 = = = Box office = = = 
 Money Never Sleeps opened at a total of 3 @,@ 597 theaters in the United States , earning nine million on its first day and approximately nineteen million in its opening weekend in the US , averaging $ 5 @,@ 330 per theatre and becoming the number one movie at the box office , although falling short of studio estimates . Nonetheless it still marked one of the best openings for a Stone film . Despite an increase of thirty @-@ two screens for its second weekend , Money Never Sleeps saw a forty @-@ seven percent decrease on its earnings , falling to third place at the box office and making slightly over ten million for the week . 
 During the October 8 – 10 weekend it had a further decrease , falling almost fifty @-@ five percent , earning over four million and dropping to seventh place at the box office . In its fourth week of domestic release it fell under the top ten at the box office with a revenue of more than one million , after suffering a forty @-@ eight percent decrease and seven @-@ hundred and ninety less screens . Domestically , the film made $ 52 @.@ 4 million , and has grossed over $ 134 @.@ 7 million worldwide . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film 's reception was mixed , review tallying website Rotten Tomatoes reported a rating of 55 % , based on a sample of 221 reviews ; the site 's consensus reading " It 's more entertaining than many sequels , but with Oliver Stone directing , a terrific cast , and a timely storyline that picks up where the original left off , Wall Street : Money Never Sleeps should be better , " for comparison , Wall Street ( 1987 ) had achieved a 78 % positive rating . Joe Neumaier of the New York Daily News publication awarded it five out of five stars saying that it is a sharp sequel that is worthy of its investment . He also saluted the cast 's performance and noted that Douglas gives Gekko " uncounted layers as he fakes , deals and fuels fire " . Matthew Toomey of Australia 's 612 ABC Radio Brisbane gave it a B @-@ rating and said that Douglas is the film 's " biggest positive " , finding LaBeouf to be unconvincing in his role . Christy Lemire , in The Canadian Press , claimed that the film ultimately " goes soft and loses its way " and described the contrast in its final scenes as being " laughable " . Furthermore , the subplot between LaBeouf and Mulligan 's characters as unneeded and pointed out that their relationship leads viewers to wonder why Winnie , who despises Gekko , would be involved with a man who does exactly the same thing as him , which she condemns ; however , Lemire acknowledged that the movie is an uncommon sequel that seems to be both relevant and necessary and said that it proves that " greed can still be good " . Film critic Colin Newton of the Brisbane Sunday Mail felt that the plot lacked the enthusiasm of the first film . Along the same lines , Village Voice contributor Nick Pinkerton pointed out that the Wall Street sequel did not have the " clean , fable @-@ like arc " formula of its predecessor . 
 Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter said that the film succeeded in being one of the good sequels in a while , but that Stone " gets too fancy here and there " , the film 's " heavy reliance on multiple screens , graphics and digital tricks makes it feel like one is watching CNN with all its computer @-@ screen busyness . " Roger Ebert , reviewing the movie in the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , noted that it ended with a better conclusion when Stone had edited the film after its Cannes viewing , but still felt it was a little too long . He considered the film to be sophisticated and said its photography was aesthetically pleasing but stated he wanted it to be " outraged . " In The Guardian Peter Bradshaw gave the film two out of five stars , commenting that " despite the pious waffle about market craziness being like cancer , no one is ever shown enduring the actual misery of losing money . " Writing for Time magazine , Richard Corliss stated that the film has the " drive , luxe and sarcastic wit of the <unk> Hollywood movies . " David Edelstein , writing in New York Magazine , described the film as being " full of promise , with minuscule returns . " He concluded that , like Stone 's other recent work , it is difficult to distinguish what the project 's focus is supposed to be . New Zealand Herald 's Russell Baillie gave it two and a half out of five stars , with the verdict for the film being that it falls flat of its expectations and hype . 
 Joe Morgenstern from The Wall Street Journal wrote that the movie manages to keep a hold on its audience 's attention . He thought that Douglas measured up to Gekko 's standards in the film , believing that he was the only actor to sustain a " sense of nasty fun " , and felt that LaBeouf 's effectiveness was within the range of the film @-@ maker 's direction , but was unimpressed with Brolin 's portrayal of James . He concluded that the script takes an unconvincing jab at Gekko 's " spiritual regeneration , " which was due to a scene that he considered to be " inherently illogical and emotionally inert . " The Daily Telegraph 's David Gritten said that Wall Street : Money Never Sleeps lacked the " punch " of the original film and was annoyed by the number of cameos throughout the film . Wall Street : Money Never Sleeps received three out of five stars from Stephen <unk> of IGN Australia . <unk> felt that Stone 's growth as a film director might mirror Gekko 's as a person ; having had used time to calm down over the years and settle into a more relaxed state of being . He concluded that the film 's final result is not " quite the incendiary attack that it could have been , but it still has plenty to say while also managing to be an entertaining crowd pleaser . " 
 In contrast to the film 's detractors , Boxoffice Magazine journalist Pete Hammond said the film was " brilliantly cast " and labeled it a " crackerjack powerhouse of a movie that shines a light on the financial machinations " . He stated that Douglas does not lose any of the substance of Gekko and LaBeouf is firm as Jacob . The writer predicted the Wall Street sequel 's box office performance would be brisk , while the prospects were assured on DVD . Andrew O 'Hehir 's of Salon.com reviewed the film from Cannes , calling it an " ambitious , uneven , surprisingly talky melodrama , which mixes a quasi @-@ documentary approach to the crash of 2008 with the story . " O 'Hehir 's considered the film to express a more " personal , intimate sense of moral hazard " . Marshall Fine , writing in the Huffington Post , viewed the film as an " overstuffed blend of agitprop and melodrama " that contains a cautionary story pertaining to unchecked capitalism . He considered Stone to be proclaiming a message of the " cancerous effects of greed " . Bill Goodykoontz of Arizona Republic admitted that he was not surprised to see that the sequel is not as effective as its predecessor , though it was an engaging film at the top of its game when it is hostile , and less satisfying during romantic parts . He ended by saying that it is not a " great movie " , but explained that it is an " effective commentary on what greed cost " everyone . CEO of <unk> <unk> , Terry Smith , one of the largest inter @-@ dealer money brokers in the world , reviewed the movie for Today on BBC Radio 4 . He gave it three out of five saying that , although it was " a little bit corny in some respects " , it puts the events of the credit crunch into context and that " it rings reasonably true , " capturing some of the activities , the moods and the individuals quite well . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Wall Street : Money Never Sleeps was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on December 21 , 2010 , in the US . Since then it has made more than $ 15 @.@ 5 million in DVD sales revenue selling more than 983 @,@ 000 units . 
 = Pennsylvania Route 402 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 402 ( PA 402 ) is a 29 @.@ 24 @-@ mile ( 47 @.@ 06 km ) north – south state route in the Pennsylvania counties of Pike and Monroe . The southern terminus of the route is at U.S. Route 209 Business ( US 209 Bus . ) in the Smithfield Township village of Marshalls Creek . The northern terminus is at US 6 in Palmyra Township . 
 PA 402 was designated in 1928 between US 611 north of Delaware Water Gap and US 6 in Palmyra Township . The route at the southern terminus became PA 612 in the 1930s before PA 402 was extended south to US 611 ( now PA 611 in Delaware Water Gap in the 1940s , replacing a portion of PA 612 . PA 402 was realigned to end at an interchange with Interstate 80 ( I @-@ 80 ) and US 611 in Delaware Water Gap by 1961 . The southern terminus was cut back to US 209 in Marshalls Creek in the 1960s , with most of the former route south of there becoming a realigned US 209 . In 1991 , a proposal to realign PA 402 and US 209 around the village of Marshalls Creek was proposed . Originally , PA 402 ended at a junction with US 209 and US 209 Bus. in Marshalls Creek . Over the years , the junction and the village had become heavily congested and a bypass was the only way to relieve traffic . After numerous delays for environmental issues , PA 402 's new alignment had construction begin in 2005 . Construction was suspended in 2008 and abandoned as PennDOT wanted a new bypass constructed without a realignment of PA 402 . The new bypass was completed in June 2012 , when US 209 was realigned away from the southern terminus of PA 402 , which ended at US 209 Bus. instead . 
 = = Route description = = 
 PA 402 begins at a junction with US 209 Bus . ( Milford Road or SR 2012 ) in the village of Marshalls Creek in Smithfield Township . PA 402 proceeds north along <unk> Falls Road , leaving the village of Marshalls Creek after crossing the namesake tributary . Soon crossing into Middle Smithfield Township , PA 402 bends northeast , crossing south of White Heron Lake and through the lakeside residential area . At Oak Grove Drive , PA 402 bends northward again , passing a small pond and bypassing Pocono Highlands Lake after turning northeast at Coolbaugh Drive . 
 PA 402 soon reaches the village of Poplar Bridge , reaching the Middle Smithfield Township Park at the north end of the village . Passing the Country Club of the Poconos , the route turns northward through a residential area surrounded by woods . This soon recedes to just woods , soon crossing over the Bush Kill , right next to <unk> Falls , which drop less than a 0 @.@ 25 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) from the roadway . North of the Bush Kill , the route passes Timber Mountain Drive and soon returns to the dense woods before crossing the county line from Monroe County to Pike County . Now in Porter Township , crossing through the dense woods until passing Twelvemile Pond . 
 The route winds northward through woods in Porter Township for several miles , passing a small parking lot and a junction with Old Bushkill Road . After a bend to the northwest , PA 402 reaches Porters Lake , a large lake marking the center of Porter Township . The route then moves northwest and crosses Pickerel Lake . PA 402 continues northwest through more woodlands , soon reaching the village of Pecks Pond , a residential community on the southwest end of the namesake pond . At the junction with Ness Road , PA 402 turns northeast along the lakeshore , soon passing a junction with a former alignment of itself . The route crosses into Blooming Grove Township , continuing northwest through the rural portions of Pike County . 
 The route soon bends north , passing through woods east of Lake Scott , soon reaching an interchange with I @-@ 84 ( exit 30 ; formerly 8 ) . Just north of the interchange , PA 402 intersects with SR 4004 , which connects to PA 434 and PA 739 at its eastern terminus . The route winds northward through Blooming Grove Township , passing White Deer Lake Access , soon bending northwest again . The route bends northward , crossing into Palmyra Township , soon reaching a clearing and a junction with US 6 . This junction serves as the northern terminus of PA 402 , just east of the junction with PA 507 . 
 = = History = = 
 PA 402 was assigned by the Pennsylvania Department of Highways in the 1928 renumbering of state highways in the commonwealth of Pennsylvania . The route at the time of designation , was assigned from US 611 at the Brodhead Creek north of Delaware Water Gap to US 6 in Palmyra Township , just outside the village of Friendly Acres , crossing US 209 in the village of Marshalls Creek . At this time , the entire length of the route was unpaved . However , the route , not up to state standards , was completely under construction to meet said standards , with the portion between Marshalls Creek and <unk> Road at Twelvemile Pond being completed in 1931 . The following year , 1932 , the portion between Twelvemile Pond and US 6 was completed . The section between Delaware Water Gap and Marshalls Creek was completed in the 1930s . By this time , the southern terminus was at PA 612 after that route swapped alignments with US 611 . PA 402 was extended south along Paper Mill Road to end at US 611 ( now PA 611 ) in Delaware Water Gap in the 1940s after the PA 612 designation was decommissioned . By 1961 , PA 402 was realigned to use River Road between an interchange with I @-@ 80 and US 611 in Delaware Water Gap and north of the Brodhead Creek . In the 1960s , the southern terminus of PA 402 was cut back to US 209 in Marshalls Creek , with the section between Minisink Hills and Marshalls Creek becoming a realigned US 209 while the former alignment south of there is now unnumbered River Road and Gap View Drive . 
 = = = Marshalls Creek Bypass = = = 
 A bypass of the southern terminus of PA 402 was proposed in 1991 to deter traffic off the congested intersection with US 209 and US 209 Bus. in the village of Marshalls Creek . The same year , the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation ( PennDOT ) got involved in the feasibility study , and preliminary engineering work was finished in 1995 . The project , notorious for delays , first hit a barrier in 1997 , when a pair of species of endangered fish ( Bridle shiners and Iron @-@ colored shiners ) were found in Marshalls Creek . In 2000 , after a Final Environmental Impact Statement had been completed , the route was approved by the Federal Highway Administration . In 2004 , a delay was created again , when pyrite was found in the area , which led to engineers finding a way to not harm the fish in Marshalls Creek . 
 By that point , the project had been delayed to opening in 2008 , 17 years after the proposal had been developed . Construction began on the new bypass of Marshalls Creek in 2005 , with Phase I of the project , which wrapped up in 2007 under the eye of J.D. Eckman Inc . , an <unk> @-@ based contractor . The original bypass plan had PA 402 being realigned at the junction with Oak Grove Drive , onto a new alignment that would have crossed over the Marshalls Creek and terminated at an interchange with US 209 at the northern end of the bypass . In 2008 , officials at PennDOT thought about a smaller bypass proposal , which would connect US 209 and US 209 Bus. and not cross Pond Creek . 
 At the same time , work was suspended in April for rising costs of the new bypass . Instead of costing $ 68 million ( 2008 USD ) , the cost of the new bypass had inflated to $ 200 million and the future of the project came into question . This upset local residents , who sold their land for the construction of the 3 @.@ 5 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) bypass , which was partially constructed for PA 402 . Locals , some of whom who had been in the area for decades , started comparing the bypass shutdown as another version of the Tocks Island Dam project from 1956 – 1992 , which led to numerous demonstrations to protect the Delaware River . At this point , PennDOT had to scale down the project and had no intent of the new PA 402 alignment to an interchange being finished , after grading and paving for the new alignment had already been started on the new alignment . 
 The Marshalls Creek Bypass was redesigned as a new project with a new park and ride at the Pocono Bazaar to the northeast of Marshalls Creek with an extended Oak Grove Drive , which would run around the back of the Bazaar and come to a new intersection with US 209 and a new bypass of the village of Marshalls Creek of US 209 only . Construction on the park and ride began in 2009 , marking the beginning of the third and final phase of the project . Construction on the US 209 bypass was slated for Spring 2010 , with a 2 @.@ 5 year span of completion at the cost of $ 20 million ( 2009 USD ) . The bypass opened on June 11 , 2012 , and PA 402 's southern terminus became US 209 Bus. as US 209 was rerouted onto the new bypass . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = PA 402 Truck = = 
 Pennsylvania Route 402 Truck is a truck route around a weight @-@ restricted bridge over the Shohola Creek on which trucks over 34 tons and combination loads over 40 tons are prohibited . 
 The northbound route begins at the interchange of PA 402 and I @-@ 84 ( exit 30 on I @-@ 84 ) . It follows the exit ramp to I @-@ 84 east towards Hawley . I @-@ 84 interchanges PA 739 in Hawley as Truck PA 402 exits the I @-@ 84 . It follows PA 739 to Lords Valley , where it terminates PA 434 . Truck PA 402 north heads to US 6 , where PA 739 is terminated . Truck PA 402 north concurs with US 6 west . It terminates at the intersection of PA 402 and US 6 . The southbound truck route begins at the intersection of PA 402 and US 6 . It follows US 6 east to the intersection of US 6 and PA 739 . At Lords Valley , it terminates PA 434 . At Hawley it enters onto I @-@ 84 west . It ends at exit 30 back at PA 402 . The route was signed in 2013 . 
 = The Fine Young Capitalists = 
 The Fine Young Capitalists ( commonly abbreviated as TFYC ) is a self @-@ described radical feminist group founded by Matthew Rappard set up to organize production initiatives for underrepresented labor in the media industry . Their first project was to facilitate the development of a video game by throwing a women @-@ only game design contest , whereby five nominees would offer proposals and the winner would see their game developed and released through Steam . The winning entry , Afterlife Empire , was designed and written by Danielle <unk> , and was released on August 21 , 2015 . The group has also pursued two other projects , including a character design contest named SNless , and a STEM scholarship with funding raised from a pornographic web cam show . 
 The group became associated with the Gamergate controversy after independent game developer Zoë Quinn criticised the group 's initial design contest . 4chan users began providing significant financial backing for the project and collaborated with TFYC to create promotional videos on female game developers . During the group 's fundraising efforts , TFYC 's Indiegogo account was hacked and the campaign briefly shut down . After 4chan users donated over US $ 5 @,@ 000 to the Indiegogo campaign , they created Vivian James , a character designed to look like an ordinary female gamer . 
 = = History = = 
 The Fine Young Capitalists is a radical feminist group founded by Matthew Rappard and based in Toronto . In an interview with <unk> , Rappard said that the mission of the group was to create media with underrepresented labor and demographics for funding non @-@ profit organizations . Rappard noted that the inspiration for the group was the prevalence of underused game ideas due to a lack of interest from business communities , and the financial cost of hiring experienced developers to develop an idea for a video game . The group was also skeptical of education @-@ only projects , opining that these projects could not result in finished video games . The group noted that the lack of interest of game development or programming by women mostly comes from socialization , saying that women were in no way less capable than men in computing fields . The group accepts donations from people of any background . 
 = = Projects = = 
 The group 's first project was an initiative to increase the involvement of women in the video games industry , in which anyone who identified as a woman prior to the start of the contest was eligible to submit a proposal for a video game . Five nominees were selected and the nominee who received the most crowd @-@ funding would have their game produced and distributed . The winner would receive eight percent of the profits , with another eight percent going towards future contests , ten percent going to the production company , and the remainder donated to charity . 
 The winner of the contest was Afterlife Empire , designed and written by Danielle <unk> , who worked with an all @-@ female team from Bogota , Colombia @-@ based developer <unk> to create the game . The game was approved through the Greenlight system on the Steam video game service in late April 2015 , allowing it to be included on the Steam storefront . It was originally scheduled to be released on August 14 , 2015 , but was later delayed due to bug concerns . The game was finally released August 21 , 2015 . 
 Another project pursued by TFYC is SNless , which concerns the representation of minority groups in science fiction . SNless is a contest in which submitters who identify racially as black before August 12 , 2014 propose a black character design . The five winning entries will be reproduced in a graphic novel , which will be published under the Creative Commons Attribution @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> 4 @.@ 0 International license . 
 In collaboration with a charity set up by pornographic actress Mercedes Carrera , TFYC administered a scholarship for people looking to work in the STEM fields . An Indiegogo campaign was set up along with a porn stream dubbed " The View of Sex " to help fund the scholarship . Carrera chose to collaborate with TFYC after a planned charity porn stream with The <unk> Foundation failed to pan out . The campaign managed to raise over $ 11 @,@ 000 on Indiegogo with an additional amount of over $ 3 @,@ 000 from the adult web cam show hosted by Carrera , half of the latter being in tips and the other half in matching donations from <unk> Applications for the scholarship ended on March 15 , 2015 , and the winner of the scholarship , Jordan Newton , was announced in April 2015 . 
 = = Involvement in Gamergate controversy = = 
 After independent game developer Zoë Quinn learned of the women 's game design contest , she spoke out against TFYC on Twitter , saying that she disliked their stance on transgender people , and thought that the women involved would be working without being paid . The game design contest was also accused of being exploitative towards women and transphobic , which resulted in TFYC receiving harassment and having some of its personal information posted publicly without consent . TFYC made a statement in response reiterating that while the winner would receive a portion of the profits , most would go to charity , and that all rights would remain with the women who submitted proposals . They also clarified that their transgender policy only required submitters to have identified as female prior to the contest as a means to prevent men from lying about their gender identity in order to participate . 
 Social media attention remained negative and TFYC found itself losing financial support and struggling to gain media coverage due to the criticism , with many major video gaming websites avoiding TFYC . One business partner , who was planning to contribute $ 10 @,@ 000 dollars , left the project , because he did not want the rest of his work to be referred to as transphobic . After a delay to review the inclusiveness of their policies , TFYC decided not to change the wording and opened the project up to submissions on March 28 , 2014 . 
 After the Gamergate controversy began in August 2014 , the details of TFYC 's earlier dispute with Quinn over the women 's game design contest became one subject of discussion . Users of the site 4chan who were critical of Quinn began providing significant financial backing for the women in video games production project on Indiegogo . During the group 's fundraising efforts , TFYC 's Indiegogo account was hacked and the campaign was briefly shut down . Media suggested the hacking incident could have been retaliation from critics of TFYC for alleged hacking incidents targeting Quinn and her supporters . 
 After some 4chan users told TFYC that they wanted the group 's promotional videos to talk about female game developers , TFYC released a video on Roberta Williams and her influential role in the early gaming industry . Later , TFYC also released videos on <unk> Yu and Anna Kipnis . 
 After 4chan users donated over US $ 5 @,@ 000 to the Indiegogo campaign , they were allowed to create a character who would appear in the winning game . The character created by 4chan , named Vivian James ( meant to sound similar to " video games " ) was designed to appear like an ordinary female gamer . The donations did not stop after the creation of Vivian , amassing over US $ 23 @,@ 000 total in funds for the group . Erik Kain of Forbes described Vivian as an “ every @-@ girl of sorts , and maybe not what you ’ d expect from 4chan " . Vivian James met some criticism , mainly for the character 's association with 4chan . Allegra Ringo of Vice called Vivian James " a character masquerading as a feminist icon for the express purpose of spiting feminists " . <unk> <unk> of TechCrunch , in turn , described her as " an entirely ordinary , non @-@ idealized female role model " . The 15 @-@ second opening cinematic of Afterlife Empire featured a still image of the Vivian James character and a shoutout to GamerGate . 
 TFYC later lowered the monetary requirement for donors to create a character to US $ 2 @,@ 000 , and announced that Reddit was also eligible to create a character . The character inspired by Reddit is named Gilda Mars , but some Reddit users have disputed whether the character is actually what they wanted . 
 The group 's decision to work with 4chan prompted criticism due to the alleged involvement of 4chan users in harassment of Quinn and feminist video game critic Anita <unk> . TFYC responded to this criticism by stating social justice movements that would not let people take part in a project because they participated at 4chan were , by definition , oppressing them . Users saw a show of support for a feminist cause against Quinn and her supporters as something that could benefit their public image . David Auerbach said " It ’ s a good cause , and doing the right thing for the wrong reason is still doing the right thing . " TFYC responded to criticism of its association with Gamergate and alleged harassment of Quinn by offering to sell Vivian James T @-@ shirts with profits going to <unk> , a charity Quinn was supporting . Later , the group was reported to have resolved its disagreement with Quinn , though founder Matthew Rappard later told an interviewer at <unk> that their agreement never went through . 
 = 2002 FA Community Shield = 
 The 2002 FA Community Shield was the 80th FA Community Shield , an annual English football match played between the winners of the previous season 's Premier League and FA Cup . It was the first to be contested following the renaming of the competition , formerly titled the FA Charity Shield . The match was contested by Arsenal , who won a league and FA Cup double the previous season , and Liverpool , who finished runners @-@ up in the league . It was held at Cardiff 's Millennium Stadium , on 11 August 2002 . Arsenal won the match by one goal to nil , watched by a crowd of 67 @,@ 337 . 
 This was Arsenal 's 16th Shield appearance and Liverpool 's 20th . Arsenal was without several of their first choice players in midfield , who were absent through injury ; this prompted a shuffle in the team which saw striker Sylvain Wiltord positioned on the left wing . For Liverpool , defender Markus Babbel was named as a substitute ater a lengthy period out of the side through illness . New signing El Hadji Diouf started in a creative role , behind strikers Michael Owen and Emile Heskey to begin with . 
 The only goal of the match came in the second half ; Arsenal substitute Gilberto Silva on his debut collected a pass from Dennis Bergkamp and struck the ball through goalkeeper Jerzy Dudek 's legs . Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger praised the match @-@ winner in his post @-@ match interview , while opposing manager Gérard Houllier felt the result showed that his team needed more game time and attention to passing , in order to improve . The result meant Arsenal was the first team to win the Shield outright 11 times , while it marked Liverpool 's first defeat at the Millennium Stadium . 
 = = Background = = 
 Founded in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield , the FA Charity Shield began as a contest between the respective champions of the Football League and Southern League , although in 1913 , it was played between an Amateurs XI and a Professionals XI . In 1921 , it was played by the league champions of the top division and FA Cup winners for the first time . Wembley Stadium acted as the host of the Shield from 1974 . Cardiff 's Millennium Stadium was hosting the Shield for the second time ; it took over as the venue for the event while Wembley Stadium underwent a six @-@ year renovation between 2001 and 2006 . 
 In February 2002 , the trophy was renamed the FA Community Shield . The then @-@ FA marketing director Paul Barber noted this was in order to reward the work of those contributing to the game , who go unnoticed : " The most important thing is that the many good causes that have benefited from the shield in the past will continue to benefit from the Community Shield in the future . " The FA also intended to prevent any interference made by the Charity Commission into where money raised by the game should go . In April 2002 , McDonald 's was announced as the main sponsor of the Community Shield , in a four @-@ year , £ 28 million pound contract . The deal included the company making an " invest [ ment ] in 8 @,@ 000 new community @-@ based coaches for young players " . 
 Arsenal qualified for the 2002 FA Community Shield as the holders of the FA Cup , beating Chelsea 2 – 0 in the 2002 FA Cup Final . The team later won the 2001 – 02 FA Premier League and completed the domestic double . The other Community Shield place went to league runners @-@ up Liverpool , who secured second place on the final day of the season . The game marked Arsenal 's 16th Charity Shield appearance and first since 1999 , where they beat Manchester United by two goals to one . By contrast this was Liverpool 's 20th , who incidentally played United and won by exactly the same scoreline to become holders of the trophy . The last meeting between the two teams was in the FA Cup ; a goal by Dennis Bergkamp ensured Arsenal progressed into the fifth round of the competition . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 In spite of the game 's traditional friendly feel , Liverpool manager Gérard Houllier highlighted in pre @-@ match press conference the importance of winning the Shield : " It is very important to me . This match is more than a friendly . It represents the start of the season . The Community Shield is like a final . There is a trophy at stake and we are the holders . " Arsène Wenger wanted to use the match as " the final preparation game for the championship " and commented that Liverpool , amongst four other teams ( Manchester United , Newcastle United , Chelsea and Leeds United ) would challenge Arsenal in the league . 
 = = Match = = 
 Arsenal was without injured trio Robert Pirès , Freddie Ljungberg and Giovanni van Bronckhorst and lined up in their traditional 4 – 4 – 2 formation ; striker Sylvain Wiltord was accommodated to the left wing , with Bergkamp playing off main striker Thierry Henry . After a lengthy illness , Liverpool defender Markus Babbel returned to the squad and was named as a substitute . Houllier deployed a 4 – 3 – 1 – 2 formation with Steven Gerrard , John Arne Riise and Dietmar Hamann as a midfield three and new signing , El Hadji Diouf positioned in a free role to begin with and as the game went on , moved to the right wing to stretch Arsenal 's defence . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Arsenal won the toss and kicked off . Within the first three minutes they fashioned their first opening : Wiltord found space outside the Liverpool box , yet failed to give the ball to Henry , as the through ball was cleared . Gerrard was booked for a tackle on Vieira in the sixth minute , which left the Frenchman seeking medical attention and moments after , he caught Henry late with a similar lunge ; Gerrard was given the benefit of the doubt by the referee . Bergkamp volleyed the ball " from close range " which was blocked by defender Abel Xavier and two of his efforts were saved in quick succession by Jerzy Dudek after the 20 @-@ minute mark . Liverpool managed their first shot on target before the half @-@ hour : a shot from Emile Heskey which hit goalkeeper David Seaman 's chest . After a quiet period towards the end of the first half , Ray Parlour went close to giving Arsenal the lead , through a long @-@ range shot that missed the post by fractions . A move from Arsenal soon after concluded with Wiltord firing the ball straight at Dudek , having been under pressure by Djimi Traoré . 
 Midfielder Gilberto Silva made his debut in the second half , coming on in place of fellow Brazilian Edu . In the 47th minute , Henry went close to scoring his first goal at the Millennium Stadium ; he collected a pass from Bergkamp and used his pace to get past the Liverpool defence . His shot caught Dudek and rebounded off the post . Henry created further chances in the 51st and 54th minutes , forcing more saves from the Liverpool goalkeeper . Owen was unable to reach the ball from a corner and Liverpool continued to pressure Arsenal , with Gerrard regaining control of the midfield and making a substitution which saw Danny Murphy come on for Hamann . In spite of this , it was Arsenal who scored the opening goal , in the 68th minute . A move by Liverpool , which had broken down , allowed Gilberto to pass the ball out to Ashley Cole , who in turn fed Bergkamp . His cut @-@ back met the Brazilian 's left foot " with a shot that squeezed through Dudek 's legs . " Diouf went down in the penalty box four minutes after , which provoked a reaction by Vieira , who believed he had dived . Both managers made numerous changes in the final 15 minutes , which included Milan Baroš replacing Heskey and midfielder Kolo Touré on for Bergkamp . The final notable chance went to Liverpool a minute before additional time : Sol Campbell was caught out of position in Arsenal 's half , but Diouf 's shot went over the goal bar . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 The result marked the first time that Liverpool had lost at the Millennium Stadium . Wenger used his post @-@ match news interview to praise goalscorer Gilberto Silva and asserted that the Brazilian would be a " very strong player " for the team , in the incoming future . He noted that Dudek had " kept [ Liverpool ] in the game for a long time " and was critical of Gerrard , who he felt was fortunate not to have been sent off for a " reckless and dangerous " challenge on Vieira . Wenger believed Arsenal 's experience put the team in good stead for the upcoming season : " There are two attitudes to being champions . One is to get respect , another is to get kicked more and to face more aggression as people want to beat you more . We are quite used to that though as we have had some big fights in the past four or five years . " 
 Houllier argued that his team paid Arsenal " too much respect " in the match and blamed his full @-@ backs Xavier and Traoré for not providing width , adding : " We need to have more flow in our game , more safety in our passing construction " . Gerrard was unrepentant for tackling Vieira and stated he was trying to " stamp [ his ] authority " on the match . He accepted defeat and was optimistic Liverpool had the means to win the Premier League : " We 'd rather they beat us in this game and then we go on to pick up the title . That 's what we 're really looking at . Even though they got the better of us yesterday , it doesn 't mean they 'll do better than us over the whole season . " Diouf insisted he should have earned a penalty in the second half , given he felt there was " definite contact " from a challenge in the penalty box : " It was a penalty , definitely , but the referee is the master on the pitch and he didn 't give it . I know the Arsenal players think I dived , but I didn 't . " 
 = Shin Megami Tensei IV = 
 Shin Megami Tensei IV ( Japanese : 真 ・ <unk> , literally " True Goddess Reincarnation IV " ) is a Japanese post @-@ apocalyptic role @-@ playing video game developed by Atlus for the Nintendo 3DS . It is the fifth entry in the Shin Megami Tensei series , the central series of the Megami Tensei franchise , though no direct story connection exists to previous entries . It was released in May and July 2013 for Japan and North America respectively . It was released digitally in Europe in October 2014 . The gameplay is reminiscent of previous Shin Megami Tensei games , carrying over the turn @-@ based Press Turn battle system , where players and enemies fight and exploit weaknesses , allowing either side to gain additional turns or lose them . 
 The story focuses on Flynn , a Samurai who protects the medieval Kingdom of Mikado from attacks by hostile demons . When a mysterious Black Samurai begins transforming the population into demons , Flynn and three companions are sent to capture her . The pursuit of the Black Samurai drags Flynn and his comrades into a startling revelation and a power struggle between angelic and demonic forces . 
 Development began after the completion of Shin Megami Tensei : Strange Journey , with the team deciding to make a fourth numbered entry in the series based on fan requests . The team intended to evoke the style and feeling of the original Shin Megami Tensei . The original story was written by series designer Kazuma Kaneko . The main characters and some demons were designed by Masayuki Doi , previously known for his work on the Trauma Center series . It debuted to strong sales in Japan and was one of the better @-@ selling games of the year . Reception of the game has been generally positive in both Japan and the west . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Shin Megami Tensei IV puts the player in control of the samurai Flynn . Navigation takes place both in the third @-@ person perspective with 3D @-@ rendered environments and a 2D overhead overworld map . On the overworld map , icons represent the player party and enemy demons . Battles take place from a first @-@ person perspective , with the enemy visible on the upper screen and party status and commands on the lower screen . As with other role @-@ playing video games , the character grows stronger and advances by completing quests ; they also earn macca , an in @-@ game currency to buy items and equipment . Some quests relate to the main story and are mandatory , while other quests are optional . Should the player be defeated , they can return to the game by spending macca ( the in @-@ game currency ) . Nintendo Play Coins can be used in place of macca . Repeatedly dying unlocks an easy mode : in this mode , the player can flee from battle if they choose . 
 Enemies wander the environments Flynn explores . A battle starts when Flynn strikes an enemy ( granting the player an advantage ) , an enemy runs into Flynn from the side or behind ( granting the advantage to the enemy ) , or when they run into each other head @-@ on . In battle , the player controls Flynn and three demons , with one AI @-@ controlled human support character . During battle , both player and enemy actions are governed by the turn @-@ based Press Turn System , a battle system carried over from previous entries in the Shin Megami Tensei series . The system revolves around exploiting physical or elemental weaknesses : if a character strikes another character 's weak point or deals a critical hit , the party gains an extra turn , while if the attack is absorbed or blocked , they lose their turn . If a character strikes a weakness or gets a critical hit , there is a chance they will enter " <unk> " status : <unk> temporarily increases a character 's damage , eliminates their elemental weaknesses , and gives them a high probability of dodging attacks . 
 Other systems continuing from previous entries in the series are Demon Recruitment and Demon Fusion . To recruit demons , the player talks with a demon instead of fighting them , and must negotiate for their services : these negotiations can involve flattery , bribery , or threats . Up to 400 demons are available for recruitment . Demon Fusions allow the player to take two demons and fuse them into a new form , granting new abilities . During fusion , players can choose which skills are retained and which are discarded . The demon 's fusion history is recorded for players to look over during the later stages of the game . Negotiation and Fusions also grant experience points for the player . Some demons change forms on their own without needing fusion ; instead , they must be leveled up with experience in battle . As Flynn levels up , new fusions become available . Tamed demons teach new skills to Flynn . Using the Nintendo 3DS ' StreetPass system , players can trade demons . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Shin Megami Tensei IV takes place in a world separate from the rest of the Shin Megami Tensei games , even though recurring demons and abilities are present . The two main locations are the Eastern Kingdom of Mikado , a feudal society inspired by Medieval Europe which is secretly controlled by angels ; and Tokyo , a modern @-@ era city enclosed in a rock dome and overrun by demons . Prior to the game 's events , when Tokyo became a demon stronghold and was threatened with destruction by angels , a member of Tokyo 's Counter @-@ Demon Force tamed the demon Masakado ( <unk> ) , fusing with him to create the protective dome over Tokyo . Mikado is built on the dome 's surface . After the dome is created , only twenty years pass in Tokyo while over a thousand years pass in the Kingdom of Mikado . Remnants of Tokyo 's technology , studied by the Mikado church as " mystic relics " , remain scattered throughout the land . 
 Players control a Samurai who is the reincarnation of Tokyo 's savior . His default name is Flynn ( <unk> , <unk> ) : as with previous Megami Tensei player characters , he is a silent protagonist , with his actions and attitudes determined by the player . Three other characters accompany Flynn on his journey , representing the game 's three main moral alignments . They are Jonathan ( <unk> , Yonatan ) , representing Law ; Walter ( <unk> , <unk> ) , representing Chaos ; and Isabeau ( <unk> , <unk> ) , representing Neutrality . Other important characters include Burroughs ( <unk> , <unk> ) , Flynn 's AI assistant ; Lilith ( <unk> , <unk> ) , a powerful demon from Tokyo ; and Issachar ( <unk> , <unk> ) , a former childhood friend of Flynn 's . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Shin Megami Tensei IV begins with Flynn and his friend Issachar traveling to Mikado Castle to undergo a test as to whether they are worthy of becoming Samurai , the guardians of Mikado who both confront and control demons . Issachar fails , yet Flynn succeeds and is promptly initiated along with other candidates , including Walter , Jonathan and Isabeau . The new Samurai <unk> receive electronic gauntlets containing <unk> : Flynn 's A.I. , Burroughs , supports him throughout the game with advice . Shortly after their initiation , unrest rises in the countryside as a figure calling herself the " Black Samurai " distributes cursed books written to spread " knowledge and wisdom " ; some residents of Mikado , including Issachar , are turned into demons after reading the books at gatherings called " Sabbaths " . The Samurai are sent to confront the resulting demons and the Black Samurai . After restoring order to Mikado and killing Issachar , the Samurai are told to pursue her to the legendary land that lies beneath Mikado , Tokyo . The Samurai climb down a tunnel which leads to the top of a skyscraper ; they discover Tokyo is a city covered by a rock dome which has enclosed it in eternal night , while Mikado lays upon the surface of the dome . 
 The party explores Tokyo searching for the Black Samurai , confronting a variety of foes : the demons which infest Tokyo ; the Ashura @-@ kai , a yakuza organization who rule the city and provide a semblance of order ; and the Ring of Gaea , a cult dedicated to its leader Yuriko . The party discovers that the Black Samurai was Yuriko , a demon whose true name is Lilith , and that she sought to bring chaos to the Eastern Kingdom of Mikado and undermine its ordered , stagnant structure . The party also rescues three mysterious masked men from Tokyo on the orders of Sister Gabby , a member of Mikado 's church . Walter is convinced by Yuriko that the Ashura @-@ kai should be defeated and more demons unleashed on Tokyo , while Jonathan is convinced by Gabby that Lilith must be slain . Flynn can support either Walter or Jonathan , but regardless of his choice , both are successful : both Lilith 's Ring of Gaea and the Ashura @-@ kai are defeated , and demons are released into Tokyo via the Yamato reactor , an energy source connecting parallel dimensions . Flynn , Jonathan , and Walter explore two different timelines of Tokyo : one where law dominates , and another where chaos reigns supreme . In both of them , Flynn 's previous incarnation was slain . 
 After viewing the alternate worlds , a score based on Flynn 's moral choices throughout the game decides whether the player is on the Law path , Chaos path , or Neutral path . Additionally , the player always has the option to destroy the world at the behest of The White , personifications of human despair who believe that the only escape from the eternal war between God and demons is oblivion . Jonathan will ally with the " new leaders " of Mikado , the four archangels Gabriel , Uriel , Raphael and Michael - Sister Gabby and the three imprisoned figures the Samurai rescued . They merge into Merkabah , God 's chariot . Walter will ally and merge with Lucifer , the most powerful demon ; they seek to destroy Mikado . Should Flynn side with Law , he and Merkabah defeat Lucifer . In order to prevent further corruption of the people of Mikado , they destroy Tokyo , killing themselves in the process . If Flynn sides with Chaos , he and Lucifer defeat Merkabah . After destroying Mikado , the two begin a new war against God . In both Law and Chaos routes , Isabeau returns to stop Flynn on behalf of humanity , but after he defeats her , she commits suicide . In the Neutral route , Flynn and Isabeau join forces against Merkabah and Lucifer , enlisting Masakado 's help against them . After Merkabah 's defeat , Isabeau evacuates Mikado 's population to Tokyo . After Flynn defeats Lucifer , Masakado uses his power to destroy the enclosing dome , which destroys Mikado and restores daylight to Tokyo . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development of Shin Megami Tensei IV began around August 2009 , after development had finished on Shin Megami Tensei : Strange Journey for the Nintendo DS , and lasted for three years and a half . After listening to fan demand , Atlus decided to make a fourth numbered entry in the Shin Megami Tensei subseries , something not seen in Japan since the release of Shin Megami Tensei III : Nocturne in 2003 . The reason for the ten @-@ year gap between III and IV was that the company had made other successful titles , and had not had the time to develop Shin Megami Tensei IV as well . It was planned from an early stage for Shin Megami Tensei IV to be on a portable platform for reasons of player convenience ; it was originally planned to be developed for the Nintendo DS using the Strange Journey engine , but eventually development was moved to the Nintendo 3DS , which led to the decision to use a different engine . The development team , which was dubbed Team Maniacs , included both staff who had worked on previous Shin Megami Tensei titles and newer staff who had not . There were differences in thinking between the two , which led to conflicts . As an example of this , game director Kazuyuki Yamai said that some of the staff would be used to contemporary games featuring " sweet " female characters who " say nice things " , and as a result would want to add that " sweetness " to Shin Megami Tensei IV ; meanwhile , Yamai saw the series as having " bitter " content , and thought that it would not be possible to add " sweetness " to it . Additionally , the staff members had differing images of the meaning of Shin Megami Tensei ; Yamai thought that the good points of each staff member 's interpretation should go into the aspects of the game they were in charge of , while not deviating from the " bitterness " . 
 The concept of the game was inspired by the punk feeling the original Shin Megami Tensei was emulating when it released . Kazuma Kaneko , a character designer and scenario writer for the series , came up with the original scenario . He came up with the original concept for the medieval Mikado and modern @-@ day Tokyo : the main reason for this was to present a contrast of values between the demon @-@ hunting inhabitants of Mikado and the people of Tokyo , who live under the demons ' control . While constructing the setting of the game , the development team referenced history books to learn about medieval customs and armor . The demons appearing in the game were chosen based on what bosses would be appearing in the scenario ; they also included some demons that they thought would grab players ' attention , and some based on their popularity . While Strange Journey 's dungeon traversal had been designed to be " old @-@ school Megami Tensei " , Shin Megami Tensei IV 's was designed to be similar to that of Nocturne . The Press Turn battle system , first introduced in Nocturne , was given an overhaul . The gameplay difficulty was designed to be adjustable to tempt new players to try out the Shin Megami Tensei series , which had gained a reputation for having a high difficulty . Also for the benefit of newer players was a " recommended fusion " feature ; it was implemented after seeing that a lot of players who were new to the series would not fuse their demons . The story and gameplay were designed to try and change the opinion of the Japanese player base that " social games " were good enough , and to appeal to an older generation of players . 
 Eiji Ishida , who worked on Nocturne and Strange Journey , acted as the game 's art director . Masayuki Doi designed the main characters . Doi had worked on the series before as an environment designer for Nocturne , but this was his first time as a character designer for the series . He was brought on due to his work on the Trauma Center series . The main characters were designed around certain archetypes : Jonathan and Walter was designed to represent law and chaos respectively , while Isabeau represents neutrality . Burroughs ( an evolution of the AI companion from Strange Journey ) , Isabeau and other female characters were also designed to be strong @-@ willed and have a strong physique , being based on " strong female archetypes " . The protagonist 's clothing was created to be fairly bland , emphasizing the player 's control over his actions and portrayal . Their outfits were designed to both represent the Kingdom of Mikado and elements of traditional Japanese clothing . The final design included a combination of eastern and western clothing elements . Their battle stances and the handles of their katanas were inspired by the Jedi of the Star Wars franchise . His design work was inspired by earlier designs by Kaneko . Doi also designed the accessories and equipment for the main protagonist and clothing for half the non @-@ playing characters . The demon designs were handled by multiple designers , including Doi , Keita <unk> , Yoshihiro Nishimura and <unk> Aki ; as Yamai liked Super Sentai and Kamen Rider , and aimed to have some demons matching Kaneko 's designs and some inspired by the Ultraman series , several of the chosen demon designers were tokusatsu artists . The artists were sent materials so they would understand the mythological backgrounds of the demons , but were otherwise free in designing the demons according to their own interpretations . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music to Shin Megami Tensei IV was composed and arranged primarily by Ryota Koduka , with additional compositions by Kenichi Tsuchiya and Toshiki Konishi . Their work began late in the development period and lasted roughly a year . They originally set a limit on the number of tracks at Yamai 's request , but as the work progressed , the number of tracks ballooned . Motifs from earlier Shin Megami Tensei games were also incorporated to add an air of familiarity for fans of the series . A four @-@ CD soundtrack was released in Japan on February 26 , 2014 by <unk> Records under the catalog number <unk> @-@ 1043 ～ 6 . It reached # 64 in the Oricon charts and remained on the charts for two weeks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its first week of release in Japan , the game topped the weekly chart with sales of 188 @,@ 562 copies , overtaking PlayStation 3 exclusive Kamen Rider : <unk> War ( 2nd ) and the PS3 port of Resident Evil : Revelations . In a later assessment , this was cited as Atlus ' second best @-@ selling title in recent history , just 4000 units behind the debut sales of Persona 4 in 2008 . By the end of 2013 , the game had sold 251 @,@ 334 copies in Japan , and was the country 's 30th best @-@ selling video game of the year . By January 2014 , the game had sold 90 @,@ 000 copies in the United States since its release in July . By July 2015 , over 600 @,@ 000 copies had been sold worldwide . 
 The title has received positive reviews in both Japan and the west . Aggregate site Metacritic gave it a ranking of 83 / 100 based on 32 critic reviews . The battle system received universal praise : Famitsu , IGN , GameSpot , Eurogamer , Joystiq , Destructoid and Game Informer all cited the battle system as highly enjoyable despite difficulty spikes and praised the game making allowances for newcomers . The negotiation and fusions systems were also praised , with several reviewers noting it as both entertaining and an improvement on previous versions . A gameplay aspect that received criticism was navigation via the over world map , which was called either difficult to follow or poorly designed . 
 The story and characters had a mixed reception : while Destructoid was generally positive , other reviews such as Eurogamer and Game Informer felt that the characters were only there to represent the player 's moral pathways . IGN , Joystiq , and GameSpot were fairly negative about them , calling them either irritating or forgettable . The graphics , while praised by some reviewers , were sometimes seen as either " bland " or " of low @-@ quality . " 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Shin Megami Tensei IV : Apocalypse , a game set in the world of Shin Megami Tensei IV , was released in Japan on February 10 , 2016 for the Nintendo 3DS . It will also be released in North America sometime in 2016 . 
 = Josef Philipp Vukassovich = 
 Baron Josef Philipp Vukassovich ( Croatian : Barun Josip Filip <unk> ; 1755 – 9 August 1809 ) was a Croatian soldier who joined the army of Habsburg Monarchy and fought against both Ottoman Empire and the First French Republic . During the French Revolutionary Wars , he commanded a brigade in the 1796 – 1797 Italian campaign against Napoleon Bonaparte . He led a division during the Napoleonic Wars and received a fatal wound in action . 
 While serving in the Grenz infantry from the Croatian Military Frontier , Vukassovich received a coveted military award for notable actions in battle against the Ottomans . Still leading his Grenzers , he fought against the French in Italy . While still a colonel , he was entrusted with the command of an infantry brigade in early 1796 . Finally appointed a general officer , he participated in nearly every battle in Italy that year , including all four Austrian attempts to raise the Siege of Mantua . In 1799 , he led troops in Italy against the French with success . The following year saw him leading troops against Bonaparte again . 
 Appointed to lead a division in Italy in 1805 , Vukassovich was soon sacked for failing to halt a French attack . The year 1809 found him leading a division in the invasion of Bavaria . He fought capably in several actions near Regensburg in April . He was mortally wounded at the Battle of Wagram in July while leading his troops . Among Austrian generals , he demonstrated above @-@ average initiative and skill , particularly in 1796 and 1809 . He was Proprietor ( Inhaber ) of an Austrian infantry regiment . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Vukassovich was born in 1755 . Sources place his birthplace either in Senj or in Sveti Petar , present day village of <unk> near Gračac . His father was major Petar <unk> who commanded the fourth Grenz infantry company of the Croatian Military Frontier , headquartered in Sveti Petar . His mother Ana , née Bašić , was also of a Grenz infantry officer family . His birthplace which is in today 's Croatia , was initially a nominal part of Kingdom of Croatia within Habsburg Monarchy , but later fully transferred under direct imperial rule as part of the larger Military Frontier . Croatian Military Frontier was placed under the unified control of the Croatian General Command in 1783 . 
 Graduating in 1771 from the Theresian Military Academy located in the castle of Wiener Neustadt , he joined his home <unk> ( Gospić ) Grenz regiment in 1775 . When promoted to Oberleutnant ( first lieutenant ) in 1780 , Vukassovich served in Montenegro . 
 The Austrians planned to start an uprising from within Montenegro , to liberate the Balkans , and Vukassovich and Ludvig Pernet were part of the delegation that were to win over the Montenegrin chiefs . 
 By 1787 , he had risen in rank to Hauptmann ( captain ) in the <unk> ( Gospić ) Grenz Infantry Regiment # 1 . During the Austro @-@ Turkish War ( 1787 @-@ 1791 ) , he fought with distinction , earning the Military Order of Maria Theresa on 15 November 1788 . He was named to the nobility as a Freiherr in December 1788 . In 1789 he raised a <unk> , which soon reached a strength of 3 @,@ 000 men in 12 companies of infantry and 4 squadrons of hussars . During the Austro @-@ Turkish War , Vukassovich served as <unk> ' acting commander with the rank of Major , and was then promoted to Oberstleutnant ( lieutenant colonel ) . 
 Vukassovich married Johanna <unk> Malfatti von <unk> . She was 24 years younger and outlived him by many years , dying in 1854 . He had four children , sons Josip and Filip and daughters Marija and Ana . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 = = = First Coalition = = = 
 Vukassovich fought in Italy during the War of the First Coalition , being promoted to Oberst in 1794 . At the Battle of <unk> in November 1795 , he and his troops conducted a stout defense in a monastery . During the Montenotte Campaign in April 1796 , he commanded a brigade in Johann Beaulieu 's Austrian army . He led the Austrian vanguard across the Turchino Pass on 10 April to attack Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> 's brigade near Genoa . 
 On 12 April , Bonaparte defeated Eugène @-@ Guillaume Argenteau 's Austrian force at the Battle of Montenotte . The next day , Beaulieu directed Vukassovich to take his brigade to Sassello to establish contact with Argenteau 's right wing , but due to a poorly written order , he started a day late and missed the 14 November fighting in the Second Battle of Dego . The next day , he marched his 3 @,@ 500 @-@ man brigade from Sassello to Dego . By good fortune , Vukassovich caught a brigade of André Masséna 's troops plundering the town and routed them . By the time Bonaparte and Masséna appeared with heavy reinforcements , " <unk> intelligently seized the opportunity offered by this success and promptly put the village into a state of defense . " He only withdrew from the town after giving the French a tough fight . 
 Appointed Generalmajor ( brigadier general ) on 2 May 1796 , Vukassovich soon fought in the Battle of Lodi on 10 May . At Lodi , he led a rear guard consisting of two battalions of the <unk> Grenz Infantry Regiment . After the Grenzers fell back to the east end of the bridge , they were employed in the first line of defense . Subjected to continual cannon fire and a frontal attack by skirmishers and a column of elite troops , the Austrians were defeated . Such was his notoriety that the French falsely claimed to have killed him during the fighting . He commanded a 2 @,@ 400 @-@ man brigade at the Battle of Borghetto on 30 May and during the Siege of Mantua . When the siege was lifted on 1 August , he led 2 @,@ 000 men from the garrison to reinforce the main army before the Battle of Castiglione . During the second attempt to relieve the Siege of Mantua , he joined Paul <unk> 's Tyrol Corps . He was badly injured in a fall the night before the Battle of <unk> , which occurred on 4 September . Nevertheless , he led his brigade during the day 's fighting . His troops bravely tried to stop Masséna 's advance , but they were finally routed by superior numbers . 
 During the third attempt to relieve Mantua , Vukassovich participated in the Tyrol Corps ' victories at <unk> on 2 November and the Battle of <unk> on 6 – 7 November . On the 17th , his troops battled their way out of the Adige River gorge to link up with Joseph <unk> von <unk> 's column on the heights . Together they routed the French at Rivoli Veronese . After Bonaparte won the Battle of Arcole , the French army commander drove the Tyrol Corps back to Trento . During the fourth attempt to relieve Mantua , Jozsef Alvinczi directed Vukassovich to lead his 6th Column down the east bank of the Adige River . His artillery supported the attack of Prince Heinrich XV of Reuss @-@ Plauen on the west bank of the river , but he exerted little other influence on the disastrous result of the Battle of Rivoli because his troops were on the wrong side of the river . 
 = = = Second Coalition = = = 
 Vukassovich served in Italy during the War of the Second Coalition . As the French were driven back by Austrians and Alexander Suvorov , Pyotr Bagration captured Brescia in a decisive move on 21 April 1799 . Loss of Brescia compelled general Schérer to further retreat . The general , commanding the French forces , was replaced by Moreau , and new defensive positions were taken along the Adda River . Vukassovich surprised the French crossing the river at Brivio , while general Ott managed a crossing at Trezzo . On 28 April 1799 , Vukassovich trapped Jean Sérurier and 3 @,@ 000 French troops at Verderio . After a " sharp fight " Sérurier and his 2 @,@ 700 surviving soldiers laid down their arms . Vukassovich then led the army 's advance guard in the capture of numerous towns in northwest Italy . In July 1799 , he became the proprietor of the newly formed ( in 1798 ) Vukassovich Infantry Regiment # 48 . The similarly numbered <unk> Regiment had been disbanded in 1795 . He would remain the regiment 's proprietor until his death . 
 Promoted to Feldmarschall @-@ Leutnant ( lieutenant general ) in October 1799 , Vukassovich took part in the 1800 Italian campaign . When Bonaparte invaded Italy via the Great Saint Bernard Pass , he commanded a division farther east in the area of Lake Maggiore and Lake Como . On 25 May , a cavalry patrol of Vukassovich 's scouts briefly captured Bonaparte before themselves becoming prisoners when the French general 's escort appeared . The sudden French offensive drove Vukassovich 's outnumbered troops out of Milan . Pursued by Guillaume Duhesme 's French corps , he retreated to Brescia and Cremona with his remaining 4 @,@ 000 men , missing the Battle of Marengo . 
 = = Napoleonic Wars = = 
 = = = 1805 = = = 
 During the War of the Third Coalition , Vukassovich led a division in Archduke Charles ' Army of Italy . His division consisted of 14 line and Grenz battalions and four squadrons organized into two brigades led by Hannibal <unk> and Karl <unk> . Tasked with guarding the east bank of the Adige opposite Verona and maintaining a link with Johann von Hiller 's corps in the Tyrol , he garrisoned the suburb of San Giorgio with two battalions while holding six battalions farther back in the hills . The rest of his troops watched the river farther north . 
 In the Battle of Verona on 18 October 1805 , André Masséna led the converged light companies of his army supported by two infantry divisions in an assault crossing of the river on Verona 's west side . The French stormed across the <unk> Bridge and quickly captured San Giorgio , but Vukassovich threw more infantry and cavalry into the struggle for the heights , which lasted most of the day . A French diversion at <unk> occupied his right flank brigade , keeping it out of the fight . Meanwhile , a second diversion at <unk> d <unk> fooled Charles into thinking it was the main attack . Only at the end of the day did Count Heinrich von Bellegarde appear with reinforcements , but it was too late to stop Masséna from establishing a bridgehead on the hills to the north of the city . Believing that Vukassovich held the riverbank with too few troops , archduke dismissed him from command and appointed Prince Franz Seraph of Rosenberg @-@ Orsini as his replacement . Another account asserts that Vukassovich was sacked because he placed a number of cannons in an exposed position in violation of Charles ' orders . At Verona , the Austrians suffered 1 @,@ 622 casualties and loss of four cannons , while the French only lost about 450 killed and wounded . 
 = = = 1809 = = = 
 At the beginning of the War of the Fifth Coalition , Vukassovich commanded the III Armeekorps light division in Archduke Charles ' main army in Bavaria . His two brigades were led by Moritz Liechtenstein and Josef <unk> and included two Grenz and two Archduke Charles Legion battalions , plus two regiments of hussars and 22 artillery pieces . 
 On the eve of the Battle of Teugen @-@ Hausen , Vukassovich was instrumental in providing information about movement of Bavarian and French troops to Archduke Charles , including correspondence between marshals Lefebvre and Davout . Leading Prince Friedrich Hohenzollern 's advance guard at the Battle of Teugen @-@ Hausen on 19 April 1809 , he drove the French advance elements out of Hausen and occupied a commanding ridge . When Marshal Louis Davout attacked , he conducted a stout defense with his troops and the reinforcements that arrived . He was wounded in the action , but continued to lead his troops in a battle notable for an unusual degree of front @-@ line leadership by Austrian generals . On 21 April , his troops fought a rear guard action against Bavarian troops . His command formed the extreme left flank of the main body as Charles prepared to crush Davout on the morning of 22 April . His dispatch brought the first word to Charles that Napoleon was about to descend on the Austrian left flank . In the Battle of Eckmühl that day , Vukassovich " conducted his defense ably " , holding off the French and Württembergers long enough for Prince Rosenberg 's IV Armeekorps to deploy . 
 Vukassovich missed the Battle of Aspern @-@ Essling , being involved in Johann Kollowrat 's unsuccessful bid to cut Napoleon 's supply line near Linz on 17 May . He commanded the center column in an attack on the fortified suburb of <unk> on the north bank of the Danube . Kollowrat 's " timid and badly coordinated " attack on the bridgehead failed . At the Battle of Wagram , he led one of two divisions in a reorganized III Armeekorps . On this occasion , he commanded the brigades of Joseph Grill ( 5 @,@ 736 infantry ) , Andreas Schneller ( 1 @,@ 100 infantry and 667 cavalry ) , and Emanuel Wratislaw ( 730 <unk> infantry ) . He was mortally wounded on 6 July , the second day of battle while defending against Jacques MacDonald 's attack . He lingered for a month and finally died of his wounds in Vienna on 9 August 1809 . He was one of four Austrian generals who were killed or fatally wounded at Wagram ; the others were Konstantin <unk> Karl d 'Aspré , Peter von Vécsey , and Armand von Nordmann . 
 = = Construction design works = = 
 Vukassovich was instrumental in development of transport infrastructure in the present @-@ day Croatian Littoral at the shores of the Adriatic Sea . His most significant contributions in the field were construction of roads after his designs . The first one was Gospić – Karlobag road , also known as <unk> road , completed between 1784 and 1786 — which replaced an earlier route which comprised very steep grades limiting its capacity . The new road permitted setting up of a free port in Karlobag and significantly improved connection to the seaward slopes of Velebit . Currently , the route largely corresponds to the western section of the <unk> road . The other major route Vukassovich designed was the Louisiana road between Karlovac and Rijeka with a branch serving Bakar . The road was built between 1803 and 1811 , and the route is now used by the D3 road . Vukassovich also designed a coastal road between Senj and Sveti Juraj , port structures in Senj , and directed reconstruction of the Josephina road leading from Senj to Karlovac . 
 = = Annotations = = 
 = Nan Chiau High School = 
 Nan Chiau High School ( NCHS ) ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ; Wade – Giles : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is a premier co @-@ educational institution in Singapore affiliated to Singapore Hokkien Huay Kuan , offering the four @-@ year Express course for secondary education . 
 Founded in 1947 , the institution currently operates under the Special Assistance Plan ( SAP ) for bilingualism and <unk> with the mission to nurture bilingual and bicultural students who are highly knowledgeable in the Chinese language and culture . Affirmed as the North Zone Centre of Excellence for Chinese Language , the school is highly regarded of its strong Chinese foundation in terms of teaching of the language and promulgation of the heritage and culture , which are not confined in the classrooms . 
 The institution is currently one of Singapore 's leading ICT Schools , and is also one of the joint organisers for the National Secondary School Chinese Creative Writing Competition . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Nan Chiau Teachers ' Training College ( 1941 – 1947 ) = = = 
 Nan Chiau High School was initially set up as Nan Chiau Teachers ' Training College in 1941 by Mr Tan Kah Kee , a Chinese businessman , community leader and philanthropist . The initial schooling site was incorporated from mansions donated by Mr Lee Kong Chian , on a plot of land in River Valley . The campus was used as the base and training barracks for Dalforce , a Chinese volunteers ’ army formed promptly before the Japanese invasion in 1942 . 
 = = = Nan Chiau Girls High School ( 1947 – 1984 ) = = = 
 In 1947 , Nan Chiau Teachers ' Training College was converted into a girls ' high school , featuring a primary school section . Mr Yang Zhen Li was the first Principal of the institution , with an initial student enrollment of 900 . A female hostel was also built in the 1950s . In 1965 , 2 million dollars was spent by the Singapore Hokkien Huay Kuan to rebuild Nan Chiau Girl 's High School to meet the needs of an increased student enrollment . During the re @-@ construction , the high school section conducted lessons at a temporary campus at Guillemard Road , whilst the primary school section continued lessons at the unaffected classroom blocks of the Kim Yam Road campus . The new campus was officially opened by then Minister for Education Mr. Ong Pang Boon , on 8 March 1969 . 
 In 1974 , the student population of the institution went up to <unk> , the highest in the school ’ s history , with 48 classes in the high school section and 24 classes at the primary school section . To cope with the increased enrollment , additional 300 thousand dollars was spent for constructing the 5th storey of the school building . 
 In 1978 , Nan Chiau Girls ' High was initially included in the list of newly established Special Assistance Plan Schools . However , with the concern from the Ministry of Education over the quality of students admitted , the number of SAP schools were amended to nine , which excluded Nan Chiau Girl 's High School . In 1980 the institution adopted English as its language medium . As student enrollment started to decline , the institution went co @-@ educational in 1984 with the enrollment of male students , and was renamed " Nan Chiau High School " 
 = = = Relocation to Sengkang ( 1984 – 2000 ) = = = 
 In the 1990s , the declining student population became more significant and the institution was on the verge of permanent closure . In 2000 , Nan Chiau High School relocated to Sengkang New Town under an agreement with the Singapore Land Authority . The primary section separated to form Nan Chiau Primary School and relocated to 50 <unk> Link . That year , Nan Chiau High School was also ranked the top value @-@ added school in the Ministry of Education 's 1999 ranking of Special / Express schools in Singapore . 
 = = = Designation of SAP Status ( 2001 – Present ) = = = 
 In November 2010 , Nan Chiau High School was formally recognised by the Ministry of Education to be included as the 11th Special Assistance Plan ( SAP ) school , with effect from 2012 . The news was brought forth by minister of education Dr Ng Eng Hen during his opening address at the Singapore Hokkien Festival , and was welcomed by numerous school alumni and educators , who were delighted to see that the institution can finally fulfill its mission to preserve and advocate the Chinese heritage and culture with more support from the government . 
 On 29 December 2013 , a home @-@ coming event was held at the former Nan Chiau High School campus at 46 Kim Yam Road , which thousands of alumni , former and present principals , teachers and staff of the institution gathered at the former school hall in a brunch buffet setting . The event was held before the official relaunch of the site of the former campus as a commercial development of offices , schools and F & B establishments . 
 In March 2015 , Nan Chiau High School celebrated its 68th School Anniversary . Themed “ Appreciating our Past , Inspiring the Future ” , the event was graced by Guest @-@ of @-@ Honour , Minister for Defence , Dr Ng Eng Hen , which saw the school and the community coming together to mark the occasion with a celebration of <unk> , the outstanding achievements of the students , as well as the completion of the school ’ s upgrading works which costed a total of 2 @.@ 67 million dollars . The school upgrading works were co @-@ funded by the Singapore Hokkien Huay Kuan , comprising a revamp of canteen , air @-@ conditioned library , as well as the construction of the park square and a new 300 seat auditorium . 
 = = Principals = = 
 = = Campus = = 
 Nan Chiau High School ’ s current campus covers 7 @.@ 2 acres of land off Sengkang East Avenue , constructed under the School Management Model granted by the Ministry of Education in 2000 . The campus was officially declared open by then Minister for Education and Second Minister for Defence Mr. Teo Chee Hean on 8 March 2003 . The five @-@ storey building cluster consists of an Administrative Block , a Science & Research Block , an Aesthetics block , and three classroom blocks . 
 The Kong Chian Hall ( main hall of Nan Chiau High School ) was named after the school ’ s co @-@ founder , Mr Lee Kong Chian . The air @-@ conditioned hall is the common venue for weekly assemblies and dialogue sessions , as well as hosting competitions and symposiums such as the National Secondary School Chinese Creative Writing Competition and the NYP @-@ YTSS @-@ NCHS Science Research Symposium . 
 The 300 @-@ seat Auditorium , housed at the fourth level of the Aesthetics Block , was converted from an Air Rifle Shooting Range under the two @-@ year school upgrading project in 2012 funded by the School Management and Singapore Hokkien Huay Kuan . The auditorium provides a venue for performances apart from the main hall , as well as conducting sharing talks and academic lectures . 
 The revamped Library , opened in 2013 , features dedicated study areas , a small platform to hold forums and press conferences , as well as three discussion rooms available for student @-@ teacher consultations , projects and group studies . As a North 4 Cluster Centre of Learning for Chinese Language , Nan Chiau High School also features 2 language labs catering for enhanced Chinese programmes and activities . The labs are currently used to host the Young Writer ’ s Programme for students of six schools in the North 4 Cluster , as well as the school ’ s Chinese calligraphy society . 
 Other facilities in NCHS include a gymnasium , an indoor sports hall , a central plaza , an open @-@ concept canteen , an eco @-@ garden and a 1 @.@ 3 acres field . 
 = = School Culture = = 
 = = = School Motto = = = 
 Nan Chiau High School 's motto , Sincerity & Perseverance ( <unk> 、 <unk> ) , is set after the philosophy of its founder , Mr Tan Kah Kee . The motto is also shared by all Hokkien Huay Kuan schools , as well as several institutions in mainland China with the same founder , such as Xiamen <unk> Middle School of Fujian , <unk> University & Xiamen University . 
 " Sincerity " or <unk> , meant to be truthful to self and others 
 " Perseverance " or <unk> , meant the dedication and persistence in the pursuit of excellence in the face of challenges . 
 = = = School Crest = = = 
 The school crest of Nan Chiau High School is represented by three interlocking rings , which symbolizes its students ' moral , physical and intellectual development . 
 The red colour of the rings depicts a persevering spirit in the pursuit of a bright and promising future , as represented by the golden background . 
 The heart shape in the centre of the overlapping rings symbolizes care and concern for the total welfare of the pupils in a student @-@ oriented system . 
 = = = School Anthem = = = 
 Nan Chiau High School keeps its original school anthem in Mandarin . The anthem was written by Ms Lin Zhen Ru , and moderated by Professor Zhao <unk> ( Mr. ) in the early 1950s . The same anthem is shared with Nan Chiau Primary School , which was formerly its ancillary primary school before 2001 . 
 = = = Attire and Appearance = = = 
 Nan Chiau High School 's uniform is closely linked to its heritage as a former traditional Chinese school . Originally , the school uniform was in full white with the Chinese name of the school sewed on the right chest level of the blouse , much similar to other institutions with Chinese heritage . Nearing the 1990s , the school uniform was switched to be worn with dark coloured school pants or pinafore , with dark coloured school tag was sewed on the left side of the shirt . The uniform was redesigned to suit the school 's identity along with the relocation of the campus in 2000 . 
 Currently , male students wear white studded shirts with Traditional Chinese characters of the school name on it in red . Navy blue shorts are worn in secondary 1 & 2 , and long pants for upper secondary levels . Female students wear white blouses bearing the Traditional Chinese characters of the school name on it in red , with navy blue pleated skirts . During Assemblies and important functions , every student will wear a red @-@ coloured school tie . 
 = = = School Discipline = = = 
 Nan Chiau High School is known for its strict regulations and discipline , with minimal tolerance to misbehaviour of its students . Nevertheless , some recalled the incident in 2004 when the principal stepped down after admitting an overly harsh disciplinary action , despite the backing of many alumni and parents stressing that the disciplinary action taken on the student is justified . 
 = = Academic Details and Curriculum = = 
 = = = O Level Express Course = = = 
 As a Special Assistance Plan ( SAP ) school , Nan Chiau High School offers the four @-@ year Express course which leads up to the Singapore @-@ Cambridge GCE Ordinary Level national examination , complemented by its signature cultural intelligence and global classroom programmes . Throughout the 4 years , NCHS students are exposed to a broad range of cultural knowledge and life skills alongside the academic curriculum . All NCHS students expect a 2 @-@ week based timetable , with supplementary lessons for four days allocated to individual subjects according to their academic needs ( with the exception for Wednesdays ) . A common educational procedure for the four @-@ year Express course , subject combination streaming for NCHS students is carried out at Secondary Two level . Usually , nine classes ( A to I ) will be allocated per cohort for upper secondary levels , with 2 classes allocated for students taking 3 pure science subjects ( commonly known as “ Triple @-@ Science ” combinations ) . 
 Nan Chiau High students has sustained academic and non @-@ academic results . A Band 1 school since 2006 , the institution has developed students with exceptional results for both GCE ‘ O ’ Level academic subjects as well as Co @-@ Curricular Activities ( or CCA ) . In 2014 , Nan Chiau High School 's ‘ O ’ Level students achieved a Mean @-@ Subject Grade ( MSG , based on <unk> Grading ) of 10 @.@ 6 , with more than 90 % of the students obtaining A1 grading for CCA involvement . 
 = = = = Academic Subjects = = = = 
 The examinable academic subjects for Singapore @-@ Cambridge GCE Ordinary Level offered by Nan Chiau High School for upper secondary level ( <unk> streaming in secondary 2 level ) , as of 2015 , are listed below . 
 Notes : 
 Subjects indicated with ‘ * ’ are Mandatory Subjects . 
 All students in Singapore are required to undertake a Mother Tongue Language as a examinable subject , as indicated by ‘ ^ ’ . 
 " SPA " in Pure Science subjects refers to the incorporation of School @-@ based Science Practical Assessment , which 20 % of the subject result in the national examination are determined by school @-@ based practical examinations , supervised by the Singapore Examinations and Assessment Board . 
 Science 
 Additional Mathematics * 
 Mathematics * 
 Physics ( SPA ) 
 Chemistry ( SPA ) * 
 Biology ( SPA ) 
 Science ( Combined ) 
 Language & Literature 
 English Language * 
 English Literature 
 Chinese Language * ^ 
 Higher Chinese Language 
 Chinese Literature 
 Malay ( Special Programme ) 
 Humanities 
 Geography 
 History 
 Combined Humanities ( Social Studies & History Elective / Geography Elective ) * 
 Arts & Aesthetics 
 Art & Design 
 Design & Technology 
 Higher Art 
 Music 
 Higher Music 
 = = = SAP Flagship Programme ( Cultural Intelligence ) = = = 
 The SAP Flagship Programme forms a major part of Nan Chiau High ’ s niche curriculum as a SAP school . It is designed with the incorporation of Howard Gardner ’ s “ Five Minds for the Future ” ( <unk> Mind , <unk> Mind , Ethical Mind , Creating Mind , <unk> Mind ) , with an additional sixth mind , the ‘ Bi @-@ cultural Mind ’ . 
 The flagship programme develops students ’ interests in learning about the eastern and the western cultures by providing them with opportunities to integrate both cultures and to be immersed in other cultures , and to have in @-@ depth understanding of the essence of both the east and the west , thus preparing students to become inclusive talents who are effectively bilingual and able to make strong and meaningful connections with the world . The four @-@ year flagship programme is mainly made up of two segments , namely ‘ Broad @-@ Base Curriculum ’ and ‘ Peaks of Excellence ’ , which include cultural intelligence and life education to groom students to be world @-@ ready . The ‘ Broad @-@ Base Curriculum ’ spans over the first year of the students ’ admission , with the introduction to the Chinese culture and history , the history of Chinese immigrants and understanding diversity of local cultures . This is inculcated through various platforms such as cultural intelligence forums , bi @-@ cultural camps , Chinese lyrics competitions , as well as local and regional learning journeys . 
 The ‘ Peaks of Excellence ’ curriculum is continuous with the ‘ Broad @-@ Base Curriculum ’ , with more elaborate programmes that cater to students ’ talent development . For instance , the Young Writers Programme , which is open to students who are interested in writing , has lessons conducted by various renowned Chinese language essayists in the region to expose and familiarise students to different forms of writing , and encourage them to appreciate different forms of written work . Students also have opportunities to attend cultural symposiums , national and international bi @-@ cultural forums , research on contemporary issues , and embark on refined overseas <unk> to strengthen their world and cultural views under the Global Classroom Programme . 
 = = = Life Education Programme = = = 
 Apart from development of cultural intelligence , life skills are also incorporated into the curriculum to prepare students for the future , by assisting students in the acquisition of various life skills that will be useful as they become part of the 21st century workforce . The Learning for Life Programme ( LLP ) provides a unique cognitive @-@ aesthetic domain of learning through drama , public speaking , debate , puppetry and creative Chinese lyrical composition , to strengthen self @-@ expression and nurtures aesthetics appreciation in students , as well as to allow them to learn and embrace cultural diversity . 
 In the Science , Technology , Engineering and Mathematics Applied Learning Programme ( STEM ALP ) , students explore using <unk> Micro @-@ controller in health related science and technology . Students also acquire science research skills to deepen their proficiency in Sciences . 
 = = = Enhanced Art Programme ( EAP ) = = = 
 Since 2013 , Nan Chiau High School is a certified education centre for the Enhanced Art Programme ( EAP ) for students who have keen interest in pursuing arts and design . Introduced in 2011 by the Ministry of Education , the two @-@ year programme provide an enriched learning environment for Secondary 3 and 4 students who are inclined towards Art , as a complementary to the Art Elective Programme ( AEP ) . Enrichment programmes such as the Aesthetics Week , Student @-@ Initiated Project in Art and Lower Secondary Integrated Art Modules are also integrated for deepened understanding and application opportunities for the art students . 
 = = = Exchange Programmes ( Global Classroom Programme ) = = = 
 Nan Chiau High School has its unique overseas learning programme that offers all students an opportunity to go on subsidised learning trips to deepen their understanding on their academic subjects , perform community projects or involvement as part of the programmes within their Co @-@ Curricular Activities ( CCAs ) . Through this programme , opportunities are also infused for interaction with students , educators and subject specialists around the region and the globe . These included famous writers , entrepreneurs , and students from sister schools such as Ming @-@ Dao High School of Taiwan & <unk> High School of Kyoto , Japan . 
 = = Co @-@ curricular Activities = = 
 Nan Chiau High School offers a wide variety of extra @-@ curricular activities , labelled Co @-@ Curricular Activities ( CCA ) by the Ministry of Education , consisting of sports groups , uniformed groups , performing arts , clubs and societies . Of which , many CCAs have attained spectacular performances throughout the years of history of the institution since its relocation to Sengkang in 2001 . 
 The NCHS National Cadet Corps unit ( <unk> ) has been awarded Gold for 19 consecutive years , winning the Best Unit Competition ( <unk> ) in 2014 . The National Police Cadet Corps ( NPCC , currently the largest uniformed group in Singapore ) unit of the institution have attained Gold Award consecutively for 9 years in the annual Unit Overall Proficiency Award ( <unk> ) . The NCHS Red Cross Youth attained the Community Service Award ( Gold ) for years 2010 and 2013 , and the Excellence Unit Award ( Gold ) for years 2011 and 2012 . The Scouts of Nan Chiau High School , despite newly established in 2011 , have attained the National Patrol Camp Best Newcomer Award , and National Patrol Camp Overall Silver in 2013 . 
 A niche of Nan Chiau High School , the performing arts groups have consistently attained Certificates of Accomplishment and Certificates of Distinction in the Singapore Youth Festival ( SYF ) since the change of Central Judging Assessment to Arts Presentation Assessment in 2012 . The 2007 SYF Central Judging Assessment saw the Chinese dance , String Orchestra and Choir attained Gold with Honour , with Chinese Orchestra , Chinese LDDS , English LDDS , Contemporary Dance and Wind Orchestra attaining Silver . In 2011 saw the Chinese Dance , Choir and English LDDS attaining Gold with Honours at the SYF Central Judging . Performing Arts groups of the institution also reaches out to the community through public performances , for instance the FOCUS held in 2016 at the <unk> Community Club . 
 The clubs and societies of Nan Chiau High School allowed for more varieties of exposure to skills and interests of the students , and have achieved outstanding achievements . The NCHS Robotics Club is the retaining zonal champion of the <unk> @-@ DSO East Zone Robotics Challenge since 2014 , and have been organising annual competition for primary and secondary school students since 2009 . The Multimedia Club attained the Best School Award for consecutive years 2014 and 2015 in the Canon Photo Marathon . 
 The full listing of Co @-@ curricular Activities ( CCAs ) offered by Nan Chiau High School is featured below . 
 = = = Sports and Games = = = 
 Basketball 
 Badminton 
 Table Tennis 
 Wushu 
 Track & Field ( 2nd CCA ) 
 = = = Uniformed Groups = = = 
 National Cadet Corps 
 National Police Cadet Corps 
 Red Cross Youth 
 Scouts 
 = = = Performing Arts = = = 
 Chinese Dance 
 Chinese Orchestra 
 Choir 
 Chinese LDDS 
 English LDDS 
 Contemporary Dance 
 String Orchestra 
 Wind Orchestra 
 = = = Clubs and Societies = = = 
 Multimedia and Photography Club 
 Infocomm Club 
 Robotics Club 
 Library Club 
 Green Club 
 Debate Club 
 = = = Visual Arts and Culture = = = 
 Mind Games ( Chinese Chess and <unk> ) 
 Visual Arts Club ( Ceramic / Art & Design ) 
 Chinese Calligraphy 
 = = = Student Council = = = 
 The student council is distinguished by their striped ties . Members of the Council are involved in the running of several school events as well as certain daily functions of the school . Student Councillors also take up the role of ambassadors of the school during major school events and functions . 
 = = = Class Council = = = 
 The Class Council is formed by the representatives of individual classes . Apart maintaining discipline procedures in the class , the class council functions alongside the student council as a bridge between the school and the students , and building unity and class spirit through the participation in organising inter @-@ class competitions . 
 = = Events = = 
 = = = <unk> in Harmony = = = 
 Since 2012 , Nan Chiau High School organises the single day community fund raising event annually to raise funds for the community welfare organisations around the district such as the <unk> , REACH Family Service Centre . The event is open to the public , which the students , alumni and the parents support group of the institution set up food and games booths around the campus , as well as put up performances for the community to engage for a good cause . 
 = = Relation with Other Schools = = 
 = = = Combined Sports Meet = = = 
 Nan Chiau High School , Xinmin Secondary School & Yishun Town Secondary School hold combined sports meets yearly since 2013 to give student athletes from the participating schools a platform to showcase their physical talent and also for the schools to unite together to celebrate and enjoy . Apart from the inter @-@ school competitions among students , parent @-@ teacher races are also featured to engage the parents and school staff . 
 = = = NYP @-@ YTSS @-@ NCHS Science and Technology Research Programme = = = 
 The NYP @-@ YTSS @-@ NCHS Science and Technology Research Programme is a collaborated initiative between Nanyang Polytechnic , Yishun Town Secondary School and Nan Chiau High School for upper secondary levels with the aim of providing opportunities for capable science students to acquire science knowledge beyond academic syllabus , carry out research modules using contemporary technology , and interact with specialists in the relevant fields of Sciences and Information Technology . The research projects are presented in the form of an annual symposium hosted by Yishun Town Secondary and Nan Chiau High alternately , which serves as a platform for students involved to showcase their work to fellow schoolmates and counterparts from other schools . 
 = = School Alumni = = 
 Nan Chiau High School boosts a significant alumni community , comprising alumni from both Nan Chiau High School and Nan Chiau Primary School , which were once affiliated . The community under various bodies continues to organise events and programmes that bonds the alumni together , as well as contributing alongside the school committee to benefit the students ’ of both institutions . 
 = = = Nan Chiau Alumni Association = = = 
 Nan Chiau Alumni Association ( NCAA ) is the main alumni body of Nan Chiau High School and Nan Chiau Primary School . Formed on 12 January 1990 at the Kim Yam Road campus , the association works closely with the two institutions to preserve the traditional values of the schools while placing emphasis on the moral , physical , cognitive , social and aesthetic aspects of students ’ development . It also serves as a platform for all members from the Nan Chiau family to socialise and stay in contact with each other . With the relocation and separation of Nan Chiau High School with the ancillary primary school section in December 2000 , NCAA presently functions at both Nan Chiau Primary School and Nan Chiau High School . In 2001 , the NCAA started the Weekend Activities Program at Nan Chiau Primary School to complement the school curriculum , and is highly successful for providing a holistic education for the primary school pupils . 
 = = = Youth of Nan Chiau = = = 
 Youth of Nan Chiau is the youth wing of the Nan Chiau Alumni Association that comprises the youth graduates from both Nan Chiau High and Nan Chiau Primary . The youth wing plays a supportive role alongside the NCAA during events , gatherings when need arises . The youth wing also organizes activities for students of Nan Chiau High and Nan Chiau Primary on an ad @-@ hoc basis . 
 = = = Nan Chiau Youth Mentors = = = 
 The Nan Chiau Youth Mentors ( <unk> ) consists of young graduates from Nan Chiau High School who have strong passion of providing assistance to the juniors within the scope of a holistic education . The members of team works alongside the school to provide assistance and sharing for upper secondary levels preparing for the GCE O Level national examinations , as well as individual mentorship of their former Co @-@ curricular Activities ( CCAs ) . 
 = = Notable Alumni = = 
 = = = Education and Politics = = = 
 Mr. Peh Chin Hua : Former Member of Parliament , Jalan Besar Group Representation Constituency ( 1988 – 2001 ) ; Executive Chairman , White Group ( Singapore ) ; Former Executive Chairman ( 1992 – 2005 ) , Dragon Land Limited . 
 Dr. Leong Chan @-@ Hoong : Deputy Head , Social Lab , Lee Kuan Yew Institute of Policy Studies , National University of Singapore 
 <unk> . Goh Lay Kuan : Singapore pioneer dance choreographer and arts educator ; Winner , Cultural Medallion , 1995 ; Co @-@ founder , Singapore Performing Arts School 
 = = = Business and Enterprise = = = 
 Mr. Jason Yeo - Founder and Chief Executive of JCS Group . 
 Ms. Han Kim Ling : Product Lifecycle Manager , <unk> ; Former Project Manager , Tyco Electronics ) 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = = Campus = = = 
 = = = Events = = = 
 = Beauchamp – Sharp Tragedy = 
 The Beauchamp – Sharp Tragedy ( sometimes called the Kentucky Tragedy ) was the murder of Kentucky legislator Solomon P. Sharp by Jereboam O. Beauchamp . As a young lawyer , Beauchamp had been an admirer of Sharp until Sharp allegedly fathered an illegitimate child with Anna Cooke , a planter 's daughter . [ a ] Sharp denied paternity of the stillborn child . Later , Beauchamp began a relationship with Cooke , who agreed to marry him on the condition that he kill Sharp to avenge her honor . Beauchamp and Cooke married in June 1824 , and in the early morning of November 7 , 1825 , Beauchamp murdered Sharp at Sharp 's home in Frankfort . 
 An investigation soon revealed Beauchamp as the killer , and he was apprehended at his home in Glasgow , four days after the murder . He was tried , convicted , and sentenced to death by hanging . He was granted a stay of execution to allow him to write a justification of his actions . Anna Cooke @-@ Beauchamp was tried for complicity in the murder , but was acquitted for lack of evidence . Her devotion to Beauchamp prompted her to stay in his cell with him , where the two attempted a double suicide by drinking laudanum shortly before the execution . This attempt failed . On the morning of the execution , the couple again attempted suicide , this time by stabbing themselves with a knife Anna had smuggled into the cell . When the guards discovered them , Beauchamp was rushed to the gallows , where he was hanged before he could die of his stab wound . He was the first person legally executed in the state of Kentucky . Anna Cooke @-@ Beauchamp died from her wounds shortly before her husband was hanged . In accordance with their wishes , the couple 's bodies were positioned in an embrace when buried in the same coffin . 
 While Beauchamp 's primary motive in killing Sharp was to defend the honor of his wife , speculation raged that Sharp 's political opponents had instigated the crime . Sharp was a leader of the New Court party during the Old Court – New Court controversy in Kentucky . At least one Old Court partisan alleged that Sharp denied paternity of Cooke 's son by claiming the child was a mulatto , the son of a family slave . Whether Sharp made such a claim has never been verified . New Court partisans insisted that the allegation was concocted to stir Beauchamp 's anger and provoke him to murder . The Beauchamp – Sharp Tragedy served as the inspiration for numerous literary works , most notably Edgar Allan Poe 's unfinished Politian and Robert Penn Warren 's World Enough and Time ( 1950 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Jereboam Beauchamp was born in Barren County , Kentucky , in 1802 . Educated in the school of Dr. Benjamin Thurston , he resolved to study law at age eighteen . While observing the lawyers practicing in Glasgow and Bowling Green , Beauchamp was particularly impressed with the abilities of Solomon P. Sharp . Sharp had twice been elected to the state legislature and had served two terms in the U.S. House of Representatives . Beauchamp became disenchanted with Sharp when , in 1820 , a planter 's daughter named Anna Cooke claimed Sharp was the father of her child , who was stillborn . Sharp denied paternity , and public opinion favored him . The disgraced Cooke became a recluse at her mother 's plantation outside Bowling Green . 
 Beauchamp 's father lived a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from Cooke 's estate , and the young man wanted to meet her . Beauchamp gradually gained Cooke 's trust by visiting under the guise of borrowing books from her library . By summer 1821 , the two became friends and began a courtship . Beauchamp was eighteen ; Cooke was at least thirty @-@ four . As the courtship progressed , Cooke told Beauchamp that , before they could be married , he would have to kill Solomon Sharp . Beauchamp agreed to her request , expressing his own desire to dispatch Sharp . 
 The preferred method of honor killing in that day was a duel . Despite Cooke 's admonition that Sharp would not accept a challenge to duel , Beauchamp traveled to Frankfort to gain an audience with him . He had recently been named the state 's attorney general by Governor John Adair . Beauchamp 's account of the interview states that he bullied and humiliated Sharp , that Sharp begged for his life , and that Beauchamp promised to horsewhip Sharp every day until he consented to the duel . For two days , Beauchamp remained in Frankfort , awaiting the duel . He discovered that Sharp had left town , allegedly destined for Bowling Green . Beauchamp rode to Bowling Green , only to find that Sharp was not there and was not expected . Sharp was saved from Beauchamp 's first attempt on his life . 
 Cooke resolved to kill Sharp herself . The next time Sharp was in Bowling Green on business , she sent a letter to him that denounced Beauchamp 's actions and claimed she had broken off all contact with him . She asked Sharp to visit her at her plantation before he left town . Sharp questioned the messenger who delivered the letter , as he suspected a trap . He replied to her , saying he would visit at the time appointed . Beauchamp and Cooke awaited the visit , but Sharp never arrived . When Beauchamp rode to Bowling Green to investigate , he learned that Sharp had left for Frankfort two days earlier , leaving substantial unfinished business . Beauchamp concluded that Sharp would eventually have to return to Bowling Green to finish his business there . Determined to await Sharp 's return , Beauchamp opened a legal practice in the city . Throughout 1822 and 1823 , Beauchamp practiced law and waited for Sharp to return . He never did . 
 Although Beauchamp had not completed the task she set him , Cooke married the younger man in mid @-@ June 1824 . Beauchamp immediately hatched another plot to kill Sharp . He began sending letters – each from a different post office and signed with a pseudonym – requesting Sharp 's assistance in settling a land claim and asking when he would again be in Green River country . Sharp finally answered Beauchamp 's last letter – mailed in June 1825 – but gave no date for his arrival . 
 = = Murder = = 
 Serving as attorney general in Governor Adair 's administration , Sharp had become involved in the Old Court – New Court controversy . The conflict was primarily between debtors who sought relief from their financial burdens after the Panic of 1819 ( the New Court , or Relief , faction ) and the creditors to whom these obligations were owed ( the Old Court , or Anti @-@ Relief , faction ) . Sharp , who came from humble beginnings , sided with the New Court . By 1825 , the New Court faction 's power was on the decline . In an attempt to bolster the party 's influence , Sharp resigned as attorney general in 1825 to run for a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives . His opponent was Old Court stalwart John J. Crittenden . 
 During the campaign , Old Court supporters again raised the issue of Sharp 's seduction and abandonment of Anna Cooke . Old Court supporter John Upshaw Waring printed handbills that not only accused Sharp of fathering Cooke 's child , but said that Sharp had denied paternity of the child on the grounds that it was a mulatto and the son of a Cooke family slave . Whether Sharp made such a claim has never been determined . Despite the allegations , Sharp won the election . 
 Word of Sharp 's alleged claims soon reached Jereboam Beauchamp , reviving his resolve to kill him . Beauchamp abandoned the idea of killing Sharp honorably in a duel . Instead , he decided to murder him and cast suspicion on his political enemies . To add to the intrigue , Beauchamp plotted to commit the murder on the eve of the General Assembly 's opening session . 
 Beauchamp rode to Frankfort on business , reaching it on November 6 . Unable to find lodging at the local inns , he rented a room in the private residence of Joel Scott , warden of the state penitentiary . Sometime after midnight , Scott heard a commotion from Beauchamp 's room . When he investigated , he found the door latch open and the room unoccupied . Beauchamp , clad in a disguise , buried a set of his clothes near the Kentucky River , then proceeded to Sharp 's house . Sharp was not at home , but Beauchamp soon found him at a local hotel . He returned to Sharp 's house , concealed himself nearby , and waited for Sharp 's return . He observed Sharp re @-@ enter the house about midnight . 
 Beauchamp approached the house at approximately two o 'clock in the morning on November 7 , 1825 . In his Confession , he described the encounter : 
 I put on my mask , drew my dagger and proceeded to the door ; I knocked three times loud and quick , Colonel Sharp said ; " Who 's there " - " Covington " I replied , quickly Sharp 's foot was heard upon the floor . I saw under the door as he approached without a light . I drew my mask over my face and immediately Colonel Sharp opened the door . I advanced into the room and with my left hand I grasped his right wrist . The violence of the grasp made him spring back and trying to disengage his wrist , he said , " What Covington is this . " I replied John A. Covington . " I don 't know you , " said Colonel Sharp , " I know John W. Covington . " Mrs. Sharp appeared at the partition door and then disappeared , seeing her disappear I said in a persuasive tone of voice , " Come to the light Colonel and you will know me , " and pulling him by the arm he came readily to the door and still holding his wrist with my left hand I stripped my hat and handkerchief from over my forehead and looked into Sharp 's face . He knew me the more readily I imagine , by my long , bush , curly suit of hair . He sprang back and exclaimed in a tone of horror and despair , " Great God it is him , " and as he said that he fell on his knees . I let go of his wrist and grasped him by the throat dashing him against the facing of the door and muttered in his face , " die you villain . " As I said that I plunged the dagger to his heart . 
 The wound severed Sharp 's aorta , killing him almost instantly . Sharp 's wife Eliza witnessed the entire scene from the top of the stairs in the house , but Beauchamp fled before he could be identified or captured . Returning to the site where he had buried a change of clothes , he stripped off his disguise , tied it up with a rock , and sank them in the Kentucky River . In his regular clothes , he returned to his room at Scott 's house , where he remained until the following morning . 
 = = Arrest = = 
 After learning of the murder , the Kentucky General Assembly authorized the governor to offer a reward of $ 3 @,@ 000 for the arrest and conviction of Sharp 's killer . The trustees of the city of Frankfort added a reward of $ 1 @,@ 000 , and friends of Sharp raised an additional $ 2 @,@ 000 reward . Suspicion for the killing rested on three men : Beauchamp , Waring , and Patrick H. Darby . During Sharp 's 1824 campaign for a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives , Darby had remarked that , should Sharp be elected , " he would never take his seat and would be as good as a dead man " . Waring had made similar threats , boasting that he had already stabbed six men . 
 A warrant was sworn out for Waring 's arrest , but officials soon learned that he was incapacitated , after being shot through both hips the day before Sharp 's death . When Darby discovered that he was under suspicion , he began his own investigation into the murder . He traveled to Simpson County where he met Captain John F. Lowe , who told Darby that Beauchamp had related to him detailed plans for the assassination . He also furnished Darby with a letter that contained damaging admissions against Beauchamp . 
 The first night following the murder , Beauchamp stayed at the home of a relative in Bloomfield . The next day , he traveled to Bardstown , where he spent the night . He lodged with his brother @-@ in @-@ law in Bowling Green on the night of November 9 before returning to his home in Glasgow on November 10 . He and Anna had planned to flee to Missouri , but before nightfall , a posse had arrived from Frankfort to arrest him . 
 He was taken to Frankfort and tried before an examining court , but Commonwealth 's Attorney Charles S. Bibb said that he had not yet collected enough evidence to detain him . Beauchamp was released , but agreed to stay in Frankfort for ten days to allow the court to finish its investigation . During this time , Beauchamp wrote letters to John J. Crittenden and George M. Bibb requesting their legal aid in the matter . Neither letter was answered . Meanwhile , Beauchamp 's uncle , a state senator , gathered a defense team that included former U.S. Senator John Pope . 
 During the investigation , unsuccessful attempts were made to match a knife taken from Beauchamp upon his arrest to the type of wound observed on Sharp 's body . Efforts to match a footprint found near Sharp 's house to Beauchamp were similarly unsuccessful . The posse that arrested Beauchamp had taken a bloody handkerchief from the crime scene , but had lost it on the trip back to Frankfort after the arrest . The best evidence presented by the prosecution was the testimony of Sharp 's wife Eliza that she heard the killer 's voice and that it was distinctly high @-@ pitched . When given the opportunity to hear Beauchamp 's voice , she identified it as that of the killer . 
 When questioned , Patrick Darby testified that in 1824 , Beauchamp had solicited his services in order to bring suit against Sharp for unspecified charges . During their ensuing conversations , Beauchamp had related the story of Sharp 's abandonment of Anna Cooke and her child , swearing that he would kill him one day , even if he had to come to Frankfort and shoot him down in the street . The combined testimonies of Eliza Sharp and Patrick Darby were sufficient to persuade the city magistrates to hold Beauchamp for trial during the circuit court 's next term , which began in March 1826 . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Beauchamp was indicted , and his trial began May 8 , 1826 . Beauchamp pleaded not guilty , but never testified during the trial . Captain Lowe was called to repeat the story he had originally related to Patrick Darby regarding Beauchamp 's threats to kill Sharp . He further testified that Beauchamp returned home following the murder waving a red flag and declaring that he had " gained the victory . " He also turned over to the court a letter from the Beauchamps regarding the murder . In the letter , Beauchamp maintained his innocence , but told Lowe that his enemies were plotting against him and asked him to testify in his behalf . The letter gave Lowe several talking points to mention if called to testify , some true and some otherwise . 
 Eliza Sharp repeated her assertion that the murderer 's voice was that of Beauchamp . Joel Scott , the warden who gave Beauchamp lodging the night of the murder , testified that he heard Beauchamp leave during the night and return later that night . He also mentioned that Beauchamp was extremely inquisitive about the crime upon being told of it the next morning . The most extensive testimony came from Darby , who recounted his 1824 meeting with Beauchamp . According to Darby , Beauchamp claimed that Sharp offered him and Anna $ 1 @,@ 000 , a slave girl , and 200 acres ( 0 @.@ 81 km2 ) of land if they would leave him alone . Sharp later reneged on the offer . 
 Some witnesses maintained that the killer 's claim to be John A. Covington was telling . They said that both Sharp and Beauchamp had been acquainted with John W. Covington , and that Beauchamp often mistakenly called him John A. Covington . Other witnesses told of threats they had heard Beauchamp make against Sharp . 
 Beauchamp 's defense team attempted to discredit Patrick Darby by stressing his association with the Old Court and suggesting the murder was politically motivated . They also presented witnesses who testified that they knew of no hostility between Beauchamp and Sharp , and questioned whether Darby and Beauchamp 's 1824 meeting ever occurred . 
 During closing arguments , defense counsel John Pope attempted to discredit Darby ; the latter reacted by assaulting one of Pope 's co @-@ counselors with a cane . The trial lasted thirteen days , and despite the absence of any physical evidence , including a murder weapon , the jury returned a guilty verdict after only an hour of deliberation on May 19 . Beauchamp was sentenced to be executed by hanging on June 16 , 1826 . 
 During the trial , Anna Beauchamp appealed to John Waring for help on her husband 's behalf . She also tried to entice John Lowe to commit perjury and testify on her husband 's behalf . Both appeals were denied . On May 20 , Anna was examined by two justices of the peace on suspicion of being an accessory to the murder , but was acquitted due to lack of evidence . At her request , Anna was permitted to stay in the cell with Beauchamp . 
 Pope 's request to have the verdict overturned was denied , but the judge granted Beauchamp a stay of execution until July 7 to allow him to produce a written justification of his actions . In it , Beauchamp said he had killed Sharp to defend Anna 's honor . Beauchamp had hoped to publish his work before his execution , but the libelous charges it contained – that prosecution witnesses committed perjury and bribery to see him convicted – delayed its publication . 
 = = Execution = = 
 The Beauchamps were accused of trying to bribe a guard to let them escape , but this effort failed . They also tried to get a letter to Senator Beauchamp , asking for his help in escaping . A final plea to Governor Desha for another stay of execution was denied on July 5 . Later that day , the couple attempted a double suicide by taking large doses of laudanum , but both survived . 
 On July 7 , the morning of Beauchamp 's scheduled execution , Anna requested that the guard allow her privacy while she dressed . Anna tried another overdose on laudanum , but was unable to keep it down . She had smuggled a knife into the cell , and the couple attempted another double suicide by stabbing themselves with it . When they were discovered , Anna was taken to the jailer 's home and tended to by doctors . 
 Weakened by his own wounds , Beauchamp was loaded on a cart to be taken to the gallows and hanged before he bled to death . He insisted on seeing his wife before being executed , but doctors told him she was not severely injured and would recover . Beauchamp protested that not being allowed to see his wife was cruel , and the guards consented to take him to her . Upon arriving , he was angered to see that the doctors had lied to him ; Anna was too weak even to speak to him . He remained with her until he could no longer feel her pulse . He kissed her lifeless lips and declared " For you I lived — for you I die . " 
 On his way to the gallows , Beauchamp asked to see Patrick Darby , who was among the assembled spectators . Beauchamp smiled and offered his hand , but Darby declined the gesture . Beauchamp publicly denied that Darby had any involvement with the murder , but accused Darby of having lied about the 1824 meeting . Darby denied this accusation of perjury and tried to engage Beauchamp in a discussion about it , hoping he would retract the charge , but the prisoner ordered the cart driver to continue to the gallows . 
 At the gallows , Beauchamp assured the assembled clergy that he had a salvation experience on July 6 . Too weak to stand , he was held upright by two men while the noose was tied around his neck . At Beauchamp 's request , the Twenty @-@ Second Regiment musicians played Bonaparte 's Retreat from Moscow while 5 @,@ 000 spectators watched his execution . It was the first legal hanging in Kentucky 's history . Beauchamp 's father requested the bodies of his son and daughter @-@ in @-@ law for burial . The two bodies were placed in an embrace in a single coffin , as they had requested . They were buried in Maple Grove Cemetery in Bloomfield , Kentucky . The couple 's tombstone was engraved with a poem written by Anna Beauchamp . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Beauchamp 's confession was published in 1826 , the same year as The Letters of Ann Cook – the authorship of which is disputed . J. G. Dana and R. S. Thomas also published an edited transcript of Beauchamp 's trial . The following year , Sharp 's brother , Dr. Leander Sharp , wrote Vindication of the character of the late Col. Solomon P. Sharp to defend Sharp from the charges made in Beauchamp 's confession . Patrick Darby threatened to sue Dr. Sharp if the work were published . John Waring threatened Dr. Sharp 's life if he published Vindication . All copies of the work were left in the Sharps ' home in Frankfort , where they were discovered many years later during a remodel . 
 Though many regarded Sharp 's murder as an honor killing , some New Court partisans charged that Beauchamp had been incited to violence by members of the Old Court party , specifically Patrick Darby . Sharp was thought to be the minority party 's choice for Speaker of the House for the 1826 session . By enticing Beauchamp to murder Sharp , the Old Court could remove a political enemy . Sharp 's widow Eliza appeared to believe this notion . In an 1826 letter in the New Court Argus of Western America , she referred to Darby as " the chief instigator of the foul murder which has deprived me of all my heart held most dear on earth " . 
 Some Old Court partisans claimed that Governor Desha had offered Beauchamp a pardon if he would implicate Darby and Achilles Sneed , clerk of the Old Court , in his confession . Shortly before his execution , Beauchamp was heard to say he had " been New Court long enough , and would die an Old Court man . " Beauchamp had steadfastly identified with the Old Court , and his claim seems to imply that he had at least considered colluding with the New Court powers to secure his pardon . Such a deal is explicitly mentioned in one version of Beauchamp 's Confession . Beauchamp ultimately rejected the deal for fear that he would be double @-@ crossed by the New Court , leaving him imprisoned and deprived of the chivalrous motive for his actions . 
 Darby denied involvement with the murder , claiming that New Court partisans such as Francis P. Blair and Amos Kendall were seeking to defame him . He also countered that Eliza Sharp 's letter to the New Court Argus was written by New Court supporters , including Kendall , the newspaper 's editor . The claims and counterclaims between the two sides reached such an extreme that an 1826 letter in the New Court Argus suggested that New Court supporters had instigated Sharp 's murder in order to blame Old Court partisans and affix a stigma to them . 
 Darby eventually brought suit for libel against Kendall and Eliza Sharp , as well as Senator Beauchamp and Sharp 's brother Leander . Numerous delays and changes of venue prevented any of the suits from ever going to trial . Darby died in December 1829 . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 The Beauchamp – Sharp Tragedy inspired fictional works , notably Edgar Allan Poe 's unfinished play Politian and Robert Penn Warren 's World Enough and Time . William Gilmore Simms wrote three works based on the Sharp 's murder and aftermath : <unk> : or The Kentucky Tragedy , A Tale of Passion , Charlemont , and <unk> : A Sequel to <unk> . <unk> : A Romance of the Mohawk by Charles Fenno Hoffman , Octavia <unk> by Charlotte Barnes , Sybil by John Savage , and Conrad and Eudora ; or , The Death of Alonzo : A Tragedy and Leoni , The Orphan of Venice both by Thomas Holley Chivers , all draw to some degree on the events that surround Sharp 's murder . 
 = Losing My Religion = 
 " Losing My Religion " is a song by the American alternative rock band R.E.M. The song was released as the first single from the group 's 1991 album Out of Time . Built on a mandolin riff , " Losing My Religion " was an unlikely hit for the group , garnering heavy airplay on radio as well as on MTV due to its critically acclaimed music video . The song became R.E.M. ' s highest @-@ charting hit in the United States , reaching No. 4 on the Billboard Hot 100 and expanding the group 's popularity beyond its original fanbase . It was nominated for several Grammy Awards , and won two for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal and Best Short Form Music Video . 
 = = Background = = 
 R.E.M. guitarist Peter Buck wrote the main riff and chorus to the song on a mandolin while watching television one day . Buck had just bought the instrument and was attempting to learn how to play it , recording the music as he practiced . Buck said that " when I listened back to it the next day , there was a bunch of stuff that was really just me learning how to play mandolin , and then there 's what became ' Losing My Religion ' , and then a whole bunch more of me learning to play the mandolin . " 
 Recording of the song started in September 1990 at Bearsville Studio A in Woodstock , New York . The song was arranged in the studio with mandolin , electric bass , and drums . Bassist Mike Mills came up with a bassline inspired by the work of Fleetwood Mac bassist John McVie ; by his own admission he could not come up with one for the song that was not derivative . Buck said the arrangement of the song " had a hollow feel to it . There 's absolutely no midrange on it , just low end and high end , because Mike usually stayed pretty low on the bass . " The band decided to have touring guitarist Peter Holsapple play acoustic guitar on the recording . Buck reflected , " It was really cool : Peter and I would be in our little booth , sweating away , and Bill and Mike would be out there in the other room going at it . It just had a really magical feel . " Singer Michael Stipe 's vocal was recorded in a single take . Orchestral strings , arranged by Mark Bingham , were added to the song by members of the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra at Soundscape Studios in Atlanta , Georgia in October 1990 . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Losing My Religion " is based on Peter Buck 's mandolin @-@ playing . Buck said , " The verses are the kinds of things R.E.M. uses a lot , going from one minor to another , kind [ of ] like those ' Driver 8 ' chords . You can 't really say anything bad about E minor , A minor , D , and G – I mean , they 're just good chords . " Buck noted that " Losing My Religion " was " probably the most typical <unk> song on the record . We are trying to get away from those kind of songs , but like I said before , those are some good chords . " Orchestral strings play through parts of the song . The song is in natural minor . 
 In the song , Michael Stipe sings the lines " That 's me in the corner / That 's me in the spotlight / Losing my religion " . The phrase " losing my religion " is an expression from the southern region of the United States that means losing one 's temper or civility , or " being at the end of one 's rope . " Stipe told The New York Times the song was about romantic expression . He told Q that " Losing My Religion " is about " someone who pines for someone else . It 's unrequited love , what have you . " Stipe compared the song 's theme to " Every Breath You Take " by The Police , saying , " It 's just a classic obsession pop song . I 've always felt the best kinds of songs are the ones where anybody can listen to it , put themselves in it and say , ' Yeah , that 's me . ' " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Losing My Religion " was released on February 19 , 1991 in the United States as the lead single from R.E.M. ' s forthcoming album Out of Time . The band 's record label , Warner Bros. , was wary about the group 's choice of the song as the album 's first single . Steven Baker , who was vice president of product management at Warner Bros. at the time , said there were " long , drawn @-@ out discussions " about releasing such an " unconventional track " as the single until the label agreed . While R.E.M. declined to tour to promote Out of Time , the band visited radio stations , gave numerous press interviews , and made appearances on MTV to promote the record . Meanwhile , Warner Bros. worked to establish the single at campus , modern rock , and album @-@ oriented rock radio stations before promoting it to American Top 40 stations , where it became a success . " The record crosses the boundaries of being just an alternative record " , one Top 40 radio station program director said ; he admitted that " Losing My Religion " was " a hard record to program ; you can 't play L.L. Cool J behind it . But it 's a real pop record — you can dance to it . " 
 " Losing My Religion " became R.E.M. ' s biggest hit in the U.S. , peaking at No. 4 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The single stayed on the chart for 21 weeks . It charted at number 19 on the UK Singles Chart , and peaked at No. 16 and No. 11 in Canada and Australia , respectively . Mills said years later , " Without ' Losing My Religion ' , Out of Time would have sold two or three million [ copies ] , instead of the ten [ million copies ] or so it did . But the phenomenon that is a worldwide hit is an odd thing to behold . Basically that record was a hit in almost every civilised country in the world . " The success of " Losing My Religion " and Out of Time broadened R.E.M. ' s audience beyond its original college radio @-@ based fanbase . When asked at the time if he was worried that the song 's success might alienate older fans , Buck told Rolling Stone , " The people that changed their minds because of ' Losing My Religion ' can just kiss my ass . " 
 The song received a number of critical plaudits . The single placed second in the Village Voice Pazz & Jop annual critics ' poll , behind Nirvana 's " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . R.E.M. was nominated for seven awards at the 1992 Grammy Awards . " Losing My Religion " alone earned several nominations , including Record of the Year and Song of the Year . The song won two awards , for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals and Best Short Form Music Video . In 2004 , Rolling Stone listed the song at No. 169 on its list of the " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . In 2007 , the song was listed as No. 9 on VH1 's 100 Greatest Songs of the 90s . In 2009 , Blender ranked it at No. 79 on its list of " The 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born " . The song is also included on The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's list of 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Losing My Religion " was directed by Tarsem Singh . As opposed to previous R.E.M. videos , Michael Stipe agreed to lip sync the lyrics . The video originated as a combination of ideas envisioned by Stipe and Singh . Stipe wanted the promo to be a straightforward performance video , akin to Sinéad O 'Connor 's " Nothing Compares 2 U " . Singh wanted to create a video in the style of a certain type of Indian filmmaking , where everything would be " melodramatic and very dreamlike " , according to Stipe . 
 The video begins with a brief sequence inside a dark room where water drips from an open window . Buck , Berry , and Mills run across the room while Stipe remains seated . A pitcher of milk drops from the windowsill and shatters , and the song begins . Director Singh drew inspiration from the Italian painter Caravaggio and the Russian filmmaker Andrei Tarkovsky . The video is laden with religious imagery such as Saint Sebastian and Hindu deities , portrayed in a series of tableaux . 
 The music video was nominated in nine categories at the 1991 MTV Video Music Awards . The video won six awards , including Video of the Year , Best Group Video , Breakthrough Video , Best Art Direction , Best Direction , and Best Editing . " Losing My Religion " also ranked second in the music video category of the 1991 Pazz & Jop poll . 
 = = MTV Unplugged Session = = 
 R.E.M. recorded an MTV Unplugged session of " Losing My Religion " with members of the Atlanta Symphony Orchestra to celebrate the 10th anniversary of MTV . The 1991 recording was made in the auditorium of the Madison @-@ Morgan Cultural Center in Madison , Georgia , about 20 miles south of Athens . Subsequently the song won the award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " Weird Al " Yankovic covered the song in his polka medley " Polka Your Eyes Out " from his 1991 album Off the Deep End . 
 Zambian singer <unk> released as a cover of the song on her 1995 album Look No Further . It was issued as a US @-@ only single that same year . 
 Post @-@ hardcore band Scary Kids Scaring Kids covered this song in 2006 for the album Punk Goes 90 's . 
 Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) covered the song in the 2010 Glee episode " Grilled Cheesus " . 
 Lacuna Coil covered the song in their 2012 album , Dark Adrenaline . 
 <unk> published a cover of the song in their 2003 album Engraved in Black . 
 Trivium released a cover of the song on the Japanese special edition of their 2013 album Vengeance Falls . 
 Jacqui Naylor released a cover of the song on her 2008 album You Don 't Know Jacqui . 
 House music producer Hardwell sampled the song in his 2013 single " Three Triangles ( Losing My Religion ) " . 
 <unk> released a parody , " Proving My Religion " , as a single in September 2014 . The new lyrics are of a Christian trying to live out and share his faith despite adversity . 
 Gregorian covered this song on their 1999 album Masters of Chant , it was also re @-@ released on the video album The Masterpieces . 
 Tori Amos covered the song on the soundtrack to the 1995 film Higher Learning . 
 Runner @-@ up Dia Frampton covered the song on the first season of NBC 's The Voice . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Bill Berry , Peter Buck , Mike Mills , and Michael Stipe , except where noted 
 7 " 
 " Losing My Religion " – 4 : 29 
 " Rotary Eleven " – 2 : 32 
 12 " and Compact Disc 
 " Losing My Religion " – 4 : 29 
 " Rotary Eleven " – 2 : 32 
 " After Hours " ( Lou Reed ) ( Live ) 1 – 2 : 08 
 UK " Collector 's Edition " CD one 
 " Losing My Religion " – 4 : 29 
 " Stand " ( Live ) 1 – 3 : 21 
 " Turn You Inside @-@ Out " ( Live ) 1 – 4 : 23 
 " World Leader Pretend " ( Live ) 1 – 4 : 24 
 UK " Collector 's Edition " CD two 
 " Losing My Religion " – 4 : 29 
 " Fretless " – 4 : 51 
 " Losing My Religion " ( Live acoustic version / Rockline ) – 4 : 38 
 " Rotary Eleven " – 2 : 32 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Slug ( song ) = 
 " Slug " is a song by Passengers , a side project of rock band U2 and musician Brian Eno . It is the second track on Passengers ' only release , the 1995 album Original Soundtracks 1 . The track was originally titled " Seibu " and was almost left off the album before it was rediscovered later during the recording sessions . Though Eno made most of the creative decisions during the recording sessions , " Slug " was one of the few tracks that the members from U2 tried to craft themselves . 
 Lyrically , it is a portrait of a desolate soul during a time of celebration . As Passengers were writing songs for fictional soundtracks , they tried to create a visual suggestion from the music that was more important than the story within the lyrics . In " Slug " , the instrumentation is intended to represent the lights turning on in a city a night . The group primarily drew inspiration for the song from U2 's experiences in Tokyo at the conclusion of the Zoo TV Tour . " Slug " was praised as one of the best songs on the album by critics from various publications . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 U2 and musician Brian Eno intended to record a soundtrack for Peter Greenaway 's 1996 film The Pillow Book . The plan did not come to fruition , however Eno suggested they continue recording music suitable for film soundtracks , as Eno did with his Music for Films album series . The result was Original Soundtracks 1 , an album of ambient and electronic music , created as a side project between U2 and Eno under the pseudonym " Passengers " . Vocalist Bono felt the visual suggestion from the music was more important than the story told by the lyrics , so the band tried to create visual music when recording , continuing a trend that had begun with their 1993 song " Zooropa " . U2 spent time in Shinjuku , Tokyo , at the end of the Zoo TV Tour in 1993 , and their experience in the city influenced the recording sessions . The vivid colours of the street signs and billboards reminded them of the set of the 1982 science @-@ fiction film Blade Runner . Bono has said that Original Soundtracks 1 evoked the setting of a " bullet train in Tokyo " . 
 Recording sessions for Original Soundtracks 1 began with a two @-@ week session in November 1994 at Westside Studios in London , and continued for an additional five weeks in mid @-@ 1995 at Hanover Quay in Dublin . " Slug " was originally titled " Seibu " , after the Japanese department store of the same name . The song was written to create the visual of lights turning on at dusk in a city like Tokyo , beginning with " tinkling " opening notes resembling Christmas lights , and a gradually rising and falling synthesizer rhythm throughout the song . After recording " Seibu " , the band set it aside , and the piece was forgotten as the sessions progressed . It was almost left off the album , until guitarist The Edge rediscovered the track while looking through the session 's discarded songs . Recognizing its potential to become a great song , The Edge brought " Seibu " to Eno 's attention , and in early June 1995 , Eno listed " Seibu " as a late entry to be considered for the album . 
 As producer , Eno had most of the artistic control during the sessions , limiting U2 's creative input on the recordings , which prompted The Edge to ensure extra work was put into arranging the song . He has said that along with " Miss Sarajevo " and " Your Blue Room " , " Seibu " was one of only three tracks from the album in which U2 " really dug in [ their ] heels and did more work on and tried to craft " . By early July 1995 , the band renamed the song " Seibu / Slug " , and Eno noted that the piece started to sound better and described it as a " lovely song " . During the final editing of the track , Eno became angry with U2 because they seemed unfocused and he felt he was doing all the work . Bono decided to completely deconstruct the mix of the song . Eno initially disapproved , but was satisfied after hearing the changes . The editing of the track was finalised on 10 July , and The Edge later said he felt his effort to put extra work into the song " paid off " . It was released with the title " Slug " on 7 November 1995 , as the second track on the Passengers album Original Soundtracks 1 ; out of the fourteen tracks on the album , it is one of six tracks to feature vocals . Details of the song 's recording sessions were documented in Eno 's 1996 book , A Year with Swollen Appendices . 
 As the compositions on Original Soundtracks 1 were written as film soundtrack music , each track is associated with a specific film in the album 's liner notes , which were written by Eno . Four of the fourteen tracks are associated with real films , while " Slug " is credited as having been written for a fictional German film of the same name . The liner notes describe the plot of Slug as the story of a young car mechanic who aspires to attract the attention of a cashier by staging a robbery and pretending to be the hero . However , the " robbers " decide to abandon the scheme and commit an actual robbery , causing a shootout where the cashier accidentally shoots a security guard and is arrested , and the mechanic must find a way to get her released from prison . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Slug " runs for 4 minutes , 41 seconds and features a synthesizer rhythm laid over a drum track , with vocals sung by Bono in a murmured voice . Jon Pareles of The New York Times described the song 's sound as a mix of " shimmering echoed guitars with swampy electronic rhythms " . The lyrics are sung in a list @-@ like format and consist of 19 lines , most of which begin with the words " Don 't want " ; the song 's title is included in the lyrics " Don 't want to be a slug " . The line " Don 't want what I deserve " was written by Bono with a sense of " ironic , self @-@ deprecatory humour " . The end result is a depiction of celebration set against the thoughts of a desolate soul , as echoed in the closing verse " Don 't want to change the frame / Don 't want to be a pain / Don 't want to stay the same " , with an undercurrent of confusion regarding the differences between love and faith . 
 The lyrics were written in five minutes and are derived from U2 's experience in Shinjuku . Bono has compared the lyrics to those in U2 's 1991 song " Tryin ' to Throw Your Arms Around the World " , as both depict the nightlife of a city . Lyrics were also inspired by the presence of the yakuza in Shinjuku ; the group saw gang members with amputated fingers as punishment for their misbehaviour , which Bono has described as a " very , very surreal " experience . He has said that " Slug " was about avoiding harmful mistakes , stating " we all play with things we shouldn 't play with " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Slug " received positive feedback from critics and was praised as one of the best tracks from the album . Shortly following its release , Tony Fletcher wrote in Newsweek that it is one of the album 's " instantly rewarding songs " and that Bono 's vocals show " genuine tenderness " . The Orange County Register listed " Slug " as one of the best songs on the album , describing it as a " dreamy " track , and The Age and The Dominion both stated that the song features Bono providing his best vocals . Jim DeRogatis of Rolling Stone described " Slug " as one of the album 's most engaging tracks , commenting that it could have been an outtake from Zooropa because of Bono 's " minimal crooning over skeletal backing tracks " . 
 In retrospective reviews , Pitchfork Media wrote that " Slug " is the high point of the album , featuring a " beautiful , slow @-@ motion groove " , and Slate praised the experimental nature of the song , calling it " lovely and melodic " . Uncut reviewer Alastair McKay described the melody as " clockwork " while noting that Eno 's " yen for melodic simplicity " was evident . In an otherwise critical review of Original Soundtracks 1 , Irvin Tan of Sputnikmusic commented that " Slug " is one of several " strangely beautiful numbers " from the album , and that its " attempt at creating an overarching time / place set actually comes off quite well " . Hot Press editor Niall Stokes said " the song has a genuinely reflective quality and it underlines the fact that , some 15 years on since the release of their debut album Boy , U2 are still running . " The song was featured on Stereogum 's list of " The 31 Best U2 Non @-@ Album Tracks " , which claims the song is unlike any other track that U2 has recorded , describing it as a " hauntingly beautiful entry in U2 's canon " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Tropical Storm Georgette ( 2010 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Georgette was a short @-@ lived tropical storm that struck the Baja California Sur in September 2010 . Georgette originated from an area of disturbed weather over the eastern Pacific on September 20 . The next day , the system was upgraded into a tropical storm a short distance south of Baja California Sur . As the storm moved over the peninsula , it weakened to a topical depression . It continued north and as such made landfall on mainland Mexico on September 22 . Georgette dissipated early the next day while located inland over Sonora . Although officials noted the threat for heavy rainfall across northwest Mexico and Baja California , damage was minimal and no deaths were reported in the country . However , remnant moisture moved into New Mexico , producing flooding that killed one person . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Tropical Storm Georgette were from a tropical wave that moved off the west coast of Africa on September 1 . Lacking organization , the wave was difficult to track as it moved across the Atlantic basin . Convection eventually increased on September 7 , as the system approached the Lesser Antilles . On September 14 , Hurricane Karl developed from the northern portion of the system over the western Caribbean Sea ; however , the southern portion of the wave crossed northern Central America and entered the Pacific Ocean on September 17 . The area of disturbed weather was first mentioned on the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) around that time , but signification development was initially not anticipated . Wind shear was forecast to decrease slightly ; however , and based on this the NHC gave the system a medium chance of undergoing tropical cyclogenesis during the next two days . 
 Gradual development took place as convection consolidated around the center of circulation while located west of Sonora . During the afternoon of September 20 , an area of low pressure developed within the system , prompting the NHC to classify it as a tropical depression . At this time , the depression was situated roughly 240 mi ( 390 km ) south @-@ southeast of Cabo San Lucas . Situated along the western edge of a subtropical ridge , the system was steered towards the north @-@ northwest throughout its existence . 
 Within hours of becoming a depression on September 20 , strong wind shear caused convection to diminish . However , data from an ASCAT scatterometer pass revealed that the system attained gale @-@ force winds , resulting in the depression being upgraded to a tropical storm on 0000 UTC September 21 . Operationally , the first advisory on storm was not issued until 1200 UTC , where it was named Georgette . Meanwhile , thunderstorm activity increased near the center of the storm . Little change took place throughout the day as the storm approached Baja California Sur . Around 1800 UTC , Georgette made landfall near San Jose del Cabo with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Additionally , a barometric pressure of 999 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) was measured . Shortly before entering the Gulf of California , Georgette weakened to a tropical depression . Maintaining winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) , the storm later made a second landfall near San Carlos in Sonora . Shortly after moving inland , the low @-@ level circulation dissipated over the mountains of western Mexico . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Prior to the arrival of Georgette , the Mexican government issued a tropical storm warning for extreme southern Baja California Sur . , but was dropped when Georgette moved inland . Officials warned rural areas in Baja California Sur of heavy rain and high wind . Forecasters at the NHC noted the potential for up to 10 in ( 25 mm ) of rainfall , especially over the higher terrain . The forecasters also noted potential for deadly flooding and mudslides . Officials evacuated over 1 @,@ 000 families from floodplains and opened four shelters in Los Cabos . 
 In Sonora , the state 's civil protection committee placed the south portion of the state under an " orange " alert , and a " red " alert soon after ; the alert was lifted that same evening , after Georgette moved inland . A total of 52 shelters were opened in the <unk> municipality . In Guaymas , 300 people from the city and surrounding areas were placed in shelters ; 250 more people sought shelter from Georgette in Empalme . Schools in Bahía Kino and coastal areas of the Hermosillo Municipality suspended classes as a precaution . Classes resumed statewide on September 23 . 
 Georgette caused the heaviest rains on Baja California Sur in the last 15 years , leaving many people homeless . Georgette also produced high waves . The tropical cyclone worsened Mexico 's flooding problem which started when Hurricane Karl made landfall several days earlier . A peak rainfall total of 5 @.@ 9 in ( 150 mm ) fell in Todos Santos . Throughout Sonora , rainfall up to 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) triggered flooding that damaged 220 homes . Georgette caused 2 @.@ 61 in ( 66 mm ) of rainfall in Guaymas Flooding was reported in several places ( Empalme , Etchojoa , Navojoa , Guaymas , Los Mochis ) , causing 500 @,@ 000 people to be evacuated . Heavy runoff caused inflows of 18 @,@ 000 cu ft / s ( 510 m3 / s ) into El <unk> Dam , forcing the Comisión Nacional del Agua , the local water authorities , to release water from the dam . 
 Moisture from the system combined with an approaching trough to produce heavy rainfall and thunderstorms across New Mexico . A total of 6 @.@ 42 in ( 163 mm ) was reported in Gladstone . The rains caused flooding that killed a person along the Rio Grande near <unk> . 
 = Gilbert Stuart = 
 Gilbert Charles Stuart ( born Stewart ; December 3 , 1755 – July 9 , 1828 ) was an American painter from Rhode Island . 
 Gilbert Stuart is widely considered one of America 's foremost portraitists . His best known work is the unfinished portrait of George Washington that is sometimes referred to as The Athenaeum , begun in 1796 and never finished . Stuart retained the portrait and used it to paint 130 copies which he sold for $ 100 each . The image of George Washington featured in the painting has appeared on the United States one @-@ dollar bill for over a century , and on various U.S. Postage stamps of the 19th century and early 20th century . 
 Throughout his career , Gilbert Stuart produced portraits of over 1 @,@ 000 people , including the first six Presidents of the United States . His work can be found today at art museums throughout the United States and the United Kingdom , most notably the Metropolitan Museum of Art and Frick Collection in New York City , the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. , the National Portrait Gallery , London , Worcester Art Museum in Massachusetts , and the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Gilbert Stuart was born on December 3 , 1755 in <unk> , Rhode Island , a village of North Kingstown , and baptized at Old Narragansett Church on April 11 , 1756 . He was the third child of Gilbert Stewart , a Scottish immigrant employed in the snuff @-@ making industry , and Elizabeth Anthony Stewart , a member of a prominent land @-@ owning family from Middletown , Rhode Island . Stuart 's father worked in the first colonial snuff mill in America , which was located in the basement of the family homestead . 
 Gilbert Stuart moved to Newport , Rhode Island at the age of six , where his father pursued work in the merchant field . In Newport , Stuart first began to show great promise as a painter . In 1770 , Stuart made the acquaintance of Scottish artist Cosmo Alexander , a visitor of the colonies who made portraits of local patrons and who became a tutor to Stuart . Under the guidance of Alexander , Stuart painted the famous portrait Dr. Hunter 's Spaniels when he was fourteen years old ; it hangs today in the Hunter House Mansion in Newport . The painting is also referred to as Dr. Hunter 's Dogs by some accounts . 
 In 1771 , Stuart moved to Scotland with Alexander to finish his studies ; however , Alexander died in Edinburgh one year later . Stuart tried to maintain a living and pursue his painting career , but to no avail , so he returned to Newport in 1773 . 
 = = = England and Ireland = = = 
 Stuart 's prospects as a portraitist were jeopardized by the onset of the American Revolution and its social disruptions . Stuart departed for England in 1775 following the example set by John Singleton Copley . He was unsuccessful at first in pursuit of his vocation , but he then became a protégé of Benjamin West with whom he studied for the next six years . The relationship was beneficial , with Stuart exhibiting at the Royal Academy as early as 1777 . 
 By 1782 , Stuart had met with success , largely due to acclaim for The Skater , a portrait of William Grant . It was Stuart 's first full @-@ length portrait and , according to art historian Margaret C. S. Christman , it " belied the prevailing opinion that Stuart ' made a tolerable likeness of a face , but as to the figure , he could not get below the fifth button ' " . Stuart said that he was " suddenly lifted into fame by a single picture " . 
 At one point , the prices for his pictures were exceeded only by those of renowned English artists Joshua Reynolds and Thomas Gainsborough . Despite his many commissions , however , Stuart was habitually neglectful of finances and was in danger of being sent to debtors ' prison . During this period , he married Charlotte Coates . In 1787 , he fled to Dublin , Ireland where he painted and accumulated debt with equal vigor . 
 = = = New York and Philadelphia = = = 
 Stuart ended his 18 @-@ year stay in the British Isles in 1793 , leaving behind numerous unfinished paintings . He returned to the United States and settled briefly in New York City . In 1795 , he moved to Germantown , Pennsylvania , near ( and now part of ) Philadelphia , where he opened a studio . It was here that he gained a foothold in the art world and lasting fame with pictures of many important Americans of the day . 
 Stuart painted George Washington in a series of iconic portraits , each of them leading in turn to a demand for copies , and keeping Stuart busy and highly paid for years . The most famous and celebrated of these likenesses is known as The Athenaeum and is currently portrayed on the United States one dollar bill . Stuart , along with his daughters , painted a total of 130 reproductions of The Athenaeum . However , he never completed the original version ; after finishing Washington 's face , he kept the original version to make the copies . He sold up to 70 of his reproductions for a price of US $ 100 each , but the original portrait was left unfinished at the time of Stuart 's death in 1828 . The painting was jointly purchased by the National Portrait Gallery and Museum of Fine Arts , Boston in 1980 , and was on display in the National Portrait Gallery in Washington , D.C. in late 2014 . 
 Another celebrated image of Washington is the Lansdowne portrait , a large portrait with one version hanging in the East Room of the White House . This painting was saved during the burning of Washington by British troops in the War of 1812 through the intervention of First Lady Dolley Madison and Paul Jennings , one of President James Madison 's slaves . Four versions of the portrait are attributed to Stuart , and additional copies were painted by other artists for display in U.S. government buildings . In 1803 , Stuart opened a studio in Washington , D. C. 
 = = = Boston , 1805 – 1828 = = = 
 Stuart moved to Devonshire Street in Boston in 1805 , continuing in both critical acclaim and financial troubles . He exhibited works locally at Doggett 's Repository and Julien Hall . He was sought out for advice by other artists , such as John Trumbull , Thomas Sully , Washington Allston , and John Vanderlyn . In 1824 , he suffered a stroke , which left him partially paralyzed ; but nevertheless , he continued to paint for two years until his death in Boston on July 9 , 1828 at the age of 72 . He was buried in the Old South Burial Ground of the Boston Common . Stuart left his family deeply in debt , and his wife and daughters were unable to purchase a grave site . He was , therefore , buried in an unmarked grave which was purchased cheaply from Benjamin Howland , a local carpenter . 
 The Boston Athenæum held a benefit exhibition of his works in August 1828 in an effort to provide financial aid for Stuart 's family . Over 250 portraits were lent for this critically acclaimed and well @-@ subscribed exhibition . This also marked the first public showing of Stuart 's unfinished 1796 Athenæum Head portrait of Washington . 
 Stuart 's family recovered from their financial troubles roughly ten years later , and they planned to move his body to a family cemetery in Newport , Rhode Island . However , they could not remember the exact location of his body , and it was never moved . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 By the end of his career , Gilbert Stuart had taken the likenesses of more than one thousand American political and social figures . He was praised for the vitality and naturalness of his portraits , and his subjects found his company agreeable . John Adams , for example , said : 
 Speaking generally , no penance is like having one 's picture done . You must sit in a constrained and unnatural position , which is a trial to the temper . But I should like to sit to Stuart from the first of January to the last of December , for he lets me do just what I please , and keeps me constantly amused by his conversation . 
 Stuart was known for working without the aid of sketches , beginning directly upon the canvas . This was very unusual for the time period . His approach is suggested by the advice which he gave to his pupil Matthew Harris Jouett : " Never be sparing of colour , load your pictures , but keep your colours as separate as you can . No blending , tis destruction to clear & bea [ u ] <unk> effect . " 
 Stuart 's works can be found today at art museums and private collections throughout the United States and Great Britain , including the University Club in New York City , the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City , the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. , the National Portrait Gallery in London , and the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston . 
 His daughter Jane Stuart ( 1812 – 1888 ) was also a painter . She sold many of his paintings and her replicas of them from her studios in Boston and Newport , Rhode Island . 
 A life mask of Stuart was created by John Henri Isaac <unk> around 1825 . 
 In 1940 , the U.S. Post Office issued a series of Postage stamps called the " Famous Americans Series " commemorating famous artists , authors , inventors , scientists , poets , educators , and musicians . Gilbert Stuart is found on the 1 cent issue in the artists category , along with James McNeil Whistler , Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens , Daniel Chester French , and Frederic Remington . 
 Today , Stuart 's birthplace in <unk> , Rhode Island is open to the public as the Gilbert Stuart Birthplace and Museum . The museum consists of the original house which Stuart was born in , with copies of paintings from throughout his career hanging throughout the house . The museum opened in 1930 . 
 = = Notable people painted = = 
 This is a partial list of portraits painted by Stuart . 
 Abigail Adams - Second First Lady of the United States , wife of John Adams 
 John Adams - Second President of the United States 
 John Quincy Adams - Sixth President of the United States 
 John Jacob Astor - First American multi @-@ millionaire , fur trader , art patron 
 John Bannister - Owner of Bannister 's Wharf in Newport , Rhode Island 
 Commodore John Barry - Father of the American Navy 
 Ann Willing Bingham - Philadelphia socialite 
 Horace Binney - Prominent Philadelphia lawyer 
 Hugh Henry Brackenridge - early American writer , Pennsylvania Supreme Court justice , and founder of the University of Pittsburgh 
 Jean Baptiste <unk> <unk> - Performer and theatrical impresario 
 Rosalie Stier Calvert - Belgian born heiress and mother of Charles Benedict Calvert 
 Mary Willing Clymer - Philadelphia socialite 
 John Singleton Copley - American colonial portraitist 
 Horatio Gates - American Revolutionary War general 
 King George III - King of United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , 1760 – 1820 
 King George IV - King of United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland , 1820 – 30 
 John Jay - First Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court 
 Thomas Jefferson - Third President of the United States 
 Rufus King - a signer of United States Constitution . 
 Robert Kingsmill - Admiral in Royal Navy during American and French Revolutionary Wars 
 King Louis XVI - King of France , 1774 - 1792 
 James Madison - Fourth President of the United States 
 Daniel McCormick - New York merchant and banker 
 Samuel Miles - Revolutionary War General , Philadelphia Mayor , and America 's first faithless elector 
 James Monroe - Fifth President of the United States 
 Daniel Pinckney Parker - Prominent Boston Merchant 
 John Randolph of Roanoke - Virginia Congressman and Senator 
 Joshua Reynolds - English artist 
 Henry Rice - Boston merchant and Massachusetts state legislator 
 Thomas Townshend , 1st Viscount Sydney , in whose honour the cities of Sydney in New South Wales , Australia and Sydney in Nova Scotia , Canada , are named , in 1785 and 1788 respectively . 
 George Washington - First President of the United States 
 Martha Washington - First First Lady of the United States , wife of George Washington 
 Benjamin West - American painter 
 Catherine Brass Yates - Philadelphia socialite 
 = = Portrait gallery = = 
 = = Stuart 's art on postage stamps = = 
 Gilbert Stuart 's paintings of Washington , Jefferson and others have been served as models for the engravings found on dozens of U.S. Postage stamps released over the years . Washington 's image from the famous Washington portrait , The Athenaeum , is probably the most noted example of Stuart 's work on U.S. Postage . 
 For other examples of Stuart 's art on US Postage see : US Presidents on US postage stamps 
 = = Artworks = = 
 = San Diego = 
 San Diego / <unk> <unk> / ( Spanish for " Saint <unk> " ) is a major city in California , in San Diego County , on the coast of the Pacific Ocean in Southern California , approximately 120 miles ( 190 km ) south of Los Angeles and immediately adjacent to the border with Mexico . 
 With an estimated population of 1 @,@ 394 @,@ 928 as of July 1 , 2015 , San Diego is the eighth @-@ largest city in the United States and second @-@ largest in California . It is part of the San Diego – Tijuana conurbation , the second @-@ largest <unk> agglomeration between the US and a bordering country after Detroit – Windsor , with a population of 4 @,@ 922 @,@ 723 people . San Diego is the birthplace of California and is known for its mild year @-@ round climate , natural deep @-@ water harbor , extensive beaches , long association with the United States Navy and recent emergence as a healthcare and biotechnology development center . 
 Historically home to the Kumeyaay people , San Diego was the first site visited by Europeans on what is now the West Coast of the United States . Upon landing in San Diego Bay in 1542 , Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo claimed the entire area for Spain , forming the basis for the settlement of Alta California 200 years later . The Presidio and Mission San Diego de Alcalá , founded in 1769 , formed the first European settlement in what is now California . In 1821 , San Diego became part of the newly @-@ independent Mexico , which reformed as the First Mexican Republic two years later . In 1850 , it became part of the United States following the Mexican – American War and the admission of California to the union . 
 The city is the seat of San Diego County and is the economic center of the region as well as the San Diego – Tijuana metropolitan area . San Diego 's main economic engines are military and defense @-@ related activities , tourism , international trade , and manufacturing . The presence of the University of California , San Diego ( UCSD ) , with the affiliated UCSD Medical Center , has helped make the area a center of research in biotechnology . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ colonial period = = = 
 The original inhabitants of the region are now known as the San Dieguito and La Jolla people . The area of San Diego has been inhabited by the Kumeyaay people . 
 = = = Spanish period = = = 
 The first European to visit the region was Portuguese @-@ born explorer Juan Rodríguez Cabrillo sailing under the flag of Castile . Sailing his flagship San Salvador from Navidad , New Spain , Cabrillo claimed the bay for the Spanish Empire in 1542 , and named the site ' San Miguel ' . In November 1602 , Sebastián Vizcaíno was sent to map the California coast . Arriving on his flagship San Diego , Vizcaíno surveyed the harbor and what are now Mission Bay and Point Loma and named the area for the Catholic Saint <unk> , a Spaniard more commonly known as San Diego de Alcalá . On November 12 , 1602 , the first Christian religious service of record in Alta California was conducted by Friar Antonio de la Ascensión , a member of Vizcaíno 's expedition , to celebrate the feast day of San Diego . 
 In May 1769 , Gaspar de Portolà established the Fort Presidio of San Diego on a hill near the San Diego River . It was the first settlement by Europeans in what is now the state of California . In July of the same year , Mission San Diego de Alcalá was founded by Franciscan friars under Junípero Serra . By 1797 , the mission boasted the largest native population in Alta California , with over 1 @,@ 400 neophytes living in and around the mission proper . Mission San Diego was the southern anchor in California of the historic mission trail El Camino Real . Both the Presidio and the Mission are National Historic Landmarks . 
 = = = Mexican period = = = 
 In 1821 , Mexico won its independence from Spain , and San Diego became part of the Mexican territory of Alta California . In 1822 , Mexico began attempting to extend its authority over the coastal territory of Alta California . The fort on Presidio Hill was gradually abandoned , while the town of San Diego grew up on the level land below Presidio Hill . The Mission was secularized by the Mexican government in 1833 , and most of the Mission lands were sold to wealthy Californio settlers . The 432 residents of the town petitioned the governor to form a pueblo , and Juan María Osuna was elected the first alcalde ( " municipal magistrate " ) , defeating Pío Pico in the vote . ( See , List of pre @-@ statehood mayors of San Diego . ) However , San Diego had been losing population throughout the 1830s and in 1838 the town lost its pueblo status because its size dropped to an estimated 100 to 150 residents . Beyond town Mexican land grants expanded the number of California ranchos that modestly added to the local economy . 
 In 1846 , the United States went to war against Mexico and sent a naval and land expedition to conquer Alta California . At first they had an easy time of it capturing the major ports including San Diego , but the Californios in southern Alta California struck back . Following the successful revolt in Los Angeles , the American garrison at San Diego was driven out without firing a shot in early October 1846 . Mexican partisans held San Diego for three weeks until October 24 , 1846 , when the Americans recaptured it . For the next several months the Americans were blockaded inside the pueblo . Skirmishes occurred daily and snipers shot into the town every night . The Californios drove cattle away from the pueblo hoping to starve the Americans and their Californio supporters out . On December 1 the Americans garrison learned that the dragoons of General Stephen W. Kearney were at Warner 's Ranch . Commodore Robert F. Stockton sent a mounted force of fifty under Captain Archibald Gillespie to march north to meet him . Their joint command of 150 men , returning to San Diego , encountered about 93 Californios under Andrés Pico . In the ensuing Battle of San Pasqual , fought in the San Pasqual Valley which is now part of the city of San Diego , the Americans suffered their worst losses in the campaign . Subsequently a column led by Lieutenant Gray arrived from San Diego , rescuing Kearny 's battered and blockaded command . 
 Stockton and Kearny went on to recover Los Angeles and force the capitulation of Alta California with the " Treaty of Cahuenga " on January 13 , 1847 . As a result of the Mexican – American War of 1846 – 48 , the territory of Alta California , including San Diego , was ceded to the United States by Mexico , under the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848 . The Mexican negotiators of that treaty tried to retain San Diego as part of Mexico , but the Americans insisted that San Diego was " for every commercial purpose of nearly equal importance to us with that of San Francisco , " and the Mexican @-@ American border was eventually established to be one league south of the southernmost point of San Diego Bay , so as to include the entire bay within the United States . 
 = = = American period = = = 
 The state of California was admitted to the United States in 1850 . That same year San Diego was designated the seat of the newly established San Diego County and was incorporated as a city . Joshua H. Bean , the last alcalde of San Diego , was elected the first mayor . Two years later the city was bankrupt ; the California legislature revoked the city 's charter and placed it under control of a board of trustees , where it remained until 1889 . A city charter was re @-@ established in 1889 and today 's city charter was adopted in 1931 . 
 The original town of San Diego was located at the foot of Presidio Hill , in the area which is now Old Town San Diego State Historic Park . The location was not ideal , being several miles away from navigable water . In 1850 , William Heath Davis promoted a new development by the Bay shore called " New San Diego " , several miles south of the original settlement ; however , for several decades the new development consisted only a few houses , a pier and an Army depot . In the late 1860s , Alonzo Horton promoted a move to the bayside area , which he called " New Town " and which became Downtown San Diego . Horton promoted the area heavily , and people and businesses began to relocate to New Town because of its location on San Diego Bay convenient to shipping . New Town soon eclipsed the original settlement , known to this day as Old Town , and became the economic and governmental heart of the city . Still , San Diego remained a relative backwater town until the arrival of a railroad connection in 1878 . 
 In the early part of the 20th century , San Diego hosted two World 's Fairs : the Panama @-@ California Exposition in 1915 and the California Pacific International Exposition in 1935 . Both expositions were held in Balboa Park , and many of the Spanish / Baroque @-@ style buildings that were built for those expositions remain to this day as central features of the park . The buildings were intended to be temporary structures , but most remained in continuous use until they progressively fell into disrepair . Most were eventually rebuilt , using castings of the original façades to retain the architectural style . The menagerie of exotic animals featured at the 1915 exposition provided the basis for the San Diego Zoo . During the 1950s there was a citywide festival called Fiesta del Pacifico highlighting the area 's Spanish and Mexican past . In the 2010s there was a proposal for a large @-@ scale celebration of the 100th anniversary of Balboa Park , but the plans were abandoned when the organization tasked with putting on the celebration went out of business . 
 The southern portion of the Point Loma peninsula was set aside for military purposes as early as 1852 . Over the next several decades the Army set up a series of coastal artillery batteries and named the area Fort Rosecrans . Significant U.S. Navy presence began in 1901 with the establishment of the Navy Coaling Station in Point Loma , and expanded greatly during the 1920s . By 1930 , the city was host to Naval Base San Diego , Naval Training Center San Diego , San Diego Naval Hospital , Camp Matthews , and Camp Kearny ( now Marine Corps Air Station Miramar ) . The city was also an early center for aviation : as early as World War I , San Diego was proclaiming itself " The Air Capital of the West " . The city was home to important airplane developers and manufacturers like Ryan Airlines ( later Ryan Aeronautical ) , founded in 1925 , and Consolidated Aircraft ( later Convair ) , founded in 1923 . Charles A. Lindbergh 's plane The Spirit of St. Louis was built in San Diego in 1927 by Ryan Airlines . 
 During World War II , San Diego became a major hub of military and defense activity , due to the presence of so many military installations and defense manufacturers . The city 's population grew rapidly during and after World War II , more than doubling between 1930 ( 147 @,@ 995 ) and 1950 ( 333 @,@ 865 ) . During the final months of the war , the Japanese had a plan to target multiple U.S. cities for biological attack , starting with San Diego . The plan was called " Operation Cherry Blossoms at Night " and called for kamikaze planes filled with fleas infected with plague ( Yersinia pestis ) to crash into civilian population centers in the city , hoping to spread plague in the city and effectively kill tens of thousands of civilians . The plan was scheduled to launch on September 22 , 1945 , but was not carried out because Japan surrendered five weeks earlier . 
 After World War II , the military continued to play a major role in the local economy , but post @-@ Cold War cutbacks took a heavy toll on the local defense and aerospace industries . The resulting downturn led San Diego leaders to seek to diversify the city 's economy by focusing on research and science , as well as tourism . 
 From the start of the 20th century through the 1970s , the American tuna fishing fleet and tuna canning industry were based in San Diego , " the tuna capital of the world " . San Diego 's first tuna cannery was founded in 1911 , and by the mid @-@ 1930s the canneries employed more than 1 @,@ 000 people . A large fishing fleet supported the canneries , mostly staffed by immigrant fishermen from Japan , and later from the Portuguese Azores and Italy whose influence is still felt in neighborhoods like Little Italy and Point Loma . Due to rising costs and foreign competition , the last of the canneries closed in the early 1980s . 
 Downtown San Diego was in decline in the 1960s and 1970s , but experienced some urban renewal since the early 1980s , including the opening of Horton Plaza , the revival of the <unk> Quarter , and the construction of the San Diego Convention Center ; Petco Park opened in 2004 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 According to SDSU professor emeritus Monte Marshall , San Diego Bay is " the surface expression of a north @-@ south @-@ trending , nested graben " . The Rose Canyon and Point Loma fault zones are part of the San Andreas Fault system . About 15 miles ( 24 km ) east of the bay are the Laguna Mountains in the Peninsular Ranges , which are part of the backbone of the American continents . 
 The city lies on approximately 200 deep canyons and hills separating its mesas , creating small pockets of natural open space scattered throughout the city and giving it a hilly geography . Traditionally , San Diegans have built their homes and businesses on the mesas , while leaving the urban canyons relatively wild . Thus , the canyons give parts of the city a segmented feel , creating gaps between otherwise proximate neighborhoods and contributing to a low @-@ density , car @-@ centered environment . The San Diego River runs through the middle of San Diego from east to west , creating a river valley which serves to divide the city into northern and southern segments . The river used to flow into San Diego Bay and its fresh water was the focus of the earliest Spanish explorers . Several reservoirs and Mission Trails Regional Park also lie between and separate developed areas of the city . 
 Notable peaks within the city limits include Cowles Mountain , the highest point in the city at 1 @,@ 591 feet ( 485 m ) ; Black Mountain at 1 @,@ 558 feet ( 475 m ) ; and Mount Soledad at 824 feet ( 251 m ) . The Cuyamaca Mountains and Laguna Mountains rise to the east of the city , and beyond the mountains are desert areas . The Cleveland National Forest is a half @-@ hour drive from downtown San Diego . Numerous farms are found in the valleys northeast and southeast of the city . 
 In its 2013 ParkScore ranking , The Trust for Public Land reported that San Diego had the 9th @-@ best park system among the 50 most populous U.S. cities . ParkScore ranks city park systems by a formula that analyzes acreage , access , and service and investment . 
 = = = Communities and neighborhoods = = = 
 The city of San Diego recognizes 52 individual areas as Community Planning Areas . Within a given planning area there may be several distinct neighborhoods . Altogether the city contains more than 100 identified neighborhoods . 
 Downtown San Diego is located on San Diego Bay . Balboa Park encompasses several mesas and canyons to the northeast , surrounded by older , dense urban communities including Hillcrest and North Park . To the east and southeast lie City Heights , the College Area , and Southeast San Diego . To the north lies Mission Valley and Interstate 8 . The communities north of the valley and freeway , and south of Marine Corps Air Station Miramar , include Clairemont , Kearny Mesa , Tierrasanta , and Navajo . Stretching north from Miramar are the northern suburbs of Mira Mesa , Scripps Ranch , Rancho Peñasquitos , and Rancho Bernardo . The far northeast portion of the city encompasses Lake Hodges and the San Pasqual Valley , which holds an agricultural preserve . Carmel Valley and Del Mar Heights occupy the northwest corner of the city . To their south are Torrey Pines State Reserve and the business center of the Golden Triangle . Further south are the beach and coastal communities of La Jolla , Pacific Beach , Mission Beach , and Ocean Beach . Point Loma occupies the peninsula across San Diego Bay from downtown . The communities of South San Diego , such as San Ysidro and Otay Mesa , are located next to the Mexico – United States border , and are physically separated from the rest of the city by the cities of National City and Chula Vista . A narrow strip of land at the bottom of San Diego Bay connects these southern neighborhoods with the rest of the city . 
 For the most part , San Diego neighborhood boundaries tend to be understood by its residents based on geographical boundaries like canyons and street patterns . The city recognized the importance of its neighborhoods when it organized its 2008 General Plan around the concept of a " City of Villages " . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 San Diego was originally centered in the Old Town district , but by the late 1860s the center of focus had relocated to the bayfront in the belief that this new location would increase trade . As the " New Town " – present @-@ day Downtown – waterfront location quickly developed , it eclipsed Old Town as the center of San Diego . 
 The development of skyscrapers over 300 feet ( 91 m ) in San Diego is attributed to the construction of the El Cortez Hotel in 1927 , the tallest building in the city from 1927 to 1963 . As time went on multiple buildings claimed the title of San Diego 's tallest skyscraper , including the Union Bank of California Building and Symphony Towers . Currently the tallest building in San Diego is One America Plaza , standing 500 feet ( 150 m ) tall , which was completed in 1991 . The downtown skyline contains no super @-@ <unk> , as a regulation put in place by the Federal Aviation Administration in the 1970s set a 500 feet ( 152 m ) limit on the height of buildings within a one @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) radius of the San Diego International Airport . An iconic description of the skyline includes its skyscrapers being compared to the tools of a toolbox . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 San Diego is one of the top @-@ ten best climates in the Farmers ' Almanac and is one of the two best summer climates in America as scored by The Weather Channel . Under the Köppen – Geiger climate classification system , the San Diego area has been variously categorized as having either a semi @-@ arid climate ( BSh in the original classification and <unk> in modified Köppen classification ) or a Mediterranean climate ( Csa and Csb ) . San Diego 's climate is characterized by warm , dry summers and mild winters with most of the annual precipitation falling between December and March . The city has a mild climate year @-@ round , with an average of 201 days above 70 ° F ( 21 ° C ) and low rainfall ( 9 – 13 inches [ 230 – 330 mm ] annually ) . Dewpoints in the summer months range from 57 @.@ 0 ° F ( 13 @.@ 9 ° C ) to 62 @.@ 4 ° F ( 16 @.@ 9 ° C ) . 
 The climate in San Diego , like most of Southern California , often varies significantly over short geographical distances resulting in microclimates . In San Diego , this is mostly because of the city 's topography ( the Bay , and the numerous hills , mountains , and canyons ) . Frequently , particularly during the " May gray / June gloom " period , a thick " marine layer " cloud cover keeps the air cool and damp within a few miles of the coast , but yields to bright cloudless sunshine approximately 5 – 10 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 – 16 @.@ 1 km ) inland . Sometimes the June gloom lasts into July , causing cloudy skies over most of San Diego for the entire day . Even in the absence of June gloom , inland areas experience much more significant temperature variations than coastal areas , where the ocean serves as a moderating influence . Thus , for example , downtown San Diego averages January lows of 50 ° F ( 10 ° C ) and August highs of 78 ° F ( 26 ° C ) . The city of El Cajon , just 10 miles ( 16 km ) inland from downtown San Diego , averages January lows of 42 ° F ( 6 ° C ) and August highs of 88 ° F ( 31 ° C ) . 
 A sign of global warming , scientists at Scripps Institution of Oceanography say the average surface temperature of the water at Scripps Pier in the California Current has increased by almost 3 degrees since 1950 . 
 Rainfall along the coast averages about 10 inches ( 250 mm ) of precipitation annually . The average ( mean ) rainfall is 10 @.@ 65 inches ( 271 mm ) and the median is 9 @.@ 6 inches ( 240 mm ) . Most of the rainfall occurs during the cooler months . The months of December through March supply most of the rain , with February the only month averaging 2 inches ( 51 mm ) or more of rain . The months of May through September tend to be almost completely dry . Though there are few wet days per month during the rainy period , rainfall can be heavy when it does fall . Rainfall is usually greater in the higher elevations of San Diego ; some of the higher elevation areas of San Diego can receive 11 – 15 inches ( 280 – 380 mm ) of rain a year . Variability of rainfall can be extreme : in the wettest years of 1883 / 1884 and 1940 / 1941 more than 24 inches ( 610 mm ) fell in the city , whilst in the driest years as little as 3 @.@ 2 inches ( 80 mm ) has fallen for a full year . The wettest month on record has been December 1921 with 9 @.@ 21 inches ( 234 mm ) . 
 Snow in the city is so rare that it has been observed only five times in the century @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half that records have been kept . In 1949 and 1967 , snow stayed on the ground for a few hours in higher locations like Point Loma and La Jolla . The other three occasions , in 1882 , 1946 , and 1987 , involved flurries but no accumulation . 
 = = = Ecology = = = 
 Like most of southern California , the majority of San Diego 's current area was originally occupied by chaparral , a plant community made up mostly of drought @-@ resistant shrubs . The endangered Torrey pine has the bulk of its population in San Diego in a stretch of protected chaparral along the coast . The steep and varied topography and proximity to the ocean create a number of different habitats within the city limits , including tidal marsh and canyons . The chaparral and coastal sage scrub habitats in low elevations along the coast are prone to wildfire , and the rates of fire have increased in the 20th century , due primarily to fires starting near the borders of urban and wild areas . 
 San Diego 's broad city limits encompass a number of large nature preserves , including Torrey Pines State Reserve , Los Peñasquitos Canyon Preserve , and Mission Trails Regional Park . Torrey Pines State Reserve and a coastal strip continuing to the north constitute the only location where the rare species of Torrey Pine , P. <unk> <unk> , is found . 
 Due to the steep topography that prevents or discourages building , along with some efforts for preservation , there are also a large number of canyons within the city limits that serve as nature preserves , including Switzer Canyon , <unk> Canyon Natural Park , and Marian Bear Memorial Park in the San Clemente Canyon , as well as a number of small parks and preserves . 
 San Diego County has one of the highest counts of animal and plant species that appear on the endangered species list among counties in the United States . Because of its diversity of habitat and its position on the Pacific Flyway , San Diego County has recorded the presence of 492 bird species , more than any other region in the country . San Diego always scores very high in the number of bird species observed in the annual Christmas Bird Count , sponsored by the Audubon Society , and it is known as one of the " <unk> " areas in the United States . 
 San Diego and its backcountry are subject to periodic wildfires . In October 2003 , San Diego was the site of the Cedar Fire , which has been called the largest wildfire in California over the past century . The fire burned 280 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 100 km2 ) , killed 15 people , and destroyed more than 2 @,@ 200 homes . In addition to damage caused by the fire , smoke resulted in a significant increase in emergency room visits due to asthma , respiratory problems , eye irritation , and smoke inhalation ; the poor air quality caused San Diego County schools to close for a week . Wildfires four years later destroyed some areas , particularly within the communities of Rancho Bernardo , Rancho Santa Fe , and Ramona . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The city had a population of 1 @,@ 307 @,@ 402 according to the 2010 census , distributed over a land area of 372 @.@ 1 square miles ( 963 @.@ 7 km2 ) . The urban area of San Diego extends beyond the administrative city limits and had a total population of 2 @,@ 956 @,@ 746 , making it the third @-@ largest urban area in the state , after that of the Los Angeles metropolitan area and San Francisco metropolitan area . They , along with the Riverside – San Bernardino , form those metropolitan areas in California larger than the San Diego metropolitan area , with a total population of 3 @,@ 095 @,@ 313 at the 2010 census . 
 As of the Census of 2010 , there were 1 @,@ 307 @,@ 402 people living in the city of San Diego . That represents a population increase of just under 7 % from the 1 @,@ 223 @,@ 400 people , 450 @,@ 691 households , and 271 @,@ 315 families reported in 2000 . The estimated city population in 2009 was 1 @,@ 306 @,@ 300 . The population density was 3 @,@ 771 @.@ 9 inhabitants per square mile ( 1 @,@ 456 @.@ 3 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of San Diego was 45 @.@ 1 % White , 6 @.@ 7 % African American , 0 @.@ 6 % Native American , 15 @.@ 9 % Asian ( 5 @.@ 9 % Filipino , 2 @.@ 7 % Chinese , 2 @.@ 5 % Vietnamese , 1 @.@ 3 % Indian , 1 @.@ 0 % Korean , 0 @.@ 7 % Japanese , 0 @.@ 4 % Laotian , 0 @.@ 3 % Cambodian , 0 @.@ 1 % Thai ) . 0 @.@ 5 % Pacific Islander ( 0 @.@ 2 % <unk> , 0 @.@ 1 % Samoan , 0 @.@ 1 % Native Hawaiian ) , 12 @.@ 3 % from other races , and 5 @.@ 1 % from two or more races . The ethnic makeup of the city was 28 @.@ 8 % Hispanic or Latino ( of any race ) ; 24 @.@ 9 % of the total population were Mexican American , and 0 @.@ 6 % were Puerto Rican . 
 As of December 2012 , San Diego has the third @-@ largest homeless population in the United States ; the city 's homeless population has the largest percentage of homeless veterans in the nation . 
 As of January 1 , 2008 estimates by the San Diego Association of Governments revealed that the household median income for San Diego rose to $ 66 @,@ 715 , up from $ 45 @,@ 733 , and that the city population rose to 1 @,@ 336 @,@ 865 , up 9 @.@ 3 % from 2000 . The population was 45 @.@ 3 % non @-@ Hispanic whites , down from 78 @.@ 9 % in 1970 , 27 @.@ 7 % Hispanics , 15 @.@ 6 % Asians / Pacific Islanders , 7 @.@ 1 % blacks , 0 @.@ 4 % American Indians , and 3 @.@ 9 % from other races . Median age of Hispanics was 27 @.@ 5 years , compared to 35 @.@ 1 years overall and 41 @.@ 6 years among non @-@ Hispanic whites ; Hispanics were the largest group in all ages under 18 , and non @-@ Hispanic whites constituted 63 @.@ 1 % of population 55 and older . 
 In 2000 there were 451 @,@ 126 households out of which 30 @.@ 2 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 44 @.@ 6 % were married couples living together , 11 @.@ 4 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 39 @.@ 8 % were non @-@ families . Households made up of individuals account for 28 @.@ 0 % and 7 @.@ 4 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 61 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 30 . 
 The U.S. Census Bureau reported that in 2000 , 24 @.@ 0 % of San Diego residents were under 18 , and 10 @.@ 5 % were 65 and over . As of 2011 the median age was 35 @.@ 6 ; more than a quarter of residents were under age 20 and 11 % were over age 65 . Millennials ( ages 18 through 34 ) constitute 27 @.@ 1 % of San Diego 's population , the second @-@ highest percentage in a major U.S. city . The San Diego County regional planning agency , SANDAG , provides tables and graphs breaking down the city population into 5 @-@ year age groups . 
 In 2000 , the median income for a household in the city was $ 45 @,@ 733 , and the median income for a family was $ 53 @,@ 060 . Males had a median income of $ 36 @,@ 984 versus $ 31 @,@ 076 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 23 @,@ 609 . According to Forbes in 2005 , San Diego was the fifth wealthiest U.S. city but about 10 @.@ 6 % of families and 14 @.@ 6 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 20 @.@ 0 % of those under age 18 and 7 @.@ 6 % of those age 65 or over . Nonetheless , San Diego was rated the fifth @-@ best place to live in the United States in 2006 by Money magazine . 
 San Diego was named the ninth @-@ most LGBT @-@ friendly city in the U.S. in 2013 . The city also has the seventh @-@ highest percentage of gay residents in the U.S. Additionally in 2013 , San Diego State University ( SDSU ) , one of the city 's prominent universities , was named one of the top LGBT @-@ friendly campuses in the nation . 
 According to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center , 68 % of the population of the city identified themselves as Christians , with 22 % professing attendance at a variety of churches that could be considered Protestant , and 32 % professing Roman Catholic beliefs. while 27 % claim no religious affiliation . The same study says that other religions ( including Judaism , Buddhism , Islam , and Hinduism ) collectively make up about 5 % of the population . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The largest sectors of San Diego 's economy are defense / military , tourism , international trade , and research / manufacturing , respectively . In 2014 , San Diego was designated by a Forbes columnist as the best city in the country to launch a small business or startup company . 
 = = = Defense and military = = = 
 The economy of San Diego is influenced by its deepwater port , which includes the only major submarine and shipbuilding yards on the West Coast . Several major national defense contractors were started and are headquartered in San Diego , including General Atomics , Cubic , and <unk> . 
 San Diego hosts the largest naval fleet in the world : In 2008 it was home to 53 ships , over 120 tenant commands , and more than 35 @,@ 000 sailors , soldiers , Department of Defense civilian employees and contractors . About 5 percent of all civilian jobs in the county are military @-@ related , and 15 @,@ 000 businesses in San Diego County rely on Department of Defense contracts . 
 Military bases in San Diego include US Navy facilities , Marine Corps bases , and Coast Guard stations . The city is " home to the majority of the U.S. Pacific Fleet 's surface combatants , all of the Navy 's West Coast amphibious ships and a variety of Coast Guard and Military Sealift Command vessels " . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 Tourism is a major industry owing to the city 's climate , its beaches , and numerous tourist attractions such as Balboa Park , Belmont amusement park , San Diego Zoo , San Diego Zoo Safari Park , and SeaWorld San Diego . San Diego 's Spanish and Mexican heritage is reflected in the many historic sites across the city , such as Mission San Diego de Alcala and Old Town San Diego State Historic Park . Also , the local craft brewing industry attracts an increasing number of visitors for " beer tours " and the annual San Diego Beer Week in November ; San Diego has been called " America 's Craft Beer Capital . " 
 San Diego County hosted more than 32 million visitors in 2012 ; collectively they spent an estimated $ 8 billion locally . The visitor industry provides employment for more than 160 @,@ 000 people . 
 San Diego 's cruise ship industry used to be the second @-@ largest in California . Numerous cruise lines operate out of San Diego . However , cruise ship business has been in steady decline since peaking in 2008 , when the Port hosted over 250 ship calls and more than 900 @,@ 000 passengers . By 2011 the number of ship calls had fallen to 103 ( estimated ) . 
 Local sight @-@ seeing cruises are offered in San Diego Bay and Mission Bay . Also available are whale @-@ watching cruises to observe the migration of gray whales , peaking in mid @-@ January . Sport fishing is another popular tourist attraction ; San Diego is home to Southern California 's biggest sport fishing fleet . 
 = = = International trade = = = 
 San Diego 's commercial port and its location on the United States @-@ Mexico border make international trade an important factor in the city 's economy . The city is authorized by the United States government to operate as a Foreign Trade Zone . 
 The city shares a 15 @-@ mile ( 24 km ) border with Mexico that includes two border crossings . San Diego hosts the busiest international border crossing in the world , in the San Ysidro neighborhood at the San Ysidro Port of Entry . A second , primarily commercial border crossing operates in the Otay Mesa area ; it is the largest commercial crossing on the California @-@ Baja California border and handles the third @-@ highest volume of trucks and dollar value of trade among all United States @-@ Mexico land crossings . 
 One of the Port of San Diego 's two cargo facilities is located in Downtown San Diego at the Tenth Avenue Marine Terminal . This terminal has facilities for containers , bulk cargo , and refrigerated and frozen storage , so that it can handle the import and export of many commodities . In 2009 the Port of San Diego handled 1 @,@ 137 @,@ 054 short tons of total trade ; foreign trade accounted for 956 @,@ 637 short tons while domestic trade amounted to 180 @,@ 417 short tons . 
 Historically tuna fishing and canning was one of San Diego 's major industries , and although the American tuna fishing fleet is no longer based in San Diego , seafood companies Bumble Bee Foods and Chicken of the Sea are still headquartered there . 
 = = = Companies = = = 
 San Diego hosts several major producers of wireless cellular technology . Qualcomm was founded and is headquartered in San Diego , and is one of the largest private @-@ sector employers in San Diego . Other wireless industry manufacturers headquartered here include Nokia , LG Electronics , Kyocera International . , Cricket Communications and <unk> Wireless . The largest software company in San Diego is security software company <unk> Inc . San Diego also has the U.S. headquarters for the Slovakian security company <unk> . San Diego has been designated as an <unk> Innovation Center for collaboration potentially between wireless and life sciences . 
 The presence of the University of California , San Diego and other research institutions has helped to fuel biotechnology growth . In 2013 , San Diego has the second @-@ largest biotech cluster in the United States , below the Boston area and above the San Francisco Bay Area . There are more than 400 biotechnology companies in the area . In particular , the La Jolla and nearby Sorrento Valley areas are home to offices and research facilities for numerous biotechnology companies . Major biotechnology companies like Illumina and <unk> Biosciences are headquartered in San Diego , while many biotech and pharmaceutical companies have offices or research facilities in San Diego . San Diego is also home to more than 140 contract research organizations ( <unk> ) that provide a variety of contract services for pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies . 
 = = = Top employers = = = 
 According to the City 's 2015 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report , the top employers in the city are : 
 = = = Real estate = = = 
 San Diego has high real estate prices . As of May 2015 the median price of a house in San Diego was $ 520 @,@ 000 . However , since February 2016 the median home price has significantly dropped to $ 455 @,@ 000 . The San Diego metropolitan area had one of the worst housing affordability of all metropolitan areas in the United States . 
 Consequently , San Diego has experienced negative net migration since 2004 . A significant number of people moved to adjacent Riverside County , commuting daily to jobs in San Diego , while others are leaving the region altogether and moving to more affordable regions of the country . 
 San Diego home prices peaked in 2005 , then declined as part of a nationwide trend . As of December 2010 , home prices were down 36 percent from the peak in 2005 . The median home price declined by more than $ 200 @,@ 000 between 2005 and 2010 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Many popular museums , such as the San Diego Museum of Art , the San Diego Natural History Museum , the San Diego Museum of Man , the Museum of Photographic Arts , and the San Diego Air & Space Museum are located in Balboa Park , which is also the location of the San Diego Zoo . The Museum of Contemporary Art San Diego ( <unk> ) is located in La Jolla and has a branch located at the Santa Fe Depot downtown . The downtown branch consists of two building on two opposite streets . The Columbia district downtown is home to historic ship exhibits belonging to the San Diego Maritime Museum , headlined by the Star of India , as well as the unrelated San Diego Aircraft Carrier Museum featuring the USS Midway aircraft carrier . 
 The San Diego Symphony at Symphony Towers performs on a regular basis and is directed by <unk> Ling . The San Diego Opera at Civic Center Plaza , directed by Ian Campbell , was ranked by Opera America as one of the top 10 opera companies in the United States . Old Globe Theatre at Balboa Park produces about 15 plays and musicals annually . The La Jolla Playhouse at UCSD is directed by Christopher Ashley . Both the Old Globe Theatre and the La Jolla Playhouse have produced the world premieres of plays and musicals that have gone on to win Tony Awards or nominations on Broadway . The Joan B. Kroc Theatre at Kroc Center 's Performing Arts Center is a 600 @-@ seat state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art theatre that hosts music , dance , and theatre performances . The San Diego Repertory Theatre at the Lyceum Theatres in Horton Plaza produces a variety of plays and musicals . Hundreds of movies and a dozen TV shows have been filmed in San Diego , a tradition going back as far as 1898 . 
 = = Sports = = 
 San Diego is home to two major professional teams — the National Football League 's San Diego Chargers , who play at Qualcomm Stadium , and Major League Baseball 's San Diego Padres , who play at Petco Park . 
 San Diego hosts three NCAA universities . NCAA Division I San Diego State Aztecs men 's and women 's basketball games are played at Viejas Arena . Other prominent Aztec sports include college football , as well as soccer , basketball and volleyball . The San Diego State Aztecs ( MWC ) and the San Diego <unk> ( WCC ) are NCAA Division I teams . The UCSD Tritons are members of NCAA Division II . 
 San Diego has hosted several sports events . Three NFL Super Bowl championships have been held at Qualcomm Stadium . Two of college football 's annual bowl games are also held at Qualcomm Stadium : the Holiday Bowl and the Poinsettia Bowl . Parts of the World Baseball Classic were played at Petco Park in 2006 and 2009 . 
 Qualcomm Stadium also hosts international soccer games and <unk> events . Soccer , American football , and track and field are also played in Balboa Stadium , the city 's first stadium , constructed in 1914 . 
 Rugby union is a developing sport in the city . The San Diego Breakers begins play in the PRO Rugby competition at Torero Stadium in 2016 . The USA Sevens , a major international rugby event , was held there from 2007 through 2009 . San Diego is represented by Old Mission Beach Athletic Club RFC , the former home club of USA Rugby 's former Captain Todd Clever . San Diego will participate in the Western American National Rugby League which starts in 2011 . 
 The San Diego Surf of the American Basketball Association is located in the city . The annual Farmers Insurance Open golf tournament ( formerly the Buick Invitational ) on the PGA Tour occurs at Torrey Pines Golf Course . This course was also the site of the 2008 U.S. Open Golf Championship . The San Diego Yacht Club hosted the America 's Cup yacht races three times during the period 1988 to 1995 . The amateur beach sport Over @-@ the @-@ line was invented in San Diego , and the annual world Over @-@ the @-@ line championships are held at Mission Bay every year . 
 = = Government = = 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 The city is governed by a mayor and a 9 @-@ member city council . In 2006 , the city 's form of government changed from a council – manager government to a strong mayor government . The change was brought about by a citywide vote in 2004 . The mayor is in effect the chief executive officer of the city , while the council is the legislative body . The City of San Diego is responsible for police , public safety , streets , water and sewer service , planning and zoning , and similar services within its borders . San Diego is a sanctuary city , however , San Diego County is a participant of the Secure Communities program . As of 2011 , the city had one employee for every 137 residents , with a payroll greater than $ 733 million . 
 The members of the city council are each elected from single member districts within the city . The mayor and city attorney are elected directly by the voters of the entire city . The mayor , city attorney , and council members are elected to four @-@ year terms , with a two @-@ term limit . Elections are held on a non @-@ partisan basis per California state law ; nevertheless , most officeholders do identify themselves as either Democrats or Republicans . In 2007 , registered Democrats outnumbered Republicans by about 7 to 6 in the city , and Democrats currently ( as of 2015 ) hold a 5 @-@ 4 majority in the city council . The current mayor , Kevin <unk> , is a Republican . 
 San Diego is part of San Diego County , and includes all or part of the 1st , 2nd , 3rd and 4th <unk> districts of the San Diego County Board of Supervisors , Other county officers elected in part by city residents include the Sheriff , District Attorney , Assessor / Recorder / County Clerk , and Treasurer / Tax Collector . 
 Areas of the city immediately adjacent to San Diego Bay ( " tidelands " ) are administered by the Port of San Diego , a quasi @-@ governmental agency which owns all the property in the tidelands and is responsible for its land use planning , policing , and similar functions . San Diego is a member of the regional planning agency San Diego Association of Governments ( SANDAG ) . Public schools within the city are managed and funded by independent school districts ( see above ) . 
 = = = State and federal representation = = = 
 In the California State Senate , San Diego is split between the 38th , 39th and 40th districts , represented by Joel Anderson ( R ) , Marty Block ( D ) , and Ben Hueso ( D ) , respectively . 
 In the California State Assembly , San Diego is split between the 77th , 78th , 79th , and 80th districts , represented by Brian <unk> ( R ) , and Toni Atkins ( D ) , Shirley Weber ( D ) , and Lorena Gonzalez ( D ) , respectively . 
 In the United States House of Representatives , San Diego is split between California 's 49th , 50th , 51st , 52nd , and 53rd congressional districts , represented by Darrell Issa ( R ) , Duncan D. Hunter ( R ) , Juan Vargas ( D ) , Scott Peters ( D ) , and Susan Davis ( D ) , respectively . 
 = = = Major scandals = = = 
 San Diego was the site of the 1912 San Diego free speech fight , in which the city restricted speech , vigilantes brutalized and tortured anarchists , and the San Diego Police Department killed an IWW member . 
 In 1916 , rainmaker Charles Hatfield was blamed for $ 4 million in damages and accused of causing San Diego 's worst flood , during which about 20 Japanese American farmers died . 
 Then @-@ mayor Roger <unk> was forced to resign his post in 1985 , after he was found guilty of one count of conspiracy and twelve counts of perjury , related to the alleged failure to report all campaign contributions . After a series of appeals , the twelve perjury counts were dismissed in 1990 based on claims of juror misconduct ; the remaining conspiracy count was reduced to a misdemeanor and then dismissed . 
 A 2002 scheme to <unk> pensions for city employees led to the San Diego pension scandal . This resulted in the resignation of newly re @-@ elected Mayor Dick Murphy and the criminal indictment of six pension board members . Those charges were finally dismissed by a federal judge in 2010 . 
 On November 28 , 2005 , U.S. Congressman Randy " Duke " Cunningham resigned after being convicted on federal bribery charges . He had represented California 's 50th congressional district , which includes much of the northern portion of the city of San Diego . In 2006 , Cunningham was sentenced to a 100 @-@ month prison sentence . 
 In 2005 two city council members , Ralph <unk> and Deputy Mayor Michael <unk> – who briefly took over as acting mayor when Murphy resigned – were convicted of extortion , wire fraud , and conspiracy to commit wire fraud for taking campaign contributions from a strip club owner and his associates , allegedly in exchange for trying to repeal the city 's " no touch " laws at strip clubs . Both subsequently resigned . <unk> was sentenced to 21 months in prison . In 2009 , a judge acquitted <unk> on seven out of the nine counts against him , and granted his petition for a new trial on the other two charges ; the remaining charges were eventually dropped . 
 In July 2013 , three former supporters of mayor Bob Filner asked him to resign because of allegations of repeated sexual harassment . Over the ensuing six weeks , 18 women came forward to publicly claim that Filner had sexually harassed them , and multiple individuals and groups called for him to resign . Filner agreed to resign effective August 30 , 2013 , subsequently pleaded guilty to one felony count of false imprisonment and two misdemeanor battery charges , and was sentenced to house arrest and probation . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 San Diego was ranked as the 20th @-@ safest city in America in 2013 by Business Insider . According to Forbes magazine , San Diego was the ninth @-@ safest city in the top 10 list of safest cities in the U.S. in 2010 . Like most major cities , San Diego had a declining crime rate from 1990 to 2000 . Crime in San Diego increased in the early 2000s . In 2004 , San Diego had the sixth lowest crime rate of any U.S. city with over half a million residents . From 2002 to 2006 , the crime rate overall dropped 0 @.@ 8 % , though not evenly by category . While violent crime decreased 12 @.@ 4 % during this period , property crime increased 1 @.@ 1 % . Total property crimes per 100 @,@ 000 people were lower than the national average in 2008 . 
 According to Uniform Crime Report statistics compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) in 2010 , there were 5 @,@ 616 violent crimes and 30 @,@ 753 property crimes . Of these , the violent crimes consisted of forcible rapes , 73 robberies and 170 aggravated assaults , while 6 @,@ 387 burglaries , 17 @,@ 977 larceny @-@ thefts , 6 @,@ 389 motor vehicle thefts and 155 acts of arson defined the property offenses . In 2013 , San Diego had the lowest murder rate of the ten largest cities in the United States . 
 = = Education = = 
 Public schools in San Diego are operated by independent school districts . The majority of the public schools in the city are served by the San Diego Unified School District , the second @-@ largest school district in California , which includes 11 K @-@ 8 schools , 107 elementary schools , 24 middle schools , 13 atypical and alternative schools , 28 high schools , and 45 charter schools . 
 Several adjacent school districts which are headquartered outside the city limits serve some schools within the city ; these include the Poway Unified School District , Del Mar Union School District , San Dieguito Union High School District and Sweetwater Union High School District . In addition , there are a number of private schools in the city . 
 = = = Colleges and universities = = = 
 According to education rankings released by the U.S. Census Bureau , 40 @.@ 4 percent of San Diegans ages 25 and older hold bachelor 's degrees . The census ranks the city as the ninth @-@ most educated city in the United States based on these figures . 
 Public colleges and universities in the city include San Diego State University ( SDSU ) , University of California , San Diego ( UCSD ) , and the San Diego Community College District , which includes San Diego City College , San Diego Mesa College , and San Diego Miramar College . 
 Private colleges and universities in the city include University of San Diego ( USD ) , Point Loma Nazarene University ( <unk> ) , Alliant International University ( <unk> ) , National University , California International Business University ( <unk> ) , San Diego Christian College , John Paul the Great Catholic University , California College San Diego , Coleman University , University of Redlands School of Business , Design Institute of San Diego ( DISD ) , Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising 's San Diego campus , <unk> of Architecture and Design , Pacific Oaks College San Diego Campus , Chapman University 's San Diego Campus , The Art Institute of California – San Diego , Platt College , Southern States University ( <unk> ) , <unk> College , and Woodbury University School of Architecture 's satellite campus . 
 There is one medical school in the city , the UCSD School of Medicine . There are three ABA accredited law schools in the city , which include California Western School of Law , Thomas Jefferson School of Law , and University of San Diego School of Law . There is also one law school , Western Sierra Law School , not accredited by the ABA . 
 = = = Libraries = = = 
 The city @-@ run San Diego Public Library system is headquartered downtown and has 34 branches throughout the city . The libraries have had reduced operating hours since 2003 due to the city 's financial problems . In 2006 the city increased spending on libraries by $ 2 @.@ 1 million . A new nine @-@ story Central Library on Park Boulevard at J Street opened on September 30 , 2013 . 
 In addition to the municipal public library system , there are nearly two dozen libraries open to the public which are run by other governmental agencies and by schools , colleges , and universities . Noteworthy among them are the Malcolm A. Love Library at San Diego State University and the Geisel Library at the University of California , San Diego . 
 = = Media = = 
 The following are published within the city : the daily newspaper , U @-@ T San Diego and its online portal , of the same name , and the alternative <unk> , the San Diego CityBeat and San Diego Reader . Times of San Diego is a free online newspaper covering local news in the metropolitan area . Voice of San Diego is a non @-@ profit online @-@ only news outlet covering government , politics , education , neighborhoods , and the arts . The San Diego Daily Transcript is a business @-@ oriented daily newspaper . 
 San Diego led U.S. local markets with 69 @.@ 6 percent broadband penetration in 2004 according to Nielsen / / <unk> . 
 San Diego 's first television station was KFMB , which began broadcasting on May 16 , 1949 . Since the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) licensed seven television stations in Los Angeles , two VHF channels were available for San Diego because of its relative proximity to the larger city . In 1952 , however , the FCC began licensing UHF channels , making it possible for cities such as San Diego to acquire more stations . Stations based in Mexico ( with ITU prefixes of XE and XH ) also serve the San Diego market . Television stations today include <unk> 3 ( Once TV ) , <unk> 6 ( CW ) , KFMB 8 ( CBS ) , <unk> 10 ( ABC ) , <unk> 12 ( Televisa Regional ) , KPBS 15 ( PBS ) , <unk> @-@ CD 17 ( Univision ) , <unk> @-@ TDT 21 ( Azteca 7 ) , <unk> @-@ TDT 27 ( Azteca 13 ) , <unk> 33 ( Telemundo ) , <unk> @-@ D 35 ( UCSD @-@ TV ) , <unk> @-@ LD 51 ( <unk> ) , <unk> 39 ( NBC ) , <unk> @-@ LP 41 ( Azteca America ) , <unk> @-@ CD 42 ( <unk> ) , <unk> @-@ TDT 45 ( Gala TV ) , XHDTV 49 ( <unk> ) , <unk> 51 ( Independent ) , <unk> @-@ TDT 57 ( Canal de las Estrellas ) , and <unk> @-@ TV 69 ( Fox ) . San Diego has an 80 @.@ 6 percent cable penetration rate . 
 Due to the ratio of U.S. and Mexican @-@ licensed stations , San Diego is the largest media market in the United States that is legally unable to support a television station duopoly between two full @-@ power stations under FCC regulations , which disallow duopolies in metropolitan areas with fewer than nine full @-@ power television stations and require that there must be eight unique station owners that remain once a duopoly is formed ( there are only seven full @-@ power stations on the California side of the San Diego @-@ Tijuana market ) . Though the E. W. Scripps Company owns <unk> and <unk> @-@ LP , they are not considered a duopoly under the FCC 's legal definition as common ownership between full @-@ power and low @-@ power television stations in the same market is permitted regardless to the number of stations licensed to the area . As a whole , the Mexico side of the San Diego @-@ Tijuana market has two duopolies and one triopoly ( <unk> Communications owns both <unk> @-@ TV and XHDTV @-@ TV , Azteca owns <unk> @-@ TV and <unk> @-@ TV , and Grupo Televisa owns <unk> @-@ TV and <unk> @-@ TV along with being the license holder for <unk> @-@ TV , which is run by California @-@ based subsidiary Bay City Television ) . 
 San Diego 's television market is limited to only San Diego county . The Imperial Valley has its own market ( which also extends into western Arizona ) , while neighboring Orange and Riverside counties are part of the Los Angeles market . ( Sometimes in the past , a missing network affiliate in the Imperial Valley would be available on cable TV from San Diego . ) 
 The radio stations in San Diego include nationwide broadcaster , Clear Channel Communications ; CBS Radio , Midwest Television , Lincoln Financial Media , Finest City Broadcasting , and many other smaller stations and networks . Stations include : <unk> AM 600 , KFMB AM 760 , <unk> AM 1000 , <unk> AM 1170 , K @-@ Praise , <unk> AM 1360 Air America , <unk> 1450 AM , KPBS @-@ FM 89 @.@ 5 , Channel 933 , Star 94 @.@ 1 , FM 94 / 9 , FM News and Talk 95 @.@ 7 , <unk> 96 @.@ 1 , <unk> 96 @.@ 5 , Free Radio San Diego ( AKA Pirate Radio San Diego ) <unk> <unk> , <unk> 97 @.@ 3 / 92 @.@ 1 , <unk> 98 @.@ 1 , Jack @-@ FM 100 @.@ 7 , 101 @.@ 5 KGB @-@ FM , <unk> 102 @.@ 1 , Rock 105 @.@ 3 , and another Pirate Radio station at <unk> , as well as a number of local Spanish @-@ language radio stations . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 Water is supplied to residents by the Water Department of the City of San Diego . The city receives most of its water from the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California . 
 Gas and electric utilities are provided by San Diego Gas & Electric , a division of Sempra Energy . 
 = = = Street lights = = = 
 In the middle part of the 20th century the city had mercury vapor street lamps . In 1978 the city decided to replace them with more efficient sodium vapor lamps . The proposal triggered an outcry from astronomers at Palomar Observatory 60 miles ( 97 km ) north of the city ; they said the proposed lamps would increase light pollution and interfere with astronomical observation . The city altered its lighting regulations to limit light pollution within 30 miles ( 48 km ) of Palomar . 
 In 2011 , the City announced plans to upgrade 80 % of its street lighting to new energy @-@ efficient street lights which use induction technology , a modified form of fluorescent lamp that produces a broader spectrum than sodium @-@ vapor lamps . The new system is predicted to save $ 2 @.@ 2 million per year in energy and maintenance costs . The city stated the changes would " make our neighborhoods safer . " They also increase light pollution . 
 In 2014 , San Diego announced plans to become the first U.S. city to install cyber @-@ controlled street lighting , using an " intelligent " lighting system to control 3 @,@ 000 LED street lights . 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 With the automobile being the primary means of transportation for over 80 percent of its residents , San Diego is served by a network of freeways and highways . This includes Interstate 5 , which runs south to Tijuana and north to Los Angeles ; Interstate 8 , which runs east to Imperial County and the Arizona Sun Corridor ; Interstate 15 , which runs northeast through the Inland Empire to Las Vegas and Salt Lake City ; and Interstate 805 , which splits from I @-@ 5 near the Mexican border and rejoins I @-@ 5 at Sorrento Valley . 
 Major state highways include SR 94 , which connects downtown with I @-@ 805 , I @-@ 15 and East County ; SR 163 , which connects downtown with the northeast part of the city , intersects I @-@ 805 and merges with I @-@ 15 at Miramar ; SR 52 , which connects La Jolla with East County through Santee and SR 125 ; SR 56 , which connects I @-@ 5 with I @-@ 15 through Carmel Valley and Rancho Peñasquitos ; SR 75 , which spans San Diego Bay as the San Diego @-@ Coronado Bridge , and also passes through South San Diego as Palm Avenue ; and SR 905 , which connects I @-@ 5 and I @-@ 805 to the Otay Mesa Port of Entry . 
 The stretch of SR 163 that passes through Balboa Park is San Diego 's oldest freeway , and has been called one of America 's most beautiful parkways . 
 San Diego 's roadway system provides an extensive network of routes for travel by bicycle . The dry and mild climate of San Diego makes cycling a convenient and pleasant year @-@ round option . At the same time , the city 's hilly , canyon @-@ like terrain and significantly long average trip distances — brought about by strict low @-@ density zoning laws — somewhat restrict cycling for utilitarian purposes . Older and denser neighborhoods around the downtown tend to be utility cycling oriented . This is partly because of the grid street patterns now absent in newer developments farther from the urban core , where suburban style arterial roads are much more common . As a result , a vast majority of cycling @-@ related activities are recreational . Testament to San Diego 's cycling efforts , in 2006 , San Diego was rated as the best city for cycling for U.S. cities with a population over 1 million . 
 San Diego is served by the San Diego Trolley light rail system , by the <unk> bus system , and by Coaster and Amtrak Pacific Surfliner commuter rail ; northern San Diego county is also served by the Sprinter light rail line . The Trolley primarily serves downtown and surrounding urban communities , Mission Valley , east county , and coastal south bay . A planned Mid @-@ Coast extension of the Trolley will operate from Old Town to University City and the University of California , San Diego along the I @-@ 5 Freeway , with planned operation by 2018 . The Amtrak and Coaster trains currently run along the coastline and connect San Diego with Los Angeles , Orange County , Riverside , San Bernardino , and Ventura via Metrolink and the Pacific Surfliner . There are two Amtrak stations in San Diego , in Old Town and the Santa Fe Depot downtown . San Diego transit information about public transportation and commuting is available on the Web and by dialing " 511 " from any phone in the area . 
 The city 's primary commercial airport is the San Diego International Airport ( SAN ) , also known as Lindbergh Field . It is the busiest single @-@ runway airport in the United States . It served over 17 million passengers in 2005 , and is dealing with an increasingly larger number every year . It is located on San Diego Bay three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from downtown . San Diego International Airport maintains scheduled flights to the rest of the United States including Hawaii , as well as to Mexico , Canada , Japan , and the United Kingdom . It is operated by an independent agency , the San Diego Regional Airport Authority . In addition , the city itself operates two general @-@ aviation airports , Montgomery Field ( <unk> ) and Brown Field ( SDM ) . By 2015 , the Tijuana Cross @-@ border Terminal in Otay Mesa will give direct access to Tijuana International Airport , with passengers walking across the U.S. – Mexico border on a footbridge to catch their flight on the Mexican side . 
 Numerous regional transportation projects have occurred in recent years to mitigate congestion in San Diego . Notable efforts are improvements to San Diego freeways , expansion of San Diego Airport , and doubling the capacity of the cruise ship terminal of the port . Freeway projects included expansion of Interstates 5 and 805 around " The Merge , " a rush @-@ hour spot where the two freeways meet . Also , an expansion of Interstate 15 through the North County is underway with the addition of high @-@ occupancy @-@ vehicle ( HOV ) " managed lanes " . There is a tollway ( The South Bay Expressway ) connecting SR 54 and Otay Mesa , near the Mexican border . According to a 2007 assessment , 37 percent of streets in San Diego were in acceptable driving condition . The proposed budget fell $ 84 @.@ 6 million short of bringing the city 's streets to an acceptable level . Port expansions included a second cruise terminal on Broadway Pier which opened in 2010 . Airport projects include expansion of Terminal 2 , currently under construction and slated for completion in summer 2013 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 San Diego has 16 sister cities , as designated by Sister Cities International : 
 = 1917 Nueva Gerona hurricane = 
 The 1917 Nueva Gerona hurricane was the most intense tropical cyclone to strike the Florida Panhandle until Hurricane Opal in 1995 . The eighth tropical cyclone and fourth tropical storm of the season , this system was identified as a tropical storm east of the Lesser Antilles on September 20 . After crossing the Lesser Antilles , the system entered the Caribbean Sea and achieved hurricane intensity on September 21 . After becoming a Category 2 hurricane , the storm struck the northern coast of Jamaica on September 23 . Early on September 25 , the cyclone reached Category 4 status and attained maximum sustained winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) soon thereafter . Later that day , the hurricane made landfall in eastern Pinar del Río Province , Cuba . The system entered the Gulf of Mexico shortly thereafter and weakened slightly . Recurving to the northeast , the hurricane briefly threatened Louisiana before turning toward Florida . Early on September 29 , the hurricane made landfall near Fort Walton Beach , Florida , with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . Once over land , the cyclone rapidly weakened and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone before dissipating on September 30 . 
 Some islands in the Lesser Antilles experienced strong winds and heavy rainfall , including Dominica , Guadeloupe , and Saint Lucia . In Jamaica , the hurricane caused significant damage to banana and coconut plantations . Communications from Holland Bay were disrupted when the station was demolished . The greatest damages were reported from the northern half of the island . Nine deaths occurred in the city of Port Antonio . In Nueva Gerona , Cuba , strong winds destroyed well @-@ constructed buildings and all but 10 homes . The Isla de la Juventud overall experienced about $ 2 million ( 1917 USD ) in damage and there were at least 20 fatalities . Orchards and crops were destroyed on the Pinar del Río Province . In Louisiana and Mississippi , impact was generally limited to damaged crops and timber stands . Ten deaths from drowning were reported in Louisiana . Farther east in Mobile , Alabama , portions of roofs , trees , and other debris littered streets . Communications were severed in Pensacola , Florida . Several small watercraft washed ashore , and numerous wharves , docks , and boat storages suffered impact . Total damages were estimated near $ 170 @,@ 000 in Pensacola area . Five deaths were reported in Florida , all of them in Crestview . The storm and its remnants also produced rainfall in Georgia , North Carolina , and South Carolina . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A open trough of low pressure , possibly a tropical wave , developed into a tropical storm about 160 miles ( 260 km ) east @-@ northeast of Barbados at 00 : 00 UTC on September 20 . Steadily intensifying , the storm moved west @-@ northwestward and crossed the Lesser Antilles between the islands of Saint Lucia and Martinique several hours later . Upon entering the Caribbean Sea on September 21 , the system intensified quicker , becoming a Category 1 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale later that day . While passing south of the Tiburon Peninsula on the following day , the storm strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane . Later on September 23 , the hurricane struck the northern coast of Jamaica , before re @-@ emerging into the Caribbean Sea . Around 06 : 00 UTC on September 24 , it intensified into a Category 3 hurricane while moving northwestward . Around that time , it struck Cayman Brac . Early on September 25 , the storm achieved Category 4 status . 
 At 12 : 00 UTC on September 25 , the hurricane attained its minimum barometric pressure of 928 mbar ( 27 @.@ 4 inHg ) , an estimate made by Ramón Perez of the Instituto de Meteorología de la República de Cuba . Using a pressure @-@ wind relationship , researchers at the National Hurricane Center estimated peak maximum sustained winds at 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) . Shortly after peak intensity , the cyclone brushed Isla de la Juventud . By 18 : 00 UTC on September 25 , the hurricane made landfall at the same intensity in the eastern part of Pinar del Río Province in Cuba . The system entered the Gulf of Mexico later on September 25 . The storm fell to Category 3 intensity early on September 27 . It briefly tracked generally northward and approached southeastern Louisiana before re @-@ curving northeastward late the next day . At 02 : 00 UTC on September 29 , the hurricane made landfall near Fort Walton Beach , Florida , with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . Once over land , the system rapidly weakened to a tropical storm within 12 hours . Early on September 30 , it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone over Georgia after merging with a frontal system . About six hours later , the remnants of the hurricane dissipated . 
 The minimum atmospheric pressure of 928 mbar ( 27 @.@ 42 inHg ) established the cyclone as the third most intense landfalling Cuban hurricane . Deeper pressures of 921 mbar ( 27 @.@ 23 inHg ) and 915 mbar ( 27 @.@ 02 inHg ) were measured in the 1924 and 1932 hurricanes , respectively . The cyclone ( 949 mbar ; 28 @.@ 02 inHg ) was also the most intense tropical cyclone in the Florida Panhandle until Hurricane Opal ( 942 mbar ; 27 @.@ 82 inHg ) . At the time , it was tied with an 1882 storm , which also had a central pressure of 949 mbar ( 28 @.@ 02 inHg ) at landfall in northwest Florida . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 On September 21 , the United States Weather Bureau issued advisories because of strong swells in the Leeward Islands , indicating the presence of a tropical disturbance . 
 The system produced heavy precipitation and strong winds in the eastern Caribbean islands . In Jamaica , the hurricane caused significant damages to banana and coconut plantations . Communications from Holland Bay were disrupted when the station was demolished . The greatest damages were reported from the northern half of the island . At Port Antonio , the custom house was destroyed , while a hotel was several damaged . Nine deaths occurred in the city . In Nueva Gerona , Cuba , severe winds destroyed well constructed buildings , devastating the town . Only ten homes remained standing . At a large plantation , every building but the house was destroyed . Nearly all of the chickens on the property were killed during the storm . Throughout Isla de la Juventud , damage reached approximately $ 2 million . The island 's food supply was also ruined . Offshore , a number of ships capsized or went missing , resulting in " many " deaths . There were at least 20 fatalities on the island , while other accounts state that there were hundreds killed . Orchards and crops were destroyed on the Pinar del Río Province . A relief committed issued an appeal for aid to then @-@ Cuban president Mario García Menocal and Americans . At the Burnside Hotel , among few buildings were demolished , a soup kitchen was opened to feed storm victims . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 On September 23 , northeast storm warnings were issued for the Florida coast from West Palm Beach to Boca Grande . On September 25 , the Weather Bureau advised marine traffic to remain alert in the Gulf of Mexico , noting that the intensity of the storm was unknown . Later , hurricane warnings were issued from Apalachicola , Florida , to Mobile , Alabama , on September 25 . Warnings were also released from Pascagoula , Mississippi , to New Orleans , Louisiana , on September 26 . The warnings were briefly discontinued because of track uncertainties , but they were re @-@ issued when the cyclone began to curve northeast . On September 27 and September 28 , scheduled vessel trips were cancelled in New Orleans , Louisiana . Marine traffic resumed after the storm passed east of the city . The storm struck the Gulf Coast later than anticipated because of slow forward motion . 
 In Louisiana , rain bands produced 6 @.@ 40 in ( 160 mm ) of rain in Burrwood . The Louisville and Nashville Railroad sent trains on alternate routes because of eroded tracks near Lake Catherine . The effects of the cyclone also damaged crops and timber stands in Louisiana and Mississippi . The storm surge associated with the hurricane moved several structures from their foundations in Buras , Louisiana . There , the storm was blamed for the death of an 8 @-@ year @-@ old boy . Nine additional fatalities occurred near Houma after the fishing bark Wanna was wrecked . In Biloxi , warnings prevented considerable loss of shrimp boats . Street cars and other traffic were practically suspended in Gulfport . 
 In Alabama , more than 5 in ( 125 mm ) of rain was measured in Montgomery , prompting flood advisories for the lower Alabama River watershed . At Camp Sheridan , a United States Army World War I training camp , the streets were inundated with at least a few inches of water . In Mobile , trees and telephone and telegraph wires were downed , cutting off communications . Roofs were detached and the galleries of houses were torn away . Police stopped the streets cars were operating and shut off the electricity . No boats from the area were lost , and waterfront damage was negligible . 
 The hurricane severed communication from Pensacola , Florida , though reports eventually indicated that the wireless radio plant was not destroyed . Several small watercraft washed ashore , including the USS Quincy , and numerous wharves , docks , and boat storages received damage . Total damages reached about $ 170 @,@ 000 in the vicinity of Pensacola . Near the city , a portion of the Louisville and Nashville Railroad was 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) underwater , while several of their bridges washed away . At Valparaiso , tides reached 7 @.@ 5 ft ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) above normal . Significant destruction of timber occurred in Okaloosa and Santa Rosa counties , and crops , structures , and livestock were affected . Strong winds occurred along the southwest coast of Florida , and a wind gust of 44 mph ( 70 km / h ) was reported in Jacksonville . A total of five people were killed in Crestview . 
 The storm and its remnants also produced rainfall in Georgia , North Carolina , and South Carolina . 
 = Sunderland A.F.C. = 
 Sunderland Association Football Club ( / <unk> / , local / <unk> / ) is an English professional football club based in the North East city of Sunderland in the larger metropolitan area of Tyne and Wear . The club is currently playing in the Premier League , the top league of English football . Since its formation in 1879 , the club has won six top @-@ flight First Division ( now the Premier League ) titles ( 1892 , 1893 , 1895 , 1902 , 1913 , and 1936 ) , a total only bettered by five other clubs , and has finished runners @-@ up five times . The club has also won the FA Cup twice ( 1937 and 1973 ) and been runners @-@ up twice ( 1913 and 1992 ) , as well as winning the FA Community Shield in 1936 and being finalists the following year . Sunderland have also been Football League Cup finalists in 1985 and 2014 . 
 Sunderland won their first FA Cup in 1937 with a 3 – 1 victory over Preston North End , and remained in the top league for 68 successive seasons until they were relegated for the first time in 1958 . Sunderland 's most notable trophy after the Second World War was their second FA Cup in 1973 , when the club secured a 1 – 0 victory over Leeds United . The team has won the second tier title five times in that period and the third tier title once . 
 Sunderland play their home games at the 49 @,@ 000 @-@ capacity all @-@ seater Stadium of Light having moved from Roker Park in 1997 . The original ground capacity was 42 @,@ 000 which was increased to 49 @,@ 000 following expansion in 2000 . Sunderland have a long @-@ standing rivalry with their neighbouring club Newcastle United , with whom they have contested the Tyne – Wear derby since 1898 . Since their most recent promotion to the Premier League in 2007 , Sunderland have become one of the world 's wealthiest football brands , being valued at USD $ 93 million in 2014 , 31st in the world overall . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years and league triumphs = = = 
 Founded 17 October 1879 as ' Sunderland and District Teachers A.F.C. ' by schoolmaster James Allan , Sunderland joined The Football League for the 1890 – 91 season . They replaced Stoke , who had failed to be re @-@ elected , becoming the first new club to join the league since its inauguration in 1888 . During the late 19th century , they were declared the " Team of All Talents " by William McGregor , the founder of the league , after a 7 – 2 win against Aston Villa . Sunderland won the league championship in the 1891 – 92 season , one season after joining The Football League . The club 's 42 points were five clear of nearest rivals Preston North End , and this performance led The Times to describe the players as " a wonderfully fine team " . Sunderland successfully defended the title the following season , aided by centre forward Johnny Campbell , who broke the 30 @-@ goal mark for the second time in consecutive seasons . In the process , they became the first team to score 100 goals in a season , a feat not matched until 1919 – 20 , when West Bromwich Albion set a new record . 
 Sunderland came close to winning a third successive league championship in the 1893 – 94 season , finishing second behind Aston Villa . However , they regained the title in the 1894 – 95 season , ending the season five points ahead of Everton . After winning the English League Championship , Sunderland played against Heart of Midlothian , the champions of the Scottish League , in a game described as the Championship of the World title match . Sunderland won the game 5 – 3 and were announced " Champions of the world " . Sunderland came close to winning another league title in the 1897 – 98 season , when they finished as runners @-@ up to Sheffield United . That season was their last at Newcastle Road , as they moved to Roker Park the following season . After coming second in 1900 – 01 , the club won their fourth league title in the 1901 – 02 season , beating Everton by a three @-@ point margin . 
 In 1904 , Sunderland 's management was embroiled in a payment scandal involving player Andrew McCombie . The club was said to have given the player £ 100 ( £ 9 @.@ 7 thousand today ) to help him start his own business , on the understanding that he would repay the money after his benefit game . However , McCombie refused to repay the money , claiming it had been a gift . An investigation conducted by the Football Association concluded that the money given to McCombie was part of a " re @-@ signing / win / draw bonus " , which violated the Association 's rules . Sunderland were fined £ 250 ( £ 24 @.@ 3 thousand today ) , and six directors were suspended for two and a half years for not showing a true record of the club 's financial dealings . Sunderland manager Alex Mackie was also suspended for three months for his involvement in the affair . 
 = = = Further league championship titles = = = 
