 On 5 December 1908 , Sunderland achieved their highest ever league win , against north @-@ east rivals Newcastle United . They won the game 9 – 1 ; Billy Hogg and George Holley each scored hat @-@ tricks . The club won the league again in 1913 , but lost their first FA Cup final 1 – 0 to Aston Villa , in a very tough loss . This was the closest the club has come to winning the league title and the FA Cup in the same season . Two seasons later the First World War brought the league to a halt . After the league 's resumption , Sunderland came close to winning another championship in the 1922 – 23 season , when they were runners @-@ up to Liverpool . They also came close the following season , finishing third , four points from the top of the league . The club escaped relegation from the First Division by one point in the 1927 – 28 season despite 35 goals from Dave Halliday . 
 The point was won in a match against Middlesbrough , and they finished in fifteenth place . Halliday improved his goal scoring to 43 goals in 42 games the following season , an all @-@ time Sunderland record for goals scored in a single season . 
 The club 's sixth league championship came in the 1935 – 36 season , and they won the FA Cup the following season , after a 3 – 1 victory against Preston North End at Wembley Stadium . The remainder of the decade saw mid @-@ table finishes , until the league and FA Cup were suspended for the duration of the Second World War . Some football was still played as a morale boosting exercise , in the form of the Football League War Cup . Sunderland were finalists in the tournament in 1942 , but were beaten by Wolverhampton Wanderers . 
 For Sunderland , the immediate post @-@ war years were characterised by significant spending ; the club paid £ 18 @,@ 000 ( £ 574 thousand today ) for Carlisle United 's Ivor Broadis in January 1949 . Broadis was also Carlisle 's manager at the time , and this is the first instance of a player transferring himself to another club . This , along with record @-@ breaking transfer fees to secure the services of Len Shackleton and Welsh international Trevor Ford , led to a contemporary nickname , the " Bank of England club " . The club finished third in the First Division in 1950 , their highest finish since the 1936 championship . 
 = = = Financial troubles and three cup finals = = = 
 The late 1950s saw a sharp downturn in Sunderland 's fortunes , and the club was once again implicated in a major financial scandal in 1957 . Found guilty of making payments to players in excess of the maximum wage , they were fined £ 5 @,@ 000 ( £ 109 @,@ 000 today ) , and their chairman and three directors were suspended . The following year , Sunderland were relegated from the highest division for the first time in their 68 @-@ year league history . 
 Sunderland 's absence from the top flight lasted six years . The club came within one game of promotion back to the First Division in the 1962 – 63 season . Sunderland required only a draw in their final game against promotion rivals Chelsea , who had another game left to play after this match , to secure promotion . However , they were defeated , and Chelsea won their last game 7 – 0 to clinch promotion , finishing ahead of Sunderland on goal average . After the close call in the previous season , the club was promoted to Division One in 1964 after finishing in second place . Sunderland beat Charlton Athletic in the final stages of the season , where they clinched promotion with a game to spare . At the end of the decade , they were again relegated to the Second Division after finishing 21st . 
 Sunderland won their last major trophy in 1973 , in a 1 – 0 victory over Don Revie 's Leeds United in the FA Cup Final . A Second Division club at the time , Sunderland won the game thanks mostly to the efforts of their goalkeeper Jimmy Montgomery , who saved two of Leeds shots at goal in quick succession , one being from hot @-@ shot Peter Lorimer . Ian Porterfield scored a volley in the 30th minute to beat Leeds and take the trophy . Since 1973 only two other clubs , Southampton in 1976 , and West Ham United in 1980 , have equalled Sunderland 's achievement of lifting the FA Cup while playing outside the top tier of English football . 
 By winning the 1973 FA Cup Final , Sunderland qualified for the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup , the club 's only appearance in European competition to date . Sunderland beat Vasas Budapest 3 – 0 on aggregate , and were drawn against Lisbon club Sporting in the second round . They won the first leg at Roker Park 2 – 1 but were defeated 2 – 0 in the away leg , and were knocked out of the competition 3 – 2 on aggregate . After spending six seasons in the Second Division , Sunderland were promoted to Division One in the 1975 – 76 season ; they topped the table over Bristol City by three points . However , Sunderland were relegated the following season back into Division Two , without their FA Cup Final winning manager Bob Stokoe , who had resigned because of health problems at the start of the season . The club celebrated its 100 @-@ year centenary in the 1979 – 80 season with a testimonial against an England XI side , which they lost 2 – 0 . 
 Sunderland appeared in their first League Cup final in 1985 , but lost 1 – 0 to Norwich City . In 1987 , Sunderland saw one of the lowest points in their history , when they were relegated to the Third Division of the English league for the first time . Under new chairman Bob Murray and new manager Denis Smith , the club was promoted the following season . In 1990 , they were promoted back to the top flight in unusual circumstances . Sunderland lost to Swindon Town in the play @-@ off final , but Swindon 's promotion was revoked after the club was found guilty of financial irregularities and Sunderland were promoted instead . They stayed up for one year before being relegated on the final day of the following season . 
 Sunderland 's next outing in a major final came in 1992 when , as a Second Division club , they returned to the FA Cup final . There was to be no repeat of the heroics of 1973 , as Sunderland lost 2 – 0 to Liverpool . 
 = = = New stadium , promotions and relegations = = = 
 In 1995 , they faced the prospect of a return to the third @-@ tier of English football . Peter Reid was brought in as manager , and quickly turned things around . Reid 's time in charge had a stabilising effect ; he remained manager for seven years . After promotion from Division One in the 1995 – 96 season , Sunderland began their first season in the Premier League , but finished third from the bottom and were relegated back to the First Division . In 1997 , Sunderland left Roker Park , their home for 99 years . Bearing fond memories of the stadium , former Sunderland player Len Shackleton said , " There will never be another place like Roker " . The club moved to the Stadium of Light , a 42 @,@ 000 @-@ seat arena that , at the time , was the largest stadium built in England after the Second World War . The capacity was later increased to 49 @,@ 000 . Sunderland returned to the Premier League as First Division champions in 1999 with a then @-@ record 105 points . Sunderland 's 1999 – 2000 season started at Stamford Bridge , where Chelsea beat them 4 – 0 . However , in the return match later in the season Sunderland turned the tables on Chelsea , avenging their 4 – 0 defeat with a 4 – 1 win at the Stadium of Light . Sunderland also achieved a 2 – 1 victory over rivals Newcastle United at St. James ' Park , a result which helped bring about the resignation of Newcastle 's manager , Ruud Gullit . At the end of the season Sunderland finished seventh , with Kevin Phillips winning the European Golden Shoe in his first top @-@ flight season , scoring 30 goals . 
 Another seventh @-@ place finish in the 2000 – 01 season was followed by two less successful seasons , and they were relegated to the second @-@ tier with a then @-@ record low 19 points in 2003 . Former Ireland manager Mick McCarthy took over at the club , and , in 2005 , he took Sunderland up as champions for the third time in less than ten years . However , the club 's stay in the top flight was short @-@ live as Sunderland were once again relegated , this time with a new record @-@ low total of 15 points . McCarthy left the club in mid @-@ season , and he was replaced temporarily by former Sunderland player Kevin Ball . The record @-@ low fifteen @-@ point performance was surpassed in the 2007 – 08 season by Derby County , who finished on eleven points . 
 = = = Drumaville Consortium takeover and Ellis Short era = = = 
 Following Sunderland 's relegation from the Premier League , the club was taken over by the Irish Drumaville Consortium , headed by ex @-@ player Niall Quinn , who appointed former Manchester United captain Roy Keane as the new manager . Under Keane , the club rose steadily up the table with an unbeaten run of 17 games to win promotion to the Premier League , and were named winners of the Championship after beating Luton Town 5 – 0 at Kenilworth Road on 6 May 2007 . 
 The club 's form in the 2007 – 08 season was better than during their last season in the Premier League , as they finished 15th with 39 points . Following an inconsistent start to the 2008 – 09 season Keane resigned , to be replaced by coach Ricky Sbragia as caretaker until the end of the season . After keeping Sunderland in the Premier League , Sbragia stepped down from his managerial post . Meanwhile , off the pitch , Irish @-@ American tycoon Ellis Short completed a full takeover of the club from the Irish Drumaville Consortium , and Steve Bruce was announced as the new manager on 3 June . 
 One of Bruce 's first signings , Darren Bent , cost a club record fee of £ 10 million . Sunderland started their first season under Bruce strongly but then went 14 matches without a win over the winter , eventually finishing the 2009 – 10 season in 13th . Sunderland completed the signing of Ghana international Asamoah Gyan in Aug 2010 for a fee around £ 13 million , becoming their new record transfer fee . Sunderland started the next season strongly and the club challenged for a European qualification place by the end of 2010 . However , striker Darren Bent left Sunderland for Aston Villa in Jan 2011 in a deal potentially worth £ 24 million ( a record transfer fee received for the club ) . Following Bent 's departure Sunderland suffered a mid @-@ season slump and finished 10th — which was still their highest top @-@ flight finish for 10 years . 
 Ellis Short replaced Quinn as chairman in Oct 2011 , with Quinn becoming Director of International Development . Bruce was sacked on 30 November 2011 , following a poor run of results , and was replaced by Martin O 'Neill . O 'Neill made an instant impact , with Sunderland taking 13 points from a possible 18 in his first six games in charge . O 'Neill was named the Premier League Manager of the Month for December , and went on to guide the club to the FA Cup quarter @-@ finals for the first time since 2004 . On 20 Feb , Niall Quinn left the club with immediate effect . Sunderland endured a difficult start to 2012 – 13 season , with their first victory not coming until late Sept , against Wigan . With the threat of relegation looming , O 'Neill was sacked on 30 March and Italian Paolo Di Canio was announced as O 'Neill 's replacement the following day . The appointment prompted the immediate resignation of club Vice Chairman David Miliband due to Di Canio 's " past political statements " . The appointment of Di Canio also sparked opposition from the Durham Miners ' Association , which threatened to remove one of its mining banners from Sunderland 's Stadium of Light , which is built on the former site of the Wearmouth Colliery . The threat by the Durham Miners ' Association was removed after meeting with the management of the club . After a 2 – 1 loss at Chelsea , Di Canio 's second match in charge saw Sunderland beat Newcastle 3 – 0 at St James ' Park in the Tyne Wear Derby and their first win at St James Park since Nov 2000 . Sunderland went on to survive relegation with one game to go . Over the summer , the club appointed Italian former agent Roberto De Fanti as the club 's first director of football . 
 Di Canio was sacked after a poor start to the 2013 – 14 season , and reports of a complete breakdown in relations with his players . Gus Poyet was announced as his replacement on 8 Oct 2013 . Poyet brought a turnaround in Sunderland 's fortunes as they brought their way back into contention for survival with wins against Newcastle , Manchester City and Everton . Poyet also led Sunderland to the 2014 Football League Cup Final against Manchester City , winning a penalty shoot @-@ out at Manchester United in the semi @-@ final . Sunderland were defeated 3 – 1 by Manchester City in the final , despite leading 1 – 0 at half time through a Fabio <unk> goal . Despite a major post @-@ final slump , which left the club bottom of the table 7 points adrift with 6 games remaining , they drew at Manchester City and then defeated Chelsea 1 – 2 , becoming the first side to beat Chelsea at Stamford Bridge in the Premier League under José Mourinho , ending a streak of 77 games over two spells . The Black Cats went on to win their next 3 games , including away at Man Utd , to avoid relegation with a game to spare . De Fanti was sacked as Director of Football in Jan 2014 and was replaced with Lee <unk> as Sporting Director . 
 Poyet signed a new two @-@ year deal after the last game of the season . However , on 16 March 2015 Poyet was sacked , following a run of 1 win in 12 games that left the club just one place above the relegation zone . Veteran Dutchman Dick Advocaat was appointed as the club 's new head coach the following day on a deal to the end of the season . Advocaat led Sunderland to Premier League safety with a game to spare following a 0 – 0 draw away at Arsenal . Eight games into the 2015 – 16 season he resigned from the position , leaving Sunderland second from bottom and without a win . Sam Allardyce was appointed the next manager in Oct 2015 , and secured a 3 – 0 victory over Newcastle Utd in his second game , giving the club a record beating six wins in a row against their local rivals . <unk> left the club in Dec 2015 , with the club apparently no longer wishing to use the Director of Football <unk> n the January transfer window Allardyce signed centre @-@ backs Lamine <unk> and Jan Kirchhoff and attacking midfielder <unk> <unk> . On 6 February 2016 , Sunderland scored two late goals to draw 2 @-@ 2 with Liverpool at Anfield , having trailed 2 @-@ 0 with ten minutes remaining . Later that week winger Adam Johnson was sacked by the club after pleading guilty to one count of sexual activity with a child and one charge of grooming . Sunderland remained in the relegation zone for much of the remainder of the 2015 – 16 season , before they boosted their survival chances by beating Norwich City 3 – 0 at Carrow Road on 16 April , closing the gap on 17th @-@ place Norwich to just one point . Allardyce successfully led Sunderland to safety from relegation after beating Everton 3 – 0 on 11 May , a result which also ensured the relegation of rivals ( and one of his former clubs ) Newcastle United . Allardyce earned praise for his management of Sunderland from some pundits , particularly for his organized approach and emphasis on a strong defence 
 = = Colours and crest = = 
 Sunderland played in an all blue strip from their formation until 1884 , when they adopted a red and white halved strip . They assumed the current strip of red and white stripes in the 1887 – 88 season . Their badge included a ship , the upper part of the Sunderland coat of arms , a black cat , and a football in front of Sunderland 's red and white stripes . In 1977 the badge was changed , but still included the ship , football and the background of red and white stripes . 
 This badge was used until the relocation from Roker Park to the Stadium of Light . To coincide with the move , Sunderland released a new crest divided into four quarters ; the upper right and lower left featured their traditional red and white colours , but the ship was omitted . The upper left section features the <unk> Monument and the lower right section shows the Wearmouth Bridge . A colliery wheel at the top of the crest commemorates County Durham 's mining history , and the land the Stadium of Light was built on , formerly the Monkwearmouth Colliery . The crest also contains two lions , the black cats of Sunderland , and a banner displaying the club 's motto , <unk> <unk> , which means " In pursuit of excellence " . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Sunderland have had seven stadiums throughout their history ; the first was at Blue House Field in Hendon in 1879 . The ground was close to the place where Sunderland formed , at Hendon Board School ; at that time the rent for use of the ground was £ 10 ( £ 900 today ) . The club relocated briefly to Groves Field in <unk> in 1882 , before moving again the following season . The club 's third stadium was Horatio Street in Roker , the first Sunderland stadium north of the River Wear ; the club played a single season there before another move , this time to Abbs Field in <unk> for two seasons . Abbs Field was notable for being the first Sunderland ground to which they charged admission . 
 Sunderland moved to Newcastle Road in 1886 . By 1898 , the ground reached a capacity of 15 @,@ 000 after renovations , and its rent had risen to £ 100 ( £ 10 thousand today ) a year . Near the turn of the 20th century , Sunderland needed a bigger stadium . They returned to Roker and set up home in Roker Park . It was opened on 10 September 1898 , and the home team played a match the same day against Liverpool , which they won . The stadium 's capacity increased to 50 @,@ 000 after redevelopment with architect Archibald Leitch in 1913 . Sunderland were nearly bankrupted by the cost of renovating the Main Stand , and Roker Park was put up for sale but no further action was taken . On 8 March 1933 , an overcrowded Roker Park recorded the highest ever attendance at a Sunderland match , 75 @,@ 118 against Derby County in a FA Cup sixth round replay . Roker Park suffered a bombing in 1943 , in which one corner of the stadium was destroyed . A special constable was killed while patrolling the stadium . By the 1990s , the stadium was no longer large enough , and had no room for possible expansion . In January 1990 , the Taylor Report was released after overcrowding at the Hillsborough Stadium resulted in 96 deaths , an incident known as the Hillsborough Disaster . The report recommended that all major stadiums must be converted to an all @-@ seater design . As a result , Roker Park 's capacity was reduced . It was demolished in 1997 and a housing estate built in its place . 
 In 1997 , Sunderland moved to their present ground , Stadium of Light in Monkwearmouth , which was opened by Prince Andrew , Duke of York . Built with an original capacity of 42 @,@ 000 , it hosted its first game against Dutch team Ajax . The stadium bears a similar name to the Portuguese club Benfica 's ground Estádio da Luz , albeit in a different language . Stadium expansion in 2000 saw the capacity increase to 49 @,@ 000 . A Davy lamp monument stands outside the stadium , and a miners banner was presented to the club by the Durham Miners ' Association , as a reminder of the Monkwearmouth Colliery pit the stadium was built on . 
 = = Supporters and rivalries = = 
 Sunderland held the seventh highest average home attendance out of the 20 clubs in the Premier League at the end of the 2013 – 14 season with an average of 41 @,@ 089 , and held the sixth highest average attendance in the 2014 – 15 season with an average of over 43 @,@ 000 . Sunderland fans often sell out allocations for away games : in the 2013 – 14 season , 9 @,@ 000 Sunderland fans attended Old Trafford for the second leg of the Football League Cup semi @-@ final , which they won to go through to the final . At Wembley , London was taken over by thousands of <unk> , the sights of Covent Garden and Leicester Square were awash with red and white , local shops completely sold out of alcohol but only one arrest was reported by the police . Support is drawn from across the North East , in particular County Durham , and beyond . The club has many supporter branches across the world , including the United States , Australia , Canada , Cambodia , and Greece . According to YouGov statistics they are the most left @-@ wing supporters in the Premier League , and often sing " The Red Flag " during games . Former chairman Bob Murray described Sunderland as a " Labour Club " . 
 Traditionally , Sunderland 's main rivals are Newcastle United , with whom they contest the Tyne – Wear derby . The club was rivals with the now defunct Sunderland Albion in the 1880s and 1890s ; a breakaway club formed by Sunderland 's founder James Allan . Sections of fans share a mutual friendship with Dutch club Feyenoord , this was developed after Wearside shipbuilders found jobs in Rotterdam during the 1970s and 80s . 
 The club has an official quarterly magazine , called the Legion of Light , which season ticket holders receive for no cost . One of the club 's current fanzine is A Love Supreme . Others in the past have been It 's The Hope I Can 't Stand , It 's An Easy One For Norman / It 's An Easy One For Given , Sex and Chocolate , Wise Men Say and The Roker Roar ( later The Wearside Roar ) . 
 = = = Affiliated clubs = = = 
 Sunderland have recently created affiliations with several African clubs including Ghana 's Asante Kotoko , <unk> 's El @-@ Ittihad El @-@ <unk> and South Africa 's Bidvest Wits . Sunderland also have an affiliation with Belgian side Lierse S.K. , allowing the possibility for young African players who would not qualify for a UK work permit to spend three years with Lierse to gain a Belgian passport . In August 2014 , Sunderland announced a commercial partnership with Washington D.C. based MLS club D.C. United . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 The holder of the record for the most league appearances is Jimmy Montgomery , having made 527 first team appearances between 1961 and 1976 . The club 's top league goal scorer is Charlie Buchan , who scored 209 goals from 1911 – 1925 ; Bobby Gurney is the record goalscorer over all competitions with 227 goals between 1926 and 1939 . Dave Halliday holds the record for the most goals scored in a season : 43 in the 1928 – 29 season in the Football League First Division . As of October 2014 John O 'Shea is the most capped player for the club , making 100 appearances for the Republic of Ireland . 
 The club 's widest victory margin in the league was in the 9 – 1 win against Newcastle United in the First Division in 1908 . Sunderland 's biggest ever win in the FA cup was against Fair field ( a non @-@ league team ) and the final score was 11 – 1 . Their heaviest defeats in the league were 8 – 0 against Sheffield Wednesday in 1911 , West Ham United in 1968 , Watford in 1982 and Southampton in 2014 Sunderland joined the top division in England , The Football League , in the 1890 – 91 season and were not relegated until 1957 – 58 ( a span of 67 seasons ) . In October 2015 , Sunderland defeated rivals Newcastle United for the sixth consecutive time , a new record . 
 Sunderland 's record home attendance is 75 @,@ 200 for a sixth round replay FA Cup match against Derby County on 8 March 1933 . 
 = = = Transfers = = = 
 The biggest transfer fee Sunderland have ever received for one of their players is £ 24 million for Darren Bent who moved to Aston Villa on 18 January 2011 . The biggest fee Sunderland have received for a player produced by the Sunderland academy is £ 16 million ( rising to a possible £ 20 million ) for Jordan Henderson , who moved to Liverpool on 9 July 2011 . The biggest transfer fee paid by Sunderland is the eventual £ 16 million after add @-@ ons for Bent , who was bought from Tottenham Hotspur in July 2009 . 
 = = = Overall = = = 
 Seasons spent at Level 1 of the football league system : 86 
 Seasons spent at Level 2 of the football league system : 29 
 Seasons spent at Level 3 of the football league system : 1 
 Seasons spent at Level 4 of the football league system : 0 
 As of the 2015 @-@ 16 season 
 = = Nicknames = = 
 Sunderland 's official nickname is The Black Cats . They have other nicknames , such as ' The <unk> ' , ' The Lads ' or ' The <unk> ' . After leaving Roker Park for the Stadium of Light in 1997 , the club decided on a vote to settle the nickname for the last time . The Black Cats won the majority of the 11 @,@ 000 votes , beating off other used nicknames such as the Light Brigade , the Miners , and the <unk> . There is a long historical link between black cats and Sunderland , including the " Black Cat Battery " , an Artillery battery based on the River Wear . 
 Around the early 19th century , the southern side of the River Wear contained four gun batteries , which guarded the river mouth during the Napoleonic wars . In 1805 , the battery was manned by local militia , the Sunderland Loyal Volunteers , one of whom was a cooper by trade named Joshua Dunn . He was said to have " fled from the howling of an approaching black cat , convinced by the influence of the full moon and a warming dram or two that it was the devil incarnate " . From that point onwards the John Paul Jones Battery was known as the Black Cat Battery . 
 A Sunderland supporter , Billy Morris , took a black cat in his top pocket as a good luck charm to the 1937 FA Cup final in which Sunderland brought home the trophy for the first time . During the 1960s a black cat lived in Roker Park , fed and watered by the football club . Since the 1960s the emblem of the Sunderland A.F.C. Supporters Association has been a black cat . 
 As well as the " Team of All Talents " at the turn of the 20th century , Sunderland were known as the " Bank of England club " during the 1950s . This was a reference to the club 's spending in the transfer market at the time , which saw the transfer @-@ record broken twice . At the beginning of the 2006 – 07 season , the purchase of the club by the Irish Drumaville Consortium , the appointments of Niall Quinn and Roy Keane to their respective roles as chairman and manager , as well as the relatively large number of Irish players in the squad , led some fans to jokingly dub the team " Sund @-@ Ireland " . 
 = = Kit sponsorship = = 
 The first sponsor to appear on Sunderland kits was Cowie 's , the business group of then chairman Tom Cowie , between 1983 – 85 . The club was sponsored by the Vaux Breweries between 1985 and 1999 , with drink brands such as <unk> sometimes appearing on kits . Subsequently , the club were sponsored by Sunderland car dealership company Reg Vardy from 1999 to 2007 . Sunderland were sponsored by the Irish bookmaker Boylesports , who signed a four @-@ year contract with the club in 2007 worth up to £ 12 million . In April 2010 , Sunderland signed a two @-@ year shirt sponsorship deal with <unk> , a local online bingo company . On 25 June 2012 , Sunderland announced the strengthening of their partnership with the Invest in Africa initiative , with the initiative becoming the club 's shirt sponsor for two years . The project is closely linked with <unk> Oil . However , after a year the club announced a new sponsorship deal with South African company Bidvest . On June 1 , 2015 Sunderland announced a new sponsorship with <unk> to appear on the kits for the following season . 
 The first kit manufacturer to appear on Sunderland kits was Umbro , between 1975 – 81 . French brand Le Coq Sportif produced kits between 1981 – 83 . Nike 's first stint as kit manufacturer came between 1983 – 86 , before kits from Patrick ( 1986 – 88 ) , Hummel ( 1988 – 94 ) , Avec ( 1994 – 97 ) and Asics ( 1997 – 00 ) . Nike returned between 2000 – 04 . Diadora produced kits for a solitary season , 2004 – 05 , and Lonsdale made kits between 2005 – 07 . Umbro returned for five seasons between 2007 – 12 , before Adidas became the club 's kit manufacturer for the first time in 2012 . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = First team squad = = = 
 As of 26 July 2016 . 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = = Out on loan = = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Reserves and Academy = = = 
 = = Club officials = = 
 = = = Board of Directors = = = 
 = = = Coaching staff = = = 
 = = Managers = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 The following are the honours Sunderland have achieved since their foundation in 1879 . 
 = = = League = = = 
 First Division / Premier League : 6 ( level 1 ) 
 1891 – 92 , 1892 – 93 , 1894 – 95 , 1901 – 02 , 1912 – 13 , 1935 – 36 
 Second Division / First Division / Championship : 5 ( level 2 ) 
 1975 – 76 , 1995 – 96 , 1998 – 99 , 2004 – 05 , 2006 – 07 
 Promotion ( 1 ) : 1989 – 90 
 Third Division / Second Division / League One : 1 ( level 3 ) 
 1987 – 88 
 = = = Cup = = = 
 FA Cup : 
 Winners ( 2 ) : 1937 , 1973 
 Charity Shield 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1936 
 Sheriff of London Charity Shield : 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1903 
 = = = Other = = = 
 BBC Sports Personality Team of the Year Award : 1 
 1973 
 Football World Championship : 1 
 1895 
 = William Gibson = 
 William Ford Gibson ( born March 17 , 1948 ) is an American and Canadian speculative fiction writer and essayist widely credited with pioneering the science fiction subgenre known as cyberpunk . Beginning his writing career in the late 1970s , his early works were bleak , noir , near @-@ future stories that explored the effects of technology , cybernetics , and computer networks on humans — a " combination of lowlife and high tech " — and helped to create an iconography for the information age before the ubiquity of the Internet in the 1990s . 
 Gibson notably coined the term " cyberspace " in his short story " Burning Chrome " ( 1982 ) and later popularized the concept in his acclaimed debut novel Neuromancer ( 1984 ) . These early works have been credited with " renovating " science fiction literature after it had fallen largely into insignificance in the 1970s . 
 After expanding on Neuromancer with two more novels to complete the dystopic Sprawl trilogy , Gibson collaborated with Bruce Sterling on the alternate history novel The Difference Engine ( 1990 ) , which became an important work of the science fiction subgenre steampunk . In the 1990s , Gibson composed the Bridge trilogy of novels , which explored the sociological developments of near @-@ future urban environments , postindustrial society , and late capitalism . 
 Following the turn of the century and the events of 9 / 11 , Gibson emerged with a string of increasingly realist novels — Pattern Recognition ( 2003 ) , Spook Country ( 2007 ) , and Zero History ( 2010 ) — set in a roughly contemporary world . These works saw his name reach mainstream bestseller lists for the first time . His more recent novel , The Peripheral ( 2014 ) , returned to a more overt engagement with technology and recognizable science fiction concerns . 
 In 1999 , The Guardian described Gibson as " probably the most important novelist of the past two decades , " while the Sydney Morning Herald called him the " noir prophet " of cyberpunk . Throughout his career , Gibson has written more than 20 short stories and 10 critically acclaimed novels ( one in collaboration ) , contributed articles to several major publications , and collaborated extensively with performance artists , filmmakers , and musicians . His work has been cited as an influence across a variety of disciplines spanning academia , design , film , literature , music , cyberculture , and technology . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood , <unk> , and adolescence = = = 
 William Ford Gibson was born in the coastal city of Conway , South Carolina , and he spent most of his childhood in Wytheville , Virginia , a small town in the Appalachians where his parents had been born and raised . His family moved frequently during Gibson 's youth owing to his father 's position as manager of a large construction company . In Norfolk , Virginia , Gibson attended Pines Elementary School , where the teachers ' lack of encouragement for him to read was a cause of dismay for his parents . While Gibson was still a young child , a little over a year into his stay at Pines Elementary , his father choked to death in a restaurant while on a business trip . His mother , unable to tell William the bad news , had someone else inform him of the death . Tom Maddox has commented that Gibson " grew up in an America as disturbing and surreal as anything J. G. Ballard ever dreamed " . 
 A few days after the death , Gibson 's mother returned them from their home in Norfolk to Wytheville . Gibson later described Wytheville as " a place where modernity had arrived to some extent but was deeply distrusted " and credits the beginnings of his relationship with science fiction , his " native literary culture " , with the subsequent feeling of abrupt exile . At the age of 12 , Gibson " wanted nothing more than to be a science fiction writer " . He spent a few unproductive years at basketball @-@ obsessed George Wythe High School , a time spent largely in his room listening to records and reading books . At 13 , unbeknownst to his mother , he purchased an anthology of Beat generation writing , thereby gaining exposure to the writings of Allen Ginsberg , Jack Kerouac , and William S. Burroughs ; the lattermost had a particularly pronounced effect , greatly altering Gibson 's notions of the possibilities of science fiction literature . 
 A shy , ungainly teenager , Gibson grew up in a monoculture he found " highly problematic " , consciously rejected religion and took refuge in reading science fiction as well as writers such as Burroughs and Henry Miller . Becoming frustrated with his poor academic performance , Gibson 's mother threatened to send him to a boarding school ; to her surprise , he reacted enthusiastically . Unable to afford his preferred choice of Southern California , his then " chronically anxious and depressive " mother , who had remained in Wytheville since the death of her husband , sent him to Southern Arizona School for Boys in Tucson . He resented the structure of the private boarding school but was in retrospect grateful for its forcing him to engage socially . On the SAT ( Scholastic Aptitude Test ) exams , he scored 148 out of 150 in the written section but 5 out of 150 in mathematics , to the consternation of his teachers . 
 = = = Draft @-@ dodging , exile , and counterculture = = = 
 After his mother 's death when he was 18 , Gibson left school without graduating and became very isolated for a long time , traveling to California and Europe , and immersing himself in the counterculture . In 1967 , he elected to move to Canada in order " to avoid the Vietnam war draft " . At his draft hearing , he honestly informed interviewers that his intention in life was to sample every mind @-@ altering substance in existence . Gibson has observed that he " did not literally evade the draft , as they never bothered drafting me " ; after the hearing he went home and purchased a bus ticket to Toronto , and left a week or two later . In the biographical documentary No Maps for These Territories ( 2000 ) , Gibson said that his decision was motivated less by conscientious objection than by a desire to " sleep with hippie chicks " and indulge in hashish . He elaborated on the topic in a 2008 interview : 
 After weeks of nominal homelessness , Gibson was hired as the manager of Toronto 's first head shop , a retailer of drug paraphernalia . He found the city 's émigré community of American draft dodgers unbearable owing to the prevalence of clinical depression , suicide , and hardcore substance abuse . He appeared , during the Summer of Love of 1967 , in a CBC newsreel item about hippie subculture in Yorkville , Toronto , for which he was paid $ 500 – the equivalent of 20 weeks rent – which financed his later travels . Aside from a " brief , riot @-@ torn spell " in the District of Columbia , Gibson spent the rest of the 1960s in Toronto , where he met <unk> Deborah Jean Thompson , with whom he subsequently traveled to Europe . Gibson has recounted that they concentrated their travels on European nations with fascist regimes and favourable exchange rates , including spending time on a Greek archipelago and in Istanbul in 1970 , as they " couldn 't afford to stay anywhere that had anything remotely like hard currency " . 
 The couple married and settled in Vancouver , British Columbia in 1972 , with Gibson looking after their first child while they lived off his wife 's teaching salary . During the 1970s , Gibson made a substantial part of his living from scouring Salvation Army thrift stores for <unk> artifacts he would then up @-@ market to specialist dealers . Realizing that it was easier to sustain high college grades , and thus qualify for generous student financial aid , than to work , he enrolled at the University of British Columbia ( UBC ) , earning " a desultory bachelor 's degree in English " in 1977 . Through studying English literature , he was exposed to a wider range of fiction than he would have read otherwise ; something he credits with giving him ideas inaccessible from within the culture of science fiction , including an awareness of postmodernity . It was at UBC that he attended his first course on science fiction , taught by Susan Wood , at the end of which he was encouraged to write his first short story , " Fragments of a Hologram Rose " . 
 = = = Early writing and the evolution of cyberpunk = = = 
 After considering pursuing a master 's degree on the topic of hard science fiction novels as fascist literature , Gibson discontinued writing in the year that followed graduation and , as one critic put it , expanded his collection of punk records . During this period he worked at various jobs , including a three @-@ year stint as teaching assistant on a film history course at his alma mater . Impatient at much of what he saw at a science fiction convention in Vancouver in 1980 or 1981 , Gibson found a kindred spirit in fellow panelist , punk musician and author John Shirley . The two became immediate and lifelong friends . Shirley persuaded Gibson to sell his early short stories and to take writing seriously . 
 Through Shirley , Gibson came into contact with science fiction authors Bruce Sterling and Lewis Shiner ; reading Gibson 's work , they realised that it was , as Sterling put it , " breakthrough material " and that they needed to " put down our preconceptions and pick up on this guy from Vancouver ; this [ was ] the way forward . " Gibson met Sterling at a science fiction convention in Denver , Colorado in the autumn of 1981 , where he read " Burning Chrome " – the first cyberspace short story – to an audience of four people , and later stated that Sterling " completely got it " . 
 In October 1982 , Gibson traveled to Austin , Texas for <unk> , at which he appeared with Shirley , Sterling and Shiner on a panel called " Behind the <unk> : A Look at Punk SF " , where Shiner noted " the sense of a movement solidified " . After a weekend discussing rock and roll , MTV , Japan , fashion , drugs and politics , Gibson left the cadre for Vancouver , declaring half @-@ jokingly that " a new axis has been formed . " Sterling , Shiner , Shirley and Gibson , along with Rudy Rucker , went on to form the core of the radical cyberpunk literary movement . 
 = = Literary career = = 
 = = = Early short fiction = = = 
 Gibson 's early writings are generally near @-@ future stories about the influences of cybernetics and cyberspace ( computer @-@ simulated reality ) technology on the human race . His themes of hi @-@ tech shanty towns , recorded or broadcast stimulus ( later to be developed into the " sim @-@ <unk> " package featured so heavily in Neuromancer ) , and dystopic intermingling of technology and humanity , are already evident in his first published short story , " Fragments of a Hologram Rose " , in the Summer 1977 issue of Unearth . The latter thematic obsession was described by his friend and fellow author , Bruce Sterling , in the introduction of Gibson 's short story collection Burning Chrome , as " Gibson 's classic one @-@ two combination of lowlife and high tech . " 
 Beginning in 1981 , Gibson 's stories appeared in Omni and Universe 11 , wherein his fiction developed a bleak , film noir feel . He consciously distanced himself as far as possible from the mainstream of science fiction ( towards which he felt " an aesthetic revulsion " , expressed in " The Gernsback Continuum " ) , to the extent that his highest goal was to become " a minor cult figure , a sort of lesser Ballard . " When Sterling started to distribute the stories , he found that " people were just genuinely baffled ... I mean they literally could not parse the guy 's paragraphs ... the imaginative tropes he was inventing were just beyond peoples ' grasp . " 
 While Larry McCaffery has commented that these early short stories displayed flashes of Gibson 's ability , science fiction critic Darko Suvin has identified them as " undoubtedly [ cyberpunk 's ] best works " , constituting the " furthest horizon " of the genre . The themes which Gibson developed in the stories , the Sprawl setting of " Burning Chrome " and the character of Molly Millions from " Johnny Mnemonic " ultimately culminated in his first novel , Neuromancer . 
 = = = Neuromancer = = = 
 Neuromancer was commissioned by Terry Carr for the second series of Ace Science Fiction Specials , which was intended to exclusively feature debut novels . Given a year to complete the work , Gibson undertook the actual writing out of " blind animal terror " at the obligation to write an entire novel – a feat which he felt he was " four or five years away from " . After viewing the first 20 minutes of landmark cyberpunk film Blade Runner ( 1982 ) which was released when Gibson had written a third of the novel , he " figured [ Neuromancer ] was sunk , done for . Everyone would assume I 'd copped my visual texture from this astonishingly fine @-@ looking film . " He re @-@ wrote the first two @-@ thirds of the book twelve times , feared losing the reader 's attention and was convinced that he would be " permanently shamed " following its publication ; yet what resulted was a major imaginative leap forward for a first @-@ time novelist . 
 Neuromancer 's release was not greeted with fanfare , but it hit a cultural nerve , quickly becoming an underground word @-@ of @-@ mouth hit . It became the first winner of one science fiction " triple crown " — both Nebula and Hugo Awards as the year 's best novel and Philip K. Dick Award as the best paperback original — eventually selling more than 6 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . 
 Lawrence Person in his " Notes Toward a <unk> Manifesto " ( 1998 ) identified Neuromancer as " the archetypal cyberpunk work " , and in 2005 , Time included it in their list of the 100 best English @-@ language novels written since 1923 , opining that " [ t ] here is no way to overstate how radical [ Neuromancer ] was when it first appeared . " Literary critic Larry McCaffery described the concept of the matrix in Neuromancer as a place where " data dance with human consciousness ... human memory is <unk> and mechanized ... multi @-@ national information systems mutate and breed into startling new structures whose beauty and complexity are unimaginable , mystical , and above all nonhuman . " Gibson later commented on himself as an author circa Neuromancer that " I 'd buy him a drink , but I don 't know if I 'd loan him any money , " and referred to the novel as " an adolescent 's book " . The success of Neuromancer was to effect the 35 @-@ year @-@ old Gibson 's emergence from obscurity . 
 = = = Sprawl trilogy , The Difference Engine , and Bridge trilogy = = = 
 Although much of Gibson 's reputation has remained rooted in Neuromancer , his work continued to evolve conceptually and stylistically . Despite adding the final sentence of Neuromancer , " He never saw Molly again " , at the last minute in a deliberate attempt to prevent himself from ever writing a sequel , he did precisely that with Count Zero ( 1986 ) , a character @-@ focused work set in the Sprawl alluded to in its predecessor . He next intended to write an unrelated postmodern space opera , titled The Log of the Mustang Sally , but reneged on the contract with Arbor House after a falling out over the <unk> art of their hardcover of Count Zero . Abandoning The Log of the Mustang Sally , Gibson instead wrote Mona Lisa Overdrive ( 1988 ) , which in the words of Larry McCaffery " turned off the lights " on cyberpunk literature . It was a culmination of his previous two novels , set in the same universe with shared characters , thereby completing the Sprawl trilogy . The trilogy solidified Gibson 's reputation , with both later novels also earning Nebula and Hugo Award and Locus SF Award nominations 
 The Sprawl trilogy was followed by the 1990 novel The Difference Engine , an alternative history novel Gibson wrote in collaboration with Bruce Sterling . Set in a technologically advanced Victorian era Britain , the novel was a departure from the authors ' cyberpunk roots . It was nominated for the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1991 and the John W. Campbell Memorial Award in 1992 , and its success drew attention to the nascent steampunk literary genre of which it remains the best @-@ known work . 
 Gibson 's second series , the " Bridge trilogy " , is composed of Virtual Light ( 1993 ) , a " darkly comic urban detective story " , Idoru ( 1996 ) , and All Tomorrow 's Parties ( 1999 ) . The first and third books in the trilogy center on San Francisco in the near future ; all three explore Gibson 's recurring themes of technological , physical , and spiritual transcendence in a more grounded , matter @-@ of @-@ fact style than his first trilogy . Salon.com 's Andrew Leonard notes that in the Bridge trilogy , Gibson 's villains change from multinational corporations and artificial intelligences of the Sprawl trilogy to the mass media – namely tabloid television and the cult of celebrity . Virtual Light depicts an " end @-@ stage capitalism , in which private enterprise and the profit motive are taken to their logical conclusion " . This argument on the mass media as the natural evolution of capitalism is the opening line of the major Situationist work The Society of the Spectacle . Leonard 's review called Idoru a " return to form " for Gibson , while critic Steven Poole asserted that All Tomorrow 's Parties marked his development from " science @-@ fiction hotshot to wry sociologist of the near future . " 
 = = = Late period novels = = = 
 After All Tomorrow 's Parties , Gibson began to adopt a more realist style of writing , with continuous narratives – " speculative fiction of the very recent past . " Science fiction critic John Clute has interpreted this approach as Gibson 's recognition that traditional science fiction is no longer possible " in a world lacking coherent ' <unk> ' to continue from " , characterizing it as " SF for the new century " . Gibson 's novels Pattern Recognition ( 2003 ) , Spook Country ( 2007 ) and Zero History ( 2010 ) are set in the same contemporary universe — " more or less the same one we live in now " — and put Gibson 's work onto mainstream bestseller lists for the first time . As well as the setting , the novels share some of the same characters , including Hubertus Bigend and Pamela Mainwaring , employees of the enigmatic marketing company Blue Ant . 
 A phenomenon peculiar to this era was the independent development of annotating fansites , PR @-@ Otaku and Node Magazine , devoted to Pattern Recognition and Spook Country respectively . These websites tracked the references and story elements in the novels through online resources such as Google and Wikipedia and collated the results , essentially creating hypertext versions of the books . Critic John Sutherland characterised this phenomenon as threatening " to completely overhaul the way literary criticism is conducted " . 
 After the September 11 , 2001 attacks , with about 100 pages of Pattern Recognition written , Gibson had to re @-@ write the main character 's backstory , which had been suddenly rendered implausible ; he called it " the strangest experience I 've ever had with a piece of fiction . " He saw the attacks as a nodal point in history , " an experience out of culture " , and " in some ways ... the true beginning of the 21st century . " He is noted as one of the first novelists to use the attacks to inform his writing . Examination of cultural changes in post @-@ September 11 America , including a resurgent tribalism and the " infantilization of society " , became a prominent theme of Gibson 's work . The focus of his writing nevertheless remains " at the intersection of paranoia and technology " . 
 = = = Latest novel = = = 
 William Gibson 's most recent work is a novel titled The Peripheral . He described the story briefly in an appearance he made at the New York Public Library on April 19 , 2013 , and read an excerpt from the first chapter of the book entitled “ The Gone <unk> . ” The story takes place in two eras , one about thirty years into the future and the other further in the future . The Peripheral was released on October 28 , 2014 . 
 = = Collaborations , adaptations , and miscellanea = = 
 = = = Literary collaborations = = = 
 Three of the stories that later appeared in Burning Chrome were written in collaboration with other authors : " The Belonging Kind " ( 1981 ) with John Shirley , " Red Star , Winter Orbit " ( 1983 ) with Sterling , and " Dogfight " ( 1985 ) with Michael Swanwick . Gibson had previously written the foreword to Shirley 's 1980 novel City Come A @-@ walkin ' and the pair 's collaboration continued when Gibson wrote the introduction to Shirley 's short story collection Heatseeker ( 1989 ) . Shirley convinced Gibson to write a story for the television series Max Headroom for which Shirley had written several scripts , but the network canceled the series . 
 Gibson and Sterling collaborated again on the short story " The Angel of Goliad " in 1990 , which they soon expanded into the novel @-@ length alternate history story The Difference Engine ( 1990 ) . The two were later " invited to dream in public " ( Gibson ) in a joint address to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences Convocation on Technology and Education in 1993 ( " the Al Gore people " ) , in which they argued against the digital divide and " appalled everyone " by proposing that all schools be put online , with education taking place over the Internet . In a 2007 interview , Gibson revealed that Sterling had an idea for " a second recursive science novel that was just a wonderful idea " , but that Gibson was unable to pursue the collaboration because he was not creatively free at the time . 
 In 1993 , Gibson contributed lyrics and featured as a guest vocalist on Yellow Magic Orchestra 's <unk> album , and wrote lyrics to the track " Dog Star Girl " for Deborah Harry 's <unk> . 
 = = = Film adaptations , screenplays , and appearances = = = 
 Gibson was first solicited to work as a screenwriter after a film producer discovered a waterlogged copy of Neuromancer on a beach at a Thai resort . His early efforts to write film scripts failed to manifest themselves as finished product ; " Burning Chrome " ( which was to be directed by Kathryn Bigelow ) and " Neuro @-@ Hotel " were two attempts by the author at film adaptations that were never made . In the late 1980s he wrote an early version of Alien 3 ( which he later characterized as " <unk> " ) , few elements of which survived in the final version . Gibson 's early involvement with the film industry extended far beyond the confines of the Hollywood blockbuster system . At one point , he collaborated on a script with Kazakh director Rashid <unk> after an American producer had expressed an interest in a Soviet @-@ American collaboration to star Russian @-@ Korean star Victor Tsoi . Despite being occupied with writing a novel , Gibson was reluctant to abandon the " wonderfully odd project " which involved " ritualistic gang @-@ warfare in some sort of sideways @-@ future Leningrad " and sent Jack Womack to Russia in his stead . Rather than producing a motion picture , a prospect that ended with Tsoi 's death in a car crash , Womack 's experiences in Russia ultimately culminated in his novel Let 's Put the Future Behind Us and informed much of the Russian content of Gibson 's Pattern Recognition . A similar fate befell Gibson 's collaboration with Japanese filmmaker <unk> Ishii in 1991 , a film they planned on shooting in the Walled City of Kowloon until the city was demolished in 1993 . 
 Adaptations of Gibson 's fiction have frequently been optioned and proposed , to limited success . Two of the author 's short stories , both set in the Sprawl trilogy universe , have been loosely adapted as films : Johnny Mnemonic ( 1995 ) with screenplay by Gibson and starring Keanu Reeves , Dolph Lundgren and Takeshi Kitano , and New Rose Hotel ( 1998 ) , starring Christopher Walken , Willem Dafoe , and Asia Argento . The former was the first time in history that a book was launched simultaneously as a film and a CD @-@ ROM interactive video game . As of 2013 , Vincenzo Natali still hoped to bring Neuromancer to the screen , after some years in development hell . Count Zero was at one point being developed as The Zen Differential with director Michael Mann attached , and the third novel in the Sprawl trilogy , Mona Lisa Overdrive , has also been optioned and bought . An anime adaptation of Idoru was announced as in development in 2006 , and Pattern Recognition was in the process of development by director Peter Weir , although according to Gibson the latter is no longer attached to the project . Announced at International Film Festival Rotterdam in 2015 is an adaptation of Gibson 's short story Dogfight by BAFTA award @-@ winning writer and director Simon <unk> . Written by Gibson and Michael Swanwick and first published in Omni in July 1985 , the film is being developed by British producer Janine Marmot at Hot Property Films . 
 Television is another arena in which Gibson has collaborated ; he co @-@ wrote with friend Tom Maddox , The X @-@ Files episodes " Kill Switch " and " First Person Shooter " , broadcast in the U.S. on 20th Century Fox Television in 1998 and 2000 . In 1998 he contributed the introduction to the spin @-@ off publication Art of the X @-@ Files . Gibson made a cameo appearance in the television miniseries Wild Palms at the behest of creator Bruce Wagner . Director Oliver Stone had borrowed heavily from Gibson 's novels to make the series , and in the aftermath of its cancellation Gibson contributed an article , " Where The <unk> Go " , to the Wild Palms Reader . He accepted another acting role in 2002 , appearing alongside Douglas Coupland in the short film Mon Amour Mon <unk> in which the pair played philosophers . Appearances in fiction aside , Gibson was the focus of a biographical documentary by Mark Neale in 2000 called No Maps for These Territories . The film follows Gibson over the course of a drive across North America discussing various aspects of his life , literary career and cultural interpretations . It features interviews with Jack Womack and Bruce Sterling , as well as recitations from Neuromancer by Bono and The Edge . 
 = = = Exhibitions , poetry , and performance art = = = 
 Gibson has contributed text to be integrated into a number of performance art pieces . In October 1989 , Gibson wrote text for such a collaboration with acclaimed sculptor and future Johnny Mnemonic director Robert Longo titled Dream Jumbo : Working the <unk> , which was displayed in Royce Hall , University of California Los Angeles . Three years later , Gibson contributed original text to " Memory Palace " , a performance show featuring the theater group La <unk> dels <unk> at Art Futura ' 92 , Barcelona , which featured images by Karl Sims , Rebecca Allen , Mark Pellington with music by Peter Gabriel and others . It was at Art Futura ' 92 that Gibson met Charlie <unk> , who would later act as <unk> and " <unk> " designer on Steve Pickering and Charley Sherman 's adaptation of " Burning Chrome " for the Chicago stage . Gibson 's latest contribution was in 1997 , a collaboration with critically acclaimed Vancouver @-@ based contemporary dance company Holy Body Tattoo and Gibson 's friend and future webmaster Christopher Halcrow . 
 In 1990 , Gibson contributed to " Visionary San Francisco " , an exhibition at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art shown from June 14 to August 26 . He wrote a short story , " Skinner 's Room " , set in a decaying San Francisco in which the San Francisco – Oakland Bay Bridge was closed and taken over by the homeless – a setting Gibson then detailed in the Bridge trilogy . The story inspired a contribution to the exhibition by architects Ming Fung and Craig Hodgetts that envisioned a San Francisco in which the rich live in high @-@ tech , solar @-@ powered towers , above the decrepit city and its crumbling bridge . The architects exhibit featured Gibson on a monitor discussing the future and reading from " Skinner 's Room " . The New York Times hailed the exhibition as " one of the most ambitious , and admirable , efforts to address the realm of architecture and cities that any museum in the country has mounted in the last decade " , despite calling Ming and Hodgetts 's reaction to Gibson 's contribution " a powerful , but sad and not a little cynical , work " . A slightly different version of the short story was featured a year later in Omni . 
 = = = Cryptography = = = 
 A particularly well @-@ received work by Gibson was Agrippa ( a book of the dead ) ( 1992 ) , a 300 @-@ line semi @-@ autobiographical electronic poem that was his contribution to a collaborative project with artist Dennis Ashbaugh and publisher Kevin Begos , Jr . Gibson 's text focused on the ethereal nature of memories ( the title refers to a photo album ) and was originally published on a 3 @.@ 5 " floppy disk embedded in the back of an artist 's book containing etchings by Ashbaugh ( intended to fade from view once the book was opened and exposed to light — they never did , however ) . Gibson commented that Ashbaugh 's design " eventually included a supposedly self @-@ devouring floppy @-@ disk intended to display the text only once , then eat itself . " Contrary to numerous colorful reports , the diskettes were never actually " hacked " ; instead the poem was manually transcribed from a surreptitious videotape of a public showing in Manhattan in December 1992 , and released on the MindVox bulletin board the next day ; this is the text that circulated widely on the Internet . 
 Since its debut in 1992 , the mystery of Agrippa remained hidden for 20 years . Although many had tried to hack the code and decrypt the program , the <unk> source code was lost long ago . Alan Liu and his team at " The Agrippa Files " created an extensive website with tools and resources to crack the Agrippa Code . They collaborated with Matthew Kirschenbaum at the Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities and the Digital Forensics Lab , and Quinn DuPont , a PhD student of cryptography from the University of Toronto , in calling for the aid of cryptographers to figure out how the program works by creating " Cracking the Agrippa Code : The Challenge " , which enlisted participants to solve the intentional scrambling of the poem in exchange for prizes . The code was successfully cracked by Robert Xiao in late July 2012 . 
 = = = Essays and short @-@ form nonfiction = = = 
 Gibson is a sporadic contributor of non @-@ fiction articles to newspapers and journals . He has been a sporadic contributor of longer @-@ form articles to Wired and of op @-@ eds to The New York Times , and has written for The Observer , Addicted to Noise , New York Times Magazine , Rolling Stone , and Details Magazine . His first major piece of nonfiction , the article " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " concerning the city @-@ state of Singapore , resulted in Wired being banned from the country and attracted a spirited critical response . He commenced writing a blog in January 2003 , providing voyeuristic insights into his reaction to Pattern Recognition , but abated in September of the same year owing to concerns that it might negatively affect his creative process . 
 Gibson recommenced blogging in October 2004 , and during the process of writing Spook Country – and to a lesser extent Zero History – frequently posted short <unk> excerpts from the novel to the blog . The blog was largely discontinued by July 2009 , after the writer had undertaken prolific microblogging on Twitter under the nom de plume " <unk> " . In 2012 , Gibson released a collection of his non @-@ fiction works entitled Distrust That Particular Flavor . 
 = = Influence and recognition = = 
 Hailed by Steven Poole of The Guardian in 1999 as " probably the most important novelist of the past two decades " in terms of influence , Gibson first achieved critical recognition with his debut novel , Neuromancer . The novel won three major science fiction awards ( the Nebula Award , the Philip K. Dick Award , and the Hugo Award ) , an unprecedented achievement described by the Mail & Guardian as " the sci @-@ fi writer 's version of winning the Goncourt , Booker and Pulitzer prizes in the same year " . Neuromancer gained unprecedented critical and popular attention outside science fiction , as an " evocation of life in the late 1980s " , although The Observer noted that " it took the New York Times 10 years " to mention the novel . 
 Gibson 's work has received international attention from an audience that was not limited to science fiction aficionados as , in the words of Laura Miller , " readers found startlingly prophetic reflections of contemporary life in [ its ] fantastic and often outright paranoid scenarios . " It is often situated by critics within the context of <unk> as , according to academic David Brande , a construction of " a mirror of existing large @-@ scale techno @-@ social relations " , and as a narrative version of postmodern consumer culture . It is praised by critics for its depictions of late capitalism and its " rewriting of subjectivity , human consciousness and behaviour made newly problematic by technology . " <unk> Rapatzikou , writing in The Literary Encyclopedia , identifies Gibson as " one of North America 's most highly acclaimed science fiction writers " . 
 = = = Cultural significance = = = 
 In his early short fiction , Gibson is credited by Rapatzikou in The Literary Encyclopedia with effectively " renovating " science fiction , a genre at that time considered widely " insignificant " , influencing by means of the postmodern aesthetic of his writing the development of new perspectives in science fiction studies . In the words of filmmaker Marianne Trench , Gibson 's visions " struck sparks in the real world " and " determined the way people thought and talked " to an extent unprecedented in science fiction literature . The publication of Neuromancer ( 1984 ) hit a cultural nerve , causing Larry McCaffery to credit Gibson with virtually launching the cyberpunk movement , as " the one major writer who is original and gifted to make the whole movement seem original and gifted . " Aside from their central importance to cyberpunk and steampunk fiction , Gibson 's fictional works have been hailed by space historian Dwayne A. Day as some of the best examples of space @-@ based science fiction ( or " solar sci @-@ fi " ) , and " probably the only ones that rise above mere escapism to be truly thought @-@ provoking " . 
 Gibson 's early novels were , according to The Observer , " seized upon by the emerging slacker and hacker generation as a kind of road map " . Through his novels , such terms as cyberspace , <unk> , ICE , jacking in , and neural implants entered popular usage , as did concepts such as net consciousness , virtual interaction and " the matrix " . In " Burning Chrome " ( 1982 ) , he coined the term cyberspace , referring to the " mass consensual hallucination " of computer networks . Through its use in Neuromancer , the term gained such recognition that it became the de facto term for the World Wide Web during the 1990s . Artist Dike Blair has commented that Gibson 's " terse descriptive phrases capture the moods which surround technologies , rather than their engineering . " 
 Gibson 's work has influenced several popular musicians : references to his fiction appear in the music of Stuart Hamm , Billy Idol , Warren Zevon , <unk> 3030 , <unk> Run ( whose name is derived from a sequence in Neuromancer ) and Sonic Youth . U2 's Zooropa album was heavily influenced by Neuromancer , and the band at one point planned to scroll the text of Neuromancer above them on a concert tour , although this did not end up happening . Members of the band did , however , provide background music for the audiobook version of Neuromancer as well as appearing in No Maps for These Territories , a biographical documentary of Gibson . He returned the favour by writing an article about the band 's Vertigo Tour for Wired in August 2005 . The band <unk> take their name from Neuromancer . 
 The film The Matrix ( 1999 ) drew inspiration for its title , characters and story elements from the Sprawl trilogy . The characters of Neo and Trinity in The Matrix are similar to Bobby Newmark ( Count Zero ) and Molly ( " Johnny Mnemonic " , Neuromancer ) . Like Turner , protagonist of Gibson 's Count Zero , characters in The Matrix download instructions ( to fly a helicopter and to " know kung fu " , respectively ) directly into their heads , and both Neuromancer and The Matrix feature artificial intelligences which strive to free themselves from human control . Critics have identified marked similarities between Neuromancer and the film 's cinematography and tone . In spite of his initial reticence about seeing the film on its release , Gibson later described it as " arguably the ultimate ' cyberpunk ' artifact . " In 2008 he received honorary doctorates from Simon Fraser University and Coastal Carolina University . He was inducted by Science Fiction Hall of Fame that same year , presented by his close friend and collaborator Jack Womack . 
 = = = Visionary influence and prescience = = = 
 In Neuromancer , Gibson first used the term " matrix " to refer to the visualised Internet , two years after the nascent Internet was formed in the early 1980s from the computer networks of the 1970s . Gibson thereby imagined a worldwide communications network years before the origin of the World Wide Web , although related notions had previously been imagined by others , including science fiction writers . At the time he wrote " Burning Chrome " , Gibson " had a hunch that [ the Internet ] would change things , in the same way that the ubiquity of the automobile changed things . " In 1995 , he identified the advent , evolution and growth of the Internet as " one of the most fascinating and unprecedented human achievements of the century " , a new kind of civilization that is – in terms of significance — on a par with the birth of cities , and in 2000 predicted it would lead to the death of the nation state . 
 Observers contend that Gibson 's influence on the development of the Web reached beyond prediction ; he is widely credited with creating an iconography for the information age , long before the embrace of the Internet by the mainstream . Gibson introduced , in Neuromancer , the notion of the " <unk> " , and is credited with inventing — conceptually rather than <unk> — the phenomenon of virtual sex . His influence on early pioneers of desktop environment digital art has been acknowledged , and he holds an honorary doctorate from Parsons The New School for Design . Steven Poole claims that in writing the Sprawl trilogy Gibson laid the " conceptual foundations for the explosive real @-@ world growth of virtual environments in video games and the Web " . In his afterword to the 2000 re @-@ issue of Neuromancer , fellow author Jack Womack suggests that Gibson 's vision of cyberspace may have inspired the way in which the Internet ( and the Web particularly ) developed , following the publication of Neuromancer in 1984 , asking " what if the act of writing it down , in fact , brought it about ? " 
 Gibson scholar <unk> G. Rapatzikou has commented , in Gothic Motifs in the Fiction of William Gibson , on the origin of the notion of cyberspace : 
 Gibson 's vision , generated by the monopolising appearance of the terminal image and presented in his creation of the cyberspace matrix , came to him when he saw teenagers playing in video arcades . The physical intensity of their postures , and the realistic interpretation of the terminal spaces projected by these games – as if there were a real space behind the screen — made apparent the manipulation of the real by its own representation . 
 In his Sprawl and Bridge trilogies , Gibson is credited with being one of the few observers to explore the portents of the information age for notions of the <unk> structuring of cities . Not all responses to Gibson 's visions have been positive , however ; virtual reality pioneer Mark <unk> , though acknowledging their heavy influence on him and that " no other writer had so eloquently and emotionally affected the direction of the hacker community , " dismissed them as " adolescent fantasies of violence and disembodiment . " In Pattern Recognition , the plot revolves around snippets of film footage posted anonymously to various locations on the Internet . Characters in the novel speculate about the filmmaker 's identity , motives , methods and inspirations on several websites , anticipating the 2006 lonelygirl15 internet phenomenon . However , Gibson later disputed the notion that the creators of lonelygirl15 drew influence from him . Another phenomenon anticipated by Gibson is the rise of reality television , for example in Virtual Light , which featured a satirical extrapolated version of COPS . 
 When an interviewer in 1988 asked about the Bulletin Board System jargon in his writing , Gibson answered " I 'd never so much as touched a PC when I wrote Neuromancer " ; he was familiar , he said , with the science @-@ fiction community , which overlapped with the BBS community . Gibson similarly did not play computer games despite appearing in his stories . He wrote Neuromancer on a 1927 olive @-@ green Hermes portable typewriter , which Gibson described as " the kind of thing Hemingway would have used in the field " . By 1988 he used an Apple IIc and <unk> to write , with a modem ( " I don 't really use it for anything " ) , but until 1996 Gibson did not have an email address , a lack he explained at the time to have been motivated by a desire to avoid correspondence that would distract him from writing . His first exposure to a website came while writing Idoru when a web developer built one for Gibson . In 2007 he said , " I have a 2005 PowerBook G4 , a gig of memory , wireless router . That 's it . I 'm anything but an early adopter , generally . In fact , I 've never really been very interested in computers themselves . I don 't watch them ; I watch how people behave around them . That 's becoming more difficult to do because everything is ' around them ' . " 
 = = Selected bibliography = = 
 Nonfiction 
 = The Doon School = 
 The Doon School ( informally Doon ) is a boys @-@ only independent boarding school in Dehradun , Uttarakhand , India . It was founded in 1935 by Satish Ranjan Das , a Kolkata lawyer . He <unk> a school modelled on the British public school , but alive to Indian ambitions and desires . The school 's first headmaster was an Englishman , Arthur E. Foot , who had spent nine years as a science master at Eton College , England before coming to Doon , and returned to England right after India 's independence . The present headmaster is Peter McLaughlin , who has occupied the post since 2009 and is the ninth headmaster of the school . He is a member of Headmasters ' and Headmistresses ' Conference . 
 The school is a member of G20 Schools and Round Square group . Doon houses roughly 500 pupils aged 13 to 18 . Admission to the school is based on a competitive entrance examination and an interview . Every year in January and April , the school admits pupils aged 13 in Grade 7 ( known as D @-@ form ) and aged 14 in Grade 8 ( C @-@ form ) respectively . Doon pupils take the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education in tenth grade and are thereafter offered two strands for the final two years : International Baccalaureate ( IB ) or Indian School Certificate ( ISC ) . The school began offering the IB curriculum only in 2006 , before which all pupils had to sit the ISC examinations in twelfth grade . 
 Doon has consistently been ranked the best residential school of India by media such as BBC , The Times of India and Outlook . Although the school has often been cited as ' Eton of India ' by media outlets such as the BBC , The Guardian , Financial Times , The Economist , The Daily Telegraph and Forbes , it strongly eschews the label . Doon remains a boys @-@ only school despite continued pressure from political leaders , including President Pratibha Patil , to become coeducational . Old boys of the school are commonly known as Doscos . Although the total number of Doscos is relatively small ( estimated at 5 @,@ 000 since the school 's founding ) , they include some of India 's most prominent politicians , government officials and business leaders . The best known alumnus is former Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Doon was founded by Satish Ranjan Das , a lawyer from Calcutta and advocate @-@ general of Bengal , who in 1927 became a member of the Viceroy 's Executive Council of Lord Irwin on the condition that he would use the prestige of this position to raise funds for a new type of school in India . He decided to name the new school " Doon " , as it was situated in the Doon Valley . He travelled widely in India with the goal of collecting ₹ 4 millions , but at the time of his death had raised only ₹ 1 million in cash and a further ₹ 1 million in promises . With the money , Das formed the Indian Public Schools ' Society ( IPSS ) , which had the objective of founding new public schools in India that would admit students regardless of caste , creed or social status . Under the IPSS , a Board of Governors supervises all matters of Doon . Jawaharlal Nehru encouraged a move towards establishing the school , but Mahatma Gandhi " would have nothing to do with it " . 
 After the death of Das in 1928 , the IPSS accomplished little , and by 1934 some of the original presenter had begun to inquire about the return of their money . To solve this problem , Sir Joseph <unk> , then Railway Minister of Lord Willingdon 's Council , became IPSS chairman and , with Sir Akbar Hydari as secretary , worked to obtain the former estate of the Forest Research Institute in Dehra Dun on favourable terms . Sir Frank Noyce also joined the team . Lord Halifax , then President of the British Board of Education , led a selection committee that nominated Arthur E. Foot , a science teacher at Eton College , to be the first headmaster . On 27 October 1935 , the Viceroy , Lord Willingdon , presided over the formal opening of the school . Seventy boys enrolled in the first term , and 110 more signed up for the second . 
 The houses at the new school were originally named after their respective housemasters , but later renamed in honour of the largest presenter to the IPSS : Hyderabad House was named after Sir Akbar Hydari secured a contribution of ₹ 200 @,@ 000 from the Nizam of Hyderabad 's government ; . Kashmir House , after Maharajah Hari Singh , then ruler of Jammu and Kashmir , promised a contribution of ₹ 100 @,@ 000 ( 100 @,@ 000 rupees ) , which was delivered in 1935 ; . Tata House , after the Tata and Wadia Trusts promised ₹ 150 @,@ 000 , half of which was delivered in 1935 ; . Jaipur House , after Rai Bahadur Amarnath Atal arranged for contributions of ₹ 100 @,@ 000 from the Durbar of Jaipur . No building was named after Rai Bahadur <unk> <unk> , since his donation of ₹ 100 @,@ 000 was initially anonymous . 
 = = = Founding ethos = = = 
 Arthur Foot had never visited India before accepting the position of headmaster , and knew little of Dehradun beyond what he learned by consulting an atlas . He noted that it appeared to be surrounded by forests and close to mountains , and the possibilities of outdoor recreation and mountaineering seem to have influenced his decision as much as the chance to create a completely new type of school in India . Foot 's first action upon being offered the position was to recruit <unk> ( John ) Martyn from Harrow School as his deputy . Doon 's ethos and guiding principles were determined early in its life by Foot , Martyn , R.L. Holdsworth and Jack Gibson , who went on to become Principal of Mayo College . While these masters all came from very traditional British schools , they were determined to create a uniquely Indian public school rather than a transplanted British institution , and they were soon joined in their efforts by equally influential Indians such as Sudhir <unk> ( the school 's first art teacher , who had trained previously in Santiniketan ) and Gurdial Singh , a pioneering mountaineer who taught at Doon for several decades . 
 In an essay entitled The Objects of Education published in the school magazine , Foot offered a template for a complete education for boys , which included teaching them to distinguish clearly between good and evil , form a habit of choosing good over evil , think logically , express their thoughts and views clearly , and maintain a healthy body . In other essays , Foot identified the milestones in the development of each student : 
 By 14 he should have learnt all the ordinary principles of social behaviour . He should know how to stand up and speak to a variety of different types of people – to his own mother , to someone else 's mother , to his father , to his schoolmasters , to servants , to Mahatma Gandhi or to the Viceroy , and to do this without any self @-@ consciousness ... At fourteen a boy should have constructed a framework of competence in language , in mathematical ability , and in social behaviour . After that age he is , as it were , filling in a design on to the framework . In short he is learning to exercise taste ... At 16 , he acquired taste , a sense of the beautiful and the ugly , of the strong and the weak , of good and evil ... At 17 must come another quality , less instinctive and requiring a maturer mind : he must acquire a capacity of judgement . 
 Martyn , who was involved with Doon for several decades and became its second headmaster , acknowledged the influence of the very remarkable German man , Kurt Hahn , in the development of the school 's ethos . Although Martyn had not visited India before , he immediately accepted Foot 's offer because of the opportunity it afforded to implement Hahn 's ideas , which he had not been able to do at Harrow . Martyn acknowledged Foot 's leadership in the development of the school , but added that they both had similar ideas : " I would not have been as bold as he was in trying to eliminate punishments , but we were equally keen on providing as wide a range as possible of activities that were creative and challenging ... The problem , as we saw it , was to create an atmosphere in which boys would learn the importance of public spirit at the same time as they acquired self @-@ confidence and initiative . " 
 = = = Headmasters = = = 
 Foot and Martyn , the first two headmasters at Doon , were both from elite British institutions – Eton College and Harrow School . They were determined to model Doon on those two schools , but both agreed that it should cater primarily for Indian boys rather than the sons of British expatriates . The public school jargon introduced by these headmasters is still in use . For example , the weekly masters ' meeting , started by Foot , is called Chambers , a term taken from Eton , and evening " prep " ( the boarding @-@ school equivalent of homework ) is called Toye @-@ time , a term taken from Winchester College . 
 Though Foot modelled Doon on Eton and Harrow ( and the school is often called the " Eton of India " by various press agencies ) , he did not want Doon to be considered elitist . Foot once said , " our boys will join an aristocracy , but it ’ s an aristocracy of service , not one of wealth , privilege or position " . The school 's first Indian headmaster was Eric Simeon appointed in 1970 . He came from a military background and laid great emphasis on disciplined living . The next headmaster , Gulab <unk> , was the first alumnus to become headmaster . <unk> 's successor <unk> Das , another alumnus , was the grandson of school founder Satish Ranjan Das . During his tenure , the Oberoi house was added to the original four houses . 
 The main emphasis of the next headmaster , John Mason , was to make Doon affordable for school pupils ; Doon did not raise its fees during his tenure . Kanti Bajpai became the third old boy to become headmaster . He oversaw the introduction of numerous punishments , notably " yellow cards " , to control an outburst of bullying at Doon . Peter McLaughlin , a member of the Headmasters ' and Headmistresses ' Conference ( HMC ) , became the first non @-@ Indian headmaster for almost four decades when he was appointed in 2009 . Shortly before taking up his appointment he said , " We will be adhering to the school credo of engaging individuals in socially productive work , at the same time delivering on quality education . " 
 In June 2016 the school announced the appointment of Matthew Raggett , principal of the Leipzig International School 's secondary department , to succeed Peter McLaughlin from the end of the summer term . 
 = = = DS @-@ 75 celebrations = = = 
 The annual Founder 's Day celebration of the school is an event of three or four @-@ days in the Autumn Term , usually in the last week of October . Many ex @-@ pupils come from all parts of the world to celebrate the event . Security on campus is tight , since alumni attending the event often include senior politicians and government officials , and the chief guest is usually a very prominent person . The event includes productions of English dramas followed by an orchestral concert given by members of the school 's Music Society . 
 Doon celebrated its 75th Founder 's Day ( Platinum Jubilee ) in October 2010 with an event christened DS @-@ 75 . Among the chief guests were the then President Pratibha Patil of India , King Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck of Bhutan and Kapil Sibal , ( then Union Minister for Human Resource Development ) . Pratibha Patil , in her address , urged the school authorities to make Doon a co @-@ educational institution . Rahul Gandhi , General Secretary of the Indian National Congress , who studied at Doon for two years , stayed away for security reasons . One of the main attractions was a discussion ( dubbed the " Chandbagh Debate " ) held between alumni including Vikram Seth , Kamal Nath , Manpreet Singh Badal , Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia and retired headmaster Kanti Bajpai , on the topic Can India lead ? . It was moderated by television commentator Karan Thapar , an alumnus of the school . 
 Ashvin Kumar made the film Dazed in Doon for the celebrations , using pupils for the cast and crew . Most of it was shot in June and July during the summer break , and those scenes which required the entire student body were filmed after the school reopened in August . The Doon School , however , objected to the film and its distribution , obtaining a court order to delay its release and labelling it " defamatory " . Shayan Italia , another alumnus , composed and gave a live performance of the song " Doscos Forever , Brothers for Life " to mark the event . On 22 October 2010 , a commemorative postage stamp depicting the school 's main building was released by the Indian Postal Service to mark the occasion of the 75th Founder 's Day . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The school occupies a single campus covering approximately 72 acres ( 290 @,@ 000 m2 ) flanked by <unk> Road and Mall Road in the Dehradun Cantonment area of Dehradun city , Uttarakhand , India . To house the school , the IPSS acquired Chandbagh Estate in Dehradun from the Forest Research Institute . Part of the estate was once a deer park . The IPSS also acquired an adjoining estate , now known as Skinner 's Field , from the descendants of James Skinner . At the time of acquisition it was overgrown and somewhat neglected , its most prominent features being two sheds formerly used to house elephants . The new Art and Media School , located on the site of the old Music School and inaugurated in October 2010 by Kapil Sibal , was shortlisted for the 2010 World Architecture News Education Award . The school 's South Garden has been mentioned in Inside Outside Magazine 's Annual Awards for its green principles and <unk> standards of environmental compatibility . 
 The Chandbagh estate is located in a green part of Dehradun and a wide variety of flora and fauna are found on the estate , including many rare trees that date back to the days of the Forest Research Institute . The school has over 150 species of trees on its campus , and the formal gardens attract a variety of birds . In 1996 , a book titled Trees of Chandbagh was released which provided a comprehensive account of vegetation found on Doon 's campus , known as Chandbagh . 
 = = = Houses = = = 
 Doon follows the house system . When the school opened in 1935 , there were only three houses . Today there are five main houses ( Hyderabad , Jaipur , Kashmir , Tata and Oberoi ) and two holding houses ( Foot and Martyn , named after former headmasters ) , where new students live for a year before moving to one of the main houses . 
 Each house is run by a housemaster , who is also an active member of the teaching staff . The housemaster is assisted by a senior boy known as the house captain . One senior boy serves as school captain and is assisted by prefects from each house . Boys are assigned to houses at the time of admission and develop great loyalty to them , since all intramural sports involve fierce competition between houses . For some alumni , inter @-@ house rivalry continues well into middle @-@ age . Boys with even the most distant family connections to a particular house are invariably assigned to that house . 
 For many decades , housemasters were always men , but now there are <unk> as well . Each housemaster and <unk> is assisted by a matron known as " The Dame " , who provides pastoral care for pupils , some of whom take several terms to adjust fully to life in a boarding school , particularly given Doon 's monastic lifestyle and strict routine . The homes of housemasters and <unk> are adjacent or physically attached to their houses to enable close supervision and support . 
 = = Academic life = = 
 The school follows flexible modular scheduling to educate the pupils . The school practices a five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ day week consisting of 40 periods ( or " schools " ) , each of 40 minutes . The school day begins with " first bell " soon after 6 : 15 am . The boys have <unk> <unk> before doing calisthenics outdoors on the playing fields . There are eight classes in total with a 20 @-@ minute break and lunch in between . All meals are served in a central dining hall , and boys from each table take turns acting as waiters for their table @-@ mates . 
 The academic year has always consisted of two terms : the Spring Term and the Autumn Term . In the early decades , the academic year followed the calendar year . This changed in the late 1970s so that the Spring Term now runs from February to the end of May . New pupils ( " D @-@ Formers " ) join Doon at the beginning of April . The Autumn Term runs from August to the year @-@ end examinations in November after which the boys are promoted to the new class beginning in February . These internal examinations are known as " trials " , while examinations leading to certificates such as the Indian School Certificate are known as " finals " . 
 Social work , known formally as " Socially Useful Productive Work " , is also part of school life . All boys of the school must complete a mandatory quota of social service hours every term . Pupils and alumni have frequently organised efforts across India to assist people affected by natural disasters . During the 1991 Uttarkashi earthquake the school 's amateur radio club was used by the government for communication purposes . Doon also oversees a Panchayat Ghar teaching impoverished children , and many building projects and workshops for the local community . Discipline has always been strict , and the school has expelled children from well @-@ known families . In the 1950s , Martyn 's suggestion that Sanjay Gandhi finish his senior year elsewhere was accepted without question by his mother , Indira Gandhi . In contrast , Doon 's decision to expel a ward of Chief Minister Nityanand Swami of Uttarakhand in 2000 led to allegations of threats to disrupt power and water supplies ; the difficulty was overcome by the prime minister 's intervention . 
 = = = Pupils = = = 
 Pupils are known as " Doscos " , a contraction of " Doon " and " school " . The press often calls alumni Doscos , but in Doon itself they are called ex @-@ Doscos , or simply Old Boys . The vast majority of alumni are Indians , but a dwindling number are from Pakistan having studied at Doon before the Partition of India forced them to leave in 1947 . Relations between Indian and Pakistani alumni have remained warm over the years , despite the long history of conflict between the two countries . Boys from Bangladesh and Nepal continue to study at Doon . Doon remains a boys @-@ only school despite continued pressure from political leaders , including President Pratibha Patil , to become coeducational . 
 = = School activities = = 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Sports are compulsory at the school . It has over 30 acres ( 120 @,@ 000 m2 ) of playing fields , the largest of which are Skinner 's Field and the Main Field . Cricket , hockey , athletics , boxing and association football are played seasonally . Tennis , table tennis , badminton , squash , basketball , swimming and gymnastics tournaments are also available . Sport is dominated by cricket and hockey during the spring term and by football , athletics and boxing in the autumn term . Inter @-@ house matches are played in cricket , hockey and football . Sports facilities include a 25 @-@ metre swimming pool , a boxing ring and a multi @-@ purpose hall with a gymnasium and facilities for indoor badminton , basketball and table tennis . There are two artificial turf cricket pitches , five basketball courts , six tennis courts , four squash courts , ten cricket nets , seven fields for hockey and football ( which can be converted to four cricket pitches to accommodate seasonal sports ) , a modern cricket pavilion and two 400 @-@ metre athletics tracks . 
 Doon hosts the annual Afzal Khan Memorial Basketball Tournament , an inter @-@ school basketball tournament . 
 = = = Clubs and societies = = = 
 Extracurricular activities are also a compulsory element of school life , and magazines are published in English and Hindi . There are around 23 clubs and societies , including politics , drama , photography , <unk> , first @-@ aid , dramatics , painting , sculpture , carpentry , amateur radio , music ( including Trinity Guildhall music examinations ) , senior and junior English debating societies , Model United Nations , chess and astronomy . In many societies pupils come together to discuss a particular topic , presided over by a schoolmaster and often including a guest speaker . The school has often invited prominent figures to give speeches and talks to the students ; these have included heads of state , politicians , ornithologists , naturalists , artists , writers , economists , diplomats and industrialists . 
 The Doon School Weekly is the official school newspaper , distributed every Saturday morning . It chronicles school activities and is a platform for creative and political writing . It was founded in 1936 and is edited by pupils . Although it is subject to censorship , satire and criticism of school policies have been published in the past . More subversive publications , far more critical of teachers and the school establishment , have occasionally been produced without official sponsorship . Other school magazines include The Yearbook and The Doon School Information Review . Publications by academic departments include Echo ( Science ) , The <unk> ( Economics ) , Infinity ( Mathematics ) , Grand Slam ( Sports ) and The Circle ( History and Political Science ) . 
 = = = Mountaineering = = = 
 Halfway through each term , the boys take a one @-@ week " midterm " – a rugged trip , often through the Siwalik Hills or Himalayas . Senior boys make treks of up to five days , unaccompanied by teachers , camping out in tents , cooking their own food and hiking . They plan these trips themselves . Alumni have credited these <unk> as being among their most formative and character @-@ building experiences . 
 Doon has been credited with pioneering mountaineering in India , due to the accomplishments of masters such as R.L. Holdsworth , Jack Gibson and Gurdial Singh and alumni such as Nandu <unk> . Notable climbs by staff and alumni include <unk> ( 6 @,@ 316 m ) in 1950 , Kala Nag ( 6 @,@ 387 m ) in 1956 , <unk> ( 7 @,@ 120 m ) in 1951 , <unk> ( 7 @,@ 756 m ) in 1955 , Abi <unk> ( 7 @,@ 355 m ) in 1953 and 1955 , <unk> ( 6 @,@ 855 m ) in 1958 and <unk> ( 6 @,@ 632 metres ) in 1964 . 
 Some of these expeditions have had their idiosyncrasies . After <unk> Singh led a successful climb of <unk> , he performed a <unk> asana on the summit as a tribute to the Hindu god Shiva , who is said to abide there . Holdsworth has been claimed to hold the high @-@ altitude record for smoking a pipe , which he did on the summit of <unk> after the first ascent in 1931 . Two Doon pupils climbed the Matterhorn in 1951 wearing cricket boots . 
 = = = Theatre and music = = = 
 An amphitheatre known as the Rose Bowl was built largely by pupils in two years during the 1930s and underwent a major structural change in 2009 . It can seat up to 1 @,@ 000 people and has been the setting for numerous Shakespeare plays and other classics of western theatre , as well as musical performances and speeches during school ceremonies such as Founder 's Day . The Multi @-@ Purpose Hall is a more modern indoor theatre that can accommodate approximately 2 @,@ 000 people . Plays are regularly staged in English and Hindi , with 8 – 9 productions each year including 2 major productions as part of the Founder 's Day celebrations . The Inter House Once @-@ Act Play competition is held each year , alternatively in English and Hindi . Many of the plays historically have been joint productions with the Welham Girls ' School in Dehradun . 
 In 2001 a new music school was built beside the Rose Bowl . It houses a music library , a concert hall and several practice and teaching rooms where students learn various western and Indian instruments . Pupils of the school have an option to appear for the Trinity Guildhall music examinations , conducted by Trinity College London , in piano , violin , drums and classical guitar . In 2002 the school choir raised ₹ 2 million for victims of the 2001 Gujarat earthquake by organising a charity concert with the title Concerto 2000 , in which drummer <unk> also took part . To commemorate its Platinum Jubilee , the school launched a music album called Spirit of Doon in collaboration with EMI . The school choir sang two songs ( " Lab pe Aati Hai Dua " and " Anand Loke " ) for the project but only the former was included in the final recording . The tracks were written by the lyricist Gulzar and were sung by Sonu Nigam , Shayan Italia and Bhajan <unk> . 
 = = School songs = = 
 Attendance at the morning assembly is required of all pupils and teachers . It traditionally begins with a song from the school 's Song Book : 
 Song No. 1 – " Jana Gana Mana " by Rabindranath Tagore 
 Song No. 2 – " <unk> Ne <unk> <unk> Mein " by Muhammad Iqbal 
 Song No. 3 – " Anand Loke " by Rabindranath Tagore 
 Song No. 4 – " Saare Jahan Se <unk> " by Muhammad Iqbal 
 Song No. 5 – " Lab Pe Aati Hai Dua " by Muhammad Iqbal 
 Song No. 6 – " Vandana Ke in <unk> Mein " ( a Bhajan ) 
 Song No. 7 – " <unk> Ke Pat <unk> Re " ( attributed to <unk> ) 
 Song No. 8 – " He <unk> <unk> <unk> " 
 Song No. 9 – " <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( a Bhajan ) 
 Song No. 10 – " Vande Mataram " ( from a poem by Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay ) 
 Although Jana Gana Mana is India 's National anthem , it is traditionally referred to as " Song No. 1 " at Doon since it was adopted as the School Song in 1935 , fifteen years before it was adopted as India 's national anthem . The school songs were deliberately chosen to include both Urdu poetry and Hindu bhajans as a way of emphasising Doon 's secular ethos ; similarly , the school prayers include a mix of Anglican hymns and Indian poetry . 
 = = Affiliations = = 
 = = = Ties with other schools = = = 
 From its foundation in 1937 until the early 1980s , Welham Boys ' School was a feeder school for Doon School and Mayo College . This ended when Surendra <unk> , an old boy and former housemaster at Doon , became Principal of Welham and transformed it into a high school . Several families who send their sons to Doon send their daughters to Welham Girls ' School , and many Doon alumni have married alumnae of Welham . The two schools hold an annual " dance social " , and their alumni sometimes collaborate in organising events . Pakistani ex @-@ pupils from Doon established the Chand Bagh School 40 km north of Lahore , Pakistan , in 1998 , modelling it on the general structure of Doon . Doon also has exchange programmes with a number of overseas schools . As of September 2011 , a small number of Doon students were attending Eton College , Harrow School , Millfield , Schule Schloss Salem , The Armidale School , Bridge House School , Deerfield Academy , King 's Academy , Stowe School , Scotch College , Melbourne and St. Mark 's School ( Texas ) . In 2011 Doon twinned with The Thomas Hardye School , Dorchester , England , through a cultural exchange project organised by the BBC and British Council in light of the 2012 Summer Olympic Games held in the UK . 
 = = = Schools with similar names = = = 
 As private schools became more widespread in India , several other schools used " Doon " as part of their names , causing some confusion . Among them are Doon Global School , Doon Presidency School , Doon International School , Doon Preparatory School , Doon Cambridge School , Doon Girls School , Doon Public School ( in West Delhi , not the Doon Valley ) and the Doon College of Spoken English . None of them is related to The Doon School . 
 = = = Memberships = = = 
 The Doon School is a member of following organisations : G20 Schools , Round Square , Rotary International 's Interact Club , Headmasters ' and Headmistresses ' Conference , International Boys ' Schools Coalition , Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations , International Baccalaureate Organization ( IBO ) , Indian Public Schools ' Conference , Rashtriya Life Saving Society ( India ) , International Award Association 
 The school is the regional test centre for University of Cambridge ESOL Examinations and SAT Tests . 
 = = Public image = = 
 Doon in films & television 
 The film Dazed in Doon , which was commissioned by the School on the occasion of its 75th anniversary and produced by old boy Ashvin Kumar , was banned by the school authorities because it " doesn 't give the school a good name " . The dispute remains unresolved . 
 In September 2010 , BBC Sport made a documentary on the Doon School for the World Olympic Dreams Project . The documentary was produced in association with the British Council . Its main purpose was to show the school where Abhinav Bindra , the first Indian individual Olympic gold medallist , spent his formative years . 
 In the 2010 Bollywood film Aisha , the character Randhir Gambhir is a Doon School alumnus . 
 Doon in literature 
 Vikram Seth used his own experiences of being bullied at Doon to model the character of Tapan in A Suitable Boy . 
 In Salman Rushdie 's short @-@ story anthology East , West , the protagonists Zulu and Chekhov are Doscos . 
 In Tenzing Norgay 's autobiography Man of Everest , he refers to <unk> as " The Doon School mountain " due to the fact that the mountain was frequented by two Doon School teachers Jack Gibson and John Martyn . 
 Doon in research 
 Doon School Chronicles is the first of five ethnographic films called the Doon School Quintet , made by David MacDougall between 1997 and 2000 about the culture of the School . <unk> has written of a tendency of some alumni to idealise a Golden Age set in the first decade of the school 's life , which sometimes makes them resistant to change . 
 Constructing Post @-@ Colonial India : National Character and the Doon School by Sanjay <unk> is a detailed sociological study of the school 's culture and how it has influenced India 's national character . 
 <unk> ' Children in ' Rich ' Schools , a 2005 report by the Institute of Social Studies Trust , discusses why the Doon School has no reservations ( quotas for specific social groups ) in its admissions process . The post quotes an unnamed student who explains , " passing the Doon School entrance exam means that you have proved yourself worthy of the school . <unk> seats for students seems to imply that the school must prove itself worthy of you . " 
 In 1969 , Asian Survey ( then Asian Review ) - an Asian studies academic journal of University of California , Berkeley - produced a report on The Doon School as a part of their project which documented Indian history after the entry of East India Company . 
 In Indian Tales of the Raj , <unk> <unk> studies how Doon School 's alumni affected the Indian political scene in the ' 60s . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = = Alumni = = = 
 Pupils of Doon have gone on to achieve prominence in politics , government service , the armed forces of India and Pakistan , commerce , journalism , the arts and literature . They include nine Cabinet Ministers , two chief ministers , several members of the Indian Parliament and state Legislative Assemblies ; a Naxalite , nineteen generals , two admirals , former heads of the Indian and Pakistani Air Forces and twenty @-@ four ambassadors , including those from India , Pakistan , Nepal and the United Kingdom . The best @-@ known alumnus is former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi , who appointed so many old boys to his administration that his inner circle was called a " Doon cabinet " . Gandhi 's reliance on Doon alumni for political advice was criticised in the media , and they seldom held public office for some time afterward . Though this has changed with the political ascendance of Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia , Kamal Nath and Rahul Gandhi . 
 Notable Doon alumni to have held senior positions in Indian and Pakistani politics include the former Indian diplomat turned politician Mani Shankar Aiyar , currently a Rajya Sabha nominee , the former Defence Secretary of Pakistan Ghulam Jilani Khan , Kamal Nath ( Politician , class of 1964 ) , Rahul Gandhi ( Congress Politician , class of 1986 ) , Sanjay Gandhi ( Congress Politician , class of 1964 ) , Naveen Patnaik ( Politician , class of 1964 ) , Jyotiraditya Madhavrao Scindia ( Politician , class of 1989 ) , Dr. Karan Singh ( Politician , class of 1948 ) In the field of Literature and Poetry , Doon alumni include <unk> Ghosh ( class of 1972 ) , Ramachandra Guha ( class of 1973 ) , Vikram Seth ( class of 1970 ) , Ardashir Vakil . 
 Doon alumni in Journalism include <unk> Roy ( class of 1965 ) , <unk> <unk> ( class of 1962 ) , Karan Thapar , <unk> Prabhakar and Vikram Chandra . The first Indian Rhodes scholar was a Doon School alumni - <unk> Kumar . Doon is also the alma mater of the first Indian individual Olympic gold medallist , Abhinav Bindra ( class of 1999 ) and the mountaineering pioneer Nandu <unk> . In the field of Arts and Entertainment , Doon 's alumni include Roshan Seth ( Class of 1960 ) , Himani Shivpuri ( class of 1971 ) , <unk> Singh and Abhishek <unk> , a prominent art collector . The sculptor Anish Kapoor ( class of 1970 ) also attended Doon . 
 In Business , the Doon alumni included Anil Kumar , former senior partner at McKinsey & Company and co @-@ founder of the Indian School of Business , Gautam Thapar , founder and chairman of the <unk> Group , <unk> Mohan Singh and <unk> Mohan Singh , former owners of <unk> Laboratories and presently owning Fortis Healthcare . 
 = = = Faculty = = = 
 Doon has benefited from the services of the following academics in the past : 
 Peter Lawrence 
 Jack Gibson 
 J. A. K. Martyn 
 <unk> <unk> 
 R. L. Holdsworth 
 Gurdial Singh 
 Sudhir <unk> 
 Chetan Anand 
 Simon Singh 
 Vikram Seth 
 <unk> Nandan 
 = West Bengal = 
 West Bengal ( / <unk> <unk> / ; Bengali pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) is a state in eastern India and is the nation 's fourth @-@ most populous state , with over 91 million inhabitants . Spread over 34 @,@ 267 sq mi ( 88 @,@ 750 km2 ) , it is bordered by the countries of Bangladesh , Nepal and Bhutan , and the Indian states of Odisha , Jharkhand , Bihar , Sikkim and Assam . The state capital is Kolkata . Together with the neighbouring nation of Bangladesh , it makes up the ethno @-@ linguistic region of Bengal . 
 Ancient Bengal was the site of several major janapadas ( kingdoms ) . It was also part of large empires such as the Maurya Empire ( second century BC ) and Gupta Empire ( fourth century AD ) ; and part of the regional Buddhist Pala Empire ( 8th to 11th century ) and Sena dynasty ( 11th – 12th century ) . From the 13th century onward , the region was controlled by the Bengal Sultanate , Hindu kings and Baro @-@ <unk> landlords under the suzerainty of the Mughal Empire , until the British East India company took control of the region from the Mughals in the late 18th century . The company consolidated their hold on the region following the Battle of Plassey in 1757 and Battle of Buxar in 1764 and by 1793 took complete control of the region . Kolkata ( or Calcutta ) served for many years as the capital of British controlled territories in India . The early and prolonged exposure to British administration resulted in the expansion of Western education , culminating in development of science , institutional education , and social reforms in the region , including what became known as the Bengali renaissance . A hotbed of the Indian independence movement through the early 20th century , Bengal was divided during India 's independence in 1947 along religious lines into two separate entities : West Bengal — a largely Hindu state of India — and East Bengal — a mostly Muslim part of the newly created Dominion of Pakistan . East Bengal later became the independent nation of Bangladesh in 1971 . 
 A major agricultural producer , West Bengal is the sixth @-@ largest contributor to India 's net domestic product . Noted for its political activism , the state was ruled by democratically elected communist governments for 34 years from 1977 . It is noted for its cultural activities and the presence of cultural and educational institutions ; the state capital Kolkata is known as the " cultural capital of India " . The state 's cultural heritage , besides varied folk traditions , ranges from stalwarts in literature including Nobel @-@ laureate Rabindranath Tagore to scores of musicians , film @-@ makers and artists . West Bengal is also distinct from most other Indian states in its appreciation and practice of playing Association football besides cricket , the national favourite sport . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The origin of the name Bengal ( known as Bangla and Bongo in Bengali language ) is unknown . One theory suggests that the word derives from " Bang , " a Dravidian tribe that settled the region around 1000 BC . The word might have been derived from the ancient kingdom of Vanga ( or Banga ) . Although some early Sanskrit literature mentions the name , the region 's early history is obscure . 
 At the end of British Rule over the Indian subcontinent , the Bengal region was partitioned in 1947 along religious lines into east and west . The east came to be known as East Bengal and the west came to known as West Bengal , which continued as an Indian state . In 2011 , the Government of West Bengal proposed a change in the official name of the state to <unk> ( Bengali : <unk> ্ <unk> ্ <unk> <unk> ) . This is the native name of the state , literally meaning western Bengal in the native Bengali language . 
 = = History = = 
 Stone Age tools dating back 20 @,@ 000 years have been excavated in the state , showing human occupation 8 @,@ 000 years earlier than scholars had thought based on prior evidence . The region was a part of the Vanga Kingdom , according to the Indian epic Mahabharata . Several Vedic realms were present in Bengal region , including Vanga , Rarh , <unk> and the <unk> Kingdom . 
 One of the earliest foreign references to Bengal is a mention by the Ancient Greeks around 100 BC of a land named <unk> , which was located at the mouths of the Ganges . Bengal had overseas trade relations with Suvarnabhumi ( Burma , Lower Thailand , Lower Malay Peninsula , and the Sumatra ) . According to the Sri Lankan chronicle Mahavamsa , Prince Vijaya , a Vanga Kingdom prince , conquered Lanka ( modern @-@ day Sri Lanka ) and gave the name Sinhala Kingdom to the country . 
 = = = Era of the janapadas = = = 
 The kingdom of Magadha was formed in 7th century BCE , consisting of the regions now comprising Bihar and Bengal . It was one of the four main kingdoms of India at the time of the lives of Mahavira , founder of Jainism , and Gautama Buddha , founder of Buddhism . It consisted of several janapadas or kingdoms . Under Ashoka , the Maurya Empire of Magadha in the 3rd century BCE extended over nearly all of South Asia , including Afghanistan and parts of Balochistan . From the 3rd to the 6th centuries CE , the kingdom of Magadha served as the seat of the Gupta Empire . 
 = = = Later rulers = = = 
 Two kingdoms – Vanga or <unk> and <unk> – are mentioned in some texts to have appeared after the end of Gupta Empire , although details of their ruling time are uncertain . The first recorded independent king of Bengal was Shashanka , who reigned in the early 7th century . Shashanka is often recorded in Buddhist annals as an intolerant Hindu ruler who is noted for his persecution of the Buddhists . Shashanka murdered <unk> , the Buddhist King of <unk> , and is noted for destroying the Bodhi tree at <unk> , and replacing Buddha statues with Shiva <unk> . After a period of anarchy , the Pala dynasty ruled the region for four hundred years starting from the eighth century . It was followed by a shorter reign of the Hindu Sena dynasty . 
 Some areas of Bengal were invaded by Rajendra Chola I of the Chola dynasty between 1021 and 1023 . Islam made its first appearance in Bengal during the 12th century when Sufi missionaries arrived . Later , occasional Muslim raiders reinforced the process of conversion by building mosques , madrasas and <unk> . Between 1202 and 1206 , Muhammad bin Bakhtiyar Khilji , a military commander from the Delhi Sultanate , overran Bihar and Bengal as far east as <unk> , Bogra and the Brahmaputra River . Although he failed to bring Bengal under his control , the expedition defeated Lakshman Sen. His two sons moved to a place then called <unk> ( present @-@ day Munshiganj District ) , where their diminished dominion lasted until the late 13th century . 
 Subsequent Muslim conquests helped spread Islam throughout the region . Consequently , the region was ruled by dynasties of Bengal Sultanate and feudal lords under the Delhi Sultanate for the next few hundred years . Smaller Hindu states , landlords , and Baro @-@ <unk> also ruled in parts of Bengal . The Bengal Sultanate was interrupted for 20 years by an uprising by the Hindus under Raja Ganesha . In the sixteenth century , Mughal general Islam Khan conquered Bengal . However , administration by governors appointed by the court of the Mughal Empire gave way to semi @-@ independence of the area under the Nawabs of Murshidabad , who nominally respected the sovereignty of the Mughals in Delhi . Several independent Hindu states were established in Bengal during the Mughal period , like those of <unk> of Jessore District and Raja Sitaram Ray of Bardhaman . The Koch dynasty in northern Bengal flourished during the period of 16th and the 17th centuries ; it weathered the Mughals and survived till the advent of the British colonial era . 
 = = = Colonial era = = = 
 Several European traders reached this area late in the fifteenth century . Their influence increased into the 18th century , when the British East India Company gained rights to collect revenue in Bengal subah ( province ) in 1765 as per the treaty between the East India company and Mughal emperor following the Battle of Buxar in 1764 . Mir Qasim , the last independent Nawab , was defeated by the British . 
 The Bengal Presidency was established in 1765 ; it later incorporated all British territories controlled north of the Central Provinces ( now Madhya Pradesh ) , from the mouths of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra to the Himalayas and the Punjab . The Bengal famine of 1770 claimed millions of lives due to tax policies enacted by the British company . Calcutta , the headquarters of the East India company , was named in 1772 as the capital of British @-@ held territories in India . In 1793 East India company abolished local rule ( Nizamat ) and annexed the former Mughal province . 
 The Bengal Renaissance and Brahmo Samaj socio @-@ cultural reform movements had great effects on the cultural and economic life of Bengal . The failed Indian rebellion of 1857 started near Calcutta and resulted in transfer of authority to the British Crown , administered by the Viceroy of India . Between 1905 and 1911 , an abortive attempt was made to divide the province of Bengal into two zones . Bengal suffered from the Great Bengal famine in 1943 , which claimed 3 million lives during World War II . 
 = = = Indian independence movement = = = 
 Bengal played a major role in the Indian independence movement , in which revolutionary groups such as Anushilan Samiti and Jugantar were dominant . Armed attempts against the British Raj from Bengal reached a climax when Subhas Chandra Bose led the Indian National Army from Southeast Asia against the British . 
 = = = After independence = = = 
 When India gained independence in 1947 , Bengal was partitioned along religious lines . The western part went to Dominion of India ( and was named West Bengal ) , while the eastern part went to Dominion of Pakistan as a province called East Bengal ( later renamed as East Pakistan in 1956 ) . The latter became independent Bangladesh in 1971 . 
 In 1950 , the Princely State of Cooch Behar merged with West Bengal . In 1955 , the former French enclave of <unk> , which had passed into Indian control after 1950 , was integrated into West Bengal ; portions of Bihar were also subsequently merged with West Bengal . Both West and East Bengal suffered from large refugee influxes during and after the partition in 1947 . Refugee resettlement and related issues continued to play a significant role in the politics and socio @-@ economic condition of the state . 
 During the 1970s and 1980s , severe power shortages , strikes and a violent Naxalite movement damaged much of the state 's infrastructure , leading to a period of economic stagnation . The Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971 resulted in the influx of millions of refugees to West Bengal , causing significant strains on its infrastructure . The 1974 smallpox epidemic killed thousands . West Bengal politics underwent a major change when the Left Front won the 1977 assembly election , defeating the incumbent Indian National Congress . The Left Front , led by Communist Party of India ( Marxist ) , governed the state for the subsequent three decades . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 The state 's economic recovery gathered momentum after economic <unk> were introduced in the mid @-@ 1990s by the central government . This was aided by the advent of information technology and IT @-@ enabled services . Since mid @-@ 2000s , armed activists conducted minor terrorist attacks in some parts of the state , while clashes with the administration took place at several sensitive places over the issue of industrial land acquisition , which became a crucial reason behind the defeat of ruling Left Front government in 2011 assembly election . 
 Although the state 's GDP has risen significantly since the 1990s , West Bengal has remained affected by political instability and bad governance . The state continues to suffer from regular <unk> ( strikes ) , substandard healthcare services , a lack of socio @-@ economic development , poor infrastructure , political corruption and civil violence . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 West Bengal is on the eastern bottleneck of India , stretching from the Himalayas in the north , to the Bay of Bengal in the south . The state has a total area of 88 @,@ 752 square kilometres ( 34 @,@ 267 sq mi ) . The Darjeeling Himalayan hill region in the northern extreme of the state belongs to the eastern Himalaya . This region contains <unk> ( 3 @,@ 636 m or 11 @,@ 929 ft ) — the highest peak of the state . The narrow Terai region separates this region from the North Bengal plains , which in turn transitions into the Ganges delta towards the south . The Rarh region intervenes between the Ganges delta in the east and the western plateau and high lands . A small coastal region is on the extreme south , while the Sundarbans mangrove forests form a geographical landmark at the Ganges delta . 
 The Ganges is the main river , which divides in West Bengal . One branch enters Bangladesh as the Padma or <unk> , while the other flows through West Bengal as the <unk> River and Hooghly River . The <unk> barrage over Ganges feeds the Hooghly branch of the river by a feeder canal , and its water flow management has been a source of lingering dispute between India and Bangladesh . The Teesta , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> rivers are in the northern hilly region . The western plateau region has rivers such as the Damodar , Ajay and <unk> . The Ganges delta and the Sundarbans area have numerous rivers and creeks . Pollution of the Ganges from indiscriminate waste dumped into the river is a major problem . Damodar , another tributary of the Ganges and once known as the " Sorrow of Bengal " ( due to its frequent floods ) , has several dams under the Damodar Valley Project . At least nine districts in the state suffer from arsenic contamination of groundwater , and an estimated 8 @.@ 7 million people drink water containing arsenic above the World Health Organisation recommended limit of 10 µg / L. 
 West Bengal 's climate varies from tropical savanna in the southern portions to humid subtropical in the north . The main seasons are summer , rainy season , a short autumn , and winter . While the summer in the delta region is noted for excessive humidity , the western highlands experience a dry summer like northern India , with the highest day temperature ranging from 38 ° C ( 100 ° F ) to 45 ° C ( 113 ° F ) . At nights , a cool southerly breeze carries moisture from the Bay of Bengal . In early summer brief squalls and thunderstorms known as <unk> , or Nor 'westers , often occur . West Bengal receives the Bay of Bengal branch of the Indian ocean monsoon that moves in a northwest direction . Monsoons bring rain to the whole state from June to September . Heavy rainfall of above 250 cm is observed in the Darjeeling , Jalpaiguri and Cooch Behar district . During the arrival of the monsoons , low pressure in the Bay of Bengal region often leads to the occurrence of storms in the coastal areas . Winter ( December – January ) is mild over the plains with average minimum temperatures of 15 ° C ( 59 ° F ) . A cold and dry northern wind blows in the winter , substantially lowering the humidity level . The Darjeeling Himalayan Hill region experiences a harsh winter , with occasional snowfall at places . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 As of 2013 , recorded forest area in the state is 16 @,@ 805 km2 ( 6 @,@ 488 sq mi ) which is 18 @.@ 93 % of the state 's geographical area , compared to the national average of 21 @.@ 23 % . Reserves , protected and <unk> forests constitute 59 @.@ 4 % , 31 @.@ 8 % and 8 @.@ 9 % , respectively , of the forest area , as of 2009 . Part of the world 's largest mangrove forest , the Sundarbans , is located in southern West Bengal . 
 From a <unk> viewpoint , the southern part of West Bengal can be divided into two regions : the Gangetic plain and the littoral mangrove forests of the Sundarbans . The alluvial soil of the Gangetic plain , compounded with favourable rainfall , make this region especially fertile . Much of the vegetation of the western part of the state shares floristic similarities with the plants of the Chota Nagpur plateau in the adjoining state of Jharkhand . The predominant commercial tree species is Shorea robusta , commonly known as the Sal tree . The coastal region of <unk> <unk> exhibits coastal vegetation ; the predominant tree is the Casuarina . A notable tree from the Sundarbans is the ubiquitous <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , from which the forest gets its name . 
 The distribution of vegetation in northern West Bengal is dictated by elevation and precipitation . For example , the foothills of the Himalayas , the <unk> , are densely wooded with Sal and other tropical evergreen trees . However , above an elevation of 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) , the forest becomes predominantly subtropical . In Darjeeling , which is above 1 @,@ 500 metres ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) , temperate @-@ forest trees such as oaks , conifers , and rhododendrons predominate . 
 West Bengal has 3 @.@ 26 % of its geographical area under protected areas comprising 15 wildlife sanctuaries and 5 national parks — Sundarbans National Park , <unk> Tiger Reserve , <unk> National Park , Neora Valley National Park and Singalila National Park . Extant wildlife include Indian rhinoceros , Indian elephant , deer , leopard , gaur , tiger , and crocodiles , as well as many bird species . Migratory birds come to the state during the winter . The high @-@ altitude forests of Singalila National Park shelter barking deer , red panda , chinkara , takin , serow , pangolin , <unk> and <unk> pheasants . The Sundarbans are noted for a reserve project conserving the endangered Bengal tiger , although the forest hosts many other endangered species , such as the Gangetic dolphin , river terrapin and estuarine crocodile . The mangrove forest also acts as a natural fish nursery , supporting coastal fishes along the Bay of Bengal . Recognising its special conservation value , <unk> area has been declared as a Biosphere Reserve . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 West Bengal is governed through a parliamentary system of representative democracy , a feature the state shares with other Indian states . Universal suffrage is granted to residents . There are two branches of government . The legislature , the West Bengal Legislative Assembly , consists of elected members and special office bearers such as the Speaker and Deputy Speaker , that are elected by the members . Assembly meetings are presided over by the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker in the Speaker 's absence . The judiciary is composed of the Calcutta High Court and a system of lower courts . Executive authority is vested in the Council of Ministers headed by the Chief Minister , although the titular head of government is the Governor . The Governor is the head of state appointed by the President of India . The leader of the party or coalition with a majority in the Legislative Assembly is appointed as the Chief Minister by the Governor , and the Council of Ministers are appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister . The Council of Ministers reports to the Legislative Assembly . The Assembly is unicameral with 295 Members of the Legislative Assembly , or MLAs , including one nominated from the Anglo @-@ Indian community . Terms of office run for 5 years , unless the Assembly is dissolved prior to the completion of the term . Auxiliary authorities known as panchayats , for which local body elections are regularly held , govern local affairs . The state contributes 42 seats to the Lok Sabha and 16 seats to the Rajya Sabha of the Indian Parliament . 
 The main players in the regional politics are the All India Trinamool Congress , the Indian National Congress , and the Left Front alliance ( led by the Communist Party of India ( Marxist ) or CPI ( M ) ) . Following the West Bengal State Assembly Election in 2011 , the All India Trinamool Congress and Indian National Congress coalition under Mamata Banerjee of the All India Trinamool Congress was elected to power ( getting 225 seats in the legislature ) . Prior to this , West Bengal was ruled by the Left Front for 34 years ( 1977 – 2011 ) , making it the world 's longest @-@ running democratically elected communist government . 
 = = Subdivisions = = 
 The following is a list of nineteen districts of West Bengal by rank in India . 
 Each district is governed by a district collector or district magistrate , appointed either by the Indian Administrative Service or the West Bengal Civil Service . Each district is subdivided into Sub @-@ Divisions , governed by a sub @-@ divisional magistrate , and again into Blocks . Blocks consists of panchayats ( village councils ) and town municipalities . 
 The capital and largest city of the state is Kolkata – the third @-@ largest urban agglomeration and the seventh @-@ largest city in India . Asansol is the second largest city & urban agglomeration in West Bengal after Kolkata . Siliguri is an economically important city , strategically located in the northeastern Siliguri Corridor ( Chicken 's Neck ) of India . Other major cities and towns in West Bengal are Howrah , Sainthia , Durgapur , Baharampur , Raniganj , Haldia , Jalpaiguri , Kharagpur , Burdwan , Darjeeling , Midnapore , Malda . 
 = = Economy = = 
 As of 2015 , West Bengal has the fifth highest GSDP in India . GSDP at current prices ( base 2004 @-@ 05 ) has increased from 208 @,@ 656 crores in 2004 @-@ 05 to 800 @,@ 868 crores in 2014 @-@ 15 . GSDP Percent growth at current prices has varied from a low of 10 @.@ 3 % in 2010 @-@ 11 to a high of 17 @.@ 11 % in 2013 @-@ 14 . The growth rate was 13 @.@ 35 % in 2014 @-@ 15 . The state ’ s per capita income has lagged the all India average for over two decades . As of 2014 @-@ 15 per capita NSDP at current prices was Rs 78 @,@ 903 . Per capita NSDP growth rate at current prices has varied from 9 @.@ 4 % in 2010 @-@ 11 to a high of 16 @.@ 15 % in 2013 @-@ 14 . The growth rate was 12 @.@ 62 % in 2014 @-@ 15 
 In 2015 @-@ 16 , percentage share of Gross Value <unk> ( GVA ) at factor cost by Economic Activity at constant price ( base year 2011 @-@ 12 ) was Agriculture @-@ Forestry & Fishery – 14 @.@ 84 % , Industry 18 @.@ 51 % and Services 66 @.@ 65 % . It has been observed that there has been a slow but steady decline in the percentage share of industry and agriculture over the years . Agriculture is the leading occupation in West Bengal . Rice is the state 's principal food crop . Rice , potato , jute , sugarcane and wheat are the top five crops of the state . Tea is produced commercially in northern districts ; the region is well known for Darjeeling and other high quality teas . State industries are localised in the Kolkata region , the mineral @-@ rich western highlands , and Haldia port region . The Durgapur – Asansol colliery belt is home to a number of major steel plants . Manufacturing industries playing an important economic role are engineering products , electronics , electrical equipment , cables , steel , leather , textiles , jewellery , frigates , automobiles , railway coaches , and wagons . The Durgapur centre has established a number of industries in the areas of tea , sugar , chemicals and fertilisers . Natural resources like tea and jute in and nearby parts has made West Bengal a major centre for the jute and tea industries . 
 Years after independence , West Bengal was still dependent on the central government for meeting its demands for food ; food production remained stagnant and the Indian green revolution bypassed the state . However , there has been a significant spurt in food production since the 1980s , and the state now has a surplus of grains . The state 's share of total industrial output in India was 9 @.@ 8 % in 1980 – 81 , declining to 5 % by 1997 – 98 . However , the service sector has grown at a rate higher than the national rate . 
 In the period 2004 – 2005 to 2009 – 2010 , the average gross state domestic product ( GSDP ) growth rate was 13 @.@ 9 % ( calculated in Indian rupee term ) , lower than 15 @.@ 5 % , the average for all states of the country . The state 's total financial debt stood at ₹ 1 @,@ 918 @,@ 350 million ( US $ 29 billion ) as of 2011 . 
 The state has promoted foreign direct investment , which has mostly come in the software and electronics fields ; Kolkata is becoming a major hub for the Information technology ( IT ) industry . Rapid industrialisation process has given rise to debate over land acquisition for industry in this agrarian state . NASSCOM – Gartner ranks West Bengal power infrastructure the best in the country . Notably , many corporate companies are now headquartered in Kolkata include ITC Limited , India Government Mint , Kolkata , Haldia Petrochemicals , Exide Industries , Hindustan Motors , Bata India , Birla Corporation , <unk> Limited , Coal India Limited , Damodar Valley Corporation , PwC India , Peerless Group , Berger Paints India , Emami , ABP Group , Bandhan Bank , United Bank of India , <unk> Bank and Allahabad Bank . In 2010s , events such as adoption of " Look East " policy by the government of India , opening of the Nathu La Pass in Sikkim as a border trade @-@ route with China and immense interest in the South East Asian countries to enter the Indian market and invest have put Kolkata in an advantageous position for development in future , particularly with likes of Myanmar , where India needs oil from military regime . 
 = = Transport = = 
 As of 2011 , the total length of surface road in West Bengal is over 92 @,@ 023 km ( 57 @,@ 180 mi ) ; national highways comprise 2 @,@ 578 km ( 1 @,@ 602 mi ) and state highways 2 @,@ 393 km ( 1 @,@ 487 mi ) . As of 2006 , the road density of the state is 103 @.@ 69 km per 100 km2 ( 166 @.@ 92 mi per 100 sq mi ) , higher than the national average of 74 @.@ 7 km per 100 km2 ( 120 mi per 100 sq mi ) . 
 As of 2011 , the total railway route length is around 4 @,@ 481 km ( 2 @,@ 784 mi ) . Kolkata is the headquarters of three zones of the Indian Railways — Eastern Railway and South Eastern Railway and the Kolkata Metro which is the newly formed 17th Zone of the Indian Railways . The Northeast Frontier Railway ( NFR ) plies in the northern parts of the state . The Kolkata metro is the country 's first underground railway . The Darjeeling Himalayan Railway , part of NFR , is a UNESCO World Heritage Site . 
 Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose International Airport at Dum Dum , Kolkata , is the state 's biggest airport . Bagdogra Airport near Siliguri is a customs airport that has international services to Bhutan and Thailand besides regular domestic services . Kazi Nazrul Islam Airport , India 's first private sector airport , serves the twin cities of Asansol @-@ Durgapur at Andal , Bardhaman . 
 Kolkata is a major river @-@ port in eastern India . The Kolkata Port Trust manages the Kolkata and the Haldia docks . There is passenger service to Port Blair on the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and cargo ship service to ports in India and abroad , operated by the Shipping Corporation of India . Ferry is a principal mode of transport in the southern part of the state , especially in the Sundarbans area . Kolkata is the only city in India to have trams as a mode of transport and these are operated by the Calcutta Tramways Company . 
 Several government @-@ owned organisations operate bus services in the state , including the Calcutta State Transport Corporation , the North Bengal State Transport Corporation , the South Bengal State Transport Corporation , the West Bengal Surface Transport Corporation , and the Calcutta Tramways Company . There are also private bus companies . The railway system is a nationalised service without any private investment . Hired forms of transport include metered taxis and auto rickshaws which often ply specific routes in cities . In most of the state , cycle rickshaws , and in Kolkata , hand @-@ pulled rickshaws , electric rickshaw are used for short @-@ distance travel . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the provisional results of the 2011 national census , West Bengal is the fourth most populous state in India with a population of 91 @,@ 347 @,@ 736 ( 7 @.@ 55 % of India 's population ) . Bengali Hindus comprise the majority of the population . The Marwaris and Bihari minorities are scattered throughout the state ; various indigenous ethnic Buddhist communities such as the Sherpas , the Bhutias , the Lepchas , the Tamangs , the Yolmos and the ethnic Tibetans can be found in the Darjeeling Himalayan hill region . The Darjeeling district also has a large number of Nepali immigrant population , making Nepali a widely @-@ spoken language in this region . West Bengal is home to indigenous tribal <unk> such as Santhal , Kol , and Toto tribe . There are a small number of ethnic minorities primarily in the state capital , including Chinese , Tamils , Gujaratis , Anglo @-@ Indians , Armenians , Punjabis , and Parsis . India 's sole Chinatown is in eastern Kolkata . 
 The official language is Bengali and English . Nepali language also has an official status in the three subdivisions of Darjeeling district . As of 2001 , in decreasing order of number of speakers , the languages of the state are : Bengali , Hindi , <unk> , Urdu and Nepali . 
 West Bengal is religiously diverse , with region wise cultural and religious specificities . As of 2011 , Hinduism is the largest religion followed by 70 @.@ 53 % of the total population , while Muslims comprise 27 @.@ 01 % of the total population , being the second @-@ largest community as also the largest minority group . Sikhism , Christianity , Buddhism and other religions make up the remainder . Buddhism remains a prominent religion in the Himalayan region of the Darjeeling hills , and almost the entirety of West Bengal 's Buddhist population are from this region . 
 The state contributes 7 @.@ 8 % of India 's population . Hindu population is 6 @,@ 43 @,@ 85 @,@ 546 in West Bengal while Muslim population is 2 @,@ 46 @,@ 54 @,@ 825 as per 2011 census . The state 's 2001 – 2011 decennial growth rate was 13 @.@ 93 % , lower than 1991 – 2001 growth rate of 17 @.@ 8 % , and also lower than the national rate of 17 @.@ 64 % . The gender ratio is 947 females per 1000 males . As of 2011 , West Bengal has a population density of 1 @,@ 029 inhabitants per square kilometre ( 2 @,@ 670 / sq mi ) making it the second @-@ most densely populated state in India , after Bihar . 
 The literacy rate is 77 @.@ 08 % , higher than the national rate of 74 @.@ 04 % . Data of 1995 – 1999 showed the life expectancy in the state was 63 @.@ 4 years , higher than the national value of 61 @.@ 7 years . About 72 % of people live in rural areas . The proportion of people living below the poverty line in 1999 – 2000 was 31 @.@ 9 % . Scheduled Castes and Tribes form 28 @.@ 6 % and 5 @.@ 8 % of the population respectively in rural areas , and 19 @.@ 9 % and 1 @.@ 5 % respectively in urban areas . A study conducted in three districts of West Bengal found that accessing private health services to treat illness had a catastrophic impact on households . This indicates the value of public provision of health services to mitigate against poverty and the impact of illness on poor households . 
 In 2011 , the police in West Bengal recorded 143 @,@ 197 cognisable offences under the Indian Penal Code ; the all @-@ India statistic for the year was 2 @,@ 325 @,@ 575 . The crime rate in the state was 158 @.@ 1 per 100 @,@ 000 people , less than the all @-@ India average of 192 @.@ 2 . This is the twelfth @-@ lowest crime rate among the 32 states and union territories of India . In 2011 , in reported crimes against women , the state showed a crime rate of 29 compared to the national rate of 18 . West Bengal accounted for about 12 @.@ 2 % of total crime against women ( 26 @,@ 125 cases out of India 's 213 @,@ 585 cases ) . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 The Bengali language boasts a rich literary heritage , shared with neighbouring Bangladesh . West Bengal has a long tradition in folk literature , evidenced by the <unk> , Mangalkavya , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and stories related to Gopal <unk> . In the nineteenth and twentieth century , Bengali literature was modernised in the works of authors such as Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay , Michael Madhusudan Dutt , Rabindranath Tagore , Kazi Nazrul Islam , Sharat Chandra Chattopadhyay , <unk> Das and Manik Bandyopadhyay . In modern times <unk> Das , Bibhutibhushan Bandopadhyay , <unk> Bandopadhyay , Manik Bandopadhyay , <unk> Devi , <unk> Mukhopadhyay , Buddhadeb Guha , <unk> Devi , <unk> Majumdar , Sanjeev Chattopadhyay and Sunil Gangopadhyay among others are well known . 
 = = = Music and dance = = = 
 The Baul tradition is a unique heritage of Bengali folk music , which has also been influenced by regional music traditions . Other folk music forms include <unk> and <unk> . Folk music in West Bengal is often accompanied by the <unk> , a one @-@ stringed instrument . West Bengal also has a heritage in North Indian classical music . " <unk> " , songs composed and set into tune by Rabindranath Tagore and " Nazrul <unk> " ( by Kazi Nazrul Islam ) are popular . Also prominent are other musical forms like <unk> , <unk> and <unk> 's songs , and " <unk> " or modern music from films and other composers . 
 Bengali dance forms draw from folk traditions , especially those of the tribal groups , as well as the broader Indian dance traditions . Chau dance of <unk> is a rare form of mask dance . 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Mainstream Hindi films are popular in Bengal , and the state is home to a Tollywood . <unk> in Kolkata is the location of numerous Bengali movie studios , and the name " Tollywood " ( similar to Hollywood and Bollywood ) is derived from that name . The Bengali film industry is well known for its art films , and has produced acclaimed directors like Satyajit Ray , Mrinal Sen , Tapan Sinha and Ritwik Ghatak . Prominent contemporary directors include veterans like <unk> Dasgupta , Tarun Majumdar , Goutam Ghose , Aparna Sen , Rituparno Ghosh and a newer pool of directors like Kaushik Ganguly and Srijit Mukherji . 
 = = = Fine arts = = = 
 Bengal had been the harbinger of modernism in fine arts . <unk> Tagore , called the father of Modern Indian Art had started the Bengal School of Art which was to create styles of art outside the European realist tradition which was taught in art colleges under the colonial administration of the British Government . The movement had many adherents like <unk> Tagore , <unk> <unk> , <unk> Roy and Rabindranath Tagore . After Indian Independence , important groups like the Calcutta Group and the Society of Contemporary Artists were formed in Bengal which dominated the art scene in India . 
 = = = Reformist heritage = = = 
 The capital , Kolkata , was the workplace of several social reformers , like Raja Ram Mohan Roy , <unk> Chandra Vidyasagar , and Swami Vivekananda . These social reforms have eventually led to a cultural atmosphere where practices like sati , dowry , and caste @-@ based discrimination or untouchability , the evils that crept into the Hindu society , were <unk> region was also home to several religious teachers , such as Chaitanya , Ramakrishna , Prabhupada and Paramahansa Yogananda . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 Rice and fish are traditional favourite foods , leading to a saying in Bengali , <unk> <unk> <unk> , that translates as " fish and rice make a Bengali " . Bengal 's vast repertoire of fish @-@ based dishes includes <unk> preparations , a favourite among Bengalis . There are numerous ways of cooking fish depending on the texture , size , fat content and the bones . Sweets occupy an important place in the diet of Bengalis and at their social ceremonies . It is an ancient custom among both Hindu and Muslim Bengalis to distribute sweets during festivities . The confectionery industry has flourished because of its close association with social and religious ceremonies . Competition and changing tastes have helped to create many new sweets . Bengalis make distinctive sweetmeats from milk products , including <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and several kinds of <unk> . Pitha , a kind of sweet cake , bread or <unk> are specialties of winter season . Sweets like coconut @-@ naru , til @-@ naru , moa , <unk> , etc. are prepared during the festival of Lakshmi puja . Popular street food includes <unk> Chop , <unk> , Kati roll , and <unk> . 
 The variety of fruits and vegetables that Bengal has to offer is incredible . A host of gourds , roots and tubers , leafy greens , succulent stalks , lemons and limes , green and purple eggplants , red onions , plantain , broad beans , okra , banana tree stems and flowers , green jackfruit and red pumpkins are to be found in the markets or <unk> bazaar as popularly called . <unk> <unk> ( rice soaked overnight in water ) with onion & green chili is a traditional dish consumed in rural areas . Common spices found in a Bengali kitchen are cumin , <unk> ( <unk> ) , bay leaf , mustard , ginger , green chillies , turmeric , etc . People of erstwhile East Bengal use a lot of <unk> , coriander leaves , tamarind , coconut and mustard in their cooking ; while those <unk> from West Bengal use a lot of sugar , <unk> masala and red chilli powder . Vegetarian dishes are mostly without onion and garlic . 
 = = = Costumes = = = 
 Bengali women commonly wear the <unk> , often distinctly designed according to local cultural customs . In urban areas , many women and men wear Western attire . Among men , western dressing has greater acceptance . Men also wear traditional costumes such as the <unk> with <unk> , often on cultural occasions . 
 = = = Weaving = = = 
 West Bengal has a rich heritage of handloom weaving , and produces some of the finest varieties of cotton and silk sarees in the country . From an economic standpoint , handlooms come second only to agriculture in providing livelihood to the rural population of the state . Every district has weaving ‘ clusters ’ , which are home to artisan communities , each specialising in specific varieties of handloom weaving . Famous handloom sarees woven in the state include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and muslin . 
 = = = Festivals = = = 
 Durga Puja in September – October is the most popular and most widely celebrated festival in West Bengal . The whole city of Kolkata undergoes a transformation during Durga Puja , decked in light and colour , as various <unk> to the goddess are made on an eclectic array of themes . The idols of the goddess as brought in from Kumortuli , where idol @-@ makers work throughout the year fashioning the clay @-@ models of the goddess . Durga Puja is often labelled as India 's largest open air art exhibition , spilling over from the domain of the religious into becoming a cultural event , where people across diverse religious and cultural spectrum partake in the festival . Tourists from all across the country come to the city of Kolkata to witness this major event . The state tourism department , as of 2015 , has been attempting to promote and market the event to international tourists as well . Durga Puja is a six @-@ day long annual holiday in West Bengal . Vijayadashami , the last day of the festival , witnesses long processions carrying the idols towards rivers and ponds , traditional <unk> @-@ <unk> and sindoor @-@ <unk> , beatings of dhak and exchange of sweets . 
 <unk> Baishakh , <unk> , <unk> or Holi , <unk> , Poush <unk> , Kali Puja , Saraswati Puja , Diwali , Lakshmi Puja , Janmashtami , Jagaddhatri Puja , Vishwakarma Puja , Bhai <unk> , Rakhi Bandhan , Kalpataru Day , Shivratri , Ganesh <unk> , <unk> , Kartik Puja , Akshay Tritiya , <unk> , Guru Purnima , Basanti Puja , <unk> Puja , Gajan , Buddha Purnima , Christmas , Eid ul @-@ Fitr , Eid ul @-@ Adha and Muharram are other major festivals . Both Rabindra Jayanti and Nazrul Jayanti are important socio @-@ cultural festivals . 
 Christmas , called <unk> ( Great day ) is perhaps the next major festival celebrated in Kolkata , after Durga Puja . Just like Durga Puja , Christmas in Kolkata is an occasion in which all communities and people across religions take part . The state tourism department organises the gala Christmas Festival every year in Park Street . The whole of Park Street is decked up in colourful lights , various food stalls are set up selling cakes , chocolates , Chinese cuisines , momo and various other items . Musical groups from Darjeeling and other states of North East India are invited by the state to perform choir recitals , carols and jazz numbers . Buddha Purnima , which marks the birth of Gautama Buddha , is one of the most important Hindu / Buddhist festivals and is celebrated with much gusto in the Darjeeling hills . On this day , processions are taken out of each of the various Buddhist monasteries or <unk> , and these congregate at the Mall , <unk> . The Lamas chant mantras and sound their bugles , and students as well as people from all communities carry the holy books or <unk> on their heads . Besides Buddha Purnima , Dashain , Diwali , Losar , <unk> or the Lepcha New Year and <unk> are the other major festivals of the Darjeeling Himalayan region . 
 Poush mela is a popular festival of <unk> in winter . 
 = = Education = = 
 West Bengal schools are run by the state government or by private organisations , including religious institutions . Instruction is mainly in English or Bengali , though Urdu is also used , especially in Central Kolkata . The secondary schools are affiliated with the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations ( CISCE ) , the Central Board for Secondary Education ( CBSE ) , the National Institute of Open School ( NIOS ) or the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education . 
 Under the 10 + 2 + 3 plan , after completing secondary school , students typically enroll for two years in a junior college , also known as pre @-@ university , or in schools with a higher secondary facility affiliated with the West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education or any central board . Students choose from one of three streams : liberal arts , commerce or science . Upon completing the required coursework , students may enroll in general or professional degree programs . 
 Some of the renowned schools in the city are La Martiniere Calcutta , St. Xavier 's Collegiate School , and Loreto House - which consistently rank amongst the best schools in the country . Many of the schools in Kolkata and Darjeeling are renowned colonial @-@ era establishments and boast of fantastic neo @-@ classical architecture . The famous schools of Darjeeling include St. Paul 's , St. Joseph 's North Point , Goethals Memorial School and Dow Hill in Kurseong . 
 West Bengal has 18 universities . Kolkata has played a pioneering role in the development of the modern education system in India . It is the gateway to the revolution of European education . Sir William Jones established the Asiatic Society in 1794 for promoting oriental studies . People like Ram Mohan Roy , David Hare , Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar , Alexander Duff and William Carey played leading roles in the setting up of modern schools and colleges in the city . 
 The University of Calcutta , the oldest public university in India , has 136 affiliated colleges . The Fort William College was established in 1810 . The Hindu College was established in 1817 . The Scottish Church College , which is the oldest Christian liberal arts college in South Asia , started its journey in 1830 . In 1855 the Hindu College was renamed as the Presidency College . In 2010 , it was granted university status by the state government and was renamed Presidency University . The Kazi Nazrul University was established in 2012 . The University of Calcutta and Jadavpur University are prestigious technical universities . Visva @-@ Bharati University at Santiniketan is a central university and an institution of national importance . 
 The state has several higher education institutes of national importance including Indian Institute of Foreign Trade , Indian Institute of Management Calcutta ( the first IIM ) , Indian Institute of Science Education and Research , Kolkata , Indian Statistical Institute , Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur ( the first IIT ) , Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology , <unk> ( the first <unk> ) , National Institute of Technology , Durgapur and West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences . After 2003 the state <unk> supported the creation of West Bengal University of Technology , West Bengal State University and Gour Banga University . 
 Jadavpur University ( Focus Area - Mobile Computing and Communication and Nano @-@ Science ) and University of Calcutta ( Modern Biology ) are among two of the fifteen <unk> selected under the scheme - University with Potential for Excellence . University of Calcutta ( Focus Area - Electro @-@ Physiological and Neuro @-@ imaging studies including mathematical modeling ) has also been selected under the scheme Centre with Potential for Excellence in Particular Area . 
 Besides these , the state has Kalyani University , The University of Burdwan , Vidyasagar University and North Bengal University — all well @-@ established and nationally renowned — to cover the education needs at the district level and an Indian Institute of Science Education and Research , Kolkata . Apart from this there is a private university run by Ramakrishna mission named Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda University at Belur Math . 
 There are a number of research institutes in Kolkata . The Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science is the first research institute in Asia . C. V. Raman got the Nobel Prize for his discovery ( Raman Effect ) done in IACS . The Bose Institute , Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics , S.N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences , Indian Institute of Chemical Biology , Central Glass and Ceramic Research Institute , National Institute of Biomedical Genomics ( <unk> ) , Kalyani and the Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre are most prominent . 
 Notable scholars who were born , worked or studied in the geographic area of the state include physicists Satyendra Nath Bose , Meghnad Saha , and Jagadish Chandra Bose ; chemist Prafulla Chandra Roy ; statisticians <unk> Chandra Mahalanobis and Anil Kumar Gain ; physician <unk> Brahmachari ; educator Ashutosh Mukherjee ; and Nobel laureates Rabindranath Tagore , C. V. Raman , and Amartya Sen. 
 = = Media = = 
 West Bengal had 505 published newspapers in 2005 , of which 389 were in Bengali . Ananda Bazar Patrika , published from Kolkata with 1 @,@ 277 @,@ 801 daily copies , has the largest circulation for a single @-@ edition , regional language newspaper in India . Other major Bengali newspapers are Bartaman , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , Jago Bangla , <unk> <unk> and <unk> . Major English language newspapers which are published and sold in large numbers are The Telegraph , The Times of India , Hindustan Times , The Hindu , The Statesman , The Indian Express and Asian Age . Some prominent financial dailies like The Economic Times , Financial Express , Business Line and Business Standard are widely circulated . Vernacular newspapers such as those in Hindi , Nepali Gujarati , Odia , Urdu and Punjabi are also read by a select readership . 
 Doordarshan is the state @-@ owned television broadcaster . Multi system operators provide a mix of Bengali , Nepali , Hindi , English and international channels via cable . Bengali 24 @-@ hour television news channels include ABP Ananda , Tara Newz , Kolkata TV , News Time , 24 Ghanta , <unk> <unk> , <unk> Plus , Channel 10 and R Plus . All India Radio is a public radio station . Private FM stations are available only in cities like Kolkata , Siliguri and Asansol . Vodafone , Airtel , BSNL , Reliance Communications , <unk> , Aircel , MTS India , Idea Cellular and Tata DoCoMo are available cellular phone operators . Broadband internet is available in select towns and cities and is provided by the state @-@ run BSNL and by other private companies . Dial @-@ up access is provided throughout the state by BSNL and other providers . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Cricket and soccer are popular sports in the state . West Bengal , unlike most other states of India , is noted for its passion and patronage of football . Kolkata is one of the major centres for football in India and houses top national clubs such as East Bengal , Mohun Bagan and Mohammedan Sporting Club . 
 West Bengal has several large stadiums — The Eden Gardens is one of only two 100 @,@ 000 @-@ seat cricket amphitheaters in the world , although renovations will reduce this figure . Kolkata Knight Riders , East Zone and Bengal play there , and the 1987 World Cup final was there although in 2011 World Cup . Calcutta Cricket and Football Club is the second @-@ oldest cricket club in the world . Notable sports persons from West Bengal include former Indian national cricket captain Sourav Ganguly , Pankaj Roy Olympic tennis bronze medallist Leander Paes , and chess grand master <unk> Barua . 
 = Rachel Henderson = 
 Rachel Henderson ( born 8 September 1992 ) is an Australian goalball player and is classified as a B2 competitor . While only starting playing the game in 2010 , she made the national team in 2011 and competed in the 2011 IBSA Goalball World Cup and 2011 African @-@ Oceania regional Paralympic qualifying competition . She was selected to represent Australia at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in goalball . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Henderson was born in <unk> , South Australia , on 8 September 1992 . She has the visual disability of retinitis pigmentosa , a heredity disease she was diagnosed with when she was four years old . As a child , Henderson was involved in javelin , and only stopped competing in 2010 following taking up goalball . She was also involved in swimming , representing South Australia in a few national competitions , before leaving the sport at the same time she quit athletics . She graduated from <unk> High School in 2010 . As of 2012 , she is studying with the goal of becoming a preschool teacher . 
 = = Goalball = = 
 Henderson is a goalball player , and is classified as a B2 competitor . She has a goalball scholarship with the South Australian Institute of Sport . In 2011 / 2012 , the Australian Sports Commission gave her a A $ 7 @,@ 000 as part of their DAS grant program . She does not play for a state team . Rather , she is coached by Australian Paralympic Committee ( APC ) Development Coordinator and athletics coach Cathy Lambert . Having not even heard of goalball a few months before , Henderson took up the sport in 2010 following an invitation to attend a team training camp . She made the national team in January 2011 at the national trials , and her national team debut in 2011 at the IBSA Goalball World Cup , where her team finished sixth , and she scored four total goals . Her team made it the quarter finals before losing to Russia 3 – 6 . It then met the Spain women 's national goalball team to try to earn a spot in the fifth / sixth place match , where Australia walked away 8 – 7 victors . In the fifth / sixth place match , it lost to the Israel women 's national goalball team 6 – 8 . She played in the 2011 African @-@ Oceania regional Paralympic qualifying competition and in its gold medal game against the New Zealand women 's national goalball team , which Australia won . 
 Henderson was a named a member of the Aussie Belles that was going to the 2012 Summer Paralympics . She was the youngest member of the team , and the only South Australian . That the team qualified for the Games came as a surprise , as the Australian Paralympic Committee had been working on player development with the idea of qualifying for the 2016 Summer Paralympics . An Australian team had not participated since the 2000 Summer Paralympics , when they earned an automatic selection as hosts , and the team finished last in the competition . The country has not medalled in the event since 1976 . Going into the Paralympics , the team was ranked eighth in the world . In the 2012 Summer Paralympics tournament , the Belles played games against Japan , Canada , the United States and Sweden . They lost every game , and did not advance to the finals . 
 = Sparsely @-@ spotted stingaree = 
 The sparsely @-@ spotted stingaree , white @-@ spotted stingaree , or Dixon 's stingaree ( Urolophus <unk> ) is a species of stingray in the family Urolophidae , common off the southern Australian coast . Preferring sandy flats and seagrass beds , this benthic ray can be found from close to shore to a depth of at least 150 m ( 490 ft ) , and tends to occur deeper in the northern portion of its range . Reaching a length of 57 cm ( 22 in ) , this species has a broad , diamond @-@ shaped pectoral fin disc that is typically plain gray in color above with a V @-@ shaped marking between the eyes . Individuals from southerly waters also generally exhibit a smattering of small , dark @-@ edged white spots . This ray is further characterized by a distinctively bell @-@ shaped curtain of skin between the nostrils . Its tail has a skin fold running along either side and a leaf @-@ shaped caudal fin , but no dorsal fin . 
 Relatively inactive during daytime , the sparsely @-@ spotted stingaree preys mainly on crustaceans , and to a much lesser extent on polychaete worms and other small benthic organisms . It is aplacental viviparous , with the mother provisioning her young with histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) . Life history differs between the eastern and western subpopulations : eastern females bear litters of up to six pups with a twelve @-@ month gestation period , while western females bear litters of only one or two pups with a ten @-@ month gestation period . Also , western rays mature later and live longer than eastern rays . The venomous sting of the sparsely @-@ spotted stingaree is potentially injurious to humans , and it has been reported to react aggressively if disturbed . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed it under Least Concern , as there is little fishing activity over the majority of its range . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The sparsely @-@ spotted stingaree was described in a 1969 issue of The Victorian Naturalist by Joan Dixon of the Museum Victoria . The specific epithet <unk> is derived from the Latin paucus , meaning " few " , and maculatus , meaning " spotted " . The type specimen was collected from the Bass Strait , near Cape Patton in Victoria . <unk> from the eastern and western portions of its range differ in aspects of life history and merit further taxonomic investigation , according to the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 One of the most abundant cartilaginous fishes off southern Australia , the sparsely @-@ spotted stingaree has a relatively wide distribution extending from Crowdy Head in New South Wales to <unk> in Western Australia , including the entirety of Tasmania . Its range has expanded southward in the past few decades , apparently due to climate change . In Port Phillip , its numbers increased from 1970 to 1991 , likely as a result of fisheries depleting its ecological competitors . 
 Bottom @-@ dwelling in nature , the sparsely @-@ spotted stingaree inhabits a variety of sandy or seagrass @-@ bottomed habitats , ranging from very shallow , sheltered bays and inlets to the open continental shelf , 150 m ( 490 ft ) deep or more . Rays found further north , such as in the Great Australian Bight , tend to be found at depths greater than 80 – 100 m ( 260 – 330 ft ) . By contrast , rays found further south , off Victoria and Tasmania , are most common in less than 30 m ( 100 ft ) of water . There is no evidence for segregation by age or sex , though there may be an offshore migration during winter . 
 = = Description = = 
 The sparsely @-@ spotted stingray has a more or less diamond @-@ shaped pectoral fin disc wider than long , with rounded outer corners . The anterior margins of the disc are nearly straight and converge at an obtuse angle on the fleshy snout , the tip of which barely protrudes from the disc . The small eyes are immediately followed by comma @-@ shaped spiracles with angular or rounded posterior rims . The outer rim of each nostril is enlarged into a knob towards the back . Between the nostrils is a bell @-@ shaped curtain of skin with a finely fringed trailing margin ; only the <unk> stingaree ( U. <unk> ) has a similarly shaped nasal curtain . The small mouth contains five or six papillae ( nipple @-@ like structures ) on the floor , most of which have forked tips . Additional small papillae are present on the outside of the lower jaw . The teeth in both jaws are small with roughly oval bases , and are arranged in a quincunx pattern . The five pairs of gill slits are short . The pelvic fins are small and rounded . 
 The tail measures 77 – 98 % as long as the disc ; it is very flattened at the base and slender towards the tip , which bears a deep , leaf @-@ shaped caudal fin . There is a prominent fold of skin running along either side of the tail , and a serrated stinging spine placed on the upper surface about halfway along its length . There is no dorsal fin . The skin is completely devoid of dermal denticles . This species is uniformly light gray above with a darker V @-@ shaped marking between the eyes , and white below with slightly darker lateral disc margins . Most rays from the southern portion of its range also have a handful of small , regularly arranged spots atop the disc , each white with a dark border . Juveniles have a black caudal fin , which lightens with age ( except sometimes for the margin ) . The largest individual on record was 57 cm ( 22 in ) long . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 During the day , the sparsely @-@ spotted stingaree spends much time resting motionless on the bottom , often buried in sand . Crustaceans form the main component of its diet , accounting for over 80 % of food intake by volume with amphipods , mysids , and shrimps being most important . Polychaete worms , mostly of the relatively mobile , shallowly buried " errant " type , are a major secondary food source . On rare occasions , molluscs , echinoderms , and small bony fishes are also eaten . This species incorporates a progressively greater diversity of prey into its diet as it grows older ; specifically , mysids , isopods , and amphipods decline in importance , while shrimps , polychaete worms , penaeid prawns , and crabs are consumed in greater proportions . The sparsely @-@ spotted stingaree is preyed upon by the broadnose sevengill shark ( Notorynchus cepedianus ) . It is known to be parasitized by a tapeworm in the genus Acanthobothrium , and the monogeneans <unk> urolophi and <unk> urolophi . 
 Like other stingrays , the sparsely @-@ spotted stingaree is aplacental viviparous : once the developing embryos exhaust their supply of yolk , the mother supplies them with nutrient @-@ rich histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) via specialized extensions of the uterine epithelium called " trophonemata " . Females have a single functional ovary and uterus , on the right side , and an annual reproductive cycle . In the eastern subpopulation , ovulation occurs in spring or early summer and the litter size ranges from one to six , increasing with female size . The gestation period lasts approximately one year , and the newborns measure about 15 – 16 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 – 6 @.@ 3 in ) long . Males reach sexual maturity at around 28 cm ( 11 in ) long and two and a half years of age , and females at around 27 cm ( 11 in ) long and three years of age . The maximum lifespan is at least 8 years for males and 9 years for females . In the western subpopulation , mating occurs in early or mid @-@ summer and females only bear litters of one or two pups . The gestation period lasts ten months , with birthing taking place in late spring or early summer . The newborns measure 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) across . Males mature sexually at around 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) across and three years of age , and females at around 22 cm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) across and five years of age . The maximum lifespan is 14 years . In both subpopulations , females grow more slowly and to a larger ultimate size than males . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Reported to be more aggressive than other stingarees , the sparsely @-@ spotted stingaree readily employs its venomous sting if disturbed and can inflict a painful injury on a human . It is edible , but seldom brought to market . Fishing pressure is insignificant across large portions of this ray 's range , including in the Great Australian Bight , though substantial numbers are caught incidentally by commercial fisheries off southeastern and southwestern Australia in beach seines and bottom trawls . The sparsely @-@ spotted stingaree generally survives being captured , sorted , and discarded , though the process often causes it to abort any unborn young . Nevertheless , losses to fisheries appear to be sustainable at present , and thus the IUCN has listed this species under Least Concern . There are a number of small Marine Protected Areas ( MPAs ) within its range , and it would potentially benefit from the implementation of the 2004 Australian National Plan of Action for the Conservation and Management of Sharks . 
 = Yugoslav monitor Vardar = 
 The Yugoslav monitor Vardar was a Sava @-@ class river monitor built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy as SMS Bosna , but was renamed SMS Temes ( II ) before she went into service . During World War I she was the flagship of the Danube Flotilla , and fought the Serbian Army , the Romanian Navy and Army , and the French Army . She reverted to the name Bosna in May 1917 , after the original SMS Temes was raised and returned to service . After World War I , she was transferred to the newly created Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) , and renamed Vardar . 
 During the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , she was the flagship of the 1st Monitor Division , and along with her fellow monitor Sava , she laid mines in the Danube near the Romanian border during the first few days of the invasion . The two monitors fought off several attacks by the Luftwaffe , but were forced to withdraw to Belgrade . Due to high river levels and low bridges , the monitors ' navigation was difficult , and they were scuttled by their crews on 11 April . Some of her crew may have been killed when a demolished bridge collapsed onto a tugboat after they abandoned ship . A number tried to escape cross @-@ country towards the southern Adriatic coast , but most were obliged to surrender to the Germans at Sarajevo on 14 April . The remainder made their way to the Bay of Kotor , where they were captured by the Italian XVII Corps on 17 April . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 Vardar was a Sava @-@ class river monitor built for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy by Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino , and was laid down as Bosna at Linz in 1914 , as part of the Austro @-@ Hungarian 1914 – 15 Naval Program . She was named after the river Bosna , but was renamed Temes ( II ) during construction , after the sinking of the original SMS Temes by a mine on the Sava River on 23 October 1914 . Along with her sister ship Sava , she had an overall length of 62 m ( 203 ft 5 in ) , a beam of 10 @.@ 3 m ( 33 ft 10 in ) , and a normal draught of 1 @.@ 3 m ( 4 ft 3 in ) . Her displacement was 580 tonnes ( 570 long tons ) , and her crew consisted of 91 officers and enlisted men . The ship was powered using steam generated by two Yarrow boilers driving two triple @-@ expansion steam engines , and the ship carried 75 tonnes ( 74 long tons ) of fuel oil . Its engines were rated at 1 @,@ 750 ihp ( 1 @,@ 300 kW ) and she was designed to reach a top speed of 13 @.@ 5 knots ( 25 @.@ 0 km / h ; 15 @.@ 5 mph ) . 
 Her main armament was a twin gun turret of 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) / L45 guns forward of the conning tower and a twin turret of 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) / <unk> howitzers aft of the conning tower . She also mounted twin 66 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) / <unk> anti @-@ aircraft guns , two 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) / L44 guns , and seven machine guns . The maximum range of her Škoda 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 45 guns was 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) . Her armour consisted of belt and bulkheads 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick , deck armour 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick , and her conning tower , gun turrets and cupolas were 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . Temes was completed on 9 July 1915 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Temes was commissioned into the Danube Flotilla in 1915 , and was in action against the Serbian Army at Belgrade in early October , when the Serbs evacuated the city in the face of an Austro @-@ Hungarian assault . During the final river crossing and reinforcement of the resulting bridgehead , Temes provided close support . During this task , she attempted to draw fire away from the battle @-@ damaged monitor Enns but after receiving a direct hit in the crew quarters aft , she had to move out of range . She was run ashore to put out fires and stop leaks , before being towed out of the battle area by an armed steamer , and taken to Budapest for repairs . 
 In November 1915 , the other monitors were assembled at Rustschuk , Bulgaria . The geopolitical position of Romania was uncertain , with the Central Powers being aware that the Romanians were negotiating to enter the war on the side of the Entente . To protect the 480 @-@ kilometre ( 300 mi ) Danubian border between Romania and Bulgaria , the flotilla established a sheltered base in the Belene Canal . When the Romanians entered the war on 27 August 1916 , the monitors were again at Rustschuk , having been joined by Temes after her repairs were completed . The monitors were immediately attacked by three improvised torpedo boats operating out of the Romanian river port of Giurgiu . The torpedoes that were fired missed the monitors , but struck a lighter loaded with fuel . The 1st Monitor Division , including Temes , was tasked with escorting supply ships back to the Belene anchorage . This was followed by forays of the Division both east and west of Belene , during which both Turnu Măgurele and Zimnicea were shelled . On 9 May 1917 , she was renamed SMS Bosna as the original SMS Temes was due to return to service after a complete rebuild . 
 In April 1918 , Bosna , along with three other monitors , two patrol boats and a tug were formed into Flottenabteilung Wulff ( Fleet Division Wulff ) under the command of Flottenkapitän ( Fleet Captain ) Olav Wulff . Flottenabteilung Wulff was sent through the mouth of the Danube and across the Black Sea to Odessa , where it spent several months supporting the Austro @-@ Hungarian troops enforcing the peace agreement with Russia . It returned to the Danube at the end of August , and was anchored at Brăila on 12 September . On 16 October , Bosna and the rest of the 1st Monitor Division sailed from Brăila to Belene . The Danube Flotilla then protected Austro @-@ Hungarian troops withdrawing towards Budapest , fighting French and irregular Serbian forces as they withdrew , and arrived on 6 November . 
 = = = Interwar period and World War II = = = 
 Immediately after the armistice , Bosna was crewed by sailors of the newly created Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( KSCS , later the Kingdom of Yugoslavia ) in 1918 – 19 . Under the terms of the Treaty of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye concluded in September 1919 , Bosna was transferred to the KSCS along with a range of other vessels , including three other river monitors , but was officially handed over to the KSCS Navy and renamed Vardar in 1920 . In 1925 – 26 , Vardar was refitted , but by the following year only two of the four river monitors of the KSCS Navy were being retained in full commission at any time . In 1932 , the British naval attaché reported that Yugoslav ships were engaging in little gunnery training , and few exercises or manoeuvres , due to reduced budgets . 
 On 6 April 1941 , the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia began , and Vardar was based at Dubovac , as the flagship of the 1st Monitor Division , responsible for the Romanian border on the Danube , under the operational control of the 3rd Infantry Division Dunavska . She was commanded by Poručnik bojnog broda Milivoj <unk> . On that day , Vardar and her fellow monitor Sava fought off several attacks by individual Luftwaffe aircraft on their base . Over the next three days , the two monitors laid mines in the Danube near the Romanian border . 
 On 11 April , the two monitors were forced to withdraw from Dubovac towards Belgrade , during which they came under repeated attacks by Junkers Ju 87 Stuka dive bombers . Vardar and her fellow monitor were undamaged , and anchored at the confluence of the Danube and Sava near Belgrade about 20 : 00 , where they were joined by the monitor Morava . The three captains conferred , and decided to scuttle their vessels due to the high water levels in the rivers and low bridges , which meant there was insufficient clearance for the monitors to navigate freely . The crews of the monitors were transshipped to two tugboats , but when one of the tugboats was passing under a railway bridge , charges on the bridge accidentally exploded and the bridge fell onto the tugboat . Of the 110 officers and men aboard the vessel , 95 were killed . 
 After the scuttling of the monitors , around 450 officers and men from the Vardar and various other riverine vessels gathered at Obrenovac . Armed only with personal weapons and some machine guns stripped from the scuttled vessels , they started towards the Bay of Kotor in the southern Adriatic in two groups . The smaller of the two groups reached its objective , but the larger group only made it as far as Sarajevo by 14 April when they were obliged to surrender by German troops approaching the city . The Bay of Kotor was captured by the Italian XVII Corps on 17 April . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Web = = = 
 = Thomas de Dundee = 
 Thomas de Dundee , also called Thomas <unk> , was a Scottish prelate who held the bishopric of Ross during the First War of Scottish Independence . Coming from a family of Dundee <unk> , he was educated as the University of Bologna , before entering into career in the church . 
 He obtained benefices in the diocese of Glasgow and the diocese of Brechin , as well as in Ross , and served as the chaplain to a cardinal before being appointed Bishop of Ross by papal provision in 1295 . After some delay , he was able to take up his position and held it until his death in early 1325 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family background = = = 
 Thomas was the son of a burghess of Dundee named Nicholas . Detailed knowledge of Thomas ' father is lacking , but one " Nicholas son of Robert " is found as a burghess of Dundee in a Lindores Abbey document dated between 1237 and 1243 . Another relevant Nicholas , " Nicholas the Chaplain " , is found in 1281 residing in a Dundee tenement located next the tenement of Radulf de Dundee . It is possible both names referred to the same person , but at any rate either could have been Thomas ' father . 
 Another Dundee burghess family in the period produced prominent churchman , the family of Hervey de Dundee , Bishop of Caithness . There is no proof that the two families were kindred , although in the early 1310s Thomas was recorded as assisting Hervey 's brother Radulf de Dundee obtain a loan for his daughter 's marriage portion . 
 Thomas ' father was prosperous , wealthy enough to send Thomas to the University of Bologna in Italy . Thomas was recorded as Magister ( " Master " ) , i.e. possessing a Master 's degree , at Bologna in 1286 . He probably studied there alongside the aforementioned Radulf de Dundee , as well as one Michael de Dundee , whose exact family origin cannot be determined . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Documents dating to 18 February and 24 April 1293 , have Thomas as <unk> of Glasgow Cathedral . On the former date he was at Scone acting as proctor for the cathedral chapter of Glasgow at an arbitration conducted by Robert Wishart , Bishop of Glasgow . Thomas had this role because the dean , Thomas Wishart , was absent , having travelled to Bologna . The arbitration agreement was settled at Glasgow on the latter date . 
 Perhaps soon after or soon before , Thomas inspected charters of Paisley Abbey on behalf of Laurence de Ergadia , Bishop of Argyll . Here he is called Thomas <unk> ( " Thomas , son of Nicholas " ) . The reports confirm that he was the Glasgow subdean but the date of the inspection can be fixed no more precisely than some time between 1286 and 1295 . 
 In 1295 he is found at the papal court acting as the <unk> ( " table companion " ) and chaplain of Cardinal Hugh <unk> ( Hugh Seguin ) , the Dominican Cardinal @-@ Bishop of Ostia . Hugh was probably making use of Dundee 's training as a lawyer . At this time Thomas is said to be Dean of Brechin Cathedral . The last known dean , William , is attested in 1269 , and another dean was in possession by 24 May 1275 , but the name of this dean is not known . This person is probably not Thomas as it is unlikely that he was Dean of Brechin and <unk> of Glasgow at the same time . 
 = = = Election and appointment as Bishop of Ross = = = 
 It is possible that Thomas was still at the papal court when the cathedral chapter of the diocese of Ross were carrying out their elections for the successor of Robert de Fyvie . Two separate elections took place in the period between 17 November 1292 and 18 November 1295 , and it appears that the chapter elected both the cathedral precentor , Adam de Darlington , as well as Thomas de Dundee , who then held a canonry in the diocese . 
 Both Adam de Darlington and Thomas de Dundee resigned their rights to this episcopal see , but nevertheless Cardinal Hugh <unk> used his influence to secure Thomas papal provision as bishop on 18 November . In the following year Adam de Darlington was compensated by being appointed Bishop of Caithness , the bishopric which adjoined Ross to the north . 
 Perhaps because of the political troubles in Scotland at the time , there is a two @-@ year gap between Thomas receiving provision to the see and gaining its " temporalities " , i.e. gaining actual possession of the office . Scotland 's king , John de Balliol , had been in a conflict of authority with the King of the English , who deposed King John in 1296 . It was not until 31 July 1297 that the temporalities of the see were released to Thomas by King Edward I of England , probably after a meeting between Thomas and King Edward at London . According to one source King Edward had been told by Pope Boniface VIII to install Thomas as bishop , Edward proceeded to judge the matter for himself . After doing so , and having received Thomas ' oath of fealty , King Edward ordered John de <unk> , the Earl of Surrey , to install Thomas into his episcopal temporalities . 
 = = = Episcopate = = = 
 Thomas had taken up his diocese in Scotland by 17 August 1298 . On this date his seal was attached to a document which recorded the losses suffered by Scone Abbey following the Scottish rebel defeat by the English crown at the Battle of Falkirk . In the first few years of the 14th century Thomas witnessed three charters of Coupar Angus Abbey in the company of Robert Wishart , Bishop of Glasgow , a known opponent of the English crown . 
 He witnessed another charter relating to that abbey , between 1300 and 1302 , by John de <unk> , who issued it as Guardian of Scotland acting in King John Balliol 's name . After the resurgence of English power in Scotland in 1304 Thomas can be found co @-@ operating with King Edward 's officials . In the autumn of 1305 King Edward planned a council of advisors to assist his new governor , John of Brittany , and Bishop Thomas was thought trustworthy enough to be included in this council . 
 It appears that Bishop Thomas remained pro @-@ English and pro @-@ Balliol after the rising in 1306 of Robert de Brus , Earl of Carrick . Bruce had himself crowned king on 25 March ( becoming King Robert I of Scotland ) . Bishop Thomas ' positions mirrored those of William II , Earl of Ross . On 7 December 1307 King Edward II of England was seeking Bishop Thomas ' support against King Robert . 
 However , the realities of de Brus power in this part of Scotland were pushed home in the following year . On 13 December 1307 King Robert secured the submission of Bishop Thomas ' temporal protector , Earl William . After this submission Bishop Thomas acted as one of the sureties for Earl William 's future loyalty . The other guarantor was David de Moravia , Bishop of Moray ) . 
 Record of Bishop Thomas ' activity in the following years is scarce . The sources do not name him as an attendee of the St Andrews parliament of 17 March 1309 , a parliament at which many of the Scottish clergy declared their support for King Robert . However , very few prelates or churchmen were mentioned individually , so that it is not possible to conclude anything about Bishop Thomas ' attendance . He may have attended most or all of the assemblies and parliaments of the following decade , but only for the parliament held at Scone on 3 December 1318 is he specifically recorded as being present . 
 On 29 October 1312 he attached his seal to a treaty between King Robert and the King of Norway . Thomas was the recipient of a papal mandate issued on 1 June 1317 authorising him to give dispensation for the wrongful marriage between King Robert 's brother Edward de Brus and a daughter of Earl William of Ross . He is found on 1 November 1321 arranging to pay a loan which had been granted by Coupar Angus Abbey to Radulf de Dundee , a loan that had been granted all the way back in 1312 . 
 His probable last occurrence in the sources concerned a conflict with Kinloss Abbey regarding the <unk> parish church of Avoch . The parish of Avoch lay within Thomas ' diocese , but the Abbot of Kinloss claimed the primary right to possess it . A papal mandate was issued on 5 January 1325 to William de Lindores , the Chancellor of Ross , commanding him to judge the dispute . Bishop Thomas was almost certainly alive on that date , but he was dead by 17 April , when Roger , canon of Abernethy , received papal provision to the bishopric of Ross , said to be vacant by Thomas ' death . 
 = John Dudley , 2nd Earl of Warwick = 
 John Dudley , 2nd Earl of Warwick , KB ( 1527 ( ? ) – 21 October 1554 ) was an English nobleman and the heir of John Dudley , 1st Duke of Northumberland , leading minister and regent under Edward VI of England from 1550 – 1553 . As his father 's career progressed , John Dudley respectively assumed his father 's former titles , Viscount Lisle and Earl of Warwick . Interested in the arts and sciences , he was the dedicatee of several books by eminent scholars , both during his lifetime and posthumously . His marriage to the former Protector Somerset 's eldest daughter , in the presence of the King and a magnificent setting , was a gesture of reconciliation between the young couple 's fathers . However , their struggle for power flared up again and ended with the Duke of Somerset 's execution . In July 1553 , after King Edward 's death , Dudley was one of the signatories of the letters patent that attempted to set Lady Jane Grey on the throne of England , and took arms against Mary Tudor , alongside his father . The short campaign did not see any military engagements and ended as the Duke of Northumberland and his son were taken prisoners at Cambridge . John Dudley the younger was condemned to death yet reprieved . He died shortly after his release from the Tower of London . 
 = = Education and court life = = 
 John Dudley was the third of thirteen children born to Sir John Dudley and Jane Guildford , daughter of Sir Edward Guildford . When John was born , his father was a young knight , son of the executed Edmund Dudley , councillor to Henry VII ; in 1537 he became vice @-@ admiral and later Lord Admiral . In 1542 he received his mother 's title of Viscount Lisle . The elder John Dudley was a family man and happily married , as was noted by contemporaries and is evident from letters . The Dudleys moved in evangelical circles from the early 1530s , and their children were educated in Renaissance humanism and science by tutors and companions such as Roger Ascham , John Dee , and Thomas Wilson . Of the brothers , John in particular had scholarly and artistic leanings . He was the dedicatee of Walter Haddon 's <unk> ( 1552 ) and Thomas Wilson 's Arte of <unk> ( 1553 ) . As late as 1570 , John Dee dedicated his Mathematicall <unk> to Euclid 's Elements to the long @-@ deceased young man 's memory , praising his use of arithmetics and " hearty love to virtuous sciences " . Dudley had his own small library with books in French , Italian and Latin as well as a Greek grammar , and " a <unk> in english of the unjust <unk> of the <unk> of Rome " . 
 John Dudley became his father 's heir after his eldest brother Henry was killed in 1544 during the siege of Boulogne under King Henry VIII . At the coronation of Edward VI in 1547 he was made a Knight of the Bath . Some weeks into Edward 's reign the new Privy Council awarded themselves a round of promotions based on Henry VIII 's wishes , and the elder John Dudley was created Earl of Warwick , the younger assumed his father 's old title of Viscount Lisle . The younger John Dudley and his brothers Ambrose and Robert frequently took part in tournaments and other court festivities . On 3 June 1550 he was married to Anne Seymour , eldest daughter of Edward Seymour , 1st Duke of Somerset and former Lord Protector of England . The marriage was a grand affair attended by the twelve @-@ year @-@ old King Edward at the palace of Sheen . According to his diary Edward had a lot of fun ; he watched mock battles , masques , and there was " a fair dinner made " , a great banquet . The match was to express the renewed amity between the young couple 's fathers , who had been political rivals , but the peace would not last . The Earl of Warwick leading the English government since early 1550 , Somerset began to plot his removal and was executed for felony in January 1552 . 
 After King Edward , now fourteen , had raised his father to the dukedom of Northumberland in October 1551 , John Dudley became styled Earl of Warwick . In January 1553 he was summoned to Parliament in his own right , so that he could attend the House of Lords . This he did but made no impact , and it is even unclear whether the other Lords allowed him to participate in debates . In April 1552 Warwick became Master of the Horse , a major position in the royal household normally held by more experienced men . In 1551 he travelled with a diplomatic mission to France . At one point he ran into financial difficulties , possibly due to bad company , as a knowing letter from his father to him reveals : 
 I had thought you had had more discretion than to hurt yourself through fantasies or care , specially for such things as may be remedied and <unk> . ... And therefore you should not hide from me your debts whatsoever it be ... send me word in any wise of the whole sum of your debts , for I and your mother will see them forthwith paid and whatsoever you do spend in the honest service of our master and for his honour , so you do not let wild and wanton men consume it , as I have been served in my days , you must think all is spent as it should be , and all that I have must be yours ... Your loving Father . Northumberland . 
 In February 1553 Princess Mary visited London and was welcomed in the outskirts by the Earl of Warwick at the head of numerous gentlemen . It was a splendid occasion , Mary being received by the Lords of the Council " as if she had been Queen of England " . Still without a proper income of his own , in the next month , Warwick received the wardship of his fourteen @-@ year @-@ old brother @-@ in @-@ law , Edward Seymour . 
 = = Downfall = = 
 In January 1553 the King became ill and by the beginning of June his condition was hopeless . For more than a year , the Imperial ambassador Jehan de Scheyfye had been convinced of Northumberland being engaged in some " mighty plot " to settle the Crown on his own head . Always looking out for signs as to this respect , he reported talk that the Duke was contemplating the divorce of his eldest son in order to marry him to Princess Elizabeth . In fact , it was Warwick 's youngest brother , Guildford Dudley , who had recently been married . His bride was Lady Jane Grey . The potential importance of this and two simultaneous weddings escaped ambassador Jehan de Scheyfye . Lady Jane was to ascend the English throne after the King 's death , according to Edward 's will , headed " My Devise for the Succession " , in which he bypassed his half @-@ sisters Mary and Elizabeth . The Earl of Warwick was among the hundred and two personages who signed the letters patent of 21 June , which were supposed to settle the Crown on Jane . When the Duke of Northumberland took arms against Mary Tudor on 14 July , his eldest son went with him . 
 They passed a week that saw no action in Cambridge and Bury St Edmunds , hearing on 20 July that the Council in London had declared for Mary . Staying at Cambridge , Northumberland himself proclaimed Mary Tudor as queen at the market place . Warwick was with him as he threw up his cap and " so laughed that the tears ran down his cheeks for grief . " The city that had welcomed the Duke splendidly was nervous to please the new queen . A large group of townsmen and university scholars surrounded King 's College to arrest the Duke , who was with his son lodged on the premises . In contrast to his father , Warwick resisted arrest . A letter from the Council arrived that everyman could go his way , so the Duke asked to be set free , " and so continued they all night [ at liberty ] " . At dawn the Earl of Warwick " was booted ready to have ridden in the morning " , and escape . It was too late , however , as the Earl of Arundel arrived to again arrest the Duke and his entourage . The prisoners returned riding side by side through London , the guards having difficulties protecting them against the hostile populace . 
 After a few days , almost all the Dudley family were imprisoned in the Tower . All the men were eventually attainted and condemned to death . Warwick was tried on 18 August 1553 in Westminster Hall , alongside his father and the Marquess of Northampton . Warwick 's turn was last and he , unlike the other defendants , pleaded guilty immediately . After sentence was passed Northumberland asked : " that her Majesty may be gracious to my children ... considering they went by my commandment who am their father , and not of their own free wills " . His execution was planned for 21 August at eight in the morning , however , it was suddenly cancelled ; Northumberland was instead escorted to St Peter ad Vincula , where he publicly took the Catholic communion , forswearing his hitherto Protestant faith , in what was a great propaganda coup for the new , Catholic , government . Any hopes of a pardon were in vain for the Duke who , after short notice , was now to be beheaded the next day . An hour before his father 's execution the Earl of Warwick was likewise led to St Peter ad Vincula to receive the sacrament ; he then returned to his prison cell . 
 From mid @-@ September Warwick was allowed visits by his wife . The rebellion of Thomas Wyatt in February 1554 led to the executions of Jane Grey and her husband , Guildford Dudley . John , Ambrose , Robert , and Henry Dudley remained imprisoned in a room of the Beauchamp Tower . They made carvings in the walls , John carving their heraldic devices with his name " <unk> <unk> " . He was allowed to <unk> on the leads , " being crazed for want of air " . During 1554 Jane Dudley , John 's mother , and his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Henry Sidney , were busy befriending the Spanish nobles around the new king consort , Prince Philip of Spain , as well in England as in Spain . In October , John Dudley and his brothers Robert and Henry were released due to their efforts , but John Dudley died immediately afterwards at Henry Sidney 's house Penshurst in Kent . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Robert Furman = 
 Robert Ralph Furman ( August 21 , 1915 – October 14 , 2008 ) was a civil engineer who during World War II was the chief of foreign intelligence for the Manhattan Engineer District directing espionage against the German nuclear energy project . He participated in the Alsos Mission , which conducted a series of operations with the intent to place all uranium in Europe into Allied hands , and at the end of the war rounded up German atomic scientists to keep them out of the Soviet Union . He personally escorted half of the uranium @-@ 235 necessary for the Little Boy atomic bomb to the Pacific island of Tinian . He was also a key figure overseeing the construction of The Pentagon building . After the war he founded Furman Builders Inc . , a construction company that built hundreds of structures , including the Potomac Mills shopping mall in Woodbridge , Virginia . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robert Ralph Furman was born on August 21 , 1915 , in Trenton , New Jersey , one of five sons of William and Leila <unk> Furman . His father was a bank teller , and his mother worked as a riveter during World War II . He attended Princeton University and graduated in 1937 with a degree in civil engineering . He then worked for the Pennsylvania Railroad and a construction company in New York . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In December 1940 , Furman was activated as a member of the United States Army Reserve and assigned to the Quartermaster Corps Construction Division , where he worked for Colonel Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , supervising the day @-@ to @-@ day construction of The Pentagon . When the building was completed in 1943 , Groves was reassigned to the " Manhattan Project " and brought his aide , Furman , with him . 
 In August 1943 Furman was put in charge of an intelligence effort formed by Groves in response to concerns raised by atomic bomb project scientists about the German nuclear energy project . As director of intelligence , Furman was responsible for ascertaining the progress the Germans were making . In December 1943 , Groves sent Furman to Britain to discuss the establishment of a London Liaison Office for the Manhattan Project and the British government , and to confer over coordinating the intelligence effort . 
 Furman sent the spy Moe Berg to Switzerland to meet the head of the German project , Werner Heisenberg . After chatting with Heisenberg at a cocktail party , Berg concluded that the Germans were a long way behind the Allied effort . Furman travelled to Rome in June 1944 , where he interviewed Italian scientists about the German project . 
 When the Alsos Mission found documentation in office of Union Minière in Antwerp that indicated over 1 @,@ 000 tons of refined uranium had been sent to Germany , but about 150 tons still remained at Olen , Belgium , Groves sent Furman back to Europe with orders to secure the Olen cache . The Alsos Mission located 68 tons there , but another 80 tons was missing , having been shipped to France in 1940 ahead of the German invasion of Belgium . Groves had the Olen uranium shipped to England and , ultimately , to the United States . 
 Documentation indicated that the missing uranium had been sent to Toulouse . An Alsos Mission team under Boris Pash 's command reached Toulouse on October 1 and inspected a French Army arsenal with a Geiger counter . When the needle jumped near some barrels , they were inspected and found to be the 31 tons of uranium from Belgium . The 3342nd Quartermaster Truck Company was released from the Red Ball Express to retrieve the shipment . The barrels were collected and transported to Marseilles , where Furman supervised their loading on a ship bound for the United States . 
 In April 1945 , Furman participated in Operation <unk> . The Alsos Mission and the 1269th Engineer Combat Battalion occupied Haigerloch , where they found and destroyed a German experimental nuclear reactor , and recovered uranium and heavy water . The Alsos Mission took Heisenberg into custody on May 2 . Furman supervised his detention and that of nine other German scientists , who were taken to Rheims , then Versailles , and finally to the country estate of Farm Hall in England , where their conversations were monitored and where they could not defect to the Soviet Union . 
 In July 1945 , Furman personally escorted half of the uranium @-@ 235 necessary for the Little Boy atomic bomb to the Pacific island of Tinian . Accompanied by Captain James F. Nolan , a radiologist with Project Alberta , Furman set out by car from Santa Fe to Albuquerque on July 14 , then travelled by air to Hamilton Field , California . The men boarded the cruiser USS Indianapolis at Hunters Point Naval Shipyard , and crossed the Pacific to Tinian , arriving on July 26 . A few days after leaving Tinian , the Indianapolis was torpedoed and sunk by a Japanese submarine with the loss of over 800 men . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Furman left the army the year after the war ended and founded Furman Builders Inc. in Rockville , Maryland . The firm built hundreds of homes , schools and commercial buildings , including the Potomac Mills shopping mall in Woodbridge , Virginia , the Metropolitan Baptist Church in Washington , D.C. , and the United States embassy in Nicaragua . He married Mary Eddy in 1952 . They had four children : a son , David , and three daughters , Martha Keating , Julia Costello and Serena Furman . 
 For the most part , Furman kept quiet about his exploits during the war . He served as president of the local rotary club and sang baritone in a barbershop quartet . He retired in 1993 , and died of metastatic melanoma on October 14 , 2008 at Buckingham 's Choice retirement community in Adamstown , Maryland at the age of 93 . 
 = Like Crazy = 
 Like Crazy is a 2011 American romantic drama film directed by Drake Doremus and starring Anton Yelchin , Felicity Jones and Jennifer Lawrence . Written by Doremus and Ben York Jones , the film tells the story of Anna ( Felicity Jones ) , a British exchange student who falls in love with an American student , Jacob ( Yelchin ) , only to be separated from him when she is denied re @-@ entry into the United States after staying in the country longer than her student visa allows . 
 Doremus based the storyline of the film partly on his own long @-@ distance relationship with a woman living in London while he lived in Los Angeles . Rather than writing a traditional screenplay , he and Ben York Jones compiled a 50 @-@ page outline of the film from which the actors improvised almost all of the dialogue . Filming took place over four weeks in Los Angeles and London with a budget of $ 250 @,@ 000 . 
 Like Crazy premiered on January 22 , 2011 at the Sundance Film Festival , where it won the festival 's Grand Jury Prize . It was released in theaters on October 28 , 2011 and grossed over $ 3 @.@ 7 million at the box office . Most reviews of the film were positive , with reviewers giving particular praise to the performances of Yelchin and Jones , although some found the plot unrealistic and contrived . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Anna Gardner ( Felicity Jones ) , a British exchange student attending college in Los Angeles , meets and falls in love with Jacob Helm ( Anton Yelchin ) , an American student who returns her affections . After graduation , Anna decides to spend the summer with Jacob rather than return to the United Kingdom , unaware of the consequences of staying longer than her student visa , which expired upon her graduation , allows . After returning to London for a family engagement , Anna flies back to Los Angeles , where she is detained , denied entry , and sent back to the United Kingdom by immigration officials . 
 The couple 's love for each other grows strained by their separation and long @-@ distance relationship . Despite her efforts at appealing the immigration decision , Anna is told she is banned from entering the United States . Meanwhile , Jacob leaves behind his successful design business and visits Anna in London for a few weeks . There , he learns that Anna 's parents , Bernard ( Oliver Muirhead ) and Jackie ( Alex Kingston ) , have hired an immigration lawyer to try to get the ban lifted . Bernard suggests that marrying may help their efforts . Jacob is uncomfortable with the suggestion , and the couple struggle with their feelings . 
 After Jacob returns to the United States , he and Anna grow apart , and Jacob begins a relationship with his colleague , Samantha ( Jennifer Lawrence ) . Anna also tries to find a new life for herself , beginning work as a secretary for a magazine , but she is unable to abandon her feelings for Jacob . She eventually phones him from London and says that they will never find in others what they found in each other , and that they should marry . Soon after , Jacob breaks up with Samantha , returns to London and marries Anna in a small registry office ceremony with her parents as witnesses — both affirming that they will " never allow anything to destroy the feelings we share for each other " . With a tearful parting , Jacob returns to his business in Los Angeles while the couple wait six months before they appeal the ban on Anna 's visa . 
 Six months later , Jacob flies back to the United Kingdom for the appeal , but it is rejected . With their relationship compromised and no hope of resolving the visa issue , Anna and Jacob begin to fight with each other out of jealousy and frustration . Jacob leaves the UK , and soon both are seeing other people . Anna eventually gets promoted at work to the position of editor — something she wanted very much . Her love life , however , is not as positive or fulfilling — her new boyfriend Simon ( Charlie Bewley ) does not evoke the same feelings in her as Jacob , whom she still misses . 
 Sometime later , Anna is finally offered a new visa . She gives up her job , her current boyfriend and her apartment , and flies to Los Angeles to Jacob , who greets her with flowers at the airport where they have an awkward reunion . Jacob brings Anna to his house where he joins her in the shower , and as the water falls over them , they remember happier memories they had together at the beginning of their relationship , which has now become strained due to their indiscretions during the time spent apart . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Drake Doremus was inspired to make Like Crazy by the end of his eight @-@ year long @-@ distance relationship with Desiree <unk> , who lived in London while Doremus lived in Los Angeles . Many elements of the film resemble their real @-@ life relationship , such as frequent travelling between Los Angeles and London , trouble with American immigration laws , a brief marriage , a trip to Santa Catalina Island ( where Jacob takes Anna in the early stages of their relationship ) , and the gift of a bracelet ( in the film , a bracelet is given to Anna by Jacob ) . The story was co @-@ written by Ben York Jones , who had also been involved in long @-@ distance relationships . Together , they assembled a 50 @-@ page outline of the film which read more like a short story than a traditional screenplay . The outline included backstory , plot points , specific scene objectives , themes and emotional moments , but had minimal dialogue . 
 Anton Yelchin was Doremus 's first choice to play Jacob , based on Yelchin 's previous work , and was cast almost immediately after meeting Doremus to discuss the role . After auditioning a number of actresses from Los Angeles and London to play Anna , Doremus talked to English actress Felicity Jones over the phone and asked her to tape rough versions of two scenes from the film . He was so impressed with her rendition of the film 's final scene — in which Anna and Jacob stand silently in a shower — that he decided to cast her . After Jones arrived in Los Angeles , she and Yelchin began an intensive week @-@ long rehearsal before filming began . Yelchin and Jones met in a Mexican restaurant to get to know one another and , during the week prior to shooting , spent " all day and often all night " discussing Anna and Jacob 's relationship with each other and Doremus . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Like Crazy was filmed over four weeks — the first three in Los Angeles and the last in London . The production budget was $ 250 @,@ 000 , which included the cost of airfares for the cast and crew . The film was shot on a Canon EOS 7D still camera with cinema lenses , mounted on a rig constructed by cinematographer John Guleserian . He chose the 7D for its portability and the ease it provided for shooting improvised scenes , where he found other cameras too cumbersome . Guleserian said that many of the film 's scenes were shot " really far away from our characters [ followed by ] really tight close ups " due to the technological limitations of the camera , but he noted that this added to the tone of the film . 
 Only a small number of crew members were employed to maintain the sense of intimacy that Doremus wanted on set . At its largest , the crew consisted of around 20 people , while some scenes were shot with as few as three crew members , such as a scene on a Santa Monica beach where only Doremus , Guleserian and " a sound guy " were present in addition to the actors . Doremus would often ask members of the crew to leave when filming intimate scenes between Jones and Yelchin so that the two actors would feel more comfortable . These scenes would be shot in improvised takes of up to 30 minutes in length , with Doremus providing only occasional direction . The film 's dialogue was almost entirely improvised by the actors , whose lines Doremus believed would come about " by virtue of being fully involved in the character and the moment " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film 's original score was composed by pianist Dustin O 'Halloran . Other music used in the film included songs by Paul Simon , M83 , Stars , The Mary <unk> and <unk> . Doremus listened to several of these artists as he developed the story ; he said that their songs " became the fabric of the film " . He assembled a similar set of songs on a CD which he gave to the cast and crew to listen to throughout production . 
 An official soundtrack , titled Like Crazy : Music from the Motion Picture , was released on CD and in digital format in conjunction with the film 's release . The track listing is as follows : 
 = = Release = = 
 Like Crazy premiered at the Sundance Film Festival on January 22 , 2011 , where it won the Grand Jury Prize . During the festival , the film 's distribution rights were acquired by Paramount Vantage for $ 4 million . 
 The film was given a limited release in theaters on October 28 , 2011 . It earned $ 123 @,@ 140 on its opening weekend with a per @-@ theater average of $ 30 @,@ 785 from four theaters . Its widest release was 162 theaters , and it closed on January 12 , 2012 after playing for 11 weeks , earning $ 3 @,@ 395 @,@ 391 in total at the domestic box office . Internationally , it grossed $ 336 @,@ 098 , making a total box office gross of $ 3 @,@ 731 @,@ 489 . 
 In the United States , Like Crazy was released by Paramount Home Media on DVD and Blu @-@ ray and made available for digital download on March 6 , 2012 . It was released on DVD in the United Kingdom on May 28 , 2012 . The DVD release included an audio commentary recorded by Doremus , Guleserian and editor Jonathan Alberts , while the Blu @-@ ray included deleted and alternate scenes in addition to the commentary . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews for Like Crazy have been favorable . The film has a 73 % " certified fresh " rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , based on 146 reviews ; the consensus states " It has the schmaltzy trappings of many romantic films , but Like Crazy allows its characters to express themselves beyond dialogue , crafting a true , intimate study . " At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film received an average score of 71 based on 37 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 In a review for The Wall Street Journal , Joe Morgenstern described Like Crazy as a " wise and beautiful little film " , giving particular praise to Guleserian 's cinematography and Yelchin and Jones 's improvised performances . David Edelstein of New York magazine claimed that Like Crazy was " the most infectious love story in decades " , comparing its " wonderfully sane " perspective to other romance films and romantic comedies . Entertainment Weekly 's Lisa Schwarzbaum gave the film an A – grade and praised Doremus , Yelchin and Felicity Jones 's storytelling ability in creating " a palpably real , universally identifiable manifestation of young love in all its ecstasy and agony " . In a review for Rolling Stone , Peter Travers gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 4 stars , writing that " Drake Doremus has crafted a crazily inventive and totally irresistible tale of first love that makes the familiar seem bittersweet and heart @-@ stoppingly new " . He described Felicity Jones as " a marvel " and Yelchin as " outstanding " . Time magazine 's Mary Pols commended the film 's ambiguous ending and wrote , " Like Crazy is a cinematic love potion and you leave it feeling bewitched . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film 3 out of 4 stars , praising Jones and Yelchin 's performances and the " intelligent , graceful indie style " of the film , although he found the storyline somewhat unrealistic . Indiewire 's Eric Kohn gave the film a B + grade and felt that while the plot developed slowly , Yelchin and Jones shared " an indelible and entirely realistic chemistry " . Variety film critic Andrew Barker , who described the film as " an exquisite , beautifully acted gem " , gave particular praise to the film 's " dexterous editing " , given that it " contains nary an extraneous detail , while still managing to luxuriate in the tender and awkward silences of young love " . 
 A more negative review of the film came from Manohla Dargis of The New York Times , who found it " a conventional , wan affair , despite its art @-@ cinema flourishes " and thought that Anna 's inability to obtain a visa was a contrived plot point that conflicted with Doremus 's attempt at creating realism . The Globe and Mail 's Rick Groen also found Like Crazy unrealistic , giving the film 2 out of 4 stars and writing that " nothing feels more false than a failed attempt at getting real " . Writing for Salon , Andrew O 'Hehir opined that the film was uninteresting , unmemorable , and " sickly sweet " . Nick Pinkerton of The Village Voice found Jones and Yelchin 's performances " aggressively average " and described the film as " a rote story , arbitrarily scattered into abstraction " . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = Fool 's Gold Loaf = 
 Fool 's Gold Loaf is a sandwich made by the Colorado Mine Company , a restaurant in Denver , Colorado . The sandwich consists of a single warmed , hollowed @-@ out loaf of bread filled with the contents of one jar of creamy peanut butter and one jar of grape jelly , and a pound of bacon . The sandwich 's connection to Elvis Presley is the source of its legend and prolonged interest . According to The Life and Cuisine of Elvis Presley , it was the focus of a midnight sandwich run by Elvis Presley and his friends . Taking his private jet from Graceland , Presley and his friends purchased 30 of the sandwiches and spent three hours eating them and drinking Perrier and champagne before flying home . The story became legend and the sandwich became the subject of continued media interest and part of numerous cookbooks , typically focused around Presley 's love of food . 
 = = Origin = = 
 There are two accounts on the origin of Fool 's Gold Loaf . According to Graeme Wood , the Fool 's Gold Loaf was created by Cindy and Buck Scott , owners of the Colorado Mine Company restaurant . Wood writes that Elvis obtained the recipe from the Scotts , so his personal chef could make it , but noted that " the Fool 's Gold Loaf never made a recorded encore " . 
 According to Nick Andurlakis , he helped create the sandwich while he was working at the Colorado Mine Company as a chef and suggested the Fool 's Gold Loaf to Elvis . Andurlakis claims that he personally delivered the sandwiches to Elvis on the famous night . 
 The sandwich was named to fit the mining motif of the restaurant . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 The recipe has been repeated numerous sources and across the internet , including The Life and Cuisine of Elvis Presley and Andurlakis , a chef of the Colorado Mine Company . 
 The Fool 's Gold Loaf begins with a loaf of French white bread that is covered in two tablespoons of margarine and baked in the oven at <unk> / <unk> until brown . One pound of sliced bacon is fried in oil until crispy and drained . The loaf is sliced lengthwise , hollowed out , and filled with peanut butter , grape jelly and bacon . 
 According to Andurlakis , he personally served Elvis the Fool 's Gold Loaf with bacon , peanut butter , and blueberry preserves on a loaf of French bread . The specific type of preserves was allegedly Dickinson 's blueberry preserves . 
 = = Elvis connection = = 
 David Adler 's book contains a detailed account of the event that made both Elvis and the Fool 's Gold Loaf sandwich famous . On the night of February 1 , 1976 , Elvis Presley was at his home Graceland in Memphis , entertaining Capt. Jerry Kennedy of the Denver , Colorado police force , and Ron <unk> of Colorado 's Strike Force Against Crime . The three men began discussing the sandwich , and Presley decided he wanted one right then . Presley had been to the restaurant before , while in Denver . Kennedy and <unk> were friends of the owners and hung out there often , so they were driven to the Memphis airport and boarded Presley 's private jet , the Lisa Marie , and flew the two hours to Denver . When they arrived at Stapleton International Airport at 1 : 40 AM , the plane taxied to a special hangar where the passengers were greeted by Buck Scott , the owner of the Colorado Mine Company , and his wife Cindy who had brought 30 fresh Fool 's Gold <unk> for the men . They spent two hours in the hangar eating the sandwiches , washing them down with Perrier and champagne . Presley invited the pilots of the plane , Milo High and Elwood Davis , to join them . When they were done , they flew back to Memphis without ever having left the Denver airport . 
 = = Coverage = = 
 The Fool 's Gold Loaf connection to Elvis dominates the media 's coverage of the subject . It was widely reported as " legend " by the media ; including the NBC 's Today , Joplin Globe , and Gloucester Times . Doug Clark , a columnist for The Spokesman Review , recounts the popular story and writes that the Fool 's Gold Recipe is " surprisingly tasty " and notes that it contains around 8 @,@ 000 calories . The popular legend and sandwich were also noted by the Smithsonian Magazine . 
 The Fool 's Gold Loaf has been included in numerous publications and cookbooks . The Fool 's Gold Loaf was included and generated national interest with David Alder 's book The Life and Cuisine of Elvis Presley . Alder 's work would continue with the television documentary : The Burger and The King . Another publication by Alder , Eating the Elvis Presley Way was later released . 
 The Fool 's Gold Loaf has been detailed in Ramble Colorado : The Wanderer 's Guide to the Offbeat , Overlooked , and Outrageous . The The Peanut Butter and Co . Cookbook refers to the Fool 's Gold Loaf legend and ties it to the peanut butter , banana and bacon sandwich , also known as the " Elvis sandwich " . 
 In addition , the sandwich and its connection to Elvis Presley is featured in the 2013 romantic comedy The F Word ( What If ) , with The Last Leg showing it off as well in order to promote the film . 
 = The Book of est = 
 The Book of est is a fictional account of the training created by Werner Erhard , ( est ) , or Erhard Seminars Training , first published in 1976 by Holt , Rinehart and Winston . The book was written by est graduate Luke Rhinehart . Rhinehart is the pen name of writer George Cockroft . The book was endorsed by Erhard , and includes a foreword by him . Its contents attempts to replicate the experience of the est training , with the reader being put in the place of a participant in the course . The end of the book includes a comparison by the author between Erhard 's methodologies to Zen , The Teachings of Don Juan by Carlos Castaneda , and to Rhinehart 's own views from The Dice Man . 
 Reception to the book was mixed . There were critical reviews in Library Journal , Kirkus Reviews , and The New York Times Book Review . An article about Erhard and est in the religious journal Quarterly Review placed the book among " the most accessible sources about est " . Professor Walter A. Effross of the American University Washington College of Law cites The Book of est in an article in the Buffalo Law Review analyzing the control of new age movements over their intellectual property . 
 = = Background = = 
 Werner Erhard ( born John Paul Rosenberg ) originally from Pennsylvania , he migrated to California . He was a former salesman , training manager and executive in the encyclopedia business , . He created the Erhard Seminars Training ( est ) course in 1971 @.@ est was a form of Large Group Awareness Training , and was part of the Human Potential Movement. est was a four @-@ day , 60 @-@ hour self @-@ help program given to groups of 250 people at a time . The program was very intensive : each day would contain 15 – 20 hours of instruction . During the training , est personnel utilized jargon to convey key concepts , and participants had to agree to certain rules which remained in effect for the duration of the course . Participants were taught that they were responsible for their life outcomes . 
 By 1977 over 100 @,@ 000 people completed the est training , including public figures and mental health professionals . Est was controversial . It had its critics and proponents . Werner Erhard and Associates repackaged the course as " The Forum " , a seminar focused on " goal @-@ oriented breakthroughs " . By 1988 , approximately one million people had taken some form of the trainings . A group of his associates formed the company Landmark Education in 1991 . In 2013 they renamed it Landmark Worldwide LLC . Landmark fully purchased from Erhard the intellectual property in the Forum and other courses by 2002 . 
 = = Publication = = 
 The book was first published in 1976 in a hardcover format by Holt , Rinehart and Winston , and a paperback edition was released later in the same year . It was published in German in 1983 by <unk> . In November 2008 , Luke Rhinehart , in association with Joe Vitale and Mark J. Ryan , re @-@ released The Book of est as an E @-@ book . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The Book of est includes a one @-@ page foreword by Werner Erhard . Erhard writes in the foreword that Rhinehart 's book " brilliantly ... communicates clearly to the reader both a sense of being in the training room and the spirit of what takes place there . " Erhard 's foreword notes : " although this book dramatizes the highlights of the training and attempts to give you the vicarious experience of being at a training , this is a book , and the est experience cannot result from reading any book " . 
 With Erhard 's endorsement , Rhinehart attempts to replicate the " transformation " experience from est . The book imparts the message that the participant 's life " doesn 't work " , and that after two weekends the individual will come to understand how to " win " . The book presents a fictional dramatization of the est training . Punctuation style usage , including exclamation points and boldface type , bring the reader 's attention to key items in the text . 
 Rhinehart describes the est training as a form of participatory theatre , writing : " Seeing the trainer as a master actor ... permits us to evaluate his acts and words more intelligently than if we misinterpret him as being a scholar or scientist giving a lecture . " In an analysis of how to approach the est training , Rhinehart comments that " It might best be described , if it can be described at all , as theater — as living theater , participatory theater , encounter theater . Once we begin to see est in these terms , much that fails to fit the scheme of therapy or religion or science begins to make sense . " 
 In Rhinehart 's fictional account of the training , the est course leader begins with the instruction : " Let me make one thing clear . I don 't want any of you to believe a thing I 'm saying . Get that . Don 't believe me . Just listen . " The est trainer explains that the course techniques are used because " Werner has found that they work . " When one of the est participants asks why the instructor says certain statements during the course , the instructor responds : " I 'm saying them because Werner has found that the trainer 's saying them works . " 
 Participants in est are told that they cannot take notes during the course , and at the end of the seminar the instructor declines to go over a review of the training . In order to participate in the course , trainees must adhere to agreements which include : they may not exit the course facility except during specified break time , they cannot sit next to someone they knew before coming to the course , and they cannot take <unk> medications or alcohol for the week prior to the training . 
 Individuals are given a chance to receive a full refund and leave the course after the instructor goes over the course agreements . A second chance to leave the course and receive a refund is offered on the third day of the course . At the end of the training , the seminar participants are strongly encouraged to bring guests to sign up for the course – participants are instructed that " bringing guests is a manifestation of a person 's willingness to participate in life . " 
 The concluding portion of the book includes a comparison of Werner Erhard 's methodologies to Zen , The Teachings of Don Juan by Carlos Castaneda , and to Rhinehart 's views from The Dice Man . Drawing a parallel to the " controlled folly " described in Castaneda 's A Separate Reality , Rhinehart argues that in almost all cases , enlightenment is linked to humor : " One can rarely have an enlightenment experience except under the impact of nonsense ... Every time we laugh we are in a way experiencing a mini enlightenment , a tiny letting go of some attachment to some bit of belief or sense . Full enlightenment , in these terms , is accepting what is , which leads to experiencing fully whatever one is experiencing . " 
 Rhinehart comments that those who have taken part in the est training feel the need for a sense of community : " Most graduates indicate that the value of the seminar series depends not so much on it 's ostensible data content or on the processes introduced , but on the sharing on an intimate basis with others . " He notes that some of the graduates of the est training " treat him [ Erhard ] with the love and awe normally associated with that of disciples for spiritual teachers " . He likens Erhard 's relationship to his staff members to the way in which a guru interacts with disciples : " [ It is ] the essentially eastern phenomenon of a powerful being ( usually a guru or a spiritual teacher ) attracting other powerful beings who nevertheless choose to channel their power through their leader . " Rhinehart argues that est " may be seen as in many ways the culmination to date of the ' <unk> of America ' , a process that first became notable in the late fifties and early sixties " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 James Charney notes in his review of the book for Library Journal , " Questions of effectiveness or possible harm are hardly considered . " Charney characterizes the problem of the book and its subject matter as a " kind of with @-@ it diffuseness which disallows any intelligent understanding on principle " . In a review of the book for The New York Times Book Review , Zane Berzins was critical of the work , commenting : " There isn 't much to be said for the book except that it exudes a kind of repellent fascination . " A review of the book in Kirkus Reviews was negative ; the review characterizes it as , " Not a book , really . A verbatim transcription of one of Werner Erhard 's weekend sessions in $ 250 doublethink . " Kirkus Reviews criticizes the author for not engaging in any judgmental analysis of the est training methodology . The review concludes , " at least the reader finally has an opportunity to see what an <unk> seminar is , with vomit bags , circuitous logic , pathetic interplay between overbearing trainer and angst @-@ ridden trainee , and all . " 
 In an article about Erhard and est for the religious journal Quarterly Review , Florida International University assistant religious studies professor Robert R. Hann places the book among " the most accessible sources about est " . Hann comments that since the book has been " reviewed by Erhard and carries his statement of support for the author " , it " can therefore be presumed to be , if not ' canonical , ' then at least not significantly at odds with the perspective of est itself . " 
 Professor Walter A. Effross of the American University Washington College of Law cites The Book of est along with Adelaide Bry 's est : 60 Hours That Transform Your Life , in an article in the Buffalo Law Review analyzing the control of new age movements over their intellectual property . Effross notes that the copyright page of The Book of est gives a notice that : " material based in part on unpublished lectures created and copyrighted by Werner Erhard and used by the author with his permission . No material created and copyrighted by Werner Erhard may be used or disseminated in any medium or language without his prior written authorization . " Effross comments on the potential loss of control over his material that Erhard may have invited due to endorsing these books about his methodology : " ... because it enabled commentators to make ' fair use ' of the disclosed information , it was not helpful for ... Werner Erhard , the founder of est , to endorse a first @-@ person account of an est training , even one which provided only simulations of est 's ' processes , ' or guided meditations . ( However , the publicity [ Erhard 's organization ] achieved from such exposure during crucial periods of ... expansion may have been seen as justifying the intellectual property risk . ) " 
 = Cuisine of the Thirteen Colonies = 
 The cuisine of the Thirteen Colonies includes the foods , eating habits , and cooking methods of the Thirteen British colonies in North America before the American revolution . It was derived from familiar traditions from the colonists ’ home countries in the British Isles and particularly England . Many agricultural items came through trade with England and the West Indies . Certain familiar items grew better in the Old World than others , and this led to a dependence on imports which drove the daily lives of the colonists . However , the colonial diet was increasingly supplemented by new animal and plant foods indigenous to the New World . 
 In the years leading up to 1776 , a number of events led to a drastic change in the diet of the American colonists . As they could no longer depend on British and West Indian imports , agricultural practices of the colonists began to focus on becoming completely self @-@ sufficient . 
 = = Regional cuisines = = 
 The majority of immigrants to North America in the 17th and 18th centuries came from various parts of Britain in four waves . These four migration waves established the four major regional cultures that still affect life in the United States to this day . Each of the migrations settled in different regions and were dominated by regional cultures from the British Isles that were transplanted across the Atlantic . Along with specific customs related to everything from religion to language , the British migrants brought with them food habits that formed major regional cuisines of English @-@ speaking America . 
 = = = Virginia = = = 
 In the early 17th century the first wave of English immigrants began arriving in North America , settling mainly around Chesapeake Bay in Virginia and Maryland . The Virginian settlers were dominated by English noblemen with their servants ( many were Cavaliers fleeing in the aftermath of the English Civil War 1642 – 51 ) and poor peasants from southern England . 
 The society the Cavaliers brought with them was highly stratified and this was reflected in food and eating habits . The aristocrats that would be the basis for the First Families of Virginia were very fond of game and red meat . Roast beef was a particular favorite , and even when oysters and goose were available , wealthy colonists could complain about the absence of meat . Virginia was the only place in North America where haute cuisine of any kind was practiced before the 19th century . Virginians such as William Byrd ( 1652 – 1704 ) would indulge in extravagant dishes such as stewed swan or roast snipe , dinners were important social events , and the art of dinner conversation was considered an important skill in affluent households . 
 Poor white farmers and black slaves ate much more humble fare and were quicker to incorporate American and African foodstuffs and flavorings . The food of the poor whites in the 17th century was similar to soul food of the 20th century . Overall , both rich and poor southerners ate spicier and more pungent food than elsewhere in the early colonies , and feasting was an important part of life for all social classes . 
 Cooking in southern England was noted for a tendency toward frying , simmering and roasting , and this also became true for Virginian cooking . While wealthy households tended to vary cooking methods greatly , poor households were generally confined to boiling and frying . The only form of cooking that was slow to develop was baking . Typical dishes among the upper classes were <unk> of various meats with herbs , and sometimes a good amount of claret . Common food among the lower classes was corn porridge , or mush , and hominy with greens and salt @-@ cured meat , and later the traditional southern fried chicken and <unk> . 
 = = = New England = = = 
 New England was first settled beginning in 1620 , and it was dominated by East Anglian Calvinists , better known as the Puritans . The religious fundamentalism of the Puritans created a cuisine that was austere , disdainful of feasting and with few embellishments . Eating was seen as a largely practical matter and one of the few occasions when New Englanders would engage in massive bouts of eating and drinking was at funerals , times when even children might drink large amounts of alcohol . Age was one of the most important signs of authority and determined eating practices ; though Puritan society was less stratified , particularly compared to the southern colonies , heads of the household and their spouses would often eat separately from both children and servants . Though New England had a great abundance of wildlife and seafood , traditional East Anglian fare was preferred , even if it had to be made with New World ingredients . Baked beans and pease porridge were everyday fare , particularly during the winter , and usually eaten with coarse , dark bread . At first it was made with a mixture of wheat and maize ( corn ) , but after a disease called wheat rust struck in the 1660s , it was made of rye and maize , creating what has later been known as " rye ' n ' <unk> " . Vegetables with meat boiled thoroughly was a popular dish , and unlike many other regions in North American colonies , they were cooked together , rather than separately , and frequently without seasoning . Baking was a particular favorite of the New Englanders and was the origin of dishes today seen as quintessentially American , such as apple pie and the baked Thanksgiving turkey . 
 = = = Delaware Valley and Mid @-@ Atlantic region = = = 
 The Quakers emigrated to the New World from the Northern English Midlands during the 17th century , and eventually settled primarily in the Delaware Valley . They were similar to the Puritans in the strictness that they applied to everyday life , though their religious teachings were far more egalitarian . The food was plain and simple . Excessive consumption was discouraged and failure to eat or drink moderately was punished with public acts of self @-@ criticism . William Penn , the founder of Pennsylvania and an important figure in the development of the Quaker movement encouraged frugality in his followers with advice such as " If thou rise with an appetite thou are sure never to sit down without one " . Just like the Puritans , the Quakers encountered an abundance of food in the New World ; forests rich with game and berries , streams teeming with fish , and flocks of birds so abundant that they would sometimes block the sun for several hours . Still the asceticism persevered . Many Quakers avoided eating butter as a form of self @-@ mortification , and the most eccentric followers would avoid tea and meat . The idealist and pacifist ideas of the Quakers also encouraged many to boycott products that were considered to be tainted by sin . This included butter , due to its role in raising war taxes , and coffee , because it was produced by slave labor . Eating habits were more egalitarian than those of either the Puritans or the Virginian Anglicans . At meals , entire households would dine at the same table , including children and servants . 
 The most typical cooking method of the Quakers was boiling , a method brought from ancestral northern England . Boiled breakfast and dinner were standard fare , as well as " pop @-@ <unk> " , balls of batter made from flour and eggs boiled in milk . Boiled dumplings and puddings were so common in Quaker homes that they were referred to by outsiders as " Quakers ' food " . Travelers noted apple dumplings as an almost daily dish in the Delaware Valley and cook books specialized in puddings and dumplings . Food was mostly preserved through boiling , simmering or standing . A popular genre of dishes made from this favored method of food preparation was " cheese " ( or " butter " ) , a generic term for dishes prepared by slow boiling or pressing . It could be made from ingredients as varying as apples ( i.e. , apple butter ) , plums and walnuts . Cream cheese had its origins in Quaker cooking , but was in colonial times not true cheese made with rennet or curds , but rather cream that was warmed gently and then allowed to stand between cloth until it became semi @-@ solid . Dried beef was widely popular in the Delaware Valley and was eaten along with puddings and dumplings to add flavor . The use of dried beef was so widespread that it was often called " Quaker gravy " in the 18th century . Though the Quaker influence from the Northern Midlands was the most dominant , there was some influence from German immigrants during the 18th century . <unk> , a pot pudding made from meat scraps and grain , became a staple of the regional cuisine for many generations . 
 = = = Backcountry = = = 
 The last major wave of British immigrants to the colonies took place from 1720 – 1775 . About 250 @,@ 000 people travelled across the Atlantic primarily to seek economic betterment and to escape hardships and famine . Most of these came from the borderlands of northern Britain and were of Scots @-@ Irish or Scottish descent . Many were poor and therefore accustomed to hard times , setting them apart from the other major British immigrant groups . They settled in what would come to be known generally as the " Backcountry " , on the frontier and in the highlands in the north and south . 
 A typical breakfast could be toasted bread , cheese , and any leftover meat or vegetables from the previous dinner . In summer , people drank fresh milk . 
 The backcountry relied heavily on a diet based on mush made from soured milk or boiled grains . <unk> , a yogurt @-@ like food made with soured milk , was a standard breakfast dish and was eaten by backcountry settlers of all ages . This dietary habit was not shared by other British immigrant groups and was equally despised by those still in Britain . The Anglican missionary Charles Woodmason , who spent time among Ulster Irish immigrants , described them as depending " wholly on butter , milk , <unk> and what in England is given to hogs " . Oatmeal mush was a popular meal in the British borderlands and remained popular in America . The only difference was that the oatmeal was replaced by corn , and is still known today in the South as grits . Cakes of unleavened dough baked on <unk> or circular <unk> were common and went by names such as " <unk> " , " griddle cakes " and " pancakes " . While the potato had originated in South America , it did not become established in North America until it was brought to the colonies by northern British settlers in the 18th century and became an important backcountry staple along with corn . Pork had been a food taboo among northern Britons and the primary meat had been sheep . In the American colonies the raising of sheep was not as efficient and mutton was therefore replaced with pork . The habit of eating " sallet " or " greens " remained popular , but the vegetables of the Old World were replaced with plants like squashes , gourds , beans , corn , land cress and <unk> . The distinctive cooking style of the British borderlands and the American backcountry was boiling . Along with <unk> , porridge and <unk> , the typical dishes were various stews , soups and pot pies . 
 Food was eaten from wooden or pewter trenchers with two @-@ <unk> forks , large spoons and hunting knives . <unk> was not popular since it was easily breakable and tended to dull knives quickly . Unlike the Quakers and Puritans , feasting with an abundance of food and drink was never discouraged and practiced as often as was feasible . Generally , the backcountry cuisine did not share the religious austerity of the North nor the refinement of the South and was therefore denigrated by outside commentators . An apparent lack of <unk> in preparing the food provoked further criticism from many sources . The Anglican Woodmason characterized backcountry cooking as " exceedingly filthy and most execrable " . Others told of matrons washing their feet in the <unk> , that it was considered unlucky to wash a milk churn and that human hairs in butter were considered a sign of quality . These descriptions seem to be confirmed by an old saying attributed to Appalachian housewives : " The <unk> [ more ] dirt the less hurt " . Another expression of backcountry hardiness was the lack of appreciation of coffee and tea . Both were described as mere " slops " and were deemed appropriate only for those who were sick or unfit for labor . 
 = = Diet before the American Revolution = = 
 When colonists arrived in America , they planted familiar crops from the Old World with varying degrees of success and raised domestic animals for meat , leather , and wool , as they had done in Britain . The colonists faced difficulties owing to different climate and other environmental factors , but trade with Britain , continental Europe , and the West Indies allowed the American colonists to create a cuisine similar to the various regional British cuisines . Local plants and animals offered tantalizing alternatives to the Old World diet , but the colonists held on to old traditions and tended to use these items in the same fashion as they did their Old World equivalents ( or even ignore them if more familiar foods were available ) . The American colonial diet varied depending on region , with local cuisine patterns established by the mid @-@ 18th century . 
 A preference for British cooking methods is apparent in cookbooks brought to the New World . There was a general disdain for French cookery , even among the French Huguenots in South Carolina and French Canadians . One cookbook common in the colonies , The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy , by Hannah Glasse , held the French style of cookery in disdain , stating " the blind folly of this age that would rather be imposed on by a French booby , than give encouragement to a good English cook ! " She does add French recipes to the text but speaks out flagrantly against the dishes , " ... think ( ing ) it an odd jumble of trash . " The French and Indian War ( 1754 – 1764 ) reinforced anti @-@ French sentiment . The conflict strengthened an age @-@ old English distrust of the French , and led the English to deport French @-@ speaking people , as in the forced migration of the Acadians to Louisiana . The Acadian French brought a profound French influence to the diet of settlers in Louisiana , but had little influence outside of that region . 
 = = = Northern colonies = = = 
 A striking characteristic of the diet in New England was the seasonal availability of food . While farming in the southern colonies took place for most of the year , northern growing seasons were more restricted , limiting the availability of fresh fruit and vegetables . However , the coastal colonists ' close proximity to the ocean gave them a bounty of fresh fish to supplement their diet year @-@ round , especially in the north . Wheat , the grain primarily used in English bread , was almost impossible to grow in the North , and imports of wheat were far from cost productive . Substitutes included corn ( maize ) in the form of cornmeal . The <unk> was generally considered a poor substitute for <unk> bread , but was accepted by residents in both the northern and southern colonies . 
 = = = Animal proteins = = = 
 Game hunting was a familiar beneficial skill to the colonists when they immigrated to the New World . Most northern colonists depended upon hunting , whether they hunted themselves or purchased game from others . As a method of obtaining protein for consumption , hunting was preferred over animal husbandry as domestic animals were expensive and more work was required to defend domestic animals against natural predators , Native Americans or the French . Commonly hunted game included deer , bear , buffalo and turkey . The larger parts of the animals were roasted and served with currant and other sauces , while smaller portions went into soups , stews , sausages , pies and pasties . 
 Venison was the most popular game . The plentiful meat was often potted or jerked , and its tripe was popular as well . Venison was especially popular during the Thanksgiving season . Buffalo was an important protein source until roughly 1770 , when the animals were over @-@ hunted in the eastern United States . Bear were numerous in the northern colonies , especially in New York , and many considered the leg meat to be a delicacy . Bear meat was frequently jerked as a preservation method . 
 In addition to game , mutton was consumed from time to time . Keeping sheep provided wool to the household , and when a sheep reached an age when it was unmanageable for wool production ; it could be harvested as mutton . Sheep were originally introduced to the Americas through the Spanish in Florida . In the north , the Dutch and English also introduced several varieties of sheep . The casual English practice of animal husbandry allowed sheep to roam free , consuming a variety of forage . Forage – based diets produce meat with a characteristically strong , <unk> flavor and a tough consistency , which requires aging and slow cooking to <unk> . 
 Fats and oils derived from animals were used to cook many colonial foods . Rendered pork fat , especially from bacon , was the most popular cooking medium . Pork fat was used more often in the southern colonies than the northern colonies as the Spanish introduced pigs earlier to the south . Many homes kept a deerskin sack filled with bear oil for use in cooking . Solidified bear fat resembled shortening . The colonists enjoyed butter in cooking as well , but it was rare prior to the American Revolution , as cattle were not yet plentiful . 
 Colonists near the shores in New England often dined on fish , crustaceans and other sea animals . Colonists ate large quantities of turtle , a delicacy also exportable to Europe . Cod was enjoyed in both fresh and salted form , salted cod being suitable for long @-@ term storage . Lobsters proliferated in the waters as well , and were commonplace in the New England diet . Some complained about dining on lobster and codfish too often and they were even used as pig fodder . The highest quality cod was usually dried and salted , however , and exported to the Mediterranean in exchange for fruits not grown in American colonies . 
 = = = = Fruits and vegetables = = = = 
 A number of vegetables were grown in the northern colonies , including turnips , onions , cabbage , carrots , and parsnips , along with pulses and legumes . These vegetables stored well through the colder months . Other vegetables , such as cucumbers , could be salted or pickled for preservation . Agricultural success in the northern colonies came from following the seasons , with consumption of fresh greens only occurring during summer months . In addition to vegetables , a large number of seasonal fruits were grown . Fruits not eaten in season were often preserved as jam , wet sweetmeats , dried , or cooked into pies that could be frozen during the winter months . Some vegetables originating in the New World , including beans , squashes , and corn , were readily adopted and grown by the European colonists . Pumpkins and gourds grew well in the northern colonies and were often used for fodder for animals in addition to human consumption . 
 = = = = Alcohol = = = = 
 Hard apple cider was by far the most common alcoholic beverage available to colonists . This is because apple trees could be grown locally throughout the colonies , unlike grapes and grain which did not grow well at all in New England . Cider was also easier to produce than beer or wine , so it could be made by farmers for their own consumption . Since it was not imported , it was much more affordable to the average colonist than beer or wine . Apple trees were planted in both Virginia and the Massachusetts Bay Colony as early as 1629 . Most of these trees were not grafted , and thus produced apples too bitter or sour for eating ; they were planted expressly for making cider . Cider was sometimes also distilled or freeze @-@ distilled into applejack ( so called because freeze @-@ distillation was called " jacking " ) ; the cold climate of the Northeast in the wintertime encouraged the process . The beverage was particularly popular in New Jersey , where applejack was occasionally called " Jersey Lightning " and was sometimes used to pay road @-@ construction crews . 
 Before the Revolution , New Englanders consumed large quantities of rum and beer as maritime trade provided relatively easy access to the goods needed to produce these items . Rum was the distilled spirit of choice as molasses , the main ingredient , was readily available from trade with the West Indies . In the continent 's interior , colonists drank whiskey , as they had ready access to corn and rye but did not have good access to sugar cane . However , up until the Revolution , many colonists considered whiskey to be a coarse beverage unfit for human consumption , believing that it caused the poor to become raucous and disorderly . 
 Beer was such an important consumable to Americans that they would closely watch the stocks of barley held by farmers to ensure quality beer production . In John Adams ' correspondence with his wife Abigail , he asked about the quality of barley crops to ensure adequate supply for the production of beer for himself and their friends . However , hops , essential to production of beer , did not grow well in the colonies . It only grew wild in the New World , and needed to be imported from England and elsewhere . In addition to these alcohol @-@ based products produced in America , merchants imported wine and brandy . Beer was not only consumed for its flavor and alcohol content , but because it was safer to drink than water , which often harbored disease @-@ causing microorganisms . Even children drank small beer . 
 = = = Southern colonies = = = 
 Unlike the north , the south did not have a central cultural origin or a single culinary tradition . The southern colonies were also more diverse in their agricultural products . Slaves and poor Europeans in the south shared a similar diet , based on many of the indigenous New World crops . The rural poor often hunted and ate squirrel , opossum , rabbit , and other woodland animals . Salted or smoked pork often supplemented the vegetable diet . Those on the " rice coast " ate ample amounts of rice , while the southern poor and slaves used <unk> in breads and <unk> . Wheat was not an option for most poorer residents in the southern colonies . 
 Well into the eighteenth century , the Chesapeake region still relied on home @-@ brewed cider as a primary beverage . In most small planters ' households , women were responsible for the production of the drink and relied on local products to make the different <unk> . This production was seasonal , as only large planters had the funds and the technology necessary to produce alcohol year round . 
 The southern colonies can be culturally divided between the uplands and the lowlands , and this distinction is seen in diet and food preparation in the two regions . The diet of the uplands often included cabbage , string beans , white potatoes , while most affluent whites in the uplands avoided crops imported from Africa because they were associated with , and reflected the social inferiority of , black slaves . Those who could grow or afford wheat often had biscuits on their table for breakfast , along with healthy portions of pork . Salted pork was a staple of any meal , as it was used in the preparations of vegetables for flavor , in addition to its direct consumption as a protein . 
 The coastal lowlands , particularly surrounding Charleston and New Orleans and which also included much of the Acadian French regions of Louisiana and the surrounding area , more varied diet was heavily influenced by Africans and Caribbeans , as well as the French . Rice played a large part in the diet . In addition , unlike the uplands , the lowlands ' protein came mostly from coastal seafood and game meats . Much of the diet involved the use of peppers , as it still does today . Although the English had an inherent disdain for French food as well as many of the native foods , the French had no such disdain for indigenous foodstuffs . In fact , they expressed an appreciation for native ingredients and dishes . 
 = = Dietary changes through boycott = = 
 The colonists were quite dependent on their " parent " England for imports of food and other basic products . When taxes and British Parliamentary tariffs on products used by the American colonists increased , the colonists were forced into paying the taxes if they were to continue importing English and West Indian goods . As a result , a number of colonists began to boycott imported goods in favor of domestic goods . The boycott was not initially widespread , especially as it could not be officially enforced , and so lacked luster in a number of regions . Increasing support for this boycott , however , helped generate the revolution against England . 
 As England imposed its series of acts upon the colonists , changes in the American colonist ’ s purchases and trades eventually altered the American diet . Starting with the Molasses Act of 1733 , followed by the Sugar Act of 1760 , a shift in alcohol consumption occurred . This was more than a protest against taxation of molasses , the main ingredient in rum production . Whiskey became the spirit of choice for many American colonists who wished to thumb their noses at England . In the northern colonies , whiskey was made with rye , while the southern colonies preferred corn . Rye was seen as a more civilized grain , while corn whiskey was presented as a more patriotic version as it was produced from an indigenous American crop . 
 The production of whiskey was certainly not a norm in the colonies in the early years . The upper echelon of colonial society looked down upon American whiskey up until the time of the American Revolution . Some even saw the harsh spirit as a bastion of debauchery in the American colonies . Whatever the sentiment , the Scottish , Irish , and Germans brought a taste for hard spirits from their homelands to the American colonies in the 1730s . These groups continued to produce hard spirits in imported stills , or stills based on Old World designs , in retaliation against the English economic controls . 
 The Revenue Act of 1764 that heavily taxed Madeira and other wines led to yet another boycott , this time against imported wines . This promoted another indigenous agricultural item of the American Colonies , the Vitis labrusca grapes . In 1765 , Benjamin Franklin decided to use Poor Richard 's Almanack to promote the growing of American grapes in order to encourage the production of domestic wines . One of Franklin 's friends , Benjamin Gale , stated one evening at one of their gatherings " We must drink wine of our own making or none at all ; " this opinion seemed to be a prevailing sentiment in the colonies from 1764 until the Revolution . Many who supported temperance in the colonies also supported the production of American wine at this time since the colonial form of temperance at the time was to drink only wine or beer instead of hard spirits . 
 The Quartering Act of 1765 , probably more than anything else , stripped the colonists of funds and thus the ability to purchase imported luxuries . The Stamp Act of 1765 resulted in a boycott on imported goods by many merchants , which was further strengthened by the passage of the Townshend Act of 1767 . These boycotts , however , were short lived , to the dismay of more radical colonists who hoped to take control of superficial goods imported by the English and imports from the West Indies . Once the Townshend Act was repealed , colonists flocked back to markets to purchase non @-@ essentials . 
 The enforcement of the Tea Act of 1773 became a heated issue with the colonists , with the well @-@ known demonstration at the Boston harbor , the Boston Tea Party , a direct reaction to the act . However , a much more important shift occurred in the colonists ' drink of choice . In 1773 , John Adams wrote a letter to his wife stating , " Tea must be universally renounced and I must be weaned , and the sooner the better . " Thus began the American shift from tea to coffee . In a concentrated boycott , the housewives of Falmouth , Massachusetts publicly united , vowing to serve only coffee in their homes . This inspired other households throughout the colonies , both in the north and south , to do the same . 
 = = Effects of the American Revolution = = 
 In 1775 , the Continental Congress decreed that no imports would enter the American colonies , nor would any exports move from America to England . Some historians state that this had a profound effect on the agriculture of America , while others state that there was no effect as the domestic market was strong enough to sustain American agriculturists . The dispute lies in the fact that the American economy was highly diverse ; there was no standard form of currency , and records were not consistently kept . 
 By the declaration of the American Revolution , with George Washington as its military leader , a number of dietary changes had already occurred in America . Coffee was quickly becoming the normal hot drink of the colonies and a taste for whiskey had been acquired among many of those who could produce it . In fact , in 1774 , the first corn was grown in Kentucky specifically for production of American Bourbon whiskey . This step may have established this American spirit in American culture , just as the country was going to war with England . In addition to whiskey coming into favor , a shift began in the consumption of cider over beer . Colonists opted to grow less barley as it was easier to ferment apple cider than to brew beer . Another reason for this change would have been the lack of imported hops needed to brew beer . 
 As the American colonies went to war , they needed soldiers , supplies , and lots of them . Soldiers needed uniforms and , as all shipping into the colonies had ceased , wool became an integral commodity to the war effort . During the Revolution the consumption of mutton ceased almost entirely in many areas , and in Virginia it became illegal to consume except in cases of extreme necessity . 
 Game had begun to become scarce in the region east of the Mississippi river . This could have been from over @-@ hunting , or the game could have been driven westward as the colonial population increased . Fortunately , Irish and Scottish immigrants had been importing cattle into the American colonies during the early part of the 18th century . Consequently , when game was becoming scarce and mutton had a moratorium placed upon it , cattle were available to take their place as a protein source . This change increased farmers ' profit from animal husbandry . Cattle raising had begun on a small scale during the French @-@ Indian War , but when the American Revolution came , farmers were able to increase their cattle holdings and increase the presence of beef in the American diet . In addition to beef production , the cattle also increased the production of milk and dairy products like butter . This may have contributed to the preference of butter over pork fat , especially in the northern colonies . 
 With the arrival of English soldiers by ship , and naval battles on the seas , areas used for salt water fishing became perilous , and lay dormant for much of the war . In addition , many of the fishing vessels were converted into warships . Before the war , there was often talk about the excess of lobsters and cod off the shores of New England . This seemed to change during and after the war , due to the vast numbers of ships and artillery entering the ocean waters . Once lobster harvesting and cod fishing was reestablished , most fishermen found that the lobster and cod had migrated away from the shores . 
 Where Americans had a historic disdain for the refineries of French cooking , that opinion , at least in a small part , began to change with the American alliance with the French . In the first American publication of Hannah Glasse ’ s Art of Cookery Made Easy , the insults toward French dishes disappeared . A number of Bostonians even attempted to cook French cuisine for their French allies , sometimes with comedic results when entire frogs were put into soups rather than just their legs . Nonetheless , the alliance supported a friendship with France that later resulted in a large migration of French cooks and chefs to America during the French Revolution . 
 The American diet was changed through this friendship as well as due to the changes forced through boycott and hostilities with England . After a time , trade did resume with the West Indies but was limited to necessities . Items that sustained the war effort in America were traded , with crops such as rice from the Carolinas shipped out and coffee beans imported in order to brew America ’ s new beverage of choice . 
 = James " Honest Dick " Tate = 
 James William " Honest Dick " Tate ( January 2 , 1831 – unknown ) was the Kentucky State Treasurer . He was nicknamed " Honest Dick " because of his good reputation and rapport with his colleagues . The nickname turned ironic , however , when Tate absconded with nearly a quarter of a million dollars from the state 's treasury in 1888 . He was never found . 
 Tate 's thievery was frequently cited during Kentucky 's fourth constitutional convention as a reason to impose term limits on Kentucky 's elected officials . The one @-@ term limit remained in force on most of Kentucky 's officials until the state 's constitution was amended in 1992 to allow the Governor , Lieutenant Governor , State Treasurer and other state officeholders to serve two consecutive terms . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James William Tate was born the only child of Nancy ( Taylor ) Tate and her second husband , Colonel Thomas L. Tate in Franklin County , Kentucky . His father was descended from a Virginia family of Scots @-@ Irish ancestry . His father was a farmer and a veteran of the War of 1812 , and his paternal grandfather was a veteran of the American Revolutionary War . His maternal grandfather was Reverend John Taylor , a pioneer Baptist minister in Kentucky . 
 Tate received his education in Franklin and Woodford counties and finished his schooling in 1848 . Later that year , at age 17 , Tate began work as a clerk at the Frankfort post office . On 3 June 1856 , he married Lucy Hawkins . On 28 June 1858 , the couple had their first child , a son named Howard , who died at the age of three . The couple also had a daughter , <unk> . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Tate 's political career began with an appointment by Governor Lazarus W. Powell to the position of Assistant Secretary of State for the state of Kentucky in 1854 . A model Democrat , he resigned the post when Know @-@ Nothing Governor Charles S. Morehead was elected in 1855 . Four years later , he was appointed to the post again under Democratic Governor Beriah Magoffin , and supported the Breckinridge wing of Kentucky 's Democratic party during the American Civil War . Though Magoffin resigned in 1862 due to disagreements with the General Assembly , Tate continued to serve under Magoffin 's hand @-@ picked successor , James F. Robinson , resigning again at the end of Robinson 's term in 1863 . From 1865 – 7 , Tate served as Assistant Clerk to the Kentucky House of Representatives . At the end of his service in the house , Tate successfully ran for state treasurer , a post to which he would be re @-@ elected every two years for the next two decades . 
 In 1878 , Tate was mentioned in the Biographical Encyclopedia of Kentucky . The biographer gushed that in 1867 , Tate had " materially contributed , by his personal popularity , to the great success of the Democratic party " adding : 
 <unk> , since that time , without opposition in his own party , he has been successively re @-@ elected by popular majorities , perhaps exceeding those obtained by any other candidate for office in the State . From these evidences of popularity , it would seem that his lease on the office might be regarded as a fixed fact . 
 In the gubernatorial race of 1887 , Republican challenger William O. Bradley made an issue of the need to examine the treasury . Though Bradley ultimately lost the race , the idea of auditing the treasurer 's records took root , and the General Assembly began calling for a commission to undertake the audit in the 1887 – 8 session . Tate claimed to need time to get his books in order ; this effectively delayed the establishment of the commission , but it was ultimately formed . 
 = = Disappearance and aftermath = = 
 In the first quarter of 1888 , Tate began a pattern of behavior that would have aroused considerable suspicion in a man of lesser repute . He began depositing only checks in the state 's bank account , instead of cash , as was usual . In a short period of time , he paid a number of personal debts . On 14 March 1888 , Henry Murray , one of Tate 's clerks , noticed him filling two tobacco sacks with gold and silver coins later determined to be worth about $ 100 @,@ 000 . He departed for Louisville , leaving a note saying he would return in two days . Again , due to the nature of his job and his perceived record of trustworthiness , nobody found his actions questionable . After a week passed with no word from Tate , it became clear what had happened . Records would later show that , after a few days in Louisville , Tate boarded a train for Cincinnati , and then vanished , leaving his wife and daughter behind . 
 During the investigation that followed , the state 's ledger , which was almost indecipherable , was found to show Tate giving some state officials loans that were many times left unpaid and advances on their salaries , including an advance of several thousand dollars to Governor Preston H. Leslie in 1872 . Tate had apparently used some of the state 's money to make personal investments in mines and real estate . Governor Simon B. Buckner announced that between his atrocious bookkeeping , his embezzlement and his outright theft , Tate had misappropriated $ 247 @,@ 128 @.@ 50 from the state 's treasury . 
 Impeachment hearings followed in the House of Representatives , and the Senate removed Tate from office , convicting him on four counts . A criminal indictment followed . An 1895 case marked " Not to be officially reported " freed those implicated in the scandal from any obligation to repay the state . " <unk> " became synonymous with political corruption in the state , and Tate 's crime was frequently cited at the state 's fourth constitutional convention in 1891 . The resulting constitution expanded the one @-@ term limit that had applied to the governor since 1800 to all statewide elected officials . The legislature and voters adopted a two @-@ term limit for such officials in 1992 . 
 Despite the General Assembly 's offer of $ 5 @,@ 000 for information leading to Tate 's arrest , he was never found . Though his family at first claimed they had heard nothing from Tate and presumed he may have committed suicide , his daughter eventually admitted that she had received at least four letters from her father between April and December 1888 . The letters were postmarked from British Columbia ( Canada ) , Japan , China , and San Francisco . Another witness claimed to have seen a letter to one of Tate 's friends written in 1890 and postmarked from Brazil . That was the last known communication from " Honest Dick " Tate . An article in The New York Times , citing " friends who should know " , claimed that Tate was believed to have died in China in 1890 . 
 = Something There = 
 " Something There " is a song written by lyricist Howard Ashman and composer Alan Menken for Walt Disney Pictures 30th animated feature film Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) . Sung by the majority of the film 's main cast , the song was recorded by American actors Paige O 'Hara as Belle and Robby Benson as the Beast via voice over , featuring actors Jerry Orbach , Angela Lansbury and David Ogden Stiers as Lumiere , Mrs. Potts and Cogsworth , respectively . The only song performed by the Beast , " Something There " is heard midway through Beauty and the Beast during a scene in which Belle and the Beast finally begin to acknowledge their own feelings for each other . 
 A last @-@ minute addition to the film , the simple love song was quickly written by Ashman and Menken to replace the more elaborate and ambitious " Human Again " after the latter was cut from Beauty and the Beast . O 'Hara based her own vocal performance on that of American singer and actress Barbra Streisand , who Howard advised the actress to impersonate , while O 'Hara herself convinced the songwriters to have Benson record the song . Critical reception towards " Something There " has been positive , with film and music critics alike praising Ashman 's abilities as both a songwriter and a storyteller . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Something There " was written by lyricist Howard Ashman and composer Alan Menken . According to Menken , " Something There " was written as " a very quick replacement for ... ' Human Again ' , " the latter of which was ultimately cut from Beauty and the Beast because it was considered " too ambitious " for the film . Eleven minutes in length , producer Don Hahn explained that the song was cut because " We just couldn 't figure out how to make it work and not take away from the central story of Belle . " Upon learning that " Human Again " was removed from Beauty and the Beast , Ashman and Menken were forced to return " to the drawing board to write something more contained and simple , " the ultimate result of which was the love song " Something There , " which has been described as " shorter and more direct " than " Human Again " . The creative team also believed that the Beast saving Belle was enough to justify the dance sequence near the end of the film , though later realised they had in fact not yet earned this moment ; this quiet song where Beast gives Belle his library was pitched and written by Howard Ashman and " and as soon as that was written , we knew the movie was going to work " . 
 In his biography I 'm Not Dead ... Yet ! , actor Robby Benson , voice of the Beast , revealed that it was co @-@ star Paige O 'Hara 's idea to have Benson 's character duet with O 'Hara 's Belle in " Something There " . According to Benson , the actress " explained to Ashman and Menken that [ Benson ] had made records and sang in Broadway musicals . " O 'Hara briefly struggled to record one of the song 's lines – " a bit alarming " – to which an ailing Ashman , who was forced to communicate with O 'Hara and the studio via telephone from his hospital bed in New York due to his illness , simply responded " Streisand . " By this , Ashman meant that he wanted O 'Hara to impersonate singer and actress Barbra Streisand , and by doing so O 'Hara finally recorded the song successfully . " Something There " was recorded by O 'Hara and Benson accompanied by a live orchestra . 
 = = Context , sequence and analysis = = 
 In the book The Meanings of " Beauty and the Beast " : A Handbook , author Jerry Griswold observed that the " Something There " musical sequence is preceded by " the once feisty Belle ... bandaging and nursing [ the Beast ] " after he rescues her from the wolves . <unk> , the purpose of the song has been identified as " <unk> [ Belle and the Beasts ' ] partnership . " Leading up to the musical sequence , the Beast first " surprises Belle by showing her his library and then they learn to eat together . " Author Robin O. Winter observed that " During the scene they begin to see beneath their outer appearances and start to appreciate each other 's inner qualities , " while one critic identified this as one of the scenes in " which Belle and the Beast hesitantly slowly open up to one another . " Writing for Wesleyan University , Rachel Anne Silverman observed that " Something There " depicts " The first time Belle and the Beast 's attraction is introduced , " describing the couple 's relationship as " a passion that has developed over time . " Initially , Belle is alarmed " as she realizes her growing love for the Beast , " briefly hiding behind a tree as she sings . According to the Hal Leonard Corporation and Music Theatre International , the castle 's staff of enchanted objects also discover " something different between Belle and the Beast . " " Something There " concludes with Belle and the Beast retreating to a fireplace and reading . In the original film , " Something There " immediately precedes the film 's title song . However , for its special edition re @-@ release , the song is immediately followed by the newly reinstated " Human Again " . 
 Identifying the song as " where the genius of music as storytelling kicks in , " Simon Brew of Den of Geek felt that " Something There " is " the track with the heaviest workload . " The author observed that " In two minutes and 19 seconds , [ the song ] gets across just how the position and feelings of the characters have changed . " For instance , " At the beginning of ' Something There , ' Belle admits that she thought the Beast was mean , coarse , and unrefined . By the end , she ’ s feeling pretty smitten , " according to Oh My Disney . The song also depicts the film 's passing of time , while providing audiences with an opportunity " to appreciate Beast and first see the potential for Belle and him . " On the song 's role in the special edition version of the film , co @-@ director Kirk Wise explained , " There 's a ... little suite of music now that starts with ' Something There ' ... which segues into ' Human Again ' which gives the object perspective on what they hope for when [ Belle and the Beast ] fall in love and that transitions into ' Beauty and the Beast ' the ballad , which is the culmination of their relationship . " Dubbing the song " soliloquies of Belle and the Beast , " TV Guide drew comparisons between " Something There " and songs from the musical South Pacific . 
 The " Something There " musical sequence was added towards the end of Beauty and the Beast 's filmmaking process . Belle was animated by Mark Henn , while the Beast was animated by Aaron Blaise . Henn described " Something There " as " a great sequence , " continuing , " I love to animate songs . " Los Angeles Times ' Charles Solomon felt that Belle was drawn inconsistently throughout the film , observing that the character appears " noticeably slimmer " during " Something There " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Written in the key of D major at a quick allegretto tempo of 108 beats per minute in common time , the " playful " " Something There " is a Broadway musical @-@ inspired duet in which Belle and the Beast finally conclude that " there 's something there that wasn 't there before . " The song spans a duration of two minutes and eighteen seconds , making it the third shortest song on the soundtrack behind the reprises of " Belle " and " Gaston " , respectively . Describing " Something There " as " a fluffy song , " Filmtracks.com observed that the song " shares many instrumental devices with ' Belle ' ; " one of Belle 's verses in " Something There " serves as " a reprise of the secondary phrase from [ ' Belle ' ] " . Combined , O 'Hara and Benson 's vocal ranges span two octaves , from the low note of G3 to the high note of E5 . The song , described as " a poignant character number " performed " Against a background of the easy rhythms of soft , lilting violins , " " allowed [ O 'Hara and Benson ] to blend their voices . " In addition , Women 's Studies in Communication observed that the " tentative bursts of notes symbolize the uncertainties of this new way of relating " . 
 In the song 's first verse , " Belle articulates how her attraction to [ the Beast ] stems from his shut @-@ off demeanor , " singing , " There 's something sweet / And almost kind / But he was mean / And he was coarse and unrefined / But now he 's dear / And so unsure / I wonder why I didn 't see it there before . " The Beast 's verse reads , " when we touched she didn 't shudder at my paw . " According to Laurence E. MacDonald , author of the book The Invisible Art of Film Music : A Comprehensive History , Benson " shocked many filmgoers with his richly resonant baritone . " Finally , Belle sings the song 's bridge , which reads , " New and a bit alarming / Who 'd have ever thought that this could be ? / True , that he 's no Prince Charming / But there 's something in him that I simply didn 't see . " According to the Los Angeles Times , by the end of " Something There " , " the audience understands what Belle and Beast feel and how disconcerting those emotions seem . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Something There " has garnered mostly positive reviews from film and music critics . Writing for Den of Geek , Simon Brew felt that " Something There " is " where the genius of music as storytelling kicks in . " In Brew 's opinion , the " utterly convincing and un @-@ mawkish " song works " because the two characters aren 't on screen singing directly at each other . " Brew concluded , " Everyone who makes an animated film that has a love story at the heart should watch this . " Filmtracks.com described " Something There " as an " affable " song . Particularly praising Ashman 's songwriting , Charles Solomon of the Los Angeles Times wrote that " Ashman 's songs advance the plot by exploring the characters ' emotions and making story points more concisely than conventional exposition . " Solomon concluded , " By the end of the deceptively simple @-@ sounding ' Something There , ' the audience understands what Belle and Beast feel and how disconcerting those emotions seem . " O 'Hara continues to cite " Something There " as her favorite of the film 's songs , elaborating , " Every time I see the Beast with that grin on his face and the bird in his hand , my heart just melts . " 
 For the studio 's pending live @-@ action adaptation of Beauty and the Beast , Julia Emmanuele of Hollywood.com suggested that the filmmakers " feel free to drop ' Something There ' if there ’ s no room for it " because " it won 't be missed . " However , when English actress Emma Watson confirmed in January 2015 that she will be portraying Belle via Facebook , she cited " Something There " as one of her favorite songs from her childhood . Irving Tan of Sputnikmusic jokingly called " Something There " " the closest the movie comes to admitting its horrendously inappropriate stance on human @-@ animal sexual relations . " 
 = Bad ( Michael Jackson song ) = 
 " Bad " is a song by an American singer Michael Jackson . " Bad " was released by Epic Records on September 7 , 1987 , as the second single from Jackson 's third major @-@ label and seventh studio album of the same name . The song was written and composed by Jackson and co @-@ produced by Quincy Jones and Jackson . Jackson stated that the song was influenced by a real @-@ life story he had read about . 
 " Bad " was well received by contemporary music critics , with some critics noting that " Bad " helped Jackson 's image become edgier during the Bad @-@ era . The song peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , and remained at the top position of the chart for two weeks , becoming Jackson 's Bad album 's second number one single , and Jackson 's eighth number one entry on the chart . Internationally , the song was also commercially successful , charting within the top ten in eleven countries as well as charting within the top five in the United Kingdom , France , Italy , Norwegian , Switzerland and Swedish charts . The song peaked at number one on the Netherlands and European charts . 
 The full version of the music video for " Bad " , released in August 1987 , and broadcast as a CBS prime time special , was directed entirely by Martin Scorsese and co @-@ starred Wesley Snipes in one of his first appearances prior to being discovered as an actor . The video portrays Michael Jackson and various backup dancers shown performing complex choreography in a subway station . " Bad " has been covered and parodied by many different artists since its release and has become a song used frequently in tributes to Jackson after his death in June 2009 . 
 The song is featured in the 2010 animated film Megamind . It is also featured in the first theatrical trailer for the 2016 animated film The Angry Birds Movie . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Jackson plays a teenager named Darryl , who has just completed a term at an expensive private school . He returns to the city and takes the subway back to his neglected neighborhood . Darryl finds his home is empty where he is greeted by his old friends . The leader of the group is Mini Max ( an emerging Wesley Snipes ) . At first , relations are friendly but slightly awkward . Then , the situation begins deteriorate as the gang starts to realize how much Darryl has changed . They especially notice how uncomfortable he has become with their criminal activities . Darryl takes the gang to the subway station ( The Hoyt Schermerhorn Station in Brooklyn ) In an attempt to show his friends he is still " bad " by robbing an elderly man . He has a change of heart at the last minute and Mini Max chastises him telling Darryl he 's no longer bad . After more disrespect from Mini Max , the video cuts to Darryl and a group of street kids dancing while Jackson sings " Bad " . Darryl insists that Max is headed for a fall which is nearly Darryl 's undoing . Eventually , Mini Max accepts that and after a final handshake , leaves Darryl in peace . At the end of the video Darryl is left alone watching his gang leave . 
 = = Background and inspiration = = 
 " Bad " is a song that was written ( in 1986 ) and recorded by Michael Jackson in January 1987 for his seventh studio album of the same name and produced by Quincy Jones ( with Jackson serving as co @-@ producer ) . " Bad " was originally intended to be a duet between Jackson and musician Prince ; although the plans were not fruitful . In Jackson 's 1988 autobiography Moonwalk , Jackson discussed the concept of " Bad " , elaborating that , 
 " ' Bad ' is a song about the street . It 's about this kid from a bad neighborhood who gets to go away to a private school . He comes back to the old neighborhood when he 's on a break from school and the kids from the neighborhood start giving him trouble . He sings , ' I 'm bad , you 're bad , who 's bad , who 's the best ? ' He 's saying when you 're strong and good , then you 're bad . " 
 In a 1988 interview with Ebony and Jet magazines ( which was released on Hulu shortly after his death ) , Jackson said that he had gotten the idea for the song from a true story that he had read about in Time or Newsweek magazine . Jackson stated that the story said that a student that went to school in upstate New York , who was " from the ghetto " , had tried to make something of his life and planned to leave all of his friends behind when he returned from Thanksgiving break . He added that the student 's friends ' jealousy resulted in them killing the student ; Jackson stated that the student 's death was not included in the music video . The only case that fits these details is that of Edmund Perry . However , Perry was not killed by kids in his neighborhood ; he was killed by a plainclothes police officer when Perry and his brother allegedly attacked and badly beat the officer in a mugging attempt . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song is written in the key of A Minor with a time signature in common time . Jackson 's vocal range spans from G3 to C6 . The track has a tempo of 114 beats per minute . " Bad " was viewed as a <unk> " Hit the Road , Jack " progression . Davitt Sigerson , a writer for Rolling Stone magazine , commented on the track 's lyrical content while reviewing Bad , " When Jackson declares that ' the whole world has to answer right now , ' he is not boasting but making a statement of fact regarding his extraordinary stardom . If anything , he is scorning the self @-@ coronation of lesser funk royals and inviting his fickle public to spurn him if it dare . " Sigerson compared the track to material by James Brown , whose " It 's a Man 's Man 's Man 's World " is openly referenced by the four chromatic note brass introduction to the song . Lyrically , " Bad " pertains to proving to people that you are tough boasting , with Jackson asking " who 's bad ? " in a repeating lyric in the song 's chorus . 
