 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Bad " was well received by contemporary music critics . Some critics noted that the song helped Jackson 's image become more edgy during the Bad @-@ era . Davitt Sigerson , a writer for Rolling Stone magazine , commented that the track " needs no " defense " and he generally praised Jackson 's vocal performance in the song . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic listed " Bad " , along with two other songs from the album , as being top picks from the album 's eleven tracks . In separate review of the song , Erlewine commented that Jackson 's vocals " sounded like [ he was ] the love child of James Brown and Mavis Staples " and added that " musically speaking , in this case , ' Bad ' is very good " . He also noted that the track 's " authority and boasting helped to humanize " Jackson and " changed his image " , remarking that it was " fun hearing him talking trash and being his own bigger booster " . Jennifer Clay of Yahoo Music noted that while Jackson 's new edgier image was a " little hard to swallow " , the image worked musically on the album 's songs " Bad " , " Man in the Mirror " , and " Dirty Diana " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Bad " charted within the top ten , at number eight , on the Billboard Hot 100 on October 10 , 1987 and peaked at number one on October 24 , 1987 . " Bad " stayed at the top position for two consecutive weeks . " Bad " was Jackson 's Bad album 's second number one single on the Billboard Hot 100 , and Jackson 's eighth number one entry on the chart . The track also charted on the Billboard Hot R & B Singles and Billboard Hot Dance Club Play at number one . " Bad " was commercially successful internationally , generally charting within the top ten , as well as reaching the top position , on music charts . " Bad " debuted at number five on the United Kingdom charts on September 26 , 1987 . The following week , the song charted at its peak position of number three , where it remained for two consecutive weeks . " Bad " remained within the chart 's top ten positions for four weeks , and charted within the top 100 for a total of eleven weeks in 1987 . " Bad " peaked at number five on Canadian music charts on November 7 , 1987 . " Bad " peaked at number four in Sweden on October 14 , 1987 . The song spent four weeks within the chart 's top ten . On October 3 , " Bad " debuted at number nine in France , and after six weeks of charting within the top ten , the song peaked at number four on November 14 . " Bad " debuted on New Zealand music charts at number four on October 18 , and the following week moved to its peak position of number two . The song then stayed within the top ten for the next five weeks . The track charted within the top fifty positions for fifteen weeks in 1987 and 1988 . 
 The song also charted at number two in Norway in the thirty @-@ ninth week of 1987 , and charted within the top ten positions for eight weeks in 1987 . The song was also very successful on the Australian music charts , peaking at number four . " Bad " debuted on Austrian charts at number ten on November 1 , 1987 . The following week the song charted out of the top ten and the next week returned to the top ten at number nine , which was its peak position . The song debuted at number eighty @-@ seven in Dutch on September 9 , 1987 . The following week , the song moved up to number eleven , which was seventy @-@ three positions higher than its previous week . The song peaked at number one , and remained at the top position for two consecutive weeks . In 2006 , Jackson 's music re @-@ entered charts following his music being re @-@ issued for his Visionary album . The track entered Spanish charts for the first time on April 4 , 2006 , and debuted at the top position . " Bad " remained within the top twenty positions for nine consecutive weeks . The song debuted at its peak position at number five in Italy on April 6 . After Jackson 's death in June 2009 , his music re @-@ entered charts again worldwide . In July , the track peaked at number eleven in Italy , number twenty in Spain , number twenty @-@ five in Sweden , number thirty @-@ seven in Denmark and number forty in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The full music video for " Bad " is an 18 @-@ minute short film written by novelist and screenwriter Richard Price and directed by Martin Scorsese . The video has many references to the 1961 film West Side Story , especially the " Cool " sequence . The soundtrack for the full length video used a different audio track than the album recording . This soundtrack included an instrumental organ solo which was not a part of the album recording . 
 The video was not commercially released until it was included in the video albums ; Video Greatest Hits - HIStory ( long version on DVD and short version in VHS ) , Number Ones ( short version ) , Michael Jackson 's Vision ( long version ) and the Target version DVD of Bad 25 ( short version ) . The full video was introduced in a TV special Michael Jackson : The Magic Returns on Primetime , a CBS television show on August 31 , 1987 . 
 The full video won awards at various prestigious award ceremonies including Favorite Single ( Soul / R & B ) at the American Music Awards and Biggest Selling Album by a Male Soloist in the UK from the Guinness Book of World Records . 
 After Jackson 's death in June 2009 , Letitia James of the New York City Council , began trying to convince the agency to rename or co @-@ name the station or to hang a plaque at the station in Jackson 's honor , but her request was denied by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority of New York in September 2009 . James commented , " Having Michael Jackson visit and moonwalk at this station was a huge deal not only for Brooklyn , but all of New York in the ' 80s [ ... ] And renaming this station in his honor would put it on the map and help ensure that people don 't forget . " A source from the MTA commented that no subway stations in the MTA system are named or co @-@ named after individuals , mostly because it could confuse riders . 
 = = Choreography = = 
 The choreographer Gregg Burge confirmed the influence , although they intended to do a more contemporary version of it . Assistant choreographer Jeffrey Daniel commented , " It 's like a train coming across the screen [ ... ] and that 's the effect I was looking for and it worked " . 
 The video 's choreographers Jeffrey Daniel and Gregg Burge were influenced by West Side Story when designing the dance routines but wanted to keep the scene more contemporary and incorporated the " moonwalk " into the movements . The music video received a nomination for choreography at the 1988 MTV Video Music Awards Ceremony . The video for " Bad " and Michael Jackson 's " The Way You Make Me Feel " video were both nominated for Best Choreography . However , Janet Jackson 's video " The Pleasure Principle " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Bad " was performed during Jackson 's Bad world tour concert series from 1987 to 1989 , in both the first and second leg , as the final song in the first leg and sixteenth song in the second leg in the setlist . The song was also included on the first leg only of Jackson 's Dangerous World Tour . A small snippet of the song was sung during his performance of They Don 't Care About Us during his This Is It concerts which never occurred due to his death . It was rumored that Jackson had plans to perform the song during certain dates of the This Is It tour . A live version of the song is available on the DVD Live at Wembley July 16 , 1988 . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " Weird Al " Yankovic recorded a parody of the song , titled " Fat " , for his 1988 album Even Worse . 
 Lenny Henry made a parody video of " Bad " , called " Mad " , the parody was first shown in The Lenny Henry Show . 
 Ray Stevens performed a country / bluegrass version on his album I Never Made a Record I Didn 't Like . 
 Alvin and the Chipmunks covered the song for their 1988 album The Chipmunks and The Chipettes : Born to Rock . 
 After Jackson 's death in June 2009 , " Bad " was performed ( usually in a medley with other of Jackson 's songs ) as a tribute to Jackson . Shaun Micallef created his version in the 2010 New Year 's Special . At the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards tribute to Jackson , dancers performed dance routines from Jackson 's music videos while the music to the song was played in the background . The songs that were chosen were " Bad " , " Thriller " ( 1982 ) and " Smooth Criminal " ( 1987 ) . 
 In February 2010 , the song was parodied by The <unk> in " The iPad Song " , which criticized the device . 
 American TV series Glee did a Michael Jackson tribute episode in 2012 entitled " Michael " , which included an a cappella version of " Bad " featuring the Beelzebubs as part of The Warblers . This cover debuted and peaked at number 80 at Billboard Hot 100 , number 48 at Billboard Digital Songs , number 90 at Billboard Canadian Hot 100 , and number 29 at Billboard Adult Pop Songs chart at the week of February 18 , 2012 . 
 A version of this song was played on The Super Mario Bros. Super Show ! in an episode called " King Mario of <unk> " . 
 Tohru <unk> rearranged the song for the arcade version of Michael Jackson 's Moonwalker . 
 Takayuki Nakamura rearranged the song for the Sega Genesis and Sega Master System versions of the game . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Official versions = = 
 Album version – 4 : 06 
 7 " single mix ( new album version ) – 4 : 06 
 Dance extended mix includes " false fade " – 8 : 23 
 Dance remix radio edit – 4 : 56 
 Dub version – 4 : 06 
 A cappella – 3 : 49 
 Afrojack Club Mix – 7 : 36 
 Afrojack remix featuring Pitbull DJ Buddha Edit – 4 : 31 
 " Remember the Time " / " Bad " ( Immortal version ) – 4 : 39 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = 2012 reissue = = 
 On August 14 , 2012 , the remix was released as a digital single via iTunes and Amazon.com. It is a new remix of the 1987 hit " Bad " worked on as a collaboration between Afrojack , DJ Buddha and Pitbull . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 Digital Single 
 Bad ( Afrojack Remix ) [ feat . Pitbull ] [ DJ Buddha Edit ] - Single - 4 : 29 
 HMV Exclusive CD Single ( HMV Bad 25 pre @-@ order only bonus CD ) 
 Bad [ Remix By Afrojack Featuring Pitbull - The Derry Mix ] - 3 : 54 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 As a digital single prior to the album release , the single appeared on several country 's music charts . It debuted at Number 52 on Billboard Japan Hot 100 chart as the title " Bad 2012 " on the week of September 15 , 2012 , and peaked at Number 6 several weeks later . It also appeared on US Billboard Dance / Electronic Digital Songs Chart with Number 45 for one week on September 1 , 2012 . On the week of September 29 , 2012 , it debuted on Hot Dance Club Songs chart at Number 42 , and peaked at Number 18 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 This remix received overwhelmingly negative reviews from the music criticism . Randall Roberts from Los Angeles Times Pop Music Critic said , the song is " an insult " to Jackson memory , and the remix is " so <unk> " Evan Sawdey from PopMatters said , the version " with two guest verses from Pitbull , is just outright trash " <unk> from <unk> reviews this single extremely negative . The single 's review from The Guardian said it was " a clubbed @-@ up remix featuring the world 's worst rapper " . 
 = = = Chart = = = 
 = Hurricane Alberto ( 1982 ) = 
 Hurricane Alberto caused the worst flooding in western Cuba in 32 years . The first tropical storm and hurricane of the 1982 Atlantic hurricane season , Alberto developed from a tropical disturbance on June 2 in the southern Gulf of Mexico . It rapidly organized and attained hurricane status the following day , the earliest date for a hurricane in the Atlantic Ocean since Hurricane Alma in May 1970 . Shortly after reaching peak winds off 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) , Alberto rapidly weakened due to approaching upper @-@ level winds . Initial forecasts predicted the hurricane would continue northeastward into Florida ; it turned sharply westward and drifted erratically for several days across the eastern Gulf of Mexico , before dissipating on June 6 . 
 Alberto produced heavy rainfall in western Cuba , causing flash flooding and severe damage . The storm damaged 8 @,@ 745 houses and destroyed 154 buildings , leaving hundreds homeless . Heavy rainfall continued in the country for several weeks after the storm , and damage from Alberto totaled about $ 85 million ( 1982 USD , $ 208 million 2016 USD ) . At least 23 people were killed in the country . Initially , Alberto was forecast to continue northeastward and strike Florida , though it turned and rapidly weakened , resulting in minor effects in the state . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late May , a tropical disturbance gradually developed over the northwestern portion of the Caribbean . It drifted westward into the Yucatán Peninsula , and on June 1 the convection organized into a circular cloud pattern in association with a low pressure system . The system tracked northeastward into the Gulf of Mexico while continuing to organize , and subsequent to the formation of a low @-@ level circulation it developed into Tropical Depression One while located about 40 miles ( 65 km ) north @-@ northwest of Cancún . Reconnaissance Aircraft confirmed the existence of the tropical depression later that day . Early on June 3 , it is estimated the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Alberto while located about 150 miles ( 240 km ) north @-@ northwest of the western tip of Cuba , based on a ship report of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) winds about 115 miles ( 185 km ) south of its center . An Air Force flight was scheduled into the storm , though was forbidden by the Cuban government due to its presence in Cuban airspace . 
 Alberto quickly strengthened while moving northeastward through the southeastern Gulf of Mexico , and intensified into a hurricane about nine hours after attaining tropical storm status . Late on June 3 , Alberto attained peak winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) while located about 120 miles ( 195 km ) west @-@ southwest of Key West , Florida . Shortly after peaking in intensity , strong upper @-@ level westerly winds impacted the deep convection of the storm . By early on June 4 Alberto weakened to a tropical storm after turning sharply westward due to weak steering currents . It drifted erratically as the circulation became exposed , and early on June 5 it degenerated into a <unk> tropical depression . As a tropical depression , Alberto drifted to the east @-@ northeast and later turned to the east , and late on June 6 it dissipated while located about 70 miles ( 115 km ) off the coast of Florida . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Cuba = = = 
 The rainbands of Alberto produced heavy rainfall and flash flooding across western Cuba . The rainfall peaked at 39 @.@ 84 inches ( 1012 mm ) , the fourth highest rainfall total in the country since 1963 . More than 50 @,@ 000 were forced to evacuate from the resulting floods , which were described as the worst flooding in the northwestern portion of the country since 1950 . 
 Hurricane Alberto damaged a total of 8 @,@ 745 houses in the country . In Pinar del Río Province , 71 homes were destroyed , and across the nation hundreds of people were left homeless . 83 buildings were collapsed in the capital city of Havana , while six factories in Havana Province received damage . The passage of Alberto left several districts in Havana without electricity , telegraph , telephone , and mail service . The Cuban military was deployed to rescue those trapped in flooded homes and also to remove fallen trees . Agricultural damage included about 250 @,@ 000 downed banana trees and 400 drowned cattle . Heavy rainfall continued for weeks after the passage of Alberto , resulting in severe damage to the tobacco crop . Subsequent winds and rains destroyed storage sheds which ruined 1 @.@ 8 million lb . ( 900 @,@ 000 kg ) of the recently finished harvest ; 2 @.@ 6 million lb . ( 1 @.@ 3 million kg ) of tobacco leaves were also damaged . Two days after its closest approach , the death toll in Cuba reached 11 , and a day later it was raised to 23 fatalities . The final death toll was reported as either 23 or 24 , with one report indicating 17 people missing ; Pinar del Río Province reported at least 20 deaths and Havana reported three casualties . Damage was estimated at $ 85 million ( 1982 USD , $ 208 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 Due to its sudden development and project track into southwest Florida , the National Hurricane Center issued a tropical storm warning and hours later a hurricane warning from the Dry Tortugas to Marathon in the Florida Keys and along the southwestern coastline northward to Fort Myers . A hurricane watch was also issued from Marathon to Jupiter Inlet . At the time of the issuance of the hurricane warning , Alberto had been moving steadily northeastward ; extrapolating its motion indicated a landfall on Key West within 12 hours and a mainland landfall at Key Largo within 24 hours . Additionally , most computer models predicted Alberto to continue northeastward across south Florida . Only one model , not available until later , suggested a weakness in steering currents that would prevent a Florida landfall . 
 Officials ordered mandatory evacuations along the southwest coast of Florida . More than 1 @,@ 000 left their homes to stay in nine emergency shelters . Air Florida canceled all flights from Miami to Key West . Many residents in the lower Florida Keys were unable to evacuate to the mainland , with about 50 people in Key West evacuating to four emergency shelters set up in the city . Officials closed schools in Monroe County at midday on June 3 and also sent all nonessential city and county employees home . 
 Gale force winds and heavy rainfall were reported in the lower Florida Keys ; Key West reported 6 @.@ 25 inches ( 160 mm ) during a 24 @-@ hour period , with the maximum reported winds at a land station being 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) in the Dry Tortugas . Moderate rainfall was reported throughout southern Florida and the eastern Florida Keys , as well , peaking at 16 @.@ 47 inches ( 418 mm ) at Tavernier . Alberto spawned three tornadoes and a waterspout in the Florida Keys , one of which at Stock Island which damaged several boats . One of the three tornadoes picked up a moving car and lightly injured the driver . Another knocked down two telephone poles on the Overseas Highway , which resulted in an hour traffic delay . Damage from the tornadoes totaled $ 275 @,@ 000 ( 1982 USD , $ 620 @,@ 000 2010 USD ) . 
 = Prosaurolophus = 
 Prosaurolophus ( / <unk> / ; meaning " before Saurolophus " , in comparison to the later dinosaur with a similar head crest ) is a genus of hadrosaurid ( or duck @-@ billed ) dinosaur from the Late Cretaceous of North America . It is known from the remains of at least 25 individuals belonging to two species , including skulls and skeletons , but it remains obscure . Around 9 m ( 30 ft ) , its fossils have been found in the late Campanian @-@ age Upper Cretaceous Dinosaur Park Formation in Alberta , and the roughly contemporaneous Two Medicine Formation in Montana , dating to around 75 @.@ 5 @-@ 74 @.@ 0 million years ago . Its most recognizable feature is a small solid crest formed by the nasal bones , sticking up in front of the eyes . 
 The type species is P. maximus , described by American paleontologist Barnum Brown of the American Museum of Natural History in 1916 . A second species , P. blackfeetensis , was described by Jack Horner of the Museum of the Rockies in 1992 . The two species were differentiated mainly by crest size and skull proportions . 
 = = Description = = 
 Prosaurolophus was a large @-@ headed duckbill ; the most complete described specimen has a skull around 0 @.@ 9 metres ( 3 @.@ 0 ft ) long on a skeleton about 8 @.@ 5 metres ( 28 ft ) long . It had a small , stout , triangular crest in front of the eyes ; the sides of this crest were concave , forming depressions . The upper arm was relatively short . 
 When originally described by Brown , Prosaurolophus maximus was known from a skull and jaw . Half of the skull was badly weathered at the time of examination , and the level of the parietal was <unk> crushed upwards to the side . The different bones of the skull could be easily defined , with the exception of the parietals and nasal bones . Brown found that the skull of the already described genus Saurolophus is very similar overall to , but also smaller than the skull of P. maximus . A unique feature of a shortened frontal in lambeosaurines is also found in Prosaurolophus , and the other horned hadrosaurines Brachylophosaurus , Maiasaura , and Saurolophus . Although they lack a shorter frontal , the genera Edmontosaurus and Shantungosaurus share with <unk> an elongated dentary . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 Well @-@ known paleontologist Barnum Brown recovered a duckbill skull in 1915 for the American Museum of Natural History ( AMNH <unk> ) from the Red Deer River of Alberta , near Steveville . He described the specimen in 1916 as a new genus , Prosaurolophus . Brown 's choice of name comes from a comparison to the genus Saurolophus , which he had described in 1912 . Saurolophus had a similar but longer and more spike @-@ like head crest . The skull had a damaged muzzle and was inadvertently reconstructed too long , but better remains were soon found that showed the true shape ; one is a nearly complete skeleton and skull , described by William Parks in 1924 . Twenty to twenty @-@ five individuals are known for this species , including seven skulls with at least some of the rest of the skeleton . 
 The second species , P. blackfeetensis , is based on a specimen in the Museum of the Rockies ( MOR 454 ) , which was described by another notable paleontologist , Jack Horner . This specimen , and the remains of three or four other individuals , were found in Glacier County , Montana . In this case , the fossils were found in a bonebed of Prosaurolophus remains , which indicates that the animals lived together for at least some time . The bonebed is interpreted as reflecting a group of animals that congregated near a water source during a drought . 
 Horner differentiated the two species by details of the crest . He interpreted P. blackfeetensis as having a steeper , taller face than P. maximus , with the crest migrating backward toward the eyes during growth . More recent studies have regarded the differences as insufficient to support two species . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Because of its name , Prosaurolophus is often associated with Saurolophus . However , this is contentious ; some authors have found the animals to be closely related , whereas others have not , instead finding it closer to Brachylophosaurus , Edmontosaurus , Gryposaurus , and Maiasaura . 
 = = = History of classification = = = 
 In 1918 , Lawrence Lambe revised the classifications of Hadrosauridae ( then Trachodontidae ) . He invalidated the family name and Trachodontinae , replacing them with Hadrosauridae and Hadrosaurinae . The other subfamily in Hadrosauridae then was Saurolophinae , which included Stephanosaurus ( = Lambeosaurus ) , Cheneosaurus , Corythosaurus , Prosaurolophus , and Saurolophus . Lambe , in 1920 , split Saurolophinae and found only two genera remaining in it , Prosaurolophus , and the type genus . The previous genera were then reclassified into <unk> or Hadrosaurinae . In 1928 , Prosaurolophus was assigned to Saurolophinae by Franz Nopcsa . The group contained hadrosaurids with a " males with median horn @-@ like protuberance on the skull " and " very numerous teeth " , found by <unk> to be Parasaurolophus , Saurolophus , and Prosaurolophus . 
 In 1954 , Charles Sternberg reevaluated the genera in Hadrosauridae , invoking the probability that Saurolophinae should be sunk into Hadrosaurinae . This greatly changed the classifications of the family , as the " saurolophines " were kept separate because of their supposedly " footed " ischium . Sternberg identified that the " footed " ischium assigned to Saurolophus was not found with the holotype , and was only assigned to it because of the location of the find . Also , he noted that William Parks ( 1924 ) found a complete skeleton of Prosaurolophus clearly showing a " <unk> " ischium , which Sternberg realized meant that it was unlikely that Saurolophus possessed a " footed " ischium . Sternberg 's reevaluation led to the abandonment of Saurolophinae . 
 Young ( 1958 ) found that the subfamily Saurolophinae , however , was not to be abandoned , and in it placed his new genus Tsintaosaurus , as well as Prosaurolophus and Saurolophus , and also Kritosaurus ( which included Gryposaurus and excluded K. navajovius ) . Two years previous , Friedrich von Huene separated Saurolophinae from Hadrosauridae , naming <unk> . <unk> was a family in Huene 's <unk> , including the genera Prosaurolophus , Saurolophus , and the probably unrelated <unk> . Another author to support the separation of Saurolophinae was John Ostrom ( 1961 ) . Ostrom found that the saurolophines Brachylophosaurus , Prosaurolophus , and Saurolophus all possessed a " <unk> crest " , a feature which united them , while distinguishing them from hollow @-@ crested lambeosaurines . 
 Hopson ( 1975 ) supported the division of Hadrosauridae into two subfamilies , Hadrosaurinae and Lambeosaurinae , and was first to suspect what modern analyses find . Hopson found that Hadrosaurinae could clearly be divided into groups , the " <unk> " , the " edmontosaurs " , and the " saurolophines " , including Prosaurolophus , Saurolophus , Tsintaosaurus and Lophorhothon , and intermediate between the " <unk> " and " saurolophines " . Brett @-@ Surman ( 1975 ) also followed Sternberg with sinking Saurolophinae into Hadrosaurinae , and like Hopson , he recognized three groups within the subfamily . Like Hopson , one group was called the Edmontosaurus lineage , the second the Kritosaurus group , and the third uniting Prosaurolophus and Saurolophus . Over a decade later in 1989 , Brett @-@ Surman scientifically named the groups of hadrosaurines , the first becoming <unk> , the second Kritosaurini , and the third <unk> . 
 = = = Phylogeny = = = 
 The first cladistic analysis to encompass the interrelationships of Hadrosauridae was conducted by Weishampel and Horner ( 1990 ) . They found Saurolophinae synonymous with Hadrosaurinae , but only separated the subfamily into two groups . The first group included Gryposaurus , <unk> , Maiasaura , and Brachylophosaurus . The other contained Edmontosaurus , Saurolophus , Prosaurolophus , Lophorhothon , and Shantungosaurus . 
 A detailed <unk> of hadrosaurid relationships was published in 2013 by Acta Palaeontologica Polonica . The study was led by Alberto Prieto @-@ Márquez , and recovered Prosaurolophus in a similar position as suggested by Brown in 1916 . The below cladogram was the one recovered by their analysis : 
 In 2001 , Prosaurolophus was studied with other hadrosaurids by Wagner . The genus , along with Corythosaurus and Maiasaura , were considered by Wagner to be synonymous with Saurolophus , Hypacrosaurus and Brachylophosaurus respectively . Prosaurolophus maximus was reassigned to Saurolophus as S. maximus . The same year however , Prosaurolophus was found to be distinct from Saurolophus , in an analysis of Hu et al .. Their analysis was unique from any of the time , and they recovered Prosaurolophus in Saurolophinae , with Saurolophus , Lophorhothon , Tsintaosaurus , <unk> , and Kritosaurus . No other analysis has recovered this group of dinosaurs . 
 Horner et al . ( 2004 ) also recovered a different phylogeny of Saurolophinae . Prosaurolophus was , for the first time , recovered separate from Saurolophus , in fact not even closely related . Prosaurolophus was found in a group with Brachylophosaurus , Maiasaura , <unk> , and Edmontosaurus , while Saurolophus was grouped with Naashoibitosaurus ( = Kritosaurus ) and " Kritosaurus " australis . 
 The Prosaurolophus @-@ Saurolophus clade has been a problematic grouping when trying to place among hadrosaurines . Many skull features are similar to Edmontosaurus , while other are closer to Gryposaurus , so the group has been classified as close to both . However , the clade might be closer to Edmontosaurus , as the features are more numerous uniting them . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 As a hadrosaurid , Prosaurolophus would have been a large herbivore , eating plants with a sophisticated skull that permitted a grinding motion analogous to chewing . Its teeth were continually replaced and packed into dental batteries that contained hundreds of teeth , only a relative handful of which were in use at any time . Plant material would have been cropped by its broad beak , and held in the jaws by a cheek @-@ like structure . Feeding would have been from the ground up to around 4 meters ( 13 ft ) above . Like other hadrosaurs , it could have moved both bipedally and quadrupedally . Comparisons between the scleral rings of Prosaurolophus and modern birds and reptiles suggest that it may have been cathemeral , active throughout the day at short intervals . 
 = = = Social behavior = = = 
 As noted , there is bonebed evidence that this genus lived in groups during at least part of the year . Additionally , it had several potential methods for display in a social setting . The bony facial crest is an obvious candidate , and nasal diverticula may also have been present . These postulated diverticula would have taken the form of inflatable soft @-@ tissue sacs housed in the deep excavations flanking the crest and elongate holes for the nostrils . Such sacs could be used for both visual and auditory signals . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 The Dinosaur Park Formation , home to Prosaurolophus maximus , is interpreted as a low @-@ relief setting of rivers and floodplains that became more swampy and influenced by marine conditions over time as the Western Interior Seaway transgressed westward . The climate was warmer than present @-@ day Alberta , without frost , but with wetter and drier seasons . Conifers were apparently the dominant canopy plants , with an understory of ferns , tree ferns , and flowering plants . In this well @-@ studied formation , P. maximus is only known from the upper part , which had more of a marine influence than the lower section . It was the most common hadrosaurine of this section , which was deposited about 75 @.@ 5 million years ago . The Dinosaur Park Formation was also home to well @-@ known dinosaurs like the horned Centrosaurus , Styracosaurus , and Chasmosaurus , fellow duckbills Gryposaurus , Corythosaurus , Lambeosaurus , and Parasaurolophus , tyrannosaurid Gorgosaurus , and armored Edmontonia and Euoplocephalus . 
 The roughly contemporaneous Two Medicine Formation , home to P. maximus , is well known for its fossils of dinosaur nests , eggs , and young , produced by the hadrosaurids Hypacrosaurus stebingeri and Maiasaura , and the troodontid Troodon . The tyrannosaurid Daspletosaurus , caenagnathid Chirostenotes , dromaeosaurids Bambiraptor and Saurornitholestes , armored dinosaurs Edmontonia and Euoplocephalus , hypsilophodont Orodromeus , and horned dinosaurs Achelousaurus , Brachyceratops , Einiosaurus , and Styracosaurus ovatus were also present . This formation was more distant from the Western Interior Seaway , and higher and drier than the Dinosaur Park Formation . The age of Prosaurolophus maximus remains from this formation is from approximately 75 @.@ 5 to 74 @.@ 0 million years ago . 
 = Bart Simpson = 
 Bartholomew JoJo " Bart " Simpson is a fictional character in the American animated television series The Simpsons and part of the Simpson family . He is voiced by Nancy Cartwright and first appeared on television in The Tracey Ullman Show short " Good Night " on April 19 , 1987 . Cartoonist Matt Groening created and designed Bart while waiting in the lobby of James L. Brooks ' office . Groening had been called to pitch a series of shorts based on his comic strip , Life in Hell , but instead decided to create a new set of characters . While the rest of the characters were named after Groening 's family members , Bart 's name is an anagram of the word brat . After appearing on The Tracey Ullman Show for three years , the Simpson family received its own series on Fox , which debuted December 17 , 1989 . 
 At ten years old , Bart is the eldest child and only son of Homer and Marge , and the brother of Lisa and Maggie . Bart 's most prominent and popular character traits are his mischievousness , rebelliousness and disrespect for authority . He has appeared in other media relating to The Simpsons – including video games , The Simpsons Movie , The Simpsons Ride , commercials , and comic books – and inspired an entire line of merchandise . 
 In casting , Nancy Cartwright originally planned to audition for the role of Lisa , while Yeardley Smith tried out for Bart. Smith 's voice was too high for a boy , so she was given the role of Lisa . Cartwright found that Lisa was not interesting at the time , so instead auditioned for Bart , which she thought was a better role . 
 Hallmarks of the character include his chalkboard gags in the opening sequence ; his prank calls to Moe ; and his catchphrases " Eat my shorts " , " ¡ Ay , caramba ! " , and " Don 't have a cow , man ! " 
 During the first two seasons of The Simpsons , Bart was the show 's breakout character and " Bartmania " ensued , spawning Bart Simpson @-@ themed merchandise touting his rebellious attitude and pride at underachieving , which caused many parents and educators to cast him as a bad role model for children . Around the third season , the series started to focus more on the family as a whole , though Bart still remains a prominent character . Time named Bart one of the 100 most important people of the 20th century , and he was named " entertainer of the year " in 1990 by Entertainment Weekly . Nancy Cartwright has won several awards for voicing Bart , including a Primetime Emmy Award in 1992 and an Annie Award in 1995 . In 2000 , Bart , along with the rest of his family , was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 = = Role in The Simpsons = = 
 The Simpsons uses a floating timeline in which the characters do not age at all , and as such , the show is always assumed to be set in the current year . In several episodes , events have been linked to specific times , though sometimes this timeline has been contradicted in subsequent episodes . Bart 's year of birth was stated in " I Married Marge " ( season three , 1991 ) as being in the early 1980s . He lived with his parents in the Lower East Side of Springfield until the Simpsons bought their first house . When Lisa was born , Bart was at first jealous of the attention she received , but he soon warmed to her when he discovered that " Bart " was her first word . Bart 's first day of school was in the early 1990s . His initial enthusiasm was crushed by an uncaring teacher and Marge became worried that something was truly wrong with Bart. One day during recess , Bart met Milhouse and started entertaining him and other students with various gestures and rude words . Principal Skinner told him " you 've just started school , and the path you choose now may be the one you follow for the rest of your life ! Now , what do you say ? " In his moment of truth , Bart responded , " eat my shorts " . The episode " That ' 90s Show " ( season nineteen , 2008 ) contradicted much of the backstory 's time frame ; for example , it was revealed that Homer and Marge were childless in the early 1990s . 
 Bart 's hobbies include skateboarding , watching television ( especially The Krusty the Clown Show which includes The Itchy & Scratchy Show ) , reading comic books ( especially Radioactive Man ) , playing video games and generally causing mischief . His favorite movies are Jaws and the Star Wars Trilogy . For the duration of the series , Bart has attended Springfield Elementary School and has been in Edna Krabappel 's fourth grade class . While he is too young to hold a full @-@ time job , he has had occasional part @-@ time jobs . He works as a bartender at Fat Tony 's social club in " Bart the Murderer " ( season three , 1991 ) ; as Krusty the Clown 's assistant in " Bart Gets Famous " ( season five , 1994 ) ; as a doorman in Springfield 's burlesque house , the Maison Derrière in " Bart After Dark " ( season eight , 1996 ) ; and briefly owns his own factory in " Homer 's Enemy " . ( season eight , 1997 ) 
 = = Character = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 Matt Groening first conceived of Bart and the rest of the Simpson family in 1986 , while waiting in the lobby of producer James L. Brooks ' office . Groening had been called in to pitch a series of animated shorts for The Tracey Ullman Show , and had intended to present an adaptation of his Life in Hell comic strip . When he realized that animating Life in Hell would require him to rescind publication rights , Groening decided to go in another direction . He hurriedly sketched out his version of a dysfunctional family , naming the characters after members of his own family . For the rebellious son , he substituted " Bart " , an anagram of the word brat , for his own name , as he decided it would have been too obvious for him to have named the character ' Matt ' . Bart 's middle initial J is a " tribute " to animated characters such as Bullwinkle J. Moose and Rocket J. Squirrel from The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show , who received their middle initial from Jay Ward . According to the book Bart Simpson 's Guide to Life , Bart 's full middle name is " JoJo " . 
 Bart had originally been envisioned as " a much milder , troubled youth given to existential angst who talks to himself " , but the character was changed based on Cartwright 's voice acting . Groening has credited several different figures with providing inspiration for Bart : Matt Groening 's older brother Mark provided much of the motivation for Bart 's attitude . Bart was conceived as an extreme version of the typical misbehaving child character , merging all of the extreme traits of characters such as Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn into one person . Groening describes Bart as " what would happen if Eddie Haskell [ from Leave It to Beaver ] got his own show " . Groening has also said that he found the premise of Dennis the Menace disappointing and was inspired to create a character who was actually a menace . 
 Bart made his debut with the rest of the Simpson family on April 19 , 1987 in The Tracey Ullman Show short " Good Night " . In 1989 , the shorts were adapted into The Simpsons , a half @-@ hour series airing on the Fox Broadcasting Company . Bart and the Simpson family remained the main characters on this new show . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The entire Simpson family was designed so that they would be recognizable in silhouette . The family was crudely drawn , because Groening had submitted basic sketches to the animators , assuming they would clean them up ; instead , they just traced over his drawings . Bart 's original design , which appeared in the first shorts , had spikier hair , and the spikes were of different lengths . The number was later limited to nine spikes , all of the same size . At the time Groening was primarily drawing in black and " not thinking that [ Bart ] would eventually be drawn in color " gave him spikes which appear to be an extension of his head . The features of Bart 's character design are generally not used in other characters ; for example , no other characters in current episodes have Bart 's spiky hairline , although several background characters in the first few seasons shared the trait . 
 The basic rectangular shape of Bart 's head is described by director Mark Kirkland as a coffee can . Homer 's head is also rectangular ( with a dome on top ) , while spheres are used for Marge , Lisa , and Maggie . Different animators have different methods of drawing Bart. Former director Jeffrey Lynch starts off with a box , then adds the eyes , then the mouth , then the hair spikes , ear , and then the rest of the body . Matt Groening normally starts with the eyes , then the nose , and the rest of the outline of Bart 's head . Many of the animators have trouble drawing Bart 's spikes evenly ; one trick they use is to draw one on the right , one on the left , one in the middle , then continue to add one in the middle of the blank space until there are nine . Originally , whenever Bart was to be drawn from an angle looking down so the top of his head was seen , Groening wanted there to be spikes along the outline of his head , and in the middle as well . Instead , Wes Archer and David Silverman drew him so that there was an outline of the spikes , then just a smooth patch in the middle because " it worked graphically . " In " The Blue and the Gray " , Bart ( along with Lisa and Maggie ) finally questions why his hair has no visible border to separate head from hair . 
 In the season seven ( 1995 ) episode " Treehouse of Horror VI " , Bart ( along with Homer ) was computer animated into a three @-@ dimensional character for the first time for the " Homer3 " segment of the episode . The computer animation was provided by Pacific Data Images . While designing the 3D model of the character , the animators did not know how they would show Bart 's hair . They realized that there were vinyl Bart dolls in production and purchased one to use as a model . 
 = = = = Appearance = = = = 
 Bart , like the rest of his family , has yellow skin . Bart usually wears a red T @-@ shirt , blue shorts and blue trainers . When the Simpson family goes to church in the episodes , or to school events or shows , Bart wears a blue suit with a white shirt , a purple tie , blue shorts and a blue jacket . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Bart 's voice is provided by Nancy Cartwright , who voices several other child characters on The Simpsons , including Nelson Muntz , Ralph Wiggum , Todd Flanders , and Kearney . While the roles of Homer and Marge were given to Dan Castellaneta and Julie Kavner because they were already a part of The Tracey Ullman Show cast , the producers decided to hold casting for the roles of Bart and Lisa . Yeardley Smith had initially been asked to audition for the role of Bart , but casting director Bonita Pietila believed her voice was too high . Smith later recalled , " I always sounded too much like a girl . I read two lines as Bart and they said , ' Thanks for coming ! ' " Smith was given the role of Lisa instead . On March 13 , 1987 , Nancy Cartwright went in to audition for the role of Lisa . After arriving at the audition , she found that Lisa was simply described as the " middle child " and at the time did not have much personality . Cartwright became more interested in the role of Bart , who was described as " devious , underachieving , school @-@ hating , irreverent , [ and ] clever " . Matt Groening let her try out for the part instead , and upon hearing her read , gave her the job on the spot . Cartwright is the only one of the six main Simpsons cast members who had been professionally trained in voice acting prior to working on the show . 
 Cartwright 's normal speaking voice is said to have " no obvious traces of Bart " . The voice came naturally to Cartwright ; prior to The Tracey Ullman Show , she had used elements of it in shows such as My Little Pony , Snorks , and Pound Puppies . Cartwright describes Bart 's voice as easy to perform , saying , " Some characters take a little bit more effort , upper respiratory control , whatever it is technically . But Bart is easy to do . I can just slip into that without difficulty . " She usually does five or six readings of every line in order to give the producers more to work with . In flashforward episodes , Cartwright still provides the voice of Bart. For " Lisa 's Wedding " , ( season six , 1995 ) Bart 's voice was electronically lowered . 
 Despite Bart 's fame , Cartwright is rarely recognized in public . When she is recognized and asked to perform Bart 's voice in front of children , Cartwright refuses as it " freaks [ them ] out " . During the first season of The Simpsons , the Fox Network did not allow Cartwright to give interviews because they did not want to publicize that Bart was voiced by a woman . 
 Until 1998 , Cartwright was paid $ 30 @,@ 000 per episode . During a pay dispute in 1998 , Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors with new actors , going as far as preparing for casting of new voices . The dispute was resolved and Cartwright received $ 125 @,@ 000 per episode until 2004 , when the voice actors demanded that they be paid $ 360 @,@ 000 an episode . The dispute was resolved a month later , and Cartwright 's pay rose to $ 250 @,@ 000 per episode . After salary renegotiations in 2008 , the voice actors receive approximately $ 400 @,@ 000 per episode . Three years later , with Fox threatening to cancel the series unless production costs were cut , Cartwright and the other cast members accepted a 30 percent pay cut to just over $ 300 @,@ 000 per episode . 
 = = = Hallmarks = = = 
 In the opening sequence of many Simpsons episodes , the camera zooms in on Springfield Elementary School , where Bart can be seen writing a message on the chalkboard . This message , which changes from episode to episode , has become known as the " chalkboard gag " . <unk> messages may involve political humor such as " The First Amendment does not cover burping " , pop culture references such as " I can 't see dead people " , and meta @-@ references such as " I am not a 32 year old woman " and " Nobody reads these anymore " . The animators are able to produce the chalkboard gags quickly and in some cases have changed them to fit current events . For example , the chalkboard gag for " Homer the Heretic " ( season four , 1992 ) read , " I will not defame New Orleans . " The gag had been written as an apology to the city for a controversial song in the previous week 's episode , " A Streetcar Named Marge " , which called the city a " home of pirates , drunks and whores " . Many episodes do not feature a chalkboard gag because a shorter opening title sequence , where the chalkboard gags are cut , is used to make more room for story and plot development . 
 One of Bart 's early hallmarks were his prank calls to Moe 's Tavern owner Moe Szyslak in which Bart calls Moe and asks for a gag name . Moe tries to find that person in the bar , but rapidly realizes it is a prank call and ( despite not knowing who actually made the call ) angrily threatens Bart. These calls were based on a series of prank calls known as the Tube Bar recordings . Moe was based partly on Tube Bar owner Louis " Red " Deutsch , whose often profane responses inspired Moe 's violent side . The prank calls debuted in " Homer 's Odyssey " , ( season one , 1990 ) the third episode to air , but were included in " Some Enchanted Evening " , the first episode of the series that was produced . As the series progressed , it became more difficult for the writers to come up with a fake name and to write Moe 's angry response , so the pranks were dropped as a regular joke during the fourth season but they have occasionally resurfaced on the show . 
 The catchphrase " Eat My Shorts " was an ad @-@ lib by Cartwright in one of the original table readings , harking back to an incident when she was in high school . Cartwright was in the marching band at Fairmont High School , and one day while performing , the band chanted " Eat my shorts " rather than the usual " Fairmont West ! Fairmont West ! " Bart 's other catchphrases , " ¡ Ay , caramba ! " and " Don 't have a cow , man ! " , were featured on T @-@ shirts manufactured during the production of the early seasons of The Simpsons . " Cowabunga " is also commonly associated with Bart , although it was mostly used on the show after it had been used as a slogan on the T @-@ shirts . The use of catchphrase @-@ based humor was mocked in the episode " Bart Gets Famous " ( season five , 1994 ) in which Bart lands a popular role on Krusty the Clown 's show for saying the line " I didn 't do it . " The writers chose the phrase " I didn 't do it " because they wanted a " lousy " phrase " to point out how really crummy things can become really popular " . 
 Bart commonly appears nude in the show , although in every case only his buttocks are visible . In The Simpsons Movie ( 2007 ) , Bart appears in a sequence where he is skateboarding while fully nude ; several different items cover his genitalia , but for a brief moment his penis can be seen . The scene was one of the first worked on for the film , but the producers were nervous about the segment because they thought it would earn the movie an R rating . Despite this , the film was rated PG @-@ 13 by the Motion Picture Association of America for " Irreverent Humor Throughout . " The scene was later included by Entertainment Weekly in their list of " 30 Unforgettable Nude Scenes . " 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Bart 's character traits of rebelliousness and disrespect for authority have been compared to that of America 's founding fathers , and he has been described as an updated version of Tom Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn , rolled into one . In his book Planet Simpson , Chris Turner describes Bart as a nihilist , a philosophical position that argues that existence is without objective meaning , purpose , or intrinsic value . 
 Bart 's rebellious attitude has made him a disruptive student at Springfield Elementary School , where Bart is an underachiever and proud of it . He is constantly at odds with his teacher Ms. Krabappel , Principal Skinner , and occasionally Groundskeeper Willie . Bart does poorly in school and is well aware of it , having once declared , " I am dumb , okay ? Dumb as a post ! Think I 'm happy about it ? " On one occasion , Lisa successfully proves that Bart is dumber than a hamster , although Bart ultimately outsmarts her in the end . In " Separate Vocations " ( season three , 1992 ) Bart becomes hall monitor and his grades go up , suggesting that he struggles mainly because he does not pay attention , not because he is stupid . This idea is reinforced in " Brother 's Little Helper " , ( season eleven , 1999 ) in which it is revealed that Bart suffers from attention deficit disorder . His lack of smarts can also be attributed to the hereditary " Simpson Gene " , which affects the intelligence of most male members of the Simpson family . Although he gets into endless trouble and can be sadistic , shallow and selfish , Bart also exhibits many qualities of high integrity . He has , on a few occasions , helped Principal Skinner and Mrs. Krabappel : In " Sweet Seymour Skinner 's Baadasssss Song " ( season five , 1994 ) , Bart accidentally got Skinner fired and befriended him outside the school environment . Bart missed having Skinner as an adversary and got him rehired , knowing that this would mean that the two could no longer be friends . 
 Due to Bart 's mischievousness and Homer 's often uncaring and incompetent behavior , the two have a turbulent relationship . Bart regularly addresses Homer by his given name instead of " Dad " , while Homer in turn often refers to him as " the boy " . Homer has a short temper and when enraged by Bart will strangle him on impulse in a cartoonishly violent manner . One of the original ideas for the show was that Homer would be " very angry " and oppressive toward Bart , but these characteristics were toned down somewhat as their characters were explored . Marge is a much more caring , understanding and nurturing parent than Homer , but she also refers to Bart as " a handful " and is often embarrassed by his antics . In " Marge Be Not Proud " , ( season seven , 1995 ) she felt she was mothering Bart too much and began acting more distant towards him after he was caught shoplifting . At the beginning of the episode , Bart protested at her over @-@ mothering but as her attitude changed , he felt bad and made it up to her . Despite his attitude , Bart is sometimes willing to experience humiliation if it means pleasing his mom . Marge has expressed an understanding for her " special little guy " and has defended him on many occasions . She once said " I know Bart can be a handful , but I also know what he 's like inside . He 's got a spark . It 's not a bad thing ... Of course , it makes him do bad things . " 
 Bart shares a sibling rivalry with his younger sister , Lisa , but has a buddy @-@ like relationship with his youngest sister Maggie , due to her infant state . While Bart has often hurt Lisa , and even fought her physically , the two are often very close . Bart cares for Lisa deeply and has always apologized for going too far . He also believes Lisa to be his superior when it comes to solving problems and frequently goes to her for advice . Bart is also highly protective of Lisa : When a bully destroys her box of cupcakes in " Bart the General " , ( season one , 1990 ) , Bart immediately stands up for her . 
 Bart is portrayed as a popular cool boy and has many friends at school . Out of all of them his best friend is Milhouse Van Houten , although Bart has at times shown embarrassment about their friendship . Bart is a bad influence on Milhouse , and the two have been involved in a lot of mischief together . Because of this behavior , Milhouse 's mother forbids Milhouse from playing with Bart in " Homer Defined " ( season three , 1991 ) . While at first he pretended that he did not care , Bart eventually realizes that he needs Milhouse , and Marge manages to convince Mrs. Van Houten to reconsider . Milhouse is a frequent target for local bullies Nelson Muntz and his friends Jimbo , Dolph , and Kearney . At times , Bart also finds himself at the hands of their abuse . Milhouse describes their social standing as " Three and a half . We get beat up , but we get an explanation . " While Bart and the bullies have been adversaries at times , with Bart once declaring war on Nelson , the school bullies actually like Bart for his ways and hang out with him at times , especially Nelson who eventually becomes close friends with him . 
 Bart is one of the biggest fans of children 's television host Krusty the Clown . He once declared , " I 've based my whole life on Krusty 's teachings , " and sleeps in a room filled with Krusty merchandise . He has helped the clown on many occasions , for example , foiling Sideshow Bob 's attempt to frame Krusty for armed robbery in " Krusty Gets Busted " ( season one , 1990 ) , reuniting Krusty with his estranged father in " Like Father , Like Clown " . and helping Krusty return to the air with a comeback special and reignite his career in " Krusty Gets Kancelled " . For his part , Krusty has remained largely ignorant of Bart 's help and treats Bart with disinterest . One summer , Bart enthusiastically attended Kamp Krusty , which turned out to be a disaster , with Krusty nowhere to be seen . Bart keeps his hopes up by believing that Krusty would show up , but is soon pushed over the edge , and finally decides that he is sick of Krusty 's shoddy merchandise and takes over the camp . Krusty immediately visits the camp in hopes of ending the conflict and manages to appease Bart. One of the original ideas for the series was that Bart worshiped a television clown but had no respect for his father , although this was never directly explored . Because of this original plan , Krusty 's design is basically Homer in clown make @-@ up . When Bart foiled Sideshow Bob 's plans in " Krusty Gets Busted " , it sparked a long @-@ standing feud between the two . The writers decided to have Bob repeatedly return to get revenge on Bart. They took the idea of the Coyote chasing the Road Runner and depicted Bob as an intelligent person obsessed with catching a bratty boy . Bob has appeared in fourteen episodes , generally plotting various evil schemes , but is always foiled in the end . 
 Despite being currently portrayed as an underachiever , Bart was actually very happy and looking forward about going to school . However , the boy 's initial enthusiastic nature is crushed by an uncaring and bitter teacher who said that he would be a failure at life and never amount to anything . Deeply hurt by this comment , Bart then began the process of developing his path into the mischievous , rebellious , disruptive , disrespectful , snarky , nihilistic , school @-@ hating , prankster @-@ pulling , trouble @-@ making delinquent he is known for being today . 
 = = Reception and cultural influence = = 
 = = = Bartmania = = = 
 In 1990 , Bart quickly became one of the most popular characters on television in what was termed " Bartmania " . He became the most prevalent Simpsons character on memorabilia , such as T @-@ shirts . In the early 1990s , millions of T @-@ shirts featuring Bart were sold ; as many as one million were sold on some days . Believing Bart to be a bad role model , several American public schools banned T @-@ shirts featuring Bart next to captions such as " I 'm Bart Simpson . Who the hell are you ? " and " Underachiever ( ' And proud of it , man ! ' ) " . The Simpsons merchandise sold well and generated $ 2 billion in revenue during the first 14 months of sales . The success of Bart Simpson merchandise inspired an entire line of black market counterfeit items , especially T @-@ shirts . Some featured Bart announcing various slogans , others depicted redesigns of the character , including " Teenage Mutant Ninja Bart , Air Simpson Bart , [ and ] <unk> " . Matt Groening generally did not object to bootleg merchandise , but took exception to a series of " Nazi Bart " shirts which depicted Bart in Nazi uniform or as a white power skinhead . 20th Century Fox sued the creator of the shirts , who eventually agreed to stop making them . 
 Due to the show 's success , over the summer of 1990 the Fox Network decided to switch The Simpsons ' timeslot so that it would move from 8 : 00 p.m. EST on Sunday night to the same time on Thursday , where it would compete with The Cosby Show on NBC , the number one show at the time . Through the summer , several news outlets published stories about the supposed " Bill vs. Bart " rivalry . The August 31 , 1990 issue of Entertainment Weekly featured a picture of Bill Cosby wearing a Bart Simpson T @-@ shirt . " Bart Gets an " F " " ( season two , 1990 ) was the first episode to air against The Cosby Show , and it received a lower Nielsen rating , tying for eighth behind The Cosby Show , which had an 18 @.@ 5 rating . The rating is based on the number of household televisions that were tuned into the show , but Nielsen Media Research estimated that 33 @.@ 6 million viewers watched the episode , making it the number one show in terms of actual viewers that week . At the time , it was the most watched episode in the history of the Fox Network , and it is still the highest rated episode in the history of The Simpsons . Because of his popularity , Bart was often the most promoted member of the Simpson family in advertisements for the show , even for episodes in which he was not involved in the main plot . 
 Bart was described as " television 's king of 1990 " , " television 's brightest new star " and an " undiminished smash " . Entertainment Weekly named Bart the " entertainer of the year " for 1990 , writing that " Bart has proved to be a rebel who 's also a good kid , a terror who 's easily terrorized , and a flake who astonishes us , and himself , with serious displays of fortitude . " In the United States congressional , senatorial and gubernatorial elections of 1990 , Bart was one of the most popular write @-@ in candidates , and in many areas was second only to Mickey Mouse amongst fictional characters . In the 1990 Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade , Bart made his debut as one of the giant helium @-@ filled balloons for which the parade is known . The Bart Simpson balloon has appeared at every parade since . This was referenced in The Simpsons in the episode " Bart vs. Thanksgiving " , which aired the same day as the parade , where Homer tells Bart , " If you start building a balloon for every flash @-@ in @-@ the @-@ pan cartoon character , you turn the parade into a farce ! " Meanwhile , behind and unbeknownst to him , the television briefly shows a Bart Simpson balloon . 
 The album The Simpsons Sing the Blues was released in September 1990 and was a success , peaking at # 3 on the Billboard 200 and becoming certified 2x platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . The first single from the album was the pop rap song " Do the Bartman " , performed by Nancy Cartwright and released on November 20 , 1990 . The song was written by Michael Jackson , although he did not receive any credit . Jackson was a fan of The Simpsons , especially Bart , and had called the producers one night offering to write Bart a number one single and do a guest spot on the show . Jackson eventually guest starred in the episode " Stark Raving Dad " ( season three , 1991 ) under the pseudonym John Jay Smith . While the song was never officially released as a single in the United States , it was successful in the United Kingdom . In 1991 it was the number one song in the UK for three weeks from February 16 to March 9 and was the seventh best @-@ selling song of the year . It sold half a million copies and was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry on February 1 , 1991 . 
 = = = Bart as a role model = = = 
 Bart 's rebellious nature , which frequently resulted in no punishment for his misbehavior , led some parents and conservatives to characterize him as a poor role model for children . Robert Bianco of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette wrote that " [ Bart ] outwits his parents and <unk> his teachers ; in short , he 's the child we wish we 'd been , and fear our children will become . " In schools , educators claimed that Bart was a " threat to learning " because of his " underachiever and proud of it " attitude and negative attitude regarding his education . Others described him as " egotistical , aggressive and mean @-@ spirited . " In response to the criticism , James L. Brooks said , " I 'm very wary of television where everybody is supposed to be a role model , you don 't run across that many role models in real life . Why should television be full of them ? " 
 In 1990 William Bennett , who at the time was drug czar of the United States , visited a drug treatment centre in Pittsburgh and upon noticing a poster of Bart remarked , " You guys aren 't watching The Simpsons , are you ? That 's not going to help you any . " When a backlash over the comment ensued , Bennett apologized , claiming he " was just kidding " and saying " I 'll sit down with the little spike head . We 'll straighten this thing out . " In a 1991 interview , Bill Cosby described Bart as a bad role model for children , calling him " angry , confused , frustrated . " In response , Matt Groening said , " That sums up Bart , all right . Most people are in a struggle to be normal . He thinks normal is very boring , and does things that others just wished they dare do . " On January 27 , 1992 , then @-@ President George H. W. Bush said , " We are going to keep on trying to strengthen the American family , to make American families a lot more like the Waltons and a lot less like the Simpsons . " The writers rushed out a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek reply in the form of a short segment which aired three days later before a rerun of " Stark Raving Dad " in which Bart replied , " Hey , we 're just like the Waltons . We 're praying for an end to the Depression , too . " 
 Although there were many critics of the character , favorable comments came from several quarters . Columnist Erma Bombeck wrote , " Kids need to know that somewhere in this world is a contemporary who can pull off all the things they can only fantasize about , someone who can stick it to their parents once in a while and still be permitted to live . " In 2003 , Bart placed first in a poll of parents in the United Kingdom who were asked " which made @-@ up character had the most influence " on children under 12 years old . 
 = = = Commendations = = = 
 In 1998 , Time named Bart one of the 100 most important people of the 20th century . He was the only fictional character to make the list . He had previously appeared on the cover of the December 31 , 1990 edition . He was also ranked # 48 in TV Guide 's " 50 Greatest TV Stars of All Time " in 1996 and both he and Lisa ranked # 11 in TV Guide 's " Top 50 Greatest Cartoon Characters of All Time " in 2002 . 
 At the 44th Primetime Emmy Awards in 1992 , Cartwright won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for voicing Bart in the season three episode " Separate Vocations " . She shared the award with five other voice actors from The Simpsons . Various episodes in which Bart is strongly featured have been nominated for Emmy Awards for Outstanding Animated Program , including " Radio Bart " in 1992 , " Future @-@ Drama " in 2005 , " The Haw @-@ <unk> Couple " in 2006 and " Homer 's Phobia " , which won the award in 1997 . In 1995 , Cartwright won an Annie Award for " Voice Acting in the Field of Animation " for her portrayal of Bart in an episode . In 2000 , Bart and the rest of the Simpson family were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame located at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard . 
 In 2014 Bart Simpson became the second mascot of Russian football club FC Zenit Saint Petersburg , wearing number 87 on his back ( referring to The Simpsons debut in 1987 ; the club 's first mascot is a blue @-@ maned lion ) . 
 = = = Merchandising = = = 
 Alongside T @-@ shirts , Bart has been included in various other The Simpsons @-@ related merchandise , including air fresheners , baseball caps , bumper stickers , cardboard <unk> , refrigerator magnets , key rings , buttons , dolls , posters , figurines , clocks , soapstone carvings , Chia Pets , bowling balls and boxer shorts . The Bart Book , a book about Bart 's personality and attributes , was released in 2004 . Other books include Bart Simpson 's Guide to Life . The Simpsons and Philosophy : The D 'oh ! of Homer , which is not an official publication , includes a chapter analyzing Bart 's character and comparing him to the " Nietzschean ideal " . 
 Bart has appeared in other media relating to The Simpsons . He has appeared in every one of The Simpsons video games , including Bart vs. the World , Bart Simpson 's Escape from Camp Deadly , Bart vs. the Space Mutants , Bart 's House of Weirdness , Bart vs. The <unk> , Bartman Meets Radioactive Man , Bart 's Nightmare , Bart & the Beanstalk and The Simpsons Game , released in 2007 . Alongside the television series , Bart regularly appears in issues of Simpsons Comics , which were first published on November 29 , 1993 and are still issued monthly , and also has his own series called Bart Simpson Comics which have been released since 2000 . Bart also plays a role in The Simpsons Ride , launched in 2008 at Universal Studios Florida and Hollywood . 
 Bart , and other The Simpsons characters , have appeared in numerous television commercials for Nestlé 's Butterfinger candy bars from 1990 to 2001 , with the slogan " Nobody better lay a finger on my Butterfinger ! " Lisa would occasionally advertise it too . Matt Groening would later say that the Butterfinger advertising campaign was a large part of the reason why Fox decided to pick up the half @-@ hour show . The campaign was discontinued in 2001 , much to the disappointment of Cartwright . Bart has also appeared in commercials for Burger King and Ramada Inn . In 2001 , Kellogg 's launched a brand of cereal called " Bart Simpson Peanut Butter Chocolate Crunch " , which was available for a limited time . Before the half @-@ hour series went on the air , Matt Groening pitched Bart as a spokesperson for Jell @-@ O. He wanted Bart to sing " J @-@ E @-@ L @-@ L @-@ O " , then burp the letter O. His belief was that kids would try to do it the next day , but he was rejected . 
 On April 9 , 2009 , the United States Postal Service unveiled a series of five 44 @-@ cent stamps featuring Bart and the four other members of the Simpson family . They are the first characters from a television series to receive this recognition while the show is still in production . The stamps , designed by Matt Groening , were made available for purchase on May 7 , 2009 . 
 = Oh , What a Knight ! = 
 Oh , What a Knight ! is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film follows a young woman , named May Brandon , who dreams a medieval fantasy in which she is wooed , rescued and married by a loyal knight . When she awakes , she dismisses her fiancé and tells him of her dream . He decides to become the knight of her dreams and dresses as one , but the experience is unpleasant and ruins her fantasy . There are no known staff or cast credits for the film , but a surviving film still shows three actors . The film was released on October 18 , 1910 and was met with praise by The New York Dramatic Mirror . The film had a wide national release and was also shown in Canada , but is now presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from October 22 , 1910 . It states : " May Brandon is a young woman of the present day who finds that the course of true love can sometimes run too smooth . She is engaged to the man of her choice , but no one objects . In fact , there is not the slightest opposition to her marriage in any quarter . And , being a woman , she does not like it . Perhaps she would have been married in the orthodox way had it not been for a dream that she had . In her sleep she found herself a beautiful young woman , persecuted because she was loyal to the knight she had selected . Her father was obdurate , and finally practically made her a prisoner in his gloomy old castle . Her sweetheart called with a rope ladder . They escaped , and after a number of thrilling adventures were married , and presumably lived happy forever afterwards . When May awoke , she was more discontented than ever . She flouted her fiancé , and returned his ring and swore she would never marry him . But finally she told him of her dream , and he won forgiveness by promising to run away with her like the knight of her dreams . Being a man of his word , he did . But the romance all faded out of it . The adventures they passed through were not to the woman 's liking , and her experience convinced her that swashbuckling knights are as much out of date as are stagecoaches . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . The cast credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . A surviving film still gives the possibility of identifying three of the actors in the film . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on October 18 , 1910 . The film is known to have had a wide national release , with showing theaters in South Dakota , New Hampshire , Oklahoma , Kansas , Pennsylvania , Indiana , Maryland , Nebraska , North Carolina , Montana , and Missouri . The film was also shown in Vancouver , Canada by the Province Theatre . 
 The Moving Picture News and The Moving Picture World were both neutral in their review of the film , giving neither specific praise nor criticism of the production . The New York Dramatic Mirror review was positive : " This idea has been used quite recently in an Independent film , but not nearly so effectively as in the hands of the capable Thanhouser players . They give the farcical events an air of reality that goes far to strengthen the comical results . ... She insists on her lover rigging himself up in knightly costume and carrying her off on a horse to be married . The absurdity of this business in modern times is not made as much of as might have been , but it brings plenty of laughter . The actress who played the part of the girl marred her work by turning too often to face the camera . She is very pretty and attractive but she should not permit it to appear that she is so well aware of her beauty . " Some advertisements by theaters heavily promoted the comedy aspect of the film with generic quips . 
 = 1981 – 82 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1981 – 82 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season was destructive and deadly in Madagascar , where four cyclones killed 100 people and caused $ 250 million ( USD ) in damage . The season was fairly active , lasting from October to May . There were nine named storms that attained gale @-@ force winds , or at least 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Five of the storms attained tropical cyclone status , which have 10 minute sustained winds of at least 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . 
 The first storm was Tropical Cyclone Alex , which was named by the Australian Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) . this was due to the boundary of the basin at the time , which incorporated the Indian Ocean south of the equator and extended from the east coast of Africa to 80 ° E ; the eastern extent was later moved to 90 ° E. Two other storms – Armelle and Damia – also originated in the Australian basin . The latter was the strongest cyclone on record in the basin at the time by barometric pressure , estimated at 898 millibars ( 898 hPa ) . The first storm to affect Madagascar was Benedicte in December , and was followed by tropical storms Frida and Electre in February and Justine in March . The final storm of the season was Cyclone Karla , which remained in the eastern periphery of the basin while reaching winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 Météo @-@ France 's meteorological office at Réunion ( MFR ) issued advisories for storms in the basin during the year . At the time , the MFR area of warning responsibility was from the coast of Africa to 80 ° E , and the agency primarily used the Dvorak technique to estimate the intensities of tropical cyclones . The nine tropical storms and five tropical cyclones was identical to the long @-@ term average from 1981 to 2011 . 
 The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , which is a joint United States Navy – United States Air Force task force that issues tropical cyclone warnings for the region , also issued advisories for storms in the year . The agency tracked a tropical depression in July 1982 . The system formed on July 4 southeast of Seychelles , and initially curved to the southwest . It failed to intensify beyond winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) , and dissipated on July 4 after turning to the northwest . At the time , the annual tropical cyclone year was from August 1 to July 31 of the subsequent year . 
 Four storms struck Madagascar in the season between December and March , collectively killing 100 people and causing $ 250 million ( 1982 United States dollars ) in damage . The storms caused widespread flooding and a state of disaster for four months , compounded by floods in January . About 180 @,@ 000 people were forced to evacuate , and there were increased levels of flood @-@ related diseases . The storms closed down many roads and destroyed widespread crops , forcing the government to import 400 @,@ 000 metric tons of rice . After the floods , workers repaired damaged roads and dykes while the government provided relief supplies . However , the ongoing floods strained the Madagascar 's resources , and the government appealed for aid to the international community on February 4 . The United States Agency for International Development provided nearly $ 9 million in aid , mostly for rice and rebuilding roads . Other countries donated about $ 7 @.@ 5 million in money or relief goods , such as building materials , food , clothing , and medicine . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Alex = = = 
 While still in the Southern Hemisphere spring , the intertropical convergence zone ( ITCZ ) was active across the southern Indian Ocean in the middle of October . On October 18 , a low pressure area formed , based on reports from nearby ships . It moved southeastward and slowly intensified , given the name Alex . Located southwest of Sumatra , the storm curved to the south . Late on October 21 , Alex attained peak winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) , or above tropical cyclone status . For several days , it maintained much of its intensity while curving to the southwest . The storm eventually weakened due to strong wind shear deteriorating the convection . On October 27 , Alex dissipated . 
 The storm developed east of 80 ° E but west of 90 ° E , which at the time was part of the warning responsibility for the Australian Bureau of Meteorology ( BoM ) . However , the MFR expanded its area of responsibility to 90 ° E in 1985 . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Bessi @-@ Armelle = = = 
 On November 1 , an area of convection formed southwest of Sumatra just south of the equator . It moved southwestward and slowly developed a distinct low pressure area . On November 6 , the system strengthened enough for the BoM to name it Bessi while the storm was west of 90 ° E. The MFR began tracking the storm on November 8 once it reached 85 ° E , estimating winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) . Two days later , a nearby ship reported winds of 63 km / h ( 39 mph ) . During this time , the storm moved generally west @-@ southwestward , crossing 80 ° E on November 11 ; at that time , the Mauritius Meteorology Service renamed it Armelle . The storm continued westward and gradually weakened . On November 18 , <unk> deteriorated to tropical depression status , dissipating two days later between Tromelin Island and the Seychelles . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Benedicte = = = 
 In the middle of December , the ITCZ was active across the southern Indian Ocean , northeast of Madagascar . A circulation developed on December 16 , which preceded the development of a tropical disturbance on December 17 . Moving to the west @-@ northwest , the system slowly developed before shifting to the southwest . On December 19 , the system intensified into a moderate tropical storm while passing 75 km ( 45 mi ) north of Madagascar . After briefly developing an eye feature , the satellite presentation degraded due to land interaction . Convection increased as the storm progressed through the Mozambique Channel , and the Madagascar Meteorological Service named it Benedicte on December 20 . The organization improved over the next few days as the eye feature became better defined . On December 23 , Benedicte intensified to tropical cyclone status , reaching peak winds of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) . That day , the storm turned westward toward the Mozambique coast , weakening as it approached land . Benedicte made landfall on central Mozambique on December 24 and turned northward , straddling the border with Malawi . The storm dissipated on the next day , with only a remnant area of clouds present on satellite imagery by December 26 . 
 While passing just north of Madagascar , Benedicte brought wind gusts of 252 km / h ( 157 mph ) to Antsiranana , with several other localities reporting gale force winds . Antsiranana also reported 178 mm ( 7 @.@ 0 in ) . The storm damaged thousands of homes and wrecked much of the region 's coffee and pepper crops . Benedicte killed 13 people and was the first in a succession of six storms that flooded the country . 
 = = = Tropical Depression <unk> = = = 
 Toward the end of December , strong convection persisted southeast of Diego Garcia . These storms consolidated into a distinct center on December 29 , warranting its classification as a tropical depression . For several days the system meandered – it moved northward on December 30 due to a ridge to the south , although soon thereafter turned back to the south and later to the west . Due to a Dvorak rating of 2 @.@ 5 , the Mauritius Meteorology Service named the system Clarisse . According to the MFR , the system only had peak winds of 50 km / h ( 30 mph ) , as lack of atmospheric instability prevented strengthening . However , the JTWC estimated 1 minute winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . Clarisse dissipated on January 7 about 500 km ( 310 mi ) east of St. Brandon . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Chris @-@ Damia = = = 
 A low pressure area developed on January 5 near Christmas Island in the Australian basin . Moving westward due to a large anticyclone to the south , it gradually intensified and was named Chris by the BoM . The storm developed an eye on January 9 , and that day crossed 90 ° E into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean . On January 11 , the Mauritius Meteorology Service renamed the storm as Damia . On the next day , the Dvorak rating reached 6 @.@ 0 for the storm , and the MFR estimated peak 10 minute winds of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) , making it an intense tropical cyclone . The agency also estimated a minimum barometric pressure of 898 mbar ( 26 @.@ 5 inHg ) . Damia turned southwestward and slowly weakened ; by January 16 , the cyclone weakened to tropical storm status , although it reintensified into a tropical cyclone the next day . Around that time , the storm passed about 20 km ( 12 mi ) north of Rodrigues and later approached Mauritius before curving to the south . As a weakened tropical storm , Damia later curved more to the southeast and dissipated on January 23 . 
 On Rodrigues , Damia produced wind gusts of 113 km / h ( 70 mph ) as well as nearly 300 mm ( 12 in ) of rainfall in 24 hours . The storm damaged or destroyed 70 houses , forcing 500 people to shelters , while 100 km ( 60 mi ) of unpaved roads were wrecked . Power , telephone , and water access was disrupted . Damia heavily damaged the island 's agriculture , with 25 % of the corn crop destroyed . Several fishing boats were wrecked , and 15 % of forest areas were damaged . Monetary damage was estimated at $ 650 @,@ 000 ( USD ) , which prompted the government to request international aid for rebuilding . Estimated by pressure , Tropical Cyclone Chris @-@ Damia was the strongest tropical cyclone on record in the basin until Cyclone Gafilo in 2004 reached a minimum pressure of 895 mbar ( 26 @.@ 4 inHg ) . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Electre = = = 
 The ITCZ became active toward the end of January from the coast of Madagascar to Diego Garcia , spawning a distinct circulation on January 31 southeast of Tromelin Island , which became a tropical disturbance . Due to a trough , the system moved west @-@ southwestward toward Madagascar . On February 1 , the system was named Electre as it gradually intensified . Two days later , the storm moved ashore eastern Madagascar between Toamasina and Mahanoro with peak winds of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) . Electre weakened as it crossed the country and emerged into the Mozambique Channel on February 4 south of Maintirano . The storm re @-@ intensified to its former peak intensity as it turned west @-@ northwest . On February 5 , Electre made its final landfall on central Mozambique between <unk> and Quelimane , dissipating soon thereafter . 
 Striking the country just two days after Tropical Storm Frida affected the region , Electre brought additional rainfall , with a peak 24 ‑ hour total of 151 @.@ 1 mm ( 5 @.@ 95 in ) at Mahanoro . The storm also produced peak winds of 119 km / h ( 74 mph ) in Mananjary . Electre caused flooding and landslides , particularly in the area around Lake Alaotra . The storm damaged all roads from eastern Madagascar to the capital city Antananarivo , as well as the rail connecting the city with Toamasina . There were 13 deaths in the country . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Frida = = = 
 Tropical Storm Frida developed on January 31 over east @-@ central Madagascar , between Fianarantsoa and Mahanoro . It moved offshore and turned to the south . On February 1 , the storm intensified to peak winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) before turning westward and moving back ashore , steered by a ridge . Frida dissipated later that day , producing wind gusts of 119 km / h ( 74 mph ) in Farafangana . As the storm moved through the former Fianarantsoa Province , it dropped rainfall that flooded and isolated several towns . The floods washed away bridges and knocked down power lines . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Gabrielle = = = 
 On February 5 , a tropical disturbance formed north of St. Brandon , and quickly intensified into Tropical Storm Gabrielle by the next day . Moving to the southwest , the storm attained peak winds of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) . On February 6 , Gabrielle passed northwest of Mauritius and Réunion ; on the latter island , the mountainous peak Plaine des Cafres recorded gusts of 158 km / h ( 98 mph ) . The storm continued to the southwest without much change in intensity , weakening slightly on February 9 . That day , Gabrielle turned to the west @-@ northwest and executed a tight loop before progressing southward . After turning to the southeast , the storm dissipated on February 11 . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Justine = = = 
 The ITCZ became active in the middle of March northeast of Madagascar , which spawned two low pressure areas on March 15 . The westernmost became a tropical disturbance on the next day between Madagascar and Tromelin . It quickly intensified while tracking to the southwest and was named Justine on March 17 . On March 18 , the storm intensified into tropical cyclone status and developed a well @-@ defined eye . At 15 : 00 UTC that day , Justine moved ashore northeastern Madagascar near Sambava . It continued southwestward and weakened over the island , emerging into the Mozambique Channel near Besalampy as a tropical storm . It re @-@ intensified into a tropical cyclone over waters , reaching peak winds of 150 km / h ( 95 mph ) on March 22 only 20 km ( 12 mi ) offshore Mozambique . That day , a ridge over southern Africa steered Justine to the southeast away from land , although the ridge weakened and allowed the storm to move back to the west @-@ southwest . It weakened to a tropical storm during this time . The storm turned again to the southeast on March 24 after the ridge moved to the east . Justine passed north of Europa Island before striking Madagascar again early on March 25 just north of Toliara . It became extratropical over land , and soon again reached open waters while turning to the south . Justine dissipated on March 27 within the flow of the westerlies . 
 While entering the Mozambique Channel , Justine was restrengthening and produced peak winds of 180 km / h ( 110 mph ) in Besalampy . The storm also dropped heavy rainfall , with a 24 ‑ hour peak of 404 @.@ 5 mm ( 15 @.@ 93 in ) in Sambava where it moved ashore . The storm was the final in a series of storms affecting the country , damaging coastal towns in the northeast and southwest . Justine damaged houses , crops , and roads , while destroying a vanilla storage shed in Sambava . While the storm was changing its trajectory offshore Mozambique , the Commandant Bourdais ship attempted to avoid the storm , only to sail through 102 km / h ( 62 mph ) gusts and 14 m ( 46 ft ) waves , which flooded the deck and damaged a gangway . Later , Justine passed near Europa island , producing 6 to 9 m ( 20 to 30 ft ) waves . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Karla = = = 
 A low pressure persisted toward the end of April between Diego Garcia and the equator . It developed a spiral area of convection on April 24 , which preceded the development of a tropical disturbance the next day . By that time , the system was already at tropical storm status and was given the name Karla . Moving southwest , the storm strengthened and organized . A ridge to the south steered Karla to the east on April 27 , although an approaching trough turned it to the southeast on the following day . Enhanced atmospheric instability helped the storm strengthen to tropical cyclone status on April 29 . On the next day , Karla attained peak winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) after developing a well @-@ defined eye . Increased wind shear and progressively cooler waters weakened the cyclone as it turned more to the south . By May 3 , the storm weakened to tropical depression status and dissipated the next day within the westerlies . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 A tropical depression formed south of Diego Garcia on February 12 . Given the name <unk> , it moved southward initially , reaching winds of only 50 km / h ( 30 mph ) . A ridge to the south turned the system back north , and <unk> dissipated on February 14 near where it formed . 
 There were three short @-@ lived tropical depressions toward the end of February . The first formed on February 19 about 350 km ( 220 mi ) northeast of Tromelin Island . It moved southward toward Mauritius , bringing several days of heavy rainfall there and Réunion . The depression turned to the west @-@ northwest and dissipated on February 23 . That day , the other two depressions formed , including one between Réunion and Madagascar . Given the name Isabeau , it moved westward and dissipated on February 24 , reaching winds of only 50 km / h ( 30 mph ) . The other depression originated in the Mozambique Channel off the southwest coast of Madagascar . On February 24 , the system passed south of the island while moving southeastward , bringing wind gusts of 79 km / h ( 49 mph ) at Tôlanaro . It gradually became extratropical , dissipating within the westerlies on February 26 . The JTWC classified the system as Tropical Cyclone 20S , estimating 1 minute winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) , although it was only officially classified as a tropical depression . 
 = George Washington Truett = 
 George Washington Truett , also known as George W. Truett ( May 6 , 1867 – July 7 , 1944 ) , was an American clergyman who was the pastor of the First Baptist Church of Dallas , Texas , from 1897 until 1944 , and the president of the Southern Baptist Convention from 1927 to 1929 . He was one of the " most famous Southern Baptist " preachers and writers of his era . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Truett was born on a farm in Hayesville in Clay County in far western North Carolina as the seventh child of Charles L. Truett and the former Mary R. Kimsey . He entered school at Hayesville Academy in 1875 and graduated in 1885 . He taught in a Towns County , Georgia schoolhouse and , in 1887 , founded the <unk> Academy in that same county , with the intention of making enough money to pay for law school . In 1889 , however , he left his position with the Academy to move with his parents to Whitewright , Texas , where he joined the Whitewright Baptist Church , and attended Grayson College . He was ordained to the Baptist ministry at the Whitewright church in 1890 . He preached his first sermon at the First Baptist Church in nearby Sherman , Texas . 
 = = = Baylor University = = = 
 In 1891 , Truett was hired by the president of Baylor University in Waco , Texas , to serve as its financial secretary . Enterprising and energetic , Truett raised $ 92 @,@ 000 in less than two years and completely wiped out the school 's indebtedness . After his stint as the school 's financial secretary , Truett enrolled as a freshman at Baylor in 1893 . From 1893 to 1897 he studied at Baylor and served as a student @-@ pastor of the East Waco Baptist Church to pay for his tuition . He graduated in June 1897 with an A.B. degree . Truett would later serve as a Baylor trustee from 1934 to 1939 . 
 = = Pastoral career = = 
 Truett accepted the position of pastor of the First Baptist Church in Dallas in September 1897 , a position he would hold until his death . During his 47 @-@ year pastorate , membership increased from 715 to 7 @,@ 804 ; a total of 19 @,@ 531 new members were received , and total contributions were $ 6 @,@ 027 @,@ 741 @.@ 52 . The church was rebuilt three times during his tenure there due to the expanding congregation . 
 Truett was the president of the Southern Baptist Convention from 1927 to 1929 and of the Baptist World Alliance from 1934 to 1939 . During World War I he was appointed by President Woodrow Wilson as one of 20 preachers sent by the president for a six @-@ month tour to preach to the Allied forces . 
 One of Truett 's most famous sermons , " Baptists and Religious Liberty " , was delivered on the steps of the Capitol in Washington , D.C. , on May 16 , 1920 . In this sermon he claimed that the United States was founded on the principles of religious freedom and separation of church and state . 
 Over the course of his pastoral career , he published ten volumes of sermons , two volumes of addresses , and two volumes of Christmas messages . 
 Truett worried that cowboys who worked the cattle drives were too isolated from family , church and society . He made annual trips through the Davis Mountains of West Texas for thirty @-@ seven years , traveling with cattle drives there and preaching . 
 = = Personal life and death = = 
 Truett married fellow Baylor student Josephine Jenkins on June 28 , 1894 , with whom he had three children , all daughters . He died in Dallas on July 7 , 1944 , and was survived by his wife , who would die twelve years later . Both are interred at Sparkman @-@ Hillcrest Memorial Park Cemetery in Dallas . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1957 Truett was portrayed by Victor Jory in the episode " Lone Star Preacher " of the syndicated television series , Crossroads . The actress Barbara Eiler was cast as Truett 's wife , Jo , who died eleven months before the episode aired . 
 An authorized biography of Truett written by James Powhatan was published in 1939 by Macmillan . 
 = = = Namesakes = = = 
 The seminary at Baylor University , George W. Truett Theological Seminary 
 Truett @-@ McConnell College ( named for both Truett and Truett 's cousin , Fernando C. McConnell ) 
 George W. Truett Elementary School , part of the Dallas Independent School District . 
 S. Truett Cathy , founder of Chick @-@ fil @-@ A restaurant chain 
 Truett Memorial First Baptist Church , Hayesville , North Carolina 
 Truett Hospital , located at Baylor University Medical Center at Dallas 
 = = Published works = = 
 George W. Truett ( 1915 ) . We Would see Jesus : and other Sermons . New York : Fleming H. Revell . 
 George W. Truett ( 1917 ) . A Quest for Souls . Harper & Brothers . 
 George W. Truett ( 1946 ) . Some Vital Questions . Grand Rapids : Eerdmans . 
 George W. Truett ( 1954 ) . After His likeness . Grand Rapids : Eerdmans . 
 George W. Truett ( 1973 ) . Sermons from Paul ( George W. Truett Library ) . Grand Rapids : Baker Book House . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 = Hitman Go = 
 Hitman Go is a turn @-@ based puzzle video game developed by Square Enix Montréal and published by Square Enix . Announced in February 2014 , the game was released for iOS in April 2014 and for Android on in June 2014 . Microsoft Windows and Windows Phone versions were released the following year in April 2015 . In February 2016 , a " Definitive Edition " version was released on PlayStation 4 , PlayStation Vita , and on Linux and Windows via Steam . It is the first game developed by Square Enix Montréal , a studio founded in 2011 . Development entered full production in 2013 and was completed by eleven people using the Unity game engine . 
 The player uses touchscreen controls to guide Agent 47 , protagonist of the Hitman franchise , through a series of grid @-@ based levels . Levels are composed of nodes and lines , and presented like a board game with characters modelled as miniature figures . Enemy characters can be dispatched by moving onto the node they occupy during a turn , similar to chess . As the player advances through levels , new enemy types and mechanics are introduced to increase the complexity of puzzle solutions . 
 Following its announcement , Hitman Go was met with some scepticism from critics . However , upon release the game received a positive reception with praise directed towards the game 's art , aesthetics , simple gameplay mechanics , and translation of Hitman to a mobile device . The game also received several nominations and awards from gaming publications and award organisations . A successor set within the Tomb Raider franchise , titled Lara Croft Go , was released in August 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Hitman Go is a turn @-@ based puzzle video game part of the Hitman video game series . In the game each level is set on a grid @-@ based board composed of interconnected nodes and lines . Nodes are positions that the player or enemies can occupy and lines are used for moving between nodes during a turn . Players take control of the series ' protagonist , Agent 47 . Using touchscreen controls , during a turn the player swipes along a line in the direction they want Agent 47 to move . Once the player completes a turn , all enemies on the board will simultaneously move . Each level has a main objective for completion , some levels require the player to guide Agent 47 to the end node and others will require the player to assassinate a specific target . The player can assassinate enemies by moving onto the target 's node , and similarly the player can be killed by enemies that move onto the player 's node . 
 Levels become more complex as the player progresses , introducing different mechanics and new types of enemies . Each enemy type is dressed in a unique colour , allowing the player to recognise their movement patterns . Some enemies remain static or rotate on a single node , while others will patrol the board along a specific route . Later stages may require the player to collect keys located on the board and unlock doors that block access to the level objective . <unk> connect one location on the board to another and allow the player to move between them during a turn . Some nodes contain potted plants , the player will not be detected while occupying these nodes . Coloured disguises can be found and equipped to let the player walk past an enemy type of that colour without being detected . There are throwable objects that are used to disrupt and change enemy behaviour patterns . Firearms can also be found on certain levels , they are used to shoot targets or obstacles from a distance . 
 Most levels have bonus objectives such as collecting a briefcase or finishing the level without killing anyone , completing these will reward the player with stars . Stars are used to unlock the next chapter of levels . The game launched with five different chapters , one of which was inspired by a level from Hitman : Blood Money . Post @-@ launch , two additional chapters were added , one based upon a level from Hitman 2 : Silent Assassin . The game features in @-@ app purchases which provide hints to the puzzles or unlock level chapters immediately . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Hitman Go was developed by Canadian video game studio Square Enix Montréal . It is the first game from the developer , which was founded in late 2011 by employees of existing Square Enix Europe studios . Upon establishment , the studio announced that their first project would be a new video game in the Hitman franchise . The studio 's original aspiration was creating triple @-@ A console games within the series and expanding to a team size of 150 people . After a year , while the team was still expanding , the console game was cancelled and the studio shifted its focus to mobile games . This transition led to around one third of the staff leaving the development team . 
 During the concept phase there were four people working on the Hitman Go . Initial prototypes were built on paper using printed out characters . The project was pitched and greenlit for production in mid 2013 . Daniel Lutz served as creative director , and the team size peaked at eleven people throughout the remainder of the game 's development . The studio looked at several different engines for building the game , but opted with Unity early on as it had a low barrier of entry , provided support for the main mobile platforms , and some members of the development team had previous experience creating projects in the game engine . An initial working prototype and a basic level editor were developed in a few days and after two weeks the first version of the game was presented to the remainder of the studio . 
 While designing Hitman Go , Lutz and his team considered some specific factors such as the game 's price , gameplay time , the brand , the genre , the audience 's expectation , production restraints , and the business model . Speaking about that game 's genre , Lutz noted that the team could have developed an endless running game for Hitman . However , they thought that this style of game did not align with the series ' values and would not be well received by its audience . Instead , they felt that translating Hitman into a board game was more appropriate as it gave players time to think and plan before executing moves . This fell in line with the idea of Hitman being a " thinking man ’ s game " . Designers tested a feature that would let players lie in wait for targets , similar to the mainline Hitman games . This feature was cut from the final version for gameplay reasons as it allowed players to kill any target on the board and prevented the puzzles from working as intended . The artistic inspiration for the game was drawn from architectural models and dioramas . Characters were created in fixed poses without any limb animations , like chess pieces . Instead of creating detailed textures which requires additional memory , the artists chose to use colour swatches so that most characters shared materials . This method allowed them to use many different colours for characters without incurring lots of draw calls . The team chose not include dialogue , cutscenes , or a heavy narrative structure in the game , citing that people often play video games in short sessions on mobile devices . 
 Hitman Go was announced in February 2014 . It was released for iOS on 17 April 2014 , and Android on 4 June 2014 . Microsoft Windows and Windows Phone versions were released on 27 April 2015 . At the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2015 , virtual reality technology company Oculus VR showcased a version of Hitman Go for the Samsung Gear VR device . On 5 December 2015 , at the PlayStation Experience , Hitman Go was announced for PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita with a 2016 release date . This version was released on 23 February 2016 , as the " Definitive Edition " , which includes improved visuals and all additional content . The " Definitive Edition " was also released on Linux and Windows via the Steam storefront . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Hitman Go received " generally favorable " reviews from professional critics , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . Several reviewers noted that they were sceptical about the idea of Hitman departing from its roots in third @-@ person stealth action and taking form as a mobile puzzle game , but upon playing the game admitted that it was a pleasant and creative take on the franchise . 
 The game 's visual presentation and board game aesthetic were widely praised . Joystiq editor , Anthony John Agnello thought the colouring and motif of Hitman Go was more appealing than the visual design employed in Hitman : Absolution . He highlighted the level selection screen and use of board game boxes in the menus as positives . Writing for Destructoid , Brittany Vincent also expressed approval of the clean menus and user interface icons , and thought that the game levels resembled <unk> . Eurogamer and IGN writers compared the character design to miniature board game pieces . The simplicity of the gameplay mechanics and minimalistic approach were praised by Polygon reviewer Arthur Gies . He believed that Hitman Go brilliantly captured and expressed elements of the series through the use of a sophisticated board game . Joystiq reviewer , Agnello called Hitman Go an impressive debut title for Square Enix Montréal and said that the play style suited touch @-@ based devices . Reviewers complimented the replay value and challenge found in completing the additional bonus objectives . 
 One aspect of the game 's design that drew criticism was that limitations of the grid system had led to a lack of paths available to complete a level . While Gies of Polygon thought that the mechanics of distraction and murder had been interpreted well in the board game setup , he was disappointed that some levels could not be completed without killing non @-@ target guards . Vincent of Destructoid also shared this opinion , disappointed that an element core to the Hitman series had been stripped away . Both Eurogamer and IGN writers thought that the in @-@ app purchases were overpriced but remarked that they could be easily ignored when level solutions are so regularly shared on the Internet . 
 Hitman Go received two nominations — Best Visual Design , Best Mobile Game — at the 2014 Golden Joystiq Awards , and in 2015 the game was nominated in two categories — Debut Game , Mobile & Handheld — at the 11th British Academy Games Awards . GameSpot and IGN both listed Hitman Go as a nominee for Best Mobile Game of 2014 in their end of year lists . The game also received two awards in the Best Game Design and Best iOS Game categories at the 2014 Canadian Videogame Awards . 
 = = Successors = = 
 At E3 2015 , Square Enix Montréal announced Lara Croft Go , a successor to Hitman Go set within the Tomb Raider universe . It was released on 27 August 2015 . In the game , players use touchscreen controls to move Lara Croft around a level composed of nodes and lines . While the core mechanics and design are similar to Hitman Go , the developers did not want Lara Croft Go to feel like a re @-@ skin , so an emphasis has been placed on the puzzle @-@ driven exploration and gameplay elements of the Tomb Raider brand . The following year , Square Enix Montréal announced a similar title Deus Ex Go , based on the Deus Ex series . 
 = Resident Evil 2 = 
 Resident Evil 2 , known in Japan as Biohazard 2 , is a 1998 survival horror video game originally released for the PlayStation . Developed by Capcom as the second installment in the Resident Evil series , its story takes place two months after the events of the first game , Resident Evil . It is set in Raccoon City , an American community whose residents have been transformed into zombies by the T @-@ virus , a biological weapon developed by the pharmaceutical company Umbrella . In their escape from the city , the two protagonists , Leon S. Kennedy and Claire Redfield , encounter other survivors , and are confronted by William Birkin , the mutated creator of the even more powerful weaponized virus called the G @-@ virus . 
 The gameplay of Resident Evil 2 focuses on exploration , puzzle solving and combat , and features typical survival horror elements such as limited saves and ammunition . The game 's main difference from its predecessor is the " Zapping System " , which provides each player character with unique storylines and obstacles . Developed by a team of 40 – 50 people over the course of one year and nine months , Resident Evil 2 was directed by Hideki Kamiya and produced by Shinji Mikami . The initial version of the game , commonly referred to as Resident Evil 1 @.@ 5 , differed drastically from the released product and was scrapped at a development stage of 60 – 80 percent , after being deemed " dull and boring " by the producer . The resulting redesign introduced different settings and a more cinematic story presentation , supported by a soundtrack that employs " desperation " as an underlying theme . 
 Resident Evil 2 was widely acclaimed by critics , who praised its atmosphere , setting , graphics and audio . Its controls , voice acting and inventory system garnered some criticism , however , and certain reviewers disliked its puzzles . The game has become a million @-@ seller , and is the franchise 's most successful title on a single platform . Years after its first release , Resident Evil 2 was included in several lists of the 100 best games . Following its initial success on the PlayStation , it was ported to Microsoft Windows , the Nintendo 64 , Dreamcast and GameCube , and was released as a modified 2.5D version for the Game.com handheld . The story of Resident Evil 2 was retold and built upon in several later games , and has been adapted into a variety of licensed works . Capcom released a sequel in 1999 , and a Resident Evil 2 remake is in development . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As a survival horror title , Resident Evil 2 features the same basic gameplay mechanics as its predecessor , Resident Evil . The player explores a fictional city while solving puzzles and fighting monsters . The game 's two protagonists may be equipped with firearms , but limited ammunition adds a tactical element to weapon use . On the status screen , the player can check the condition of the protagonists , use medicine to heal their wounds , and assign weapons . The characters ' current health can also be determined by their posture and movement speed . For example , a character will hold their stomach in pain if wounded , and will limp slowly if on the verge of death . The protagonists may carry a limited number of items , and must store others in boxes placed throughout the game world , where they may later be retrieved . Each protagonist is joined by a support partner during the course of the story . These characters accompany the player in certain scenes , and occasionally become playable . Certain rooms contain typewriters that the player may use to save the game . However , each save expends one of a limited number of ink ribbons , which the player must collect in the game world . The graphics of Resident Evil 2 are composed of real @-@ time generated – and thus movable – polygonal character and item models , superimposed over pre @-@ rendered backgrounds that are viewed from fixed camera angles . 
 The main addition over the preceding game is the " Zapping System " , by which each of the two playable characters is confronted with different puzzles and storylines in their respective scenarios . After finishing the " A " scenario with one protagonist , a " B " scenario , in which the events are depicted from the other character 's perspective , is unlocked . The player has the option of starting the " A " scenario with either of the two protagonists , resulting in a total of four different scenarios . Actions taken during the first playthrough affect the second . For example , the availability of certain items may be altered . After each game , the player receives a ranking based on the total time taken to complete the scenario , and on the number of saves and special healing items used . Depending on the player 's accomplishments , bonus weapons and costumes may be unlocked as a reward . The original version of Resident Evil 2 contains two stand @-@ alone minigames : " The 4th Survivor " and " The To @-@ fu Survivor " . In both of these minigames , the player must reach the goal while fighting every enemy along the way with only the default item loadout . All the later versions ( except the N64 version ) add a third minigame titled " Extreme Battle " , which consists of four playable characters and three stages . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game is set two months after the events of the first Resident Evil , in the Midwestern American mountain community of Raccoon City . Nearly all of its citizens have been transformed into zombies by an outbreak of the T @-@ virus , a new type of biological weapon secretly developed by the pharmaceutical company Umbrella . The game 's two protagonists are Leon S. Kennedy , a rookie police officer on his first day in the local force , and Claire Redfield , a college student looking for her brother Chris . Having just arrived in the city , Leon and Claire make their way to the Raccoon Police Department , seeking protection from the mutated population . However , after a runaway truck crashes into their police car and they are forced to split up after some zombies attack , Leon / Claire make it to the Police Headquarters . The player discover that the police station is abandoned and that most of the police officers have been killed , and that Chris has left town to investigate the Umbrella headquarters in Europe . With no remaining motivation to stay , the two protagonists split up to look for other survivors and flee the city . While searching for an escape route , Claire meets a little girl named Sherry , who is on the run from an unknown creature , and Leon encounters Ada Wong , who claims to be looking for her boyfriend John , an Umbrella researcher . 
 It is revealed that Leon 's superior officer , Raccoon City police chief Brian Irons , had been bribed by Umbrella to hide evidence of the company 's experiments in the outskirts of the city . He also concealed their development of the new G @-@ virus , an agent capable of mutating a human into the ultimate bioweapon . Irons tries to murder Claire but is killed by a G @-@ virus mutant in the police department . Then , Claire and Sherry escape through the sewers and become separated . After splitting up with Leon , Ada comes upon Sherry and picks up a golden pendant the girl loses while running away . Further into the sewers , Ada reluctantly teams up with Leon again , after he insists on his duty to protect her . They encounter a middle @-@ aged woman who fires at Ada , but Leon dives between them and takes a bullet himself . Ada ignores the unconscious Leon and follows the woman , who reveals herself to be Sherry 's mother Annette and the wife of William Birkin , the Umbrella scientist who created the G @-@ virus . In an attempt to protect his life 's work from special agents sent by the Umbrella headquarters , he injected himself with the virus , which turned him into the malformed creature that is now chasing Sherry . Annette recognizes her daughter 's pendant and attempts to take it from Ada . A fight ensues , during which Annette is thrown over a railing . Ada learns that the golden locket contains a sample of the G @-@ virus , and later – taken over by her emotions – returns to Leon , tending to his bullet wound . 
 Meanwhile , Claire is reunited with Sherry and discovers that the mutated Birkin has implanted his daughter with an embryo to produce offspring . Leon , Ada , Claire and Sherry advance through an abandoned factory connected to Umbrella 's secret underground research facility . An attack by Birkin leaves Ada heavily wounded , and Leon explores the laboratory to find something to treat her wounds . He is interrupted by a psychotic Annette , who explains to him that Ada 's relationship with John was only a means of getting information about Umbrella : Ada is a spy sent to steal the G @-@ virus for an unknown organization . Just as Annette is about to shoot Leon , a Tyrant monster appears , and she is forced to retreat . Ada returns to save Leon and defeats the Tyrant seemingly at the cost of her own life . She confesses her love to Leon , who leaves behind her motionless body . Meanwhile , Annette tries to escape with another sample of the G @-@ virus but is fatally wounded by her mutated husband . However , before she dies , she tells Claire how to create a vaccine that will stop the mutations caused by the embryo within Sherry . After preparing the cure , Leon and Claire reunite at an emergency escape train and inject Sherry with the vaccine , which saves her life . Birkin – now mutated into a large agglomeration of flesh and teeth – follows them , but is destroyed when a self @-@ destruct system causes the train to explode . After escaping from the city with Sherry , Leon intends to take down Umbrella , while Claire continues to search for her brother . Ada is implied to have survived and to have made away with the G @-@ virus in the pendant . The minigame " The 4th Survivor " depicts the successful G @-@ virus retrieval mission of Hunk , one of the special agents sent by Umbrella . " The To @-@ fu Survivor " and " Extreme Battle " are stand @-@ alone missions that are unconnected to the plot of the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Resident Evil 1 @.@ 5 = = = 
 Development of Resident Evil 2 began one month after the completion of its predecessor in early 1996 . The first footage of the game was shown at the V Jump Festival ' 96 in July . This early build , later dubbed " Resident Evil 1 @.@ 5 " ( " Biohazard 1 @.@ 5 " in Japan ) by producer Shinji Mikami , differed drastically from the released version in its scenario , presentation and gameplay mechanics . Its plot followed the same basic outline as that of Resident Evil 2 , and featured a zombie outbreak in Raccoon City two months after the events of the first game . In this version of the story , however , Umbrella had already been closed down as a consequence of their illegal experiments . The development team sought to retain the level of fear from the original game , and thus introduced to the narrative two new characters who lacked experience with terrifying situations : Leon S. Kennedy , largely identical to his persona in the final build , and Elza Walker , a college student and motorcycle racer vacationing in Raccoon City , her hometown . Unlike the final version , the story paths of Leon and Elza did not cross , and each playable character had two support partners instead of just one . Leon received help from fellow police officer Marvin Branagh and a researcher named Ada , while Elza was aided by Sherry Birkin and a man named John , whose design was used for gun shop owner Robert Kendo in the released Resident Evil 2 . 
 Real @-@ world influences had an impact on several character designs by artists Isao Ohishi and Ryoji <unk> . For example , Ohishi based Leon on his bloodhound , and Annette Birkin was modeled after actress Jodie Foster . The police department in which Resident Evil 1 @.@ 5 began had a more modern and realistic design , and was smaller than the final building seen in Resident Evil 2 . There were more encounters with surviving policemen , such as a superior officer of Leon called Roy . The number of polygons used for enemy models was far lower than in the released version . This allowed many zombies to appear on the screen , a method of invoking fear in the player that recurred throughout Resident Evil 1 @.@ 5 . Furthermore , the game employed dynamic music , and frequently applied alterations to the pre @-@ rendered backgrounds in response to events during the gameplay . The playable characters could be equipped with gear , such as protective clothes that enhanced their defense and enabled them to carry more items . The characters ' polygonal models were altered by costume changes and by damage received from enemies . 
 = = = Final version = = = 
 The development was carried out by a 40- to 50 @-@ person group that would later be part of Capcom Production Studio 4 . Director Hideki Kamiya led the team , which was composed of newer Capcom employees and over half of the staff from the original Resident Evil . In the initial stages of development , producer Mikami often had creative disagreements with Kamiya , and tried to influence the team with his own direction . He eventually stepped back to an overseeing role as producer , and only demanded to be shown the current build once a month . Believing the game 's assets to be good individually , but not yet satisfactory as a whole , Mikami expected that everything would coalesce in the three months leading up to the projected May 1997 release date . Shortly thereafter , however , Resident Evil 1 @.@ 5 was scrapped at a development stage of 60 – 80 percent . Mikami later explained that the game would not have reached the desired quality in the aforementioned period , and especially frowned upon the gameplay and locations for being " dull and boring " . 
 The story of Resident Evil 1 @.@ 5 , with which Mikami planned to end the series , was criticized by supervisor Yoshiki Okamoto , who found it to be too conclusive to allow for future installments . Instead , Okamoto proposed the creation of a fictional universe that would turn Resident Evil into a metaseries – similar to the Gundam and James Bond franchises – in which self @-@ contained stories with common elements could be told . During a period in which the team made no progress rewriting the scenario , Okamoto was introduced to professional screenwriter Noboru Sugimura , who was enthusiastic about the first game 's story . Sugimura was initially consulted on a trial basis , but Okamoto was impressed by the ease with which the writer came up with solutions to the problems that plagued the script , and soon asked him to compose the entire scenario for Resident Evil 2 . One fundamental modification to the story was the reworking of Elza Walker into Claire Redfield , in order to introduce a connection to the plot of the first game . To fulfill Capcom 's sales plan of two million copies , director Kamiya tried to attract new customers with a more ostentatious and Hollywood @-@ like story presentation . As Okamoto did not want to simply enforce the new direction , he had Sugimura discuss the plot revisions with Mikami and the development staff . The planners redesigned the game from the ground up to fit the changes , and the programmers and other remaining members of the team were sent to work on Resident Evil Director 's Cut , which was shipped with a playable preview disc of the new Resident Evil 2 version in order to promote the sequel and to apologize to the players for its belated release . 
 Only a few assets from Resident Evil 1 @.@ 5 could be recycled , as the principal locations in the final build were made to look more extravagant and artistic , based on photographs taken of the interiors of Western @-@ style buildings in Japanese cities . These environments were created with a software program called O2 , and each background took two to three weeks to render . The maximum number of zombies displayed on the screen at one time was limited to seven , making it possible to use 450 polygons for the comparatively detailed models of Leon and Claire . The protagonists , instead of being given visible wounds , were made to limp slowly upon receiving heavy damage . Apart from the graphics , one of the most important new features was the " Zapping System " , which was partly inspired by Back to the Future Part II , a time travel @-@ themed film sequel that offers a different perspective on the story of the original film . The voice @-@ overs by the all @-@ Canadian cast of Resident Evil 2 were recorded before the actual cutscenes were completed , with each of the actors selected from a roster of ten people per role . Thereafter , the full @-@ motion videos ( FMVs ) were created by filming stop motion animations of action figures , which were then rendered to completed pictures with computer graphics ( CG ) tools . Ada 's movie model could not be finished in time . Thus , she is the only main character not to appear in a pre @-@ rendered cutscene . 
 Several changes had to be made between the regional releases of Resident Evil 2 . The North American version contains more violent " game over " screens , which were removed from the Japanese Biohazard 2 . Resident Evil 2 was also made more difficult than its Japanese equivalent to prevent rentals from affecting U.S. sales . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for Resident Evil 2 was composed by Masami Ueda , Shusaku Uchiyama and <unk> <unk> , with one song ( The Underground Laboratory ) composed by Naoshi Mizuta . The compositions were meant to convey " desperation " as their underlying theme . In his role as lead composer , Ueda provided the motifs , while Uchiyama was responsible for the horror @-@ themed music used for the investigation and movie scenes . The main theme of the score , a versatile three @-@ note leitmotif , appears several times throughout the course of the story , being included in compositions such as " Prologue " , " Raccoon City " and " The Third <unk> of G " . Various musical styles , ranging from ambient horror music to industrial pieces , are used to represent the different environments of the game . For example , the streets of Raccoon City are emphasized with militaristic percussion @-@ based music , while the police department features ominous piano underscores . Key events of the story are supported with orchestral and cinematic compositions – a move that was inspired by blockbuster films . 
 Two albums containing music from the game were released in January and August 1998 , respectively . The first , Biohazard 2 Original Soundtrack , is the main release and includes most of the significant compositions . The second , Biohazard 2 Complete Track , largely encompasses less prevalent themes , but offers an orchestral medley and a second CD with sound effects and voice collections , as well as an interview with the sound staff . Biohazard 2 Original Soundtrack received an identical European CD titled Resident Evil 2 Original Soundtrack . In the North American album of the same name , the opening theme " The Beginning of Story " is split up into four individual tracks . Five orchestral arrangements of the game 's music were included on the Bio Hazard Orchestra Album , a recording of a live concert performed by the New Japan Philharmonic . Disc jockey Piston Nishizawa created electronic remixes for several of the compositions , which were later released as the album Biohazard 2 Remix : Metamorphoses . 
 = = Releases and ports = = 
 After its initial release for the PlayStation in January 1998 , Resident Evil 2 was reissued and ported to other systems , often gaining new features in the process . The first re @-@ release was the Dual Shock Ver . , which incorporated support for the vibration and analog control functions of the PlayStation 's DualShock controller . Other additions include a new unlockable minigame called " Extreme Battle " , and a " Rookie " mode that enables the player to start the main story with a powerful weapon that features infinite ammunition . The Japanese release of the Dual Shock Ver. contained a " U.S.A. Version " mode based on the difficulty level of Resident Evil 2 's Western versions . 
 The Dual Shock Ver. served as the basis for the majority of ports , such as the Windows 9x @-@ based PC @-@ CD release , which was titled Resident Evil 2 Platinum in North America . Aside from retaining all previously added features , the PC version can be run in higher resolutions . A " Data Gallery " was added to the main menu , allowing the player to view movies , rough sketches , illustrations and 3D models . In February 2006 , a Japan @-@ exclusive , Windows XP @-@ compatible PC @-@ DVD re @-@ release was published . Developed by Sourcenext , it included high @-@ quality FMVs encoded at a resolution of 640 × 480 pixels . The Dreamcast version keeps the additions from the original PC release , and incorporates real @-@ time display of the character 's condition on the Visual Memory Unit peripheral . The Japanese edition of the Dreamcast port was given the subtitle Value Plus and came with a playable demo of Resident Evil Code : Veronica . An unmodified port of the Dual Shock Ver. was released for the GameCube . The initial PlayStation version was re @-@ released on the Japanese PlayStation Network in 2007 , while the service 's North American counterpart received the Dual Shock Ver. two years later . 
 The Nintendo 64 version of Resident Evil 2 differs most from the other releases is the first of very few games released for the console to have FMVs despite the limited storage space on the cartridge . Over the course of twelve months and with a budget of $ 1 million , Resident Evil 2 was ported to the console by a staff of about 20 employees from Capcom Production Studio 3 , Angel Studios and Factor 5 . This version offers features that were not included on any other system , such as alternate costumes , the ability to adjust the degree of violence and to change the blood color , a randomizer to place items differently during each playthrough , and a more responsive first @-@ person control scheme . Additionally , the port features 16 new in @-@ game documents known as the " Ex Files " , written by <unk> Oyama . Hidden throughout the four scenarios , they reveal new information about the series ' lore and connect the story of Resident Evil 2 to those of the other installments . The Nintendo 64 version adjusts its display resolution depending on the number of polygonal models currently on screen , and supports the console 's Expansion Pak accessory for a maximum resolution of 640 × 480 during gameplay . Other visual enhancements include smoother character animations and sharper , perspective @-@ corrected textures for the 3D models . The music of the Nintendo 64 version uses Dolby Surround , and was converted by Chris Hülsbeck , Rudolf Stember and Thomas Engel . The team reworked the sound set from the ground up to provide each instrument with a higher sample rate than on the PlayStation , thus resulting in higher @-@ quality music . Some features from the other enhanced ports based on the Dual Shock Ver. do not appear in the Nintendo 64 version , such as the " Extreme Battle " minigame . 
 A port of Resident Evil 2 for the Sega Saturn was developed internally at Capcom for a time , but technical difficulties led to its cancellation in October 1998 . Tiger Electronics released a sprite @-@ based 2.5D version for their Game.com handheld in late 1998 . It included only Leon 's story path , and removed several of the original game 's core features . In February 2013 , an unfinished build of Resident Evil 1 @.@ 5 was leaked onto the Internet . 
 A Tech Demo for the Game Boy Advance was created by <unk> Studios to show off the power of the Game Boy Advance . The demo was never authorized by Capcom , and a version of the game can be found online . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Promoted with a US $ 5 million advertising campaign , Resident Evil 2 became the fastest @-@ selling video game in North America . On the weekend following its release , it sold 380 @,@ 000 copies and grossed US $ 19 million . It therefore surpassed the revenue of all but one Hollywood movie at that time and broke previous sales records set by the video games Final Fantasy VII and Super Mario 64 . With 4 @.@ 96 million copies sold , the PlayStation version of Resident Evil 2 was a commercial success , and is the franchise 's best @-@ selling game on a single platform . Another 810 @,@ 000 copies of the Dual Shock Ver. were shipped by March 1999 . 
 = = = Initial reviews = = = 
 Resident Evil 2 received critical acclaim from critics . Its original PlayStation release holds average scores of 93 percent at GameRankings and 89 out of 100 points at Metacritic . The majority of reviews praised Resident Evil 2 for its atmosphere , setting , graphics and audio , but criticized its controls , voice acting and certain gameplay elements . [ b ] 
 IGN 's Ricardo Sanchez thought that the game 's atmosphere was " dead on " , and claimed that " [ the ] graphics , sound effects , music and level design all work together to create a spooky , horror @-@ filled world " . Ryan Mac Donald of GameSpot shared the opinion , and found the game to be " like a product out of Hollywood " . He believed that it was " more an interactive , cinematic experience than a video game " . Writing for ComputerAndVideoGames.com , Paul Mallinson considered the game 's atmosphere , story and film @-@ like presentation its most outstanding features . Although he found its plot to be " far @-@ fetched " , he noted that it was ultimately " kept down to earth by clever scripting and gritty storytelling " . GamePro staff writer Mike Weigand called the narrative " engrossing and dramatic " , and the dialogue " well @-@ written " and " spell @-@ binding " . Sanchez , GameSpy 's Brian Davis and Eurogamer.net 's Martin Taylor praised the " Zapping System " for adding to the story and increasing the replay value . Mac Donald thought that the idea of actions in the first scenario affecting the second was " cool in concept " , but underused in the game . 
 Resident Evil 2 was also praised for its graphics , which many critics felt were a substantial improvement upon those of the first installment . Sanchez and Weigand thought that the pre @-@ rendered backgrounds were an impressive leap ahead of those in the original Resident Evil , thanks to their increased detail and interactivity . Mac Donald praised the model animations for having reached " true realism " , and commended the game 's use of body language as a means of seamlessly communicating the condition of the protagonists ' health . Allgame 's Shawn Sackenheim awarded its graphics the highest possible score , as he found the backgrounds to be " rendered to perfection " , the cutscenes " a work of art " and the animation " fluid and eerie " . The audio was well received by critics . Weigand cited it as an " excellent accompaniment to the visuals " . Sanchez went as far as to say that Resident Evil 2 " may have the best sound design yet for a console game " . Sackenheim described the music and sound effects as " spot on perfect " , and called the soundtrack " perfectly composed " , while Mac Donald likened the game 's use of audio to that of classic horror films . 
 A common point of criticism was the inventory system , which Sanchez called " a pain " . He frowned upon the player 's need to retrieve objects from item boxes , and Mac Donald criticized the system for being unrealistic , as the boxes are " [ magically ] " interconnected and all items take the same amount of space when being carried , regardless of their size . Furthermore , Mallinson and Mac Donald disapproved of certain puzzles , which they believed were out of place in a police station setting . Sanchez thought that the puzzles were paced better than in the first game , but also found them less interesting and too easy for experienced players . Sackenheim noted the game 's brevity in his review , and remarked that the individual scenarios are not different enough to hold the interest of casual players until the end of the game . He found the controls to be " easy to pick up and play " , while Sanchez thought that aiming weapons was difficult . Certain reviewers panned the voice acting , calling it " cheesy " , " terrible " and " barbaric " . [ c ] 
 = = = Later reviews = = = 
 With the exception of the game 's critically acclaimed Nintendo 64 port , most later releases of Resident Evil 2 have received slightly lower scores than the PlayStation version . [ d ] Weigand advised players who already owned Resident Evil 2 to rent the Dual Shock Ver. for the " Extreme Battle " minigame , and recommended that newcomers buy the updated edition instead of the original release . The Windows port was praised for its additional content , but criticized for not allowing the player to save at will , and for lacking updated backgrounds to fit the higher in @-@ game resolution . [ e ] The Nintendo 64 version was widely commended for the technical achievement of fitting a two @-@ disc game on a single 512 @-@ Mbit ( <unk> ) cartridge . However , Taylor criticized the game for retaining scenes from the PlayStation version that were used to conceal loading times – a technical disadvantage of optical discs that cartridges do not share . [ f ] A GamePro writer under the pseudonym " The Freshman " was impressed with the enhanced graphics of the Nintendo 64 port , but was disappointed by its heavily compressed CG FMVs . GameSpot 's Joe Fielder found the compression to be forgivable given the cartridge format , and noted that the new exclusive features made up for the lack of the " Extreme Battle " mode . IGN reviewer Matt Casamassina applauded the implementation of Dolby Surround support , and called the Nintendo 64 release the " best version of the game " . 
 The clearer sound effects of the Dreamcast port were received well by Game Revolution 's Shawn Sparks , who also remarked that the character models look slightly sharper . However , Steve Key of ComputerAndVideoGames.com disliked the Dreamcast release 's low @-@ resolution backgrounds , which he thought made the characters stand out too much from the environments , and thus lessened the game 's atmosphere . GameSpot staff writer James Mielke did not believe that the Dreamcast port was " an essential purchase " , but still called it a " great game " and , thanks to its low retail price , an attractive offer . The GameCube release was heavily criticized for its high price and dated graphics . [ g ] However , " Four @-@ Eyed Dragon " of GamePro noted that it offered the best in @-@ game visuals of any version of the game . Davis and 1UP.com 's Mark MacDonald were disappointed by the port 's lack of features that were included in the Nintendo 64 release . Peer Schneider of IGN found the 2.5D version for the Game.com to be frustrating and only " partially faithful " to the original release of Resident Evil 2 . Although he felt that its graphics and sound effects managed to recreate the original game 's atmosphere to a certain extent , he thought that its controls were too " sluggish " to allow for an enjoyable experience . 
 = = = Retrospective = = = 
 Resident Evil 2 has been held in high regard in the years following its initial release , and was named the fourth best game on the PlayStation by Famitsu . Electronic Gaming Monthly , IGN , Game Informer and Official UK PlayStation Magazine included it in their lists of the 100 best games of all time ; it came in 62nd , 58th , 34th and sixth place , respectively . [ a ] Readers of Retro Gamer voted Resident Evil 2 the 97th top retro game , with the staff noting that it was " considered by many to be the best in the long @-@ running series " . GameTrailers ranked it fourth on a list of the games that most needed remakes . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The story of Resident Evil 2 was the basis for several licensed works and later games . Ted Adams and Kris <unk> loosely adapted it into the comics " Raccoon City – R.I.P. " and " A New Chapter of Evil " , which were released in the first and second issues of Resident Evil : The Official Comic Book Magazine in March and June 1998 . The 60 @-@ issue Cantonese manhua Shēnghuà Wēijī 2 ( lit . " Biological Crisis 2 " ) was published weekly from February 1998 to April 1999 . A romantic comedy retelling of the game 's story , centered on Leon , Claire and Ada , was released as the Taiwanese two @-@ issue comic Èlíng Gǔbǎo II ( lit . " Demon Castle II " ) . Resident Evil : City of the Dead , a 1999 book written by author S. D. Perry , is a more direct adaptation of the narrative , and is the third release in her series of Resident Evil novelizations , published by Pocket Books in 1999 . 
 The mobile game Resident Evil : Uprising contains a condensed version of the Resident Evil 2 story , adapted by Megan Swaine . Resident Evil : The Darkside Chronicles , an on @-@ rails shooter released for the Wii in 2009 , includes a scenario named " Memories of a Lost City " , which reimagines the original Resident Evil 2 plot while retaining key scenes from the game 's four scenarios . In 2008 , Resident Evil 5 producer Jun Takeuchi , who had previously worked on the series as weapons designer and graphics animator , alluded to the possibility of a full @-@ fledged remake of Resident Evil 2 . Such a project had already been considered for the GameCube in 2002 , but Mikami abandoned the idea as he did not want to delay the in @-@ development Resident Evil 4 . 
 The story arcs introduced in Resident Evil 2 continue in drama albums and later game releases . Kyoko <unk> , Junichi <unk> , Yasuyuki Suzuki , Noboru Sugimura , <unk> Soda and <unk> Miyagi – screenwriters employed by Capcom 's former scenario subsidiary Flagship – created two radio dramas titled Chiisana <unk> Sherry ( lit . " The Little Runaway Sherry " ) and <unk> Onna Spy Ada ( lit . " The Female Spy Ada Lives " ) . The dramas were broadcast on Radio Osaka in early 1999 , and later released by publisher Suleputer as two separate CDs with the common title Biohazard 2 Drama Album . Chiisana <unk> Sherry begins shortly after the events of the game . Sherry is separated from Claire while fleeing from Umbrella soldiers sent to kill all witnesses of the viral outbreak . Raccoon City is burned down by the U.S. Government and Umbrella in an attempt to cover up the disaster . Sherry seeks refuge in the neighboring town of Stone Ville , and later escapes to Canada with the help of a girl named Meg , who vows to help her reunite with Claire . 
 <unk> Onna Spy Ada is set a few days after Resident Evil 2 , and deals with Ada 's mission to retrieve Sherry 's pendant with the G @-@ virus sample , which is said to be in the possession of Hunk in the backstory of the drama album . Ada intercepts the delivery of the locket in France , and kills Hunk and his men . As a consequence of an accidental T @-@ virus leak in Loire Village , the destination of the delivery , Ada is forced to retreat to an old castle . Along with a unit of the French Air Force sent to burn down the village , she encounters Christine Henry , the Umbrella facility director who gave Hunk the order to deliver the G @-@ virus to France . Jacob , the leader of the airborne unit , is revealed to be Christine 's co @-@ conspirator . However , he plans to keep the G @-@ virus sample for himself , and shoots her . Philippe , another member of the unit , convinces Ada to give him the pendant , after which he injects himself with the G @-@ virus to give himself the power to stop Jacob . Ada escapes and realizes her feelings for Leon , deciding to quit the spy business and return to him . The two drama albums are considered " what @-@ if " scenarios and are not acknowledged in later series releases . The characters ' story arcs are continued differently : Sherry is taken into custody by the U.S. Government immediately after the events of Resident Evil 2 , and Ada keeps the pendant with the G @-@ virus and resumes her activities as a spy . Hunk successfully delivers a separate G @-@ virus sample to Umbrella . 
 On August 12 , 2015 , Capcom producer Yoshiaki Hirabayashi confirmed that a remake of Resident Evil 2 is in development . 
 = Guitar Hero : On Tour series = 
 Guitar Hero : On Tour is a series of music video games based on the Guitar Hero series for the Nintendo DS handheld game system . The series is developed by Vicarious Visions and distributed by RedOctane and Activision . Three games in the series have been released since June 2008 : Guitar Hero : On Tour , Guitar Hero On Tour : Decades and Guitar Hero On Tour : Modern Hits . 
 As with other games in the Guitar Hero series , the player is challenged to play through the lead or bass guitar portions of rock songs by matching colored notes that scroll on screen towards the player in time with physical actions to score points and keep the virtual crowd pleased . While the console versions of Guitar Hero use a separate guitar @-@ shaped peripheral , Vicarious Visions developed a " Guitar Grip " unit that slips into the Game Boy Advance port on the DS or the DS Lite to be used with the games ; the Grip is incompatible with the Nintendo DSi and Nintendo 3DS . The Guitar Grip provides a strap to hold the game unit while providing the player with four fret buttons ; the player uses the fret buttons in combination with using the stylus to simulate strumming on the touch @-@ sensitive screen of the DS . Each game features more than 25 songs , with some variation in track lists depending on the region of release , and multiple single @-@ player modes . The local wi @-@ fi capabilities of the DS are used for multiplayer mode , and allow a player to use songs from one installment of the series in competitive modes with a player with a different installment . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The core gameplay remains unchanged from the other games in the series . The Guitar Grip is required to play the game and comes as part of a bundle that can be purchased for each installment . The Grip is designed for the DS Lite , but features a small adapter that can be removed for use in the older Nintendo DS models . Four fret buttons are located on the side of the unit near the cartridge slot . This is one less than the normal five frets , included an orange @-@ colored one , managed by other Guitar Hero controllers . A wriststrap is attached to the underside to provide support while playing . The player holds the unit in a vertical book orientation ( similar to Ninja Gaiden : Dragon Sword or Hotel Dusk : Room 215 ) , and uses a special guitar pick @-@ shaped stylus to strum on the touchscreen of the DS with their free hand . The " note highway " and the performance of the chosen character in the band are shown on the opposite screen . As notes scroll down on the note highway , the player must press the correct fret button and strum the touchscreen at the same time to successfully score points . While holding a long note , the player can also use the touch screen to apply a whammy effect by moving the stylus across the on @-@ screen whammy bar or anywhere on the screen . After the player has successfully hit a selected series of notes , he or she will gain " Star Power " which doubles their score until the meter has run out . This is activated by yelling or blowing into the DS 's microphone , by pressing any of the face buttons on the DS , or by tapping the Star Power meter on the touchscreen . 
 There is a single player Career Mode , allowing the player to select from new characters introduced for On Tour or previous characters from the other games in the Guitar Hero series . Completing Career Mode will unlock more venues and options for the selected character 's appearance . The game uses the local wireless abilities of the Nintendo DS to support both 2 @-@ player co @-@ operative play and competitive play . The competitive play introduces concepts found in Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock 's " Battle Mode " which is called " Guitar Duel " . In Guitar Duel , one player can create a temporary distraction for the other player by successfully completing certain sections of the song . In On Tour , these distractions require the affected player to use features of the DS to remove the distraction . Modern Hits introduces a new single player gameplay feature called " Fan Requests " that is used to progress in the single player career . These requests prompt the player to complete songs with certain requirements , such as hitting a minimum number of consecutive notes or hitting a minimum percentage of the notes in the song . Other requests are based on the effects players use in multiplayer mode , such as playing an entire song at " <unk> " ( notes moving on the screen faster than normal ) or by using the whammy bar on every sustained note . 
 = = Development = = 
 Work on a Nintendo DS version of Guitar Hero started in early 2007 according to Vicarious Visions CEO , Karthik Bala . Bala stated that the inspiration for the game was to " see if it was even possible to do a really good music rhythm game on a handheld " . The first six months of development were " touch and go " , according to Bala , and it took nearly a year of testing and experimentation to determine the best strumming mechanism for the game . Bala claimed that Vicarious Visions had gone through more than 20 different combinations of software and hardware peripherals until they " hit upon the idea of creating a peripheral that would have the fret buttons plugging into the GBA slot of the DS " . This also gave the advantage of making the peripheral compact , allowing it to be easily carried by the user . Other designs that were tested but dropped included a larger guitar @-@ shaped unit that the DS was attached to ( dubbed " <unk> Hero " by the design team ) , different grips with three to six to twelve buttons , and gameplay that was built only around using the stylus . Not until the initial prototype was done did Vicarious Visions approach Nintendo and RedOctane ; both companies were skeptical of the game but helped to support the team , Nintendo by assisting in the hardware interaction with the DS , and RedOctane by helping with the ergonomics of the Guitar Grip . This peripheral is not compatible with the Nintendo DSi because it lacks a GBA slot to insert the grip into , but Vicarious Visions has stated that it is eager to continue development of the series on the DSi . 
 Even with the hardware designed , Vicarious Visions spent additional time refining the game play . According to lead designer Jeremy Russo , the team had the largest number of playtesters brought in for any Vicarious Vision project in order to refine the touchscreen " strumming " action , using a range of testers , including those that had never played a Guitar Hero game , the " ' DragonForce ' Expert " players , and real guitar players . In addition , the team wanted to expand the " Guitar Duel " mode to include several DS @-@ specific mini @-@ games that could not be recreated on other consoles , but found themselves running out of time . RedOctane wanted to see On Tour as a " polished AAA title on a handheld " and insisted that the " Guitar Duel " be a key feature of the game , giving Vicarious Visions more time to complete the game . The additional time allowed the team to develop the software to recognize every type of strumming approach , including finding a solution to handle the expert players that strummed faster than could be previously recognized . This time also was used to strengthen the " Guitar Duel " gameplay , and as a result , this mode became the testers ' favorite feature of the game . While some tracks were brought over from Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock , Vicarious Visions recreated all the note tracks for the game , aiming to keep the same difference in difficulty from Easy to Expert as in the console versions . Each song has been divided into three separate compressed tracks that play back simultaneously during gameplay . Vicarious Visions developed a method to overcome the 2 @,@ 000 @-@ polygon drawing limit imposed by the Nintendo DS hardware in order to allow the characters , each composed of about 2 @,@ 000 polygons , to be recognizable . 
 Bala stated that Vicarious Visions envisioned the " On Tour " series as a trilogy , and despite the availability of the DSi before the release of " Modern Hits " , it wanted to finish out the series on the DS system . While Bala has not revealed what plans the development team has for the DSi for Guitar Hero , they have used their experience in creating the DSiWare game Mixed Messages to prepare for further Guitar Hero games on the unit , including the possibility of downloadable content . Much of the core aspects of the On Tour series will be reused in the DS version of Band Hero , also being developed in part by Vicarious Visions ; the game will <unk> the " Guitar Grip " while adding drumming support through a " drum skin " and vocals through the DS ' microphone , and support for four player localized play has been included . 
 = = = On Tour = = = 
 Guitar Hero : On Tour was officially announced on September 7 , 2007 , at the Austin GDC ' 07 , and released on June 22 , 2008 . During a conference call on May 8 , 2008 , Activision revealed that the game would be sold as an individual game ( along with the " Guitar Grip " ) as well as bundled with the DS hardware itself . In North America , Nintendo released a bundle which included Guitar Hero : On Tour and a limited edition Silver / Black Nintendo DS Lite branded with the Guitar Hero logo . This bundle was available with the release of Guitar Hero : On Tour in the United Kingdom . This is the first third @-@ party DS game to be included in such a bundle . When pre @-@ ordered in certain stores , the consumer received either a special Guitar Hero : On Tour set of headphones , Nintendo DS Lite " wrap " pack ( two stickers for use on the console ) or an exclusive guitar pick stylus . The headphones and stylus feature the Guitar Hero : On Tour logo . On June 14 , Toys " R " Us stores across the US hosted a " First to Play " event , where players tried out the game more than a week before its release . Also at the event , anyone who attended received a free Guitar Hero sticker , a temporary tattoo , and a special dog tag . 
 = = = Decades = = = 
 Guitar Hero On Tour : Decades was announced on July 15 , 2008 , at the 2008 E3 conference , and released on November 16 , 2008 . Executive Producer David <unk> stated that the short time between releases was to help give DS players the same depth of content as available to the console players of Guitar Hero . Additionally , Vicarious Visions incorporated the ability to share songs between different versions of the game through the wi @-@ fi capabilities of the DS in order to expand the number of potential songs to more than 50 . 
 = = = Modern Hits = = = 
 Guitar Hero On Tour : Modern Hits was announced on March 5 , 2009 , and released on June 9 , 2009 . Reflecting its title , Modern Hits incorporates songs published within the last five years of its release , and the developers had to balance what songs were included in order to make a setlist with a wide appeal . The engine of the game has no major changes , but Vicarious Visions stated that it has continued to work on strum detection on the DS touchpad to meet a wide range of playstyles . The interface , however , has been revised over the previous two On Tour titles to feature a more modernized look ( particularly in @-@ game on the touch screen side ) . The game includes a new single player career progression using " Fan Requests " to create a new non @-@ linear progression through the songs in the games . These were added to help move away from gameplay that was " just going , playing a venue , and then moving on to the next one " and instead to " open the world up " . The developers also noted that the Fan Requests helped to tap into the way that players had previously played games in the series , setting their own personal goals for certain songs . Audio designer Jason Willey created the game 's theme song through his two @-@ man band , <unk> – <unk> , to capture the Modern Hits theme of the game , and after demonstrating a sampling of the song to the rest of the team , were asked to create the whole song . The theme song was released as a free download for Guitar Hero World Tour the week before the game 's release . 
 = = = Band Hero = = = 
 In addition to the above games , a Nintendo DS version of Band Hero was also released . It is compatible with the On Tour Guitar Grip , as well as a unique " Drum Skin " and microphone support , but is not considered part of the On Tour series . 
 = = Soundtracks = = 
 Each game in the series contains 25 or more songs , generally consisting of rock music over the past 50 years . The <unk> varies ; some songs replace others depending on the region of release . On Tour used a number of cover versions of the songs in addition to master recordings , while both Decades and Modern Hits feature complete soundtracks based on master recordings . The games support the local wi @-@ fi connection of the Nintendo DS to allow players to play against each other even if using different versions of the game , with songs being share in an ad hoc manner during play . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews of On Tour = = = 
 Guitar Hero : On Tour received somewhat positive reviews . In general , critics felt the game captured the majority of the elements of the Guitar Hero series , and IGN commented that the note tracks were well done as to provide " a great challenge with a solid difficulty curve " . However , the primary concern of reviewers was the Guitar Grip , as it was both difficult to hold and caused hand cramps in some players . The Grip was also reported to seat poorly in the GBA slot and came out of the unit at times , which caused the game to stop unexpectedly . Reviews reported difficulty in keeping the DS unit steady while playing with the Grip , making it difficult to follow the note patterns on the screen . Reviewers found the set list to be both short and somewhat skewed towards recent music , and some commented that the sound quality of the tracks was poor . The multiplayer aspects of the game were well received . While some reviewers considered the game as an " absolute Guitar Hero experience " , others noted that the social aspect of the series was not present , and that the game felt " more like an experiment than a full @-@ fledged game , as if Activision just wanted to see if it could be pulled off . " 
 Guitar Hero : On Tour has won several Nintendo awards from IGN for their 2008 Nintendo DS Best of 2008 feature , including Best Music / Rhythm Game , Most Innovative Design , and Best Local Multiplayer . It was also nominated for several other Nintendo DS awards , including Best Use of Sound , Best Graphics Technology , and Game of the Year . 
 The game was the top selling DS game in North America the week of its release , selling over 300 @,@ 000 units , and setting the record for any Activision DS release and as one of the top five releases from Activision on any platform . The game continued to be the best selling DS title in North America in its second week of release . On Tour was the second best @-@ selling game across all systems for the month of June 2008 , according to the NPD Group selling more than 422 @,@ 000 units . In July and August 2008 , it sold an additional 309 @,@ 700 and 110 @,@ 000 units in North America , respectively , placing on NPD 's top ten game sales for both months . The worldwide release of On Tour took in over $ 15 million in sales during the month of July 2008 . The bundled version of Guitar Hero : On Tour is the 19th best @-@ selling Nintendo DS game in the United States , selling 1 @.@ 1 million copies as of November 2008 . 
 = = = Reviews of Decades = = = 
 Decades received better reviews than On Tour , with reviewers noting that the game , released only a short time after the original On Tour , felt more like an expansion pack than a new title . Critics noted that there was no change in the hardware design and the gameplay mechanics , such that the same issues with hand @-@ cramping and the inability to keep the DS steady while playing still persisted in Decades . Reviewers did praise the compatibility with the previous On Tour title , the improved touch screen interface , and the ability to play competitively with other users regardless of which version of the game they possessed . 
 The tracklist was considered to be well @-@ rounded ; IGN explained the game 's tracklist " starts out bad but starts getting more enjoyable as you unlock the earlier decades " though attributed this partially to personal taste . However , reviewers also noted that with the songs presented in chronological order , the difficulty curve presented in other Guitar Hero games was not present . The poor audio quality of the songs , a problem that was also noted with On Tour , was found to persist in this sequel . Hyper 's Tracey Lien commends the game for " staying as true to Guitar Hero as the DS can possibly allow " but criticises it for " major hand cramps , poor song selection , and too few tracks ! " 
 = = = Reviews of Modern Hits = = = 
 Modern Hits received moderate reviews from the gaming press . The game 's change of form from having fixed set lists that must be completed to move on , to the fan requests system , though found it still tedious to work through the game in this fashion , according to IGN 's Craig Harris . Albert García of Eurogamer considered that the series is still lacking features found in the console @-@ based games , but remains a consistent " little brother " to the main series ' titles . The soundtrack was considered to have stronger guitar portions than from previous games , but still felt like a " disco " collection . Modern Hits was criticized in part for being a " victim of Nintendo 's timing " , according to Harris , as the game was released shortly after the arrival of the Nintendo DSi unit , which lacks the necessary port to use the Guitar Grip , thus making Modern Hits unplayable on the system . 
 = U Gambira = 
 U Gambira ( Burmese : <unk> ် <unk> ္ <unk> ; born 19 June 1979 ) , is a former Buddhist monk , activist and a leader of the All @-@ Burma Monks ' Alliance , a group which helped lead the 2007 protests against Burma 's military government . Following the protests , he went into hiding and published two editorials critical of the Burmese government in the Washington Post and The Guardian on 4 November 2007 . He was arrested the same day . 
 In October 2008 , he was sentenced to 68 years in prison , including 12 years hard labour ; the sentence was reduced to 65 years on appeal . Gambira reportedly protested his imprisonment by organising chanting with other imprisoned monks , boycotting his trial , and going on hunger strike . Human rights groups including Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch also protested his imprisonment . 
 Gambira was released during a mass pardon of prisoners on 13 January 2012 as part of the 2011 – 2012 Burmese political reforms . He ceased to be a monk in April 2012 , stating that he had been unable to find a monastery to join due to his status as a former prisoner . He was re @-@ arrested at least three times in 2012 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gambira started attending school at age five , but the 1988 pro @-@ democracy protests caused school closings that interrupted Gambira 's schooling . According to the Assistance Association for Political Prisoners ( AAPP ) , he ran away from home at age 12 and was recruited as a child soldier by a military unit in Yangon . Once his parents located him , they removed him from the unit and returned with him to their home in <unk> Township . When the authorities came to investigate , Gambira 's parents enrolled him in a local monastery to protect him from arrest or conscription into further military service . 
 = = 2007 protests and aftermath = = 
 Gambira first became well known in August 2007 during widespread protests against the State Peace and Development Council ( SPDC ) , the military government which had ruled the country since suppressing the previous uprising in 1988 . The protests were sparked when the SPDC cut fuel subsidies without warning , causing fuel and other commodity prices to suddenly rise . 
 The city 's Buddhist monks took on a leadership role in these demonstrations , forming the All @-@ Burma Monks ' Alliance and lending the uprising its nickname of " the Saffron Revolution " , after the colour of the monks ' robes . Gambira , then a 29 @-@ year @-@ old monk , became one of the new organisation 's leaders . He later stated that the monks had been planning an uprising since 2003 or 2004 . Because monks are revered in Burma 's Buddhist @-@ majority society , the government at first appeared reluctant to suppress their demonstrations . 
 On 24 September 2007 , the All @-@ Burma Monks ' Alliance released a statement condemning the military government : " In order to banish the common enemy evil regime from Burmese soil forever , united masses of people need to join hands with the united clergy forces ... We pronounce the evil military despotism , which is impoverishing and <unk> our people of all walks , including the clergy , as the common enemy of all our citizens . " During the demonstrations , Gambira split his time between Mandalay and Yangon , moving between the two cities to avoid arrest . 
 After government forces violently broke up the protests , killing some monks and other protesters , Gambira went into hiding . His brother Aung Kyaw Kyaw was arrested on 17 October , in what the AAPP called an attempt by the government to force Gambira out of hiding . On 4 November , Gambira published editorials in the Washington Post and The Guardian calling for the international community to continue sanctions against Burma 's leadership , for Russia and China to cease supporting the SPDC on the United Nations Security Council , and for Burma 's people to continue to peacefully protest against the military rulers . " The regime 's use of mass arrests , murder , torture and imprisonment has failed to extinguish our desire for the freedom that was stolen from us so many years ago . We have taken their best punch " , he wrote in the Post . The day that the editorials appeared , Gambira was arrested in Sagaing Region . His father was arrested as well and detained in Mandalay prison for a month . 
 = = Imprisonment = = 
 Gambira stated after his release that authorities had beaten him and deprived him of sleep during his imprisonment , and Human Rights Watch reported that he was " badly tortured " and stripped of his monk 's robes . 
 In April 2008 , Gambira 's sister reported that he was leading a <unk> chanting campaign among other imprisoned monks of Insein Prison to protest against their being issued " layperson " identification cards for the upcoming constitutional referendum . He was subsequently placed in solitary confinement . In speaking later of conditions in the prison , Gambira stated that he had malaria for seven of his eight months there . Tomas <unk> Quintana , the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Human Rights for Burma , visited Gambira and four other political prisoners at Insein in August . 
 Gambira faced a total of sixteen charges for his role in the protests , including membership in an unlawful association and illegal movement across borders . In October 2008 , Gambira 's lawyer , Aung Thein , resigned from his case , saying that the military government would not allow him the materials to prepare an adequate defence . On one occasion , Gambira refused to appear in court himself , stating that the trial of a forcibly disrobed monk was disrespectful to Buddhism . 
 In November , Gambira was sentenced to 68 years in prison , at least 12 years of which would be hard labour . In early 2009 , five years were taken off his total sentence , reducing it to 63 years . Both Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International protested his sentence , calling for his immediate release . Aung Ko Ko Lwin , Gambira 's brother who had sheltered him from authorities , was sentenced to twenty years in prison , and Moe <unk> <unk> , Gambira 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , was also imprisoned . Aung Ko Ko Lwin and Moe <unk> <unk> were sent to Arakan State and Mon State , respectively , to serve their sentences . 
 Gambira was transferred to a labour camp in Sagaing Region . When his mother visited him in early 2009 , she reported that he was on hunger strike , refusing to eat in protest of the conditions of his confinement . Amnesty International reported that he suffered from nervous tension and was in generally ill health . On 31 October 2011 , the organisation issued an " urgent action " identifying Gambira as a prisoner of conscience and stating that he was being denied hospitalisation necessary to treat complications from being tortured at <unk> prison in April 2009 . Democratic Voice of Burma reported that Gambira was being regularly beaten by guards during the same period and was having seizures as a result . 
 During his imprisonment , Gambira won the Bindmans Law and Campaigning Award in absentia at the 2008 Index on Censorship Freedom of Expression Awards . The prize recognises " lawyers and campaigners who have fought repression or who have struggled to change political climates and perceptions , especially those who have used or established legal means to fight injustice in the field of freedom of expression " , and is sponsored by Bindmans LLP . Also in 2008 , the official website of <unk> , Italy announced that Gambira had been made an honorary citizen of the town . 
 = = 2012 release and re @-@ arrests = = 
 On 13 January 2012 , Gambira was released in a mass presidential pardon of political prisoners that also included 88 Generation activists Min Ko <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> Thein , as well as Shan leader Khun <unk> Oo . Gambira stated in an interview that his imprisonment had left him with depression , frequent headaches , and failing memory ; however , he said he had difficulty finding a doctor willing to treat him , for fear that it would draw government reprisals . He attempted to leave the country for treatment , but could not get the necessary paperwork . Gambira told reporters that his organisation would continue to boycott the government despite the amnesty : " The government has transformed its external appearance into a civilian one but their efforts to implement democracy are still rather weak , while many cases of human rights violations continue " . 
 After breaking into and reopening several monasteries closed during the Saffron Revolution , Gambira was rearrested on 10 February during a 2 a.m. raid , and was released after a night in jail . Authorities announced that he was undergoing investigation for illegally squatting at the <unk> Monastery in Yangon 's <unk> Township without officially registering with the Ministry of Religious Affairs after his release , and for breaking and entering the Sasana <unk> and Sasana <unk> Monasteries in <unk> Township . 
 On 6 March 2012 , he was once again detained and interrogated over a recent visit he had made to Kachin State , where local ethnic minority groups were engaged in guerrilla warfare against the government . He was released two days later . The following month , he was forced to formally cease to be a monk after several monasteries refused him membership , which he said was due to their fear of government reprisals if they were to allow him to enter . He then returned to his birth name of Nyi Nyi Lwin . 
 In November 2012 , Gambira was seated in the front row for a speech by visiting US President Barack Obama , who cautiously praised seeming democratic reforms including the release of political prisoners like Gambira . A few weeks after the speech , authorities arrested Gambira again and sent him to Insein prison . The US Embassy released a statement on the arrest , saying , " We 're monitoring reports of U Gambira 's detention . We urged the government of Burma to be fully transparent and follow due process of law " . Gambira 's family believed that he had been arrested to prevent him from joining protests by a group of monks against a copper mining project . On 11 December , Gambira was released on a bail of 4 million kyat ( US $ 4 @,@ 686 ) . 
 On 19 January 2016 , he was arrested in Mandalay on a charge of illegal border crossing and sentenced to 6 months in prison . He was released on 1 July 2016 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gambira , who is no longer a monk , has been living in Thailand after being re @-@ arrested several times in 2012 , and married to Marie <unk> , an Australian citizen . 
 = = Health problems = = 
 He has been suffering from serious physical and mental health issues , including schizophrenia and post @-@ traumatic stress disorder . 
 = 1926 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1926 Atlantic hurricane season featured the highest number of major hurricanes at the time . At least eleven tropical cyclones developed during the season , all of which intensified into a tropical storm and eight further strengthened into hurricanes . Six hurricanes deepened into a major hurricane , which is Category 3 or higher on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The first system , the Nassau hurricane , developed near the Lesser Antilles on July 22 . Moving west @-@ northwest for much of its duration , the storm struck or brush several islands of the Lesser and Greater Antilles . However , the Bahamas later received greater impact . At least 287 deaths and $ 7 @.@ 85 million ( 1926 USD ) in damage was attributed to this hurricane . The next cyclone primarily effected mariners in and around the The Maritimes of Canada , with boating accidents and drownings resulting in between 55 and 58 fatalities . In late August , the third hurricane brought widespread impact to the Gulf Coast of the United States , especially Louisiana . Crops and buildings suffered $ 6 million ( 1926 USD ) in damage and there were 25 people killed . The next three storms left relatively little to no damage on land . 
 The strongest and most damaging storm of the season was Hurricane Seven , nicknamed the Miami hurricane . Peaking as a Category 4 hurricane , the hurricane struck the Bahamas and Florida at a slightly weaker intensity . Much of the Miami metropolitan area was devastated by the storm . Inland , a storm surge on Lake Okeechobee flooded towns such as Clewiston and Moore Haven . The storm was a factor in ending the Florida land boom of the 1920s . Overall , the Miami hurricane resulted in at least 372 deaths and $ 125 million ( 1926 USD ) in damage . However , adjusted for wealth normalization in 2010 , the damage toll would be $ 164 @.@ 8 billion – far higher than Hurricane Katrina in 2005 . The eight , ninth , and eleventh tropical cyclones left only minor or not impact on land . However , the tenth storm , nicknamed the Havana @-@ Bermuda , devastated Cuba , the Bahamas , and ships in the vicinity of Bermuda . At least 709 deaths were linked to the system , with 600 in Cuba alone . Damage to towns on the island exceeded $ 100 million ( 1926 USD ) . Collectively , the storms of this season left over $ 267 @.@ 4 million in damage and at least 1 @,@ 554 fatalities . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The season featured twelve named storms and eight of which strengthened into hurricanes . With six of those storms reaching major hurricane intensity , this was the highest number in a season on record , until being tied in 1933 and 1950 and then being surpassed in 1961 . There were several cyclones that brought devastating effects , including the Nassau hurricane , the Louisiana hurricane , the Miami hurricane , and the Havana @-@ Bermuda . Collectively , the storms of this season left over $ 267 @.@ 4 million in damage and at least 1 @,@ 554 fatalities . 
 Tropical cyclogenesis began on July 22 with Nassau hurricane , followed by the second storm on July 29 . Only one system , the Louisiana hurricane , developed in the month of August . September was much more active , featuring the forth , fifth , six , seventh ( Miami hurricane ) , and eighth storms of the season . On September 17 , four tropical cyclones existed simultaneously in the Atlantic Ocean , three of which , in an uncommon occurrence , were then hurricanes . The Miami hurricane was the most intense tropical cyclone of the season , peaking as a 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) Category 4 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale with a minimum barometric pressure of 930 mbar ( 27 inHg ) . In October , the ninth and tenth ( Havana @-@ Bermuda ) storms formed . One final tropical cyclone formed in November and existed until November 16 . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 230 , the forth highest value on record , behind only the 1893 , 2005 , and 1933 seasons . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , such as the forth hurricane , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , such as the Miami hurricane and Havana , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One = = = 
 The first storm of the season formed early on July 22 about 200 miles ( 320 km ) east of the island of Barbados and gradually strengthened into a hurricane a day later . At 00 : 00 UTC on July 24 , the hurricane made landfall at Cabo Rojo , Puerto Rico , with winds of 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) . Weakening as it crossed Puerto Rico , the cyclone quickly regained strength on July 25 as it moved through the Bahamas ; rapidly reaching maximum sustained winds of 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) , it attained the equivalence of Category 4 intensity — one of only four Atlantic hurricanes to have done so in or before the month of July . After peaking at 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) with an estimated central pressure of 938 mb ( 27 @.@ 70 inHg ) , based on ship observations , the cyclone struck the island of New Providence , the seat of the Bahamian capital Nassau , on the morning of July 26 , with sustained winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) . Weakening thereafter , the storm moved northwestward , paralleling the east coast of Florida , but came ashore near New Smyrna Beach early on July 28 with winds of 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) . Thereafter , the cyclone quickly diminished in intensity , becoming a tropical depression on July 29 , as it curved west @-@ northwestward over Georgia ; three days later , it became an extratropical cyclone and dissipated over Ontario , Canada , on August 2 . 
 In Puerto Rico , the storm produced hurricane @-@ force winds and heavy rainfall that flooded all the rivers in the southern half of the island ; crops in the western portion of the island were greatly damaged , and the entire island was affected by strong winds . At least 25 people were reported to have died as a result . In the Bahamas , the cyclone killed at least 146 people and produced severe damage to the capital Nassau ; it was called the worst storm to affect Nassau since the 1866 Nassau hurricane , also a Category 4 cyclone that struck New Providence and caused major flooding throughout the Bahamas . More than a week after the storm , 400 people were reported to be missing . On the east coast of Florida , the hurricane produced a large storm tide that damaged boats , docks , and coastal structures , and damaging winds destroyed barns and crops well inland ; severe damage to structures and communications wires was reported at New Smyrna Beach , where the storm struck the state . The storm also produced heavy rainfall along the coast , peaking at 10 @.@ 02 inches ( 254 @.@ 51 mm ) at Merritt Island . One person died from the effects of the storm in Florida . In all , the hurricane caused at least 287 deaths — the fourth deadliest July hurricane since 1492 — and $ 16 @.@ 4 million ( 1926 USD ) in losses , at least $ 8 million of which were in the Bahamas . It remains only the second of three recorded hurricanes since 1851 to have struck the east coast of Florida north of Cape Canaveral from the Atlantic Ocean , the others being a hurricane in 1915 and Hurricane Dora in 1964 . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 Early on July 29 , a tropical depression formed more than 1 @,@ 200 mi ( 1 @,@ 930 km ) east of the Leeward Islands . Over the next few days , it moved west @-@ northwest , becoming a tropical storm by 00 : 00 UTC on July 31 . On August 1 , the cyclone turned northwestward and began strengthening rapidly , reaching hurricane intensity by the early afternoon . The next day , it attained major hurricane intensity — winds of at least 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , equivalent to the modern @-@ day classification of Category 3 intensity — and over the next few days its track varied between north @-@ northwest and northwest . Early on August 5 , it reached a peak intensity of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) , based on the pressure – wind relationship . It curved to the north and weakened , then passed about 80 mi ( 129 km ) west of Bermuda on August 6 . A few days later , it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone and then struck near Port Hawkesbury , Nova Scotia , with winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) and a central pressure at or below 1 @,@ 000 mb ( 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) . 
 Several ships recorded hurricane @-@ force winds and pressures as low as 968 mb ( 28 @.@ 59 inHg ) , though none entered the eye of the hurricane and sampled the lowest pressure in the storm . The system produced winds of 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) on Bermuda as it passed very close to that island . About this time , five ocean liners near each other encountered the storm ; some portholes on the Orca were damaged and 15 passengers were treated for cuts , bruises , and contusions . Off Nova Scotia , the cyclone produced an unspecified number of casualties , including the sinking of the schooners Sylvia Mosher and Sadie <unk> . Between 55 and 58 deaths occurred , including 49 from two ships crashing ashore Sable Island . In Nova Scotia , the storm downed trees and electrical poles , damaging some homes and leaving telephone service outages . Crops and fruit trees were also damaged . High winds also interrupted telegraph communications in Newfoundland . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 On August 20 , a low pressure area producing unsettled weather in the western Caribbean Sea , and centered about 400 mi ( 644 km ) west @-@ northwest of Maracaibo , Venezuela , was determined to have become a tropical depression . However , prior to scientific reanalysis in April 2012 based upon a 1975 report , it was not believed to have done so until two days later . Moving west @-@ northwest , the depression strengthened to a tropical storm on August 21 , and then turned northwestward while strengthening steadily . After brushing Cape San Antonio at the western tip of Cuba on August 22 , the cyclone then veered to the west @-@ northwest . Early on August 23 , the storm became a hurricane over the southern Gulf of Mexico . Later that day , the cyclone continued to intensify and began curving northwestward . By August 24 , with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , it turned north . Early on August 25 , the cyclone peaked as a modern @-@ day 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) Category 3 , based on the pressure – wind relationship . In the afternoon , it struck west of Houma , Louisiana , at that intensity . Less than 24 hours later , the storm rapidly weakened to a moderate tropical storm and curved west @-@ northwestward , weakening to a tropical depression on August 27 and dissipating over Texas . 
 No known effects were reported from the Caribbean due to the cyclone . On the morning of August 24 , the United States Weather Bureau in Washington , D.C. , advised that the storm was likely to make landfall between Galveston , Texas , and Burrwood , Louisiana . Late that day , hurricane warnings were issued from Morgan City , Louisiana , to Mobile , Alabama . Although small in size at landfall , the storm caused a storm surge of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) south of Houma and hurricane @-@ force winds in a small area near the center . The lowest recorded pressure was 959 mb ( 28 @.@ 32 inHg ) at Houma , though this was taken inland and is not believed to have been in the exact center , as recent estimates place the central pressure slightly lower at 955 mb ( 28 @.@ 20 inHg ) . Along the Gulf Coast of the United States , the storm caused $ 6 million ( 1926 USD ) in damage to crops and buildings , with substantial damage to vegetation . In all , 25 deaths were reported , although extensive ship reports and timely warnings by mail , telephone , radio , and telegraph reduced the number of casualties . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 At 00 : 00 UTC on September 1 , an area of low pressure about 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 610 km ) west of the Cape Verde islands organized into a tropical depression , though prior to hurricane reanalysis it was estimated to have formed a day later as a tropical storm . Moving generally west @-@ northwest over the next three days , the cyclone gradually intensified , first into a tropical storm on September 2 and later , based upon a report from the ship Stornest of hurricane @-@ force winds and 990 @.@ 5 mb ( 29 @.@ 25 inHg ) , a minimal hurricane by 00 : 00 UTC on September 5 . Late on September 7 , the cyclone strengthened to a major hurricane with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and turned northwest ; early the next day , the steamship <unk> passed through the eye of the storm and recorded a central pressure of 957 mb ( 28 @.@ 26 inHg ) , the lowest associated with the cyclone . Thereafter , the storm for two days maintained its intensity while resuming a west @-@ northwest track . Late on September 10 , the storm abruptly turned north @-@ northwest . On September 12 , while centered about 400 mi ( 644 km ) southwest of Bermuda , the cyclone briefly peaked at 135 mph ( 217 km / h ) — equivalent to Category 4 intensity — though the cyclone was rather small and observations near the center were scarce . 
 Over the next two days , the cyclone headed north @-@ northwest again and slowly weakened to Category 2 strength with winds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) , then afterward curved west @-@ northwest for about a day . As the storm passed west of Bermuda on September 13 , the island recorded a pressure of 1 @,@ 006 mb ( 29 @.@ 71 inHg ) . As a trough approached , the hurricane suddenly turned northeast late on September 16 , and over the next three days , while located about 500 mi ( 805 km ) south @-@ southeast of Halifax in Nova Scotia , it executed a counterclockwise , S @-@ shaped curve . It then weakened to a tropical storm , recurved northeast , and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on September 22 , whence it reacquired hurricane @-@ force winds . The next day , the system weakened and hit Cape St. Mary 's , Newfoundland , with winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . As an extratropical storm it continued north @-@ northeastward until dissipating near Greenland on September 24 . The storm produced a pressure of 994 @.@ 2 mb ( 29 @.@ 36 inHg ) at St. John 's , Newfoundland and Labrador on September 23 , along with gale @-@ force winds along the coast of Newfoundland that affected an Arctic expedition led by George P. Putnam of the American Museum of Natural History . Strong winds in the province downed telegraph lines and demolished a post office in the town of <unk> . 
 = = = Hurricane Five = = = 
 By 06 : 00 UTC on September 10 , a strong tropical storm with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) was first observed over the open Atlantic Ocean about 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 610 km ) southeast of Bermuda , but likely formed earlier and remained undetected due to a lack of ship observations . Over the next two days it headed north @-@ northwestward and strengthened , remaining approximately 730 mi ( 1 @,@ 170 km ) east of Hurricane Four . Based upon a ship report of hurricane conditions — 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) from the east @-@ southeast along with a pressure of 1 @,@ 000 mb ( 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) — the cyclone was ascertained to have peaked at 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) , equivalent to Category 2 intensity , early on September 12 , although no meteorological data were available near the eye . Shortly thereafter , the system began turning north and then north @-@ northeast on September 13 , followed by steady weakening . At 00 : 00 UTC on September 14 , the cyclone diminished in intensity to a tropical storm and moved southeast , dissipating less than 24 hours later . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Six = = = 
 Early on September 11 , a weak tropical depression formed in the western Caribbean Sea about 200 mi ( 322 km ) east @-@ southeast of the Swan Islands , Honduras . Without strengthening substantially , the depression moved west @-@ northwest for the next day and a half , passing north of the Swan Islands based upon weather reports , and then curved northward . On September 13 , the depression gradually curved to the northeast , and on the afternoon of September 14 it made landfall southeast of Cienfuegos , Cuba . The cyclone then crossed the central region of Cuba , entering the Bahamian islands in the evening . Shortly thereafter , by 00 : 00 UTC on September 15 the depression became a tropical storm and peaked with maximum sustained winds of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . The cyclone then turned north , passing about 15 mi ( 24 km ) west of Nassau in the afternoon . The weak storm then turned abruptly to the northwest , having been trapped by a building ridge , and early the next day , while centered north of Andros Island , it assumed a gradual curve to the southwest . Late that day , it degenerated into a tropical depression and dissipated over the Straits of Florida on September 17 , as the Great Miami hurricane approached from just 550 mi ( 885 km ) to the east @-@ southeast . 
 In Cuba , impacts were minimal . The cyclone produced sustained winds up to 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) and pressures as low as 1 @,@ 004 mb ( 29 @.@ 65 inHg ) in the Bahamas . In South Florida , the cyclone did not produce tropical storm @-@ force winds , although thunderstorms produced 1 @.@ 20 inches ( 30 @.@ 48 mm ) of rainfall at Miami , Florida , on September 16 . No severe effects occurred and the storm was not mentioned in the monthly notations of the local U.S. Weather Bureau office in Miami . However , its presence and that of the Great Miami hurricane , then of Category 4 intensity and in the South @-@ Central Bahamas , caused confusion in the local press . On the morning of September 17 , one day before the Miami hurricane struck , the Miami Herald published a front @-@ page story on the weak tropical storm in the Straits of Florida and included statements by the editors that it was not anticipated to strike Florida ; news articles on the hurricane , which was expected to deliver " destructive winds " to the area , were not published by other local newspapers until the afternoon , leaving Miami residents confused as to the extent of the danger . 
 = = = Hurricane Seven = = = 
 By 12 : 00 UTC on September 11 — just twelve hours after the formation of the preceding cyclone — a new tropical storm formed in the Atlantic about 1 @,@ 100 mi ( 1 @,@ 770 km ) east of the island of Martinique , though it probably originated earlier and was undetected ; operationally , the storm was not tracked until September 14 . Steadily moving north of due west , the cyclone quickly became a hurricane the next day , and over the next three days , while bypassing the Greater Antilles to the north , it continued to intensify to a major hurricane , with maximum sustained winds of at least 111 mph ( 179 km / h ) , yet few ships were near the eye with which to determine its path . On the afternoon of September 16 , the cyclone peaked at 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) , near the upper threshold of the modern @-@ day classification of Category 4 , and shortly thereafter passed just 10 mi ( 16 @.@ 1 km ) north of the island of Grand Turk , striking Mayaguana at peak intensity early the next day . Continuing over the South @-@ Central Bahamas and Andros Island on September 17 – 18 , the cyclone , with winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) , then struck South Florida near Perrine , 15 mi ( 24 km ) south of Downtown Miami , shortly before 12 : 00 UTC on September 18 , with its large eye passing over the Miami metropolitan area . Swiftly crossing southernmost Florida , the potent hurricane weakened slightly before entering the Gulf of Mexico near Punta Rassa in the afternoon , and its path gradually curved northwest on September 19 . Late on September 20 , its path slowed drastically and curved west , making landfall near Perdido Beach , Alabama , with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and a measured pressure of 954 @.@ 9 mb ( 28 @.@ 20 inHg ) in the calm eye . Quickly weakening thereafter , the cyclone paralleled the coasts of Alabama and Mississippi , dissipating more than two days later over Louisiana . 
 Throughout the Bahamas , reports of damage were relatively scarce despite the intensity with which the storm struck the region . However , numerous structures were completely destroyed . The storm was attributed to 372 deaths in the Southeastern United States , 114 of which took place in Miami and at least 150 at Moore Haven , where a storm surge estimated as high as 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 57 m ) overtopped portions of a levee on Lake Okeechobee . Many people in Miami , transients who knew little of hurricanes , perished after examining damage during the passage of the eye , unaware that the back end of the storm was approaching . <unk> structures built to house workers during the Florida land boom of the 1920s were completely leveled . The hurricane partially contributed to the end of the land boom , which was in decline by early 1926 . In terms of monetary losses , damage from the hurricane was estimated to be as high as $ 125 million ( 1926 USD ) . Up to 4 @,@ 725 structures throughout southern Florida were destroyed and 8 @,@ 100 damaged , leaving at least 38 @,@ 000 people displaced . A storm surge of 14 ft ( 4 @.@ 27 m ) occurred south of Miami and winds on Miami Beach were recorded at 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) before the anemometer blew away . The lowest pressure was estimated at 930 mb ( 27 @.@ 46 inHg ) , the seventh most intense in a storm to strike the United States . The storm also produced significant damage , rainfall up to 16 @.@ 2 in ( 411 @.@ 48 mm ) , and a storm surge up to 14 @.@ 2 ft ( 4 @.@ 33 m ) in the Florida Panhandle . The entire state of Florida lost 35 % of its grapefruit and orange crops combined , including nearly 100 % losses in the Miami area . In a study of hurricane damage statistics conducted in 2008 , it was estimated that if a storm similar to that of the Miami hurricane were to occur in 2005 it would result in over $ 140 – 157 billion in damage . In all , the storm caused at least 478 deaths along its path accounting for the revised toll in the United States since 2003 . The storm 's slow movement caused it to produce substantial effects to coastal regions between Mobile and Pensacola ; these areas experienced heavy damage from wind , rain , and storm surge . Wind records at Pensacola indicate that the city encountered sustained winds of hurricane force for more than 20 hours , including winds above 100 mph ( 161 km / h ) for five hours . The storm tide destroyed nearly all waterfront structures on Pensacola Bay and peaked at 14 ft ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) near Bagdad , Florida . Rainfall maximized at Bay Minette , Alabama , where 18 @.@ 5 in ( 470 mm ) fell . 
 = = = Hurricane Eight = = = 
 Twelve hours after the Great Miami hurricane struck Alabama , the eighth tropical storm of the season formed in the east @-@ central Atlantic about 2 @,@ 000 mi ( 3 @,@ 220 km ) southwest of Horta in the Azores on September 21 . Over the next three days , it moved north of due east and rapidly strengthened , becoming a minimal hurricane by 12 : 00 UTC on September 22 and later peaking at 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) — equivalent to a moderately strong Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale — on the morning of September 24 . For about 24 hours thereafter , the cyclone briefly curved to the northeast before turning sharply to the east early on September 26 . Late that day , the cyclone swerved precipitously to the north , making landfall on the island of São Miguel near Ponta Delgada at peak intensity . Curving northwest and then south of due west , the cyclone weakened after striking São Miguel and reverted to a minimal hurricane late on September 27 . It gradually completed a counter @-@ clockwise loop through the western Azores , curving due south as a tropical storm , though its cool surface temperatures and enlarged size suggest it might have been a subtropical cyclone then . Just afterward , late on September 28 , it hit Faial Island near Horta with sustained winds near 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Over the next two days , it moved generally south @-@ southeast and slowly weakened , curving suddenly east @-@ southeast beginning on September 30 . Turning south of due east , it dissipated by 18 : 00 UTC on October 1 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Nine = = = 
 Early on October 3 , a tropical depression developed in the South @-@ Central Caribbean about 100 mi ( 160 km ) east of <unk> Bank and the Miskito Cays . It quickly intensified into a minimal tropical storm with maximum sustained winds of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) , the strongest in its life span . Curving west @-@ northwest without further intensification , the weak cyclone made landfall near Barra <unk> in Gracias a Dios Department , Honduras , shortly before 12 : 00 UTC on October 4 . Shortly thereafter , the storm gradually turned just north of due west , and early on October 5 , after degenerating into a tropical depression , it made a second landfall over Belize just south of Alabama Wharf in Toledo District . Less than 12 hours later , the cyclone dissipated over eastern Guatemala . 
 = = = Hurricane Ten = = = 
 On October 14 a tropical depression developed in the southern Caribbean Sea about 350 mi ( 563 km ) north @-@ northwest of Colón , Panama . Strengthening into a minimal tropical storm the next day , it gradually curved to the north @-@ northwest over the next four days , becoming a hurricane on October 18 . It then quickly intensified to a major hurricane early on October 19 as it turned northward toward western Cuba . Shortly before striking the Isla de la Juventud south of Nueva Gerona , it attained maximum sustained winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) on October 20 . The cyclone then continued strengthening , peaking at 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) before making landfall on the Cuban mainland south of <unk> de Melena . The center passed just 10 mi ( 16 km ) east of the capital Havana before entering the Straits of Florida about 80 mi ( 129 km ) south of Key West , Florida . The cyclone then weakened and turned to the northeast on October 21 , passing within 20 mi ( 32 @.@ 2 km ) of the Florida Keys while remaining east of Florida . Nearly two days later , about 48 hours after turning east @-@ northeast , the cyclone passed over Bermuda late on October 22 with sustained winds up to 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) ; Hamilton , Bermuda , recorded calm winds and 963 @.@ 4 mb ( 28 @.@ 45 inHg ) in the eye , along with sustained winds up to 102 mph ( 164 km / h ) with gusts to 138 mph ( 222 km / h ) afterward . Three days thereafter , on October 25 the storm executed a clockwise , semicircular loop to the south @-@ southwest , and a day later it lost hurricane intensity . Gradually curving to the west , the cyclone dissipated early on October 28 , though it was once believed to have been an extratropical cyclone as early as October 23 . 
 The hurricane inflicted devastation along its path , causing at least 709 deaths in Cuba and Bermuda . Upon striking Cuba , the hurricane caused catastrophic damage and as many as 600 deaths . Several small towns in the storm 's path were completely destroyed and damage estimates exceeded $ 100 million ( 1928 USD ) . In the upper Florida Keys and on Key Biscayne , minimal hurricane conditions occurred , causing minor damage in South Florida . In Bermuda , 40 % of the structures were damaged and two homes destroyed , but otherwise damage was light in the harbor . While weather forecasters knew of the storm 's approach on Bermuda , it covered the thousand miles from the Bahamas to Bermuda so rapidly it apparently struck with few warning signs aside from heavy swells . On October 21 , with the eye of the storm still 700 mi ( 1 @,@ 130 km ) from Bermuda , weather forecasts from the United States called for the hurricane to strike the island on the following morning with gale force . The Arabis @-@ class sloop HMS Valerian , based at the HMD Bermuda , was returning from providing hurricane relief in the Bahamas and was overtaken by the storm shortly before she could make harbour . Unable to enter through Bermuda 's <unk> , she fought the storm for more than five hours before she was sunk with the loss of 85 men . The British merchant ship <unk> was also sunk near Bermuda . When the centre of the storm passed over Bermuda , winds increased to 114 mph ( 183 km / h ) at Prospect Camp , whereupon the Army took down its anemometer to protect it . The Royal Naval Dockyard was being hammered and never took its anemometer down . It measured 138 mph ( 222 km / h ) at 13 : 00 UTC , before the wind destroyed it . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Eleven = = = 
 Around 06 : 00 UTC on November 12 , a tropical depression developed about 115 mi ( 185 km ) north of El Porvenir , Kuna Yala , Panama . Moving northwest , the cyclone rapidly attained peak winds of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) early on November 13 but failed to intensify further over the next three days . Passing less than 50 mi ( 80 @.@ 47 km ) west of the Swan Islands , Honduras , early on November 14 , the cyclone gradually turned north by the afternoon . Curving <unk> to the northeast on October 15 , it weakened to a tropical depression early the next day before hitting the Isla de la Juventud in Cuba . 12 hours later , after striking mainland Cuba , it dissipated over the southern Straits of Florida . 
 = = Other storms = = 
 Reports from the government of the Mexican state of Veracruz indicate that in late September 1926 a tropical disturbance formed in the northwest Caribbean Sea , then moved across the Yucatán Peninsula and the Bay of Campeche to strike Veracruz as a hurricane on September 28 . The storm reportedly began with sudden fury at 16 : 00 UTC and produced unspecified winds as high as 124 mph ( 200 km / h ) — if sustained , equal to those of a strong Category 3 hurricane — causing boats to be stranded , roofs to be torn off , and trees and electric cables to be blown down , though the worst conditions reportedly lasted only two hours . The reported storm ruined most of the seashore as a storm tide destroyed the local breakwater , including at the historic Hotel Villa del Mar in the city of Veracruz , demolishing most of the hotel as well as the yacht club there , and forced train service to be suspended . The city was flooded to a depth of 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 52 m ) , but well constructed buildings in the city center survived the wind . Several ships were sunk in the harbor , and several sailors were feared drowned . However , a peer @-@ reviewed publication in 2012 , which reanalyzed the 1926 Atlantic hurricane season , did not confirm its supposed existence . 
 = = Seasonal effects = = 
 = Hadleigh Castle = 
 Hadleigh Castle in the English county of Essex overlooks the Thames estuary from a ridge to the south of the town of Hadleigh . Built after 1215 during the reign of Henry III by Hubert de Burgh , the castle was surrounded by parkland and had an important economic , as well as defensive role . Hadleigh was significantly expanded and remodelled by Edward III , who turned it into a grander property , designed to defend against potential French attack as well as provide the King with a convenient private residence close to London . Built on a geologically unstable hill of London clay , the castle has often been subject to subsidence ; this , combined with the sale of its stonework in the 16th century , has led to it now being ruined . The remains are now preserved by English Heritage and protected under UK law as a Grade I listed building and scheduled monument . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 13th century = = = 
 Hadleigh Castle was first built by Hubert de Burgh , the 1st Earl of Kent , who was a key supporter of King John . De Burgh was given the honour of Rayleigh by John in 1215 as a reward for his services , but chose not to develop the existing caput of Rayleigh Castle , instead building a new fortification south of the town of Hadleigh . The exact date of construction is uncertain , but it is now believed the work was conducted early in de Burgh 's tenure of the site , permission being retrospectively officially confirmed through a licence to crenellate in 1230 under Henry III . 
 The site was chosen on top of a local ridge , overlooking the Thames estuary , formed from a geologically unstable outcrop of London clay . In the 13th century , marshlands would have stretched away to the south of the castle , with the tide occasionally reaching up as far as the base of the hill itself , and the area would have been more wooded than today . By 1235 the park of Hadleigh had been formed around the castle , including woodland , a fishpond , stables and a park lodge , but the castle was also associated with a wider estate including Rayleigh , Thundersley and Eastwood Parks . 
 The first castle built on the site was probably of an octagonal design , running along the top of the ridge , protected by square and semi @-@ circular mural towers , with a barbican guarding the eastern entrance . It probably resembled White Castle , remodelled by de Burgh in the same period , or Bolingbroke and Beeston Castles , both built in the 1220s . The castle was built of Kentish ragstone and cemented by a mortar containing a large proportion of seashells , particularly <unk> from the cockle beds of neighbouring Canvey Island . A valuable tidal watermill had been built by 1249 , essential for making bread for the castle ; recent archaeological work suggests that it was positioned on a wharf reaching out into the estuary just to the south @-@ east of the castle . Terraced gardens were built along the south side of the castle overlooking the estuary , probably including vineyards . 
 De Burgh finally fell out of favour with Henry III ; he was imprisoned and then finally stripped of Hadleigh Castle in 1239 . For the rest of the century , Hadleigh was retained as a royal castle , as part of an estate containing 142 acres ( 57 ha ) of agricultural land , the park and the castle mill . By the 1250s , the castle had fallen into neglect and , despite some investment after it was given to Queen Eleanor in 1273 , it remained in relatively poor condition . Only the mill , vital for the operation of the wider estate , appears to have been well @-@ maintained . A new 17 @-@ metre @-@ wide by 9 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 56 foot by 30 foot ) hall and an adjacent solar complex were built at the castle around 1290 , but collapsed due to subsidence shortly afterwards . In 1299 the castle was given to Queen Margaret , who complained about the quality of the building and insisted that repairs were carried out . Her husband , Edward I , visited the castle twice , using it as a base for hunting in the area . 
 = = = 14th century = = = 
 Edward II took a much closer interest in Hadleigh , leading to a period of renewal and rebuilding during his reign and that of his son , Edward III . Edward II first stayed there in 1311 , and work was done to renovate the castle before he arrived , including building new royal quarters and repairing some of the castle walls that had succumbed to subsidence . Amongst the buildings known to be in the castle during the period were the castle hall , larder , kitchen , cellar , a long house , prison , an " old chamber " and armoury ; they were guarded by a garrison of 24 soldiers during crises . Edward stayed there frequently during his reign up until 1324 , on occasion travelling to Hadleigh Castle from London on his royal barge , which docked at a wharf to the south of the castle . 
 Edward III acquired Hadleigh Castle in 1330 , when he recovered it from his mother , Isabella of France , who had taken it from Edward when she deposed him in 1326 . Edward paid little initial interest to the castle , but in the 1360s decided to make much greater use of the property , ordering large parts of it to be rebuilt at a cost of more than £ 2200 . Between 1361 and 1363 the internal buildings were renovated and new royal lodgings built along the south walls , after which the east side of the castle was rebuilt entirely , with two large circular towers installed in a new stretch of curtain wall , completed by 1365 . The north side of the castle was rebuilt to include a main entrance with a portcullis and a drawbridge , protected by a barbican and a large circular tower called the " High Tower " , which was complete by 1370 . The work was probably overseen by William of Wykeham . 
 Originally , historians believed that Edward 's decision to rebuild much of the castle was in response to the growing tensions with France ; in this version of events , Hadleigh would have formed an importance coastal fortification along the Thames estuary , protecting it from French raids . Current historical opinion plays down this motivation , noting that at the time of the work on Hadleigh relations with France were unusually good . Instead , it is suspected that the increasing elderly Edward intended Hadleigh more as a personal retreat close to London , where he could stay in privacy and considerable comfort . Whilst the entrance on the inland side remained relatively basic , the building work created a grander impression from the estuary – any visitors to London , English or French , would have passed by Queenborough Castle on the south bank and Hadleigh on the north , the combination communicating a strong sense of royal power . 
 = = = 15th – 19th centuries = = = 
 Edward III 's grandson , Richard II , made little use of Hadleigh , and the use of the castle was granted to Aubrey de Vere until his death in 1400 . The castle was passed amongst a number of high @-@ status owners during the 15th century , but saw little use by the crown . Edmund of Langley and his son Edward of Norwich , the Dukes of York , used the castle in the early years , before passing it on to Humphrey of Lancaster , the Duke of Gloucester . Richard , Duke of York , used the castle next , before it passed to Edmund Tudor in the middle of the century . The tradition of the castle forming part of the queen 's property was then reinstated and it was granted to Elizabeth Woodville , the wife of Edward IV . Henry VIII made no known use of the castle himself , but it formed part of the dower of three of his wives - Catherine of Aragon , Anne of Cleves , and Catherine Parr - and the castle 's parks were used as sources of timbers for his navy . 
 After 1544 the estate began to be broken up ; first the parks were sold and then the castle itself , bought by Lord Richard Rich from Edward VI for £ 700 in 1551 . Rich dismantled the castle for the value of its stone , primarily between 1551 and 1575 , and the castle , now thoroughly ruined , passed through Rich 's descendants . 
 The English painter John Constable visited Hadleigh in 1814 and made a drawing of the castle as preparation for ten oil sketches and a single painting . The oil painting Hadleigh Castle was produced in 1829 and exhibited at the Royal Academy in the same year . One of the sketches is currently displayed at the Tate Gallery , London , while the painting now hangs in the Yale Center for British Art at New Haven , United States . Constable 's painting , " one of his most monumental works " according to the art historians <unk> <unk> and Mary Mackay , depicts the early 19th @-@ century Hadleigh Castle as a decaying , man @-@ made structure , succumbing to the elemental power of nature . 
 William Booth purchased Hadleigh Castle and its surrounding site in 1891 for the use of the Salvation Army , which established a farm to train the English poor prior to them being sent overseas to the British colonies . Considerable subsidence and slippage on the ridge occurred between 1898 and 1923 , causing a collapse of the southern curtain wall . 
 = = = Today = = = 
 The Salvation Army gave the castle to the Ministry of Works in 1948 , and it is now owned by English Heritage , classed as a scheduled monument and a Grade I listed building . Subsidence and landslips have continued ; the north @-@ east tower largely collapsed in the 1950s , and further major <unk> occurred in 1969 , 1970 , and 2002 . One of the three @-@ storey towers at the eastern side stands to nearly full height with narrow rectangular windows in the upper levels . The second tower has only about one @-@ third of its original form . Some sections of the curtain wall have survived , as well as the foundations of the great hall , <unk> , and the kitchen . 
 The castle is still surrounded by the 19th @-@ century Salvation Army farm , and beyond that by Hadleigh Country Park , owned and managed by Essex County Council and a Site of Special Scientific Interest with special regard for invertebrates . In 2008 , Hadleigh Farm , close to the castle , was announced as the venue for the mountain biking competition in the 2012 Summer Olympic Games . 
 = Pyrrhus ' invasion of the Peloponnese = 
 Pyrrhus ' invasion of the Peloponnese in 272 BC was an invasion of south Greece by Pyrrhus , King of Epirus . He was opposed by Macedon and a coalition of Greek city @-@ states ( poleis ) , most notably Sparta . The war ended in a joint victory by Macedonia and Sparta . 
 After being defeated by the Roman Republic in the Pyrrhic War in 275 BC , Pyrrhus ( r . 297 – 272 BC ) decided to turn his attention to Greece . He declared war on Antigonus Gonatas ( r . 283 – 239 BC ) of Macedon and in a rapid campaign , managed to defeat him and make himself king of Macedon . In 272 BC , Pyrrhus agreed to assist the disgruntled Spartan prince , Cleonymus , who requested his assistance in securing the Spartan throne . 
 Pyrrhus advanced with his army through central Greece and upon reaching the Peloponnese , he marched against Sparta . The city was sparsely defended at the time as the majority of its army had been taken to Crete by King Areus I ( r . 309 – 265 BC ) . The Spartans led by Crown Prince Acrotatus were able to withstand a series of Epiriote assaults until Macedonian reinforcements and Areus ' army arrived to relieve the defenders . 
 Following the arrival of the relieving force , Pyrrhus lifted the siege and prepared to winter in Laconia . However , he was approached by an Argive citizen who requested his assistance in overthrowing the government of Argos . Seeking to take advantage of the opportunity , Antigonus took his army to Argos , being harried along the way by the Spartans . Whilst attempting to seize Argos by night , Pyrrhus was set upon by his Argive opponents as well as the Spartans and Antigonus ' Macedonians . In the ensuing mêlée , Pyrrhus was slain . His death prompted the capitulation of his army and the reestablishment of a Macedonian hegemony over Greece . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Following entreaties from the Greek polis of Tarentum in 281 BC , Pyrrhus , the king of Epirus in northern Greece , invaded Italy with an army of 25 @,@ 500 and 20 war elephants . The aim of the expedition was to combat the aggression of the Roman Republic , which was increasingly annexing the Greek cities of Magna Graecia . Upon arriving in Italy in 280 BC , Pyrrhus assumed command of an army consisting of the Greeks of Magna Graecia . Adding these forces to his own from Epirus , he engaged and defeated the Roman army at the Battle of Heraclea , near Tarentum in 280 BC . The Epiriote victory caused a number of native groups such as the Samnites and the <unk> , who were also fearful of Roman expansionism to join Pyrrhus . Subsequently , Pyrrhus advanced towards Rome and at the Battle of Asculum he vanquished another Roman army . 
 Despite having bested the Romans in their battles , Pyrrhus had sustained heavy casualties . With his Italian allies wavering , Pyrrhus decided to abandon his campaign against Rome . At this point in time , Pyrrhus had two options available . Firstly , he could return to Greece where the throne of Macedon had been left vacant by the death of King Ptolemy <unk> at the hands of the Gallic invaders of Greece . Pyrrhus had coveted the Macedonian throne and had briefly held it from 287 BC to 285 BC . Alternatively , he could respond to the appeal of the Greek poleis of Sicily which were requesting his assistance to combat Carthaginian aggression . 
 Ultimately , in 278 BC , Pyrrhus decided to direct his army against the Carthaginians in Sicily . Pyrrhus was highly successful in his campaign against Carthage and by 275 BC had managed to restrict them to the settlement of Lilybaeum in the far west of the island . Despite these victories , Pyrrhus ' despotic disposition and pretensions alienated his Sicilian allies who began to abandon him . In light of these developments , Pyrrhus decided to return to mainland Italy to continue his war against Rome . The Epiriotes attacked the Roman army but after the inconclusive Battle of Beneventum , he returned to Epirus . Despite Pyrrhus leaving a garrison there , Tarentum succumbed to Rome in 272 BC . 
 = = War against Macedon = = 
 On his return to his homeland , Pyrrhus found himself in a difficult position . His Italian sojourn had emptied his coffers and crippled his army , leaving him reliant on Sicilian mercenaries who required payment . In order to secure funds to pay his troops , Pyrrhus planned a war against Antigonus II Gonatas , the new king of Macedon . Citing Antigonus ' refusal to provide him with aid during his Italian expedition as a casus belli , Pyrrhus invaded Macedon in the spring of 274 BC . He was accompanied by an army consisting of 8 @,@ 000 infantry and 500 cavalry although their numbers were probably augmented by Gallic mercenaries . It has been speculated that by invading Macedon , Pyrrhus was acting as the agent of the monarchs of Ptolemaic Egypt , Ptolemy II and Arsinoe II , however N. G. L. Hammond posits that this is highly unlikely . 
 Initially , Pyrrhus had simply viewed his incursion into Macedon as an opportunity to plunder . However , the capture of numerous towns and the defection to his side of 2 @,@ 000 Macedonian soldiers caused him to make his objective the seizure of the Macedonian throne . <unk> marched with his army to western Macedon and was confronted by Pyrrhus at the Battle of the Aous . Pyrrhus began the engagements by slaughtering Antigonus ' Gallic rearguard before securing the surrender of the Macedonian war elephants . Demoralised by these sudden reverses , the Macedonian phalangites responded to Pyrrhus ' appeals and defected to the Epiriote side . Abandoned by his army , Antigonus managed to escape to Thessaloniki with a small force of cavalry . He was able to entrench himself there , protected by his strong navy which enabled him to maintain links with his possessions in southern Greece . 
 Antigonus ' flight left Pyrrhus in complete control of the Macedonian hinterland and Thessaly in central Greece . However , not all of Macedon surrendered to the Epiriote king and he was compelled to send his general , the Spartan Prince Cleonymus to capture Edessa . Despite initially being welcomed with enthusiasm by the Macedonians , he managed to alienate his new subjects when his Gallic troops ransacked the royal Macedonian tombs at Vergina . By late 274 BC or early 273 BC , Pyrrhus secured the occupation of Macedonia and returned to Epirus , leaving his son Ptolemy to govern the region . 
 = = Advance into the Peloponnese = = 
 Following his Macedonian triumph , Pyrrhus was approached by his officer Cleonymus . The Spartan convinced the Epiriote king to aid him in a scheme to seize control of his homeland . Cleonymus ' reasons for seeking to attack Sparta were twofold . Firstly , he was angry that he had been overlooked for the Agiad kingship of Sparta in favour of his nephew , Areus II . Plutarch ascribes Cleonymus ' failure to secure the throne to his arbitrariness and violent nature . Furthermore , Cleonymus had become a target of ridicule in Sparta by the fact that his new wife , Chilonis , was engaging in an affair with Acrotatus , the son of Areus . 
 Pyrrhus ' motivation for agreeing to assist Cleonymus is more complex . By installing Cleonymus on the throne , the Epiriote would secure Sparta as an ally . Additionally , by invading the Peloponnese , Pyrrhus would be able to subdue any cities which had remained loyal to Antigonus . In doing so , he could prevent Antigonus using the peninsula as a base from which to launch a counter @-@ attack on Macedon . The size of the force assembled by Pyrrhus is indicative of his intention to extend his hegemony into the Peloponnese . The Epiriote king mustered an army consisting of 25 @,@ 000 infantry and 2 @,@ 000 cavalry as well as 24 war elephants . In 272 BC , Pyrrhus marched his army through Central Greece to the city of <unk> from where they were ferried across the Gulf of Corinth to the Peloponnese . This suggests that the invasion was supported by the Aetolian League , a powerful confederate in Central Greece which was allied with Pyrrhus and hostile to Antigonus . 
 Antigonus attempted to exploit Pyrrhus ' absence from Macedon by launching an invasion to reclaim his kingdom . However , his attack on Macedon was unsuccessful as he was defeated in battle by Pyrrhus ' son , Ptolemy . Unperturbed by Antigonus ' offensive , Pyrrhus advanced into the Peloponnese where he was welcomed in Achaia . The Epiriote army marched to Megalopolis , a central Peloponnesian city which lay on the border with Sparta . Several of Sparta 's neighbours , namely Megalopolis , Elis and many of the <unk> poleis , supported Pyrrhus invasion as they would profit from the reduction of Spartan influence in the region . While his force was camped at Megalopolis , Pyrrhus received ambassadors from Messene , Athens , the <unk> League and Sparta . In response to the Spartans ' inquires as to the reasons for his Peloponnesian incursion , Pyrrhus managed to dupe the envoys . He told the Spartans that he had come to liberate any cities still held by Antigonus and that he hoped to send his sons to Sparta to obtain a traditional education at the agoge . However , when the emissaries returned to Sparta , Pyrrhus advanced into Laconia . He advanced south , following the course of the Eurotas River and ravaging the lands of the Spartan perioeci . It may have been at this time that Pyrrhus assigned Cleonymus a series of independent commands as he is recorded as subjugating the city of <unk> in Elis as well as sacking <unk> in the <unk> region of Laconia . Pyrrhus ' perfidy was met with anger in Sparta and ambassadors were immediately sent to Pyrrhus to rebuke him . 
 = = Siege of Sparta = = 
 The Spartans were caught unawares by Pyrrhus ' invasion . Areus had taken the majority of the Spartan army with him to Crete , where he was campaigning on behalf of Gortyn at the request of Ptolemaic Egypt . The result was that the settlement was lightly defended . Arriving at Sparta as night fell , Cleonymus advised Pyrrhus to attack the city immediately . However , the Epiriote declined to as he was fearful of the damage that would be wrought by Gallic troops if they entered the city at night and moreover expected the sparsely defended city to surrender in the morning . 
 The Spartan council of Elders , the <unk> , suggested that the Spartan women be sent to Crete for their protection . They were dissuaded from doing so by <unk> , the former queen and grandmother of the Eurypontid King Eudamidas II who convinced them that the women could assist in the city 's defence . In order to guarantee the fighting men some rest , the women and the elderly began bolstering defences . Aware that Pyrrhus had elephants with him , the defenders dug a large trench and sunk wagons into the ground at its flanks in order to hinder the Epiriote advance . Moreover , messengers were sent both to summon Areus back and to request aid from Antigonus , despite the fact the Sparta and Macedon had traditionally been hostile . Pausanias , the Greek geographer , claims that Sparta received some aid from Messene and the pro @-@ Spartan faction at Argos . 
 The Epiriotes launched their first assault against the city at daybreak . However , they were unable to get a firm footing because of the trench and were repulsed by the defenders , who were encouraged by the women . In order to circumvent this obstacle . Pyrrhus ordered a 2 @,@ 000 picked force of Gauls and Chaonians commanded by Ptolemy to attempt to go around the trench . Finding their path blocked by the wagons , they began to pulling them out of the ground . Aware of the danger , Acrotatus used a series of depressions to attack this force from the rear and managed to the push the Epiriote flanking group into the trench after inflicting heavy casualties upon them . Unable to make an impact on the defences , Pyrrhus ordered his troops to withdraw to their camp at nightfall . 
 After receiving a favourable omen during the night Pyrrhus renewed his assault . An effect of the shortage of warriors was that the Spartan women were active in providing the defenders with missiles and refreshments as well as taking away the wounded . In an attempt to nullify the Spartans ' advantage , the Epiriotes tried to fill up with trench with debris and bodies but were prevented from doing so by the Sparta . Responding to this Spartan counter @-@ attack , Pyrrhus personally led a charge against the Spartan lines and succeeded in entering the city , spreading panic amongst the defenders . However , at this point his horse threw him after it was wounded by a javelin in the belly . Pyrrhus ' fall threw his companions into a state of dismay , permitting the Spartans to rally and they managed to slay many of the companions in a barrage of missiles . Despite this , Pyrrhus was taken safely back to his camp . 
 Prompted by this unsuccessful foray , Pyrrhus order his army to return to its camp . He now expected the Spartans seek terms as the severity of their casualties would make the defence unsustainable . However , Sparta was saved by the arrival of unexpected reinforcements . In the interim , Antigonus had launched another offensive in northern Greece and succeeded in evicting Pyrrhus ' garrisons from Macedon ( this possibly accounts for the presence of Ptolemy in Pyrrhus ' army ) . Having reclaimed his kingdom , Antigonus moved south into the Peloponnese , probably using the sea route to avoid a confrontation with the Aetolian League . Upon his arrival in Corinth , he sent his general Ameinias the Phocian with a group of mercenaries to assist the Spartans . The arrival of the Macedonia mercenaries was closely followed by Areus ' return from Crete with 2 @,@ 000 men . <unk> by the arrival of these reinforcements , the defenders prepared to face Pyrrhus ' next assault . The Epiriotes launched an attack in the morning but after this was repelled Pyrrhus became convinced of the futility of the situation and ordered his men to lift the siege . 
 = = March to Argos = = 
 Pyrrhus retreated with his army into the Laconian hinterland with the purpose of wintering there before making another attempt against Sparta . However , as his troops were ravaging the surrounding countryside , he received news that Antigonus was marching on Argos from Corinth on his way to trap Pyrrhus in Laconia . Pyrrhus was approached by Aristeas , the leader of the democratic faction in Argos , who sought Epiriote support to counter the pro @-@ Macedonian aristocratic party of Argos led by <unk> . Accepting Aristeas ' proposal , Pyrrhus began his march north to the Argolis . 
 Pyrrhus ' advance on Argos did not go smoothly as his army was constantly harassed by vengeful Spartan troops led by Areus . By setting up ambushes and occupying strategic positions along the Epiriote line of retreat , the Spartans were able to inflict heavy casualties on Pyrrhus ' rearguard of Gauls and Molossians . In an attempt to restore the wavering morale of his rear , Pyrrhus sent Ptolemy to assume its command . Pyrrhus hoped that the presence of his son amongst the troops would stiffen their resolve and enable to him to extricate the remainder of his troops from the narrow pass through which they were passing . Ptolemy 's position was attacked by a picked Spartan war band under the command of Evaclus . In the ensuing struggle , Ptolemy was slain by the Spartans causing his remaining troops to rout . The victorious Spartans pursued the fleeing Epiriote rearguard until they were checked by some Epiriote infantry . 
 Upon hearing of his son 's death and the collapse of his rearguard , Pyrrhus summoned his Molossian cavalry and charged the Spartans . In the battle that followed , Pyrrhus killed the Spartan leader Evaclus with his own hand and succeeded in annihilating the pursuing Spartan troops . After this skirmish , the Epiriotes continued their march to Argos . However , upon reaching his destination , he found that Antigonus had arrived at Argos first and camped to the city 's north . The Macedonian presence compelled Pyrrhus to pitch camp at Nauplion to the south of Argos . 
 Pyrrhus attempted to goad Antigonus into fighting a pitched battle on the plain in front of Argos but the Macedonian king was unmoved . The Argives sent ambassadors to both kings , beseeching them to respect the city 's neutrality . Antigonus agreed to the Argives ' terms and gave his son as a hostage in order to demonstrate his sincerity . While Pyrrhus agreed to retreat from Argos , he failed to give a pledge and as a result was regarded with suspicion . 
 = = Battle of Argos = = 
 During the night , Pyrrhus was able to enter Argos . While Pausanias recounts that he did so by force , Plutarch asserts that <unk> Gate had been left open for the Epiriotes by Aristeas . Hammond opines that it is more likely that Aristeas admitted Pyrrhus into the city . Although Pyrrhus ' Gauls were able to occupy the Argive agora , the rest of the army was delayed due to the war elephants being too large to pass through the gate . In order for them to enter , the towers need to be taken off their backs and reattached once they were inside the city . Furthermore , Pyrrhus left the majority of his army outside the city walls under the command of his son Helenus . This delay gave the Argives enough time to reach their citadel , the Aspis , and seek aid from Antigonus . The Macedonian king responded immediately , advancing towards the city walls and sending a relief force inside under the command of his son <unk> . 
 The situation further deteriorated for Pyrrhus when Areus entered Argos with a force of 1 @,@ 000 lightly armed Cretans and Spartans . The Argives , assisted by their Spartan and Macedonian allies , launched a counter @-@ attack on Pyrrhus ' Gallic troops in the agora and threw them into a state of panic . Due to the labyrinthine layout of the city and the darkness , both Pyrrhus ' advancing troops and those of his opponents become scattered throughout Argos . The result was that Pyrrhus , entering the city at the head of his cavalry to assist the Gauls , was unable to effectively communicate his commands to his soldiers . Realising the difficulty of his situation , Pyrrhus ordered his army to retreat from Argos as day broke . 
 Understanding that the gates were too narrow for his army to exit in an orderly fashion , Pyrrhus ordered Helenus to tear down part of the wall and to be prepared to fend off any enemy counter @-@ attacks against the retreating troops . However , the instructions brought by the messenger were unclear and instead of organising the retreat , Helenus advanced with the rest of the army into Argos . With the majority of his troops streaming in through the gates , Pyrrhus ' line of retreat was blocked off . The disorder was exacerbated when Pyrrhus ' largest elephant fell and blocked the gateway and another elephant started running amok after his mahout was felled . The weight of the enemy 's assault pushed Pyrrhus and his troops from the agora and compelled them to fight in the narrow street leading to the <unk> Gate . In the fighting which ensued , Pyrrhus was wounded by a spear wielded by an Argive . As Pyrrhus turned to strike down his assailant , he was hit on the head by a roof tile thrown by his attacker 's mother . Pyrrhus was either killed by the force of the tile 's impact or , alternately , having fallen dazed from his horse he was decapitated by one of Antigonus ' Macedonian soldiers , Zopyrus . Pyrrhus ' head was brought by <unk> to Antigonus , who expressed dismay when he saw it and upbraided his son for acting in such a barbarous manner . Upon Pyrrhus ' death , Epiriote resistance crumbled and Antigonus accepted the surrender of Helenus , giving him Pyrrhus ' body for burial . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The expedition into the Peloponnese was a disaster for Epiriote ambitions . Although Helenus was permitted by Antigonus to return to his homeland with the remainder of his army , Epirus ceased to be a regional power . Pyrrhus ' son and successor , Alexander II of Epirus was granted generous terms by the Macedonian king . Epirus was able to keep Pyrrhus ' conquests of <unk> , <unk> and Atintania in western Macedon . Antigonus realised that an independent Epirus was essential in order to act as a buffer against the Illyrians to the north . 
 Antigonus emerged from the conflict as the unchallenged ruler of Macedon and the leading power in Greece . After his victory in Argos , Antigonus was able to install his supporter <unk> as tyrant of the city and appointed various pro @-@ Macedonian leaders as tyrants in other Greek cities . His support for tyrants over democratic rulers would lead to growing resentment amongst the Greek cities against Macedon . On his journey north to Macedon , Antigonus succeeded in placing garrisons in the cities of Chalcis and Eretria on the important island of <unk> with the outcome being that he further consolidated his power in Greece . The Spartan @-@ Macedon alliance proved to be transient . Angered by Macedon 's supremacy and full of ambition , Areus formed a coalition with several Greek poleis , most notably Athens . In the resulting Chremonidean War , Areus was slain by his former ally Antigonus in a battle on the Isthmus of Corinth in 265 BC . The war ended in a defeat that was so crushing for Sparta that it would not rise as a regional power again until the reign of Cleomenes III thirty years later . 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 Pausanias ; Jones , W. H. S. ( translator ) ( 1918 ) . Description of Greece . New York : Harvard University Press . 
 Plutarch ; Scott @-@ Kilvert , Ian ( translator ) ( 1973 ) . Life of Pyrrhus . New York : Penguin Classics . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 = = = Modern sources = = = 
 Cartledge , Paul ; Spawforth , Antony ( 1989 ) . Hellenistic and Roman Sparta : A tale of two cities . London : Routledge . ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ 03290 @-@ 3 . 
 Cross , Geoffrey ( 2015 ) . Epirus . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Fox , Robert Lane ( 2006 ) . The Classical World . Maryborough : Penguin Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 14 @-@ 103761 @-@ 5 . 
 Green , Peter ( 1993 ) . Alexander to Actium : The Historical Evolution of the Hellenistic Age . Los Angeles : University of California Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 500 @-@ 01485 @-@ X. 
 Hammond , N. G. L. ( 1988 ) . A History of Macedonia : 336 – 167 BC . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0198148151 . 
 Pomeroy , Sarah ( 2002 ) . Spartan Women . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 415 @-@ 03290 @-@ 3 . 
 Walbank , F. W. ( 1984 ) . The Cambridge Ancient History , Volume 7 , Part 1 : The Hellenistic World . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . 
 Wylie , Graham ( 1999 ) . " Pyrrhus <unk> " . <unk> . 58 ( Societe d 'Etudes <unk> de Bruxelles ) 2 . 
 = Hurricane Liza ( 1968 ) = 
 Hurricane Liza was the third hurricane of the 1968 Pacific hurricane season . Forming from an area of the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) on August 28 and reaching tropical storm strength in the same day , Liza meandered generally westward over the Pacific Ocean , reaching hurricane strength on August 29 while far from land . It maintained that intensity until September 2 , when the hurricane was downgraded to a tropical storm , but avoided tropical depression status despite the presentation seen by an Air Force reconnaissance plane . After weakening , the storm moved northwestward , weakening to a depression on September 4 , when it began a turn to the east . There is a possibility that the depression completed a small loop between the downgrade and its dissipation on September 6 . 
 Although it remained far from land , the waves triggered by Liza were able to reach California , where they combined with high tide , threatening beachfront homes that had weakened foundations after a previous tide . The hurricane was responsible for sweeping hundreds of Labor Day swimmers out into the ocean in Zuma Beach and Newport Beach , all of whom were saved by lifeguards . The waves also tore off a group of <unk> estimated at $ 5 @,@ 000 ( 1968 USD ) near Laguna Beach . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 For a period beginning on August 25 , the ITCZ was active near the border between Mexico and Guatemala . A report of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) winds , a barometric pressure of 1010 @.@ 5 mbar , and heavy thundershowers was received from a Coast Guard cutter called the Androscoggin while the ship was 150 mi ( 240 km ) south of Tehuantepec . The report also mentioned that the thundershowers were generating 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) high swells . The conditions developed in a northward bend in the ITCZ that was moving westward . No activity other than clusters of rain were shown on satellite until August 28 , when a tropical disturbance suddenly developed along the bend , reaching tropical depression status as the day began . The depression became Tropical Storm Liza later that day , when the ship Jag Jawan reported winds of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) and 1003 @.@ 2 mbar . Another ship named <unk> , which was 60 mi ( 97 km ) northwest of the Jag Jawan , reported similar wind speeds , but a pressure of 998 mbar , the lowest barometric pressure recorded from the storm throughout its life . Satellite pictures showed a vortex arrangement consisting of three cloud masses and two arching bands of cumulonimbus clouds , all of which were producing cirrus outflow . 
 The tropical storm moved west @-@ northwest for 48 hours after being named , reaching hurricane intensity on August 29 , with satellite pictures showing an eye . Until September 1 , all ships kept out of range of the hurricane , leaving satellite imagery as the only method for obtaining information . The August 30 ESSA @-@ 6 satellite image of the hurricane showed a circular eye embedded in a nearly circular central dense overcast ( CDO ) spanning 5 ° of latitude in diameter . Inflow was apparent in feeder bands from the south , but a large area of dry air and clear skies spanned to the north and west of the hurricane . It was estimated that the hurricane was at its peak intensity at this time . On August 31 , the CDO had shrunk , but the cyclone still maintained intensity until September 1 , when the hurricane had moved over cooler water and began to weaken due to cold inflow . Around this time , an unnamed ship passing north of the center going eastward reported winds of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) and 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) to 45 @-@ foot ( 14 m ) high seas . The weakening of the hurricane accelerated , becoming uncoupled from the warm waters and losing its cirrus cap , exposing the center . An Air Force reconnaissance plane sent to investigate the storm on September 2 showed that the hurricane had weakened into a tropical storm . However , the cyclone was so disorganized at this time that the observer remarked that there was a possibility that Liza was no longer even a tropical storm . The storm continued to evaporate and was downgraded to a depression on September 4 and drifted southwestward until it dissipated on September 6 . 
 = = = Disputes = = = 
 There are two disputes between the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , the best track data , and the post @-@ season report concerning the hurricane . The first involved the peak intensity of the hurricane . The post @-@ season report released by the Environmental Science Services Administration noted that the 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) winds recorded by the unknown ship on September 1 were received two days after cool inflow , and gave the hurricane a peak intensity estimate of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) on August 30 , making Liza a Category 3 hurricane and the most intense hurricane of the season . However , the JTWC and the best track data both gave peak intensities equivalent to the ship report on September 1 . Liza was the first of three hurricanes of the season that was thought to have reached Category 3 strength . The other two were Pauline and Rebecca . 
 Another dispute exists concerning the track the hurricane took , specifically between the downgrade to tropical depression and dissipation . The best track and ESSA report both showed that Liza went southwestward through the time period . However , the JTWC final report on Liza reported that Liza made a tiny loop that was entirely within 24 ° N to 25 ° N latitude and 125 ° W to 126 ° W longitude from September 4 to September 6 . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 Despite never making landfall , the United States Weather Bureau warned that Liza could cause damage in California due to 4 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) to 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) swells it generated merging with high tide , creating 5 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) to 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) breaker waves which they reported could sweep over jetties and breakwaters as well as cause riptides on beaches . Officials at Long Beach were keeping an eye on breakwater activity and Laguna Beach lifeguards were prepared in case the swells reported there grew . At Newport Beach , the Corps of Engineers were brought in to create a buffer with sand and rock to protect homes between 41st Street and 46th Street , and concern in West Newport Beach was that the hurricane would cause more damage to oceanfront homes that were weakened by swirling seas the previous week . The waves were expected to be the only cause of damage from the hurricane , which forecaster <unk> Kurtz remarked was " much too far away " to affect atmospheric weather conditions . 
 From September 2 to September 3 , large waves , some as high as 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) , impacted beaches throughout southern California , with Los Angeles and Orange Counties experiencing growing breakers , and Cabrillo Beach experiencing riptides for two days straight . Due to the Labor Day beach turnout , many reports of rescuing swimmers who were swept up by waves caused by the hurricane were received . On September 2 , forty @-@ seven swimmers in Zuma Beach had to be rescued despite warnings to stay out of deep water , and an additional 261 rescues were reported in Newport . More rescues were reported the next day , although no exact total from the second day is known . At the El Morro Beach Trailer Park near Laguna Beach , a group of <unk> estimated at $ 5 @,@ 000 ( 1968 USD ) were ripped from their supports by rough seas . Long Beach , in terms of damage , was particularly hit hard by Liza , with debris and sea foam from the heavy surf clogging storm drains . A group of tidal pools formed along an area of the beach , draining out from a parking lot on 72nd Street onto Ocean Boulevard , resulting in flooding that closed a section of the boulevard between 68th Place and 72nd Place to traffic . Various flower gardens were also reported to have been swamped by the flooding , but no damage to housing was reported . The weakened properties in West Newport Beach also sustained no additional damage . 
 = The Boat Race 1929 = 
 The 81st Boat Race took place on 23 March 1929 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The event featured three Olympic medallists and included the first Danish rower ever to participate in the Boat Race . In a race umpired by former Oxford rower Charles Burnell , Cambridge won by seven lengths in a time of 19 minutes 24 seconds , the fastest winning time since the 1924 race . The victory , their sixth in a row and their tenth in the previous eleven years , levelled the overall record for the first time since 1863 , at 40 wins each . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1928 race by ten lengths , with Oxford leading overall with 40 victories to Cambridge 's 39 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by Francis Escombe and P. Haig @-@ Thomas ( four @-@ time Blue who had rowed between 1902 and 1905 ) . Oxford 's coaches were Harcourt Gilbey Gold ( Dark Blue president for the 1900 race and four @-@ time Blue ) , Guy Oliver Nickalls ( who had rowed three times between 1921 and 1923 ) and Arthur Wiggins ( who had rowed for Oxford in the 1912 , 1913 and 1914 races ) . For the third year the umpire was Charles Burnell who had rowed for Oxford in the 1895 , 1896 , 1897 and 1898 races . Charles Kent , who rowed for Oxford in the 1891 race , was the finishing judge for the second consecutive year . 
 Bad weather plagued the practice and build @-@ up to the race : Heavy fog caused the postponement of at least one outing . The Times rowing correspondent described Cambridge 's style as " so easy as to be almost sluggish " while Oxford were " lively to the point of punishing their boat " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 10 lb ( 80 @.@ 5 kg ) , 5 @.@ 5 pounds ( 2 @.@ 5 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford saw two rowers return in George Godber and H. C. Morphett . Cambridge 's boat contained five participants with Boat Race experience , including Richard Beesly who was making his third consecutive appearance . He and Michael Warriner were gold medallists in the coxless four at the 1928 Summer Olympics . Their cox Arthur Sulley won a silver medal in the men 's eight . Three of the Oxford crew were registered as non @-@ British : H. C. Morphett and J. A. Ingles were from Australia , while C. F. Juel @-@ Brockdorff was the first Danish rower in the history of the event . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . The umpire Burnell started the race at 12 : 12 p.m. in " gloriously fine weather " , and both boats got off to quick starts , with Oxford just ahead after the first strokes . Level past the boathouses , Cambridge edged ahead to hold a canvas @-@ length lead by Craven Steps . Taking advantage of the Dark Blues ' struggle in rough water by Craven Cottage , Cambridge slowly drew ahead and held a three @-@ quarter length lead by the time the crews passed the Mile Post . A push from the Dark Blues saw them keep in contention until Hammersmith Bridge where , according to L. Cecil Smith writing in The Observer , they " went ahead so fast and steadily as to suggest that even had they lost the toss they would have been able safely to take the Surrey water " while Oxford " had been taken out of their stride " . The Light Blues passed below the bridge with a two @-@ length lead . 
 A spurt from Cambridge around the Chiswick Reach bend effectively ended the race as a contest . A final surge from Oxford was held off by Cambridge who passed below Barnes Bridge five lengths ahead . Here , some of the Dark Blues started to show signs of distress , in particular their bow P. D. Barr who , it was later noted , had been suffering from influenza . Cambridge pulled away from the Dark Blues with every stroke and rated 36 strokes per minute towards the finish , passing the finishing post with a lead of seven lengths in a time of 19 minutes 24 seconds . It was their sixth consecutive victory , the tenth in the previous eleven years and was the fastest winning time since the 1924 race , and the ninth fastest time in the history of the event . The win took the overall record to 40 – 40 , the first time since the 1863 race that the scores had been levelled . 
 According to E. P. Evans , former Oxford rower in the 1904 , 1905 and 1906 races , writing in The Manchester Guardian , the Cambridge crew was " worthy to be classed with some of the best that Cambridge has turned out " , while Oxford " rowed distinctly below their practice form and were a most disappointing crew " . The rowing correspondent for The Times described it as a " crushing defeat " for Oxford , stating that they were " completely outpaced " yet while Cambridge " upheld the tradition of skill " , Oxford " upheld that of courage " . 
 = Letting Go ( Body of Proof ) = 
 " Letting Go " is the second episode of the first season of the American medical drama Body of Proof . It was originally broadcast in the United States on ABC on April 3 , 2011 . The episode was directed by Nelson McCormick and written by Matthew Gross and series creator Christopher Murphey . 
 In this episode , Megan Hunt ( Dana Delany ) and Detectives Bud Morris ( John Carroll Lynch ) and Samantha Baker ( Sonja Sohn ) inspect the case of an interracial couple who are shot dead in their car at Fairmount Park . This case leads them to many suspects , including one of the victim 's parents , Al ( Barry Shabaka Henley ) and Laura ( Brenda Pressley ) , both who seem to be hiding secrets about the couple 's relationship . 
 The episode received positive reviews , and was watched by 8 @.@ 49 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , on the Sunday night it aired in the United States . Critics pointed out Curtis Brumfield ( Windell Middlebrooks ) as giving " some of the best lines of the night " and providing some " much needed comic relief " . Although this episode received positive reviews , it received significantly lower ratings than both the previous and the subsequent episodes , most likely due to the episode moving from the normal Tuesday timeslot to a Sunday night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dave <unk> ( Steven <unk> ) and Linda Chapman ( <unk> Cook ) are found shot dead in their car at Fairmount Park . When Megan Hunt ( Dana Delany ) and detectives Bud Morris ( John Carroll Lynch ) and Samantha Baker ( Sonja Sohn ) arrive , they think the case is a Murder – suicide , but Megan finds two bullets in Dave and concludes that someone murdered them . Megan meets Linda 's parents , Al ( Barry Shabaka Henley ) and Laura ( Brenda Pressley ) , and tells them the news , leaving them devastated . Megan links Linda 's ex @-@ boyfriend Brian Hall ( Brian White ) to Dave and finds out that Dave was at Brian 's restaurant the night he died . However , Brian has an alibi as he was with employee Nina Wheeler ( Sherri <unk> ) . The police find out that Linda used to work at Brian 's restaurant and received psychological abuse until Dave found out and confronted him . Brian has started to abuse Nina , so the police get Nina away from Brian , as he caused Linda to suffer from bulimia due to the abuse . 
 Ethan Gross ( Geoffrey Arend ) and Curtis Brumfield ( Windell Middlebrooks ) find out that Dave was planning on marrying Linda ; however , as the two were an interracial couple , they gained an enemy in Eric Singleton ( Alexander <unk> ) , who stole the engagement ring out of the couple ’ s car , but after they were dead . Megan later finds residue in Linda 's eyes to suggest that the killer closed her eyes after she died , which leads them back to Linda 's parents , who knew that Dave intended to propose . When they call the two into the office , Al admits he killed Dave and Linda . He had only wanted to scare them so they would not marry ; however , the gun discharged , killing Linda , and in panic , he killed Dave too . After apologizing to Laura , Al is taken away . Throughout the day , Megan tries to reconnect with her daughter Lacey ( Mary Mouser ) ; however , her attempts to create a better relationship with her backfire . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Letting Go " was written by series creator Christopher Murphey and Matthew Gross , who is best known for directing episodes of Dirty Sexy Money and Day Break , and films such as Fired Up ! and Joe Somebody . Gross later directed the fifth episode of season 1 , " Dead Man Walking " , alongside Murphey . It was directed by Nelson McCormick making it the second episode in a row in which he was the director ; he also directed the previous episode " Pilot " . Daniel Licht , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for the episode . Actor Barry Shabaka Henley guest starred in the episode as Al Chapman and Brian J. White appeared as Brian Hall . Sherri <unk> – best known for her roles in Sunset Beach and One Life to Live – also guest starred , playing Nina Wheeler . Mary Mouser – best known for her role in Life Is Wild – made another re @-@ appearance as Lacey Fleming , Megan 's daughter . The show was moved to a Sunday from the normal timeslot of Tuesday before Body of Proof 's pilot episode had aired . In a press statement , ABC said , " The second episode of new drama Body Of Proof will air on a special night and time , <unk> , APRIL 3 ( 10 : 01 @-@ 11 : 00 p.m. , ET ) , following an original episode of Desperate Housewives " . 
 " Letting Go " , along with the eight episodes from Body of Proof 's first season , were released on a two @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on September 20 , 2011 . The sets included brief audio commentaries from various crew and cast members for several episodes , a preview of season 2 , a 10 @-@ minute " featurette " on the making of the show with commentaries from the medical consultants who helped with the script , and a " Contaminated Evidence " blooper reel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on 3 April 2011 , " Letting Go " was seen by 8 @.@ 49 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings . Among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , it received a 2 @.@ 0 rating / 9 share . This means that it was seen by 2 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This episode achieved a much lower number of viewers than the previous episode , " Pilot " , as well as the subsequent episode , " Helping Hand " . However , the lower ratings than both " Pilot " and " Helping Hand " were likely due to the move from the normal Tuesday timeslot to a Sunday night . Body of Proof came sixth in the ratings on Sunday night ; it was outperformed by the ABC 's Desperate Housewives and Secret Millionaire , CBS 's 60 Minutes and airing of the ACM Awards , and NBC 's Celebrity Apprentice . " Helping Hand " was watched by 1 @.@ 69 million viewers upon its airing on Channel 5 in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The episode received positive reviews . Christine Orlando from TV Fanatic stated that this episode gave her " hope for this procedural that the pilot didn 't " . She called the storyline " heartbreaking " , " sad " , shocking " , and " chilling " and added that there were " plenty of twists and turns that kept me guessing throughout the hour " . She was upset that Al Chapman was the murderer , saying that it would have been " wonderful to see Brian , Linda 's bad tempered , control freak of an ex hauled away in cuffs " . She added that the look that Eric Singleton gave Detective Baker was " positively evil " . She praised the interaction between the Megan and the rest of the main cast , saying , " We got to know more about the cast of characters in Megan 's office and Curtis was the standout . Last week Megan questioned Curtis ' abilities as a doctor . This week , Curtis not only proved her wrong but turned out to be the much needed comic relief delivering some of the best lines of the night " . She finished , " " Letting Go " definitely left me looking forward to what this new hit show has in store for us next " . After the ratings for " Pilot " were high , Matt Roush of TV Guide hoped that Body of Proof would " continue to improve " adding that he preferred this episode to " Pilot " , despite the lower ratings . 
 = Iowa Highway 182 = 
 Iowa Highway 182 ( Iowa 182 ) is a 9 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 14 km ) state highway in the northwestern corner of Iowa . It begins at U.S. Route 18 ( US 18 ) in Inwood and ends at Iowa 9 southeast of <unk> . The highway has been in the primary highway system since 1930 , when it was known as Iowa 26 . On January 1 , 1969 , Iowa 26 and Iowa 182 swapped designations . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Iowa Highway 182 begins at an intersection with US 18 and County Road A42 ( CR A42 ) . At the intersection , eastbound US 18 approaches from the west , eastbound US 18 approaches from the south , and CR A42 approaches from the east . Iowa 182 travels north through Inwood for one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) and continues due north through the farmland of Lyon County for eight miles ( 13 km ) to an intersection with Iowa Highway 9 . The intersection with Iowa 9 is very similar to the intersection with US 18 ; eastbound Iowa 9 approaches from the north and westbound Iowa 9 approaches from the east . 
 = = History = = 
 Between 1930 and 1968 , the highway now known as Iowa 182 was called Iowa 26 . This was the second instance of Iowa 26 . The first was designated in 1920 with the rest of the primary highway system . It was originally a spur route from Primary Road No. 19 ( now US 18 ) to Rock Valley . Iowa 26 was extended north from Rock Valley back to US 18 in 1929 . 
 In 1930 , US 18 was rerouted in Lyon and Sioux counties . The new routing of US 18 went through Rock Valley , thus eliminating the need for Iowa 26 , which had connected Rock Valley to US 18 . The Iowa 26 designation was moved northwest . It replaced County Road S , which followed the same course Iowa 182 now follows . 
 On January 1 , 1969 , the Iowa State Highway Commission , now known as the Iowa Department of Transportation , renumbered several state highways . The changes to the highway system fixed a number of issues : creating continuous route numbers across state lines , removing duplicate route numbers where they were unnecessary , and extending route numbers in some locations . In this case , the former Iowa 182 in <unk> County crossed into Minnesota and became Trunk Highway 26 . The two routes ' numbers were switched and have remained the same since then . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Lyon County . 
 = Lord Guildford Dudley = 
 Lord Guildford Dudley ( also spelt Guilford ) ( c . 1535 – 12 February 1554 ) was the husband of Lady Jane Grey who , declared as his heir by King Edward VI , occupied the English throne from 10 July until 19 July 1553 . Guildford Dudley enjoyed a humanist education and was married to Jane in a magnificent celebration about six weeks before the King 's death . After Guildford 's father , the Duke of Northumberland , had engineered Jane 's accession , Jane and Guildford spent her brief rule residing in the Tower of London . They were still in the Tower when their regime collapsed and remained there , in different quarters , as prisoners . They were condemned to death for high treason in November 1553 . Queen Mary I was inclined to spare their lives , but Thomas Wyatt 's rebellion against her plans to marry Philip of Spain led to the young couple 's execution , a measure that was widely seen as unduly harsh . 
 = = Family and marriage = = 
 Lord Guildford Dudley was the second youngest surviving son of John Dudley , 1st Duke of Northumberland , and his wife , Jane Guildford . The Dudley lineage goes back to a family called Sutton . In the early 14th century they became the lords of Dudley Castle , from whom Guildford descended through his paternal grandfather . This was Edmund Dudley , a councillor to Henry VII , who was executed after his royal master 's death . Through his father 's mother , Elizabeth Grey , Viscountess Lisle , Guildford descended from the Hundred Years War heroes , Richard Beauchamp , Earl of Warwick , and John Talbot , 1st Earl of Shrewsbury . 
 The Dudley children — there were thirteen born in all — grew up in a Protestant household and enjoyed a humanist education . Under the young King Edward VI , Guildford 's father became Lord President of the Privy Council and de facto ruled England from 1550 – 1553 . The chronicler Richard Grafton , who knew him , described Guildford as " a comely , virtuous and goodly gentleman " . In 1552 Northumberland unsuccessfully tried to marry Guildford to Margaret Clifford , a cousin of Jane Grey . Instead , in the spring of 1553 , Guildford was engaged to the sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Jane Grey herself . Jane Grey figured higher in the line of succession than Margaret Clifford . On 25 May 1553 , three weddings were celebrated at Durham Place , the Duke of Northumberland 's town mansion . Guildford married Jane , his sister Katherine was matched with Henry Hastings , the Earl of Huntingdon 's heir , and another Catherine , Jane 's sister , married Lord Herbert , the heir of the Earl of Pembroke . It was a magnificent festival , with jousts , games , and masques . For the latter , two different companies had been booked , one male , one female . The Venetian and French ambassadors were guests , and there were " large numbers of the common people ... and of the most principal of the realm " . Guildford and some others suffered an attack of food poisoning , because of " a mistake made by a cook , who plucked one leaf for another . " 
 = = De facto consort = = 
 Mortally ill , King Edward , in his " Device of the Succession " , settled the Crown on his cousin once removed , Jane Grey , bypassing his half @-@ sisters , Mary and Elizabeth . After Edward 's death on 6 July 1553 the Duke of Northumberland undertook the enforcement of the King 's will . The envoys of the Holy Roman Empire and France were sure of the plan 's success . Jane was reluctant to accept the Crown : She gave in after remonstrances by an assembly of nobles , including her parents and in @-@ laws ; Guildford chimed in with a lovelier approach , with " prayers and caresses " . On 10 July Jane and Guildford made their ceremonial entry into the Tower of London . Residing in there , Guildford wanted to be made king ; according to her own later account , Jane had a long discussion about this with Guildford , who " assented that if he were to be made king , he would be so by me , by Act of Parliament " . But then , Jane would agree only to make him Duke of Clarence ; Guildford replied that he did not want to be a duke , but king . When the Duchess of Northumberland heard of the argument she became furious and forbade Guildford to sleep any longer with his wife . She also commanded him to leave the Tower and go home , but Jane insisted that he remain at court , at her side . 
 According to later remarks by the Imperial ambassadors the daily Council meetings were presided by Guildford , who allegedly also dined in state alone and had himself addressed in regal style . Antoine de Noailles , the French ambassador , described Guildford as " the new King " . The Imperial court in Brussels also believed in the existence of King Guildford . 
 = = Imprisonment = = 
 On 10 July , the same day as Jane 's proclamation , a letter from Mary Tudor arrived in London , saying that she was now queen and demanding the obedience of the Council . Mary was assembling her supporters in East Anglia ; it was decided to take the field against her after some discussion over who should go , in which Jane made sure that her father should not . The Duke of Northumberland marched to Cambridge with his troops and passed a week that saw no action , until he heard on 20 July that the Council in London had declared for Mary . Northumberland now proclaimed Mary Tudor himself at the market @-@ place and was arrested the next morning . On 19 July , a few hours before Queen Mary I 's proclamation in London , the baptism of one of the Gentlemen Pensioners ' children took place . Jane had agreed to be the godmother and wished the child 's name to be Guildford . The Bishop of Winchester , Stephen Gardiner , who had been imprisoned in the Tower for five years , took great offence at this fact as he heard of it . 
 A majority of the Privy Council moved out of the Tower before switching their allegiance . Becoming aware of his colleagues ' change of mind , Jane 's father , the Duke of Suffolk , abandoned his command over the fortress and proclaimed Mary I on nearby Tower Hill . After he had left , his wife was told she could also go home , while Jane , Guildford , and the Duchess of Northumberland were not allowed to . Jane was later moved from the royal apartments to the Gentleman <unk> 's lodgings and Guildford was imprisoned in the Bell Tower . There he was soon joined by his brother , Robert . His remaining brothers were imprisoned in other towers , as was his father , who was for the moment the only prominent person to go to the scaffold ; Mary was prepared to spare Jane 's and Guildford 's lives . 
 Jane and Guildford were indicted on 12 August , and Jane submitted a letter of explanation to the Queen , " asking forgiveness ... for the sin she was accused of , informing her majesty about the truth of events . " In this account she spoke of herself as " a wife who loves her husband " . On 13 November 1553 Jane and Guildford were tried at Guildhall , together with Archbishop Cranmer and Guildford 's brothers Ambrose and Henry . They were all convicted of high treason after pleading guilty . Guildford was convicted of compassing to depose Queen Mary I by sending troops to the Duke of Northumberland and by proclaiming and honouring Jane as queen . 
 In December , Jane was allowed to walk freely in the Queen 's Garden . " Lord Robert and Lord Guildford " had to be content with taking the air on the leads of the Bell Tower . Jane and Guildford may have had some contact with each other , and at some point Guildford wrote a message to his father @-@ in @-@ law in Jane 's prayer book : 
 Your loving and obedient son wishes unto your grace long life in this world with as much joy and comfort as ever I wish to myself , and in the world to come joy everlasting . Your humble son to his death , G. Dudley 
 = = Execution = = 
 Queen Mary I 's plan to marry Philip II of Spain was greeted with widespread opposition , not just among the populace but also among Members of Parliament and privy councillors . Thomas Wyatt 's Rebellion in early 1554 , in which the Duke of Suffolk took part , was a result of this dislike . It was not the intention of the conspirators to bring Jane Grey on the throne again . Nevertheless , the government , at the height of the military crisis around 7 February , decided to execute Jane and her husband , possibly out of panic . It was also an opportunity for removing possible inspirations for future unrest and unwelcome reminders of the past . It troubled Mary to let her cousin die , but she accepted the Privy Council 's advice . Bishop Gardiner pressed for the young couple 's execution in a court sermon , and the Imperial ambassador Simon Renard was happy to report that " Jane of Suffolk and her husband are to lose their heads . " 
 The day before their executions Guildford asked Jane for a last meeting , which she refused , explaining it " would only ... increase their misery and pain , it was better to put it off ... as they would meet shortly elsewhere , and live bound by indissoluble ties . " Around ten o 'clock in the morning of 12 February Guildford was led towards Tower Hill , where " many ... gentlemen " waited to shake hands with him . Guildford made a short speech to the assembled crowd , as was customary . " Having no ghostly father with him " , he knelt , prayed , and asked the people to pray for him , " holding up his eyes and hands to God many times " . He was killed with one stroke of the axe , after which his body was conveyed on a cart to the Tower chapel of St Peter ad Vincula . Watching the scene from her window , Jane exclaimed : " Oh , Guildford , Guildford ! " He was buried in the chapel with Jane who was dead within an hour after him . 
 The executions did not contribute to the government 's popularity . Five months after the couple 's death , John Knox , the future Scottish reformer , wrote of them as " innocents ... such as by just laws and faithful witnesses can never be proved to have offended by themselves " . Of Guildford , the chronicler Grafton wrote ten years later : " even those that never before the time of his execution saw him , did with lamentable tears bewail his death " . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = New York State Route 322 = 
 New York State Route 322 ( NY 322 ) is a state highway in the Southern Tier of New York in the United States . The western terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 83 in Balcom Corners , a hamlet within the Chautauqua County town of Villenova . Its eastern terminus is at a junction with U.S. Route 62 ( US 62 ) in the Cattaraugus County town of Dayton . In between , the route passes through the village of South Dayton . 
 NY 322 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to its current alignment . Originally , maintenance of the Cattaraugus County portion of the route was split between the village of South Dayton and the county , the latter of which co @-@ designated the highway as County Route 3 ( CR 3 ) . The state of New York assumed ownership and maintenance of the Cattaraugus County segment in 1980 as part of a highway maintenance swap between the state , the county , and South Dayton . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 322 is classified by the New York State Department of Transportation as a rural collector road . It serves as a connector from NY 83 to US 62 by way of the village of South Dayton . Most of the traffic along the route is made up of non @-@ commercial vehicles ; trucks account for only nine percent of all traffic along NY 322 . The roadway has an asphalt surface that is two lanes wide and varies in width from 21 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) to 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) . NY 322 travels through flat , open land outside of South Dayton and through residential areas within the village . 
 The route begins at an intersection with NY 83 and CR 87 at Balcom Corners , a hamlet within the town of Villenova . It heads eastward , passing through open fields and a handful of homes . Roughly 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) east of NY 83 , the route meets the west branch of Conewango Creek and turns southeastward to follow the southern bank of the waterway . NY 322 passes over the creek just before crossing into Cattaraugus County and the village of South Dayton , located it the town of Dayton , that sits on the western county line . 
 In South Dayton , NY 322 is known as Pine Street as it proceeds through the village . The amount of development along the route rises as it approaches the center of the village at Main Street . The route continues on , traveling by four blocks of homes and businesses before curving eastward and entering another area dominated by open fields . It exits the village limits shortly afterward . East of South Dayton , NY 322 is known as Dexter Corners Road as it heads through a rural area of the town of Dayton . NY 322 continues to the community of Dexter Corners , where it ends at an intersection with US 62 . 
 In 2008 , the portion of NY 322 between NY 83 and the county line handled an estimated average of 1 @,@ 810 vehicles per day . The traffic volume increases to 2 @,@ 300 per day from there to Main Street in the village of South Dayton . East of Main Street , traffic volume falls to 1 @,@ 280 cars per day . 
 = = History = = 
 NY 322 was assigned to its modern alignment as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . Initially , NY 322 was maintained by Cattaraugus County between the eastern village limits of South Dayton and its junction with NY 241 ( now US 62 ) in Dayton and by the village of South Dayton within the village limits . The Cattaraugus County @-@ maintained portion of the route was co @-@ designated as CR 3 . On April 1 , 1980 , ownership and maintenance of NY 322 in Cattaraugus County was transferred from the village of South Dayton and the county to the state of New York as part of a highway maintenance swap between the three levels of government . The entirety of the route is now state @-@ maintained . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Hurricane Alice ( June 1954 ) = 
 Hurricane Alice was the second @-@ strongest Atlantic hurricane to make landfall in the month of June since reliable records began in the 1850s . While not a major hurricane , the storm was linked to catastrophic flooding in southern Texas and northern Mexico , especially along the Rio Grande and its tributaries . The third tropical cyclone and first hurricane of the 1954 Atlantic hurricane season , Alice was one of two storms to receive the same name that year , the other being an unusual post @-@ season hurricane that persisted into the new year of 1955 , becoming one of only two January hurricanes on record ( the other having formed in 1938 ) . The first Alice developed rather suddenly on June 24 over the Bay of Campeche , though it may well have formed earlier but went undetected due to limited surface weather observations . Moving northwestward , Alice strengthened rapidly as it neared the Mexican coastline , becoming a hurricane early the next day . By midday on June 25 , the hurricane reached peak winds of 110 miles per hour ( 177 km / h ) before moving inland well south of the U.S. – Mexico border . The storm struck an area with few inhabitants and caused relatively minimal impacts from wind near the point of landfall and in southern Texas . 
 As it moved inland , however , Alice produced prolific rains along and near the Rio Grande , resulting in some of the worst flooding ever seen in parts of northern Mexico and southern Texas ; in some areas , the flooding amounted to a one @-@ in @-@ 2 @,@ 000 @-@ year event . The Pecos River crested at 96 @.@ 24 ft ( 29 @.@ 33 m ) , which joined with the Rio Grande to produce significant flooding . The floods destroyed bridges and dikes and flooded many cities along the inner reaches of the river , which reached its highest water levels since 1865 . As the river overflowed its banks , floods breached the dikes at Piedras Negras , Coahuila , destroying large sections of the town . Other communities in Mexico reported significant flood damage . In the United States , damage was heaviest in Ozona , Texas , where the floods killed 15 people and caused $ 2 million in damage ( 1954 USD ) . Rainfall peaked at over 24 @.@ 07 in ( 611 mm ) , most of which fell in a 24 ‑ hour period . In all , flooding from Hurricane Alice killed at least 55 people , including 17 in the U.S. and 38 in Mexico , though many deaths in rural Mexico may have gone unreported ; the total death toll could have exceeded 150 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 At 12 : 00 UTC on June 24 , 1954 , a moderate tropical storm formed about 270 miles ( 435 km ) east of Tampico , Tamaulipas , with winds of 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) . In 2015 , NOAA researchers working on reanalysis with the Hurricane Research Division examined observations to determine whether Alice formed earlier , but were unsuccessful due to sparse surface weather observations over the Bay of Campeche . The first observation of gale @-@ force winds occurred at 18 : 00 UTC on June 24 , when a ship reported 60 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 97 km / h ) winds and an atmospheric pressure of 999 millibars ( 29 @.@ 50 inHg ) , indicating a well @-@ developed cyclone in the area . Based on these data , scientists concluded that Alice likely formed earlier than indicated , but went undetected until that day . Regardless , Alice steadily intensified almost immediately upon detection as it headed northwestward , strengthening into the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale by 00 : 00 UTC on June 25 . Early on that day , a ship calibrated the rapid strengthening of the storm , measuring winds of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) at 08 : 17 UTC . As Alice neared the coast of Mexico , reconnaissance aircraft known as Hurricane Hunters began tracking the eye of the hurricane , but apparently did not penetrate the center of the storm . They did , however , provide information about the position of the storm . 
 The storm continued to intensify rapidly as it approached the coastline south of the United States – Mexico border . Based on aircraft observations , research suggests that Alice made landfall about 60 mi ( 97 km ) south of Matamoros , Tamaulipas , at 14 : 00 UTC on June 25 . The storm affected a thinly populated segment of the Mexican coastline , and few observations were available to determine the strength of the hurricane . One report , taken about 100 mi ( 161 km ) south of Brownsville , Texas , suggested top winds of at least 70 to 80 mph ( 113 to 129 km / h ) . Prior to scientific reexamination , HURDAT — the official database containing tracks and intensities of cyclones in the North Atlantic and Eastern North Pacific regions — listed top winds of 80 mph ( 129 km / h ) at landfall in Mexico . However , a radiosonde , launched from Brownsville in time for the 12 : 00 UTC observation , recorded winds of 150 mph ( 241 km / h ) from the southeast at 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 914 m ) in elevation . Based on this measurement , which may have represented winds in the eyewall , researchers determined that Hurricane Alice was likely significantly stronger at landfall than previously assessed . They analyzed Alice as having struck Mexico with winds of 110 mph ( 177 km / h ) , while noting the great uncertainty and the possibility that the storm may have even been much stronger than this . The central pressure in the eye was probably 975 mb ( 28 @.@ 79 inHg ) or lower , as corroborated by observations well inland in Texas . Therefore , Alice was at least equivalent to a high @-@ end Category 2 hurricane at landfall and conceivably could have attained major hurricane status . 
 After hitting land , Hurricane Alice gradually weakened as it approximately followed the Rio Grande , crossing into southern Texas near La <unk> just before 00 : 00 UTC on June 26 . The storm by then had weakened back to a moderate tropical storm with winds of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) , but it still produced gale @-@ force winds in several communities across southern Texas ; a few areas in Texas may have even experienced hurricane @-@ force winds for brief periods before the storm entered the state , but there are no observations to confirm such winds . The storm likely caused winds of at least 70 mph ( 113 km / h ) in southern Texas . As it crossed into Texas , Tropical Storm Alice curved more to the north @-@ northwest early on June 26 before assuming a sharp bend back westward later in the day . The storm degenerated into a tropical depression by 18 : 00 UTC and dissipated early on June 27 near the Big Bend National Park in Texas . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Before Alice moved ashore , about 50 Girl Scouts at a camp were evacuated to a center in Brownsville , Texas . The residents of Padre Island were also evacuated . Residents in the storm 's path were unprepared due to the storm forming suddenly . The United States Coast Guard spread the word about the storm by traversing the coast and advising residents to seek shelter . Officials at the U.S. Weather Bureau posted northwest storm warnings for the Brownsville area , recommending that small boats to stay at harbor . Damages along the coastline at the point of landfall were relatively light . Winds in Brownsville reached 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) , which created flying debris that injured one man . Moderate to strong gales affected the Rio Grande Valley inland over southern Texas . Across the border , minor damage was reported in Matamoros , Tamaulipas , and one person there was killed by a fallen power line . A few shrimp fishing boats were driven ashore by heavy winds . Although later there was severe flooding further inland , a dam along the Rio Grande prevented significant flooding in the Brownsville area . 
 Most of the damage resulting from Alice was caused by heavy rain in the inland areas of Texas , Tamaulipas and Coahuila ; damage was exacerbated in these areas by drought conditions that rendered the soil especially vulnerable to erosion . Estimates of peak rainfall within 12 hours vary from 22 inches ( 56 cm ) to 26 inches ( 132 cm ) , and a total of 35 inches ( 89 cm ) of rain fell in 24 hours , approaching the world record that had been set by an unnamed hurricane in Texas in 1921 . However , a 2010 report on the storm 's rainfall indicated a maximum of 24 @.@ 07 in ( 611 mm ) near Pandale , of which 16 @.@ 02 in ( 407 mm ) fell in a 24 ‑ hour period . 
 The peak rainfall occurred in a small area centered near the Pecos River . A location along the Johnson Draw reported 11 in ( 280 mm ) of rainfall after receiving minimal precipitation in the previous three years . In addition , some locals in western Texas experienced rainfall from Alice that exceed yearly averages . This contributed to significant flooding along the Pecos River , reaching a flood stage of 55 ft ( 17 m ) in Pandale . The flooding swept away a group of fishermen in Sheffield as well as at a location 10 mi ( 16 km ) north of Pandale , killing four . Downstream , the river crested at 96 @.@ 24 ft ( 29 @.@ 33 m ) , which washed out a highway and three railroad bridges . A temporary bridge was built between Eagle Pass and <unk> Negro by July 10 , or two weeks after the storm . The destroyed rail lines stranded a Sunset Limited train , which prompted the passengers to evacuate to nearby Langtry . The flooding also stranded a Southern Pacific train , whose occupants were later evacuated by helicopters . The peak river crest corresponded to a discharge rate of 948 @,@ 000 ft ³ / s ( 26 @,@ 800 m ³ / s ) , which the International Boundary and Water Commission remarked was " probably the greatest rate of runoff for a watershed of [ that ] size in the United States . " Heavy rain fell across all of southern Texas and northern Mexico as a result of Alice , causing flash floods in inland areas . Ozona , Texas was the town most affected by the floods , sustaining $ 2 million in damage ( 1954 USD ) , as well as 15 deaths . Early on the morning of June 25 , a " wall of water " as high as 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 2 m ) poured out of a dry gully and overwhelmed most of the town . Roughly a third of Ozona had to be evacuated , and many livestock there were killed . About 500 families were left homeless in the town . United States military helicopters worked to rescue people trapped by the floodwaters . In all , at least seven towns experienced flooding from the storm on either side of the border , including <unk> and Laredo , Texas which were badly damaged by flash floods . 
 The Rio Grande rose well above flood level at the cities of Eagle Pass , Texas and Piedras Negras , Coahuila . While the city of Eagle Pass was evacuated , Piedras Negras was not . Both cities were completely flooded , and the dike intended to protect Piedras Negras from floods was washed away . At least 38 people ( some sources say 39 ) were killed in Piedras Negras after the dike collapsed . In Eagle Pass , the commercial sector was flooded by over 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) of waters , which let heavy losses . Before the storm began producing heavy rainfall , officials anticipated moderate river flooding that would peak at less than the flood of 1948 . The river crested at Laredo , Texas , where waters reached a peak of 62 @.@ 2 feet ( 19 m ) , at least 10 feet ( 3 m ) above the previous record flood . High waters caused the water treatment plants to fail there , which prevented the safe delivery of fresh water until July 1 . The International Bridge connecting Laredo and Nuevo Laredo was swept away . Although severe damage occurred in the latter city , no deaths were recorded in either city due to evacuations . Flooding along the Rio Grande was the highest since 1865 , and was considered a 1 in 2000 year event . About 12 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from nearby Ciudad Acuña following the flood . There , the floods left heavy damage . 
 Estimates for total death toll range from 55 to 153 . Death toll estimates for Texas range from 17 to 38 , though official records indicate that the 38 deaths occurred in Mexico rather than Texas . Estimates of the deaths in Mexico , where records are less complete , vary more widely . Several of the deaths in Texas were homeless people attempting to enter the United States , and as a result their deaths were not counted . Monetary damage figures are not available , but it is known that flooding from Alice caused considerable damage to crops , primarily cotton . 
 = = Aftermath and records = = 
 While Alice left almost unprecedented flooding in its wake , the storm itself was not an unheard @-@ of occurrence : a similar storm in 1921 , which followed a comparative track , caused significant flooding in Texas as well , albeit not in the same areas affected by the floods of 1954 . Following the devastation left by Alice , members of the U.S. Air Force , Navy , and Army flew 21 helicopters with over 81 tons of relief supplies to the affected people of Mexico and Texas , including food , water , medicine , and clothing . The disastrous flooding caused by Hurricane Alice along the Rio Grande accelerated the joint US – Mexico Amistad Dam project , a series of flood control dams designed to prevent similar catastrophes in the future . The project , in the planning stages for decades before the storm , was finally begun in 1960 . 
 Leftover waters from the storm led to an increase in mosquitoes in Texas , which prompted a widespread application of <unk> via airplane . On July 1 , the flood areas of southern Texas were declared a major disaster area . This followed a delivery of 2 flood specialists , 20 laborers , 2 portable water treatment plants , 7 trucks , and a quantity of insecticides and water treatment tablets . Residents in Laredo , Texas provided citizens of its neighboring city Nuevo Laredo , Mexico with food and water . The Mexican government provided temporary homes for the affected citizens of the flood . American officials distributed typhoid vaccinations , water purification tablets , and insecticides to the American cities along the Rio Grande . Safe water was eventually restored to Laredo , Texas on July 12 . All emergency work related to the disaster was finished by September 3 . 
 Besides flooding , Hurricane Alice was also notable for another reason : it made landfall with some of the strongest winds in a June hurricane on record . With top winds of 110 mph ( 177 km / h ) , the cyclone was the second @-@ strongest Atlantic hurricane to make landfall in the month of June , behind only Hurricane Audrey in 1957 , which made landfall in Louisiana with winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) . The storm was somewhat analogous to Hurricane Alex , which also affected the same region in 2010 with winds of 110 mph ( 177 km / h ) , though Alex made landfall in early July . 
 = New York State Route 31 = 
 New York State Route 31 ( NY 31 ) is a state highway that extends for 208 @.@ 74 miles ( 335 @.@ 93 km ) across western and central New York in the United States . The western terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 104 in the city of Niagara Falls . Its eastern terminus is at a traffic circle with NY 26 in Vernon Center , a hamlet within the town of Vernon . Over its routing , NY 31 spans 10 counties and indirectly connects three major urban areas in Upstate New York : Buffalo – Niagara Falls , Rochester , and Syracuse . The route is one of the longest routes in New York State , paralleling two similarly lengthy routes , NY 104 to the north and NY 5 to the south , as well as the Erie Canal , as it proceeds east . 
 Much of NY 31 west of Jordan was originally designated as part of a legislative route from the late 1900s to the early 1920s . NY 31 itself was assigned in the mid @-@ 1920s , utilizing all of legislative Route 30 ( modern NY 31 , NY 429 , and NY 104 ) west of Rochester and much of its current alignment from Rochester to Lenox . At Lenox , NY 31 turned southeast to follow what is now NY 316 and NY 46 to NY 5 in Oneida . It was realigned by 1929 to continue west to Lewiston on Ridge Road and altered in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to continue east to Utica via Verona . With the advent of U.S. Route 104 ( US 104 ) c . 1935 , NY 31 was realigned west of Rochester to follow most of its modern routing . 
 NY 31 was truncated westward to NY 365 in Verona in the early 1940s , moving the eastern terminus of NY 31 to the same junction that also had served as the northern terminus of New York State Route 234 , a north – south route that extended southeastward to Vernon Center , since the early 1930s . The two routes continued to share a terminus until 1981 , when ownership and maintenance of part of NY 234 was transferred from the state of New York to Oneida County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . In return , the state acquired a pair of county roads that followed a routing parallel to that of the transferred section of NY 234 . The new state highways and the remainder of NY 234 became an extension of NY 31 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Most of NY 31 is owned by the state of New York and maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) ; however , some sections of the route — mostly within cities — are locally owned and maintained . In the cities of Niagara Falls and Rochester , NY 31 is completely city @-@ owned . Another city @-@ maintained section exists in the city of Lockport from Washburn Street ( five blocks east of NY 78 ) to the eastern city line . Two villages — Medina and Newark — also maintain parts of NY 31 . In Medina , the locally owned section begins at the Falls Road Railroad crossing in the village center and ends at Center Street ( NY 31E ) . The portion in Newark , meanwhile , extends from Mason Street ( one block west of NY 88 ) to the eastern village line . 
 As of 2009 , the most heavily trafficked segments of NY 31 lie in and around the city of Rochester . The busiest of these , from Interstate 590 ( I @-@ 590 ) to NY 65 in the eastern suburb of Brighton , carries in excess of 40 @,@ 000 vehicles per day on average . Two other segments — between South and Woodbury Avenues in downtown Rochester and from NY 65 to French Road in Brighton and Pittsford — have traffic volumes in excess of 30 @,@ 000 vehicles . On the other hand , the portion of NY 31 in the Oneida County town of Vernon between the Vernon Downs racetrack and Youngs Road handles just 910 cars per day on average , making it the least @-@ traveled segment of the route . 
 = = = Western New York = = = 
 NY 31 begins at an intersection with NY 104 in northern Niagara Falls . After a short distance eastward through the northern fringe of the city as College Avenue , the road encounters NY 61 at the northeastern city line . NY 31 continues northeastward into the town of Niagara , following Witmer Road to an interchange with I @-@ 190 at exit 24 . Past I @-@ 190 , NY 31 meets NY 265 south of the Robert Moses Niagara Power Plant reservoir . At the intersection , NY 31 becomes Saunders Settlement Road , a name it retains for almost 15 miles ( 24 km ) . Continuing through Niagara County , NY 31 passes the south end of the Tuscarora Indian Reservation ahead of a brief overlap with NY 429 . Past the east end of the concurrency , NY 429 travels north toward NY 104 while NY 31 continues east past Niagara County Community College to an intersection with NY 425 , the final state route that NY 31 intersects before entering the Lockport area . 
 West of Lockport , NY 31 crosses NY 270 and NY 93 . Continuing into the city , NY 31 meets NY 78 ( Transit Street ) at an intersection partially located over the Erie Canal . NY 31 heads eastward through Lockport , intersecting the northern terminus of NY 77 at the eastern edge of the city . While NY 77 continues along the right @-@ of @-@ way of NY 31 , NY 31 exits , following a northeasterly alignment through Gasport to Middleport , where it acts as the western and southern terminus of NY 31E and NY 271 , respectively . Just east of town , NY 31 crosses the first of nine county lines along its routing , entering Orleans County . 
 At an intersection south of Medina , NY 31A branches off , continuing straight from NY 31 while NY 31 turns north to overlap NY 63 for a short distance between NY 31A and NY 31E in Medina . At NY 31E , NY 31 separates from NY 63 , following the path of NY 31E east out of the village . 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the east , NY 31 crosses NY 98 in Albion . Midway between Albion and Holley , NY 31 intersects the southern end of NY 387 . NY 31 continues to the southeast , entering Holley and intersecting NY 237 in the village center . The route quickly leaves Holley soon after , crossing into Monroe County just over a mile ( about 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the village line . 
 = = = Rochester area = = = 
 = = = = Western suburbs and downtown = = = = 
 Just inside the Monroe County line , the road traverses the Erie Canal before intersecting Redman Road about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) west of the village of Brockport . NY 31 turns south here , following Redman Road back across the Erie Canal and past the western fringe of the SUNY Brockport campus to a junction with Fourth Section Road . NY 31A enters the intersection from the west and ends at NY 31 while the latter turns east onto Fourth Section Road . NY 31 progresses eastward , intersecting NY 19 in a commercialized area directly south of Brockport and becoming Brockport – Spencerport Road . East of the village in the surrounding town of Sweden , NY 31 meets the southern terminus of NY 260 . The route continues eastward , paralleling the Erie Canal as it enters Ogden , where NY 31 comes to the current western terminus of NY 531 , the Spencerport Expressway , and , shortly after , the northern terminus of NY 36 . NY 31 , now sandwiched by the canal to the north and NY 531 to the south , heads eastward into the village of Spencerport , where it becomes Nichols Street and meets NY 259 in the center of the community . 
 Outside of Spencerport , NY 31 becomes Spencerport Road as it heads eastward into the town of Gates . The route heads past residential neighborhoods to the north and mostly undeveloped land to the south as it enters the hamlet of Elmgrove , built up around NY 31 's junction with NY 386 . Not far to the east , NY 31 enters North Gates , a densely populated residential community near the northern town line of Gates . In the southeastern outskirts of the community , NY 31 intersects Lyell and Howard Roads at a junction that once served as the western terminus of NY 47 . NY 31 continues east from here as Lyell Avenue , meeting NY 390 at an interchange immediately north of the route 's larger interchange with I @-@ 490 . Not far to the east is the Rochester city line , which NY 31 crosses upon traversing the Erie Canal once again . 
 NY 31 follows Lyell Avenue through the city to West Broad Street , where it turns to follow Broad Street southeastward past Sahlen 's Stadium . It heads onward toward a pair of overpasses , one carrying I @-@ 490 and another holding the CSX Transportation @-@ owned Rochester Subdivision . NY 31 continues under both , following the former path of the Erie Canal southeast through the city to the eastern terminus of NY 33 at West Main Street . NY 31 follows West Main Street to the east , passing under I @-@ 490 once again before breaking from Main Street and occupying East Broad Street . The street proceeds to the east , passing through the commercial heart of the city . Just east of Exchange Boulevard , the northern terminus of NY 383 , the route crosses the Genesee River on the Broad Street Aqueduct . 
 East of the waterway , NY 31 follows East Broad Street to South Avenue , where it turns south for two blocks to a junction with Woodbury Boulevard . It turns east here , following Woodbury Boulevard for two blocks to Chestnut Street , at which point NY 31 turns southward to follow Chestnut Street . Westbound NY 31 in the area , however , follows one block of Woodbury Boulevard and two blocks of South Clinton Avenue to reach East Broad Street . At the Inner Loop , Chestnut Street becomes Monroe Avenue , the name NY 31 retains to Pittsford . Over this stretch , NY 31 maintains a constant southeasterly progression as it passes though southeastern Rochester and the town of Brighton . As the route exits downtown Rochester , it intersects I @-@ 490 at exit 18 . The route continues onward , passing Cobbs Hill Park and entering Brighton , where it traverses areas more commercial in nature and meets the former routing of NY 47 a second time in an area of town known as Twelve Corners . 
 = = = = Eastern suburbs and Wayne County = = = = 
 In the eastern portion of Brighton , NY 31 meets I @-@ 590 by way of an interchange and intersects NY 65 . From NY 65 , NY 31 continues southeast into the town of Pittsford , passing along the southern fringe of Oak Hill Country Club and paralleling the former right @-@ of @-@ way of the Auburn Road railroad line to the village of Pittsford . Just inside the village limits , NY 31 crosses the Erie Canal once more and intersects the West Shore Subdivision at @-@ grade . In the village center , NY 31 intersects NY 96 . East of NY 96 , the route crosses over the Erie Canal once again and exits the village . Outside of the village , NY 31 parallels I @-@ 490 for a short distance across slightly open areas before connecting to the freeway near the Perinton town line at exit 26 . The route continues east into Perinton , where it traverses the Erie Canal for one final time within the county and crosses NY 250 near Perinton Square Mall . 
 East of the mall , the route passes through increasingly rural areas , with the exception of the hamlet of Egypt midway between NY 250 and the Wayne County line . NY 31 progresses onward into Wayne County , where the Rochester suburbs end as the route heads eastward through the mostly rural town of Macedon to the village of the same name . Prior to exiting the village , NY 31 meets the southern terminus of NY 350 and the eastern terminus of NY 31F . The highway continues on , exiting the village and proceeding eastward through the town of Macedon , bordered by the Erie Canal to the north and <unk> Creek to the south . In Palmyra , NY 31 joins NY 21 through the center of the village . 
 From Palmyra east , the route parallels the Erie Canal for a considerable distance . Between Palmyra and Newark , NY 31 dips into Ontario County for less than a mile ( about 1 @.@ 6 km ) before reentering Wayne County . In Newark , NY 31 intersects NY 88 . Farther east , in Lyons , it crosses NY 14 and the Erie Canal . At Clyde , NY 31 briefly overlaps NY 414 in the center of the village . Outside of Clyde , the Erie Canal veers off to the southeast while NY 31 continues east alongside the Rochester Subdivision to the hamlet of Savannah , the final centralized community within Wayne County . Here , NY 31 intersects NY 89 and follows it southward toward the Seneca County line . At the county line , NY 89 turns west to follow the county line while NY 31 heads southeast into Seneca County . The route proceeds across the northeastern most corner of the county before crossing into Cayuga County via a bridge over the Erie Canal after just 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) . 
 = = = Central New York = = = 
 Shortly after entering Cayuga County , NY 31 crosses and begins to parallel the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 90 ) , which NY 31 does for most of its routing west of the outer Syracuse suburbs . In Port Byron , NY 31 intersects NY 38 in the center of the village . The routes embark on an overlap through the village before separating near the eastern edge of Port Byron . NY 31 continues alone to Weedsport , where the route meets NY 34 and County Route 31B ( CR 31B , formerly NY 31B ) north of the village . East of Weedsport , NY 31 and the Thruway are joined by the CSX Rochester Subdivision mainline , which runs down the center of the strip of land created by the Thruway to the north and NY 31 to the south . 
 Continuing into Onondaga County and the village of Jordan , NY 31 begins to make a turn northward while connecting to the northern end of NY 317 ( the former northern terminus of NY 31C ) a short distance north of the village center . With the turn complete , NY 31 traverses the CSX mainline and the Thruway via successive overpasses before returning to level ground and resuming an eastward alignment in the shadow of the Thruway . Once inside the limits of Van Buren , NY 31 separates from the Thruway , curving north and intersecting the western terminus of NY 173 in quick succession . The alignment remains fairly straight to the outskirts of Baldwinsville , where NY 31 turns to the right onto Downer Street to avoid the Seneca River to the immediate north . The eastward progression is limited , however , as NY 31 merges with NY 690 northward , traversing the Seneca River and straddling the western edge of Baldwinsville . 
 On the north bank of the river , NY 31 exits NY 690 but joins NY 370 at the end of the exit ramp . Together , NY 31 and 370 enter Baldwinsville , intersecting NY 48 in the village center . Three blocks from NY 48 , NY 370 splits from NY 31 . As NY 370 heads for downtown Syracuse , NY 31 continues east , overlapping NY 631 for a short distance before passing through Lysander New Community and crossing the Seneca River again . Now in the town of Clay , NY 31 meets NY 481 at an interchange in the shadow of the Great Northern Mall . NY 31 continues eastward through the town to Cicero , where it meets US 11 and I @-@ 81 at exit 30 . As NY 31 heads away from I @-@ 81 , Oneida Lake slowly becomes visible to the north . NY 31 comes within a mile ( about 1 @.@ 6 km ) of the lakeshore before turning slightly to parallel the shoreline . Near the Madison County line , here delimited by Chittenango Creek , NY 31 enters the western half of Bridgeport and meets the eastern terminus of NY 298 near the banks of the creek . NY 31 continues eastward , crossing the creek and entering Madison County and the remaining portion of Bridgeport . 
 East of Bridgeport , NY 31 moves closer to Oneida Lake , eventually coming to within 200 yards ( 180 m ) of the lakeshore at points . Near the eastern edge of Oneida Lake , NY 31 intersects NY 13 in the hamlet of South Bay . To the east , NY 31 meets the northern terminus of NY 316 at a junction adjacent to the Oneida County line , again marked by a body of water , the Oneida Creek . NY 31 traverses the creek and proceeds eastward through the Oneida County town of Verona . Northeast of Oneida , NY 31 intersects NY 46 adjacent to the path of the old routing of the Erie Canal . Farther east , NY 31 intersects NY 365 just north of its interchange with the Thruway . The Turning Stone Resort & Casino , located 2 miles ( 3 km ) south of the intersection , is accessible via NY 365 . 
 Past NY 365 , NY 31 passes over the Thruway ( I @-@ 90 ) for the final time . The route continues southeast into the town of Vernon and the village of the same name within , where NY 31 intersects NY 5 . NY 31 joins NY 5 , following the route eastward for about 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) out of the village to Stuhlman Road . Here , NY 31 splits from NY 5 and follows Stuhlman Road southward , passing to the east of Vernon Downs before intersecting Youngs Road . Stuhlman Road ends here ; however , NY 31 turns eastward onto Youngs Road , following it into the hamlet of Vernon Center . The route continues eastward into the center of the community , where it ends at a large traffic circle with NY 26 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early designations = = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature established a statewide legislative route system that initially consisted of 37 unsigned routes . Much of what is now NY 31 west of Jordan became part of one of three routes , namely Route 14 , Route 20 , and Route 30 . Route 30 began at the Niagara Falls city line ( delimited by modern NY 61 ) and followed current NY 31 east to Sanborn , where it turned north onto modern NY 429 . The route followed current NY 429 to Ridge Road in Porter , at which point it turned to follow Ridge Road eastward to what is now NY 63 in Ridgeway . Route 30 went south here , utilizing modern NY 63 between Ridgeway and Medina . It rejoined what is now NY 31 in the latter location and proceeded eastward on roughly current NY 31 to the Rochester city line . In the vicinity of Brockport , however , Route 30 was routed on West Avenue and modern NY 19 instead . From the southeastern city line to NY 96 in the village of Pittsford , Monroe Avenue ( modern NY 31 ) was part of Route 14 , which turned south onto South Main Street in the center of Pittsford . Lastly , the segment what is now NY 31 between current NY 31F and NY 350 in the village of Macedon and NY 317 in Jordan was part of Route 20 . 
 Two spur routes were added to the definition of Route 30 in 1914 . One of these , a route connecting Lockport to Medina , utilized what is now NY 31 from the Lockport city line to NY 77 and from Gasport Road in Gasport to Medina ( via modern NY 31E ) . On March 1 , 1921 , several routes were altered or eliminated as part of a partial renumbering of the legislative route system . Among these was Route 30 , which was modified to follow Ridge Road instead between Ridgeway and Rochester . Its former routing from Medina eastward and the Lockport spur of Route 30 mostly became part of an extended Route 20 , which now began in North Tonawanda and followed modern NY 425 and Lower Mountain , Gothic Hill , and Upper Mountain Roads north and east through Cambria Center to Lockport . From Middleport to Medina , however , Route 20 was routed on modern NY 31 instead . East of Rochester , the section of Route 20 between Fairport and Macedon was reconfigured to utilize what is now NY 250 and NY 31 . 
 = = = Assignment = = = 
 The first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 . At this time , all of legislative Route 20 west of Rochester became part of NY 3 , a cross @-@ state route that began in North Tonawanda and ended in Plattsburgh . By 1926 , NY 31 was assigned to an alignment extending from Niagara Falls to Oneida . The route began at NY 34 ( now NY 104 ) in Niagara Falls and followed College Avenue east to the city line , from where it continued eastward to Rochester on the alignment of legislative Route 30 . Within the city of Rochester , NY 31 continued east on Ridge Road to Lake Avenue , where it turned south to enter downtown Rochester , becoming State Street at Lyell Avenue . At East Main Street , NY 31 resumed its eastward alignment , crossing the Genesee River and continuing on Main Street to Monroe Avenue , which , at the time , connected directly with Main Street . NY 31 turned right on Monroe Avenue , rejoining its present alignment of NY 31 near Union Street . 
 East of Rochester , NY 31 continued eastward to Jordan , utilizing the Rochester – Pittsford portion of legislative Route 14 , the Perinton – Jordan segment of Route 20 , and its current alignment between Pittsford and Perinton . From Weedsport to Jordan , NY 31 used a slightly different routing . It initially exited the village on Clinton Road and followed that road to Jordan , where NY 31 turned north and followed modern NY 317 and NY 31 north and east to modern CR 84 . NY 31 turned north here , using what is now Old Route 31 , current NY 31 , and Downer Street to reach Baldwinsville . Within the village , NY 31 followed Downer Street and what is now NY 48 along Syracuse Street between Downer and Genesee Streets . Outside of Baldwinsville , NY 31 remained on its current routing to Cicero , where it followed a more northerly alignment along Lakeshore Road . It rejoined its modern alignment near the eastern town line , and followed it east to what is now NY 316 in Lenox . From here , NY 31 went southeastward to NY 5 in Oneida by way of modern NY 316 and NY 46 . 
 = = = Truncations and extensions = = = 
 In the late 1920s , NY 31 was rerouted west of what is now NY 429 to follow Ridge Road to Lewiston , where it ended at then @-@ NY 34 . The former routing of NY 31 into downtown Niagara Falls was redesignated as NY 31A . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 31 was realigned east of Oneida Valley to continue east to Utica by way of its modern alignment plus Spring and Lowell Roads and several city streets . At the same time , NY 3 was realigned to continue west to Niagara Falls over modern NY 31 , overlapping NY 31A west of Sanborn . Two other portions of NY 3 — from the modern junction of NY 31 and NY 77 east of Lockport to Gasport and between Middleport and Medina — were also realigned at this time to use modern NY 31 and the old routing of legislative Route 30 Spur along modern NY 31E , respectively . 
 What is now NY 31 from NY 365 in Verona to NY 5 in Vernon became part of NY 234 c . 1932 . The new north – south highway continued south to NY 26 in Vernon Center by way of NY 5 and Churton and Youngs Roads . Also around this time , NY 3 was realigned between Shawnee and Lockport to use Saunders Settlement Road . US 104 , meanwhile , was assigned c . 1935 , following Ridge Road from Niagara Falls east to Maple View in Oswego County . The assignment of the highway led to the reconfiguration of several state highways in western and central New York , including NY 3 and NY 31 . The latter route was rerouted west of Rochester to follow the former alignment of NY 3 to Niagara Falls while NY 3 was truncated to a location in northern Cayuga County . At the same time , NY 31A was reassigned to a new alignment extending from Middleport to Knowlesville via Medina . 
 NY 31 was truncated to NY 365 in Verona in the early 1940s ; as a result , NY 31 and NY 234 now had a common terminus . Despite this fact , the two routes continued to co @-@ exist for the next 40 years . On April 1 , 1981 , ownership and maintenance of the Churton Road portion of NY 234 was transferred from the state of New York to Oneida County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . Two of highways that the state received in return were Stuhlman Road ( CR 81 ) and the segment of Youngs Road ( CR 13 ) between Stuhlman Road and Churton Road ( NY 234 ) . The two new state highways did not become a rerouting of NY 234 , however , as the NY 234 designation was eliminated at this time . Instead , NY 31 was extended southeastward over NY 234 's former routing to Vernon , from where it continued to Vernon Center by way of NY 5 , Stuhlman and Youngs Roads . Churton Road was redesignated as CR 94 . 
 = = = Realignments = = = 
 Several small @-@ scale realignments of NY 31 have occurred over the years . NY 31 was altered c . 1938 to follow its modern alignment through Cicero , bypassing Lakeshore Road to the south . In the late 1930s , NY 31 was moved onto a new , more northern highway between Weedsport and Jordan . The section of the route between Middleport and Medina was shifted southward on January 1 , 1949 , to follow what had been NY 31A between the two villages . NY 31 's old northerly routing became NY 31E . The portion of NY 31 northeast of Jordan was straightened at some point in the late 1970s or early 1980s to bypass the hamlet of Jacks Reef to the south and east . In the early 1980s , NY 31 was rerouted near Baldwinsville to follow NY 690 and NY 370 into the village . 
 Around the same time as the Baldwinsville realignment , NY 31 was moved onto its current alignment southwest of Brockport , bypassing the village on Redman and Fourth Section Roads and eliminating an overlap with NY 19 . The new alignment of NY 31 utilized part of NY 31A , which was truncated westward to the junction of Redman and Fourth Section Roads . Reference markers along the Fourth Section Road segment still read " 31A " . The former routing of NY 31 into Brockport became NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route , and later also became part of NY 19 Truck . The Redman Road portion of NY 31 , meanwhile , was initially maintained by Monroe County as part of CR 236 . In 2007 , ownership and maintenance of the Redman Road segment of NY 31 was transferred from Monroe County to the state of New York as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . A bill ( S4856 , 2007 ) to enact the swap was introduced in the New York State Senate on April 23 and passed by both the Senate and the New York State Assembly on June 20 . The act was signed into law by Governor Eliot Spitzer on August 28 . Under the terms of the act , it took effect 90 days after it was signed into law ; thus , the maintenance swap officially took place on November 26 , 2007 . 
 = = = Rochester = = = 
 The portion of NY 31 in downtown Rochester between Brown Street and South Avenue runs along the old path of the Erie Canal through the city . When the canal was diverted to bypass the city to the south in 1920 , the canal bed became part of the Rochester Subway while a 4 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 219 m ) bridge was built over the bed to carry a new street named Broad Street . None of Broad Street was initially part of NY 31 , however ; when NY 31 replaced NY 3 west of Rochester c . 1935 , it entered the city by way of NY 3 's old routing on Lyell Avenue and rejoined its original alignment at State Street . In the late 1930s , NY 31 was realigned through downtown to follow Smith and Bausch Streets east across the Genesee River and St. Paul Street and South Avenue south to Woodbury Boulevard , which at the time connected to Monroe Avenue one block to the east at South Clinton Avenue . NY 31 was altered once again c . 1964 to leave Lyell Avenue at Broad Street and follow West and East Broad Streets through downtown to South Avenue . 
 From West Main Street to South Avenue , the bridge supports were largely built with concrete while the supports on the section between Brown Street and West Main Street were mostly built with steel . Unlike the concrete supports , the steel supports flexed throughout the year , creating holes and gaps in the pavement on the deck above . The city of Rochester , which owns and maintains the section of NY 31 within the city , closed the outer northbound lane of West Broad Street ( westbound NY 31 ) between Brown and Main Streets in June 2008 for this reason . 
 In February 2010 , work began on a $ 17 @.@ 5 million project to either demolish or rehabilitate the Broad Street bridge between Brown Street and Exchange Boulevard ( NY 383 ) . As part of the project , the section of the bridge between Brown and West Main Streets would be removed — allowing for the canal bed to be filled in and the road to be rebuilt — while the segment between West Main Street and Exchange Boulevard would be rehabilitated . The portion of Broad Street between Allen and Main Streets was closed to all traffic in February and was originally scheduled to open on October 30 . It finally reopened to traffic on December 3 . 
 Farther north , work on the segment between Brown and Allen Streets was performed on one side at a time , keeping one side of Broad Street open at all times . The northbound lanes of this segment were closed on April 7 , and one direction of the segment was closed until November . It fully reopened on December 3 along with the West Main Street – Allen Street segment . Rehabilitation of Broad Street from West Main Street to Exchange Boulevard was expected to be completed in mid @-@ to @-@ late 2011 . The entire project , which also calls for landscape improvements to the area surrounding West Broad Street , was tentatively scheduled to be finished in February 2012 . 
 = = Suffixed routes = = 
 NY 31 has had as many as eight suffixed routes using six different designations ; all but three have been eliminated or renumbered . 
 The NY 31A designation has been used for three distinct highways , two of which briefly co @-@ existed : 
 The first NY 31A was a connector between NY 31 in Jordan and NY 5 in the village of Elbridge . It was assigned in the mid @-@ 1920s and absorbed by NY 41 in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 The second NY 31A was an alternate route of NY 31 between Niagara Falls and Cambria via Sanborn . It was assigned in the late 1920s and mostly supplanted by a realigned NY 31 c . 1935 . 
 The current NY 31A ( 22 @.@ 89 miles or 36 @.@ 84 kilometres ) is an alternate route of NY 31 between the villages of Medina and Brockport . The route bypasses Medina , Albion , and Holley to the south via Clarendon . It was assigned c . 1935 . 
 The NY 31B designation has been used for two distinct highways : 
 The first NY 31B was a short @-@ lived connector in Cicero that linked Lakeshore Road ( at the time NY 31 ) to US 11 by way of Mud Mill Road . It was assigned c . 1932 and removed c . 1933 . 
