 The second NY 31B was a connector linking NY 31 in Weedsport to NY 5 in the town of Elbridge . The designation was assigned c . 1933 and removed in 1980 . It was replaced with CR 31B in Cayuga County and CR 99 in Onondaga County . 
 NY 31C was a connector between NY 31 in Jordan to NY 5 in Elbridge . It was assigned c . 1933 and partially replaced by NY 317 in 2003 . 
 NY 31D was a spur that extended from the Orleans County line to NY 31 south of Brockport in Monroe County . The route was assigned c . 1935 and became the easternmost portion of NY 31A c . 1963 . 
 NY 31E ( 5 @.@ 29 miles or 8 @.@ 51 kilometres ) is an alternate route of NY 31 between the villages of Middleport and Medina . It was assigned in 1949 . 
 NY 31F ( 13 @.@ 59 miles or 21 @.@ 87 kilometres ) is an alternate route of NY 31 that extends from NY 96 in Pittsford to NY 31 in Macedon . The route bypasses Pittsford and southern Perinton to serve East Rochester and Fairport . It was assigned in 1949 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = John P. Daley = 
 John P. Daley ( born December 5 , 1946 ) is the 11th Ward Democratic Committeeman in Chicago , Illinois , a member of the Cook County Board of Commissioners ( 11th District ) , and the Chair of the Cook County Board Audit and Finance Committee . He has previously served in both the Illinois State Senate and the Illinois House of Representatives , as well as being employed as a school teacher . He is the son of former Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley and brother of former Mayor Richard M. Daley , as well as William M. Daley , former White House Chief of Staff under President Obama and United States Secretary of Commerce under President Bill Clinton . Unlike his brothers , he continues to live in the neighborhood the family was raised in . 
 Daley is also an insurance broker who earns several hundred thousand dollars a year in this second job . In 2005 , the City of Chicago endured a hired truck corruption scandal involving bribe money . The case involved a federal investigation and criminal charges to Daley associates . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Daley was born and raised in the Bridgeport neighborhood on Chicago 's South Side . He is the second youngest child of former six @-@ term Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley and Eleanor " Sis " Daley . Daley is an alumnus of St. Ignatius College Preparatory School and Loyola University . He was about eight years old when his father was first elected mayor and grew up at <unk> South Lowe with Chicago Police Department patrol cars famously stationed out front at all times , however the Daley children walked to school unescorted . 
 When John 's wedding to Mary Lou <unk> was announced in the April 24 , 1975 edition of <unk> Tribune , the headline read : " Daley 's son to wed hood 's daughter " due to his <unk> ' father , Louis <unk> , linked to connections with organized crime . 
 Daley is currently the only son of the former mayor who still lives in Bridgeport 
 = = Political career = = 
 Daley serves as the Ward Democratic Committeeman for the same 11th Ward that his father and brother served before him in the same capacity . He assumed the position in 1980 from his brother who left the post to become Cook County 's State 's Attorney . Daley oversees the ward 's 50 precincts and their captains as well as assistants year round . Among the duties of the ward committeemen are to determine Democratic endorsed nominees for office in their region . For example , when a United States Congressman such as Bill Lipinski leaves an unexpired term of office , Daley and other Ward <unk> from affected districts such as Edward M. Burke and Michael Madigan meet to endorse a new candidate such as Dan Lipinski . 
 John Vitek resigned from the Illinois House of Representatives on September 19 , 1985 due to health reasons , which made way for Daley 's appointment . In the Illinois House of Representatives , Daley served the 21st District . 
 In 1989 , when his brother Mayor @-@ elect Richard Daley named Tim Degnan to his cabinet , John was able to move from the Illinois House of Representatives into Degnan 's seat in the Illinois Senate that Degnan had assumed when Richard Daley went on to become Cook County states attorney nine years earlier . In 1991 , the Republican Party controlled the decennial redistricting and the Illinois State Senate districts were drawn to place John Daley into an unfavorable majority Black district . In 1991 , Charles Bernardini vacated a seat on the Cook County Board . On February 3 , 1992 , after a few months of political dealings , Daley was voted in as the new 10th Chicago member of the Board by the other nine . Pamela <unk> was Daley 's successors in both moves from Illinois General Assembly posts . 
 When John Stroger , who was first elected to the Cook County Board of Commissioners in 1970 and who served three terms as President beginning in 1994 , suffered a stroke on March 14 , 2006 , Daley was mentioned as a likely fill @-@ in who could be trusted until Stroger 's son , Todd Stroger , could run to replace his father as President and William Beavers could run for his seat in the November 2006 elections . Time described Daley as the second most powerful person on the board at the time . In 2001 , U.S. News & World Report felt Daley might rise to the presidency of the board himself on more than an interim basis . 
 On the Cook County Board , he serves as chairman of the Audit and Finance committees . He is a member of the Health & Hospital , Information Technology & Automation , and Rules & Administration committees . 
 = = Insurance career = = 
 In 1973 when he was 26 , Daley first met with controversy involving his insurance career . At that time , the press made an issue of his father 's decision to shift some of the city 's insurance business to the Evanston , Illinois insurance firm with which John had business ties . 
 In 2003 , Daley confirmed that he earned US $ 400 @,@ 000 annually from insurance commissions . In 2005 , a hired truck scandal involved a client of Daley who plead guilty in the bribes @-@ for @-@ work scandal . Several of Daley 's 11th Ward organization political operatives were charged or accused of being involved in the situation . Daley , however , escaped direct involvement in the ordeal , which was investigated by United States Attorney Patrick Fitzgerald in a federal investigation . 
 Daley 's business causes him many conflicts of interests in the course of business as a Commissioner on the Cook County Board . He frequently recuses himself or abstains from voting on various matters of business because of his extensive insurance network . Several of his clients do millions of dollars of business with the city and some are active in the city 's hired truck program . In addition to his own clients , he is an officer in another insurance company that has no city government business . 
 = MV Geysir = 
 MV Geysir is a U.S.-flagged general cargo / container ship owned by TransAtlantic Lines LLC . Originally named Amazonia , the 90 @-@ meter ship was built by American Atlantic Shipping in 1980 to serve a route from the United States to Brazil . In 1983 , the ship was seized by the United States Maritime Administration for nonpayment of government loans . 
 In 1984 , it was renamed Rainbow Hope and leased by a small startup company to serve a route between the United States and the American military base at Keflavik , Iceland . As Rainbow Hope the ship was central in an international disagreement between the United States and Iceland that would span years , be compared by The Chicago Tribune to the plot of the movie The Mouse That <unk> , and involve political personalities including Antonin Scalia , Ruth Bader Ginsburg , Ken Starr , Elizabeth Dole , George Schultz , and Ronald Reagan . 
 After finally losing the Iceland route , the ship was renamed Juno , bought by Norwegian owners and worked in the Norwegian trade from 1996 to 1999 . In 1999 , it was bought by TransAtlantic Lines , renamed Geysir and put back on the U.S. – Iceland route , leading to further tensions between the United States and Iceland . After the 2006 closing of the United States Naval Station in Keflavik , the ship has gone on to carrying cargo to U.S. activities in the Azores . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Then named Amazonia , the ship 's keel was laid on 1 January 1977 at Equitable Shipyard in Madisonville , Louisiana . Its hull , constructed from ordinary strength steel , has an overall length of 90 @.@ 1 metres ( 296 ft ) , a beam of 13 @.@ 7 metres ( 45 ft ) , and a moulded depth of 6 @.@ 7 metres ( 22 ft ) . Its three general cargo holds have a total bale capacity of 2 @,@ 945 cubic metres ( 104 @,@ 000 cu ft ) or grain capacity of 3 @,@ 341 cubic metres ( 118 @,@ 000 cu ft ) . The ship has a gross tonnage of 2 @,@ 266 GT and a total carrying capacity of 2 @,@ 032 long tons deadweight ( DWT ) . 
 Amazonia was built with eight ballast tanks , having a total ballast capacity of 770 cubic metres ( 27 @,@ 000 cu ft ) . Other major features of the ship 's structure include its five diesel oil tanks , two lubricating oil tanks , two potable water tanks , a chain tank , and a waste water tank . The ship was built with two cranes , which have since been removed . 
 The ship features a MAN B & W Diesel A / S <unk> / 32A main engine with eight 280 @-@ millimetre ( 11 in ) cylinders with a 320 @-@ millimetre ( 13 in ) stroke for maximum continuous power of 1 @,@ 961 @.@ 98 kilowatts ( 2 @,@ 631 @.@ 06 hp ) driving a bronze propeller . Electrical power is generated by two 400 kilowatts ( 540 hp ) auxiliary generators . Construction of the ship was completed in 1980 . 
 = = History = = 
 In the early 1980s , the company American Atlantic Shipping , a wholly owned subsidiary of American Maritime Industries , built three 2 @,@ 000 DWT multi @-@ purpose ships to carry cargo between the United States and Brazil : the Amazonia and her two sister @-@ ships , America and <unk> . In 1983 , the United States Maritime Administration took possession of the three ships after American Atlantic defaulted on Title XI payments . 
 = = = Rainbow Hope = = = 
 In May 1984 , entrepreneur Mark W. Yonge of Monmouth County , New Jersey founded Rainbow Navigation for the sole purpose of serving the route between the United States and United States military base at Keflavik , Iceland . Using money he earned from a ship @-@ chartering company , Younge chartered Amazonia from the Department of Transportation and renamed it Rainbow Hope . The company consisted of one ship , a crew of 22 , and seven full @-@ time employees . Icelandic companies had serviced the Iceland route since the late 1960s . Yonge submitted a bid quoting the same rates that the Icelandic companies were charging and invoked the Cargo Preference Act of 1904 . Rainbow won an $ 11 million contract to carry 70 % of the cargo on the route , and immediately began to work the route under contract to the Military Sealift Command . 
 According to an official of the U.S. State Department speaking on the condition of anonymity , " Almost right at the start , Iceland let their feelings be known about losing the business ... For the Icelanders , who are entirely dependent on seagoing trade , it was an issue of national sovereignty . " Minister Counselor for the Icelandic Embassy in Washington , <unk> <unk> informed the Reagan Administration that Iceland " could not accept that a foreign shipping company would have a monopoly on carrying the cargo to Iceland . " 
 Before Rainbow Hope ever left the pier , the Department of Transportation approached Rainbow trying to defuse the situation . The New York Times characterized the ensuing fight as Rainbow Navigation versus " the Navy , the National Security Council and the Departments of State , Defense , Justice and Transportation to the President himself . " During 1985 , Iceland raised the matter with the United States Department of State at least six times , including a meeting in Lisbon in June of that year between Secretary of State George Schultz and Foreign Minister of Iceland Geir <unk> . Schultz described the matter as a " major irritant in U.S. – Icelandic relations " and relations were strained to the point that Iceland threatened to start boarding U.S.-flagged ships and to close the Keflavik base . 
 Schultz 's State Department attempted to solve the problem in a number of ways . It tried and failed to have the 1904 Cargo Preference Act amended . It made an offer to pay Icelandic shipping firms monetary damages for loss of the route , which was refused . President Reagan asked United States Secretary of the Navy John F. Lehman , Jr. to determine if Rainbow 's claim under the Cargo Preference Act was valid , and on 8 August 1985 , Lehman declared Rainbow 's rates to be " excessive and unreasonable . " Within four days , Rainbow pressed suits in United States District Court against " the Department of the Navy and various other federal agencies " as well as " the Secretary of the Navy and various other government officials in their personal capacities . " The suits demanded declaratory and injunctive relief from the federal agencies and monetary damages from the named individuals . The International Organization of Masters , Mates & Pilots , representing Rainbow Hope 's crew , joined Rainbow in the suits . 
 On 15 October 1985 , the District Court issued its order , granting Rainbow 's requests for declaratory and injunctive relief , and ordered the government to withdraw a call for new bids . The government appealed the finding . On 27 January 1986 , the panel of the D.C. Circuit Court of appeals consisting of future Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia , future Starr Report special prosecutor Kenneth Starr and Senior Circuit Judge Carl E. McGowan upheld Rainbow 's victory . During the appeal , the government 's attorneys conceded that Lehman 's finding of Rainbow 's rates to be " excessive and unreasonable " was politically motivated , and the court found some arguments put forth by Shultz and Lehman " extraordinary " and having " no rational basis " . In particular , Scalia wrote that the " factual basis for ( Lehman 's ) assertion ( wa ) s utterly lacking . " During this time , Transportation Secretary Elizabeth Dole supported Rainbow , according to the Chicago Tribune , as a viable employer of United States mariners . 
 Eight months later , the government took a different approach to solve its problem with Rainbow , in the form of the 1986 Treaty Between the United States of America and the Republic of Iceland to <unk> Their Defense Relationship . This treaty , negotiated by future Secretary of Veteran Affairs Ed Derwinski , updated the 1951 U.S. – Iceland treaty , adding an explicit exemption of the Cargo Preference Act , guaranteeing 35 % of the contract would go to Icelandic companies , and giving Icelandic companies an opportunity to compete for up to 65 % of the contract . " At the time , Derwinski said , " If we don 't solve this problem , then the U.S. will be in a cod war " . The United States Senate ratified the treaty one day before Reagan left for Reykjavik to attend a summit meeting with Mikhail Gorbachev . Reagan met with the President of Iceland , <unk> <unk> , before seeing Gorbachev , giving his guarantee that the majority of the contract would be returned to Icelandic shipping companies . 
 Though a tumultuous time , Rainbow Hope kept at least part of the Iceland route from 1987 through late 1990 . In the 1987 bidding , Rainbow was the only U.S. company to bid . Bids from Icelandic competitors were lower , giving them 65 % of the carriage rights , while Rainbow Hope secured the remaining 35 % . In the 1988 bidding , the Navy changed the bidding process in a way Rainbow found unfair , and Rainbow took a new case to the Washington D.C. District Court . By May 1988 , the court had issued a preliminary injunction halting the bidding process and ordering carriage be continued under the terms of the 1987 contracts . In November 1988 , the court granted a summary judgement for Rainbow , finding the new bidding system illegal . This judgement held for nearly two years , but was ultimately overturned on 24 August 1990 , when a panel of Judges Ruth Bader Ginsburg , Douglas H. Ginsburg and David B. <unk> of the U.S. Court of Appeals , Washington D.C. Circuit , reversed the lower court 's decision . 
 = = = = Operational incidents = = = = 
 In addition to the almost non @-@ stop succession of challenges related to the contracts on the U.S. – Iceland run , Rainbow Hope was involved in a few notable operational incidents . The most notable of these involves a labor strike that prevented Rainbow Hope from discharging cargo , keeping the vessel at anchor for 22 days . The ship was scheduled to depart bound for Iceland on 24 September 1984 , but the U.S. Government and Rainbow were aware there was the possibility of a strike by Icelandic longshoremen scheduled to begin on 4 October . Rainbow Hope arrived at <unk> , Iceland on 8 October , while the strike was already underway . Rainbow repeatedly contacted the U.S. government for instructions , but none were given . The ship remained idle at anchor for 22 days unable to discharge its cargo . The strike ended on 30 October , and the cargo was delivered the next day . The government paid Rainbow $ 266 @,@ 370 @.@ 50 for the delivery , but Rainbow filed suit in the 3rd Circuit Court seeking remuneration for the extra 22 days of waiting . The court denied the claim , and appeals lasted until 24 June 1991 , when the appeals court upheld the earlier decision . 
 Other operational incidents of note include a 1988 fire during a return voyage from Iceland to the United States which forced the ship to stop in Newfoundland for repairs , and a crane breakdown on 15 November 1991 during cargo operations that required repairs be made in Praia da Vitória , Azores . 
 = = = Juno = = = 
 The ship 's certificate of inspection was deactivated by the United States Coast Guard on 9 May 1994 , rendering it unable to move . On 28 March 1996 , the vessel had been sold to " owners in Jamaica " and the Coast Guard prevented the ship from receiving oil and proceeding from its berth until a valid certificate of financial responsibility could be provided . 
 In late 1996 , the ship was purchased by the company <unk> of Haugesund , Norway under a 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Norwegian krone ( approximately $ 800 @,@ 000 in 1998 U.S. dollars ) mortgage by Sparebank 1 SR @-@ Bank . On 31 December 1996 , the new owner registered the ship under the Norwegian International Ship Register and wages for the journey to Norway were guaranteed by Sparebanken Rogaland . The ship was inspected in Hampton Roads , Virginia , on 22 April 1997 . On 30 June 1998 it was transferred to the Norwegian Ship Register . It was spotted by amateur enthusiasts in Haugesund on 26 October 1998 . On 12 January 1999 , the ship was renamed Juno . On 17 November 1999 , the ship was declared free of financial encumbrances and sold to the American company TransAtlantic Lines . 
 = = = Geysir = = = 
 In 1997 , <unk> Kjærnested decided to start a shipping company to serve the Iceland route . Then an Icelandic citizen , educated in the United States , and having worked at Van Ommeren shipping for seven years , he was familiar with the route and its history . Kjærnested 's college roommate at Babson College , Brandon C. Rose , came from an affluent family whose yearly business revenues were estimated at $ 200 million per year . Rose offered to back the company , and together they started the two companies TransAtlantic Lines LLC and TransAtlantic Lines Iceland in February 1998 . The two were originally even partners in both ventures . Shortly thereafter , they accepted an offer from shipping company American <unk> to purchase 51 % of the company , along with a never @-@ exercised option to buy 51 % of another Icelandic company largely owned by Kjærnested , <unk> . 
 The company made several preparations to bid for the Iceland contract . Rose secured a million @-@ dollar letter of credit from the State Bank of Long Island to back early operations . The company did not yet own any ships , but did secure four letters from U.S. shipping companies pledging to supply vessels sufficient to cover the charter requirements . One of the pledged vessels was the supply boat Native Dancer . 
 Eight bids for the 1998 U.S. – Iceland run were solicited by the Military Traffic Management Command on 30 January 1998 , and six bids were received . Observers speculate that the bids were from the Icelandic company Eimskip , Dutch shipping company Van Ommeren , <unk> , TransAtlantic Lines , and TransAtlantic Lines Iceland . In September 1998 , the Military Traffic Management Command awarded 65 % of the Iceland contract to TransAtlantic Lines Iceland , the lowest overall bidder , and the remaining 35 % to the TransAtlantic Lines LLC , the lowest bidder among American shipping companies . The portion awarded to TransAtlantic Lines LLC had a cumulative total value of $ 5 @,@ 519 @,@ 295 and was set to expire by 31 October 2000 . 
 Within a month , TransAtlantic re @-@ flagged Juno to the United States and renamed it Geysir at the Port of Jacksonville . In response to the awards , the government of Iceland lodged a protest with the U.S. State Department , arguing that " TLI was not a true Icelandic shipping company " and " lacks the necessary experience , technical capability , financial responsibility , and material connection with Iceland " Shipping companies Van Ommeren Lines ( USA ) and Eimskip of Iceland , which had previously serviced the Iceland route , sued the United States protesting the award . The district court found for Van Ommeren and Eimskip , requiring the Army to restart the bidding process . TransAtlantic appealed the decision , and on 11 January 2000 the Court of Appeals reversed the lower court 's decision , finally securing the contract for TransAtlantic . 
 On 4 December 2000 , members of the Coast Guard Marine Safety Office observed an accidental discharge of approximately 250 US gallons ( 950 l ) of diesel fuel from one of Geysir 's tank vents into the Elizabeth River . In 2001 , the Coast Guard of Iceland detained the vessel leading the American Bureau of Shipping to temporarily revoke the ship 's safety construction certificate and safety equipment certificate . 
 On 8 September 2006 , with the Cold War well over , the United States ceremonially disestablished Naval Air Station Keflavik and its twenty @-@ three tenant commands , a process begun that March . The closure marked the end of the 65 @-@ year military presence , the last 45 years of which coordinated under the United States Navy with activities of the National Guard , Air Force , and Army . 
 On 3 February 2009 the United States Transportation Command awarded TransAtlantic a $ 15 @,@ 078 @,@ 334 contract to carry cargo between the United States and the terminal in Praia da Vitoria , Azores . This contract , serviced by the Geysir , is expected to be completed by 29 February 2012 , and was a 100 percent Small Business Set Aside acquisition with two bids received . 
 As of 2010 , the ship is owned and operated by TransAtlantic Lines LLC . The company currently owns and operates 5 vessels , including one tug @-@ and @-@ barge combination . Four of these vessels are chartered by the Military Sealift Command , and perform duties such as delivering cargo to U.S. military activities in Diego Garcia and Guantanamo Bay , Cuba . TransAtlantic Lines has no collective bargaining agreements with seagoing unions . 
 = 1926 Lithuanian coup d 'état = 
 The 1926 Lithuanian coup d 'état ( Lithuanian : 1926 @-@ <unk> <unk> ) was a military coup d 'état in Lithuania that resulted in the replacement of the democratically elected government with a conservative authoritarian government led by Antanas Smetona . The coup took place on 17 December 1926 and was largely organized by the military ; Smetona 's role remains the subject of debate . The coup brought the Lithuanian Nationalist Union , the most conservative party at the time , to power . Before 1926 , it had been a fairly new and insignificant nationalistic party : in 1926 , its membership numbered about 2 @,@ 000 and it had won only three seats in the parliamentary elections . The Lithuanian Christian Democratic Party , the largest party in the Seimas at the time , collaborated with the military and provided constitutional legitimacy to the coup , but did not accept any major posts in the new government and withdrew in May 1927 . After the military handed power over to the civilian government , it ceased playing a direct role in political life . Smetona and his party , however , remained in power until 1940 , when Lithuania was occupied by the Soviet Union . 
 = = Background = = 
 Lithuania was incorporated into the Russian Empire in 1795 . It was occupied by Germany during World War I , and declared itself independent on 16 February 1918 . The next two years were marked by the turbulence of the Lithuanian Wars of Independence , delaying international recognition and the establishment of political institutions . The newly formed army fought the Bolsheviks , the Bermontians , and Poland . In October 1920 , Poland annexed Vilnius , the historic and modern @-@ day capital of Lithuania , and the surrounding area ; this controversial action was the source of ongoing tension between the two powers during the interwar period . Lithuania 's second @-@ largest city , Kaunas , was designated the interim capital of the state . 
 The Constituent Assembly of Lithuania , elected in April 1920 , adopted a constitution in August 1922 ; elections to the First Seimas took place in October 1922 . The most @-@ disputed constitutional issue was the role of the presidency . Eventually , the powers of government were heavily weighted in favor of the unicameral parliament ( Seimas ) . Members of the Seimas were elected by the people to three @-@ year terms . Each new Seimas directly elected the president , who was authorized to appoint a prime minister . The Prime Minister was then charged with confirming a cabinet of ministers . The presidential term was limited to no more than two three @-@ year terms in succession . The parliamentary system proved unstable : eleven cabinets were formed between November 1918 and December 1926 . 
 The principal political actors at the time of the coup had been active during the independence movement and the republic 's first few years . Antanas Smetona had served as Lithuania 's first president between April 1919 and June 1920 ; he then withdrew from formal political involvement , although he published political criticism , for which he served a brief prison term in 1923 . Augustinas Voldemaras represented Lithuania at the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk in 1918 and later served as Prime Minister , Minister of Defense , and Minister of Foreign Affairs . He resigned from the government in 1920 , although he continued to write and publish political criticism , for which he also was sentenced to a short prison term . Kazys Grinius had chaired a post @-@ World War I repatriation commission , and went on to serve as head of the 6th Cabinet of Ministers and in the First and Second Seimas . Mykolas Sleževičius served as prime minister in 1918 and 1919 , oversaw the organization of the Lithuanian armed forces in 1920 , and was a member of the Second Seimas between 1922 and 1926 . 
 = = 1926 parliamentary election = = 
 Between 8 and 10 May 1926 , regular elections to the Third Seimas were held . For the first time since 1920 , the bloc led by the Lithuanian Christian Democratic Party , which strongly supported the Roman Catholic Church and its clergy , did not obtain a majority . The Lithuanian people were disillusioned with this party , as its members had been involved in several financial scandals : Juozas <unk> had been using his diplomatic privileges in Moscow to deal in cocaine and saccharin ; <unk> <unk> and Petras <unk> had purchased cheap low @-@ quality smoked pig fat from Germany instead of buying from Lithuanian farmers ; and the Minister of Finance , Vytautas <unk> , had transferred a large sum of money from the state budget to his personal account . The party 's strategies for coping with an economic crisis were perceived as ineffective . An additional tension arose when Concordat of 1925 unilaterally recognized Vilnius as an ecclesiastical province of Poland , despite Lithuanian requests to govern Vilnius directly from Rome , which however , was not Vatican policy or tradition . The decision implied that the Pope had recognized Polish claims to Vilnius , and constituted a loss of prestige for the Christian Democrats . Diplomatic relations were severed and they did not improve when in April 1926 Pope Pius XI unilaterally established and reorganized Lithuanian ecclesiastical province without regard to Lithuanian proposals and demands . 
 The Peasant Popular Union and Social Democrats formed a left @-@ wing coalition in opposition to the Christian Democrats . But the coalition still did not constitute a majority , and it went on to add representatives of minorities in Lithuania – Germans from the Klaipėda Region , Poles , and Jews . On 7 June , Kazys Grinius was elected the 3rd President of Lithuania and Mykolas Sleževičius became the Prime Minister . Both were members of the Peasant Popular Union . 
 = = Causes = = 
 The reasons for the coup remain the subject of debate . The domestic situation was definitely troubled ; historians have pointed to specific European precedents in the 1920s that may have had an influence , including the 1922 Coup by Benito Mussolini in Italy and the May 1926 Coup by Józef Piłsudski in Poland . Other historians have cited more general trends in Europe that resulted , by the end of the 1930s , in more or less undemocratic governments in almost all European nations . Democratic immaturity was displayed by an unwillingness to compromise , and the frequent shifts of government created a chronic perception of crisis . Historians have also discussed an exaggerated fear of communism as a factor , along with the lack of a stable center that could reach out to parties on the left and right ; these parties accused each other of Bolshevism and fascism . According to historian Anatol Lieven , Smetona and Voldemaras saw themselves as the dispossessed true heroes of the independence movement , who despaired of returning to power by democratic means . 
 After the May elections , the Grinius / Sleževičius government lifted martial law , still in effect in Kaunas and other localities , restored democratic freedoms , and granted broad amnesty to political prisoners . For the first time , Lithuania had become truly democratic . However , the change did not meet with universal approval . Many of the released prisoners were communists who quickly used the new freedoms of speech to organize a protest , attended by approximately 400 people , in Kaunas on 13 June . The protest was dispersed . The new government 's opposition used this protest as the platform for a public attack on the government , alleging that it was allowing illegal organizations ( the Communist Party of Lithuania was still outlawed ) to freely continue their activities . Despite its local nature , the incident was presented as a major threat to Lithuania and its military ; the government was said to be incapable of dealing with this threat . 
 Further allegations of " <unk> " were made after Lithuania signed a non @-@ aggression treaty with the Soviet Union on 28 September 1926 . The treaty was conceived by the previous government , which had been dominated by the Christian Democrats . However , Christian Democrats voted against the treaty , while Antanas Smetona strongly supported it . It drew sharp criticism as Lithuania exchanged repeated recognition of its rights to the Vilnius Region for international isolation as the treaty demanded that Lithuania make no other alliances with other countries . At the time , the Soviet Union was not a member of the League of Nations ; France and the UK were looking for reliable partners in Eastern Europe and the Baltic states were contemplating a union on their own . On 21 November , a student demonstration against " <unk> " was forcibly dispersed by the police . About 600 Lithuanian students gathered near a communist @-@ led workers ' union . The police , fearing armed clashes between the two groups , intervened and attempted to stop the demonstration . Seven police officers were injured and thirteen students were arrested . In an attempt to legally overthrow the government , the Christian Democrats suggested a motion of no confidence in response to the incident , but it was rejected . 
 Another public outcry arose when the government , seeking the support of ethnic minorities , allowed the opening of over 80 Polish schools in Lithuania . At the time , the Polish government was closing Lithuanian schools in the fiercely contested Vilnius Region . The coalition government directly confronted the Christian Democrats when it proposed a 1927 budget that reduced salaries to the clergy and subsidies to Catholic schools . Further controversies were created when the government 's military reform program was revealed as a careless downsizing . Some 200 conservative military officers were fired . The military began planning the coup . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 There is considerable academic debate concerning Antanas Smetona 's involvement in planning the coup . In 1931 , Augustinas Voldemaras , who had since been ousted from the government and forced into exile , wrote that Smetona had been planning the coup since 1925 . Historian <unk> Butkus asserted that an idea of a coup had been raised as early as 1923 . However , this time frame is disputed , since the military did not take action until the autumn of 1926 . Smetona 's personal secretary , Aleksandras <unk> , held that Smetona knew about the coup , but neither inspired nor organized it . Before the coup , Smetona had been the editor of <unk> ( The Lithuanian ) , and a shift in its orientation that took place in late November has been cited as evidence that he was not informed about the coup until then . Before the issue of 25 November appeared , the newspaper was critical of the government and of the Christian Democrats . On that date , however , the newspaper published several articles about the 21 November student protest and an article headlined Bolshevism 's Threat to Lithuania . The latter article argued that the communists posed a genuine threat and that the current government was incapable of dealing with it . After that date , the newspaper ceased issuing criticisms of the Christian Democrats . 
 On 20 September 1926 , five military officers , led by Captain Antanas <unk> , organized a committee . Generals Vladas <unk> and Jonas <unk> were among its members . About a month later , another group , the so @-@ called Revolutionary General Headquarters ( Lithuanian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , was formed . The two groups closely coordinated their efforts . By 12 December , the military had already planned detailed actions , investigated the areas where the action was to take place , and informed the leaders of the Lithuanian National Union and Christian Democratic parties . Rumors of the plan reached the Social Democrats , but they took no action . Just before the coup , disinformation about movements of the Polish army in the Vilnius Region was disseminated ; its purpose was to induce troops in Kaunas that would potentially have opposed the coup to move towards Vilnius . 
 = = The coup = = 
 Late in the evening of 16 December , the Soviet consul informed Sleževičius about a possible coup the following night , but Sleževičius did not pay much attention to this warning . The coup began on the night of 17 December 1926 . The 60th birthday of President Kazys Grinius was being celebrated in Kaunas , attended by numerous state officials . The 1927 budget , with its cuts to military and church spending , had not yet been passed . During the night , military forces occupied central military and government offices and arrested officials . Colonel Kazys Škirpa , who had initiated the military reform program , tried to rally troops against the coup , but was soon overpowered and arrested . The Seimas was dispersed and President Grinius was placed under house arrest . Colonel Povilas <unk> was released from prison ( he had been serving a 20 @-@ day sentence for a fist fight with another officer ) and declared dictator of Lithuania . Later that day , Colonel <unk> asked Smetona to become the new President and normalize the situation . The military strove to create the impression that the coup had been solely their initiative , that Smetona had not been involved at all , and that he had joined it only in response to an invitation to serve as the " savior of the nation " . Prime Minister Sleževičius resigned , and President Grinius appointed Augustinas Voldemaras as the new Prime Minister . 
 Smetona and Voldemaras , both representing the Lithuanian National Union , invited the Christian Democrats to join them in forming a new government that would restore some degree of constitutional legitimacy . The party agreed reluctantly ; they were worried about their prestige . Looking toward the near future , the Christian Democrats reasoned that they could easily win any upcoming Seimas elections , regaining power by constitutional means and avoiding direct association with the coup . In keeping with this strategy , they allowed members of the Lithuanian National Union to take over the most prominent posts . 
 Initially , President Grinius refused to resign , but he was eventually persuaded that Polish invasion was imminent and that Smetona had sworn to uphold the constitution . On 19 December , 42 delegates of the Seimas met ( without the Social Democrats or the Peasant Popular Union ) and elected Aleksandras Stulginskis as the new Speaker of the Seimas . Stulginskis was the formal head of state for a few hours before Smetona was elected as the President ( 38 deputies voted for , two against , and two abstained ) . The Seimas also passed a vote of confidence in the new cabinet formed by Voldemaras . Constitutional formalities were observed thereby . The Lithuanian National Union secured other major roles : Antanas Merkys assumed office as Minister of Defense and Ignas <unk> as Minister of the Interior . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The official rationale given by the military was that their actions had prevented an imminent Bolshevik coup , allegedly scheduled for 20 December . Martial law was declared . About 350 communists were arrested and four leaders ( <unk> <unk> , Juozas <unk> , Kazys <unk> and <unk> <unk> ) were executed on 29 December . This was a serious blow to the Communist Party of Lithuania and it was inactive for a time . No concrete evidence was ever found that the communists had planned any coups . Other political parties and organizations were not brutalized and , according to the military , no casualties were associated with the coup , apart from the four executions . However , other sources cite the case of Captain Vincas <unk> , who was allegedly shot by the guards of the Presidential Palace , and died a day later in a hospital . 
 International recognition of the new government did not prove to be difficult . The Western powers were not pleased with the Third Seimas when it ratified the non @-@ aggression treaty with the Soviet Union in September . They were looking for a government that would change the priorities of Lithuanian foreign policy . It was therefore not surprising that the British Daily Telegraph , the French Le Matin , and the United States ' New York Times wrote that the coup was expected to curtail the move towards friendly relations with the Soviet Union and normalize relations with Poland ; the anti @-@ democratic and unconstitutional nature of the coup was not emphasized . The Western press reported the news calmly , or assessed it as a positive development in the Lithuanian struggle against Bolshevism . International diplomatic opinion held that a strong authoritarian leader would provide internal stability , and that even during the earlier years of the republic Lithuania had not been genuinely democratic , since many essential freedoms were curtailed under martial law . 
 The Christian Democrats , believing that the coup was merely a temporary measure , demanded that new elections to the Seimas be held , but Smetona stalled . He predicted that his party would not be popular and that he would not be re @-@ elected president . In the meantime , the Nationalists were discussing constitutional changes that would increase the powers of the executive branch while curbing the powers of the Seimas . In April a group of populists tried to organize a coup " to defend the constitution , " but the plans were discovered and the rebels were arrested . Among the detainees was a member of the Seimas , Juozas <unk> . On 12 April 1927 , the Seimas protested this arrest by delivering a motion of no confidence against the Voldemaras government . Smetona , using his constitutional right to do so , dissolved the Seimas . The constitution was violated , however , when no new elections were held within two months . In April , Christian Democratic newspapers , which had been calling for new elections , were censored . On 2 May 1927 , Christian Democrats withdrew from the government , thinking that the Nationalists acting alone would not be able to sustain it . As a result , the Lithuanian National Union took the upper hand in its dispute with a much larger and influential rival and assumed the absolute control of the state . 
 The 1926 coup was a major event in interwar Lithuania ; the dictatorship would go on for 14 years . In 1935 , the Smetona government outlawed the activities of all other political parties . The coup continues to be a difficult issue for Lithuanians , since the Soviet Union would go on to describe its subsequent occupation of Lithuania as a liberation from fascism . Encyclopædia Britannica , however , describes the regime as authoritarian and nationalistic rather than fascist . The coup 's apologists have described it as a corrective to an extreme form of parliamentarianism , justifiable in light of Lithuania 's political immaturity . 
 = Mauna Kea = 
 Mauna Kea ( English pronunciation : / <unk> <unk> / or / <unk> <unk> / , Hawaiian : [ <unk> <unk> ] ) , is a dormant volcano on the island of Hawaiʻi . Standing 4 @,@ 207 m ( 13 @,@ 802 ft ) above sea level , its peak is the highest point in the state of Hawaii . Much of the mountain is under water ; when measured from its oceanic base , Mauna Kea is over 10 @,@ 000 m ( 33 @,@ 000 ft ) tall , making it the world 's tallest mountain from base to summit , beating out even Mount Everest . Mauna Kea is about a million years old , and has thus passed the most active shield stage of life hundreds of thousands of years ago . In its current post @-@ shield state , its lava is more viscous , resulting in a steeper profile . Late volcanism has also given it a much rougher appearance than its neighboring volcanoes ; contributing factors include the construction of cinder cones , the decentralization of its rift zones , the glaciation on its peak , and the weathering effects of the prevailing trade winds . Mauna Kea last erupted 6 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 years ago and is now considered dormant . 
 In Hawaiian mythology , the peaks of the island of Hawaiʻi are sacred . An ancient law allowed only high @-@ ranking aliʻi to visit its peak . Ancient Hawaiians living on the slopes of Mauna Kea relied on its extensive forests for food , and quarried the dense volcano @-@ glacial basalts on its flanks for tool production . When Europeans arrived in the late 18th century , settlers introduced cattle , sheep and game animals , many of which became feral and began to damage the mountain 's ecology . Mauna Kea can be ecologically divided into three sections : an alpine climate at its summit , a Sophora chrysophylla – Myoporum sandwicense ( or māmane – naio ) forest on its flanks , and an Acacia koa – Metrosideros polymorpha ( or koa – ʻōhiʻa ) forest , now mostly cleared by the former sugar industry , at its base . In recent years , concern over the vulnerability of the native species has led to court cases that have forced the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources to eradicate all feral species on the mountain . 
 With its high altitude , dry environment , and stable airflow , Mauna Kea 's summit is one of the best sites in the world for astronomical observation . Since the creation of an access road in 1964 , thirteen telescopes funded by eleven countries have been constructed at the summit . The Mauna Kea Observatories are used for scientific research across the electromagnetic spectrum from visible light to radio , and comprise the largest such facility in the world . Their construction on a " sacred landscape " continues to be a topic of debate . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Mauna Kea is one of five hotspot volcanoes that form the island of Hawaii , the largest and youngest island of the Hawaiian – Emperor seamount chain . Of these five volcanoes , Mauna Kea is the fourth oldest and fourth most active . It began as a preshield volcano driven by the Hawaii hotspot around one million years ago , and became exceptionally active during its shield stage until 500 @,@ 000 years ago . Mauna Kea entered its quieter post @-@ shield stage 250 @,@ 000 to 200 @,@ 000 years ago , and is currently dormant . Mauna Kea does not have a visible summit caldera , but contains a number of small cinder and pumice cones near its summit . A former summit caldera may have been filled and buried by later summit eruption deposits . 
 Mauna Kea is over 3 @,@ 200 km3 ( 770 cu mi ) in volume , so massive that it and its neighbor , Mauna Loa , depress the ocean crust beneath it by 6 km ( 4 mi ) . The volcano continues to slip and flatten under its own weight at a rate of less than 0 @.@ 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 01 in ) per year . Much of its mass lies east of its present summit . Mauna Kea stands 4 @,@ 205 m ( 13 @,@ 800 ft ) above sea level , just 35 m ( 110 ft ) higher than its neighbor Mauna Loa , and is the highest point in the state of Hawaii . Measured from its base on the ocean floor , it rises over 10 @,@ 000 m ( 33 @,@ 000 ft ) , significantly greater than the elevation of Mount Everest above sea level . 
 Like all Hawaiian volcanoes , Mauna Kea has been created as the Pacific tectonic plate has moved over the Hawaiian hotspot in the Earth 's underlying mantle . The Hawaii island volcanoes are the most recent evidence of this process that , over 70 million years , has created the 6 @,@ 000 km ( 3 @,@ 700 mi ) -long Hawaiian Ridge – Emperor seamount chain . The prevailing , though not completely settled , view is that the hotspot has been largely stationary within the planet 's mantle for much , if not all of the Cenozoic Era . However , while Hawaiian volcanism is well @-@ understood and extensively studied , there remains no definite explanation of the mechanism that causes the hotspot effect . 
 Lava flows from Mauna Kea overlapped in complex layers with those of its neighbors during its growth . Most prominently , Mauna Kea is built upon older flows from Kohala to the northwest , and intersects the base of Mauna Loa to the south . The original eruptive fissures ( rift zones ) in the flanks of Mauna Kea were buried by its post @-@ shield volcanism . Hilo Ridge , a prominent underwater rift zone structure east of Mauna Kea , was once believed to be a part of the volcano ; however , it is now understood to be a rift zone of Kohala that has been affected by younger Mauna Kea flows . 
 The shield @-@ stage lavas that built the enormous main mass of the mountain are tholeiitic basalts , like those of Mauna Loa , created through the mixing of primary magma and subducted oceanic crust . They are covered by the oldest exposed rock strata on Mauna Kea , the post @-@ shield alkali basalts of the <unk> Volcanics , which erupted between 250 @,@ 000 and 70 – 65 @,@ 000 years ago . The most recent volcanic flows are <unk> and <unk> : they are the post @-@ shield <unk> Volcanics , erupted between 65 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 000 years ago . These changes in lava composition accompanied the slow reduction of the supply of magma to the summit , which led to weaker eruptions that then gave way to isolated episodes associated with volcanic dormancy . The <unk> lavas are more viscous and contain more volatiles than the earlier tholeiitic basalts ; their thicker flows significantly steepened Mauna Kea 's flanks . In addition , explosive eruptions have built cinder cones near the summit . These cones are the most recent eruptive centers of Mauna Kea . Its present summit is dominated by lava domes and cinder cones up to 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) in diameter and hundreds of meters tall . 
 Mauna Kea is the only Hawaiian volcano with distinct evidence of glaciation . Similar deposits probably existed on Mauna Loa , but have been covered by later lava flows . Despite Hawaii 's tropical location , during several past ice ages a drop of only a degree in temperature allowed snow to remain at the mountain 's summit through summer , triggering the formation of an ice cap . There are three episodes of glaciation that have been recorded from the last 180 @,@ 000 years : the <unk> ( 180 – 130 ka ) , <unk> ( 80 – 60 ka ) and <unk> ( 40 – 13 ka ) series . These have extensively sculpted the summit , depositing moraines and a circular ring of till and gravel along the mountain 's upper flanks . Subglacial eruptions built cinder cones during the <unk> glaciation , most of which were heavily gouged by glacial action . The most recent cones were built between 9000 and 4500 years ago , atop the glacial deposits , although one study indicates that the last eruption may have been around 3600 years ago . 
 At their maximum extent , the glaciers extended from the summit down to between 3 @,@ 200 and 3 @,@ 800 m ( 10 @,@ 500 and 12 @,@ 500 ft ) of elevation . A small body of permafrost , less than 25 m ( 80 ft ) across , was found at the summit of Mauna Kea prior to 1974 , and may still be present . Small gullies etch the summit , formed by rain- and snow @-@ fed streams that flow only during winter melt and rain showers . On the windward side of the mountain , stream erosion driven by trade winds has accelerated erosion in a manner similar to that on older Kohala . 
 Mauna Kea is home to Lake Waiau , the highest lake in the Pacific Basin . At an altitude of 3 @,@ 969 m ( 13 @,@ 022 ft ) , it lies within the Puʻu Waiau cinder cone and is the only alpine lake in Hawaii . The lake is very small and shallow , with a surface area of 0 @.@ 73 ha ( 1 @.@ 80 acres ) and a depth of 3 m ( 10 ft ) . Radiocarbon dating of samples at the base of the lake indicates that it was clear of ice 12 @,@ 600 years ago . Hawaiian lava types are typically permeable , preventing the formation of lakes due to infiltration . Here , either sulfur @-@ bearing steam altered the volcanic ash to low @-@ permeability clays , or explosive interactions between rising magma and groundwater or surface water ( phreatic eruptions ) formed exceptionally fine ash that also would reduce the permeability of the lake bed . 
 Until 1993 , artesian water was not known to be present in the Island of Hawaii . Drilling by the University of Hawaii at that time encountered an artesian groundwater aquifer at 300 meters below sea level and 100 meters of hole depth within a compacted layer of soil and lava where the flows of both Mauna Loa and Mauna Kea meet ( <unk> saddle region ) . Isotopic composition shows the water present to have been derived from rain coming off Mauna Kea at an elevation higher than 2000 meters above mean sea level . Its presence is attributed to a freshwater head within Mauna Kea 's basal lens . Scientists believe there may be more water in Mauna Kea 's fresh water lens than current models may indicate . In 2012 two more bore holes were drilled on Mauna Kea and water discovered at much higher elevations than previously believed but shallower than expected . Donald Thomas , director of the University of Hawaii 's Center for the Study of Active Volcanoes believes one reason to continue study of the aquifers is due to use and ‘ occupancy ’ of the higher elevation areas , stating : " Nearly all of these activities depend on the availability of potable water that , in most cases , must be trucked to the Saddle from Waimea or Hilo — an inefficient and expensive process that consumes a substantial quantity of our scarce liquid fuels . ” 
 = = = Future activity = = = 
 The last eruption of Mauna Kea was about 4 @,@ 600 years ago ( about 2600 BCE ) ; because of this inactivity , Mauna Kea is assigned a United States Geological Survey hazard listing of 7 for its summit and 8 for its lower flanks , out of the lowest possible hazard rating of 9 ( which is given to the extinct volcano Kohala ) . Twenty percent of the volcano 's summit has seen lava flows in the past 10 @,@ 000 years , and its flanks have seen virtually no lava flows during that time . 
 Despite its dormancy , Mauna Kea is expected to erupt again , although there would be sufficient warning to evacuate . The telescopes on Mauna Kea 's summit would be the first to detect the minute amounts of deformation resulting from the volcano 's swelling , acting like expensive tiltmeters . Based on prior eruptions , such an event could occur anywhere on the volcano 's upper flanks and would likely produce extended lava flows , mostly of a 'a , of 15 – 25 km ( 9 – 16 mi ) in length . Long periods of activity could build a cinder cone at the source . Although not likely in the next few centuries , such an eruption would probably result in little loss of life but significant damage to infrastructure . 
 = = Human history = = 
 = = = Native history = = = 
 The first Ancient Hawaiians to arrive on Hawaii island lived along the shores , where food and water were plentiful . Settlement expanded inland to the Mauna Loa – Mauna Kea region in the 12th and early 13th centuries . Archaeological evidence suggests that these regions were used for hunting , collecting stone material , and possibly for spiritual reasons or for astronomical or navigational observations . The mountain 's plentiful forest provided plants and animals for food and raw materials for shelter . Flightless birds that had previously known no predators became a staple food source . 
 Early settlement of the Hawaiian islands led to major changes to local ecosystems and many extinctions , particularly amongst bird species . Ancient Hawaiians brought foreign plants and animals , and their arrival was associated with increased rates of erosion . The prevailing lowland forest ecosystem was transformed from forest to grassland ; some of this change was caused by the use of fire , but the prevailing cause of forest ecosystem collapse and avian extinction on Hawaii appears to have been the introduction of the Polynesian ( or Pacific ) rat . 
 The summits of the five volcanoes of Hawaii are revered as sacred mountains ; and Mauna Kea 's summit , the highest , is the most sacred . For this reason , a kapu ( ancient Hawaiian law ) restricted visitor rights to high @-@ ranking aliʻi . Hawaiians associated elements of their natural environment with particular deities . In Hawaiian mythology , the summit of Mauna Kea was seen as the " region of the gods " , a place where benevolent spirits reside . <unk> , deity of snow , also resides there . In Hawaiian , Mauna Kea means " white mountain " , a reference to its summit , which can be frequently covered in snow . 
 Around AD 1100 , natives established adze quarries high up on Mauna Kea to extract the uniquely dense basalt ( generated by the quick cooling of lava flows meeting glacial ice during subglacial eruptions ) to make tools . Volcanic glass and gabbro were collected for blades and fishing gear , and māmane wood was preferred for the handles . At peak quarry activity after AD 1400 , there were separate facilities for rough and fine cutting ; shelters with food , water , and wood to sustain the workers ; and workshops creating the finished product . 
 Lake Waiau provided drinking water for the workers . Native chiefs would also dip the umbilical cords of newborn babies in its water , to give them the strength of the mountain . Use of the quarry declined between this period and contact with Americans and Europeans . As part of the ritual associated with quarrying , the workers erected shrines to their gods ; these and other quarry artifacts remain at the sites , most of which lie within what is now the Mauna Kea Ice Age Reserve . 
 This early era was followed by peace and cultural expansion between the 12th and late 18th century . Land was divided into regions designed for both the immediate needs of the populace and the long @-@ term welfare of the environment . These ahupuaʻa generally took the form of long strips of land oriented from the mountain summits to the coast . Mauna Kea 's summit was encompassed in the ahupuaʻa of <unk> , with part of its eastern slope reaching into the nearby <unk> . Principal sources of nutrition for Hawaiians living on the slopes of the volcano came from the māmane – naio forest of its upper slopes , which provided them with vegetation and bird life . Bird species hunted included the ʻuaʻu ( Pterodroma sandwichensis ) , <unk> ( Branta sandvicensis ) , and palila ( <unk> <unk> ) . The lower koa – ʻōhiʻa forest gave the natives wood for canoes and ornate bird feathers for decoration . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 There are three accounts of foreigners visiting Hawaii before the arrival of James Cook , in 1778 . However , the earliest Western depictions of the isle , including Mauna Kea , were created by explorers in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . Contact with Europe and America had major consequences for island residents . Native Hawaiians were devastated by introduced diseases ; port cities including Hilo , Kealakekua , and Kailua grew with the establishment of trade ; and the adze quarries on Mauna Kea were abandoned after the introduction of metal tools . 
 In 1793 , cattle were brought by George Vancouver as a tribute to King Kamehameha I. By the early 19th century , they had escaped confinement and roamed the island freely , greatly damaging its ecosystem . In 1809 John Palmer Parker arrived and befriended Kamehameha I , who put him in charge of cattle management on the island . With an additional land grant in 1845 , Parker established Parker Ranch on the northern slope of Mauna Kea , a large cattle ranch that is still in operation today . Settlers to the island burned and cut down much of the native forest for the construction of sugarcane plantations and houses . 
 The Saddle Road , named for its crossing of the saddle @-@ shaped plateau between Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa , was completed in 1943 , and eased travel to Mauna Kea considerably . 
 The <unk> Training Area on the plateau is the largest military training ground in Hawaii . The 108 @,@ 863 @-@ acre ( 44 @,@ 055 ha ) base extends from the volcano 's lower flanks to 2 @,@ 070 m ( 6 @,@ 790 ft ) elevation , on state land leased to the US Army since 1956 . There are 15 threatened and endangered plants , 3 endangered birds , and 1 endangered bat species in the area . 
 Mauna Kea has been the site of extensive archaeological research since the 1980s . Approximately 27 percent of the Science Reserve had been surveyed by 2000 , identifying 76 shrines , 4 adze manufacturing workshops , 3 other markers , 1 positively identified burial site , and 4 possible burial sites . By 2009 , the total number of identified sites had risen to 223 , and archaeological research on the volcano 's upper flanks is ongoing . It has been suggested that the shrines , which are arranged around the volcano 's summit along what may be an ancient snow line , are markers for the transition to the sacred part of Mauna Kea . Despite many references to burial around Mauna Kea in Hawaiian oral history , few sites have been confirmed . The lack of shrines or other artifacts on the many cinder cones dotting the volcano may be because they were reserved for burial . 
 = = = Ascents = = = 
 In pre @-@ contact times , natives traveling up Mauna Kea were probably guided more by landscape than by existing trails , as no evidence of the latter has been found . It is possible that natural ridges and water sources were followed instead . Individuals likely took trips up Mauna Kea 's slopes to visit family @-@ maintained shrines near its summit , and traditions related to ascending the mountain exist to this day . However , very few natives actually reached the summit , because of the strict kapu placed on it . 
 In the early 19th century , the earliest notable recorded ascents of Mauna Kea included the following : 
 On August 26 , 1823 , Joseph F. Goodrich , an American missionary , made the first recorded ascent in a single day ; however , a small arrangement of stones he observed suggested he was not the first human on the summit . He recorded four ecosystems as he travelled from base to summit , and also visited Lake Waiau . 
 On June 17 , 1825 , an expedition from HMS Blonde , led by botanist James Macrae , reached the summit of Mauna Kea . Macrae was the first person to record the Mauna Kea silversword ( <unk> sandwicense ) , saying : " The last mile was destitute of vegetation except one plant of the <unk> tribe , in growth much like a Yucca , with sharp pointed silver coloured leaves and green upright spike of three or four feet producing pendulous branches with brown flowers , truly superb , and almost worth the journey of coming here to see it on purpose . " 
 In January 1834 , David Douglas climbed the mountain and described extensively the division of plant species by altitude . On a second climb in July , he was found dead in a pit intended to catch wild cattle . Although murder was suspected , it was probably an accidental fall . The site , Ka lua <unk> 19 ° 53 ′ 17 ″ N 155 ° 20 ′ 17 ″ W , is marked by the Douglas fir trees named for him . 
 In 1881 , Queen Emma traveled to the peak to bathe in the waters of Lake Waiau during competition for the role of ruling chief of the Kingdom of Hawaii . 
 On August 6 , 1889 , E.D. Baldwin left Hilo and followed cattle trails to the summit . 
 In the late 19th and early 20th centuries trails were formed , often by the movement of game herds , that could be traveled on horseback . However , vehicular access to the summit was practically impossible until the construction of a road in 1964 , and it continues to be restricted . Today , multiple trails to the summit exist , in various states of use . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Hawaii 's geographical isolation strongly influences its ecology . Remote islands like Hawaii have a large number of species that are found nowhere else ( see Endemism in the Hawaiian Islands ) . The remoteness resulted in evolutionary lines distinct from those elsewhere and isolated these endemic species from external biotic influence , and also makes them especially vulnerable to extinction and the effects of invasive species . In addition the ecosystems of Hawaii are under threat from human development including the clearing of land for agriculture ; an estimated third of the island 's endemic species have already been wiped out . Because of its elevation , Mauna Kea has the greatest diversity of biotic ecosystems anywhere in the Hawaiian archipelago . Ecosystems on the mountain form concentric rings along its slopes due to changes in temperature and precipitation with elevation . These ecosystems can be roughly divided into three sections by elevation : alpine – subalpine , montane , and basal forest . 
 Contact with Americans and Europeans in the early 19th century brought more settlers to the island , and had a lasting negative ecological effect . On lower slopes , vast tracts of koa – ʻōhiʻa forest were converted to farmland . Higher up , feral animals that escaped from ranches found refuge in , and damaged extensively , Mauna Kea 's native māmane – naio forest . Non @-@ native plants are the other serious threat ; there are over 4 @,@ 600 introduced species on the island , whereas the number of native species is estimated at just 1 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Alpine environment = = = 
 The summit of Mauna Kea lies above the tree line , and consists of mostly lava rock and alpine tundra . An area of heavy snowfall , it is inhospitable to vegetation , and is known as the Hawaiian tropical high shrublands . Growth is restricted here by extremely cold temperatures , a short growing season , low rainfall , and snow during winter months . A lack of soil also retards root growth , makes it difficult to absorb nutrients from the ground , and gives the area a very low water retention capacity . 
 Plant species found at this elevation include <unk> <unk> , Taraxacum <unk> , <unk> humile , Agrostis <unk> , <unk> odoratum , Trisetum <unk> , Poa annua , <unk> <unk> , and Coprosma <unk> . One notable species is Mauna Kea silversword ( <unk> sandwicense var. sandwicense ) , a highly endangered endemic plant species that thrives in Mauna Kea 's high elevation cinder deserts . At one stage reduced to a population of just 50 plants , Mauna Kea silversword was thought to be restricted to the alpine zone , but in fact has been driven there by pressure from livestock , and can grow at lower elevations as well . 
 The Mauna Kea Ice Age Reserve on the southern summit flank of Mauna Kea was established in 1981 . The reserve is a region of sparsely vegetated cinder deposits and lava rock , including areas of aeolian desert and Lake Waiau . This ecosystem is a likely haven for the threatened ʻuaʻu ( Pterodroma sandwichensis ) and also the center of a study on <unk> bugs ( Nysius <unk> ) . 
 <unk> bugs feed on dead insect carcasses that drift up Mauna Kea on the wind and settle on snow banks . This is a highly unusual food source for a species in the genus Nysius , which consists of predominantly seed @-@ eating insects . They can survive at extreme elevations of up to 4 @,@ 200 m ( 13 @,@ 780 ft ) because of natural antifreeze in their blood . They also stay under heated surfaces most of the time . Their conservation status is unclear , but the species is no longer a candidate for the Endangered Species List ; studies on the welfare of the species began in 1980 . The closely related Nysius aa lives on Mauna Loa . Wolf spiders ( <unk> ) and forest tent caterpillar moths have also been observed in the same Mauna Kea ecosystem ; the former survive by hiding under heat @-@ absorbing rocks , and the latter through cold @-@ resistant chemicals in their bodies . 
 = = = Māmane – naio forest = = = 
 The highest forested zone on the volcano , at an elevation of 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 – 9 @,@ 800 ft ) , is dominated by māmane ( Sophora chrysophylla ) and naio ( Myoporum sandwicense ) , both endemic tree species , and is thus known as māmane – naio forest . Māmane seeds and naio fruit are the chief foods of the birds in this zone , especially the palila ( <unk> <unk> ) . The palila was formerly found on the slopes of Mauna Kea , Mauna Loa , and Hualālai , but is now confined to the slopes of Mauna Kea — only 10 % of its former range — and has been declared critically endangered . 
 The largest threat to the ecosystem is grazing by feral sheep ( Ovis aries ) , cattle ( Bos primigenius ) , and goats ( Capra hircus ) introduced to the island in the late 18th century . Feral animal competition with commercial grazing was severe enough that a program to eradicate them existed as far back as the late 1920s , and continued through to 1949 . One of the results of this grazing was the increased prevalence of herbaceous and woody plants , both endemic and introduced , that were resistant to browsing . The feral animals were almost eradicated , and numbered a few hundred in the 1950s . However , an influx of local hunters led to the feral species being valued as game animals , and in 1959 the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources , the governing body in charge of conservation and land use management , changed its policy to a sustained @-@ control program designed to facilitate the sport . 
 <unk> ( Ovis aries orientalis ) was introduced from 1962 – 1964 , and a plan to release axis deer ( Axis axis ) in 1964 was prevented only by protests from the ranching industry , who said that they would damage crops and spread disease . The hunting industry fought back , and the back @-@ and @-@ forth between the ranchers and hunters eventually gave way to a rise in public environmental concern . With the development of astronomical facilities on Mauna Kea commencing , conservationists demanded protection of Mauna Kea 's ecosystem . A plan was proposed to fence 25 % of the forests for protection , and manage the remaining 75 % for game hunting . Despite opposition from conservationists the plan was put into action . While the land was partitioned no money was allocated for the building of the fence . In the midst of this wrangling the Endangered Species Act was passed ; the National Audubon Society and Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund filed a lawsuit against the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources , claiming that they were violating federal law , in the landmark case <unk> v. Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources ( 1978 ) . 
 The court ruled in favor of conservationists and upheld the precedence of federal laws before state control of wildlife . Having violated the Endangered Species Act , Hawaii state was required to remove all feral animals from the mountainside . This decision was followed by a second court order in 1981 . A public hunting program removed many of the feral animals , at least temporarily . An active control program is in place , though it is not conducted with sufficient rigor to allow significant recovery of the māmane @-@ naio ecosystem . There are many other species and ecosystems on the island , and on Mauna Kea , that remain threatened by human development and invasive species . 
 The Mauna Kea Forest Reserve protects 52 @,@ 500 acres ( 212 km2 ) of māmane @-@ naio forest under the jurisdiction of the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources . <unk> hunting is allowed year @-@ round . A small part of the māmane – naio forest is encompassed by the Mauna Kea State Recreation Area . 
 = = = Lower environment = = = 
 A band of ranch land on Mauna Kea 's lower slopes was formerly Acacia koa – Metrosideros polymorpha ( koa @-@ ʻōhiʻa ) forest . Its destruction was driven by an influx of European and American settlers in the early 19th century , as extensive logging during the 1830s provided lumber for new homes . Vast swathes of the forest were burned and cleared for sugarcane plantations . Most of the houses on the island were built of koa , and those parts of the forest that survived became a source for firewood to power boilers on the sugarcane plantations and to heat homes . The once vast forest had almost disappeared by 1880 , and by 1900 logging interests had shifted to Kona and the island of Maui . With the collapse of the sugar industry in the 1990s , much of this land lies fallow but portions are used for cattle grazing , small @-@ scale farming and the cultivation of eucalyptus for wood pulp . 
 The Hakalau Forest National Wildlife Refuge is a major koa forest reserve on Mauna Kea 's windward slope . It was established in 1985 , covering 32 @,@ 733 acres ( 13 @,@ 247 ha ) of ecosystem remnant . Eight endangered bird species , twelve endangered plants , and the endangered Hawaiian hoary bat ( Lasiurus cinereus <unk> ) have been observed in the area , in addition to many other rare biota . The reserve has been the site of an extensive replanting campaign since 1989 . Parts of the reserve show the effect of agriculture on the native ecosystem , as much of the land in the upper part of the reserve is abandoned farmland . 
 Bird species native to the acacia koa – ʻōhiʻa forest include the Hawaiian crow ( Corvus <unk> ) , the <unk> ( <unk> coccineus ) , Hawaii creeper ( <unk> mana ) , <unk> ( Hemignathus munroi ) , and Hawaiian hawk ( Buteo solitarius ) , all of which are endangered , threatened , or near threatened ; the Hawaiian crow in particular is extinct in the wild , but there are plans to reintroduce the species into the Hakalau reserve . 
 = = Summit observatories = = 
 Mauna Kea 's summit is one of the best sites in the world for astronomical observation due to favorable observing conditions . The arid conditions are important for submillimeter and infrared astronomy for this region of the electromagnetic spectrum . The summit is above the inversion layer , keeping most cloud cover below the summit and ensuring the air on the summit is dry , and free of atmospheric pollution . The summit atmosphere is exceptionally stable , lacking turbulence for some of the world 's best astronomical seeing . The very dark skies resulting from Mauna Kea 's distance from city lights are preserved by legislation that minimizes light pollution from the surrounding area ; the darkness level allows the observation of faint astronomical objects . These factors historically made Mauna Kea an excellent spot for stargazing . 
 In the early 1960s , the Hawaii Island Chamber of Commerce encouraged astronomical development of Mauna Kea , as economic stimulus ; this coincided with University of Arizona astronomer Gerard Kuiper 's search for sites to use newly improved detectors of infrared light . Site testing by Kuiper 's assistant Alika Herring in 1964 confirmed the summit 's outstanding suitability . An intense three @-@ way competition for NASA funds to construct a large telescope began between Kuiper , Harvard University , and the University of Hawaii ( UH ) , which only had experience in solar astronomy . This culminated in funds being awarded to the " upstart " UH proposal . UH rebuilt its small astronomy department into a new Institute for Astronomy , and in 1968 the Hawaii Department of Land and Natural Resources gave it a 65 @-@ year lease for all land within a 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) radius of its telescope , essentially that above 11 @,@ 500 ft ( 3 @,@ 505 m ) . On its completion in 1970 , the UH 88 in ( 2 @.@ 2 m ) was the seventh largest optical / infrared telescope in the world . 
 By 1970 , two 24 in ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) telescopes had been constructed by the US Air Force and Lowell Observatory . In 1973 , Canada and France agreed to build the 3 @.@ 6 m <unk> on Mauna Kea . However , local organisations started to raise concerns about the environmental impact of the observatory . This led the Department of Land and Natural Resources to prepare an initial management plan , drafted in 1977 and supplemented in 1980 . In January 1982 , the UH Board of Regents approved a plan to support the continued development of scientific facilities at the site . In 1998 , 2 @,@ 033 acres ( 823 ha ) were transferred from the observatory lease to supplement the Mauna Kea Ice Age Reserve . The 1982 plan was replaced in 2000 by an extension designed to serve until 2020 : it instituted an Office of Mauna Kea Management , designated 525 acres ( 212 ha ) for astronomy , and shifted the remaining 10 @,@ 763 acres ( 4 @,@ 356 ha ) to " natural and cultural preservation " . This plan was further revised to address concern expressed in the Hawaiian community that a lack of respect was being shown toward the cultural values of the mountain . 
 Today the Mauna Kea Science Reserve has 13 observation facilities , each funded by as many as 11 countries . There are nine telescopes working in the visible and infrared spectrum , three in the submillimeter spectrum , and one in the radio spectrum , with mirrors or dishes ranging from 0 @.@ 9 to 25 m ( 3 to 82 ft ) . In comparison , the Hubble Space Telescope has a 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) mirror , similar in size to the <unk> , now the second smallest telescope on the mountain . 
 A " Save Mauna Kea " movement , believes development of the mountain to be sacrilegious . Native Hawaiian non @-@ profit groups such as <unk> , concerned with cultural heritage and the environment also oppose development for cultural and religious reasons . The multi @-@ telescope " outrigger " , proposed in 2006 was eventually canceled . A planned new telescope , the Thirty Meter Telescope ( TMT ) , has attracted controversy and protests . The TMT was approved in April 2013 . In October of 2014 , the groundbreaking ceremony for the telescope was interrupted by protesters causing the project to temporarily halt . In late March 2015 , demonstrators blocked access of the road to the summit again . On April 2 , 2015 , 300 protestors were gathered near the visitor 's center when 12 people were arrested with 11 more arrested at the summit . Among the concerns of the protest groups are the land appraisals and Native Hawaiians consultation . Construction was halted on April 7 , 2015 after protests expanded over the state . After several halts , the project has been voluntarily postponed . Governor <unk> announced substantial changes to the management of Mauna Kea in the future but stated the project can move forward . A pending court case has been accepted by the Supreme Court of Hawaii over the project by a number of groups . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The summit of Mauna Kea has an alpine climate 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Mauna Kea 's coastline is dominated by the Hamakua Coast , an area of rugged terrain created by frequent slumps and landslides on the volcano 's flank . The area includes several recreation parks including <unk> State Recreation Area , Wailuku River State Park and Akaka Falls State Park . 
 There are over 3 @,@ 000 registered hunters on Hawaii island , and hunting , for both recreation and sustenance , is a common activity on Mauna Kea . A public hunting program is used to control the numbers of introduced animals including pigs , sheep , goats , turkey , pheasants , and quail . The Mauna Kea State Recreation Area functions as a base camp for the sport . Birdwatching is also common at lower levels on the mountain . A popular site is <unk> Pu 'u <unk> , a <unk> on Mauna Kea 's flank that formed when lava flows isolated the forest on a hill . 
 Mauna Kea 's great elevation and the steepness of its flanks provide a better view and a shorter hike than the adjacent Mauna Loa . The high elevation with its risk of altitude sickness , weather concerns , steep road grade , and overall inaccessibility make the volcano dangerous and summit trips difficult . Until the construction of roads in the mid @-@ 20th century , only the hardy visited Mauna Kea 's upper slopes ; hunters tracked game animals , and hikers traveled up the mountain . These travelers used stone cabins constructed by the Civilian Conservation Corps in the 1930s as base camps , and it is from these facilities that the modern mid @-@ level Onizuka Center for International Astronomy telescope support complex is derived . The first Mauna Kea summit road was built in 1964 , making the peak itself accessible to larger numbers of people . 
 Today , multiple hiking trails exist , including the Mauna Kea Trail , and by 2007 over 100 @,@ 000 tourists and 32 @,@ 000 vehicles were going each year to the Visitor Information Station ( VIS ) adjacent to the Onizuka Center for International Astronomy . The Mauna Kea Access Road is paved up to the Center at 2 @,@ 804 m ( 9 @,@ 199 ft ) . One study reported that around a third of visitors and two thirds of professional astronomers working on the mountain have experienced symptoms of acute altitude sickness ; visitors traveling up the volcano 's flanks are advised to stop for at least half an hour and preferably longer at the visitor center to acclimate to the higher elevation . It is strongly recommended to use a four @-@ wheel drive vehicle to drive all the way to the top . Brakes often overheat on the way down and there is no fuel available on Mauna Kea . A free Star Gazing Program is held at the VIS every night from 6 @-@ 10 pm . Between 5 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 000 people visit the summit of Mauna Kea each year , and to help ensure safety , and protect the integrity of the mountain , a ranger program was implemented in 2001 . 
 = Typhoon Saomai ( 2000 ) = 
 Typhoon Saomai , known in the Philippines as Typhoon <unk> , was a long @-@ tracked and intense tropical cyclone that brought flooding rainfall in Japan and the Korean peninsula in September 2000 . The torrential precipitation in Japan was considered some of the worst in the past century . 
 Saomai , the second strongest typhoon in the western Pacific in 2000 , developed from an area of disturbed weather in open sea on August 31 . The system was initially quick to intensify , reaching an initial peak intensity as a typhoon on September 4 . Wind shear caused a hiatus in Saomai 's strengthening phase , and as a result Saomai weakened back to a tropical storm as it tracked northwest for the next few days . On September 9 , the system regained typhoon intensity and began to rapidly intensify , reaching peak intensity on September 10 with maximum sustained winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . Over the ensuing two days Saomai would weaken slightly before making landfall on Okinawa Island . The typhoon later entered the East China Sea , where it recurved towards the northeast before making landfall on South Korea as a severe tropical storm , later transitioning into an extratropical cyclone on September 16 . Saomai 's remnants would move into Russia before dissipating three days later . 
 As a developing typhoon , the outer rainbands of Saomai affected the Northern Mariana Islands and Guam , causing moderate damage . Localized power outages were reported , and damage totaled to US $ 650 @,@ 000 . Even before Saomai made landfall on Okinawa , the typhoon caused rough seas off the coast of Japan that resulted in several shipping incidents . Concurrently , the approach of a front into the country interacted with the typhoon , resulting in unprecedented rainfalls in Japan . Due to the floods , approximately 400 @,@ 000 people were evacuated in three prefectures . In Nagoya , observed rainfall totals were the highest since records began in 1891 . Despite making landfall on Okinawa , damage was not as severe , though several landslides and strong winds were reported . Overall , damage in Japan and its outlying islands totaled JP ¥ 24 @.@ 8 billion ( US $ 223 million ) and eleven fatalities were reported . As Saomai tracked near China , its outer rainbands and strong waves prompted the evacuation of 20 @,@ 000 people and caused record high stream heights . 
 In South Korea , eight people were killed and damage figures equated to US $ 71 million . Widespread power outages took a toll on as many as 422 @,@ 000 homes and heavy rains flooded numerous fields of crops . Minor damage occurred in North Korea , though the damage wrought by Typhoon Prapiroon earlier in the month was exacerbated by Saomai 's impacts . In Russia , where the typhoon made landfall as an extratropical storm , nine people were killed due to car accidents spurred by rainfall caused by the Saomai . Overall , Saomai 's affects resulted in the death of 28 people and roughly US $ 295 million in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Typhoon Saomai emerged from an area of convection that developed well east of Guam in late @-@ August . Though the disturbance was associated with a low @-@ pressure area , the circulation center was too weak to support persistent shower activity . Despite the satellite presentation , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical depression at 1800 UTC on August 31 . Over the next few days , the system organized and curved towards the west from its initial northerly track . At 1200 UTC on September 2 , the JMA upgraded the small depression to tropical storm intensity . Within Saomai , convection deepened near the center , signifying continued intensification . A cold central dense overcast eventually developed , and at 1200 UTC the next day , Saomai became a severe tropical storm . Early on September 4 , the tropical cyclone intensified further into a typhoon . At the time , Saomai was still well northeast of Guam . 
 Upon reaching typhoon strength , Saomai attained an initial peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 120 km / h ( 65 mph ) . Shortly after , despite the fact that a primitive eye had begun to develop , wind shear increased , shearing the storm 's convection away . As a result , the JMA downgraded Saomai below typhoon strength on September 5 , and at roughly the same time a subtropical ridge to the storm 's southeast steered Saomai southward . This break in the storm 's westerly course was short lived , and early on September 6 , Saomai assumed its previous heading . Over time the shearing conditions gradually abated , and <unk> about the cyclone was showing signs of organization and strengthening . On September 8 , Saomai finally re @-@ developed a central dense overcast , prompting the JMA to upgrade the tropical storm back to typhoon intensity at 0000 UTC the following day . Back in favorable conditions , the typhoon entered a phase of rapid intensification beginning six hours later . During this period a well @-@ defined eye developed , and the storm 's eyewall significantly intensified . At 1200 UTC on September 10 , Saomai reached its peak intensity with sustained winds estimated at 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 925 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 32 inHg ) . The intense typhoon held this intensity for approximately nine hours before it began to weaken . 
 Following peak intensity , Saomai 's eye became cloud @-@ filled , and the storm began to develop concentric eyewalls . Shortly after 1000 UTC on September 12 , the typhoon made landfall on central Okinawa , Japan with sustained winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) and a pressure of 945 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 91 inHg ) . Saomai quickly passed over the island , and concurrently its weakening phase came to a halt . After tracking into the East China Sea , the typhoon began to track towards the northeast in response to a mid @-@ latitude trough . At its westernmost point along its track , Saomai was located approximately 345 km ( 215 mi ) east of Wenzhou , China . Atmospheric conditions became increasingly more hostile as Saomai tracked northeast , and the typhoon became elongated and ragged in appearance . At 1200 UTC on September 15 , Saomai was downgraded to severe tropical storm intensity as the cyclone began to undergo extratropical transition . At around 2030 UTC that day , Saomai made its final landfall as a tropical system west of Pusan , South Korea ; after emerging into the Yellow Sea the storm was declared extratropical at 0600 UTC the next day . These remnants later tracked inland near Vladivostok , Russia before dissipating on September 19 . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 = = = Northern Mariana Islands and Guam = = = 
 Early in Saomai 's developmental history , the rainbands associated with the storm dropped heavy rain across the Northern Mariana Islands . Schools across the archipelago nation were closed , and ferry service between Saipan and Tinian was cancelled . Reports of flooding were widespread , including in Saipan . In <unk> , some banana trees were damaged by the storm 's affects . Damage from the islands amounted to US $ 650 @,@ 000 , with $ 600 @,@ 000 to infrastructure . 
 The presence of the nearby tropical cyclone caused the delaying of two flights and the cancellation of another at Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport . On Guam , the United States Navy ordered the release of ships from the local harbor . There , peaked at 251 mm ( 9 @.@ 90 in ) over a 24 @-@ hour period at Piti . At the National Weather Service office in Tiyan , a gauge observed 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 95 in ) of rain . Gusty winds were also associated with Saomai 's outer rainbands , with gusts peaking at a measured 105 km / h ( 66 mph ) on September 4 . The winds caused power outage in localized areas and downed two telephone poles . Severe flooding occurred in <unk> after a storm drain became clogged with debris , inundating six houses . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 On September 10 , rough seas caused by Saomai capsized a fishing boat off of Shizuoka Prefecture , causing one person to go missing . Another occupant of the boat was rescued three hours after the sinking by police helicopter . The waves also caused a dozen containers from the South Korean <unk> Nagoya to fall into the sea 5 @.@ 5 km ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) off the coast of <unk> and Wakayama Prefecture . Off of Oita Prefecture , the waves were the impetus for red tides , resulting in significant marine loss . The approach of the typhoon towards Okinawa coincided with the approach of a weather front over mainland Japan , resulting in prolonged rainfall over the mainland . The rains caused extensive flooding , prompting the Cabinet of Japan to make reassurances in the repair of the ensuing damage . Rail service along the Tōkaidō Shinkansen between Tokyo and Osaka was suspended for more than 18 hours at one point , the longest delay to be enforced in the rail 's service history . As a result , 50 @,@ 000 passengers were forced to wait out the storm in the line 's stopped trains . Toyota closed 24 of its manufacturing plants , resulting in the incompletion of 10 @,@ 000 vehicles . Similarly , Mitsubishi stopped production at two of its facilities in Nagoya . Japan Airlines , All Nippon Airways , and Japan Air System cancelled a combined 114 fights , which adversely affected about 21 @,@ 000 people . 
 Across the country , rainfall peaked at 1 @,@ 000 mm ( 39 @.@ 37 in ) in Miyagawa , Mie ; the same station also recorded 522 mm ( 20 @.@ 55 in ) of rain in a single 24 @-@ hour period . As a result of the flooding in Mie , 2 @,@ 819 homes were inundated and 25 landslides occurred . Several buildings succumbed to the water and thus collapsed . Extensive power outage occurred in Kagoshima Prefecture , affecting approximately 4 @,@ 500 households . In addition , the heavy rains caused damage to agriculture , including sugar cane crops . Damage in the prefecture totaled JP ¥ 356 million ( US $ 3 million ) . Similar effects were felt across Kyushu . Several flights into Nagasaki Prefecture were cancelled ; the rains there also caused agricultural damage totaling JP ¥ 99 million ( US $ 900 @,@ 000 ) . Flooding also occurred on Shikoku , where rainfall totals peaked at 976 mm ( 38 @.@ 43 in ) in Funato , Kōchi . Severe damage occurred elsewhere in Kōchi , where combined forestry and agricultural damage figures reached JP ¥ 2 @.@ 1 billion ( US $ 19 million ) . In Tokushima Prefecture , several landslides occurred , disrupting transportation routes . 
 Record rainfall was observed in Aichi Prefecture , with 511 mm ( 21 @.@ 69 in ) of rain in Tokai and 532 mm ( 20 @.@ 94 in ) of rain in Nagoya in a span of a single day ; both observations were the highest since records began in 1891 . Due to the threat of landslides in Nagoya , the municipal government ordered the evacuation of 140 @,@ 000 families . In the ward of Nakagawa @-@ ku , two rivers overflowed their banks and over @-@ topped the surrounding embankment . Two tornadoes occurred in the prefecture , with one striking <unk> and another striking <unk> ; the former tornado injured 22 people , of which two were hospitalized . Another 41 @,@ 000 families encompassing 400 @,@ 000 people were evacuated across Aichi , Gifu , and Mie prefectures as a precautionary measure . 
 Damage in Okinawa , the site of Saomai 's first landfall , was considerable but not unprecedented . On September 10 , the provincial government established a disaster warning headquarters on <unk> Island to more efficiently deal with the typhoon 's effects . Rainfall peaked on Mount <unk> , where a station recorded 537 mm ( 21 @.@ 14 in ) of rain . During the storm , 31 roads sustained damage and 26 landslides occurred . Damage in Okinawa Prefecture reached JP ¥ 636 million ( US $ 6 million ) . Overall , Saomai caused the destruction of 609 homes and the inundation of 70 @,@ 017 others in Japan . Damage costs in the country totaled JP ¥ 24 @.@ 8 billion ( US $ 223 million ) . Eleven people were killed and 103 others suffered injury . At the height of the storm , over 17 @,@ 000 people had been displaced in emergency shelters . 
 = = = Korean peninsula = = = 
 As Saomai approached South Korea , the typhoon forced the cancellation of flights beginning on September 12 . Four airports had their air service suspended . Other suspensions of transportation included the refuge of 362 fishing boats in ports and the closure of 10 national parks and 43 mountain paths . As a result , about 16 @,@ 600 campers and hikers were evacuated to safer areas . As a result of the inclement weather , the operation of 149 passenger ships were cancelled . On September 13 , the Korea Meteorological Administration ( KMA ) issued a typhoon warning for waters south of South Korea and Jeju Province . The administration anticipated heavy rainfall , though not as much as what had taken place in Japan . Offshore , an Indonesian freighter with 39 crewmen became stranded by the typhoon in waters south of Pusan . The crew were rescued by maritime police , but 270 tons of oil spilled into the ocean from a broken oil container . 
 In South Korea , the northern and southern Gyeongsang provinces were the most heavily impacted . At least 6 @,@ 000 ha ( 15 @,@ 000 ac ) of paddy fields were flooded . Heavy rains caused the Nakdong River to breach a section of embankment , prompting the evacuation of 100 families . Flood warnings were issued by the KMA on sections of the river for the first time in 2000 . In South Gyeongsang , an electricity pylon collapsed , cutting power supply to about 700 houses . Strong winds uprooted trees and destroyed homes and fishing boats in Pusan . Countrywide , losses were initially estimated at KR ₩ 20 billion ( US $ 18 million ) , though these figures later rose to US $ 71 million . As a result of Saomai , eight people were killed , and 411 others were displaced . More than 600 buildings were either inundated or destroyed entirely . At the height of the storm , roughly 422 @,@ 000 households were without power , primarily in northern and southern Gyeongsang provinces . 
 Relatively minor damage occurred in North Korea , previously impacted by Typhoon Prapiroon earlier in September . Rainfall peaked at 147 mm ( 5 @.@ 79 in ) in Kaesong . Saomai somewhat exacerbated the unprecedented damage caused by Prapiroon , and damaged maize crops which were set to be harvested in the coming weeks . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 At its closest approach to China , Saomai generated high waves that coincided with high tide , resulting in extensive damage . In preparation for the storm , schools in Ningbo were forced to close , and ferry service was discontinued . Over 20 @,@ 000 people were evacuated by the Chinese government onto higher land . The most severely affected Chinese province was Zhejiang . A station in Dinghai District observed 102 mm ( 4 @.@ 02 in ) of rain in 18 hours , equivalent to more than half of that station 's monthly average . In Zhoushan , 20 @,@ 000 hectares of farmland were inundated and 2 @,@ 500 homes collapsed . Off the island , ten fishing boats collided , and another oil tanker capsized . Areas in <unk> were submerged under as much as 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) of water . Off the coast , 225 boats and 130 piers were damaged . In Shanghai , 20 streets were flooded and hundreds of homes were flooded with water . At nearby <unk> Airport , an Airbus A340 bound for Paris slipped off the runway . Though no people were injured , the airport was closed for eight hours . The typhoon also caused the Huangpu River to rise to its third highest level in recorded history . 
 Despite being a much weaker storm upon impacting Russia , Saomai 's rains flooded coal retrieval sites , cutting down on electric power supplies in Primorsky Krai . Due to the shortages , electric power was transferred there from other surrounding areas . Furthermore , a 50 percent decrease in electricity output was documented at the local power station in <unk> . To the south , an overflowing of the <unk> River prompted the evacuation of over 60 people . Overall , 55 automobile accidents occurred in eastern Russia , leading to nine fatalities and 76 people injured . 
 = Action of 3 February 1812 = 
 The Action of 3 February 1812 was an unusual minor naval engagement off the western coast of Haiti between a British frigate and a frigate manned by a loose collation of Haitian rebels . The battle was fought against the background of the Napoleonic Wars and the collapse of government in Haiti in the aftermath of the Haitian Revolution eight years earlier . After the French had been expelled from Haiti in 1804 , the newly independent nation was first ruled by Jean @-@ Jacques Dessalines , who was murdered in 1806 and replaced by two of his advisors , Henri Christophe and Alexandre Pétion . These rulers divided the country between them and in the confused political situation that followed a number of minor fiefdoms appeared , including one led by Jérôme Maximilien Borgella in the south of the island called the Sud Department . The small Haitian Navy defected to Borgella , who crewed the vessels with a collection of sailors from various countries , led by a notorious privateer named Gaspard . 
 Stationed off Haiti was the British frigate HMS Southampton under Captain Sir James Lucas Yeo , tasked with observing the political situation but with orders not to interfere in the intermittent conflict between Christophe and Pétion . Yeo 's orders did not include Borgella 's ships and Yeo reasoned that the Haitian flagship , the large frigate Heureuse Réunion ( recently renamed from Améthyste and often reported under its former name ) , presented a serious threat to international trade in the region . 
 Sailing to intercept the Haitian ship , Yeo discovered her in the Gulf of Léogane and ordered Gaspard to surrender . The Haitian refused , and the frigates exchanged shots at 06 : 30 . The superior seamanship and discipline on Southampton prevented Gaspard from boarding the British ship with his greater numbers and within half an hour Heureuse Réunion was dismasted and battered . At 07 : 45 the Haitian ship surrendered , Yeo depositing the crew ashore and bringing Heureuse Réunion to Port Royal , Jamaica . At Jamaica , his actions were approved by his superiors and Heureuse Réunion , renamed Améthyste , was returned to Henri Christophe . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the Napoleonic Wars , the Caribbean Sea was initially an important theatre of naval conflict , as ships operating from the various French , British , Spanish and Dutch colonies preyed on enemy trade . During 1809 and 1810 however , the Royal Navy launched a series of co @-@ ordinated amphibious operations that eliminated the French and Dutch colonies and brought the conflict in the Caribbean to an end . With the threat of attacks on British trade in the region significantly reduced , the Royal Navy correspondingly reduced their presence in the Caribbean and the remaining British ships were distributed to observe trouble spots in the region , which in 1812 included the independent nation of Haiti . 
 Haiti had won its independence from France in 1804 , the first Caribbean nation to do so . The Haitians had fought a lengthy and bloody war against the French known as the Haitian Revolution , in which armies of former slaves led by Toussaint Louverture and then Jean @-@ Jacques Dessalines succeeded in driving the French into their fortified ports and then systematically eliminating their enclaves . With the start of the Napoleonic Wars in 1803 , French reinforcements for the garrison on Haiti were delayed and intercepted by the British Royal Navy , who blockaded the island and took the surrenders of the last garrisons in 1804 , removing them and their dependents to prevent a massacre . Dessalines rapidly established himself as monarch of Haiti , but his reign was cut short in 1806 when his closest advisors , Henri Christophe and Alexandre Pétion organised his assassination . Assuming control of Haiti , Christophe laid claim to the northern part of the country and Pétion the south , the two sides waging a constant low @-@ level civil war during the next decade . Many minor rulers sprang up during this period , especially in the south , where Pétion gave parcels of land for his followers to establish their own private fiefdoms . One such warlord was Jérôme Maximilien Borgella , who took over command of a small state in the region of Léogane following the death of its ruler , André Rigaud . 
 In early 1809 , the French sent a number of reinforcement convoys to their blockaded colonies in the hope of strengthening the garrisons before the British invasions began . Many ships , including four frigates , were lost in these missions and few reached their destinations successfully . Among these failed attempts was Troude 's expedition to the Caribbean , which arrived in April 1809 at the Îles des Saintes . Finding that Guadeloupe was the only surviving colony , Amable Troude intended to anchor at Basse @-@ Terre and unload his supplies , but was blockaded in the Îles des Saintes by a British squadron under Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane . Attempting to break out on 14 April , Troude led his main squadron northwest towards Puerto Rico while two en flûte frigates slipped out northeast to Basse @-@ Terre , arriving safely . Troude 's squadron was defeated on 17 April , but the frigates Félicité and Furieuse remained at Basse @-@ Terre until 14 June , when they attempted to break out and return to France , laden with trade goods . The British blockade squadron were soon in pursuit and on 18 June the frigate HMS Latona captured Félicité without a fight . Furieuse was captured a month later in the North Atlantic . Félicité was 24 years old and was therefore considered too antiquated for commissioning in the Royal Navy ; instead she was sold to Henri Christophe to form the nucleus of the new Haitian Navy under the name Améthyste . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At some point in January 1812 the Haitian Navy defected , for reasons unknown , from Christophe to Borgella . Borgella placed a noted French privateer named Gaspard in command of the squadron , which included the frigate Améthyste ( renamed Heureuse Réunion ) , a corvette and a brig . Gaspard then armed Heureuse Réunion with 44 cannon , took on board a motley crew of over 600 men , a mixture of Haitian , French , American and other nationalities , and began cruising in the Gulf of Gonâve . The British observer off Haiti at this time was Captain Sir James Lucas Yeo in the frigate HMS Southampton , under strict orders to respect the flags of Christophe and Pétion , but not those of the minor warlords that had emerged along the coast . On 2 January word reached him at Port au Prince of Gaspard 's movements and he immediately sailed to intercept him , concerned that if Gaspard was allowed to take his powerful squadron out of Haitian waters he might begin attacks on merchant ships regardless of nationality . 
 At 06 : 00 on 3 February , Yeo discovered Gaspard 's ships at anchor to the south of the island of <unk> and demanded that Gaspard come aboard Southampton with his commissioning papers , to establish under whose authority Gaspard commanded the warship . The Haitian captain refused , but sent aboard his first lieutenant with a note purported to be from Borgella , signed " <unk> , general in chief of the south of <unk> " . As Borgella had no authority to commission warships , Yeo ordered the lieutenant to tell Gaspard that his ships must submit to Southampton and be taken to Port Royal , Jamaica , where their ownership could be established by the naval authorities . He would have five minutes to consider the proposal . A British officer accompanied the Haitian lieutenant back to Heureuse Réunion for Gaspard 's answer , and was informed within three minutes that Gaspard had no intention of submitting to the British ship . He was also told that should Yeo be intent on fighting the Haitian ship then he should indicate it with a bow gun fired ahead of Heureuse Réunion . Returning to Southampton at 06 : 30 , the lieutenant relayed the message and the bow gun was fired , followed a few seconds later by a full broadside from Southampton . 
 Heureuse Réunion responded to the cannonade in kind . During the engagement , Gaspard repeatedly attempted to board Southampton , where his vastly superior numbers could overwhelm the British crew . Yeo was aware of his enemy 's intentions , and repeatedly manoeuvered out of the way , his more disciplined and agile vessel easily able to remain out of contact with the overloaded Haitian ship . Within half an hour the highly efficient gunners on Southampton had knocked down the main and mizen masts on Heureuse Réunion , leaving her unable to manoeuvre and vulnerable to repeated pounding at close range . Despite the severe damage the Haitian ship suffered , her crew continued to fire cannon at irregular intervals for 45 minutes , each shot prompting a broadside from the British ship . The two smaller Haitian vessels did not support the frigate , fleeing towards <unk> near Petit Goâve to shelter under the batteries there . By 07 : 45 , after over an hour of heavy fire , Yeo hailed Heureuse Réunion to discover whether or not she had surrendered . Somebody aboard replied that they had , although Gaspard had been seriously wounded and was no longer in command , so the identity of the person who gave the surrender is not known . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 As Southampton stopped firing , the remaining masts of the Haitian ship fell overboard . Casualties on Heureuse Réunion were immense : of the 600 – 700 crew , 105 were dead and 120 wounded , the latter including Gaspard , who subsequently died of his injuries . Yeo 's loss was one man killed and ten wounded , from a crew of 212 . Seeking to rid himself of so many prisoners , Yeo landed most of them at <unk> before sailing to Port au Prince , where the rest were landed and temporary jury masts were fitted to Heureuse Réunion for the journey to Jamaica . The British retained 20 prisoners for trial at Port Royal . Heureuse Réunion was repaired at Jamaica and subsequently restored to Christophe under the name Améthyste , returning to Haitian service . Yeo 's action in attacking the Haitian ship , although not officially sanctioned by his commanding officer beforehand , was commended . 
 The Caribbean rose in importance again later in 1812 , with the outbreak of the War of 1812 between Britain and the United States . American privateers threatened British trade routes and Royal Navy ships were sent out to defeat them , including Southampton , which was wrecked in the Bahamas during an anti @-@ privateer patrol in November 1812 . There were no further significant actions in the region during the Napoleonic Wars , the presence of Royal Navy patrols deterred any large scale French or American operations in the Caribbean . 
 = Jessie Bonstelle = 
 Laura Justine " Jessie " Bonstelle ( c . 1870 – October 14 , 1932 ) was an American theater director , actress , and drama company manager . Encouraged by her mother , she sang and performed in the theater from a young age ; she went on to become a famous leading lady and made several performances on Broadway . Later she became a director , managing many stock companies , directing Broadway productions and training many young performers who went on to be famous actors . In 1925 she founded her own theater in Detroit . Reorganized in 1928 as the Detroit Civic Theatre , it was one of America 's first civic theaters , and her methods influenced community theater projects elsewhere . She has been described as " one of the pioneering women stage directors in the early twentieth century " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bonstelle was born to Helen and Joseph <unk> on her father 's farm near the town of Greece , New York , the youngest of their eight children . Her exact date of birth is unknown , and she kept it a secret , but it was sometime in November 1869 – 1871 . Originally named <unk> , later in life she changed it to Bonstelle after , according to legend , seeing it misspelled like that on a theater marquee . 
 Bonstelle 's mother , who herself had wanted to be an actress , home @-@ schooled her in reading , writing , singing , dancing , and even in reciting Shakespeare . Jessie 's first public performance was singing temperance songs in church at the age of two years . Helen gave her daughter a passion for acting by often taking her to theaters in nearby Rochester . Around the age of ten Jessie auditioned for critic Thomas Keane , and with his encouragement she left on tour with a production of Bertha , the Beautiful Sewing Machine Girl , a melodrama . After returning home from California she briefly studied at Nazareth Academy , a convent school in Rochester . In 1886 she returned to the stage , working for local opera house owner Edward D. Stair and touring in his productions . 
 = = Career = = 
 After the death of her parents in 1890 , Bonstelle went to New York City , and in 1891 she joined the company of Fanny Janauschek , with whom she toured for a season . In 1892 she worked as an understudy and chorus member in Augustin Daly 's company , but the season left her exhausted . However , in 1893 she married the actor Alexander Hamilton Stuart , who was twenty years older than her and Janauschek 's leading man . Happily married , together they worked in Philadelphia 's <unk> Stock Company for two years , before moving to Rochester , where Bonstelle played various roles and became an established leading lady . She was the leading lady of Philadelphia 's Standard Stock Company during the 1898 – 99 season . Stuart died in 1911 ; Bonstelle would never remarry . 
 Bonstelle performed in three productions on Broadway , including Elizabeth Jordan 's The Lady from Oklahoma , which Bonstelle herself produced in 1913 . Her acting received mixed or poor reception from New York Times critics , and according to some she " lacked creative depth " . 
 In 1899 , while playing with the <unk> Sisters , Bonstelle produced Heimat by Hermann Sudermann . This was its first performance in the United States , and only the second in English . Later she received a letter from Sudermann in which he thanked her for performing his work . Her career as a manager and director began around 1900 when Jacob J. Shubert offered her the management of a stock company in Rochester . This company , the Lyceum stock company , based at Rochester 's Lyceum Theater , included some prominent actors and future stars , such as Orrin Johnson , Margaret Wycherly and Charles Hutchison . 
 She spent the next five years managing , directing and acting there , but also appeared from time to time in Philadelphia and toured at least once in Canada . Moreover , she occasionally directed for the Shuberts in New York , and was associated with Frederick Freeman Proctor 's 125th Street Theater in Harlem . Bonstelle said that her dedication was partly inspired by the death of Janauschek in 1904 , realizing that what she did for the theater was lasting . From 1906 she managed stock companies at the Star Theater in Buffalo , and from 1910 also at Detroit 's Garrick Theater , moving weekly between the two cities . She usually put on plays which had recently been successful on Broadway , but not those which she saw as immoral . The most popular production she directed was an adaptation of Louisa May Alcott 's Little Women by Marian de Forest . Bonstelle researched the play herself , traveling to Boston to view personal papers provided by Alcott 's family and talking to her friends . The production toured nationally in 1911 , with four companies performing in different places at the same time , and had a " successful and lengthy run " on Broadway in 1912 . It was also performed in London after World War I. From 1912 to 1917 she was a director at the Northampton Municipal Theater in Massachusetts . 
 Bonstelle sold her stake in the Garrick Theater in 1924 . She and her company founded the Bonstelle Playhouse in Detroit , which opened on January 1 , 1925 . Backed by a syndicate led by a patron of hers , she bought a former synagogue on Woodward Avenue , Temple Beth El , for $ 500 @,@ 000 and commissioned C. Howard Crane to renovate it . At first she carried on producing mostly Broadway @-@ style plays . However , the company did perform classics , including modern @-@ dress productions of Romeo and Juliet in 1926 and Hamlet in 1927 , among the first to put on such performances . In February 1928 Bonstelle began a campaign to gain community support for the theater . A fund of over $ 200 @,@ 000 was raised by donations from the public and Bonstelle made an agreement with local authorities to make the playhouse the city 's unofficial premier theater . Later that year the group became known as the Detroit Civic Theater . In her plan for the theater she emphasized the importance of providing the public with the best drama , including both classics and modern works , and improving young people 's knowledge of dramatic literature . Funded by public subscription , it had ticket prices as low as $ 1 @.@ 50 . Performances included works by Shakespeare , Henrik Ibsen and Richard Brinsley Sheridan . The theater also played a religious role . Bonstelle used it in an effort to improve understanding and co @-@ operation between the church and the theater , holding multi @-@ denominational religious services there during Lent , and she stated that her plays , while avoiding being preachy , were intended to have a positive moral influence on the audience . Local clergy publicly praised her work with the theater . 
 In June 1932 Bonstelle went to Hollywood ; possible reasons include a desire to direct films , to found an acting school , or to explore the possibility of a new stock company . She returned to Detroit after falling ill and learning she had cancer . There she began a campaign to keep open the Civic Theatre , which was adversely affected by the Great Depression , but became seriously ill . Aided by her secretary , she continued to campaign for and run the theater until her death on October 14 , 1932 , when she suffered a heart attack at the home of relatives in Detroit . On October 16 her body lay in state at the theater and the New York Times reported that twenty @-@ five thousand people went to see her bier . A memorial service was held there which thousands attended and at which mayor Frank Murphy spoke . She was buried in Rochester next to her husband . 
 = = Character = = 
 Bonstelle was a perfectionist who was passionate about her work . She ran grueling rehearsals and kept control over the direction , even on productions she was not directing . However , she was willing to help actors if they were struggling , and was respected for her passion and drive . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Bonstelle had a wide reputation ; according to Brooks Atkinson her " industry in the theater [ was ] famous throughout Eastern America " . However , Broadway critics did not rate her directing highly . In Detroit , though , drama critics praised her greatly , and few of her 165 plays were poorly reviewed ; however most of these critics were in fact either friends of Bonstelle or employees of Stair . 
 Bonstelle 's Playhouse was one of America 's first civic theaters and , uniquely in the 1920s , a profitable one . Though it closed in 1933 , a year after her death , due to the rise of the movie industry and the Depression , Wayne State University bought the premises in 1956 for the use of its theater department , and in 1963 renamed it the Bonstelle Theatre in her memory . Bonstelle 's approach gained nationwide attention and she was interviewed by authorities from other cities which wanted information about her plan . Her theater influenced the future Federal Theater Project . 
 She was well known for spotting talent in young actors and was skilled at developing that talent . She trained many actors and actresses who later became well known , including Katharine Cornell and William Powell . 
 = The Kids in the Hall : Death Comes to Town = 
 The Kids in the Hall : Death Comes to Town ( or simply Death Comes to Town ) is an eight @-@ episode Canadian mini @-@ series that aired on CBC Television on Tuesdays between January 12 and March 16 , 2010 . The show takes place in a fictional Ontario town called Shuckton where their mayor has been murdered . As the Shuckton residents cope with the loss , a new lawyer moves in to prosecute a suspect – though another resident , unsatisfied with the evidence , tries to find the real killer . At the same time , a character who is a personification of death waits at a motel room for the latest Shuckton residents to die . 
 The series was proposed by Bruce McCulloch during a 2008 The Kids in the Hall comedy tour and developed by the ensemble into a dark @-@ comedy murder mystery , a departure from their typical sketch comedy format . Inspiration for the series came in part from the British comedy series The League of Gentlemen . While the members of The Kids in the Hall play all of the major adult characters , a number of other comedic actors appear in supporting roles , including Dan <unk> , Colin <unk> , Wayne Robson , Susan Kent and Mike Beaver . The series was filmed in North Bay , Mattawa and Sturgeon Falls , Ontario in the summer of 2009 . 
 = = Premise = = 
 The mayor of Shuckton , Ontario ( population 27 @,@ 063 ) is murdered several hours after announcing that the town 's bid for the 2028 Summer Olympics was rejected . A small @-@ time criminal , Crim , is found with blood on him and is put on trial for the murder . However , an obese man named Ricky suspects the real murderer is still at large and , with the help of his friend Marnie , he investigates the crime . Meanwhile , the mayor 's widow takes over mayoral duties , women on a local news team compete for attention , the coroner steals the mayor 's body , Crim 's lawyer does everything he can to keep his cat alive , and Death waits in a motel room to collect the souls of dead Shuckton citizens . 
 = = Characters = = 
 All major characters in the miniseries were played by the five members of The Kids in the Hall , except for the mayor 's son , who was played by young actor Landon Reynolds @-@ Trudel . Several of the original The Kids in the Hall characters appear in cameo roles , including Mark McKinney 's Chicken Lady as a candidate juror and Paul Bellini clad only in his towel at an ATM ; in addition , McCulloch and McKinney 's police officers are tweaked variations of their OPP officer characters of the original series . 
 Other actors who appeared in supporting roles include Dan <unk> , Colin <unk> , Wayne Robson , Jesse Camacho and Mike Beaver . 
 Larry Bowman ( Bruce McCulloch ) , a former US draft dodger , mayor and former hockey coach of Shuckton . Although shown abusing the powers of his office , he is beloved by the townspeople . 
 Marilyn Bowman ( Dave Foley ) is Larry 's unhappy alcoholic wife . As requested in the mayor 's will , Marilyn becomes mayor and seeks economic development opportunities for the town . 
 <unk> ( Landon Reynolds @-@ Trudel ) is Larry and Marilyn 's adopted son . He responds to questions with screeches and chirps , he flails his arms when he runs , and he sees all humans as large animated butterflies . His mother calls him " special " but <unk> is the only member of his family who knows which remote control turns on the TV and is the only one who can see Death in his true form and communicate with him . 
 Marnie ( Kevin McDonald ) is a middle @-@ aged delivery driver for the local pizzeria who is prone to frequent spells of forgetfulness she refers to as " the <unk> . " 
 Ricky Jarvis ( McCulloch ) is an obese man who has not left his house since he lost a hockey tournament ; as the captain of the town 's hockey team , he lost all his stamina in sex with a rival team 's cheerleader the night before the final game . 
 Crimson " Crim " Hollingsworth ( Scott Thompson ) is a small @-@ time criminal who self @-@ identifies as one @-@ sixteenth Ojibwe . He is the prime suspect of Larry 's murder . 
 Corrinda <unk> ( Mark McKinney ) is the field reporter for the local TV news . After becoming pregnant with Shaye 's child , she becomes conflicted on whether to stay pregnant or have an abortion . 
 Heather Weather ( Thompson ) is the weather reporter for the local TV news . She battles Corrinda for the spotlight . She is suspected of the murder when Marilyn learns Heather may have had an affair with Larry . 
 Levon Blanchard ( Foley ) is the news producer , visibly frustrated by Corrinda and Heather 's rivalry . 
 Shaye ( McDonald ) is the news team 's boom microphone operator . He sleeps with Corrinda only after being rejected by other women at the local bar . 
 Dusty Diamond ( Thompson ) is the town coroner who secretly harboured feelings for Mayor Bowman . 
 " Big City " ( McCulloch ) is a lawyer who is prosecuting Crim for the murder of Larry Bowman . He uses showmanship to dazzle judge and jury . 
 Sam Murray ( McDonald ) is the inexperienced local public defense attorney . Not understanding quality of life , he incurs expensive veterinarian bills keeping his sick 32 @-@ year @-@ old cat , <unk> , alive . 
 Death ( McKinney ) is a grim reaper assigned to collects souls from Shuckton . He has personal vendetta against Ricky – who was supposed to be aborted before he was born , but who survived the procedure because Death was late to collect his soul . When off duty , he hangs out at the tavern , drinking owl 's blood and flirting with voluptuous red @-@ headed women . 
 Dr. " Doc " Porterhouse ( Foley ) is the kindly town abortionist . He is a talented doctor but uses odd tools and methods . 
 The Judge ( McKinney ) presides over Crim 's murder trial . He is shown to be frustrated by the disappearance of his gavel and the gavel 's replacements . 
 The Police Officers ( McCulloch and McKinney ) are investigating Mayor Bowman 's murder . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Production and style = = 
 During a reunion tour in summer 2008 , The Kids in the Hall comedy troupe decided they would like to work together again . Since their 1996 movie Brain Candy , during which they had a falling out over creative differences , they had only worked together on live comedy tours and had not appeared on television together since the end of their show in 1995 . Bruce McCulloch pitched a television story idea which the rest of the group liked . They spent a couple days together brainstorming and developing characters . The storyline resolved into a murder mystery miniseries – partly inspired by the British comedy series The League of Gentlemen . McCulloch described it as Corner Gas meets Twin Peaks . The format diverged from their typical sketch comedy style by following a continuous narrative – though side @-@ stories explore characters further . Along with producer Susan Cavin in fall 2008 , they pitched the concept to CBC executive Fred Fuchs who greenlit the project . 
 The troupe hired several of the people they had worked with on Brain Candy , including Craig Northey and director Kelly Makin . They shot the series in North Bay , along with locations in Mattawa and Sturgeon Falls , Ontario , which allowed them to access federal and provincial funding incentives for economic development in Northern Ontario . For example , the courtroom scenes were filmed in North Bay 's Trinity United Church and the graveyard site was filmed on Mattawa 's Explorer 's Point . McKinney has claimed in interviews that the red vest worn by Death was found in a storehouse of old CBC props and costumes , and was previously worn by Bob Homme in The Friendly Giant . While drafting the script , cast member Scott Thompson was diagnosed with stage one non @-@ Hodgkin lymphoma . He began chemotherapy sessions shortly before the August – September 2009 shooting dates and started four weeks of radiation treatment once shooting wrapped . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The series was aired on CBC Television as eight 30 @-@ minute shows . It was broadcast between January 12 and March 16 , 2010 , on Tuesdays at 9 pm following news @-@ comedy shows Rick Mercer Report and This Hour Has 22 Minutes . Death Comes to Town was one of three new prime @-@ time shows that CBC launched in the second week of January ; the others were a detective comedy @-@ drama Republic of Doyle and a family @-@ oriented situation comedy 18 to Life . The debut of Death Comes to Town was watched by approximately 1 @.@ 054 million viewers ( 60 % in the 25 @-@ 54 age demographic ) , higher than both Republic of Doyle and 18 to Life . The American cable network Independent Film Channel purchased the US broadcast rights and began broadcasting it on August 20 , 2010 . 
 In the Winnipeg Free Press , Brad Oswald reviewed the show cautiously , writing it that is " decidedly different , distinctly weird and definitely @-@ an @-@ acquired @-@ taste kind of great " and that some characters and scenes " are edgy and uncompromising and sure to shock and offend nearly as many viewers as they amuse . " In the Toronto Star Raju Mudhar wrote that the " humour is classic Kids , with plenty of visual gags mixed with off @-@ colour , politically incorrect jokes " and that " the troupe 's eye for satire remains sharp as ever " . John Doyle in the The Globe and Mail wrote a negative review concluding it was " a dismal coda to the comedy troupe 's outstanding career " . Doyle identified himself as a fan of the original The Kids in the Hall series but found that this show had " excruciatingly awful attempts at humour " and " no comic rhythm " . Doyle called it " appallingly slow @-@ witted TV " , " mediocre and maddeningly pointless " . In the Times @-@ Colonist , Alex Strachan provided a qualified positive review writing that it was " juvenile , sophomoric and deliberately unsophisticated " but " a joy to watch " . Strachan concludes that " Death Comes to Town is easy to dismiss as being lightweight , which it is , and scattershot , which it is . There 's a genuine joie de vivre at work , though . Death Comes to Town is silly comedy for smart people . " 
 = = Home media = = 
 The complete mini @-@ series was released on Region 1 DVD by Alliance Home Entertainment on August 3 , 2010 . 
 = Gilbert Perreault = 
 Gilbert Perreault ( born November 13 , 1950 ) is a Canadian retired professional ice hockey centre who played for 17 seasons with the National Hockey League 's Buffalo Sabres . He was inducted to the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1990 . Known for his ability to stickhandle in close quarters , he is regarded as one of the most skillful play @-@ making centres of all time . He was the first draft pick of the Sabres in their inaugural season in the NHL . He is well known as the centre man for the prolific trio of Sabres forwards known as The French Connection . 
 Perreault was a standout junior hockey player who went on to become a nine @-@ time NHL ALL @-@ Star , two @-@ time official NHL All @-@ Star Team ( second team centre ) selection , a Calder Trophy winner , a Lady Byng Trophy winner and a Hockey Hall of Famer . He played his entire 17 year career with the Buffalo Sabres and continues to be the all @-@ time franchise leader in career regular season games played , goals , assists , points , game @-@ winning goals , and shots on goal , serving as the team 's captain from 1981 until his initial retirement in November 1986 . He led the team to 11 consecutive playoff appearances ending with the 1984 – 85 season . 
 Over the course of his 17 season career he accumulated 512 goals and 814 assists in 1191 games . Among his career highlights was the game @-@ winning goal in overtime of the 1978 National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game played at the Buffalo Memorial Auditorium . Perreault once totaled seven points in a single game which remains a Sabres record . He also recorded the first power play goal and the first hat trick in the team 's history . He is the only Buffalo Sabre to wear number 11 , with the number being retired in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Perreault began playing organized hockey at about age six . He preferred street hockey to playing on the ice and did not skate until he was eight . At age nine , he made his first appearance at Peewee hockey tournament in Quebec City . He left home at the age of 16 to join his first junior hockey team . His first year ( 1966 – 67 ) of junior hockey was spent with Thetford Mines in the Quebec Junior A League . His teammates included Rick Kehoe and Marc Tardif . The team won the league championships . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Amateur career = = = 
 After the Quebec Junior A League shut down , Perreault joined the Montreal Junior Canadiens of the Ontario Hockey Association ( OHA ) for the 1967 – 68 season , the first of three years with the Junior Canadiens . His 49 points in 47 games helped the Junior Canadiens to a second place finish . During his second year on the team , one that included future NHL talents <unk> Houle and André Dupont as well as future professional teammates Jocelyn Guevremont and Richard Martin , Perreault blossomed . His 97 points were second on the team to Houle 's 108 points , and they earned him OHA First All @-@ Star Team honours . As Perreault blossomed , the team excelled . In his second season , the team finished first in the OHA and won the 1969 Memorial Cup Canadian Junior championship . It was the first Memorial Cup win for Montreal since 1950 . 
 After Houle moved on to become the NHL 's first overall pick , Perreault assumed the leadership role and compiled a 51 goal , 71 assist season , which led the team in both categories and place second in the league to Marcel Dionne 's 132 points . The Canadiens defeated the Weyburn Red Wings to become the third junior team to successfully defend their championship and the Memorial Cup . Perreault was named the Ontario Hockey Association most valuable player . 
 The record of the 1969 and 1970 Montreal Junior Canadiens in the playoffs was so outstanding it caused a change in Memorial Cup eligibility rules . Previously , all Junior clubs in Canada were eligible for the cup , but the Junior Canadiens beat a club from Prince Edward Island so badly in the playoffs that ' Junior A ' was re @-@ organized into ' Major Junior ' and ' Junior A ' . Since then , only Major Junior clubs are eligible for the Cup . 
 = = = Professional career = = = 
 In 1970 , two new franchises were awarded in the NHL — the Buffalo Sabres and the Vancouver Canucks . It was a foregone conclusion Perreault would be the first selection in the 1970 Entry Draft . The two new teams took part in a roulette wheel spin to determine who would get the first pick . Ultimately , the Canucks were allocated numbers 1 @-@ 10 on the wheel , while the Sabres had 11 @-@ 20 . When league president Clarence Campbell spun the wheel , he initially thought the pointer landed on 1 and started to congratulate the Vancouver delegation . However , Sabres coach / general manager Punch Imlach asked Campbell to check again . As it turned out , the pointer was on 11 . Imlach had chosen 11 for the roulette wheel spin because it was his favourite number . This was the first year the Montreal Canadiens did not have a priority right to draft Québécois junior players . Consequently , Perreault was available and taken first overall by the Sabres . 
 Coincidentally , Perreault had worn # 11 throughout his junior career , and kept it in Buffalo in honour of the roulette wheel choice . As expected , he became an immediate star . He scored a goal in the franchise 's very first game , which was a 2 @-@ 1 victory on October 10 , 1970 , against the Pittsburgh Penguins . During his first season , he led the Sabres in scoring ( with 38 goals and added 34 assists ) — a feat he would never fail to accomplish in any season in which he did not miss significant time to injury before his penultimate year — and won the Calder Trophy as rookie of the year . 
 Perreault developed a reputation as a superb stickhandler , and scored a goal on his first shift in a professional scrimmage . Bobby Orr once said of Perreault : " His head and shoulders go one way , his legs go the other way , and the puck is doing something else . When I first saw it I couldn 't believe it . " His popularity and respect surpassed O. J. Simpson in a poll of <unk> about the best Buffalo athlete . Phil Esposito once said if anyone was to break his 76 goal , 152 point season records " It will be Gilbert Perreault . " 
 Before the 1971 – 72 NHL season the Sabres drafted Perreault 's Junior Canadiens teammate , Rick Martin , with their first pick . The two gelled as a tandem with each scoring 74 points . Late in the season the Sabres traded Eddie Shack for Rene Robert . The trio formed one of the decade 's most memorable and exciting lines , known as " The French Connection " with Robert on right wing and Martin on left wing . They ended the following 1972 – 73 season sweeping the top three scoring positions for the team and leading the franchise to its first playoff appearance with Perreault winning the Lady Byng Trophy as the most gentlemanly player . In 1973 – 74 , Perreault endured a broken leg that limited him to 55 games . 
 The 1974 – 75 NHL season was memorable for the Sabres ' Stanley Cup Finals appearance . The Sabres finished first in the newly reformatted league 's Adams Division , and the French Connection members each finished in the top ten in league scoring . The Sabres defeated original six teams Chicago Black Hawks and Montreal Canadiens on their way to a Finals appearance against the Philadelphia Flyers . The Sabres lost the series four games to two . 1975 was the closest Perreault would come to winning the Stanley Cup . 
 = = = International career = = = 
 Perreault was named to the Canadian national team ( " Team Canada " ) that participated in the 1972 Summit Series against the Soviet Union . He managed to contribute two points in two games but left the team after game five . 
 In 1976 , Canada hosted the first Canada Cup series . Perreault played with future Hockey Hall of Fame members such as Bobby Orr , Darryl Sittler , Bobby Hull , Guy Lafleur and Marcel Dionne . Perreault often played on a line with fellow Québécois Lafleur and Dionne . Canada won the series after beating Czechoslovakia in a best two out of three . He later played in the 1981 Canada Cup on a line with Wayne Gretzky and Lafleur . He was playing some of the best hockey of his career , leading all scorers with nine points in four games , when he was forced out of the tournament with a broken ankle . Canada lost the final to the USSR 8 – 1 . Perreault was named to the All Tournament Team , despite playing in only four of Canada 's seven games . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Perreault retired at the end of the 1985 @-@ 86 season . Thereafter , pension changes came into effect significantly boosting the pensions of retired players who played at least 20 games in the 1986 @-@ 87 season . He duly came out of retirement and still played effectively , scoring 9 goals in the first 14 games . He retired for good on November 24 , 1986 after his 20th game . 
 He finished his career with scoring totals of 512 goals and 814 assists for 1326 points in 1191 games . At the time of his retirement , Perreault was the sixth leading scorer in NHL history . Along with the other two members of the French Connection , Perreault was inducted into the Buffalo Sabres Hall of Fame in 1989 . He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1990 , and the Sabres retired his number 11 in the same year , having been the only player to ever wear number 11 for the Buffalo Sabres ; his # 11 was the first number retired by the Sabres . When his French Connection linemates ' numbers were retired , Perreault 's # 11 was lowered and raised back between Martin 's # 7 and Robert 's # 14 , as the Buffalo Sabres retired the French Connection line as a group , marking the first three players to have their numbers retired by the Sabres . 
 Since his retirement from hockey , Perreault has remained active in the game , coaching Junior teams in the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League . In addition , he also plays on occasion with the Buffalo Sabres Alumni Hockey Team for charity events . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Perreault is married to Carmen , has two sons , Marc @-@ André ( born 1978 ) and Sean ( born 1986 ) , and still resides in his hometown of Victoriaville , Quebec . After retiring from playing , Perreault coached junior ice hockey , and invested in real estate . In his spare time , Perreault enjoys golfing , listening to music , and going to the movies . 
 = = Career achievements = = 
 Holds franchise record for most games ( 1191 ) , goals ( 512 ) , assists ( 814 ) and points ( 1326 ) with the Buffalo Sabres . 
 Won the Calder Memorial Trophy in 1971 . 
 Won the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy in 1973 . 
 Named an NHL Second Team All @-@ Star in 1976 and 1977 . 
 Chosen to play in eight NHL All @-@ Star Games in 1970 – 71 , 1971 – 72 , 1973 – 74 , 1974 – 75 , 1976 – 77 , 1977 – 78 , 1979 – 80 , and 1983 – 84 , as well as the 1979 Challenge Cup , which pitted NHL players against a team representing the Soviet Union , in place of an all @-@ star game in 1979 . 
 In 1998 , he was ranked number 47 on The Hockey News ' list of the 100 Greatest Hockey Players . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Billy Pierce = 
 Walter William Pierce ( April 2 , 1927 – July 31 , 2015 ) was an American starting pitcher in Major League Baseball between 1945 and 1964 who played most of his career for the Chicago White Sox . He was the team 's star pitcher in the decade from 1952 to 1961 , when they posted the third best record in the major leagues , and received the Sporting News Pitcher of the Year Award for the American League ( AL ) in 1956 and 1957 after being runner @-@ up in both 1953 and 1955 . A seven @-@ time All @-@ Star , he led the American League ( AL ) in complete games three times despite his slight build , and in wins , earned run average ( ERA ) and strikeouts once each . He pitched four one @-@ hitters and seven two @-@ hitters in his career , and on June 27 , 1958 came within one batter of becoming the first left @-@ hander in 78 years to throw a perfect game . 
 He was one of the principal figures in Chicago 's fierce rivalry with the New York Yankees ; particularly notable were his matchups with Whitey Ford , with the two left @-@ handers opposing one another as starters 14 times from 1955 to 1960 . Pierce 's record suffered from pitching so much against New York – who he faced more often than any other team – when the Yankees dynasty was at its peak ; but although his career record against New York was only 25 – 37 , that was still slightly better than the 27 – 41 mark compiled by National League ( NL ) championship teams over 11 World Series against the Yankees during the same period . 
 After joining the San Francisco Giants in 1962 , Pierce played a pivotal role in helping them win the NL pennant , going 12 – 0 in home games and getting a three @-@ hit shutout and a save in a three @-@ game playoff against the Los Angeles Dodgers to clinch the title . His 1 @,@ 999 career strikeouts were the fifth most by a left @-@ hander when he retired , and his AL total of 1 @,@ 842 ranked ninth in league history . He also ranked tenth among left @-@ handers in career wins ( 211 ) , sixth in games started ( 432 ) and games pitched ( 585 ) , eighth in shutouts ( 38 ) and ninth in innings pitched ( 3 @,@ 306 ⅔ ) . He holds the White Sox franchise record for career strikeouts ( 1 @,@ 796 ) , and his club marks of 186 wins , 2 @,@ 931 innings and 390 starts are team records for a left @-@ hander . The White Sox retired his number 19 in 1987 , and unveiled a statue in his honor at U.S. Cellular Field in 2007 ; he was selected to the White Sox All @-@ Century Team in 2000 . 
 = = Early baseball career = = 
 = = = Youth baseball = = = 
 The son of pharmacist Walter Pierce and his wife Julia , Billy Pierce grew up in Highland Park , Michigan , and showed his first interest in baseball at age ten . He recalled : " I refused to have my tonsils removed . My folks offered me a major league baseball and a good glove if I 'd have the operation . I took the payola . It really was a thrill to throw around that ' league ' ball . " After starting out as a first baseman , he switched to pitching to emulate his hero , Detroit Tigers star Tommy Bridges , who like Pierce had a slight build . He attended Highland Park Community High School where his teammates included future major league pitcher Ted Gray , and pitched six shutouts as a junior in 1944 , earning the nickname " Mr. Zero " . He was the starting and winning pitcher in an East @-@ West All @-@ American Boys ' Game sponsored by Esquire magazine , held on August 7 , 1944 at the Polo Grounds in New York , with Connie Mack managing Pierce 's East All @-@ Stars ; one reporter wrote , " His fast ball was amazing when one considers that he only weighs 140 pounds . In civilian attire he seemed very slender . " The West team included catcher and future Hall of Fame center fielder Richie Ashburn , who was hitless in two at bats against Pierce . The game was held as a benefit for World War II community memorials , and two days prior to the event the participating players were guests of Babe Ruth on his weekly radio program . Pierce was voted the game 's outstanding player , winning a four @-@ year scholarship to the college of his choice . Detroit Free Press sports editor Dale Stafford , who chaperoned him to New York , later told a fellow writer , " I never saw such a clean @-@ living youngster . On our trip to New York for the East @-@ West game , Billy kept a diary . One morning I found it open to this entry : ' Here it is ten o 'clock and Mr. Stafford still hasn 't gone to bed . ' " Pierce downplayed the experience of pitching in a major league stadium , stating , " I was not nervous at the Polo Grounds , as I 've pitched several games in Briggs Stadium back home . I 've worked out there with the Tigers , and they , the Red Sox and the Phillies have been interested in me . But my folks and I decided that I 'd make up my mind about playing pro ball after I graduated from high school . " After considering studying medicine at the University of Michigan , he signed with his hometown Tigers for a bonus of $ 15 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Major League Baseball = = 
 = = = Detroit Tigers ( 1945 , 1948 ) = = = 
 He made the Tigers team in spring training 1945 before finishing high school and without having played in the minor leagues , but sat on the bench before making his major league debut in June 1945 , just a few weeks after his 18th birthday . He made three relief appearances that month and two more in September after a two @-@ month stint with the Buffalo Bisons of the International League under manager Bucky Harris , and was on the Detroit roster for the team 's victory in the 1945 World Series although he did not appear in any games . He had a remarkably unassuming presence ; Paul Richards , then a catcher for the Tigers , later recalled occasionally going to his neighborhood drugstore . One day , Pierce went up to him at practice and asked why Richards never talked to him at the store , with Richards replying that he didn 't know what Pierce was talking about ; Pierce answered that the drugstore was his family 's , and Richards slowly realized that Pierce had been the clerk behind the counter each time he went in . 
 Pierce was sent back to Buffalo for the 1946 season , now with Gabby Hartnett as his manager ( Harris having moved to the team 's front office ) , but missed most of the year with a back injury which was attributed to overwork . After the 1947 season in Buffalo , where Richards was now his manager , he returned to Detroit in 1948 , spending most of the season in the bullpen but making five starts and posting a 3 – 0 record ; he had yet added very little weight since his high school days , being still at 148 pounds . He made his first start , and earned his first major league victory , on August 8 against the Washington Senators , pitching 7 ⅔ innings and striking out six in a 6 – 5 victory in which he also drove in a run with a triple and scored . However , Pierce also issued 51 walks in 55 ⅓ innings that year , and concerns about his pitching control led the Tigers to trade him to the White Sox on November 10 for catcher Aaron Robinson and $ 10 @,@ 000 , in what most baseball historians consider to be one of the most one @-@ sided trades in baseball history . Talks had initially centered on Chicago acquiring Pierce 's high school teammate Ted Gray , although sources differ as to whether it was White Sox general manager Frank Lane or his Detroit counterpart Billy Evans who switched the focus to Pierce ; the Tigers tried to call off the deal one day after it was completed upon fully realizing what they had given up , even offering $ 50 @,@ 000 to get Pierce back , but Lane had no intention of giving up the steal he had accomplished in his first trade as general manager . 
 = = = Chicago White Sox ( 1949 – 1961 ) = = = 
 In his first seasons with White Sox , Pierce 's control problems continued ; his 137 walks in 1950 tied him for the fourth most ever by an AL left @-@ hander . But those seasons also included indications of his developing excellence , as well as the struggles he would face in gaining run support . On May 29 , 1949 , in just his sixth start with Chicago ( and the 11th of his career ) , the 22 @-@ year @-@ old Pierce was matched against 42 @-@ year @-@ old Negro league legend Satchel Paige in a road game against the defending World Series champion Cleveland Indians . The pitchers ' duel went into the 11th inning , when Pierce walked leadoff hitter Ken Keltner , followed by two bunt singles . After Pierce was replaced by a reliever and the next batter lined to shortstop Luke Appling , Lou Boudreau singled to give Cleveland a 2 – 1 win ; Pierce had himself scored Chicago 's only run after singling in the eighth inning . And on June 15 , 1950 against the World Series champion Yankees , Pierce got his first career shutout – a 5 – 0 one @-@ hitter , interrupted by rain delays in the second , fourth and fifth innings totaling over an hour and a half , with the only hit being Billy Johnson 's single in the fifth inning . 
 = = Early 1950s = = 
 = = = Development of style = = = 
 Over 13 seasons with the White Sox , Pierce was the ace of the pitching staff , leading the team in wins nine times and in strikeouts eight times . He was Chicago 's Opening Day starter seven times ( 1951 – 52 , 1954 , 1956 – 59 ) , and started the home opener in 1953 and 1961 . He had an outstanding fastball and an excellent curveball , and in 1951 added the slider ( for which he used his motion for the curve rather than the fastball ) as a third strong pitch , as well as a changeup . He worked quickly with an over @-@ the @-@ top motion , dropping his back shoulder in a style similar to that later used by Sandy Koufax . In 1957 , Paul Richards noted of Pierce 's early style : " He had a tendency to windmill in his delivery , which makes the ball spin too much and takes the life out of it . He flashed his curve @-@ the Yankees always knew when he was throwing a curve . But mainly Bill didn 't want to throw anything but fast balls in the old days . He laughed at the change @-@ of @-@ pace and the slider , so most of the strong right @-@ hand hitters were laying back for him , waiting for a fast ball down the middle . " After Pierce finally tried the slider against the Yankees , to great effect , Richards noted , " Then , for a while there , he began throwing nothing but sliders . He finally learned about that , too . Even today Pierce will pitch a whole ball game and almost never throw anything but fast balls . But only on certain days . " Yankees star Joe DiMaggio was among those praising Pierce 's ability , reportedly remarking , " That little so @-@ and @-@ so is a marvel . So little – and all that speed . And I mean speed ! He got me out of there on a fastball in the ninth that I 'd have needed a telescope to see . " Richards became Chicago 's manager in 1951 , and worked with Pierce to develop his two new pitches and slow down his pace , as well as significantly improve his control ; Pierce later recalled , " I learned to control my fastball better [ ... ] Developing the slider helped me tremendously because it gave me a third out pitch . I threw it almost as hard as my fastball , but I could throw it for strikes better than the fast ball or good curve ... Richards made me work on it , and it took me about two years before it was consistent . " After issuing 249 walks in 391 innings in 1949 – 1950 , Pierce gave up only 73 walks in 240 innings in 1951 , and averaged more than 3 walks per 9 innings in three seasons afterward . His 1951 ERA of 3 @.@ 03 was fourth best in the league , and he ranked sixth in 1952 with a mark of 2 @.@ 57 . On September 21 , 1952 he broke Doc White 's 1907 club record of 141 strikeouts by a left @-@ hander , ending the season with 144 . 
 On April 16 , 1953 against the St. Louis Browns ( the second game of the season , and Chicago 's home opener ) Pierce pitched his second one @-@ hitter , a 1 – 0 victory in which he allowed only a seventh @-@ inning double by Bobby Young ; the White Sox gained only two singles in the contest , and scored on a walk , sacrifice hit , error and sacrifice fly . Pierce was chosen to start the All @-@ Star Game for the AL – the first White Sox pitcher ever to do so – and allowed only one hit through three innings ( a single by Stan Musial ) . Boston Red Sox star Ted Williams recalled of the game : " It was a hot day at Crosley Field and I remember being so concerned for little Billy Pierce of the White Sox . Billy probably threw harder than anybody for a guy his size , he had a real big delivery , nice to look at , and he had overcome a lot . I understand he had had epilepsy , and I was really pulling for him . He was a nervous little guy , and here he was starting his first All @-@ Star game in a <unk> park that 's tough to pitch in , and against Robin Roberts to boot . Pierce held them in the palm of his hand that day . He threw the ball right by everybody . " 
 During the early 1950s , Richards preferred to arrange his rotation so that Pierce started only every fifth or sixth day , holding him back against weaker teams but using him more often for big games against the powerful Yankees and Indians . Catcher Sherm <unk> later observed that although it was essentially a compliment to Pierce 's ability , he might have picked up more victories and won 20 games sooner in his career had he faced each opponent more equally . With a 1 – 0 two @-@ hitter at Washington on August 3 , in which the White Sox won on an unearned run in the ninth inning with a hit batter , error and sacrifice fly , Pierce began a streak of 39 ⅔ consecutive scoreless innings – the longest such streak in the AL between 1926 , when Ted Lyons had a 41 @-@ inning streak for the White Sox , and 1968 ; it remains the fifth longest ever by a left @-@ hander , and the longest by an AL southpaw since 1905 . The streak ended when he allowed two unearned runs against the Browns in the sixth inning on August 19 ; two additional earned runs in the tenth inning ended his streak , dating to July 29 , of 49 ⅔ innings without an earned run , and gave him a 4 – 3 loss . He led the league in strikeouts ( 186 ) and was second in ERA ( 2 @.@ 72 ) , and on September 27 started for the White Sox in the final game in Browns history , winning 2 – 1 in 11 innings at St. Louis . His seven shutouts that season were the second most by an AL left @-@ hander since 1916 , matched only by Hal Newhouser 's 1945 total of eight . 
 = = = = Progress interrupted = = = = 
 Pierce 's 1954 season was interrupted when he reported pain in his left arm in a May 25 win over Cleveland ; after several days of difficulty in determining the problem , he had oral surgery to remove an infected wisdom tooth and adjacent molar on June 3 . He did not pitch again until June 20 , but a lack of arm strength caused him to be ineffective in that start before slowly coming back with two relief appearances and another poor start , finally picking up wins with consecutive 3 – 0 shutouts on July 5 and 11 , the latter being his fourth career two @-@ hitter . It was later reported that the tooth problem had possibly existed as early as spring training , when Pierce initially suffered arm problems . But although he recorded only nine wins that season , he was one of just four pitchers to defeat the Indians three times as they racked up a league @-@ record 111 victories , after also having been one of four pitchers to defeat the champion Yankees four times in 1953 . 
 Playing the Yankees on June 25 , 1953 , he was part of a rare defensive shift ; leading 4 – 2 in the ninth inning , he was moved to first base , with Harry <unk> entering in relief . Pinch hitter Don <unk> barely beat out a bunt single to first base , but Pierce than recorded a putout on Gil McDougald 's grounder to third base . He then retook the mound , and after issuing a walk , gained the final two outs to finish the victory ; the White Sox set an AL record by using five first basemen in the game . Pierce was also an excellent baserunner , and was used as a pinch runner 30 times between 1949 and 1957 – even scoring as a substitute for three @-@ time stolen base champion Minnie Miñoso in a 5 – 4 victory over the Yankees on June 22 , 1956 . 
 = = Late 1950s = = 
 = = = Peak years = = = 
 In 1955 Pierce again started the All @-@ Star Game , going into the All @-@ Star break with a record of just 5 – 6 in spite of his 2 @.@ 11 ERA ; in his last two starts before the break , he suffered back @-@ to @-@ back 1 – 0 losses to Early Wynn and Bob Lemon of the Indians . In the All @-@ Star Game he allowed only one baserunner through three innings ( a leadoff single by Red Schoendienst , who was thrown out on a steal attempt ) ; he staked the AL to a 4 – 0 lead , but the National League came back for a 6 – 5 win in 10 innings after scoring five runs off Whitey Ford in the seventh and eighth innings . Pierce ended the season with the league lead in ERA ( although his record was just 15 – 10 ) , with his mark of 1 @.@ 97 being the lowest by a major league pitcher between Hal Newhouser in 1946 ( 1 @.@ 94 ) and Sandy Koufax in 1963 ( 1 @.@ 88 ) ; he led the major leagues by nearly two thirds of a run , with Ford having the next best mark at 2 @.@ 63 . Total Baseball has rated Pierce as the best pitcher in the major leagues in 1955 , after having placed him among the AL 's top five pitchers each year from 1951 to 1953 . 
 In 1956 he started his third All @-@ Star Game , but was charged with the loss despite allowing only one run in three innings . Buoyed by the arrival of rookie shortstop Luis Aparicio , who sparked the team in leading the league in stolen bases , the White Sox enjoyed a two @-@ month offensive surge from June 4 to August 3 in which they averaged eight runs in Pierce 's 13 starts ; he won 11 of the games , losing only those immediately before and after the All @-@ Star break , the latter being a 2 – 1 loss to Ford and the Yankees . He became the first White Sox pitcher since 1941 to win 20 games , was second in the AL with a career @-@ high 192 strikeouts ( a team record for left @-@ handers until Gary Peters had 205 in 1964 ) , and was named AL Pitcher of the Year by The Sporting News , outpolling Ford ( who had edged him in a close 1955 vote ) by a margin of 117 to 52 ; he also finished fifth in voting for the AL Most Valuable Player Award . In 1957 Pierce became the first White Sox pitcher since Red Faber ( 1920 – 1922 ) to earn 20 victories in consecutive seasons ; he tied Jim Bunning for the league lead , and bested him in voting for AL Pitcher of the Year . He had six consecutive complete game victories from May 16 to June 8 in which his total ERA was 0 @.@ 64 , with two 1 – 0 victories in ten innings including his sixth career two @-@ hitter on June 4 against the Red Sox ; the White Sox scored just nine total runs over the last five games in that stretch . Despite the presence of such popular players as Miñoso , Aparicio and second baseman Nellie Fox , Pierce was chosen as the player most popular with White Sox fans in a 1957 spring training poll of sportswriters . A separate poll of managers , coaches , writers and broadcasters named him Chicago 's best fielding pitcher , best pitcher at holding runners to first base , and best pitcher for crucial games , as well as the team 's most nervous player on the field . 
 = = = = End of peak = = = = 
 In 1958 he was second in the league in both wins ( 17 ) and ERA ( 2 @.@ 68 ) ; his seventh two @-@ hitter , a 1 – 0 win on June 21 against the Baltimore Orioles in which the White Sox scored only an unearned run in the first inning , was followed by the greatest game of his career . On June 27 against the Senators , he retired the first 26 batters before pinch hitter Ed Fitz Gerald lined Pierce 's first pitch down the first base line for an opposite @-@ field double that landed about a foot from the foul line . Pierce then struck out Albie Pearson on three pitches to end the game ; only twice did he go to a three @-@ ball count . The lone hit marred what would have been a remarkable accomplishment ; not only had no left @-@ hander pitched a perfect game since Lee Richmond in 1880 , but only one AL left @-@ hander ( Mel Parnell in 1956 ) pitched even a no @-@ hitter between 1931 and 1962 . Although disappointed by the near miss , Pierce praised his teammates for their defensive work , saying , " Give Luis plenty of credit . And Sherm really mixed ' em up beautifully . The big thing is that we won . " At a Capitol lunch with several White Sox players during the following year 's pennant race , Vice President Richard Nixon told Pierce that he had watched the game on television , saying , " I 'm a Washington fan , but that was one night I was rooting for the White Sox . " In a 1982 interview , Pierce said , " The book on Fitz Gerald was that he was a fastball hitter on the first ball and liked it inside where he could pull it . So we threw him a curve away and he hit into right for a solid hit . I didn 't feel that badly about it , really . It didn 't mean that much at the moment . But now ... well , now I wish I had got it . It would have been nice . " His streak of 33 consecutive scoreless innings was ended with an unearned run in the seventh inning on July 1 . 
 Pierce tied for the league lead in complete games each year from 1956 to 1958 , and was again selected for the All @-@ Star team each year from 1957 to 1959 and again in 1961 , although he only appeared in the 1957 game in which he retired his first five batters before allowing three runs . On June 11 , 1959 he pitched his fourth and final one @-@ hitter , a 3 – 1 victory at Washington in which he allowed only a third @-@ inning double by Ron Samford , who scored after three two @-@ out walks , the last to Harmon Killebrew ; the White Sox won on a two @-@ run double in the ninth inning by Jim Landis off Senators starter Camilo Pascual . Pierce had the longest outing of his career on August 6 in a road game against the Orioles , pitching 16 innings in a contest that ended in a 1 – 1 tie after 18 frames ; it proved to be the last time in his career that he pitched into extra innings . After losing his next two starts , pulling a back muscle and straining the ligaments in his right hip against the Kansas City Athletics in the third inning on August 15 , he was out of action until a 2 – 1 win over Kansas City on September 7 . 
 Manager Al López ' decision not to start Pierce in the 1959 World Series against the Los Angeles Dodgers was highly controversial . After Cy Young Award winner Early Wynn started for Chicago in Game 1 , Lopez chose to start Bob Shaw ( 18 – 6 in the regular season ) and Dick Donovan ( 9 – 10 ) in the next two contests , which the White Sox lost by scores of 4 – 3 and 3 – 1 . Pierce was held back until Game 4 , and relieved in each of the final three games of the Series , allowing only two hits and no runs in four innings of work . In Game 4 he entered in the fourth inning with Chicago trailing 4 – 0 , and pitched a hitless three innings before being pulled for a pinch hitter in the seventh inning , when the Sox tied the game ; the Dodgers went on to win 5 – 4 . In Game 5 he entered in the eighth inning to protect a 1 – 0 lead , but only issued an intentional walk before Lopez again changed pitchers ; the White Sox held on for the 1 – 0 win . Lopez even chose to start Wynn in Game 6 on two days ' rest , but he was ineffective , and Chicago was behind 8 – 3 by the time Pierce was brought in to start the eighth inning ; the Dodgers later added a run in the ninth inning to complete the 9 – 3 win and capture the Series championship . Being used out of the bullpen was a deep letdown for Pierce , who said in a 1982 interview , " Other guys , Early Wynn and Bob Shaw , had better years than I did that year . And against the left @-@ handed @-@ heavy lineup the Dodgers threw at us , Al wanted his right @-@ handers like Dick Donovan . There was no question I was disappointed , but I understood . " However , there have been suggestions that Lopez ' decision had other , undisclosed motivations ; noting his surprise that Lopez chose to use Pierce out of the bullpen , outfielder Al Smith recalled , " We all knew why Al López didn 't pitch him , but we never told anyone and I won 't say now . I will say that I thought he should have pitched . He 'd been pitching all year , hadn 't he ? " 
 = = Offensive support = = 
 Although they never finished below third place from 1952 through 1960 , the " Go @-@ Go White Sox " were a team which thrived on speed , defense and pitching rather than hitting , and Pierce struggled for offensive support throughout his time with the club . Both Richards and Lopez – who became Chicago 's manager in 1957 – placed a low emphasis on offense , with Lopez expressing his philosophy that " all a team really needed was pitching and defense , because if you didn 't allow the other team to score , eventually they would give you a run , and you 'd win the game . " Nellie Fox , who was also Pierce 's roommate , turned to him on one occasion when the White Sox picked up a run following a scoring drought and said , " Here 's your run . Now go out there and hold it . " Although AL teams averaged 4 @.@ 46 runs per game from 1949 through 1961 , and the White Sox averaged 4 @.@ 53 runs in games started by their other pitchers , they averaged only 4 @.@ 20 runs in Pierce 's starts – a figure which drops to 4 @.@ 07 if the two @-@ month scoring outburst in 1956 is discounted ; in over two thirds of his losses with Chicago ( 105 of 152 ) , and fully one third of his starts ( 130 of 390 ) , they scored two or fewer runs . They averaged 3 @.@ 7 runs in his 1953 starts , and 3 @.@ 6 runs in his 1955 starts ; even in 1959 , when the pennant @-@ winning White Sox averaged 4 @.@ 29 runs per game , they averaged only 3 @.@ 36 runs in Pierce 's starts . By 1955 it was regularly noted that Chicago 's offensive struggles were placing undue pressure on the pitching staff , wearing them out with " one tense game after another , never having a comfortable margin that might permit a little breather now and then " ; Pierce was described as " the unluckiest pitcher in the majors " that year due to the lack of scoring . But in contrast , when he had a reasonable level of offensive backing he was far more successful , posting a record of 30 – 11 when Chicago scored four runs and 99 – 10 when they scored five or more ; from September 1951 through May 1958 , he was 71 – 6 when they scored at least four runs and 55 – 1 when they scored at least five . 
 = = Yankees rivalry = = 
 Pierce played a major role in keeping the White Sox competitive with the powerhouse Yankees through most of the 1950s , and after a rough period from June 1951 to July 1952 in which he dropped 10 of 11 decisions to New York ( despite a respectable 3 @.@ 69 ERA in those games ) , he held his own against the Yankees , posting a record of 21 – 21 from August 1952 through the 1960 season . Ironically , the turnaround in his fortunes against the Yankees followed one of Chicago 's most crushing defeats to their rivals ; on July 29 , 1952 he left with a 7 – 3 lead and one out in the eighth inning , only to see the Yankees come back against the White Sox bullpen to win 10 – 7 on Mickey Mantle 's grand slam in the ninth . Years later , Pierce still recalled the game as being one of his most frustrating outings . He faced Whitey Ford 15 times in his career ( more than against any other pitcher ) , including a 1 – 0 loss on May 17 , 1955 , a 3 – 2 loss in 10 innings on June 5 later that year , a 2 – 1 loss on July 15 , 1956 , a 3 – 2 loss in 11 innings on September 18 of that year ( in which the Yankees clinched the pennant on Mantle 's 50th home run in the final frame ) , a 3 – 1 win on May 21 , 1957 , and a 4 – 3 win in 11 innings on April 30 , 1959 . 
 By the 1957 season , Shirley Povich of The Washington Post expressed a clear preference for Pierce over Ford , writing that anyone doubting Pierce 's place as the league 's top left @-@ hander was " risking committal as an incurable psycho who can neither read the figures nor respond to reason . " Pierce 's 4 – 3 win over the Yankees on July 28 , 1959 put the White Sox in first place , where they stayed for the remainder of the season to take their first pennant in 40 years ; it was his 160th victory with Chicago , breaking Doc White 's team record for wins by a left @-@ hander ( he broke White 's club records for career games and innings by a left @-@ hander the same year ) . In late 1958 , sportswriter Edgar <unk> wrote , " The primary difference between Pierce and Ford , in their long @-@ standing duel for southpaw supremacy in the American League , is that Pierce is pitching for a woefully weak hitting team , while Ford is backed by the league 's most powerful offensive machine ... An even greater boon to Whitey is the fact that he doesn 't have to face the Yankees . " Of Pierce , who he described as the top White Sox pitcher for the past decade , he added , " Normally , he 's lucky if he 's supported with as many as two runs when he faces the Yankees . " 
 Yankee outfielder Bob <unk> recalled of the rivalry , " I always remember the games when Pierce and Ford would lock up . Those were great <unk> – 2 – 1 , 3 – 2 . Usually , if they 'd get beat , Mantle would hit a home run . " New York outfielder Hank Bauer noted , " The guy who gave me the most problem – I know he gave ' em to me , and I think he gave ' em to most of us – was Billy Pierce . " Tommy Byrne , who pitched for the Yankees for most of his career from 1943 to 1957 but played for Chicago for the first half of the 1953 season , said , " Pierce was sneaky fast , a good breaking ball . He was tough . For several years there he was right up there on a par with Ford . " Sportswriter Bill Madden recalled in 1982 , " Always it was Pierce against Whitey Ford and always , to me , that seemed like an unfair matchup . They were your classic ' stylish ' left @-@ handers , equal in guile and guts , but Ford had those howitzers of Mickey Mantle , Yogi Berra , Bill Skowron and Hank Bauer behind him , while Pierce came armed with <unk> . Nellie Fox , Luis Aparicio and Minnie Miñoso supported him with hustle and chink singles and I always marveled at the fact that Pierce could duel Ford on even terms despite those odds . " Ironically , the Yankees tried to acquire Pierce in the early 1950s when Ford was in the military , but White Sox general manager Frank Lane proposed that New York give up Bauer , first baseman Joe Collins and second baseman Jerry Coleman in exchange for Pierce and outfielder Al <unk> , and ended talks when Yankees GM George Weiss suggested the Yankees send minor leaguers instead . 
 = = Later career = = 
 In his last two seasons with Chicago , Pierce posted records of just 14 – 7 and 10 – 9 , but a shaky bullpen contributed to his middling record ; although he left the game with a lead in the sixth inning or later 15 times in those seasons , White Sox relievers failed to protect that lead seven times . Indeed , Pierce was seen to be the team 's only consistently effective starter in 1960 , picking up eight complete @-@ game victories by mid @-@ August . On June 20 , 1961 , Pierce broke Ed Walsh 's White Sox record of 1 @,@ 732 career strikeouts . 
 = = = San Francisco Giants ( 1962 – 64 ) = = = 
 On November 30 , 1961 he was traded to the San Francisco Giants along with Don Larsen in exchange for four players ( three of them pitchers ) who had spent most or all of 1961 in the minor leagues . Giants manager Alvin Dark declared his intent to use Pierce as the ace of a young pitching staff that included developing talents such as Juan Marichal , Gaylord Perry and Mike McCormick . Unlike the White Sox , the Giants featured a powerful offense which included Willie Mays , Willie McCovey and Orlando Cepeda , and Pierce took advantage of the improved run support with his new team , winning his first eight starts before suffering a 4 – 3 loss on June 7 . His first start on April 13 was a deeply rewarding one , after a rough spring training in which he recorded a 16 @.@ 45 ERA . Facing the Cincinnati Reds , he retired the first 13 batters and allowed only two hits in 7 ⅓ innings . The crowd of 23 @,@ 755 gave him a roaring ovation , and he later said , " The cheers really got to me inside . Fans nowhere could have been more wonderful . I felt it way down deep . " 
 The Giants were credited with pulling off the best deal of the year , with Larsen and Pierce – " the little southpaw chatterbox " – leading the team to the best record in the major leagues through early June . In a road game against the Reds on June 14 , he allowed a leadoff double to Vada Pinson , but was then accidentally spiked in the left ankle while covering first base on a groundout by Don Blasingame , an injury which required 14 stitches . Pulled from the game after just ⅓ of an inning , he took the loss when Pinson later scored and the Giants were shut out 8 – 0 . The injury likely cost him what would have been his eighth All @-@ Star selection , and he did not return to the field until he lasted only three innings in a loss on July 15 ; he then made three relief appearances before picking up a win on August 2 . But over the course of the year he proved to be a pitcher who thrived in blustery Candlestick Park , winning all 11 of his home starts as the Giants tied the Dodgers for the NL pennant with a record of 101 – 61 , forcing a three @-@ game playoff . Against the Dodgers on August 11 he earned his 200th career victory , with McCovey 's three @-@ run home run off eventual Cy Young winner Don Drysdale giving the Giants a 5 – 4 win and ending Drysdale 's 11 @-@ game win streak . 
 Pierce started the first game of the playoff against the Dodgers on October 1 , opposing Sandy Koufax , and pushed his Candlestick record to 12 – 0 with a three @-@ hit 8 – 0 victory in which only two Dodgers reached second base ; he described it as " the most satisfying game I ever pitched . " Former NL umpire Babe Pinelli , watching from the press box , remarked , " Look at him fire that fast one ! He 's been in so many clutch games that they 're nothing to him ! " After the Dodgers tied the series in Game 2 , he came back in Game 3 on October 3 to pitch the ninth inning with a 6 – 4 lead , and retired all three batters he faced to clinch the Giants ' first pennant in San Francisco , being mobbed by his teammates upon the final out . Against the Yankees in the World Series , he started Game 3 , and went into the bottom of the seventh inning with no score ; but he allowed three runs in the seventh inning ( one of them unearned after two outfield errors ) , and took the 3 – 2 loss . He came back with another brilliant outing in Game 6 at Candlestick Park against Whitey Ford , not allowing a baserunner until the fifth inning and finishing with a three @-@ hit 5 – 2 victory to tie the Series at three games each ; he only allowed three runners to reach second base , and only went to a three @-@ ball count four times . Although his two Series appearances both came after his peak years were behind him , Pierce posted a career Series ERA of 1 @.@ 89 in 19 innings . 
 = = = = Last seasons = = = = 
 Given his brilliance in home games in 1962 , it was no surprise that Pierce was chosen to start the Giants ' home opener in 1963 , and he responded with the last shutout of his career – a 7 – 0 win over the Houston Colt .45s. He achieved his Candlestick success despite often discarding one of his primary pitches , the low curve , saying , " How many left @-@ handers come into this park and win with that pitch on a windy afternoon ? " He instead altered the location of his pitches , throwing outside to left @-@ handers to get them to hit to left field , taking advantage of the wind which kept the ball in the air longer ; two @-@ time AL batting champion Pete Runnels observed that Pierce pitched to him completely differently upon changing leagues . His home win streak ended in his next start on April 20 , a 4 – 0 loss to the Chicago Cubs ; he gradually moved to the bullpen over the course of the 1963 season , and was used almost exclusively in relief in 1964 . On September 10 , 1964 against the Dodgers , in what was later called " Billy the Kid 's last fight , " he made his first start in over a year and the last of his career , pitching 7 ⅔ innings and gaining a 5 – 1 win . He made one more appearance in relief on October 3 , falling one strikeout short of 2 @,@ 000 , and announced his retirement the next day as the season came to an end . In an 18 @-@ season career , Pierce posted a 211 – 169 record with a 3 @.@ 27 ERA in 3 @,@ 306 ⅔ innings ; only twice ( 1948 and 1963 ) did he post an ERA of 4 @.@ 00 or higher , and never in a season of at least 100 innings . He completed 193 of his 432 starts , including 38 shutouts , and also had 32 saves among his 585 total games pitched . His 186 career victories with the White Sox rank fourth on the club 's all @-@ time list , behind Hall of Famers Ted Lyons , Red Faber and Ed Walsh . His White Sox record of 456 career games by a left @-@ hander was broken by Wilbur Wood in 1974 . 
 Listed at 5 ft 10 in ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) and 160 pounds ( 73 kg ) , Pierce was also among the more diminutive pitchers to enjoy great success , and is likely the smallest pitcher since the 1920s to win 200 games . Sherm <unk> , his catcher for ten years in Chicago , noted that his lack of size didn 't diminish his velocity , noting , " He isn 't too big , but he has wonderful coordination . And he sure is pretty to watch , the way he pumps and rocks and throws . Sometimes , when I 'm not catching a game , I 'll just go off to one side and watch him pitch . " And Paul Richards noted , " Pierce is a perfectionist who has achieved maximum potential out of the equipment nature gave him . " Pierce 's size also belied his durability , as he was one of the few pitchers under 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in height to lead the league in complete games since the 1920s , with Ned Garver , Frank Lary , Camilo Pascual and Fernando Valenzuela – all of whom were an inch taller and outweighed Pierce by at least 20 pounds – being the only other pitchers under six feet tall to lead the league more than once since the early 1930s . He remains the last pitcher to lead the AL in complete games three years in a row . 
 = = MLB stats , awards , and achievements = = 
 = = = Stats = = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 All @-@ Star : 1953 , 1955 , 1956 , 1957 , 1958 , 1959 , 1961 
 = = = Achievements = = = 
 American League leader in ERA ( 1955 ) 
 American League leader in wins ( 1957 ) 
 American League leader in complete games ( 1956 – 1958 ) 
 American League leader in strikeouts ( 1953 ) 
 American League leader in strikeouts per 9 innings pitched ( 1953 – 1954 ) 
 American League leader in fielding average as pitcher ( 1956 ) 
 American League pennant team ( 1945 , 1959 ) 
 World Series champion team ( 1945 ) 
 20 @-@ game wins ( 2 ) 
 One @-@ hitter ( 4 ) 
 Two @-@ hitter ( 7 ) 
 Chicago White Sox All @-@ Century Team ( 2000 ) 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Through the 1950s , Pierce generally spent the offseason helping his father run the family 's Detroit pharmacy . He did not pursue a coaching career , even though a 1963 spring training poll of sportswriters had named him the top managerial prospect on the Giants . After leaving baseball , he was a White Sox television color analyst in 1970 , briefly a partner in Oldsmobile and Cadillac dealerships , a stockbroker , then worked as a sales and public relations representative for the Continental Envelope company from 1974 until retiring in 1997 . He also worked as a White Sox scout , discovering 1983 Rookie of the Year Ron Kittle . The White Sox retired his number 19 in 1987 ; he is one of only eight players so honored . He was named to the Sox Team of the Century in 2000 , and was inducted into the Michigan Sports Hall of Fame in 2003 . On October 4 , 2005 , Pierce threw out the first pitch before Game 1 of the AL Division Series against the Red Sox ( a 14 – 2 win ) , as the White Sox began the postseason which culminated in the 2005 World Series title – their first championship in 88 years . In 2006 he was inducted into the Chicagoland Sports Hall of Fame . On July 23 , 2007 , the White Sox unveiled a statue in Pierce 's honor in the center field concourse of U.S. Cellular Field , joining likenesses of Charles Comiskey , Minnie Miñoso , Carlton Fisk , Luis Aparicio and Nellie Fox . Sculptors had borrowed photographs and measured his face , leading him to comment , " I don 't know why ; it isn 't the same measurement it was in the ' 50s . " Adding that he hoped statues of Hall of Fame shortstop Luke Appling and pitcher Ted Lyons – both stars of the 1930s and 1940s – might be added in the future , he nonetheless admitted his excitement over the honor , saying , " I think of it more , in times to come , when my grandkids go out to the park , they 'll see it . It 's going to be there for years . " The book " Then Ozzie Said to Harold ... " : The Best Chicago White Sox Stories Ever Told , coauthored by Pierce , was published in March 2008 . 
 Pierce married Gloria McCreadie , who he had dated since high school , on October 22 , 1949 , and they have three children , William Reed ( born July 6 , 1953 ) , Patricia " Patti " Crowley ( born October 4 , 1955 ) and Robert Walter ( born July 16 , 1958 ) . Pierce told one interviewer of his wife , " She 's not only a loyal fan , but a smart one , and there was the day I had to go to Marty Marion – he was the White Sox manager then – and tell him that he 'd better change our bunt sign because Gloria had stolen it , so very likely the opposition would be stealing it too . " Although he had by then been traded to the Giants , following the 1962 season they relocated from Birmingham , Michigan to the southwest Chicago suburb of Evergreen Park . ( For several years while he was with the White Sox , they had also maintained a summer residence in the south side 's landmark Flamingo @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Lake Apartments , where teammate Jim Rivera and his family also lived . ) He remained a member of the White Sox community relations department into his late 80s , making frequent public appearances in the Chicago area . In addition , beginning in 1993 he headed the not @-@ for @-@ profit Chicago Baseball Cancer Charities , a cause he began supporting after Nellie Fox 's death in 1975 at age 47 . On June 29 , 2013 , the White Sox gave out souvenir statuettes of Pierce to fans at that day 's game against the Cleveland Indians , and he threw out the ceremonial first pitch . Pierce died in Palos Heights , Illinois on July 31 , 2015 at the age of 88 from gallbladder cancer . Pierce was a 33rd Degree Mason of Evergreen Park Lodge ; his funeral was held at Evergreen Park Presbyterian Church , and he was entombed in Chapel Hill Gardens South Cemetery in <unk> . 
 = = Hall of Fame candidacy and statistical evaluations = = 
 Pierce , so far , has been overlooked for election to the National Baseball Hall of Fame . However , in October 2014 he was selected for the first time by the Baseball Writers ' Association of America 's ( BBWAA ) overview committee to be one of ten candidates on the Golden Era Committee ballot for possible induction in 2015 . He and the other candidates , including former White Sox teammate Minnie Miñoso , all fell short of selection . The committee meets and votes on ten candidates selected from the 1947 to 1972 era every three years . Pierce received less than 4 votes of the required 12 votes from the committee at the MLB winter meeting on December 8 , with no one elected to the Hall by the committee . Ron Santo received 15 votes at the committee 's previous election , prior to his 2012 enshrinement . 
 Pierce 's considerable credentials are comparable to many of the pitchers enshrined in Cooperstown . When he first became eligible in 1970 , the BBWAA had elected only eight new members in 13 years , with Pierce being stuck in the voting behind such pitchers as Early Wynn , Bob Lemon , and Hal Newhouser ( each of whom was eventually elected ) . In the next few years , other pitching stars such as Sandy Koufax , Robin Roberts , Warren Spahn , and Whitey Ford became eligible and likely drew votes away from Pierce . Pierce was dropped from the ballot after 1974 . In discussing various criticisms of BBWAA voting over the years , Baseball Digest editor John <unk> wrote in 2008 , " The dissenters wonder , for example , how the writers can elect pitchers Whitey Ford ( 236 – 106 ) , Jim Bunning ( 224 – 184 ) and Don Drysdale ( 209 – 166 ) to the hall of fame , while barely giving any recognition to Billy Pierce ( 211 – 169 ) " . 
 In the five years he was on the BBWAA ballot ( 1970 – 1974 ) , Pierce never drew more than two percent of the votes cast . His record , compiled mostly with undistinguished White Sox teams , deserved much more respect from the voters . In one @-@ on @-@ one competition , he actually beat Ford more times than Ford beat him , even though Ford was backed up by stronger teams . " ( Bunning was actually elected by the Veterans Committee in 1996 , although he did far better in BBWAA balloting than Pierce , coming within four votes of election in 1988 ) . Pierce is the only one of the top ten left @-@ handers in career strikeouts at the time of his retirement , that has not been elected to the Hall of Fame : 
 Pierce 's average of 5 @.@ 62 strikeouts per 9 innings pitched during the 1950s was the highest by any pitcher with at least 1 @,@ 000 innings in the decade , with his average of 7 @.@ 96 hits per nine innings ranking third ( behind Ford and Wynn ) and his 3 @.@ 06 ERA also ranking third ( behind Ford and Spahn ) . His final strikeout total ranked 15th among all pitchers when he retired ; of the 24 pitchers who had at least 1 @,@ 750 strikeouts at that time , Bobo Newsom and Tony <unk> are the only others who have not been elected to the Hall . 
 When comparing Pierce with the 15 left @-@ handers in the Hall ( the above nine as well as Herb Pennock , Eppa Rixey , Lefty Gomez , Steve Carlton , Tom Glavine and Randy Johnson ) , he consistently stands in the middle of the group , ranking eleventh in wins , ninth in strikeouts , games pitched and starts , seventh in shutouts , and tenth in innings . 
 Pierce 's seven All @-@ Star team selections tie him for the most among eligible pitchers not in the Hall of Fame , along with Lee Smith and Dave <unk> ; Vida Blue and Jack Morris are the only other eligible pitchers to have started three All @-@ Star Games . Over his three All @-@ Star starts ( each lasting three innings ) , Pierce allowed only one run and four hits in nine innings ; his career All @-@ Star record included a 3 @.@ 38 ERA with 12 strikeouts in 10 ⅔ innings . Pierce and Blue are also the only eligible pitchers who have won 200 games and been named Pitcher of the Year by The Sporting News more than once . 
 Pierce had a record of 24 – 24 in 54 career regular @-@ season starts against Hall of Famers : 7 – 7 vs. Whitey Ford , 4 – 7 vs. Early Wynn , 7 – 3 vs. Bob Lemon , 2 – 3 vs. Bob Feller , 1 – 1 vs. Hal Newhouser , 0 – 2 vs. Jim Bunning , 1 – 0 vs. Don Drysdale , Sandy Koufax and Hoyt Wilhelm , and 0 – 1 vs. Satchel Paige . ( Pierce had no decision in his lone start against Warren Spahn ; he also earned no decision in two All @-@ Star starts against Robin Roberts . ) 
 Pierce struck out ten or more batters eleven times in his career , and achieved his career high of 12 strikeouts four times ; but due to characteristically low run support , he won only one of those four games , a 5 – 0 three @-@ hit shutout of Kansas City on September 25 , 1955 in which he recorded his 1,000th career strikeout . He also recorded 12 strikeouts in a 4 – 2 , 12 @-@ inning loss to the Philadelphia Athletics on July 24 , 1953 , in a 10 @-@ inning scoreless tie against the Tigers on May 9 , 1954 , and in a 3 – 1 loss at Baltimore on May 23 , 1961 in which he pitched only six innings . In 22 career starts in which he pitched into extra innings , Pierce had a record of 8 – 11 despite a 1 @.@ 85 ERA . In his 41 complete @-@ game losses ( 10 of which were against the Yankees ) , he compiled a 2 @.@ 67 ERA with 231 strikeouts in 368 innings , a rate slightly higher than his career average . 
 He was also a highly effective pitcher when used in a relief role , recording 32 career saves ( possibly 34 ) compared to only 9 blown saves , a success rate of nearly 80 % . In his 14 career wins in relief ( none of which resulted from a blown save ) , he averaged 3 ⅓ innings pitched and a 0 @.@ 77 ERA . 
 Using MVP voting results , historical surveys and sabermetric analysis , historian Bill Deane projected in 1989 that Pierce would have won the American League Cy Young Award in 1953 and 1956 if it had been given at the time ; the award was not created until 1956 ( when the National League 's Don Newcombe won the award by unanimous vote ) , and awards were not given for both leagues until 1967 . In 1988 , baseball historian and statistician Bill James chose Pierce as having had the tenth greatest career value among left @-@ handers , ahead of six Hall of Famers . 
 On the other hand , baseball @-@ reference.com shows that Pierce 's career wins above replacement stand at just 53 @.@ 2 , well below the 73 @.@ 9 of a typical Hall of Fame starting pitcher . 
 = Osteochondritis dissecans = 
 Osteochondritis dissecans ( OCD or OD ) is a joint disorder in which cracks form in the articular cartilage and the underlying subchondral bone . OCD usually causes pain and swelling of the affected joint which catches and locks during movement . Physical examination typically reveals an effusion , tenderness , and a crackling sound with joint movement . 
 OCD is caused by blood deprivation in the subchondral bone . This loss of blood flow causes the subchondral bone to die in a process called avascular necrosis . The bone is then reabsorbed by the body , leaving the articular cartilage it supported prone to damage . The result is fragmentation ( dissection ) of both cartilage and bone , and the free movement of these bone and cartilage fragments within the joint space , causing pain and further damage . OCD can be difficult to diagnose because these symptoms are found with other diseases . However , the disease can be confirmed by X @-@ rays , computed tomography ( CT ) or magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) scans . 
 Non @-@ surgical treatment is rarely an option as the ability for articular cartilage to heal is limited . As a result , even moderate cases require some form of surgery . When possible , non @-@ operative forms of management such as protected reduced or non @-@ weight bearing and immobilization are used . Surgical treatment includes arthroscopic drilling of intact lesions , securing of cartilage flap lesions with pins or screws , drilling and replacement of cartilage plugs , stem cell transplantation , and joint replacement . After surgery rehabilitation is usually a two @-@ stage process of immobilization and physical therapy . Most rehabilitation programs combine efforts to protection the joint with muscle strengthening and range of motion . During the immobilization period , isometric exercises , such as straight leg raises , are commonly used to restore muscle loss without disturbing the cartilage of the affected joint . Once the immobilization period has ended , physical therapy involves continuous passive motion ( CPM ) and / or low impact activities , such as walking or swimming . 
 OCD occurs in 15 to 30 people per 100 @,@ 000 in the general population each year . Although rare , it is an important cause of joint pain in physically active adolescents . Because their bones are still growing , adolescents are more likely than adults to recover from OCD ; recovery in adolescents can be attributed to the bone 's ability to repair damaged or dead bone tissue and cartilage in a process called bone remodeling . While OCD may affect any joint , the knee tends to be the most commonly affected , and constitutes 75 % of all cases . Franz König coined the term osteochondritis dissecans in 1887 , describing it as an inflammation of the bone – cartilage interface . Many other conditions were once confused with OCD when attempting to describe how the disease affected the joint , including osteochondral fracture , osteonecrosis , accessory ossification center , osteochondrosis , and hereditary epiphyseal dysplasia . Some authors have used the terms osteochondrosis dissecans and osteochondral fragments as synonyms for OCD . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 In osteochondritis dissecans , fragments of cartilage or bone become loose within a joint , leading to pain and inflammation . These fragments are sometimes referred to as joint mice . OCD is a type of osteochondrosis in which a lesion has formed within the cartilage layer itself , giving rise to secondary inflammation . OCD most commonly affects the knee , although it can affect other joints such as the ankle or the elbow . 
 People with OCD report activity @-@ related pain that develops gradually . Individual complaints usually consist of mechanical symptoms including pain , swelling , catching , locking , popping noises , and buckling / giving way ; the primary presenting symptom may be a restriction in the range of movement . Symptoms typically present within the initial weeks of stage I ; however , the onset of stage II occurs within months and offers little time for diagnosis . The disease progresses rapidly beyond stage II , as OCD lesions quickly move from stable cysts or fissures to unstable fragments . Non @-@ specific symptoms , caused by similar injuries such as sprains and strains , can delay a definitive diagnosis . 
 Physical examination typically reveals fluid in the joint , tenderness , and crepitus . The tenderness may initially spread , but often reverts to a well @-@ defined focal point as the lesion progresses . Just as OCD shares symptoms with common maladies , acute osteochondral fracture has a similar presentation with tenderness in the affected joint , but is usually associated with a fatty <unk> . Although there is no significant pathologic gait or characteristic alignment abnormality associated with OCD , the patient may walk with the involved leg externally rotated in an attempt to avoid tibial spine impingement on the lateral aspect of the medial condyle of the femur . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Despite much research , the causes remain unclear but include repetitive physical trauma , ischemia ( restriction of blood flow ) , hereditary and endocrine factors , avascular necrosis ( loss of blood flow ) , rapid growth , deficiencies and imbalances in the ratio of calcium to phosphorus , and problems of bone formation . Although the name " osteochondritis " implies inflammation , the lack of inflammatory cells in histological examination suggests a non @-@ inflammatory cause . It is thought that repetitive <unk> , which leads to microfractures and sometimes an interruption of blood supply to the subchondral bone , may cause subsequent localized loss of blood supply or alteration of growth . 
 Trauma , rather than avascular necrosis , is thought to cause osteochondritis dissecans in juveniles . In adults , trauma is thought to be the main or perhaps the sole cause , and may be endogenous , exogenous or both . The incidence of repetitive strain injury in young athletes is on the rise and accounts for a significant number of visits to primary care ; this reinforces the theory that OCD may be associated with increased participation in sports and subsequent trauma . High @-@ impact sports such as Gymnastics , soccer , basketball , lacrosse , football , tennis , squash , baseball and weight lifting may put participants at a higher risk of OCD in stressed joints ( knees , ankles and elbows ) . 
 Recent case reports suggest that some people may be genetically predisposed to OCD . Studies in horses have implicated specific genetic defects . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Osteochondritis dissecans differs from " wear and tear " degenerative arthritis , which is primarily an articular surface problem . Instead , OCD is a problem of the bone underlying the cartilage , which may secondarily affect the articular cartilage . Left untreated , OCD can lead to the development of degenerative arthritis secondary to joint incongruity and abnormal wear patterns . 
 OCD occurs when a loose piece of bone or cartilage partially ( or fully ) separates from the end of the bone , often because of a loss of blood supply ( osteonecrosis ) and <unk> of the trabecular bone matrix . The loose piece may stay in place or slide around , making the joint stiff and unstable . OCD in humans most commonly affects the knees , ankles , and elbow but can affect any joint . 
 In skeletally immature individuals , the blood supply to the epiphyseal bone is good , supporting both osteogenesis and <unk> . With disruption of the epiphyseal plate vessels , varying degrees and depth of necrosis occur , resulting in a cessation of growth to both osteocytes and chondrocytes . In turn , this pattern leads to disordered ossification of cartilage , resulting in subchondral avascular necrosis and consequently OCD . 
 Four minor stages of OCD have been identified after trauma . These include revascularization and formation of granulation ( scar ) tissue , absorption of necrotic fragments , <unk> <unk> deposition , and remodeling of new bone . With delay in the revascularization stage , an OCD lesion develops . A lesion can lead to articular @-@ surface irregularities , which in turn may cause progressive arthritic deterioration . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 To diagnose osteochondritis dissecans , an X @-@ ray , CT scan or MRI scan can be performed to show necrosis of subchondral bone , formation of loose fragments , or both . Occasionally a nuclear medicine bone scan is used to assess the degree of loosening within the joint . 
 = = = Physical examination = = = 
 Physical examination often begins with examination of the patient 's gait . In OCD of the knee , people may walk with the involved leg externally rotated in an attempt to avoid tibial spine impingement on the lateral aspect of the medial condyle of the femur . 
 Next , the examining physician may check for weakness of the quadriceps . This examination may reveal fluid in the joint , tenderness , and crepitus . The Wilson test is also useful in locating OCD lesions of the femoral condyle . The test is performed by slowly extending the knee from 90 degrees , maintaining internal rotation . Pain at 30 degrees of flexion and relief with tibial external rotation is indicative of OCD . 
 Physical examination of a patient with ankle OCD often returns symptoms of joint effusion , crepitus , and diffuse or localized tenderness . Examination often reveals symptoms of generalized joint pain , swelling , and times with limited range of motion . Some with loose body lesions may report catching , locking , or both . The possibility of <unk> emphasizes a need for evaluation of biomechanical forces at the knee in a physical examination . As a result , the alignment and rotation of all major joints in the affected extremity is common , as are extrinsic and intrinsic abnormalities concerning the affected joint , including laxity . 
 = = = Diagnostic imaging = = = 
 X @-@ rays show lucency of the ossification front in juveniles . In older people , the lesion typically appears as an area of <unk> bone with a radiolucent line between the osteochondral defect and the <unk> . The visibility of the lesion depends on its location and on the amount of knee flexion used . Harding described the lateral X @-@ ray as a method to identify the site of an OCD lesion . 
 Magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) is useful for staging OCD lesions , evaluating the integrity of the joint surface , and distinguishing normal variants of bone formation from OCD by showing bone and cartilage edema in the area of the irregularity . MRI provides information regarding features of the articular cartilage and bone under the cartilage , including edema , fractures , fluid interfaces , articular surface integrity , and fragment displacement . A low T1 and high T2 signal at the fragment interface is seen in active lesions . This indicates an unstable lesion or recent microfractures . While MRI and <unk> have a close correlation , X @-@ ray films tend to be less inductive of similar MRI results . 
 Computed tomography ( CT ) scans and Technetium @-@ 99m bone scans are also sometimes used to monitor the progress of treatment . Unlike plain radiographs ( X @-@ rays ) , CT scans and MRI scans can show the exact location and extent of the lesion . Technetium bone scans can detect regional blood flow and the amount of osseous uptake . Both of these seem to be closely correlated to the potential for healing in the fragment . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 OCD is classified by the progression of the disease in stages . There are two main staging classifications used ; one is determined by MRI diagnostic imaging while the other is determined <unk> . However , both stagings represent the pathological conditions associated with OCD 's natural progression . 
 While the arthroscopic classification of bone and cartilage lesions is considered standard , the Anderson MRI staging is the main form of staging used in this article . Stages I and II are stable lesions . Stages III and IV describe unstable lesions in which a lesion of the cartilage has allowed synovial fluid between the fragment and bone . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Treatment options include modified activity with or without weight bearing ; immobilization ; cryotherapy ; anti @-@ inflammatory medication ; drilling of subchondral bone ; microfracture ; removal or reattachment of loose bodies ; <unk> and <unk> transfer system ( <unk> ) procedures . The primary goals of treatment are : 
 Enhance the healing potential of subchondral bone ; 
 Fix unstable fragments while maintaining joint <unk> ; and 
 Replace damaged bone and cartilage with implanted tissues or cells that can grow cartilage . 
 The articular cartilage 's capacity for repair is limited : partial @-@ thickness defects in the articular cartilage do not heal spontaneously , and injuries of the articular cartilage which fail to penetrate subchondral bone tend to lead to deterioration of the articular surface . As a result , surgery is often required in even moderate cases where the osteochondral fragment has not detached from the bone ( Anderson Stage II , III ) . 
 = = = Non @-@ surgical treatment = = = 
 Candidates for non @-@ operative treatment are limited to skeletally immature teenagers with a relatively small , intact lesion and the absence of loose bodies . Non @-@ operative management may include activity modification , protected weight bearing ( partial or non @-@ weight bearing ) , and immobilization . The goal of non @-@ operative intervention is to promote healing in the subchondral bone and prevent potential <unk> collapse , subsequent fracture , and crater formation . 
 Once candidates for treatment have been screened , treatment proceeds according to the lesion 's location . For example , those with OCD of the knee are immobilized for four to six weeks in extension to remove shear stress from the involved area ; however , they are permitted to walk with weight bearing as tolerated . X @-@ rays are usually taken three months after the start of non @-@ operative therapy ; if they reveal that the lesion has healed , a gradual return to activities is instituted . Those demonstrating healing by increased <unk> in the subchondral region , or those whose lesions are unchanged , are candidates to repeat the above described three @-@ month protocol until healing is noted . 
 = = = Surgical treatment = = = 
 The choice of surgical versus non @-@ surgical treatments for osteochondritis dissecans is controversial . Consequently , the type and extent of surgery necessary varies based on patient age , severity of the lesion , and personal bias of the treating surgeon — entailing an exhaustive list of suggested treatments . A variety of surgical options exist for the treatment of persistently symptomatic , intact , partially detached , and completely detached OCD lesions . Post @-@ surgery reparative cartilage is inferior to healthy hyaline cartilage in <unk> concentration , histological , and immunohistochemical appearance . As a result , surgery is often avoided if non @-@ operative treatment is viable . 
 = = = = Intact lesions = = = = 
 If non @-@ surgical measures are unsuccessful , drilling may be considered to stimulate healing of the subchondral bone . <unk> drilling may be performed by using an antegrade ( from the front ) approach from the joint space through the articular cartilage , or by using a retrograde ( from behind ) approach through the bone outside of the joint to avoid penetration of the articular cartilage . This has proven successful with positive results at one @-@ year follow @-@ up with antegrade drilling in nine out of eleven teenagers with the juvenile form of OCD , and in 18 of 20 skeletally immature people ( follow @-@ up of five years ) who had failed prior conservative programs . 
 = = = = <unk> lesions = = = = 
 Pins and screws can be used to secure flap ( sometimes referred to as hinged ) lesions . Bone pegs , metallic pins and screws , and other <unk> screws may be used to secure these types of lesions . 
 = = = = Full thickness lesions = = = = 
 The three methods most commonly used in treating full thickness lesions are arthroscopic drilling , abrasion , and <unk> . 
 In 1946 , Magnusson established the use of stem cells from bone marrow with the first surgical debridement of an OCD lesion . These cells typically differentiate into fibrocartilage and rarely form hyaline cartilage . While small lesions can be resurfaced using this form of surgery , the repair tissue tends to have less strength than normal hyaline cartilage and must be protected for 6 to 12 months . Results for large lesions tend to diminish over time ; this can be attributed to the decreased resilience and poor wear characteristics of the fibrocartilage . 
 In attempts to address the weaker structure of the reparative fibrocartilage , new techniques have been designed to fill the defect with tissue that more closely simulates normal hyaline articular cartilage . One such technique is autologous <unk> implantation ( ACI ) , which is useful for large , isolated femoral defects in younger people . In this surgery , chondrocytes are <unk> extracted from the <unk> notch of the articular surface . The chondrocytes are grown and injected into the defect under a periosteal patch . ACI surgery has reported good to excellent results for reduced swelling , pain and locking in clinical follow @-@ up examinations . However , some physicians have preferred to use undifferentiated <unk> cells , such as periosteal cells and bone marrow stem cells , as opposed to chondrocytes . These too have demonstrated the ability to regenerate both the cartilage and the underlying subchondral bone . 
 Similar to <unk> , arthroscopic articular cartilage paste grafting is a surgical procedure offering cost @-@ effective , long @-@ lasting results for stage IV lesions . A bone and cartilage paste derived from crushed plugs of the non @-@ weight @-@ bearing <unk> notch can achieve pain relief , repair damaged tissue , and restore function . 
 = = = = Unstable lesions = = = = 
 Some methods of fixation for unstable lesions include countersunk compression screws and Herbert screws or pins made of stainless steel or materials that can be absorbed by the body . If loose bodies are found , they are removed . Although each case is unique and treatment is chosen on an individual basis , ACI is generally performed on large defects in skeletally mature people . 
 = = = = Rehabilitation = = = = 
 Continuous passive motion ( CPM ) has been used to improve healing of the articular surface during the postoperative period for people with full @-@ thickness lesions . It has been shown to promote articular cartilage healing for small ( < 3 mm in diameter ) lesions in rabbits . Similarly , Rodrigo and Steadman reported that CPM for six hours per day for eight weeks produced an improved clinical outcome in humans . 
 A rehabilitation program often involves protection of the compromised articular surface and underlying subchondral bone combined with maintenance of strength and range of motion . Post @-@ operative analgesics , namely a mix of opioids and NSAIDs , are usually required to control pain , inflammation and swelling . Straight leg raising and other isometric exercises are encouraged during the post @-@ operative or immobilization period . A six to eight @-@ week home or formal physical therapy program is usually instituted once the immobilization period has ended , incorporating range of motion , stretching , progressive strengthening , and functional or sport @-@ specific training . During this time , patients are advised to avoid running and jumping , but are permitted to perform low impact activities , such as walking or swimming . If patients return to activity before the cartilage has become firm , they will typically complain of pain during maneuvers such as squatting or jumping . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 The prognosis after different treatments varies and is based on several factors which include the age of the patient , the affected joint , the stage of the lesion and , most importantly , the state of the growth plate . It follows that the two main forms of osteochondritis dissecans are defined by skeletal maturity . The juvenile form of the disease occurs in open growth plates , usually affecting children between the ages of 5 and 15 years . The adult form commonly occurs between ages 16 to 50 , although it is unclear whether these adults developed the disease after skeletal maturity or were undiagnosed as children . 
 The prognosis is good for stable lesions ( stage I and II ) in juveniles with open growth plates ; treated conservatively — typically without surgery — 50 % of cases will heal . Recovery in juveniles can be attributed to the bone 's ability to repair damaged or dead bone tissue and cartilage in a process called bone remodeling . Open growth plates are characterized by increased numbers of undifferentiated chondrocytes ( stem cells ) which are precursors to both bone and cartilaginous tissue . As a result , open growth plates allow for more of the stem cells necessary for repair in the affected joint . Unstable , large , full @-@ thickness lesions ( stage III and IV ) or lesions of any stage found in the skeletally mature are more likely to fail non @-@ operative treatment . These lesions offer a worse prognosis and surgery is required in most cases . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 OCD is a relatively rare disorder , with an estimated incidence of 15 to 30 cases per 100 @,@ 000 persons per year . <unk> W et al. found OCD to be the cause of articular cartilage defects in 2 % of cases in a study of 25 @,@ 124 knee <unk> . Although rare , OCD is noted as an important cause of joint pain in active adolescents . The juvenile form of the disease occurs in children with open growth plates , usually between the ages 5 and 15 years and occurs more commonly in males than females , with a ratio between 2 : 1 and 3 : 1 . However , OCD has become more common among adolescent females as they become more active in sports . The adult form , which occurs in those who have reached skeletal maturity , is most commonly found in people 16 to 50 years old . 
 While OCD may affect any joint , the knee — specifically the medial femoral condyle in 75 – 85 % of knee cases — tends to be the most commonly affected , and constitutes 75 % of all cases . The elbow ( specifically the capitulum of the humerus ) is the second most affected joint with 6 % of cases ; the <unk> dome of the ankle represents 4 % of cases . Less frequent locations include the patella , vertebrae , the femoral head , and the glenoid of the scapula . 
 = = History = = 
 The condition was initially described by Alexander Monro ( primus ) in 1738 . In 1870 , James Paget described the disease process for the first time , but it was not until 1887 that Franz König published a paper on the cause of loose bodies in the joint . In his paper , König concluded that : 
 Trauma had to be very severe to break off parts of the joint surface . 
 Less severe trauma might <unk> the bone to cause an area of necrosis which might then separate . 
 In some cases , the absence of notable trauma made it likely that there existed some spontaneous cause of separation . 
 König named the disease " osteochondritis dissecans " , describing it as a subchondral inflammatory process of the knee , resulting in a loose fragment of cartilage from the femoral condyle . In 1922 , <unk> described this process in the ankle joint . On review of all literature describing <unk> fractures of the talus , Berndt and Harty developed a classification system for staging of osteochondral lesions of the talus ( <unk> ) . The term osteochondritis dissecans has persisted , and has since been broadened to describe a similar process occurring in many other joints , including the knee , hip , elbow , and <unk> joints . 
 = = Notable cases = = 
 Michael Russell , American tennis player 
 Kristina <unk> , Canadian artistic gymnast 
 Jonathan Vilma , American football linebacker 
 = = Veterinary aspects = = 
 OCD also is found in animals , and is of particular concern in horses , as there may be a hereditary component in some horse breeds . Feeding for forced growth and selective breeding for increased size are also factors . OCD has also been studied in other animals — mainly dogs , especially the German Shepherd — where it is a common primary cause of elbow dysplasia in medium @-@ large breeds . 
 In animals , OCD is considered a developmental and metabolic disorder related to cartilage growth and <unk> ossification . Osteochondritis itself signifies the disturbance of the usual growth process of cartilage , and OCD is the term used when this affects joint cartilage causing a fragment to become loose . 
 The Merck Veterinary Manual states that developmental orthopedic diseases ( DOD ) in companion animals are related to nutrition and include either excess calcium and energy ( carbohydrate ) in dogs or taurine deficiency in cats that is related to blindness . 
 According to the Columbia Animal Hospital the frequency of affected animals is dogs , humans , pigs , horses , cattle , chickens , and turkeys , and in dogs the most commonly affected breeds include the German Shepherd , Golden and Labrador Retriever , Rottweiler , Great Dane , Bernese Mountain Dog , and Saint Bernard . Although any joint may be affected , those commonly affected by OCD in the dog are : shoulder ( often bilaterally ) , elbow , knee and tarsus . 
 The problem develops in puppyhood although often <unk> , and there may be pain or stiffness , discomfort on extension , or other compensating characteristics . Diagnosis generally depends on X @-@ rays , <unk> , or MRI scans . While cases of OCD of the stifle go undetected and heal spontaneously , others are exhibited in acute lameness . Surgery is recommended once the animal has been deemed lame . 
 Osteochondritis dissecans is difficult to diagnose clinically as the animal may only exhibit an unusual gait . Consequently , OCD may be masked by , or misdiagnosed as , other skeletal and joint conditions such as hip dysplasia . 
 = Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom = 
 Princess Beatrice of the United Kingdom , GCVO , GBE , GCStJ , VA , CI ( Beatrice Mary Victoria Feodore ; later Princess Henry of Battenberg ; ( 14 April 1857 – 26 October 1944 ) was the fifth daughter and youngest child of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert . King Felipe VI of Spain , is her great @-@ great @-@ grandson . Beatrice was the last of Queen Victoria 's children to die , 66 years after the first , her sister Alice . 
 Beatrice 's childhood coincided with Queen Victoria 's grief following the death of her husband Albert , Prince Consort on 14 December 1861 . As her elder sisters married and left their mother , Queen Victoria came to rely on the company of her youngest daughter , whom she called " Baby " for most of her childhood . Beatrice was brought up to stay with her mother always and she soon resigned herself to her fate . Queen Victoria was so set against her youngest daughter marrying that she refused to discuss the possibility . Nevertheless , many suitors were put forward , including Louis Napoléon , Prince Imperial , the son of the exiled Emperor Napoleon III of France , and Louis IV , Grand Duke of Hesse , the widower of Beatrice 's older sister Alice . She was attracted to the Prince Imperial and there was talk of a possible marriage , but he was killed in the Anglo @-@ Zulu War in 1879 . 
 Beatrice fell in love with Prince Henry of Battenberg , the son of Prince Alexander of Hesse and by Rhine and Julia von Hauke and brother @-@ in @-@ law of her niece Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine . After a year of persuasion , Queen Victoria agreed to the marriage , which took place at Whippingham on the Isle of Wight on 23 July 1885 . Queen Victoria consented on condition that Beatrice and Henry make their home with her and that Beatrice continue her duties as the Queen 's unofficial secretary . The Prince and Princess had four children , but 10 years into their marriage , on 20 January 1896 , Prince Henry died of malaria while fighting in the Anglo @-@ Asante War . Beatrice remained at her mother 's side until Queen Victoria died on 22 January 1901 . Beatrice devoted the next 30 years to editing Queen Victoria 's journals as her designated literary executor and continued to make public appearances . She died at 87 , outliving all her siblings , two of her children , and several nieces and nephews including George V and Wilhelm II . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Beatrice was born at Buckingham Palace . She was the fifth daughter and youngest of the nine children of the reigning British monarch , Queen Victoria , and her husband , Prince Albert of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha ( later The Prince Consort ) . The birth caused controversy when it was announced that Queen Victoria would seek relief from the pains of delivery through the use of chloroform administered by Dr John Snow . <unk> was considered dangerous to mother and child and was frowned upon by the Church of England and the medical authorities . Queen Victoria was undeterred and used " that blessed chloroform " for her last pregnancy . A fortnight later , Queen Victoria reported in her journal , " I was amply rewarded and forgot all I had gone through when I heard dearest Albert say ' It 's a fine child , and a girl ! ' " Albert and Queen Victoria chose the names Beatrice Mary Victoria Feodore : Mary after Princess Mary , Duchess of Gloucester , the last surviving child of King George III of the United Kingdom ; Victoria after the Queen ; and Feodore after Feodora , Princess of Hohenlohe @-@ Langenburg , the Queen 's older half @-@ sister . She was christened in the private chapel at Buckingham Palace on 16 June 1857 . Her godparents were the Duchess of Kent ( maternal grandmother ) ; the Princess Royal ( eldest sister ) ; and the Prince Frederick of Prussia ( her future brother @-@ in @-@ law ) . 
 From birth , Beatrice became a favoured child . The elder favourite daughter of Prince Albert , the Princess Royal , was about to take up residence in Germany with her new husband , Frederick ( " Fritz " ) of Prussia . At the same time , the newly arrived Beatrice showed promise . Albert wrote to Augusta , Fritz 's mother , that " Baby practises her scales like a good prima donna before a performance and has a good voice ! " Although Queen Victoria was known to dislike most babies , she liked Beatrice , whom she considered attractive . This provided Beatrice with an advantage over her elder siblings . Queen Victoria once remarked that Beatrice was " a pretty , plump and flourishing child ... with fine large blue eyes , [ a ] pretty little mouth and very fine skin " . Her long , golden hair was the focus of paintings commissioned by Queen Victoria , who enjoyed giving Beatrice her bath , in marked contrast to her bathing preferences for her other children . Beatrice showed intelligence , which further endeared her to the Prince Consort , who was amused by her childhood precociousness . 
 He wrote to Baron Stockmar that Beatrice was " the most amusing baby we have had . " Despite sharing the rigorous education programme designed by Prince Albert and his close adviser , Baron Stockmar , Beatrice had a more relaxed infancy than her siblings because of her relationship with her parents . By four years of age , the youngest , and the acknowledged last Royal child , Beatrice was not forced to share her parents ' attention the way her siblings had , and her amusing ways provided comfort to her faltering father . 
 = = Queen Victoria 's devoted companion = = 
 In March 1861 , Queen Victoria 's mother Victoria , Duchess of Kent , died at Frogmore . The Queen broke down in grief and guilt over their estrangement at the beginning of her reign . Beatrice tried to console her mother by reminding her that the Duchess of Kent was " in heaven , but Beatrice hopes she will return " . This comfort was significant because Queen Victoria had isolated herself from her children except the eldest unmarried , Princess Alice , and Beatrice . Queen Victoria again relied on Beatrice and Alice after the death of Albert , of typhoid fever , on 14 December . 
 The depth of the Queen 's grief over the death of her husband surprised her family , courtiers , politicians and general populace . As when her mother died , she shut herself off from her family — most particularly , the Prince of Wales , ( whom she blamed for her husband 's death ) , with the exception of Alice and Beatrice . Queen Victoria often took Beatrice from her cot , hurried to her bed and " lay there sleepless , clasping to her child , wrapped in the nightclothes of a man who would wear them no more . " After 1871 , when the last of Beatrice 's elder sisters married , Queen Victoria came to rely upon her youngest daughter , who had declared from an early age : " I don 't like weddings at all . I shall never be married . I shall stay with my mother . " As her mother 's secretary , she performed duties such as writing on the Queen 's behalf and helping with political correspondence . These mundane duties mirrored those that had been performed in succession by her sisters , Alice , Helena and Louise . However , to these the Queen soon added more personal tasks . During a serious illness in 1871 , the Queen dictated her journal entries to Beatrice , and in 1876 she allowed Beatrice to sort the music she and the Prince Consort had played , unused since his death fifteen years earlier . 
 The devotion that Beatrice showed to her mother was acknowledged in the Queen 's letters and journals , but her constant need for Beatrice grew stronger . The Queen suffered another bereavement in 1883 , when her highland servant , John Brown , died at Balmoral . Once again , the Queen plunged into public mourning and relied on Beatrice for support . Unlike her siblings , Beatrice had not shown dislike for Brown , and the two had often been seen in each other 's company ; indeed , they had worked together to carry out the Queen 's wishes . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 = = = Possible suitors = = = 
 Although the Queen was set against Beatrice marrying anyone in the expectation that she would always stay at home with her , a number of possible suitors were put forward before Beatrice 's marriage to Prince Henry of Battenberg . One of these was Napoleon Eugene , the French Prince Imperial , son and heir of the exiled Emperor Napoleon III of France and his wife , the Empress Eugénie . After Prussia defeated France in the Franco @-@ Prussian War , Napoleon was deposed and moved his family to England in 1870 . After the Emperor 's death in 1873 , Queen Victoria and Empress Eugénie formed a close attachment , and the newspapers reported the imminent engagement of Beatrice to the Prince Imperial . These rumours ended with the death of the Prince Imperial in the Anglo @-@ Zulu War on 1 June 1879 . Queen Victoria 's journal records their grief : " Dear Beatrice , crying very much as I did too , gave me the telegram ... It was dawning and little sleep did I get ... Beatrice is so distressed ; everyone quite stunned . " 
 After the death of the Prince Imperial , Beatrice 's brother , Albert Edward , the Prince of Wales , suggested that she marry their sister Alice 's widower , Louis IV , the Grand Duke of Hesse , who had lost his wife to diphtheria in 1878 . Albert Edward argued that Beatrice could act as replacement mother for Louis 's young children and spend most of her time in England looking after her mother . He further suggested the Queen could oversee the upbringing of her Hessian grandchildren with greater ease . However , at the time , it was forbidden by law for Beatrice to marry her sister 's widower . This was countered by the Prince of Wales , who vehemently supported passage by the Houses of Parliament of the Deceased Wife 's Sister Bill , which would have removed the obstacle . Despite popular support for this measure and although it passed in the House of Commons , it was rejected by the House of Lords because of opposition from the Lords Spiritual . Although the Queen was disappointed that the bill had failed , she was happy to keep her daughter at her side . 
 Other candidates , including two of Prince Henry 's brothers , Prince Alexander ( " Sandro " ) and Prince Louis of Battenberg , were put forward to be Beatrice 's husband , but they did not succeed . Although Alexander never formally pursued Beatrice , merely claiming that he " might even at one time have become engaged to the friend of my childhood , Beatrice of England " , Louis was more interested . Queen Victoria invited him to dinner but sat between him and Beatrice , who had been told by the Queen to ignore Louis to discourage his suit . Louis , not realising for several years the reasons for this silence , married Beatrice 's niece , Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine . Although her marriage hopes had been dealt another blow , while attending Louis 's wedding at Darmstadt , Beatrice fell in love with Prince Henry , who returned her affections . 
 = = = Engagement and wedding = = = 
 When Beatrice , after returning from Darmstadt , told her mother she planned to marry , the Queen reacted with frightening silence . Although they remained side by side , the Queen did not talk to her for seven months , instead communicating by note . Queen Victoria 's behaviour , unexpected even by her family , seemed prompted by the threatened loss of her daughter . The Queen regarded Beatrice as her " Baby " – her innocent child – and viewed the physical sex that would come with marriage as an end to innocence . 
 Subtle persuasions by the Princess of Wales and the Crown Princess of Prussia , who reminded her mother of the happiness that Beatrice had brought the Prince Consort , induced the Queen to resume talking to Beatrice . Queen Victoria consented to the marriage on condition that Henry give up his German commitments and live permanently with Beatrice and the Queen . 
 Beatrice and Henry were married at Saint Mildred 's Church at Whippingham , near Osborne , on 23 July 1885 . Beatrice , who wore her mother 's wedding veil of Honiton lace , was escorted by the Queen and Beatrice 's eldest brother , the Prince of Wales . Princess Beatrice was attended by ten royal bridesmaids from among her nieces : Princess Alix and Princess Irene of Hesse and by Rhine ; Princess Alexandra , Princess Marie , and Princess Victoria Melita of Edinburgh ; Princess Louise , Princess Maud , and Princess Victoria of Wales ; Princess Marie Louise and Princess Helena Victoria of Schleswig @-@ Holstein . The bridegroom 's supporters were his brothers , Prince Alexander of Bulgaria and Prince Francis Joseph of Battenberg . 
 The ceremony – which was not attended by her eldest sister and brother @-@ in @-@ law , the Crown Prince and Princess of Prussia , who were detained in Germany ; William Ewart Gladstone ; or Beatrice 's cousin , Princess Mary Adelaide , Duchess of Teck , who was in mourning for her father @-@ in @-@ law – ended with the couple 's departure for their honeymoon at Quarr Abbey House , a few miles from Osborne . The Queen , taking leave of them , " bore up bravely till the departure and then fairly gave way " , as she later admitted to the Crown Princess . 
 = = Queen Victoria 's last years = = 
 After a short honeymoon , Beatrice and her husband fulfilled their promise and returned to the Queen 's side . The Queen made it clear that she could not cope on her own and that the couple could not travel without her . Although the Queen relaxed this restriction shortly after the marriage , Beatrice and Henry travelled only to make short visits with his family . Beatrice 's love for Henry , like that of the Queen 's for the Prince Consort , seemed to increase the longer they were married . When Henry travelled without Beatrice , she appeared happier when he returned . 
 The addition of Prince Henry to the family gave new reasons for Beatrice and the Queen to look forward , and the court was brighter than it had been since the Prince Consort 's death . Even so , Henry , supported by Beatrice , was determined to take part in military campaigns , and this annoyed the Queen , who opposed his participation in life @-@ threatening warfare . Conflicts also arose when Henry attended the Ajaccio carnival and kept " low company " , and Beatrice sent a Royal Navy officer to remove him from temptation . On one occasion , Henry slipped away to Corsica with his brother Louis ; the Queen sent a warship to bring him back . Henry was feeling oppressed by the Queen 's constant need for his and his wife 's company . 
 Despite being married , Beatrice fulfilled her promise to the Queen by continuing as her full @-@ time confidante and secretary . Queen Victoria warmed to Henry , as she often did with other handsome , strong men . However , the Queen criticised Beatrice 's conduct during her first pregnancy . When Beatrice stopped coming to the Queen 's dinners a week before giving birth , preferring to eat alone in her room , the Queen wrote angrily to her physician , Dr James Reid , that , " I [ urged the Princess to continue ] coming to dinner , and not simply moping in her own room , which is very bad for her . In my case I regularly came to dinner , except when I was really unwell ( even when suffering a great deal ) up to the very last day . " Beatrice , aided by chloroform , gave birth the following week to her first son , Alexander . Despite suffering a miscarriage in the early months of her marriage , Beatrice gave birth to four children : Alexander , called " <unk> " , was born in 1886 ; Ena in 1887 ; Leopold in 1889 and Maurice in 1891 . Following this , she took a polite and encouraging interest in social issues , such as conditions in the coal mines . However , this interest did not extend to changing the conditions of poverty , as it had done with her brother , the Prince of Wales . 
 Although court entertainments were few after the Prince Consort 's death , Beatrice and the Queen enjoyed tableau vivant photography , which was often performed at the royal residences . Henry , increasingly bored by the lack of activity at court , longed for employment , and in response , the Queen made him Governor of the Isle of Wight in 1889 . However , he yearned for military adventure and pleaded with his mother @-@ in @-@ law to let him join the Ashanti expedition fighting in the Anglo @-@ Asante war . Despite misgivings , the Queen consented , and Henry and Beatrice parted on 6 December 1895 ; they would not meet again . Henry contracted malaria and was sent home . On 22 January 1896 , Beatrice , who was waiting for her husband at Madeira , received a telegram informing her of Henry 's death two days earlier . 
 Devastated , she left court for a month of mourning before returning to her post at her mother 's side . The Queen 's journal reports that Queen Victoria " [ w ] ent over to Beatrice 's room and sat a while with her . She is so piteous in her misery . " Despite her grief , Beatrice remained her mother 's faithful companion , and as Queen Victoria aged , she relied more heavily on Beatrice for dealing with correspondence . However , realising that Beatrice needed a place of her own , she gave her the Kensington Palace apartments once occupied by the Queen and her mother . The Queen appointed Beatrice to the governorship of the Isle of Wight , vacated by Prince Henry 's death . In response to Beatrice 's interest in photography , the Queen had a darkroom installed at Osborne House . The changes in the family , including Beatrice 's preoccupation with her mother , may have affected her children , who rebelled at school . Beatrice wrote that Ena was " troublesome and rebellious " , and that Alexander was telling " unwarrantable untruths " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Beatrice 's life was overturned by the death of Queen Victoria on 22 January 1901 . She wrote to the Principal of the University of Glasgow in March , " ... you may imagine what the grief is . I , who had hardly ever been separated from my dear mother , can hardly realise what life will be like without her , who was the centre of everything . " Beatrice 's public appearances continued , but her position at court was diminished . She , unlike her sister Louise , was not close to her brother , now King Edward VII , and was not included in the King 's inner circle . Although their relationship did not break down completely , it was occasionally strained , for example when she accidentally ( but noisily ) dropped her service book from the royal gallery onto a table of gold plate during his coronation . 
 After inheriting Osborne , the King had his mother 's personal photographs and belongings removed and some of them destroyed , especially material relating to John Brown , whom he detested . Queen Victoria had intended the house to be a private , secluded residence for her descendants , away from the pomp and ceremony of mainland life . However , the new King had no need for the house and consulted his lawyers about disposing of it , transforming the main wing into a convalescent home , opening the state apartments to the public , and constructing a Naval College on the grounds . His plans met with strong disapproval from Beatrice and Louise . Queen Victoria had bequeathed them houses on the estate , and the privacy promised to them by their mother was threatened . When Edward discussed the fate of the house with them , Beatrice argued against allowing the house to leave the family , citing its importance to their parents . 
 However , the King did not want the house himself , and he offered it to his heir @-@ apparent , Beatrice 's nephew George , who declined , objecting to the high cost of maintenance . Edward subsequently extended the grounds of Beatrice 's home , Osborne Cottage , to compensate her for the impending loss of her privacy . Shortly afterwards , the King declared to Arthur Balfour , the Prime Minister , that the main house would go to the nation as a gift . An exception was made for the private apartments , which were closed to all but the royal family members , who made it a shrine to their mother 's memory . 
 = = = Queen Victoria 's journals = = = 
 Upon Queen Victoria 's death , Beatrice began the momentous task of transcribing and editing her mother 's journals , which had been kept since 1831 . The hundreds of volumes contained the Queen 's personal views of the day @-@ to @-@ day business of her life and included personal and family matters as well as matters of state . 
 Queen Victoria had given Beatrice the task of editing the journals for publication , which meant removing private material as well as passages that , if published , might be hurtful to living people . Beatrice deleted so much material that the edited journals are only a third as long as the originals . The destruction of such large passages of Queen Victoria 's diaries distressed Beatrice 's nephew , King George V , and his wife Queen Mary , who were powerless to intervene . Beatrice copied a draft from the original and then copied her draft into a set of blue notebooks . Both the originals and her first drafts were destroyed as she progressed . The task took thirty years and was finished in 1931 . The surviving 111 notebooks are kept in the Royal Archives at Windsor Castle . 
 = = = Retirement from public life = = = 
 Beatrice continued to appear in public after her mother 's death . The public engagements she carried out were often related to her mother , Queen Victoria , as the public had always associated Beatrice with the deceased monarch . 
 The beauty of Beatrice 's daughter , Ena , was known throughout Europe , and , despite her low rank , she was a desirable bride . Her chosen suitor was King Alfonso XIII of Spain . However , the marriage caused controversy in Britain , since it required Ena to convert to Catholicism . This step was opposed by Beatrice 's brother , King Edward VII , and Spanish ultra @-@ conservatives were against the King 's marriage to a Protestant of low birth , as her father , Prince Henry , was the son of a morganatic marriage . Thus , they considered Ena to be only partly royal and thus unfit to be Queen of Spain . Nonetheless , the couple wed on 31 May 1906 . The marriage began inauspiciously when an anarchist attempted to bomb them on their wedding day . Apparently close at first , the couple grew apart . Ena became unpopular in Spain and grew more so when it was discovered that her son , the heir to the throne , suffered from haemophilia , a disease for which Alfonso held Beatrice responsible for having brought the disease to the Spanish royal house and turned bitterly against Ena . 
 During her time as Queen of Spain , Ena returned many times to visit her mother in Britain , but always without Alfonso and usually without her children . Meanwhile , Beatrice lived at Osborne Cottage in East Cowes until she sold it in 1913 , when Carisbrooke Castle , home of the Governor of the Isle of Wight , became vacant . She moved into the Castle while keeping an apartment at Kensington Palace in London . She had been much involved in collecting material for the Carisbrooke Castle museum , which she opened in 1898 . 
 Her presence at court further decreased as she aged . Devastated by the death of her favourite son , Maurice , during the First World War in 1914 , she began to retire from public life . In response to war with Germany , George V changed the family surname from Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha to Windsor to downplay their German origins . Subsequently , Beatrice and her family renounced their German names ; Beatrice 's style reverted from HRH Princess Henry of Battenberg to her birth style , HRH The Princess Beatrice . Her surname was anglicised to Mountbatten . Her sons gave up their courtesy style , Prince of Battenberg . Alexander , the eldest , became Sir Alexander Mountbatten and was later given the title Marquess of Carisbrooke in the Peerage of the United Kingdom . Her younger son , Leopold , became Lord Leopold Mountbatten and was given the rank of a younger son of a marquess . He was a haemophiliac , having inherited the " royal disease " from his mother , and died during a knee operation in 1922 one month short of his 33rd birthday . 
 Following the war , Beatrice was one of several members of the royal family who became patrons of The Ypres League , a society founded for veterans of the Ypres Salient and bereaved relatives of those killed in fighting in the Salient . She was herself a bereaved mother , as her son , Prince Maurice of Battenberg , had been killed in action during the First Battle of Ypres . Rare public appearances after his death included commemorations , including laying wreaths at the Cenotaph in 1930 and 1935 to mark the 10th and 15th anniversaries of the founding of the League . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Even in her seventies , Beatrice continued to correspond with her friends and relatives and to make rare public appearances , such as when , pushed in a wheelchair , she viewed the wreaths laid after the death of George V in 1936 . She published her last work of translation in 1941 . Entitled " In Napoleonic Days " , it was the personal diary of Queen Victoria 's maternal grandmother , Augusta , Duchess of Saxe @-@ Coburg @-@ Saalfeld . She corresponded with the publisher , John Murray , who greatly approved of the work . She made her last home at <unk> Park in West Sussex , which was owned by Queen Mary 's brother , Alexander Cambridge , the first Earl of Athlone , and his wife , Princess Alice , who was Beatrice 's niece ; the <unk> were at the time in Canada where the Earl was Governor @-@ General . There , Beatrice died peacefully in her sleep on 26 October 1944 , aged eighty @-@ seven ( the day before the 30th anniversary of her son , Prince Maurice 's death ) . After her funeral service in St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle , her coffin was placed in the royal vault on 3 November . On 28 August 1945 , her body was transferred and placed inside a joint tomb , alongside her husband , in St. Mildred 's Church , Whippingham . Beatrice 's final wish , to be buried with her husband on the island most familiar to her , was fulfilled in a private service at Whippingham attended only by her son , the Marquess of Carisbrooke , and his wife . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Beatrice was the shyest of all of Queen Victoria 's children . However , because she accompanied Queen Victoria almost wherever she went , she became among the best known . Despite her shyness , she was an able actress and dancer as well as a keen artist and photographer . She was devoted to her children and was concerned when they misbehaved at school . To those who enjoyed her friendship , she was loyal and had a sense of humour , and as a public figure she was driven by a strong sense of duty . She was Patron of the Isle of Wight Branch of the Royal National Lifeboat Institution from 1920 until her death . Music , a passion that was shared by her mother and the Prince Consort , was something in which Beatrice excelled , and she played the piano to professional standards . Like her mother , she was a devout Christian , fascinated by theology until her death . With her calm temperament and personal warmth , the princess won wide approval . 
 The demands made on Beatrice during her mother 's reign were high . Despite suffering from rheumatism , Beatrice was forced to endure her mother 's love of cold weather . Beatrice 's piano playing suffered as her rheumatism got gradually worse , eliminating an enjoyment in which she excelled ; however , this did not change her willingness to cater to her mother 's needs . Her effort did not go unnoticed by the British public . 
 In 1886 , when she agreed to open the Show of the Royal Horticultural Society of Southampton , the organisers sent her a proclamation of thanks , expressing their " admiration of the affectionate manner in which you have comforted and assisted your widowed mother our Gracious Sovereign the Queen " . As a wedding present , Sir Moses Montefiore , a banker and philanthropist , presented Beatrice and Henry with a silver tea service inscribed : " Many daughters have acted virtuously , but thou <unk> them all . " The Times newspaper , shortly before Beatrice 's marriage , wrote : " The devotion of your Royal Highness to our beloved Sovereign has won our warmest admiration and our deepest gratitude . May those blessings which it has hitherto been your constant aim to confer on others now be returned in full measure to yourself . " The sentence was , as far as it dared , criticising the Queen 's hold over her daughter . 
 Some of the buildings with which Beatrice would have been familiar , continue to be regularly used by the royal family : Buckingham Palace , Windsor Castle , Balmoral Castle , and Kensington Palace . She died at <unk> Park , the home of her niece , Princess Alice , and her husband , the Earl of Athlone , at the time serving as Governor General of Canada . Osborne House , her mother 's favourite home , is accessible to the public . Her Osborne residences , Osborne and Albert Cottages , remain in private ownership after their sale in 1912 . At her death , Beatrice was the only surviving child of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert . The future Elizabeth II , Beatrice 's great @-@ grandniece , was eighteen years of age at that time . 
 Through her daughter , Victoria Eugenie , she is an ancestress of Felipe VI , the current King of Spain and the Spanish Royal Family . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 14 April 1857 – 23 July 1885 : Her Royal Highness The Princess Beatrice 
 23 July 1885 – 14 July 1917 : Her Royal Highness Princess Henry of Battenberg 
 17 July 1917 – 26 October 1944 : Her Royal Highness The Princess Beatrice 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 9 January 1874 : Royal Order of Victoria and Albert ( 1st class ) 
 1 January 1878 : Order of the Crown of India 
 30 November 1881 : Grand Duchy of Hesse Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Golden Lion 
 24 May 1885 : Royal Red Cross 
 10 February 1904 : Royal Family Order of King Edward VII ( 2nd class ) 
 3 June 1911 : Royal Family Order of King George V ( 2nd class ) 
 1 January 1919 : Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire 
 12 June 1926 : Dame Grand Cross of the Order of St John 
 11 May 1937 : Dame Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order 
 <unk> Dame of the Spanish Royal Order of Queen Maria Luisa . 
 Order of St. Catherine ( Russian ) 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 In 1858 , Beatrice and the three younger of her sisters were granted use of the royal arms , with an inescutcheon of the shield of Saxony and differenced by a label of three points argent . On Beatrice 's arms , the outer points bore roses gules , and the centre a heart gules . In 1917 , the inescutcheon was dropped by royal warrant from George V. 
 = = Issue = = 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Ine of Wessex = 
 Ine was King of Wessex from 688 to 726 . He was unable to retain the territorial gains of his predecessor , Cædwalla , who had brought much of southern England under his control and expanded West Saxon territory substantially . By the end of Ine 's reign , the kingdoms of Kent , Sussex , and Essex were no longer under West Saxon domination ; however , Ine maintained control of what is now Hampshire , and consolidated and extended Wessex 's territory in the western peninsula . 
 Ine is noted for his code of laws ( leges <unk> or " laws of Ine " ) , which he issued in about 694 . These laws were the first issued by an Anglo @-@ Saxon king outside Kent . They shed much light on the history of Anglo @-@ Saxon society , and reveal Ine 's Christian convictions . Trade increased significantly during Ine 's reign , with the town of Hamwic ( now Southampton ) becoming prominent . It was probably during Ine 's reign that the West Saxons began to mint coins , though none have been found that bear his name . 
 Ine abdicated in 726 to go to Rome , leaving , in the words of the contemporary chronicler Bede , the kingdom to " younger men " . He was succeeded by Æthelheard . 
 = = Genealogy and accession = = 
 Early sources agree that Ine was the son of Cenred , and that Cenred was the son of Ceolwald ; further back there is less agreement . Ine 's siblings included a brother , Ingild , and two sisters , Cuthburh and <unk> . Cuthburh was married to King Aldfrith of Northumbria , and Ine himself was married to Æthelburg . Bede tells that Ine was " of the blood royal " , by which he means the royal line of the Gewisse , the early West Saxon tribal name . 
 The genealogy of Ine and of the kings of Wessex is known from two sources : the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle and the West Saxon Genealogical Regnal List . The Chronicle was created in the late 9th century , probably at the court of Alfred the Great , and some of its annals incorporated short genealogies of kings of Wessex . These are often at variance with the more extensive information in the Regnal List . The inconsistencies appear to result from the efforts of later chroniclers to demonstrate that each king on the list was descended from Cerdic , the founder , according to the Chronicle , of the West Saxon line in England . 
 Ine 's predecessor on the throne of Wessex was Cædwalla , but there is some uncertainty about the transition from Cædwalla to Ine . Cædwalla abdicated in 688 and departed for Rome to be baptized . According to the West Saxon Genealogical Regnal List , Ine reigned for 37 years , abdicating in 726 . These dates imply that he did not gain the throne until 689 , which could indicate an unsettled period between Cædwalla 's abdication and Ine 's accession . Ine may have ruled alongside his father , Cenred , for a period : there is weak evidence for joint kingships , and stronger evidence of subkings reigning under a dominant ruler in Wessex , not long before this time . Ine acknowledges his father 's help in his code of laws , and there is also a surviving land @-@ grant that indicates Cenred was still reigning in Wessex after Ine 's accession . 
 = = Reign = = 
 The extent of West Saxon territory at the start of Ine 's reign is fairly well known . The upper Thames valley on both sides of the river had long been the territory of the Gewisse , though Cædwalla had lost territory north of the river to the kingdom of Mercia before Ine 's accession . To the west , Ceawlin of Wessex is known to have reached the Bristol Channel one hundred years before . The West Saxons had since expanded further down the southwestern peninsula , pushing back the boundary with the British kingdom of Dumnonia , which was probably roughly equivalent to modern Devon and Cornwall . On the West Saxons ' eastern border was the kingdom of the East Saxons , which included London and what is now Surrey . To the southeast were the South Saxons , on the coast east of the Isle of Wight . Beyond Sussex lay the kingdom of Kent . Ine 's predecessor , Cædwalla , had made himself overlord of most of these southern kingdoms , though he had not been able to prevent Mercian inroads along the upper Thames . 
 Ine retained control of the Isle of Wight , and made further advances in Dumnonia , but the territorial gains Cædwalla had made in Sussex , Surrey and Kent were all lost by the end of Ine 's reign . 
 = = = Kent , Essex , Sussex , and Surrey = = = 
 Ine made peace with Kent in 694 , when its king Wihtred gave Ine a substantial sum in compensation for the death of Cædwalla 's brother Mul , who had been killed during a Kentish rebellion in 687 . The value of the amount offered to Ine by Wihtred is uncertain ; most manuscripts of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle record " thirty thousand " , and some specify thirty thousand pounds . If the pounds are equal to sceattas , then this amount is the equal of a king 's <unk> — that is , the legal valuation of a man 's life , according to his rank . 
 Ine kept the South Saxons , who had been conquered by Cædwalla in 686 , in subjugation for a period . King Nothhelm of Sussex is referred to in a charter of 692 as a kinsman of Ine ( perhaps by marriage ) . Sussex was still under West Saxon domination in 710 , when Nothhelm is recorded as having campaigned with Ine in the west against Dumnonia . 
 Control of Surrey , which may never have been an independent kingdom , passed between Kent , Mercia , Essex , and Wessex in the years before Ine 's reign . Essex also included London , and the diocese of London included Surrey ; this appears to have been a source of friction between Ine and the East Saxon and Mercian kings , until the province was transferred to the diocese of Winchester in 705 . Evidence for Ine 's early control of Surrey comes from the introduction to his laws , in which he refers to Eorcenwald , bishop of London , as " my bishop " . Ine 's subsequent relations with the East Saxons are illuminated by a letter written in 704 or 705 by Bishop Wealdhere of London to <unk> , the Archbishop of Canterbury . The letter refers to " disputes and discords " that had arisen " between the king of the West Saxons and the rulers of our country " . The rulers that Wealdhere refers to are <unk> and <unk> of the East Saxons , and the cause of the discord was the East Saxons ' sheltering of exiles from the West Saxons . Ine had agreed to peace on the condition that the exiles were expelled . A council at Brentford was planned to resolve the disputes . By this point Surrey had clearly passed out of West Saxon control . 
 Bede records that Ine held Sussex in subjection for " several years " , but in 722 an exile named <unk> fled to Surrey and Sussex , and Ine invaded Sussex as a result . Three years later Ine invaded again , this time killing <unk> . Sussex had evidently broken away from West Saxon domination some time before this . It has been suggested that <unk> was a son of Ine , or a son of Ine 's brother Ingild . 
 = = = Dumnonia and Mercia = = = 
 In 710 , Ine and Nothhelm fought against Geraint of Dumnonia , according to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle ; John of Worcester states that Geraint was killed in this battle . Ine 's advance brought him control of what is now Devon , the new border with Dumnonia being the river Tamar . The Annales Cambriae , a 10th @-@ century chronicle , records that in 722 the British defeated their enemies at the Battle of <unk> . The " enemies " must be Ine or his people , but the location is unidentified ; historians have suggested locations in both Cornwall and Devon . 
 Ine fought a battle at Woden 's Barrow in 715 , either against the Mercians under Ceolred or together with them against an unnamed opponent ; the result is not recorded . Woden 's Barrow is a tumulus , now called Adam 's Grave , at Alton Prior , Wiltshire . Ine may not have recovered any of the lands north of the Thames that had belonged to the West Saxons under previous kings , but it is known that he controlled the southern bank : a charter dated 687 shows him giving land to the church at <unk> on the Thames and at nearby Basildon . 
 = = = Other conflicts = = = 
 In 721 , the Chronicle records that Ine slew one Cynewulf , of whom nothing else is known , though his name suggests a connection to the Wessex royal line . A quarrel apparently arose in the royal family soon afterwards : in 722 , according to the Chronicle , Ine 's queen Æthelburg destroyed Taunton , which her husband had built earlier in his reign . 
 = = Internal affairs = = 
 The first mention of the office of ealdorman in Wessex , and the first references to the shires they led , occur during Ine 's reign . It may have been Ine who divided Wessex into something approximating the modern counties of Hampshire , Wiltshire , Somerset , Devon , and Dorset , though earlier administrative boundaries might also have influenced these borders . It has also been suggested that these counties began as divisions of the kingdom among members of the royal family . 
 By about 710 , in the middle of Ine 's reign , the trading settlement of Hamwic had become established on the west bank of the river Itchen ; the site is now part of the modern city of Southampton . The goods traded at this port included glass vessels , and finds of animal bones suggest an active trade in hides . Further evidence of trade comes from finds of imported goods such as <unk> , whetstones , and pottery ; and finds of sceattas from the town include Frisian coins . Specialist trades carried on in the town included cloth @-@ making , <unk> , and metalworking . It is not known whether Ine took an interest in Hamwic , but some of the goods he favoured , including luxuries , were imported there , and the merchants would probably have needed royal protection . The total population of Hamwic has been estimated at 5 @,@ 000 , and this high population itself implies Ine 's involvement , since no @-@ one but the king would have been able to arrange to feed and house such a large group of people . 
 The growth of trade after about 700 was paralleled by an expansion of the area of circulation of the <unk> , the common coin of the day , to include the upper Thames valley . It is thought that the first West Saxon coinage was minted during Ine 's reign , though no coins bearing his name have been found — sceattas typically gave no hint of the reigning king . 
 = = Laws = = 
 The earliest Anglo @-@ Saxon law code to survive , which may date from 602 or 603 , is that of Æthelberht of Kent , whose reign ended in 616 . In the 670s or 680s , a code was issued in the names of Hlothhere and Eadric of Kent . The next kings to issue laws were Wihtred of Kent and Ine . 
 The dates of Wihtred 's and Ine 's laws are somewhat uncertain , but there is reason to believe that Wihtred 's laws were issued on 6 September 695 , while Ine 's laws were written in 694 or shortly before . Ine had recently agreed peaceful terms with Wihtred over compensation for the death of Mul , and there are indications that the two rulers collaborated to some degree in producing their laws . In addition to the coincidence of timing , there is one clause that appears in almost identical form in both codes . Another sign of collaboration is that Wihtred 's laws use <unk> , a West Saxon term for noble , in place of the Kentish term <unk> . It is possible that Ine and Wihtred issued the law codes as an act of prestige , to re @-@ establish authority after periods of disruption in both kingdoms . 
 Ine 's laws survive only because Alfred the Great appended them to his own code of laws . The oldest surviving manuscript , and only complete copy , is Corpus Christi College , Cambridge MS 173 , which contains both Alfred 's and Ine 's law codes and the oldest extant text of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle . Two more partial texts survive . One was originally a complete copy of Ine 's laws , part of British Library MS Cotton Otho B xi , but that manuscript was largely destroyed in 1731 by a fire at Ashburnham House in which only Chapters 66 to 76 @.@ 2 of Ine 's laws escaped destruction . A fragment of Ine 's laws can also be found in British Museum MS Burney 277 . 
 It is possible that we do not have Ine 's laws in their original 7th @-@ century form . Alfred mentions in the prologue to his laws that he rejected earlier laws which he disliked . He did not specify what laws he omitted , but if they were the ones no longer relevant in his own time , it cannot be assumed that the surviving version of Ine 's laws is complete . 
 The prologue to Ine 's laws lists his advisors . Three people are named : bishops Eorcenwald and <unk> , and Ine 's father , King Cenred . Ine was a Christian king , whose intent to encourage Christianity is clear from the laws . The oath of a communicant , for example , is declared to carry more weight than that of a non @-@ Christian ; and baptism and religious observance are also addressed . Significant attention is also paid to civil issues — more than in the contemporary Kentish laws . 
 One of the laws states that common land might be enclosed by several ceorls ( the contemporary name for Saxon freemen ) . Any ceorl who fails to fence his share , however , and allows his cattle to stray into someone else 's field is to be held liable for any damage caused . This does not mean that the land was held in common : each ceorl had his own strip of land that supported him . It is notable that a king 's law is required to settle a relatively minor issue ; the laws do not mention the role of local lords in obtaining compliance from the ceorls . It is clear from this and other laws that tenants held the land in tenure from a lord ; the king 's close involvement indicates that the relationship between lord and tenant was under the king 's control . 
 The laws that deal with straying cattle provide the earliest documentary evidence for an open @-@ field farming system . They show that open @-@ field agriculture was practiced in Wessex in Ine 's time , and it is probable that this was also the prevalent agricultural method throughout the English midlands , and as far north and east as Lindsey and Deira . Not all of Wessex used this system , however : it was not used in Devon , for example . The law which mentions a " yard " of land is the first documented mention of that unit . A yard was a unit of land equal to a quarter of a hide ; a hide was variable from place to place but could be as much as 120 acres ( 49 ha ) . The yard in this sense later became the standard holding of the medieval <unk> , and was known as the virgate . One historian has commented that " the beginnings of a manorial economy are clearly visible in Ine 's laws . " 
 The fine for neglecting fyrd , the obligation to do military service for the king , is set at 120 shillings for a nobleman , and 30 shillings for a ceorl , incidentally revealing that ceorls were required to serve in the army . Scholars have disagreed on the military value of the ceorl , but it is not surprising that all free men would fight , since defeat might have meant slavery . 
 Another law specified that anyone accused of murder required at least one high @-@ ranking person among his " oath @-@ helpers " . An oath @-@ helper would swear an oath on behalf of an accused man , to clear him from the suspicion of the crime . Ine 's requirement implies that he did not trust an oath sworn only by peasants . It may represent a significant change from an earlier time when a man 's kin were expected to support him with oaths . 
 The laws made separate provision for Ine 's English and British subjects and were neither oppressive to the British nor completely even @-@ handed . The evidence they provide for the incomplete integration of the two populations is supported by research into placename history , the history of religious houses , and local archaeology , which indicates that the western part of Wessex was thinly settled by the Germanic newcomers at the time the laws were issued . It is notable that , although issued by the Saxon king of a Saxon kingdom , the term used in the laws to define Ine 's Germanic subjects is <unk> . This reflects the existence , even at this early date , of a common English identity encompassing all the Germanic peoples of Britain . 
 = = Christianity = = 
 Ine was a Christian king , who ruled as a patron and protector of the church . The introduction to his laws names his advisors , among whom are Eorcenwald , Bishop of London and <unk> , Bishop of Winchester ; Ine says that the laws were also made with the advice and instruction of " all my ealdormen , and chief councillors of my people , and also a great assembly of the servants of God " . The laws themselves demonstrate Ine 's Christian convictions , specifying fines for failing to baptize infants or to tithe . Ine supported the church by patronising religious houses , especially in the new diocese of Sherborne , which had been divided from the diocese of Winchester in 705 . Ine had opposed this division , ignoring threats of excommunication from Canterbury , but he agreed to it when Bishop <unk> died . 
 The first West Saxon nunneries were founded in Ine 's reign by Ine 's kinswoman , <unk> , the daughter of King Centwine , and by Ine 's sister Cuthburh , who founded the abbey of Wimborne at some point after she separated from her husband , King Aldfrith of Northumbria . At the bishop Aldhelm 's suggestion in 705 , Ine built the church which later became Wells Cathedral , and the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle also records that Ine built a minster at Glastonbury . This must refer to additional building or re @-@ building since there was already a British monastery at Glastonbury . 
 Ine has been credited with supporting the establishment of an organized church in Wessex , though it is not clear that this was his initiative . He is also connected with the oldest known West Saxon synods , presiding at one himself and apparently addressing the assembled clerics . 
 There is a tradition that Ine was a saint , and was the dedicatee of St Ina 's Church in <unk> near New Quay , Wales . However , a more likely dedicatee for this church is the fifth @-@ century Welsh Saint Ina . 
 = = Abdication and succession = = 
 In 726 , Ine abdicated , with no obvious heir and , according to Bede , left his kingdom to " younger men " in order to travel , with his wife Æthelburg , to Rome where they both died ; his predecessor , Cædwalla , had also abdicated to go to Rome and was baptized there by the pope . A pilgrimage to Rome was thought to aid one 's chance of a welcome in heaven , and according to Bede , many people went to Rome at this time for this reason : " ... both noble and simple , <unk> and clergy , men and women alike . " Either Ine or Offa of Mercia is traditionally supposed to have founded the Schola Saxonum there , in what is today the Roman rione , or district , of Borgo . The Schola Saxonum took its name from the militias of Saxons who served in Rome , but it eventually developed into a hostelry for English visitors to the city . Ine 's successor was King Æthelheard ; it is not known whether Æthelheard was related to Ine , though some later sources state that Æthelheard was Ine 's brother @-@ in @-@ law . Æthelheard 's succession to the throne was disputed by an ætheling , Oswald , and it may be that Mercian support for Æthelheard in the unsettled aftermath of Ine 's abdication both helped establish Æthelheard as king and also brought him into the sphere of influence of Æthelbald , the king of Mercia . Ine 's brother Ingild , who died in 718 , is given as ancestor of king Egbert of Wessex and the subsequent kings of England . 
 = Dorival Caymmi = 
 Dorival Caymmi ( April 30 , 1914 – August 16 , 2008 ) was a Brazilian singer , songwriter , actor , and painter active for more than 70 years beginning in 1933 . He contributed to the birth of Brazil 's bossa nova movement , and several of his samba pieces , such as " Samba da Minha Terra " , " <unk> " and " Saudade da Bahia " , have become staples of Música popular <unk> . Equally notable are his ballads celebrating the fishermen and women of Bahia , including " <unk> de Pescador " , " O Que É Que a Baiana Tem ? " , and " <unk> " . Caymmi composed about 100 songs in his lifetime , and many of his works are now considered to be Brazilian classics . Both Brazilian and non @-@ Brazilian musicians have covered his songs . 
 Ben Ratliff of The New York Times wrote that Caymmi was " perhaps second only to Antônio Carlos Jobim in ' establishing a songbook of [ the 20th ] century ’ s Brazilian identity . ' " Throughout his career , his music about the people and culture of Bahia influenced Brazil 's image in the eyes of both Brazilians and foreigners . Caymmi was married to Brazilian singer Stella Maris for 68 years , and the couple 's children , Dori Caymmi , Danilo Caymmi , and Nana Caymmi , are also prominent musicians . Each debuted professionally by accompanying their father onstage and in recordings . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Caymmi was born in Salvador , Bahia , to Durval Henrique Caymmi , the great @-@ grandson of an Italian immigrant , and <unk> Soares Caymmi , a native Bahian . He had two younger sisters , <unk> and Dinah , and a younger brother , <unk> . His father , a civil servant , often played the piano , guitar , and mandolin at home , and his mother , a housewife , sang regularly . He participated in his church 's choir for much of his childhood . At age 13 , he left school to work as a journalist at Bahian newspaper O Imparcial . When O Imparcial went out of business two years later , he took up work as a street vendor . 
 Although he never formally studied music , Caymmi taught himself to play guitar in the late 1920s and began to compose , sing , and play his own songs on Bahian radio programs around 1930 . He first achieved widespread recognition in 1933 , when at age 16 , he composed the song " O Que É Que A Baiana Tem ? " ( " What Is It About Bahian Women ? " ) for singer Carmen Miranda . In 1936 , at age 22 , he won a songwriting contest at Salvador 's annual Carnaval celebration . His prize was a pink satin lampshade . Despite his early musical success , he moved to Rio de Janeiro in 1938 with intentions to pursue a law degree and to return to working as a journalist . While employed there by the newspaper <unk> <unk> , he spent his spare time composing and singing songs on the radio show Dragão da Rua Larga . His popularity began to grow with the show 's audience . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Many of Caymmi 's lyrics pay homage to the lifestyle , beaches , fishermen , and women of his native Bahia . He drew much of his inspiration from music indigenous to northeastern Brazil , especially Afro @-@ Brazilian music and samba . He recorded for more than five decades and released about 20 albums , sometimes singing and playing guitar as a soloist and at other times accompanied by bands and orchestras . Although active for the better part of the 20th century , Caymmi wrote only about 100 songs . Despite having a relatively small body of work , Caymmi held a reputation for composing songs of exceptional quality . He occasionally collaborated with Jobim , who called him a " universal genius " and Brazil 's greatest composer . Many contemporary Brazilian artists , including Caetano Veloso , Gilberto Gil and Beth Carvalho cite Caymmi as a significant influence on their music . 
 = = = Chronology = = = 
 " O Que É Que a Baiana Tem ? " gained even more fame in Brazil when Miranda performed it in the 1939 film Banana @-@ da @-@ Terra , and it was this song that garnered her international attention and helped launch her career . After this success , Caymmi began to focus more on making music , and he wrote songs that appeared in other Brazilian films . In late 1939 , he signed with Odeon Records and recorded his first three singles , " Rainha do Mar / <unk> de Pescador " ( " Queen of the Sea / Promise of the Fisherman " ) , " Roda <unk> " ( " Top Wheel " ) , and " O Que É Que a Baiana Tem ? / A Preta do <unk> " ( " What Is It About Bahian Women ? / The Dark Woman from <unk> " ) . He came to more attention in the early 1940s when he performed as a regular on the Brazilian radio network Rádio Nacional . He recorded " Samba da Minha Terra " ( " Samba of My Homeland " ) in 1940 and " A Jangada <unk> <unk> " ( " The Raft Returned Alone " ) in the following year . In 1944 , he performed his own " <unk> Que Eu <unk> Baiano " ( " It Just So Happens That I 'm Bahian " ) in the movie <unk> Azul ( Blue Pineapple ) . In the late 1940s , he was a member of the samba @-@ <unk> movement largely founded by his sometime creative rival , composer Ary Barroso . Other prominent Brazilian musicians of the day covered several of his songs , including Dick <unk> , who famously recorded Caymmi 's " Marina " ( 1944 ) in 1947 . In 1957 Caymmi wrote " <unk> do Pescador " , which appeared in the film The <unk> Generals . 
 In the 1950s and 1960s , Jobim , João Gilberto , and others who contributed to the birth of the bossa nova style collaborated with Caymmi and often referenced his work when composing their own pieces . During this era , Gilberto covered several of Caymmi 's songs , including " Rosa Morena " ( " Dark @-@ skinned Rose " ) and " Saudade da Bahia " ( " Longing for Bahia " ) . Jobim was particularly enamored of Caymmi 's music , and the two grew to be close friends . American lyricist Ray Gilbert translated Caymmi 's " Das Rosas " into English in 1965 , and it was released in the United States as " And Roses and Roses " . The song was recorded by Brazilian vocalist <unk> Gilberto and by American singers Andy Williams and Perry Como . Williams 's version became a hit , and as a result , Caymmi was invited to spend four months in Los Angeles , where he performed , filmed a television show , and recorded an LP record . 
 = = = = Collaboration with Jorge Amado = = = = 
 Caymmi was a lifelong friend of Bahian author Jorge Amado , and in 1945 , he set one of Amado 's politically driven poems to music to aid the senatorial campaign of Luís Carlos Prestes . In the late 1970s , Caymmi again took inspiration from Amado when he composed " <unk> para a Gabriela " ( " A Little Song for Gabriela " ) , a musical adaptation of Amado 's novel Gabriela , <unk> e Canela ( Gabriela , Cloves and Cinnamon ) . Perhaps the best @-@ known product of Caymmi and Amado 's collaboration is the song " É Doce <unk> no Mar " ( " It 's Sweet to Die in the Sea " ) , which the two wrote over dinner one night at Amado 's home . Other songs they co @-@ wrote include " <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( " Kisses Through the Night " ) , " <unk> para Teresa Batista " ( " A Little Song for Teresa Batista " ) , " <unk> " ( " Migrants " ) , and " Essa Nega <unk> " ( " This <unk> Dark Lady " ) . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 To thank Caymmi for bringing international attention to Brazilian music and culture , in 1968 , the governor of Bahia presented Caymmi with a house in Salvador , and so he returned to live in his hometown for a short period of time . In 1972 , Caymmi was awarded the Order of Merit of the State of Bahia , an order given to Bahian residents for excellent service to the state . In Caymmi 's case , the service was bringing pride and honor to Bahian people through the widespread dissemination of his music about life there . On Caymmi 's 70th birthday , in 1984 , French Minister of Culture Jack Lang presented him with the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres , a French order that recognizes significant contributors to the fields of art and literature , in Paris . The following year , a new street named Avenida Dorival Caymmi ( Dorival Caymmi Avenue ) opened in Salvador . In 1986 , Rio de Janeiro 's famed <unk> samba school based its Carnaval performance on Caymmi 's life and work , and the school won the annual parade @-@ style samba competition . In 2015 , his tribute album <unk> <unk> was nominated for the 16th Latin Grammy Awards in the Best MPB Album category . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Although Caymmi earned his fame through music , he was also known to a lesser degree for his paintings . From 1943 to 1945 , he regularly attended a drawing and painting class at the Escola de <unk> Artes , a fine arts school in Rio de Janeiro . Even after discontinuing his formal study , he painted for the rest of his life . He practiced Candomblé , an Afro @-@ Brazilian religion characterized by belief in spirit @-@ gods and ritualistic practices involving mediumship . Candomblé was his father 's religion , and Caymmi gradually involved himself more with it as an adult , when his friends invited him to accompany them to religious ceremonies and parties . Caymmi was also a naturist , and when he was in Bahia , he liked to bathe nude in the Lagoa do <unk> ( <unk> Lagoon ) with a group of friends . He stated to the newspaper Valor <unk> : " We rolled around in palm leaves and slipped through the mountains of sand . Some people didn 't like this , but most understood that we weren 't naked for unclean reasons . " 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 While working at Rádio Nacional in 1939 , he met Brazilian vocalist Adelaide <unk> , who is better known by her stage name Stella Maris , and the two married in 1940 . <unk> responded to a 1994 press query about Caymmi 's habit of frequenting bars with a short story : " One night I went to look for him in a bar ... He was surrounded by women . I went in and slammed a table . A glass broke . The bouncer came , and I punched Caymmi 's face . Then I left <unk> . I thought he was involved with drugs , but it wasn 't the case . He was with the tramps . " Despite such incidents , however , they remained together for 68 years , until his death in 2008 . The couple had three children , Nana , Danilo , and Dori , all of whom followed their father into musical careers . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Although Caymmi rarely incorporated political messages into his music , he often spoke bitterly about the government 's corruption . Jorge Amado , his close friend , was sent into exile for several years after he publicly criticized the country 's rulers during the period of military dictatorship . In 1994 , Caymmi said , " I have concluded that to act as a citizen in Brazil today is to live a joke . It 's the same as playing the lotto , dreaming about nonsense , trying to get rich when you are 80 . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Dorival Caymmi died at age 94 of kidney cancer and multiple organ failure on August 16 , 2008 , at his home in Copacabana , Rio de Janeiro . His granddaughter , Stella , who wrote a biography about him in 2001 , said , " He did not know that he had cancer , and he did not want to know . He did not ask much about this . He was first hospitalized in 1999 . My grandfather went through with treatment , but he did not want to know anything about the illness . He acted with serenity every day , and because of that , we respected this wish . " 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Brazilian singer and composer Carlos Lyra praised Caymmi 's style for its " suave and romantic colloquialism . " In a 1994 anthology of Caymmi 's work , Antônio Carlos Jobim wrote in the introduction , “ Dorival is a universal genius . He picked up the guitar and orchestrated the world . ” In 2001 , New York Times journalist Ben Ratliff wrote that Caymmi was " perhaps second only to Antônio Carlos Jobim in ' establishing a songbook of this century ’ s Brazilian identity . ' " On the day of Caymmi 's death in 2008 , Brazilian composer and musician Tom Zé said , " It 's difficult to comprehend just how valuable a CD of Caymmi 's beach songs from the 1940s is . " Also around the time of Caymmi 's death , President of Brazil Luis Inácio Lula da Silva called him " one of the founders of Brazilian popular music . " Several of Caymmi 's contemporaries , including Gal Costa and Olivia Hime , have recorded tributes to him . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 Prior to 1988 , all of Caymmi 's albums were released as LP records . His last four albums were released as CDs . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 All of Caymmi 's singles were released as 78 rpm gramophone records . 
 = = = Tributes = = = 
 Note 
 A. ^ Reissued under new label . 
 = Defenders of Ardania = 
 Defenders of Ardania is a hybrid tower defense and real @-@ time strategy video game for the Windows PC , iOS , Xbox Live Arcade , and PlayStation Network . It was developed by Most Wanted Entertainment and published by Deep Silver and Paradox Interactive . The game was released December 6 , 2011 for the iOS and on March 14 , 2012 on all other platforms . Defenders of Ardania has an ESRB rating of Teen , a PEGI rating of 12 , and a USK rating of 12 . The game 's iOS release was well received by some critics and poorly received by others . A subsequent release on the PC , Xbox 360 , and PlayStation 3 was significantly less well received . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Defenders of Ardania is a tower defense game that also has offensive real @-@ time strategy elements . As with all tower defense games , the player must defend their home base by building several types of static tower units that fire at weak offensive units spawned by the opponent . In Defenders of Ardania , however , players must also spawn soldiers themselves . Like the opponent 's soldiers , the player 's soldiers move along a fixed path towards their opponent 's base and cannot be directly maneuvered by the player . The game is won if units spawned by the player get past the opponent 's towers and destroy the opponent 's base before the opponent 's units get past the player 's towers and destroy the player 's base . 
 The game features a campaign mode with eighteen levels , pitting the player , controlling human , elven , and dwarven land and air units against a computer opponent controlling undead units . There is also a multiplayer mode that supports up to four players , either in free for all or two versus two format . In the multiplayer , players can choose from one of three factions to play as ; the single player campaign 's human faction , an animal @-@ filled faction , or the undead faction . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Defenders of Ardania received a mix of positive and negative reviews for the iOS but mixed to poor reviews on the PC , Xbox 360 , and PlayStation 3 . 
 For the iOS , 148Apps gave the game four and a half out of five stars , praising the game 's visuals and level of detail , and expressing dissatisfaction only with the game 's tutorial . Eric Ford of TouchArcade , another iOS reviewer , gave Defenders of Ardania four out of five stars , praising the visuals as " beautiful " and " gorgeous " and saying that the game " is an excellent addition to the tower defense genre and is a must @-@ try for any fan " . Ford did , however , criticize the tutorial , expressing a desire for a tutorial mission rather than instructional screens . Mat Jones of The Average Gamer gave the game a highly negative review , saying that the game was not challenging and that concepts , such as the ability during one level to attack multiple bases and change which one player 's units went towards , were never explained . Jones concluded his review by saying that " Defenders of Ardania isn ’ t a quality product and you probably shouldn ’ t spend money on it . " 
 Reviews were universally less than positive on other systems . While critics praised the idea of the game , they found fault in the execution . Several critics disliked that the troops spawned by the player simply walk past the troops spawned by the opponent without the two groups fighting . The game 's flow also attracted significant criticism , with Peter Eykemans of IGN saying " Even on double speed , the pace is painful . This makes a simple two @-@ person battle turn into a lengthy saga of repeating the same actions over and over again . " and Ray Carsillo of Electronic Gaming Monthly complaining of " long drawn out matches on even the easiest difficulty settings as you try to force your way past a virtual stalemate " . While the visuals did receive praise , critics felt that they also got in the way of allowing the player to tell what was going on in the game . Opinions about the narrator were mixed . Henry Winchester of PC Gamer praised the voiceover , calling it " a pleasingly booze @-@ obsessed voiceover , delivered by what sounds like a Dalek doing an impression of Sean Connery " . Carsillo of Electronic Gaming Monthly was less kind , stating that " your narrator and chief advisor sounds like an awful Sean Connery impersonator and he may be the best of the voice actors you come across " . GamesRadar strikes a more neutral tone , stating that " Pre and post @-@ battle dialog is fully voiced by what are only technically ' actors , ' but it definitely beats silent text , and does add a bit of flavor to the world . " Multiplayer also received mixed reviews . Eykemans of IGN suggested that multiplayer exacerbates the length and flow issues already present in the single player game , while Matt Hughes of GamesRadar calls multiplayer the game 's " biggest asset " , stating that " Playing against real humans definitely ramps up the intensity and reduces the cheap exploitation found in the campaign . " . 
 = Action of 29 November 1811 = 
 The Action of 29 November 1811 was a minor naval engagement fought between two frigate squadrons in the Adriatic Sea during the Adriatic campaign of the Napoleonic Wars . The action was one of a series of operations conducted by the British Royal Navy and the French Navy to contest dominance over the Adriatic between 1807 and 1814 . During this period the Adriatic was surrounded by French territory or French client states and as a result British interference was highly disruptive to the movement of French troops and supplies . 
 The action came over eight months after the British had achieved a decisive victory over the French at the Battle of Lissa and was the first squadron action since that engagement . The action of November 1811 was the result of the British interception of a French military convoy traveling from Corfu to Trieste with a consignment of cannon , and resulted in a British victory , only one French ship escaping capture by the British force . It has been suggested that this action was a factor in Napoleon 's decision to change the direction of his planned eastwards expansion in 1812 from the Balkans to Russia . 
 = = Background = = 
 Since the War of the Third Coalition , the French had maintained client kingdoms in Italy and Naples that controlled the western shores of the Adriatic . Over the next four years , strategically important islands and territories had been seized in the treaties of Tilsit and Schönbrunn , giving Napoleon direct command of the eastern shore . With these treaties , France had seized not only several important fortress islands , most notably Corfu , but also many important shipyards and harbours . Maintaining control of the Adriatic was however even harder than seizing it had been , the threat of attack by Austrian , Russian or Ottoman armies and the mountainous terrain of the Balkans forcing the development of garrisons that could be effectively resupplied only by sea . 
 The Royal Navy , preeminent in the Mediterranean since the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 , sought to disrupt French convoys across the Adriatic . Following the Russian withdrawal in 1807 , the Royal Navy dispatched a small frigate squadron to operate in the sea . The squadron was commanded by Captain William Hoste , who seized the Illyrian island of Lissa ( present @-@ day Vis ) to use as a base , waging a campaign against the French and their allies that forced the French Navy to deploy significantly larger forces to combat him . This escalating series of raid and counter raid continued until March 1811 , when the French commander in the Adriatic , Bernard Dubourdieu attacked Lissa with force twice that available to Hoste . In the ensuing battle Hoste not only routed his opponents , but captured two ships , sank another and killed Dubourdieu . 
 In the aftermath of the Battle of Lissa , the badly wounded Hoste returned to Britain in HMS Amphion leaving Captain James Brisbane in command in the Adriatic . Conflict in the theatre was widely dispersed , and so Brisbane delegated command to various commanders of small squadrons and independent cruisers . These dispersed forces continued to have success against French convoys ; on 27 November 1811 , the independently sailing HMS Eagle foiled an attempt to send supplies to Corfu and captured the unarmed frigate <unk> . The following day at 07 : 00 , a message was received at Port St. George on Lissa warning that another French convoy had been sighted close to the island . 
 = = Chase = = 
 The British commander on Lissa in November 1811 was Captain Murray Maxwell of HMS Alceste with two other frigates and a sloop . Maxwell responded to the signal by readying his squadron to seek out and destroy the convoy , but the attempted invasion of Lissa the previous March had bred caution in the British defenders and Maxwell was therefore compelled to disembark 30 sailors and most of his marines at Port St. George and leave behind the 20 @-@ gun HMS Acorn to protect the harbour . This not only weakened the squadron but also delayed it , Maxwell 's force not departing Port St. George until 19 : 00 . It was assumed among the British squadron that the convoy comprised Danaé , Flore and Corona , the survivors of the Battle of Lissa now sailing from Trieste to Corfu to supply the island . 
 Shortly after passing the southern headland of Lissa , the British squadron encountered a neutral merchant ship that had been carrying Lieutenant John McDougal , formerly of HMS Unite , to Malta . McDougal had seen the French ships in passing and identified them as a convoy heading north from Corfu rather than south to it , and had ordered the merchant ship to return him to Lissa to bring warning . The French convoy was under the command of Commodore François @-@ Gilles Montfort and consisted of three ships , the two large frigates Pomone and Pauline and the smaller Persanne . The convoy had departed Corfu on 16 November carrying a cargo of cannon to Trieste . 
 = = = Squadrons = = = 
 Key 
 A † symbol indicates that the officer was killed during the action or subsequently died of wounds received . 
 The ships are ordered in the sequence in which they formed up for battle . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Casting south close to the island of Augusta ( Lastovo ) , Captain Gordon in Active sighted the French force at 09 : 20 on 29 November , sailing to the north @-@ west . Initially the French ships held their course , but on determining that the approaching squadron was British , Montfort spread all sail to escape pursuit . By 11 : 00 it was evident that Persanne could not maintain the pace of the two larger frigates and so turned north @-@ east in hopes of escaping independently . Active initially gave chase to the smaller ship , but Maxwell recalled her and sent Unite after Persanne , keeping Active and Alceste in pursuit of the larger French ships . At 11 : 50 it became clear that Alceste would soon catch the heavily laden French ships , and Maxwell sent the telegraph signal to Gordon ; " Remember the battle of Lissa " , the action of eight months before at which Hoste had raised the signal " Remember Nelson " . 
 The first shots were fired at 12 : 30 by Persanne close to the island of Pelagosa ( Palagruža ) , but the main action did not begin for another hour , when Alceste and Pomone exchanged shots from their stern and bow guns . By 13 : 40 , Alceste was firing her broadside into Pomone and simultaneously pressing on all sail in an effort to reach Pauline , but this ambition was thwarted when a shot from Pomone brought down Alceste 's main topmast , slowing her suddenly and allowing Pauline to pull a little ahead . At 14 : 00 , Active had arrived in action and was also firing into Pomone , forcing Montfort to bring Pauline round to protect her outgunned colleague . By 14 : 20 the conflicts between Active and Pomone and Alceste and Pauline had separated into different duels , Pomone particularly suffering severely but Active also taking heavy damage , a 32 @-@ pounder carronade shot severing Captain Gordon 's leg at the height of the engagement . 
 At 15 : 05 another British ship appeared on the horizon , the sloop HMS Kingfisher , which persuaded Montfort that he could no longer protect the battered Pomone against superior numbers . Pauline set all sail to the west , away from her opponents who were either too battered or too distant to pursue . Alceste and Active now concentrated their full broadsides on Pomone , which soon lost both masts and was forced to surrender to prevent total destruction . Pauline escaped , later reaching Ancona safely but having suffered severe damage in the engagement . 
 = = = Unite vs. Persanne = = = 
 The secondary engagement of the battle was contested initially within sight of the other combatants , Persanne firing the first shots at the pursuing Unite at 12 : 30 . The smaller size of these vessels made them faster and more maneuverable than their larger counterparts , and as a result it was not until 16 : 00 that Unite caught the smaller ship . During the pursuit , the ships had exchanged long @-@ range shots from their stern and bow guns which caused six casualties aboard Unite but none on Persanne . From external appearances , Persanne seemed to be a frigate of similar size to the fifth rate Unite , but in fact the French ship was only lightly armed , carrying 26 small guns to her opponents 36 . As a result , when it became clear that his ship could not outrun Unite , Captain Satie surrendered after firing a token broadside rather than be destroyed by the more powerful ship . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Casualties suffered in the action were relatively heavy on both sides . The British ships , with their reduced crews , suffered 61 men killed or wounded while the French lost over 50 on Pomone alone . There were no casualties on Persanne , and Pauline 's losses are unknown , although believed to be heavy given her battered condition . The French also lost the cargo aboard Persanne and Pomone , which amounted to 201 bronze and iron cannon , 220 iron wheels for gun carriages and numerous other military stores . 
 Promotions were granted to the junior officers of Alceste and Active and both crews received praise and prize money for their service in the operation . Similar rewards were not made to the crew of Unite , probably because Persanne was so much smaller and less @-@ well armed than her opponent . The total prize money was £ 3 @,@ 500 , not as much as first anticipated because neither of the captured ships were of sufficient quality to warrant purchase into the Royal Navy . Pomone had been hastily built in 1803 as the personal warship of Jérôme Bonaparte and as a result was of weak construction while Persanne had been designed as an armed storeship rather than a full @-@ scale warship . Ultimately Pomone was transferred to Britain , briefly renamed HMS Ambuscade and broken up for materials while Persanne was sold to the Bey of Tunis . Nearly four decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . 
 In France , the action had more significant consequences . The loss of two ships and over 200 cannon was a serious blow to the French army marshalling in the Balkans . Napoleon himself took an interest in the engagement and it has been suggested by British historian James Henderson that this action convinced Napoleon of his inability to control the Adriatic Sea , which was vital to launching operations in the Balkans . This action may have been a factor in his decision to abandon plans to invade the Ottoman Empire , and instead to turn his attention on Russia . In the French Navy , the flight of Pauline was deemed cowardly and Captain Montfort was court @-@ martialled and relieved of command . In 1817 , when Murray Maxwell visited St Helena on his return from the East Indies where HMS Alceste had been wrecked , Napoleon greeted him with the words " Your government must not blame you for the loss of Alceste , for you have taken one of my frigates " . 
 The effects on the Adriatic itself were slight , the action only confirming the already overwhelming British dominance in the region . The French Navy would continue to seek reinforcements for their squadrons , concentrating on the construction of several new ships in Italian seaports that would not be ready until 1812 . As a result , this was the last significant action of the year in the Adriatic . 
 = Colonel Homer = 
 " Colonel Homer " is the twentieth episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 26 , 1992 . In the episode , Homer embarrasses his wife Marge at a movie theater , leading to a big argument between the two . Homer , angry at Marge , visits a redneck bar in the middle of the night where he meets a waitress named Lurleen Lumpkin , a talented singer . Homer becomes Lurleen 's manager and tries to make her famous , but he does not appear aware that Lurleen has fallen in love with him . With Marge already upset and thinking Homer is cheating on her , he must decide on the importance of his marriage after Lurleen makes romantic advances toward him . 
 The episode was written by The Simpsons creator Matt Groening , and directed by Mark Kirkland . It is the only episode of the series for which Groening received an individual writing credit . American singer and actress Beverly D 'Angelo guest starred in the episode as Lurleen . Although the character makes several cameo appearances after this episode , Lurleen makes her second full @-@ time appearance sixteen years later in " Papa Don 't Leech " . The episode features cultural references to songs such as " There 's a Kind of Hush ( All Over the World ) " by Herman 's Hermits and " Funkytown " by Lipps Inc , and the films Deliverance , Honey , I Shrunk the Kids , and Look Who 's Talking . 
 Since airing , " Colonel Homer " has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It attained a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 8 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network for the week it aired . The episode was selected for inclusion in a video collection of selected episodes , titled The Last Temptation of Homer , that was released on November 9 , 1998 . An action figure set based on " Colonel Homer " was released in March 2002 , and two of Lurleen 's songs from the episode appeared on the Simpsons compilation album Songs in the Key of Springfield . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpsons go to the local movie theater to see a film . Bart and Lisa see Space Mutants VI , while Homer , Marge , and Maggie see The Stockholm Affair . As the film starts , Homer acts loud and obnoxious , embarrassing Marge . When he gives away the film 's ending , Marge berates him and the audience heckles Homer , embarrassing them both . During the car ride home , Marge tries to apologize , but Homer will not accept it , by dropping Marge and the children off at home and goes off on a long drive into the night , finally stopping at a redneck bar called Beer ' N ' Brawl , where he grabs a beer while listening to an attractive waitress named Lurleen Lumpkin performing on stage . She sings a song that follows Homer 's current state with every detail , and once she finishes , Homer introduces himself to her . 
 Several days later , still humming Lurleen 's song , Homer drives to her mobile home to ask for a copy . Lurleen tells him she has not recorded the song , so Homer insists that she come to a recording company to record a CD . Homer grants the recording company clerk permission to play the song on the radio , and Lurleen 's songs are an instant hit all over Springfield . At home , Marge asks Homer about Lurleen ; he claims that she is just a waitress who is turning into a music superstar . Marge does not approve that he is seeing her , as she fears that something more will come of the relationship . Homer becomes Lurleen 's manager , and to fit with the role , she buys him an expensive white cowboy suit which he wears at home . Marge is annoyed , and asks if he is having an affair . He denies it , and says whether Marge likes it or not , he is going to help Lurleen become a country music star . The whole family gathers at the recording studio with Lurleen to record more of her songs . Her new single , a suggestive love metaphor called " Bagged Me a Homer " , leads Marge to lose her temper . 
 Homer gets Lurleen a gig on a country western television series called Ya @-@ Hoo ! Just before her performance , Homer and Lurleen spend the night in her mobile home , and she shows him one of her new songs . In the song she asks Homer to " bunk " with her , but Homer knows that would violate his marital vows and leaves . During her performance , Homer is approached by a business agent who asks to buy Lurleen 's contract , but Homer refuses . In Lurleen 's dressing room , Homer becomes locked in an embrace with her , then describes how his love life is flashing before his eyes . Homer tells Lurleen that he only wanted to share her voice with the world and leaves before he does anything to lose his family . He again runs into the agent and this time sells Lurleen 's contract for US $ 50 . At home , Marge is watching the Ya @-@ Hoo ! show when Homer returns . When Homer gets into bed , Marge hears what Homer did through Lurleen 's bluesy song on the television which Lurleen concludes by saying she knows how lucky Marge is . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and directing = = = 
 The episode was written by series creator Matt Groening , the lone episode ( discounting the Tracey Ullman shorts ) in which he received an individual writing credit , though he has co @-@ written for the episodes " Some Enchanted Evening " , " The Telltale Head " , and " 22 Short Films About Springfield " . " Colonel Homer " was partly based on the 1980 film Coal Miner 's Daughter , which tells the story of country music singer Loretta Lynn . Groening said he had always wanted to write an episode in which Homer is offered a chance at being rich and famous , other than being with his family , but then chooses his family over glamour at the end . He pitched the idea to the writers of the show , who suggested the parody of Coal Miner 's Daughter and also that Homer should become a manager for a country singer . Show runner Mike Reiss was originally skeptical about the episode , as he did not think Homer could get a new job when he already had a full @-@ time job at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant . Reiss eventually gave in , but in future episodes the writers tried to develop the explanation that he got fired from the plant and then rehired at the end . Groening said that during the episode production , he received comments from the production team that Homer was acting like a " jerk " in it , but his explanation was that Homer 's behavior was due to his desire to make Lurleen a star and he was oblivious to her attempts to seduce him until the end . Mike Reiss stated that " Whenever we want to write stories about characters getting divorced or actually having an affair , rather than with Homer and Marge , which we could never do , we use secondary characters for that . " 
 The episode 's director , Mark Kirkland , said he enjoyed directing the episode because the characters ' emotions throughout it are " very human and real " . He believed many viewers watching the episode would recognize the emotions from experiences in their own lives , and would feel sympathy for the characters . The idea of Homer annoying the people at the movie theater was based on an experience Groening had with a friend of his when he was younger . They were sitting by themselves in a movie theater and two " annoying " women sat down right in front of them . Groening 's friend told the women to move and they did . One of the women then turned to Groening and his friend and said , " Now are you satisfied ? " , to which Groening 's friend replied : " I won 't be satisfied until I see you burn in hell . " 
 = = = Voice acting and music = = = 
 American singer and actress Beverly D 'Angelo guest starred in the episode as Lurleen Lumpkin . The actress first met Groening at a party at Frank Zappa 's house , and was called in to audition for Lurleen based on her performance as Patsy Cline in Coal Miner 's Daughter . She got the role after completing a singing test . D 'Angelo wrote two songs for the episode : " Your Wife Don 't Understand You " ( which Lurleen sings at the Beer ' N ' Brawl where Homer hears her for the first time ) and " I Bagged a Homer " . D 'Angelo wrote both songs in an hour and presented them to Groening at the episode 's table read . Unlike most other guest stars on The Simpsons who record their lines and then leave to accommodate their schedule , D 'Angelo stayed with the production team all day and pitched several jokes for the episode . Entertainment Weekly named D 'Angelo 's performance as Lurleen one of the sixteen best guest appearances on The Simpsons . Tom Nawrocki of Rolling Stone rated the songs D 'Angelo wrote as two of the best songs in the history of the show . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 The episode marks the debut appearance of Lurleen on The Simpsons . She was created by one of the show 's character designers , John Rice . Kirkland thought the first design Rice drew of Lurleen was too " bland " and " plain " , so they decided to model her after D 'Angelo and add " every kind of pretty girl cliché " into the design . Rice and Kirkland then sent the character to Groening , who sent back a note saying " wow " . Reiss 's show runner partner Al Jean said that " one of the most difficult things when translating real people to a Simpsons look is for women to look beautiful " , as the Simpson overbite and facial construction make it particularly difficult to design women 's looks . Lurleen 's last name , Lumpkin , came from the country bumpkin character Tony Lumpkin in the 1773 comedy play She Stoops to Conquer by Oliver Goldsmith . 
 Bart 's voice actor , Nancy Cartwright , wrote in her autobiography My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy that the episode 's script gives the audience a " visual and aural feast " . She said the background designers " must have gone on another field trip for this one " because they captured the look of a typical musical recording studio . The recording studio in the episode , where Lurleen records her new songs with the Simpson family , features two rooms , one for the artist and one for the engineer , with a pane of glass between them . Cartwright said the designers added their own " special touch " by putting a few cracks on the walls , designing a slightly dilapidated ceiling , and by making it look as if the soundproofing on the walls is falling off . The property designers went on a field trip to Sun Studio to receive inspiration for the props in the recording studio , such as the " in session " red light , the mixing board , the musical instruments , and the volume @-@ unit meters that indicates how loud the artist is singing . For the interior design of the recording studio , the color designers mixed colors such as orange , mauve , gray , and brown to make them complement each other . The colors in the engineer 's booth were darker to make Homer 's white suit stand out from the background . The appearance of the engineer at the recording studio was based on John Boylan , an American music producer who produced the highly successful album The Simpsons Sing the Blues . Lurleen 's mobile home was designed to be " very confined " and " tiny " so that the compositions of Homer and Lurleen would be tighter , thus giving the scene an intimate , romantic feeling . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's title and Homer 's attire are references to Colonel Tom Parker , singer Elvis Presley 's manager . Films playing at the Springfield <unk> movie theater at the beginning of the episode include Honey , I Hit a School Bus ( a parody of Honey , I Shrunk the Kids ) , Look Who 's <unk> ( a parody of Look Who 's Talking ) , and a film called Ernest vs. The Pope which stars the fictional character Ernest P. Worrell . During his long drive to the Beer ' N ' Brawl , Homer passes a boy playing a banjo on a porch , a reference to the " Dueling Banjos " sequence in the film Deliverance . The same boy appears later at the recording studio waiting in line with his banjo to record a CD . William Irwin writes in his book Philosophy and the Interpretation of Pop Culture that this " burst of banjo " must convey a message even if the viewers do not " get " the reference to Deliverance : " Thanks to prevailing connotations of banjo music , viewers who do not recognize the banjo tune as the theme from Deliverance will not laugh , but the mere sound of banjo tells the audience that Homer has entered a backward , redneck area . " 
 The Beer ' N ' Brawl redneck bar is based on the bar in the film Urban Cowboy . The Beer ' N ' Brawl sells Laramie High Tar cigarettes , a reference to the American cigarette brand Laramie . After arriving home from the Beer ' N ' Brawl , Lurleen 's song is stuck in Homer 's head , and he even sings it to his bowling ball for good luck . Homer 's co @-@ worker Lenny decides to give it a shot and sings " There 's a Kind of Hush ( All Over the World ) " to his bowling ball . Homer says that the last song before Lurleen 's " Your Wife Don 't Understand You " that he could not get out of his mind was the Lipps Inc song " Funkytown " . The syndicated country comedy show that Lurleen appears on , Ya @-@ Hoo ! , is based on the country television series Hee Haw , which ran in syndication from 1971 to 1993 . 
 = = Reception = = 
