 = = = Ratings and critical reviews = = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Colonel Homer " finished 22nd in the ratings for the week of March 23 – 29 , 1992 , with a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 16 @.@ 63 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed gave the episode a 5 / 5 rating and called it " another great " episode that chronicles the love between Homer and Marge , showing the " ups and downs " of their marriage . He said Lurleen 's songs are " filled with clever observations " , but it is Homer 's befuddlement that makes it a " classic " episode . Meyers added , however , that country music fans might " take offense at Matt Groening 's script , which hams up every stereotype imaginable " . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said that after the " great " previous episode " Dog of Death " , " one might expect some drop @-@ off with ' Colonel Homer ' , but virtually none occurs . It offers another classic episode that benefits from a memorable guest voice performance from D ’ Angelo . Homer ’ s moment in the sun creates a fun plot and the program nicely lampoons the country music business . " The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , said the episode is a " good example of The Simpsons fixing itself on a target ( in this case , country and western music ) and extracting every possible gag . Lurleen 's songs are all marvelous . " 
 Hock Guan Teh of DVD Town said he enjoyed the episode , and although it does not contain the " usual amount " of The Simpsons humor , the " rich character development itself makes this episode worth multiple viewings . However , anyone allergic to country music should give this one a pass ! " Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict thought the episode featured " one of the best " parodies the Simpsons writers have ever conceived , the parody of the country television series Hee @-@ Haw called Ya @-@ Hoo ! : " While one must give multiple kudos to Beverly D 'Angelo for writing and performing her own witty hillbilly ditties , it 's the twisted <unk> [ television series Ya @-@ Hoo ! ] , with such stars as Big <unk> Ron and Cappy Mae , that really propels this installment into comic heaven . Homer 's sheepish response to <unk> 's advances shows just what a decent , family loving man he is . " A reviewer for the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram called the episode " heartwarming " , and commented that The Simpsons " once again shows that at the heart of this crazy family there is an abiding love . " Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club said " it 's a pretty impossible question for a die @-@ hard fan , but if I were forced at gunpoint to name my favorite episode ever , ' Colonel Homer ' would probably be the first to leap to mind , if only for the pure joy that is ' Bagged Me a Homer ' . " 
 = = = Lurleen 's legacy = = = 
 Lurleen has made several cameo appearances on the show after this episode . She appears for her second time in the season four episode " Marge vs. the Monorail " , voiced by Doris Grau , as she is briefly interviewed by Kent Brockman during the monorail 's maiden voyage party . When he asks her what she has been doing lately , she responds that since Homer left her , her personal and professional life have gone downhill . She looks dirty and scuffed up , and talks with a harsh , croaky , gravelly voice , rather than the soft , Southern voice she had when she was first introduced . Lurleen also has a cameo in the season four episode " Krusty Gets Kancelled " as the center square on The Springfield Squares , and appears in " Team Homer " as a member of the bowling team " The Home Wreckers " . In the season seven episode " Bart on the Road " , Lurleen 's name can be seen briefly on a banner saying " playing tonight " in Branson , Missouri . She made her second full @-@ time appearance in the season nineteen episode " Papa Don 't Leech " , in which the Simpsons family takes Lurleen into their home after she becomes a fugitive from the Springfield authorities for not paying her taxes . 
 Compared to " Colonel Homer " , Lurleen 's comeback episode " Papa Don 't Leech " received rather negative reviews from television critics . Richard Keller of TV Squad expressed dislike for the episode , stating that he hopes the show will reconsider the next time they decide to give a " solo opportunity " to a one @-@ off character " many people don 't remember " . Robert Canning of IGN said , " there were too few laugh @-@ out @-@ loud moments in this lackluster episode . Overall , it was nice to see Lurleen again , but she 'd probably get more laughs in future cameos than in carrying an entire episode . " 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 " Colonel Homer " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 26 , 1992 . The episode was selected for release in a video collection of selected episodes , titled The Last Temptation Of Homer , that was released on November 9 , 1998 . Other episodes included in the set were " One Fish , Two Fish , Blowfish , Blue Fish " , " Homer Alone " , and " Simpson and Delilah " . The episode was later included on The Simpsons season three DVD set that was released on August 26 , 2003 . Matt Groening , Mark Kirkland , cast member Dan Castellaneta , and show runners Al Jean and Mike Reiss participated in the DVD 's audio commentary of the episode . " Colonel Homer " was again included in the 2005 DVD release of the Last Temptation Of Homer set . An action figure set based on the episode was released exclusively to Toys " R " Us stores in March 2002 . The set , featuring Homer in his white suit and Lurleen with her guitar , is part of the World of Springfield series of The Simpsons action figures created by Playmate Toys . Lurleen 's songs " Your Wife Don 't Understand You " and " Bagged Me a Homer " appeared on the Simpsons compilation album Songs in the Key of Springfield , that was released on March 18 , 1997 . 
 = Gobioolithus = 
 Gobioolithus is an oogenus of fossil bird egg native to Mongolia . They are small , smooth @-@ shelled , and elongated eggs that were first discovered in the 1960s and early 70s during a series of fossil @-@ hunting expeditions in the Gobi desert . Two oospecies have been described : Gobioolithus minor and G. major . The eggs were probably laid in colonial nesting sites on the banks of rivers and lakes . 
 G. minor is unusual because it frequently is found with embryonic skeletons of the enantiornithine bird Gobipipus . Interestingly , these embryos have very well @-@ developed wings , which suggest they would be able to fly very soon after hatching , unlike most modern birds . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Gobioolithus is found in the Gobi desert in Mongolia . More specifically , the fossils are found in the Barun Goyot and the <unk> Formations of the Nemegt Basin , which is dated to the Upper Cretaceous . 
 = = History = = 
 Numerous fossils , including Gobioolithus specimens , were discovered and collected by the Polish @-@ Mongolian fossil @-@ hunting expeditions in the Gobi desert from 1963 to 1971 and by the Soviet @-@ Mongolian expeditions between 1969 and 1996 . These fossils were brought to the Institute of Paleobiology of the Polish Academy of Sciences in Warsaw and to the Paleontological Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences in Moscow . Eggs now classified as Gobioolithus were first analyzed in 1981 by the Polish paleontologist Andrzej Elżanowski , who described several well @-@ developed bird embryos within some of the fossil eggs housed in Warsaw . He identified them as most similar to Gobipteryx <unk> , so scientists began referring to them as " Gobipteryx eggs . " 
 In 1991 , the Russian paleontologist Konstantin Mikhailov introduced the modern parataxonomic system used to classify fossil eggs . While he did not give the " Gobipteryx " eggs a formal name under this classification scheme , he did assign them to the prismatic morphotype in the <unk> basic type . He believed that they were eggs of <unk> <unk> , but probably not Gobipteryx ( which was then considered to be a <unk> ) . In the same year , the Polish paleontologist Karol Sabath reviewed the entire collection of fossil eggs discovered on the Polish expeditions , including the not @-@ yet @-@ named Gobioolithus eggs . Following Elżanowski , he referred them to Gobipteryx , though only tentatively because at the time ongoing studies of similar eggs found on the Soviet expeditions cast doubt on this classification . 
 In 1994 , Mikhailov , working with Sabath and Kurzanov , divided the Mongolian " Gobipteryx " eggs into two informal groups : G1 , containing the smaller eggs ( including the ones with embryos described by Elżanowski ) , and G2 for the larger eggs . Two years later , Mikhailov went on to classify these eggs <unk> as a new oofamily , Gobioolithidae , containing the single oogenus Gobioolithus , with two oospecies : G. minor and G. major , corresponding to G1 and G2 , respectively . In 2013 , <unk> , Chatterjee , and Mikhailov described a new genus and species of bird , Gobipipus <unk> , based on the embryos within Gobioolithus eggs . They classified Gobipipus as an enantiornithine . In 2015 , some of the larger egg specimens previously assigned to G. major were moved into their own new oogenus and oospecies , Styloolithus <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Gobioolithus eggs are small and smooth @-@ shelled . They are asymmetrically shaped , similar to many modern bird eggs , with one end <unk> than the other . The two oospecies are distinguished mainly by their size : G. major ranges from 50 to 53 @.@ 5 mm long and 25 to 32 mm across , with an eggshell thickness of 0 @.@ 2 @-@ 0 @.@ 4 mm , whereas G. minor is only 30 @-@ 46 mm by 20 @-@ 24 mm and 0 @.@ 1 @-@ 0 @.@ 2 mm thick . 
 The microstructure of Gobioolithus ' eggshell has not been thoroughly studied , and heavy recrystallization of most specimens makes it difficult to examine the eggshell structure or pore system . The eggshell consists of two ( or possibly three ) structural layers . The inner layer , called the mammillary layer , is about half the thickness of the outer , or continuous , layer . On the outside , many specimens have a recrystallized outer layer . This could simply due to diagenesis or it could be a true external zone , which is a third layer present in most bird eggs but is rare in non @-@ avian dinosaurs . However , a few specimens are unaffected by recrystallization . These do not have a third layer , but this does not rule out the possibility that the eggshell originally had a three layers since the external layer can easily separate from the rest of the eggshell . These specimens also reveal an angusticanaliculate pore system , which means that the pores have a low density , and are long , narrow , and straight . 
 Styloolithus , another fossil enantiornithine egg from the Gobi , differs from Gobioolithus in that it is larger and has a thicker eggshell with a proportionately smaller mammillary layer . <unk> , which are also eggs of enantiornithines , are also larger than Gobioolithus , but they have a much thicker mammillary layer . 
 = = = Embryos = = = 
 Many Gobioolithus minor specimens contain embryonic remains of the enantiornithine genus Gobipipus . The embryos have well @-@ ossified skeletons , implying that they were at a late stage in development when they died . Their wings and shoulders are especially well @-@ developed . Only the modern megapodes and the little tern exhibit a comparable degree of embryonic ossification in the arm and shoulder bones . It is likely that Gobipipus hatchlings , like megapodes and little terns , would be able to fly very soon after hatching . 
 No embryos are known from G. major eggs , but they are usually assumed to have been laid by a similar type of bird . 
 = = = Nests = = = 
 Gobioolithus eggs were probably laid in open nests on the banks of ephemeral rivers or lakes , which could frequently flood the nesting areas and bury the eggs . The distribution of the eggs suggests that they had a long @-@ term colonial nesting site at the <unk> Tsav locality in the Barun Goyot Formation . At the <unk> @-@ <unk> locality , the eggs are typically arranged in clutches , whereas elsewhere they are scattered randomly , each oriented nearly vertically in the substrate . The solitary eggs may have been laid and buried individually , similar to the nesting habits of modern megapodes . It is also possible that they were originally laid in clutches , but flooding separated them and deposited them vertically as the water level dropped . Water damage would also explain why Gobioolithus shells are frequently heavily recrystallized . 
 = = Classification = = 
 According to the parataxonomic system used to classify fossil eggs , Gobioolithus is classified in the oofamily Gobioolithidae , which , in turn , is classified in the prismatic morphotype ( also called the neognath morphotype ) of the <unk> basic type . A cladistic analysis performed by <unk> and Barta ( 2015 ) ( pictured below ) found Gobioolithus to be a sister taxon to Styloolithus . However , they considered Styloolithus different enough from Gobioolithus to warrant its <unk> from Gobioolithidae . 
 = Anna ( Disney ) = 
 Princess Anna of Arendelle is a fictional character who appears in Walt Disney Animation Studios ' 53rd animated film Frozen . She is voiced by Kristen Bell as an adult . At the beginning of the film , Livvy Stubenrauch and Katie Lopez provided her speaking and singing voice as a young child , respectively . Agatha Lee Monn portrayed her as a nine @-@ year @-@ old ( singing ) . 
 Created by co @-@ directors Jennifer Lee and Chris Buck , Anna is loosely based on Gerda , a character of the Danish fairytale The Snow Queen by Hans Christian Andersen . In the Disney film adaptation , Anna is depicted as the princess of Arendelle , a fictional Scandinavian kingdom and the younger sister of Princess Elsa ( Idina Menzel ) , who is the heiress to the throne and possesses the elemental ability to create and control ice and snow . When Elsa exiles herself from the kingdom after inadvertently sending Arendelle into an eternal winter on the evening of her coronation , fearless and faithful Anna is determined to set out on a dangerous adventure to bring her sister back and save both her kingdom and her family . 
 The original fairytale in general and the character of the Snow Queen in particular posed long @-@ term problems to adapt into a feature @-@ length production . Several film executives , including Walt Disney , made their attempts towards the story and numerous adaptations were shelved as the filmmakers could not work out the characters . Finally , directors Buck and Lee solved the issue by portraying Anna and Elsa as sisters , establishing a dynamic relationship between the characters . 
 Anna has received widespread acclaim from film critics , who praised the determination and enthusiasm in her personality . Bell was also extolled by various reviewers for her performance in the film . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins and conception = = = 
 Attempts to produce an adaption of The Snow Queen in the Disney studio dated back to 1943 , when Walt Disney considered collaborating with Samuel Goldwyn to produce a biography film of Hans Christian Andersen . However , the story and particularly the Snow Queen character proved to be too problematic to Disney and his animators . Namely one of the troubles they encountered was that the original story lacked necessary interaction between the main protagonist , Gerda ( who later served as an inspiration for Anna ) , and the Snow Queen . Most obviously , Andersen 's version did not feature any confrontation between them : when brave little Gerda enters the Snow Queen 's ice castle and sheds her tears on Kay , the Snow Queen is nowhere to be seen . There just was not enough character conflict to form a full @-@ length feature . Later on , Glen Keane , Paul and Gaëtan Brizzi , Harvey Fierstein , Dick Zondag and Dave Goetz were among other Disney executives to make efforts towards translating this potential material to the big screen , but none of them made their way . Around 2008 , Chris Buck pitched Disney his version of The Snow Queen . At the time , the project was planned to be traditionally animated under the name of Anna and the Snow Queen . However , by early 2010 , the project encountered the same problem and was stuck again . Jennifer Lee , Frozen 's co @-@ director , later recalled , " The issue with the original for us in a lot of ways is it 's a very symbolic story . It 's very hard to translate symbolism into concrete things . Film is concrete , so you translate it . " 
 After the success of Tangled ( 2010 ) , on December 22 , 2011 , Disney announced a release date , November 27 , 2013 , for the film , together with a new title , Frozen , and Peter Del Vecho and John Lasseter took up as the project 's producers . Now , when the film was revived again , one of the main challenges that Buck and his team had to face with was the character . The storyboards were presented to John Lasseter , who would tell the assembled production team " You haven 't dug deep enough . " Lasseter commended that Chris Buck 's latest version was fun and very light @-@ hearted , but the characters were not multifaceted , and thus did not resonate for the producer . 
 The original character of Gerda , known as Anna , was one of the three major characters in the script at this time , along with the Snow Queen , Elsa and Kristoff , loosely based on Kay . The characters were not considered to be well @-@ rounded or relatable , but an interpersonal , family dynamic was created once Anna and Elsa were established as sisters , an idea suggested by someone on the writing team that no one remembered who . This changed the story dramatically , shifting from the conflict between the good and the evil to the conflict between love and fear . Buck stated that their script still retained basic parts of the story and the character of Gerda , citing the similarities between the original story and his version , " [ Gerda ] won 't give up on finding her friend Kai . The only thing she really has in her , she 's not a superhero or anything , but she has love . And it 's love that conquers fear in the end . " 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 On March 5 , 2012 , Kristen Bell was cast to voice the adult Anna . Livvy Stubenrauch was chosen to portray Anna as a young child , while Katie Lopez , daughter of the husband @-@ and @-@ wife songwriting team of the film , Kristen Anderson @-@ Lopez and Robert Lopez , provided the singing voice for young Anna in " Do You Want to Build a Snowman ? " musical sequence . Additionally , Agatha Lee Monn , daughter of the film 's director Jennifer Lee , portrayed teenage Anna in this song . Lee explained about these casting decisions , " We really wanted to use the first two verses of this song to show you Anna 's personality . And we wanted the singing to be done by real @-@ sounding kids , not necessarily Broadway kids . " Kristen Bell and Idina Menzel ( who voiced Elsa in the film ) had both auditioned for Rapunzel in Tangled and had already known each other , but they did not get the part . 
 Talking about her feelings when she got the part , Bell expressed , " Since I was 4 years old , I dreamed of being in a Disney animated film , " she said . " It was the first goal I ever set for myself . It seemed like it would be a very unrealistic one . " She described Disney movies as " the ones [ she ] watched over and over again when [ she ] was a kid , " and continued , " I knew every line from The Little Mermaid . I love Aladdin . When asked about her favorite Disney character , Bell said , " Ariel from The Little Mermaid . Because I think it was a shift that Disney had , where a female lead — the " princess , " I guess — didn 't just want to find her mate . She was singing " I want to be where the people are . I want to see the world . I want to venture outside my comfort zone . " " Bell described her initial reaction when she first found that she was cast as " I was in glee " . Lee admitted Bell 's casting selection was influenced after the filmmakers listened a couple of vocal tracks from The Little Mermaid , including " Part of Your World " that the actress recorded when she was young , stating that without these recordings , it would 've been very difficult to the find the right one to play Anna . 
 The two directors , Buck and Lee , were also impressed by how Kristen and Idina related . " During one of our early read @-@ throughs , Kristen and Idina sang a ballad to each other which had so much emotion that everyone in the room was in tears , " Buck said . " It not only showed how great their voices were together , but showed the power the music would have in the story . " However , Bell wasn 't all confidence when recording with Menzel , described the experiences working with her co @-@ star as " nerve @-@ racking " . The duo had rehearsed at Idina 's house a song called " Wind Beneath My Wings " , in which Bell greatly commended Idina 's powerful voice . Regarding the songs that she performed in the film , Kristen said , " We 're singing the lovely songs of Kristen and Bobby Lopez , who wrote ' Book of Mormon . ' So it 's really , really funny music . It 's really good music . They 're amazing to work for . " 
 Director Jennifer Lee strongly believed that there couldn 't be any other Anna but Kristen Bell , saying , " It was definitely a wonderful surprise hearing her voice [ during auditions ] , not knowing that she had been classically trained . Also , she had such a warm , sweet voice . She was everything that we could 've hoped for Anna . " Co @-@ director Chris Buck shared Lee 's ideas , commenting , " Kristen Bell for Anna was the very first person that we saw . We did a lot of casting to find Anna , but she just hit it out of the park . From the beginning we loved her , and she just kind of became Anna and Anna became her . I don 't know which one is which . " Idina Menzel was also surprised by her co @-@ star 's singing ability , stating that , " I didn 't know how great a singer she was . I quickly found out and need to constantly tell her because she doesn 't tell anybody else ! She 's always playing it down . " Songwriter Kristen Anderson @-@ Lopez later commended Bell 's quick comprehension of her ideas , saying that she would collaborate with the actress for " the rest of [ her ] life " if she could . Anna 's animator Becky Bresee commented that Bell 's voice " lends itself well , so you are taking bits and pieces . " 
 During production , Bell and Menzel had to do a lot of recordings and re @-@ recordings , and were required to be together in the same room when on the key emotional scenes between Anna and Elsa . " We even got Kristen and Idina together for a song . That really helped elevate the song because they have a duet in the movie and it definitely helped drive that , " said producer Peter Del Vecho . Chris Buck later commented that getting the actresses in together as much as they could helped add the real , amazing chemistry between them and made them really interact . Bell 's recording sessions were completed while she was pregnant , and later she had to re @-@ record some of the lines after giving birth , as her voice had deepened . After watching the completed film , Bell described her performance as " cool and weird and surreal and jarring " , saying that she was really proud that Anna " came out like she did that [ the directors ] let [ Bell ] do her like this . " 
 = = = Design and characterization = = = 
 Anna in particular and the whole film in general had undergone a number of changes in the story , most notably making the heroine the younger sister of the Snow Queen . Describing the character 's development process , director Jennifer Lee admitted , " Even with Anna there was a tug of war for a long time . There are elements of it that we didn 't land on with Anna until late into production , so we changed some of the animation to support it . " Bell generally described her character as " She doesn 't have good postures , she 's not very elegant , but she 's a good person and she 's utterly determined . " Lee added , " She doesn 't have any superpowers , but Anna is one of these ordinary people doing an extraordinary thing . " Contrary to her sister Elsa who represents fear , Anna represents love , she is filled with optimism with an extraordinary heart . Director Chris Buck later stated , " [ Anna 's ] secret weapon is love , " while head of story Paul Briggs commented that she is " a character who is willing to stand beside you and stand up for what 's right . Her sister was born with a condition that 's shaped a world where Anna doesn 't belong . " In the images of Frozen 's main characters released by Disney in July 2013 , Anna and her role in the film was described as follows : 
 Anna is more daring than graceful and , at times , can act before she thinks . But she ’ s also the most optimistic and caring person you ’ ll ever meet . She longs to reconnect with her sister , Elsa , as they were close during their childhood . When Elsa accidentally unleashes a magical secret that locks the kingdom of Arendelle in an eternal winter , Anna embarks on a dangerous adventure to make things right . Armed with only her fearlessness , a never @-@ give @-@ up attitude and her faith in others , Anna is determined to save both her kingdom and her family . 
 In order to have one person fully understand and develop their own character , as well as later be able to impart that to the crew , the film 's directors and producers decided to have character leads and supervising animators on specific characters . First @-@ time character lead Becky Bresee serves as the supervising animator for Anna . She described her job as " making the character more believable " . To achieve this , she had to act out part of a sequence in the movie between Anna and Kristoff for a number of times , each of them emphasizing the character 's gestures differently . " Anna 's a little bit nervous and uncomfortable , and I had to find a way to put that into the animation , " explained Bresee . 
 Bell said that at first Anna was written plainer and more general . " In the first draft of the script she was written more , in my opinion , prissy . She was kind of specific and very girly , " which Bell didn 't find appealing . She admitted that she had always wanted to be part of Disney animated feature , but she " wanted to be a very specific type of princess " , who " was way more awkward than the normal princesses " , not someone with too good postures or too well @-@ spoken . As she was offered the role of Anna , she came up with a lot of suggestions for the directors . They were responsive and allowed the actress to mould the character the way she wanted , since they wanted the film to be truthful . Bell significantly made specific changes to Anna , including the infusion and incorporation of the actress ' own personality to the character , embodying a relatable heroine , which received full support from the directors . She called the scene where Anna first meets Hans is a " typical Disney moment " , as they come too close physically and find out that they both fall in love with each other . Bell wanted Anna 's words to reflect what she herself would say in real life , which included some " nonsensical rambling " . " I think I said , " This is awkward . You 're not awkward . Me , I 'm awkward . You 're gorgeous . Wait — what ? " Words just spill out of her mouth too quickly and she has to backtrack . " Bell continued . Or the whole scene where she wakes up in the beginning with saliva all over the face , Bell " wanted her to also have hair in her mouth " , which took inspiration from her own real life . " Sometimes I wake up like that . Then you have hair in your mouth , and you start coughing . The animators totally got what I was trying to do . It 's cool , and way more fun when stuff is realistic like that , instead of the perfection of waking up with mascara on . " Anna 's snorting and tripping over also drew inspirations from Bell 's real life . Bell 's recording sessions were also videotaped to assist in animating the character , and animators took into considerations even subtle things like the actress ' biting her lip a lot . According to director Jennifer Lee , Anna is a bit flawed . 
 When asked about Anna 's biggest charm , Bell said that " her charm is caught somewhere between her sincerity and optimism . Anna is genuine , sincere and compounded with optimism , and eternally optimistic people are the most charismatic people , much more attractive than those with a bad mood . " She also expressed why the character seemed to loveable to her , " To have Anna in a situation where she starts the movie without any friends , because her lifestyle hasn ’ t allowed her to have a full kingdom . She runs around , because she wants friends . " Bell called the film 's story is " another turning point " for Disney animation because the love depicted in this story is the love between siblings , a non @-@ romantic love . Anna wants the world and she wants to explore , but she also wants to nurture the relationships around her , particularly the family relationship . " It 's very non @-@ traditional for a Disney movie , " she added . 
 Regarding Bell 's influence on Anna , director Chris Buck said her personality was just so fun and energetic . " We had an Anna character but Kristen really came in and pushed it and made it even funnier and even sweeter I think , and more believable as a three @-@ dimensional character , " he said . He also admitted that he " fell in love with [ Bell ] ' s voice and [ Bell ] ' s spirit " . Director Jennifer Lee said that she loved Bell because the actress shared a similarity with her , that girls could be funny . " So she was a fantastic collaborator , " Lee added . Songwriting duo Kristen @-@ Anderson Lopez and Robert Lopez later commented that they had written a lot of first songs for Kristen , for Anna but , " The more we were working with Kristen Bell , the more , the more she influenced . " They quickly understand who Anna was because Anna 's Kristen Bell . 
 Anna 's costumes in the film were informed by the research of Norwegian clothing styles . Based on these findings , art director Brittney Lee and her team later found out what materials should be used for the costumes . Co @-@ director Jennifer Lee created a cheerful wardrobe featuring " playful " floral patterns and saturated colors in order to accurately reflect Anna 's personality . The animators also took into account the climate that Anna is living in , costuming her in heavy wools and velvets , reflecting traditional winter clothing of the Scandinavian area . The animators added structures to the costumes in a way , such as pleated dresses , that allows movements , giving the character a free range of " twirl [ ing ] all she wants " throughout the film . In order to deepen the cultural context of the film , rosemaling , a traditional form of Norwegian decorative folk art , was added to almost every character 's costumes . Anna and her sister , Elsa , also enjoyed a large number of types of costumes and the layers of costuming that have never been done before . As these characters are running around in the snow , they have to have petticoats , undergarments , capes , " and they have all these layers and layers of things that are all meticulously designed , " Brittney explained . 
 = = = = Character model = = = = 
 Anna has distinguishable facial features of a typical Disney heroine , including big eyes , thin lips and a small nose . Her physical appearance has drawn much comparison between her and Rapunzel from Tangled , however there are considerable differences between them . Anna 's eyes are slightly more upturned , her cheeks are a bit fuller , her face and chin are generally rounder , and her eyebrows and eyelashes are thicker than Rapunzel 's . She also has more freckles than Rapunzel and even has them on her shoulders . Anna 's eyebrows wrinkle when they move , and she has prevalent neck muscles that appear when she speaks . Anna 's travel outfit generally consists of magenta , black , dark and light blue , with flowery designs on the bottom of her dress . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Frozen = = = 
 Anna is the younger child in the royal family of Arendelle , whose older sister , Elsa is born with the power to create and control ice and snow . As children , they enjoy the life of princesses using Elsa 's abilities to create a winter wonderland for their enjoyment . After they create a snowman named Olaf in the throne room , Elsa accidentally strikes Anna unconscious with her magic . The king and queen hurriedly take Anna to the mountain trolls for help . The troll king , Pabbie , erases Anna 's memory of her sister 's magic , <unk> Elsa 's power , only leaving memory of the fun the sisters shared . Pabbie warns Elsa to control her powers — a strike to Anna 's heart would have been fatal . In an effort to protect Anna , the king and queen lock the castle gates and generally restrict Elsa to her new separate bedroom . Confused by the sudden loss of contact by Elsa , Anna makes repeated failed attempts to draw her out of her room . Elsa cares too much for her sister , traumatized by the near @-@ death experience and she resists reconnecting with Anna . Eventually , the younger sister ceases trying to rekindle their bond . The sisters become even more isolated from each other after their parents , the King and Queen of Arendelle , die in a shipwreck . Devastated by the news , Anna tries to reunite with her sister , looking for love and comfort in the tragedy . Elsa remains in her room , not attending her parents ' funeral . 
 Three years later , when Elsa becomes a young adult , she is set to be crowned queen . The people of Arendelle are joyously preparing for her coronation day . Anna is flushed with excitement as the castle gates are opened for the first time since the sisters ' childhood . The young princess expresses how cheerful she is when she leaves her lonely life and meets people , as well as her hopes to find romance and a love interest . While exploring the town , Anna bumps into a horse owned by Prince Hans of the Southern Isles . Despite the awkward meeting at first , the pair quickly get acquainted and develop a mutual attraction for each other . Though Elsa fears of her secret being revealed to the public , her coronation goes on without incident . At the reception party , Anna is offered a waltz from Hans and the two have a date around the kingdom . They later find out that they have much in common , and Anna agrees to Hans ' marriage proposal . Anna asks for Elsa 's blessing to marry Hans , but she refuses and criticizes her for engaging with someone she has just met . This raises an argument between the two with Anna losing her temper , culminating in Elsa getting angry and accidentally exposing her abilities . Upon the guests ' ( including Anna ) horrified reactions , Elsa flees the castle in panic and goes into hiding in the icy mountains . During her retreat , she inadvertently unleashes an eternal winter throughout Arendelle . Far from there , Elsa decides to let go her powers and build an enormous ice palace . Anna , believing it 's her fault , determines to find her sister and bring her back , leaving Hans in charge of Arendelle . 
 At a trading post on her journey , Anna meets a mountain man named Kristoff , an ice harvester who agrees to lead her to the North Mountain , where he knows that a magical phenomenon has occurred and helps her escape a pack of wolves , resulting in his sled being destroyed after falling down into a large hole and catching on fire . The duo and Kristoff 's reindeer Sven , encounter the sister 's snowman , Olaf , who was unknowingly brought to life by Elsa and later leads them to her palace . The sisters reunite , but Elsa is reluctant to help Anna by ending the eternal winter . Upset , she loses control of her powers , striking Anna in her heart . Desperate to get her sister to leave , Elsa creates a giant snow creature , and it throws Anna and her friends away from the palace . Upon noticing Anna 's hair is turning white , Kristoff takes her back to his adoptive family of trolls . Pabbie tells Anna that her heart has been frozen by her sister 's magic and only an act of true love can save her from freezing completely . Kristoff , believing that a romantic kiss from Hans will heal her , takes Anna back to the kingdom . 
 Meanwhile , Hans has led a group of soldiers to the ice palace . Elsa 's defenses are not enough and she is taken back to Arendelle 's dungeon unconscious . At the castle , Anna 's request for a kiss is denied by Hans , who reveals their engagement was merely a ploy to seize the throne of Arendelle . He locks Anna in her room without a fire , leaving her to die . Hans falsely claims that Anna is already dead and that they spoke their marriage vows before she died , making him the ruler of Arendelle . Olaf aids Anna while revealing to her Kristoff 's love for her . Elsa also escapes into the fjord , her fears triggering a massive blizzard , but breaks down in shock when Hans tells her that she killed Anna and the blizzard stops . While the end of the storm allows Anna to reunite with Kristoff , she sees Hans ready to kill Elsa , and with her final breath , she stops him from killing her sister and inadvertently knocks him unconscious just as she freezes solid — a result of the earlier accident . 
 As Elsa grieves for her sister , Anna begins to thaw , since her choice to sacrifice herself to save her elder sister rather than herself constitutes " an act of true love " . Realizing love is the key to controlling her powers , Elsa is able to thaw the kingdom and use her magic safely in public . Anna confronts Hans and punches him in the face , making him fall off the ship into the water . She then buys Kristoff a previously @-@ promised new sled and they share a kiss , starting their new relationship . Anna and Elsa 's sisterly bond is rekindled , with Elsa promising never to shut the castle gates again , much to Anna 's joy . 
 = = = Once Upon a Time = = = 
 Anna appears in the fourth season of Once Upon a Time , with actress Elizabeth <unk> portraying the character . Following the events of the film Frozen , Anna is preparing to wed Kristoff when Elsa finds a diary from their mother stating their real reason for their parents ' fatal trip . Determined to seek answers , Anna postpones her wedding and travels to the Enchanted Forest ( known as Misthaven in Arendelle ) . Anna meets David , a friend of Kristoff 's , and trains him in swordsmanship so he can defend his farm from the evil warlord Bo Peep . Following Bo Peep 's defeat , David gives Anna his horse and David 's mother gives Anna the name of Rumplestiltskin , a powerful wizard who she believes can give her the answers she is looking for . Anna visits Rumplestiltskin ( Robert Carlyle ) who tells her that the King and Queen of Arendelle came to him , and he will tell her what they said if she administers a potion to an old man . Anna is afraid the potion is poison and pours it into the old man 's fire . She returns to Rumplestiltskin 's lair and lies , saying she has given the man the potion , and quickly learns it was an antidote , not a poison . In not giving him the drink , Anna has broken her deal with Rumplestiltskin and subjected the man to turn into a mouse . The deal , when broken , meant that Anna had to be Rumplestiltskin 's slave — but , alas , Anna gets control of the dagger that controls him , and orders him to never harm her or her sister , and to send her back home with Rumplestiltskin 's weapon , a magic @-@ stealing hat . Back in Arendelle , Anna admits to Kristoff that Rumplestiltskin told her that her parents were afraid of Elsa . She does not tell this to Elsa , but is shocked to see that Elsa is learning to control her power — due to a new woman by the name of Ingrid ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) , who claims she is their mother 's sister and also has magic snow powers like her sister Elsa . Anna never knew their mother had a sister , so she is immediately skeptical . She goes to meet Grand Pabbie and the rock trolls to find out if this is the truth . While purchasing supplies at Oaken 's shop , Anna runs into Belle ( Emilie de Ravin ) and they become friends . Together , they journey to the rock trolls , where Anna learns that her mother had two sisters named Ingrid and Helga , but Grand Pabbie changed everyone 's memory in all of Arendelle . On the return journey back to the castle , Anna and Belle run into Ingrid . Ingrid sees that Anna has Rumplestiltskin 's magic @-@ stealing hat and believes she will betray her , so she grabs hold of Anna and imprisons her . Ingrid tells Anna that she has nothing in common with either her or Elsa as she has no magic as they , and now Ingrid must replace her . Eventually , Anna reunites with her sister , helps Ingrid see the errors of her ways , and marries Kristoff . 
 With the introduction of Frozen characters , the season 4 of Once Upon a Time saw a 31 @-@ percent increase in ratings from the autumn of 2013 ( 9 @.@ 3 million viewers ) , marking its best ratings in almost two years . 
 = = = Frozen Fever = = = 
 A year after the events of the movie , Elsa throws a birthday for Anna . However Anna discovers , through Elsa 's continuous sneezing that Elsa has caught a cold . Despite trying to make the party perfect for her sister , Elsa 's sneezes create tiny snowmen which try to take the cake for themselves , and she nearly falls off the clocktower due to her condition . Afterwards Anna takes Elsa to rest and feeds her soup , while Kristoff , Sven , and Olaf help transport the snowmen to Elsa 's ice palace in the mountains . 
 = = = Frozen holiday special = = = 
 Anna will appear in a Frozen holiday special along with Elsa , Kristoff , Sven , and Olaf , scheduled to air on ABC in 2017 . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 = = = = Merchandise = = = = 
 On November 6 , 2013 , Disney Consumer Products began releasing a line of merchandise featuring Anna in Disney Store and other retailers . Various versions of Anna dolls include the fashion doll set , the mini @-@ doll set , plush doll , Anna @-@ as @-@ a @-@ toddler doll , and a special version called Musical Magic Elsa and Anna Dolls , which lights up and plays their signature songs that appear in the film when users hold their hands or they hold each other 's hands . Anna 's merchandise also covers a wide range of other products , such as rolling luggage , boots , clothes , nightgowns , bowls , plates , coffee mugs , and home <unk> . In addition , the film was adapted as simplified storybooks for children , with diverse versions featuring sound effects , original character voices , and mini projectors that project movie images on the wall . One of those books , called A Sister More Like Me , includes illustrations by Brittney Lee , the film 's visual development artist . Both Anna and Elsa appear as playable characters in Disney Infinity through the use of their corresponding figurines . 
 = = = = Theme parks = = = = 
 In November 2013 , prior to the release of Frozen , Anna and Elsa began daily meet @-@ and @-@ greet sessions at Walt Disney Parks and Resorts in Florida and California , US . In Walt Disney World , the sisters had their debut on October 22 , 2013 , in a temporary attraction at Disney 's Hollywood Studios while their main attractions in Epcot were being built , then officially made appearances in the Norway Pavilion of Epcot on November 2 , 2013 , alongside a gallery of Norwegian culture which the film 's setting and design drew inspirations from . A cottage called the " Royal Reception " was set up in the Fantasyland section of Disneyland , featuring the pair and an audio @-@ animatronic Olaf speaking on the cottage roof . In February 2014 , these meet @-@ and @-@ greet sessions were extended indefinitely , with wait time to meet the princesses frequently exceeding two hours , which is longer than any previous Disney characters . As of March 2014 , it was reported that this wait time had reached four or five hours . Additionally , Elsa , Anna , and Olaf were given a Frozen @-@ themed float for Disneyland Paris ' Disney Magic on Parade . On March 9 , 2014 , the three made appearances again on their own Frozen parade float in Festival of Fantasy Parade at Magic Kingdom theme park , Walt Disney World , with Anna showing up in her coronation dress for the first time in a Disney park . On April 20 , 2014 , Anna and Elsa moved from Epcot to the Princess Fairytale Hall at Magic Kingdom , with wait time to see the characters amounted to three hours , comparing to Cinderella and Rapunzel 's 15 minutes . 
 Anna made a few appearances in Disney California Adventure 's Winter Dreams , a 30 @-@ minute , winter @-@ themed new show of the nighttime spectacle World of Color with Olaf , the show 's host , and Elsa . Disneyland Paris 's nighttime spectacular Disney Dreams ! featured Anna as the French co @-@ narrator of the show , alongside the English @-@ speaking Olaf . Scenes from the original film , featuring Anna and other characters like Olaf and Kristoff , appear on the castle while Elsa is singing " Let It Go " , during the Frozen segment in the Magic Kingdom nighttime projection show , Celebrate the Magic . Coinciding with the film 's release , Anna began making meet @-@ and @-@ greet sessions aboard the Disney Cruise Line 's Disney Dream cruise ship . 
 On May 16 , 2014 , it was announced that Disneyland would debut a Frozen pre @-@ parade featuring Anna , Elsa , and Olaf . It premiered June 13 , 2014 , and precedes performances of Mickey 's <unk> Parade . From July 5 to September 1 , 2014 , as part of ' Frozen ' Summer Fun show at Disney 's Hollywood Studios , Anna and Elsa will appear in a horse @-@ drawn sleigh making their way down Hollywood Boulevard , alongside Kristoff and skaters , skiers and ice cutters in the Anna and Elsa 's Royal Welcome section . The sisters will also make appearances in For the First Time in Forever : A Frozen Sing @-@ Along Celebration , where they are joined by royal historians to retell the history of Arendelle ; and " Frozen " Fireworks Spectacular alongside Kristoff and Olaf , a fireworks display set to the music of Frozen . Other characters from the film will also appear in their respective offerings : Olaf in Olaf on Summer Vacation , the Oaken 's family in Wandering Oaken 's Trading Post & Frozen Funland , and " Coolest Summer Ever " Dance Party featuring a DJ and live band . In response to strong demand , Disney Parks subsequently announced on August 7 that Frozen Summer Fun would be extended to September 28 . 
 On August 19 , 2014 , it was initially announced that Elsa & Anna 's Boutique ( replacing Studio Disney 365 ) would open mid @-@ September in Downtown Disney at the Disneyland Resort . The opening date was later changed to October 6 , 2014 , and the store name was changed to " Anna & Elsa 's Boutique " . The location includes products inspired by Anna , Elsa , and Olaf . 
 While there hadn 't been any official announcements from Disney regarding a coronation for Anna and Elsa , it had been announced in late August 2014 that a special character meal would be held by a group of travel agents in the morning of September 24 , 2014 . While not officially organized by Disney , the event , called My Royal Coronation , would feature the official Anna and Elsa characters owned by Disney with assistance from the company . On September 12 , 2014 , Walt Disney World announced that a Frozen attraction was scheduled to open in early 2016 at Epcot 's World Showcase in the Norway pavilion , replacing the park 's Maelstrom ride . The attraction features the kingdom of Arendelle with music and scenes from the film , as well as meet @-@ and @-@ greets with Anna and Elsa . Anna , Elsa , Kristoff , and Olaf will make appearances in Mickey ’ s Once Upon a Christmastime Parade , offered during Mickey ’ s Very Merry Christmas Party at Magic Kingdom in November and December 2014 ( from November 7 to December 31 ) . 
 On November 13 , 2014 , prior to " A Sparkling Christmas " Evert , Anna and Elsa began meet @-@ and @-@ greet sessions at Hong Kong Disneyland . 
 Beginning December 20 , 2014 , the Anna and Elsa meet and greet at Disneyland Resort was moved from Disneyland park to a new location in the Disney Animation Building called " Anna and Elsa ’ s Royal Welcome " in Disney California Adventure . In addition , the Storybook Land Canal Boats at Disneyland were updated to include the village of Arendelle from the film , including Anna and Elsa 's castle . Officially starting January 7 , 2015 , Anna began making appearances alongside Elsa and Kristoff at Disney California Adventure in " For the First Time in Forever — A Frozen Sing @-@ Along Celebration " in Hollywood Land as part of the park 's " Frozen Fun " event . Also starting January 7 , Anna and Elsa are making appearances in a Frozen play at the Royal Theatre in Disneyland park . 
 Beginning May 22 , 2015 , Disneyland debuted a new nighttime parade called " Paint the Night " , which includes a Frozen float featuring Anna , Elsa , and Olaf , as part of the park 's 60th anniversary celebration . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reviews = = = 
 Collider.com writer Matt Goldberg referred to Anna as a character who " can go from cute to melancholy to odd to defiant and never miss a beat " . Emma <unk> of Christian Post described her and Elsa as the " most lovable and charismatic characters yet " , while Tony Hicks of San Jose Mercury News wrote that both Anna and Elsa were depicted as devoted from the start , and " [ Anna 's ] confusion and Elsa 's anguish as she shuts herself away from the world — and her sister — is palatable . " Deepanjana Pal from First Post commented that Anna " is very much a child who needs to grow up and she does in the course of the film . " The Wall Street Journal suggested that the character become more endearing for being " exactly the free spirit she seems to be " . Noah Lee of The Coast News was impressed by the heroine duo Anna and Elsa , and said , " I never lost interest in the drastic measures Anna took or the tribulations Elsa faced . " Travis Bean , a reviewer of Community Newspaper Group put emphasis on the lessons that kids could perceive from the film , saying , " Children can also root for Anna to race through the forest and break through Elsa 's icy walls and prove that love conquers all fears . " Linda Barnard , Toronto Star film critic , described the sisters as " engaging female characters " , particularly praised Anna for her funny and iron @-@ willed characteristics . Sabina Ibarra from Geek Exchange commended that the directors had crafted two very real girls " who come into their own and also come together in this amazing tale . " 
 Kristen Bell was lauded for her performance as Anna in the film . Michelle Im , writing for the Eye of the Tiger referred to the character as " bubbly and spirited " , and commented , " Not only was [ Bell ] able to nail those <unk> and belting notes in her songs , it was actually her singing them . " The Coast News review of the film wrote that Bell " earns top marks " for instilling a spirited sensibility in the clumsy but well @-@ meaning Anna . <unk> , a film critic for Blogcritics , commended the actress ' singing ability , stating that she and Menzel " sing their hearts out , with two showstoppers in Let it Go and For the First Time in Forever " . Colin Covert of Colorado Springs ' The Gazette considered Bell 's performance as a " flawless delivery " . Matt Goldberg extolled the relationship between Anna and her elder sister Elsa , writing , " There 's so much to love about Frozen , but at the top of the list is the emphasis on [ Anna ] and Elsa 's relationship . Anna still has an infatuation with the charming Hans and romantic chemistry with the flustered Kristoff , but her greatest love is for her sister . [ Elsa ] is mostly scared and guilt @-@ ridden . She 's an incredibly sympathetic character , and it 's a fresh spin on depicting estrangement between siblings . Anna has so much life and enthusiasm , and we want to see her share it with Elsa . " Magdalena <unk> of The Heights referred to this sisterly bond as " what truly makes the film and the moral that comes with it " , commenting , " the plot is set up to lead the viewer into thinking that it needs to be true love 's kiss — something which Anna then goes to seek . This journey sends her on a difficult adventure in which she learns about both sacrifice and love . " Debbie Lynn Elias of Culver City Observer commented , " Female driven with confidence and positivity , Elsa and Anna are like two sides of a coin , both strong , albeit one through power and confidence and the other through clumsy <unk> and love , " while Stephen Holden from The New York Times appreciated that instead of a romantic attachment , it was a sisterly love and devotion that drove the story , which departed greatly from traditional Disney formula . Noah Lee described Anna and Elsa 's relationship as " genuine " , saying , " watching those themes of family and love versus isolation and fear touched my heart in more ways than one . " 
 However , the character was not without criticisms . Michelle Im from the Eye of the Tiger referred to Anna 's falling immediately in love with a prince as the only personal development in her character , and found it " disappointing " in comparison with Elsa 's emotionally evolving personality . Anna Smith of The Guardian disliked that both Anna and Elsa were drawn with slender figures and large eyes as is typical of Disney princesses . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Both Anna and Elsa were nominated for Best Animated Female by the Alliance of Women Film Journalists , with only Anna winning the award . Frozen also won Women Film Critics Circle award in the same category . 
 = Louie B. Nunn = 
 Louie Broady Nunn ( March 8 , 1924 – January 29 , 2004 ) was the 52nd governor of Kentucky . His election in 1967 made him the first Republican to hold that office since the end of Simeon Willis ' term in 1947 , and the last to hold the position until the election of Ernie Fletcher in 2003 . 
 After rendering noncombat service in World War II and graduating from law school , Nunn entered local politics , becoming the first Republican county judge in the history of Barren County , Kentucky . He worked on the campaigns of Republican candidates for national office , including John Sherman Cooper , Thruston Morton , and Dwight D. Eisenhower . He was the Republican nominee for governor in 1963 , but ultimately lost a close election to Democrat Ned Breathitt . An executive order signed by Governor Bert T. Combs that desegregated Kentucky 's public services became a major issue in the campaign . Nunn vowed to repeal the order if elected , while Breathitt promised to continue it . 
 In 1967 , Nunn again ran for governor . After defeating Marlow Cook in the Republican gubernatorial primary , he eked out a victory over Democrat Henry Ward . The state offices were split between Democrats and Republicans , and Nunn was saddled with a Democratic lieutenant governor , Wendell H. Ford . Despite a Democratic majority in the General Assembly , Nunn was able to enact most of his priorities , including tax increases that funded improvements to the state park system and the construction of a statewide network of mental health centers . He oversaw the transition of Northern Kentucky University from a community college to a senior institution and brought the University of Louisville into the state university system . The later years of his administration were marred by race riots in Louisville and a violent protest against the Vietnam War at the University of Kentucky . Following his term as governor , he unsuccessfully challenged Walter " Dee " Huddleston in the 1972 senatorial election and John Y. Brown , Jr. in the 1979 gubernatorial contest . In his later years , he supported the political ambitions of his son , Steve , and advocated for the legalization of industrial hemp in Kentucky . He died of a heart attack on January 29 , 2004 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Louie Broady Nunn was born in Park , Kentucky – a small community on the border of Barren and Metcalfe counties – on March 8 , 1924 . His given name , Louie , honored a deceased friend of his father 's ; his middle name , Broady , was a surname in his mother 's family . Louie was the youngest of the four sons born to Waller Harrison and Mary ( Roberts ) Nunn ; their youngest child , Virginia , was their only daughter . The <unk> were farmers and operated a general store , though Waller suffered from a congenital heart condition and severe arthritis and was limited to light chores . The eldest brother , Lee Roy , became an influential campaigner and fundraiser for the Republican Party . 
 Nunn obtained the first eight years of his education in a one @-@ room , one @-@ teacher schoolhouse in Park . During his teenage years , he gave himself a hernia while lifting a heavy piece of farm equipment . This , combined with his father 's health history , may have contributed to back pain issues that plagued him for most of his life . In 1938 , he matriculated to <unk> High School . He earned a Bachelor of Arts degree at Bowling Green Business University . 
 After the bombing of Pearl Harbor on December 7 , 1941 , Nunn departed for Cincinnati , Ohio , to take flying lessons in hopes of becoming a B @-@ 17 pilot . By the time he finished his flight training , however , the Army had discontinued its air cadet program . On June 2 , 1943 , he enlisted in the Army and received his recruit training at Fort Wolters near Fort Worth , Texas . He was transferred numerous times . First , he was stationed at Sheppard Air Force Base near Wichita Falls , Texas . Next , he was assigned to the 97th Infantry Division , then received additional training at Fort Leonard Wood in Missouri . Finally , he transferred to the Army Medical Corps , but his back injury flared up , and he received a medical discharge on September 13 , 1945 . He held the rank of corporal at the time of his discharge . 
 Following his military duty , Nunn pursued a pre @-@ law degree at the University of Cincinnati . Three years later , he matriculated to the University of Louisville School of Law where he was a classmate of future congressman Marlow Cook . Nunn earned his Bachelor of Laws degree in 1950 . He opened his legal practice in Glasgow , Kentucky , in September 1950 . 
 On October 12 , 1950 , Nunn married Beula Cornelius Aspley , a divorcee from Bond , Kentucky . The couple had two children – Jennie Lou , born in 1951 , and Steve , born in 1952 . Aspley also had three children from her first marriage . Nunn left the Methodist denomination in which he had been raised after marrying Aspley , joining her as a member of the Christian Church . 
 = = Political career = = 
 On June 17 , 1953 , Nunn declared as a Republican candidate for county judge and was ultimately the only Republican to declare . In the Democratic primary , one of the challengers charged that the incumbent had used his office for personal gain . In the wake of the investigation , a group of disgruntled Democrats formed an organization to elect Nunn , who defeated his Democratic challenger by a vote of 5 @,@ 171 to 4 @,@ 378 , becoming the first Republican elected county judge in the history of the heavily Democratic county . 
 In 1956 , Nunn served as statewide campaign manager for Dwight D. Eisenhower 's presidential bid , as well as the senatorial campaigns of John Sherman Cooper and Thruston Morton . The Kentucky Junior Chamber of Commerce named him " Young Man of the Year " in 1956 . He was not a candidate for re @-@ election as county judge in 1957 , but was appointed as city attorney for the city of Glasgow in 1958 . He considered running for governor in 1959 , but became convinced it would be a bad year for Republicans and did not make the race . He managed successful re @-@ election campaigns for Senator Cooper in 1960 and Senator Morton in 1962 . He also managed the state campaign of presidential candidate Richard Nixon in 1960 . Although John F. Kennedy won the election , Nixon carried Kentucky 54 % to 46 % . 
 Nunn was the Republican nominee for governor of Kentucky in 1963 . During the campaign , he attacked an executive order issued by sitting Democratic governor Bert T. Combs that desegregated public accommodations in the state . Calling the order " a dictatorial edict of questionable constitutionality " , Nunn charged that it had been dictated by U.S. Attorney General Robert Kennedy . In a television appearance , Nunn displayed a copy of the order and declared " My first act will be to abolish this . " The New Republic accused him of conducting " the first outright segregationist campaign in Kentucky " . He lost the election to Democrat Ned Breathitt by a margin of just over 13 @,@ 000 votes . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 In 1967 , Nunn faced his old classmate , Jefferson County judge Marlow Cook , in Kentucky 's first Republican gubernatorial primary in many years . Nunn attacked Cook as a " liberal , former New Yorker " , and some of his supporters made reference to Cook 's " Jewish backers " . The injection of antisemitism into the campaign drew criticism from Senator John Sherman Cooper , who threw his support to Cook . Nunn also attacked Cook for his Catholic faith , a tactic that proved particularly effective with the state 's Protestant voters . In a close vote , Nunn defeated Cook to secure the nomination . 
 Nunn then faced Democrat Henry Ward in the general election . During the campaign , Nunn charged that Democrats wanted to raise taxes to pay for administrative inefficiencies . He also played up divisions within the Democratic party , and was endorsed by two @-@ time former Democratic Governor A. B. " Happy " Chandler . Nunn allied himself closely with the national Republican campaign against Lyndon B. Johnson , bringing several prominent Republicans to the state to speak for him . He won the election by a vote of 454 @,@ 123 to 425 @,@ 674 , despite the fact that half of the other state offices went to Democrats , including the lieutenant governorship , won by Wendell H. Ford . 
 The General Assembly was controlled by Democrats , but Nunn was able to pass most of his agenda . Despite a campaign promise not to raise taxes , when the outgoing Breathitt administration projected a shortfall of $ 24 million in the state budget , Nunn convinced the General Assembly to pass an increase in the motor vehicle license fee from $ 5 @.@ 00 to $ 12 @.@ 50 and raise the state sales tax from three percent to five percent . Nunn 's budget focused on increased funding for education , mental health , and economic development . In the 1970 legislative session , the General Assembly enacted Nunn 's proposals to eliminate taxes on prescription drugs and the use fee charged on vehicles transferred within families , but rejected his plans to reduce the income tax for low @-@ income families and increase tax credits for the blind and the elderly . 
 Nunn oversaw the entry of the University of Louisville into the state 's public university system . Fulfilling a campaign promise , he helped transform Northern Kentucky Community College into Northern Kentucky State College ( which later became Northern Kentucky University ) , a four @-@ year institution and member of the state university system . Historian Lowell H. Harrison argued that these actions diluted state support to existing higher education institutions . Nunn also supported the newly created Kentucky Educational Television . 
 Nunn doubled the accommodations in the state park system . Barren River Lake State Resort Park was completed during his tenure , and three other parks were planned and funded during his administration . He also greatly improved the state mental health system . Under his leadership , a statewide network of 22 mental health centers was completed , and all four state psychiatric hospitals were accredited for the first time . Nunn called the revamping of the state mental health system his proudest accomplishment as governor . There was not total agreement between Nunn and the legislature , however . The governor vetoed one @-@ quarter of the bills passed in the 1968 legislative session and 14 percent of those passed in the 1970 session . An open housing bill became law without Nunn 's signature , and he also refused to sign the 1970 state budget as a form of protest . ( Unsigned bills become law after ten days under the Kentucky Constitution , in contrast to the pocket veto provision in the federal constitution . ) 
 A supporter of President Nixon 's law @-@ and @-@ order philosophies , Nunn called out the National Guard to break up violent protests in the state . In May 1968 , he sent the Guard to Louisville to break up race @-@ related protests that followed peaceful civil rights marches . This action was criticized by civil rights leaders across the state . In May 1970 , Nunn again dispatched the Guard to quell protests against the Vietnam War at the University of Kentucky , and imposed a curfew that interfered with final examinations . The latter protest culminated in the burning of one of the university 's ROTC buildings . 
 From 1968 to 1969 , Nunn served on the Executive Committee of the National Governors ' Conference and , in 1971 , chaired the Republican Governors Association . The Louisville Courier @-@ Journal said of Nunn 's administration " On the whole , his management of the state 's finances has been sound . ... [ H ] e took a general fund facing a deficit , restored it to solvency , and kept it healthy . No scandals have marred the Nunn record . He chose able men to direct his revenue and finance departments , and their efficiency saved the state millions of dollars . " Historian Thomas D. Clark called Nunn the strongest of Kentucky 's eight Republican governors . 
 = = Later career = = 
 Following his term as governor , Nunn opened a law practice in Lexington . He campaigned for a seat in the U.S. Senate in 1972 , losing to Democrat Walter " Dee " Huddleston . His loss came despite a landslide victory for Richard Nixon in the state and was generally blamed on his support for an increased sales tax during his gubernatorial administration . He continued working on behalf of Republican candidates , and backed Ronald Reagan 's primary challenge to incumbent Gerald Ford in 1975 . His last run for office came in 1979 when he was again the Republican nominee for governor against Democrat John Y. Brown , Jr . He decried the excessive spending , expanding government , and increased state employment that had occurred under Democratic administrations . He also attacked Brown for his playboy image ( he was married to former Miss America Phyllis George ) and his refusal to release his tax returns , as well as his inexperience in government . Despite these attacks , Nunn lost by a vote of 558 @,@ 008 to 381 @,@ 278 and returned to his legal practice . 
 In the 1980s , Nunn served on the boards of regents of Morehead State University and Kentucky State University . He served as a lecturer at Western Kentucky University , and received the Distinguished Alumni Award from the University of Louisville in 1999 . During the late 1980s , he criticized Senator Mitch McConnell , one of the emerging leaders of the state 's Republican party , for not doing more to support other Republicans in their bids for office ; McConnell maintained that he had to focus on his own reelection campaign in 1990 . In 1988 , Nunn unsuccessfully challenged Congressman Jim Bunning in his bid to retain his position as Kentucky 's Republican national committeeman . 
 In 1994 , Nunn 's wife Beula filed for divorce from a hospital bed where she lay dying of cancer . She claimed she was trying to preserve some of her estate for her children . A Metcalfe County judge granted the divorce , but Nunn challenged the ruling , and it was later set aside . Some property issues were still pending at the time of Beula 's death in 1995 . During the divorce proceedings , Nunn 's son Steve sided with his mother , causing a rift between him and his father . A 1994 letter from the elder Nunn alleged that Steve Nunn physically and verbally abused Louie Nunn and other members of his family . The letter was discovered in 2009 when Steve Nunn was charged with the murder of his former fiancée , Amanda Ross . 
 In 1999 , Nunn again considered a bid for governor , precluding a potential bid by his son , Steve . He cited personal and health issues for not making the race . In 2000 , he backed the presidential campaign of Senator John McCain . Nunn was reconciled to his son Steve , and when Steve ran for governor in 2003 , Louie supported him . After Steve Nunn ran third in a four @-@ way primary , the elder Nunn supported the Republican nominee , Ernie Fletcher , hosting a fundraiser for him . 
 Nunn also became an advocate of legalizing industrial hemp in Kentucky , writing , " Frankly , I was opposed to the legalization of hemp for years because I had been of the opinion hemp was marijuana . I was short @-@ sighted in my thinking , and I was wrong . " In 2000 , Nunn secured an acquittal for actor Woody Harrelson , who came to Lee County , Kentucky , and planted hemp seeds in open defiance of Kentucky 's law forbidding the cultivation of hemp . Later , he traveled to South Dakota where , at the base of Mount Rushmore , he publicly presented an Oglala Lakota leader with bales of hemp after the tribe 's crop was confiscated by officers from the federal Drug Enforcement Administration . 
 Louie B. Nunn died of a heart attack at his home in Versailles , Kentucky , on January 29 , 2004 , hours after hosting a luncheon with labor leaders seeking help in dealing with the newly elected Fletcher administration . He was buried at the Cosby Methodist Church cemetery in Hart County , Kentucky . The Cumberland Parkway was renamed the Louie B. Nunn Cumberland Parkway in 2000 , and the main lodge at the Barren River Lake State Resort Park is also named in Nunn 's honor . 
 = Pennsylvania Turnpike = 
 The Pennsylvania Turnpike is a toll highway operated by the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania . A controlled @-@ access highway , it runs for 360 miles ( 580 km ) across the state . The turnpike begins at the Ohio state line in Lawrence County , where the road continues west into Ohio as the Ohio Turnpike . It ends at the New Jersey border at the Delaware River – Turnpike Toll Bridge over the Delaware River in Bucks County , where it continues east as the Pearl Harbor Memorial Extension of the New Jersey Turnpike . 
 The highway runs east – west through the state , connecting the Pittsburgh , Harrisburg , and Philadelphia areas . It crosses the Appalachian Mountains in central Pennsylvania through four tunnels . The turnpike is part of the Interstate Highway System ; it is designated as part of Interstate 76 ( I @-@ 76 ) between the Ohio border and Valley Forge , I @-@ 70 and I @-@ 76 between New Stanton and Breezewood , and I @-@ 276 between Valley Forge and the New Jersey border . The road uses a ticket system of tolling between the Warrendale and Neshaminy Falls toll plazas . An additional eastbound toll plaza is located at Gateway , near the Ohio border , while a cashless westbound toll plaza using toll @-@ by @-@ plate is located at the Delaware River Bridge . E @-@ ZPass , a form of electronic toll collection , is accepted at all toll plazas . 
 During the 1930s the Pennsylvania Turnpike was designed to improve automobile transportation across the mountains of Pennsylvania , using seven tunnels built for the abandoned South Pennsylvania Railroad in the 1880s . The road opened on October 1 , 1940 between Irwin and Carlisle as the first long @-@ distance limited @-@ access highway in the United States , leading to the construction of other limited @-@ access toll roads and the Interstate Highway System . 
 Following World War II , the turnpike was extended east to Valley Forge in 1950 and west to the Ohio border in 1951 . In 1954 , the road was extended further east to the Delaware River . The mainline turnpike was finished in 1956 with the completion of the Delaware River Bridge . During the 1960s an additional tube was bored at four of the two @-@ lane tunnels , while the other three tunnels were bypassed ; these improvements made the entire length of the highway four lanes wide . Improvements continue to be made to the road : rebuilding the original section to modern standards , widening portions of the turnpike to six lanes , and adding interchanges . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The turnpike runs east @-@ west across Pennsylvania , from the Ohio state line in Lawrence County to the New Jersey state line in Bucks County . It passes through the Pittsburgh , Harrisburg , and Philadelphia areas , along with farmland and woodland . The highway crosses the Appalachian Mountains , in the central part of the state , through four tunnels . The Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission , created in 1937 to construct , finance , operate , and maintain the road , controls the highway . Five members comprise the commission , including the secretary of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and four other members appointed by the governor of Pennsylvania . In 2014 , the roadway had an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 117 @,@ 000 vehicles between Norristown and I @-@ 476 to a low of 12 @,@ 000 vehicles between the Ohio border and Pennsylvania Route 18 ( PA 18 ) . As part of the Interstate Highway System , the turnpike is part of the National Highway System . The Pennsylvania Turnpike is designated a Blue Star Memorial Highway honoring those who have served in the United States Armed Forces ; the Garden Club Federation of Pennsylvania has placed Blue Star Memorial Highway markers at service plazas along the turnpike . 
 In addition to the east @-@ west Pennsylvania Turnpike , the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission also operates the Northeast Extension of the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( I @-@ 476 ) , the Beaver Valley Expressway ( I @-@ 376 ) , the Mon @-@ Fayette Expressway ( PA 43 ) , the Amos K. Hutchinson Bypass ( PA 66 ) , and the Southern Beltway ( PA 576 ) . 
 = = = Western extension = = = 
 The Pennsylvania Turnpike begins at the Ohio state line in Lawrence County ( beyond which it continues west as the Ohio Turnpike ) . From the state line , the turnpike heads southeast as a four @-@ lane freeway designated as I @-@ 76 through the rural area south of New Castle . A short distance from the Ohio border , the eastbound lanes come to the Gateway toll plaza . The highway then crosses into Beaver County , where it reaches its first interchange with I @-@ 376 ( the Beaver Valley Expressway ) in Big Beaver . 
 After this interchange , the turnpike reaches the exit for PA 18 in Homewood before crossing the Beaver River on the Beaver River Bridge . The road then enters Butler County , where it comes to Cranberry Township . Here , an interchange accesses U.S. Route 19 ( US 19 ) and I @-@ 79 . The turnpike continues through a mix of rural land and suburban residential development north of Pittsburgh into Allegheny County . 
 The road then approaches the Warrendale toll plaza ( where toll ticketing begins ) , and continues southeast to an interchange with PA 8 in Hampton Township . The turnpike then comes to the Allegheny Valley exit in Harmar Township , which provides access to PA 28 via Freeport Road . East of this interchange , the road heads south and crosses the Allegheny River on the six @-@ lane Allegheny River Turnpike Bridge . 
 After the Allegheny River crossing the turnpike returns to four lanes , passing through the Oakmont Country Club . The highway heads southeast to Monroeville , an eastern suburb of Pittsburgh ; an interchange with I @-@ 376 / US 22 ( Penn – Lincoln Parkway ) provides access to Pittsburgh . East of Monroeville , the turnpike continues through eastern Allegheny County before crossing into Westmoreland County . Here , it heads south to the exit for US 30 in Irwin . 
 = = = Irwin to Carlisle = = = 
 After the Irwin interchange , the Pennsylvania Turnpike widens to six lanes and heads into the rural area west of Greensburg . Curving southeast , it reaches New Stanton ; an interchange provides access to I @-@ 70 , US 119 and the southern terminus of PA 66 ( the Amos K. Hutchinson Bypass ) . The road narrows back to four lanes at this interchange , and I @-@ 70 forms a concurrency with I @-@ 76 on the turnpike . After New Stanton , the road winds southeast to the exit for PA 31 / PA 711 in Donegal . Continuing east past Donegal , the turnpike crosses Laurel Hill into Somerset County . 
 In this county , the road continues southeast to Somerset and an interchange with PA 601 accessing US 219 and Johnstown . East of Somerset the highway reaches Allegheny Mountain , going under it in the Allegheny Mountain Tunnel . Exiting the tunnel , the turnpike winds down the mountain at a three @-@ percent grade ( the steepest grade on the turnpike ) into a Bedford County valley . At Bedford , an exit for US 220 Business ( US 220 Bus . ) provides access to US 220 and the southern terminus of I @-@ 99 ; this exit also serves Altoona to the north . 
 East of Bedford the turnpike passes through the Bedford Narrows , a gap in Evitts Mountain . The turnpike , US 30 and the <unk> Branch of the Juniata River all pass through the 650 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 200 m ) narrows . The road winds through a valley south of the river , before traversing Clear Ridge Cut near Everett . Further east , at Breezewood , I @-@ 70 leaves the turnpike . 
 After Breezewood I @-@ 76 continues along the turnpike , heading northeast across Rays Hill into Fulton County . The turnpike continues east across Sideling Hill , before reaching an interchange with US 522 in Fort Littleton . After this interchange the highway parallels US 522 before curving east into Huntingdon County . The turnpike goes under Tuscarora Mountain through the Tuscarora Mountain Tunnel , entering Franklin County . It then curves northeast into a valley to the exit for PA 75 in Willow Hill . 
 Again heading east , the road passes under Kittatinny Mountain through the Kittatinny Mountain Tunnel . Shortly after exiting the tunnel , the highway enters the Blue Mountain Tunnel under Blue Mountain . Leaving that tunnel , the turnpike heads northeast along the base of Blue Mountain to an exit for PA 997 . East of this interchange the road enters Cumberland County , heading east through the Cumberland Valley on a stretch known as " the straightaway " . Further east , the turnpike reaches Carlisle and an interchange with US 11 providing access to I @-@ 81 . 
 = = = Philadelphia extension = = = 
 Approaching Harrisburg , the Pennsylvania Turnpike heads east through a mixture of rural land and suburban development . In Upper Allen Township , the highway reaches the US 15 interchange accessing Gettysburg to the south . The road continues east into York County , where it reaches the interchange with I @-@ 83 serving Harrisburg , its western suburbs and York to the south . East of I @-@ 83 it widens to six lanes , crossing the Susquehanna River into Dauphin County on the Susquehanna River Bridge and bypassing Harrisburg to the south . 
 In Lower Swatara Township the turnpike reaches an interchange with the southern end of I @-@ 283 , serving Harrisburg and its eastern suburbs . Here , the road narrows back to four lanes through suburban development near Middletown before continuing into rural areas . The turnpike crosses a corner of Lebanon County before entering Lancaster County . 
 In Lancaster County the highway passes through Pennsylvania Dutch Country to an interchange with PA 72 accessing Lebanon to the north and Lancaster to the south . Further east , the turnpike reaches an interchange with US 222 and PA 272 near Denver which serves the cities of Reading and Lancaster . The route continues into Berks County and an interchange with I @-@ 176 ( a freeway to Reading ) and PA 10 in Morgantown . 
 The turnpike then enters Chester County , running southeast to an exit for PA 100 north of Downingtown and the western suburbs of Philadelphia . Continuing east , it reaches an E @-@ ZPass @-@ only interchange with PA 29 near Malvern . The highway crosses Montgomery County to the Valley Forge interchange in King of Prussia , where I @-@ 76 splits from the turnpike and heads southeast ( as the Schuylkill Expressway ) toward Philadelphia . 
 = = = Delaware River extension = = = 
 After the Valley Forge interchange the turnpike is designated as I @-@ 276 and becomes a six @-@ lane road serving as a suburban commuter highway , crossing the Schuylkill River on the Schuylkill River Bridge near Norristown . In Plymouth Meeting , an interchange with Germantown Pike provides access to Norristown before the roadway reaches the Mid @-@ County Interchange . This interchange connects to I @-@ 476 , which heads south as the Blue Route and north as the Northeast Extension of the turnpike ; connecting the mainline turnpike to the Lehigh Valley and the Pocono Mountains . 
 After the Mid @-@ County Interchange , the main turnpike heads east through the northern suburbs of Philadelphia to Fort Washington and an interchange with PA 309 . One mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) later , the road has a westbound exit and entrance for Virginia Drive accessible only by E @-@ ZPass <unk> . In Willow Grove the highway reaches the PA 611 exit , crossing more suburban areas into Bucks County . In Bensalem , an interchange with US 1 provides access to Philadelphia . 
 The highway narrows back to four lanes before another E @-@ ZPass @-@ only exit for PA 132 , with an eastbound exit and entrance . A short distance later , the turnpike arrives at the east end of the ticket system at the Neshaminy Falls toll plaza . The road passes through more suburbs , crossing under I @-@ 95 where an interchange is currently under construction . Further east the turnpike reaches the final interchange , providing access to US 13 in Bristol , before coming to the westbound all @-@ electronic Delaware River Bridge toll plaza , where tolls can be paid with E @-@ ZPass or toll @-@ by @-@ plate at highway speeds . After this , the highway crosses the Delaware River into New Jersey on the Delaware River – Turnpike Toll Bridge . At this point , the I @-@ 276 designation and the Pennsylvania Turnpike end ; the road continues east as the Pearl Harbor Memorial Extension of the New Jersey Turnpike , which connects to the New Jersey Turnpike ( the Pearl Harbor Memorial Extension is an unsigned portion of I @-@ 95 ) . However , exit signs on the New Jersey Turnpike indicate I @-@ 276 / Pennsylvania Turnpike . 
 = = = Major bridges and tunnels = = = 
 The Pennsylvania Turnpike incorporates several major bridges and tunnels along its route . Four tunnels cross central Pennsylvania 's Appalachian Mountains . The 6 @,@ 070 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 850 m ) Allegheny Mountain Tunnel passes under Allegheny Mountain in Somerset County . The Tuscarora Mountain Tunnel runs beneath Tuscarora Mountain ( at the border of Huntingdon and Franklin Counties ) , and is 5 @,@ 236 feet ( 1 @,@ 596 m ) long . The Kittatinny Mountain and Blue Mountain Tunnels are adjacent to each other in Franklin County and are 4 @,@ 727 feet ( 1 @,@ 441 m ) and 4 @,@ 339 feet ( 1 @,@ 323 m ) long , respectively . 
 Five bridges carry the turnpike over major rivers in the state . The 1 @,@ 545 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 471 m ) Beaver River Bridge crosses the Beaver River in Beaver County . The highway crosses the Allegheny River in Allegheny County on the 2 @,@ 350 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 720 m ) Allegheny River Turnpike Bridge , and crosses the Susquehanna River between York and Dauphin Counties on the 5 @,@ 910 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) Susquehanna River Bridge . In Montgomery County , the turnpike crosses the Schuylkill River on the 1 @,@ 224 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 373 m ) Schuylkill River Bridge . At the New Jersey border in Bucks County , the highway is connected to the Pearl Harbor Memorial Extension of the New Jersey Turnpike by the 6 @,@ 571 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 2 @,@ 003 m ) Delaware River – Turnpike Toll Bridge over the Delaware River . 
 = = = Speed limits = = = 
 The turnpike had no enforced speed limit when it opened except for the tunnels , which had a 35 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 55 km / h ) speed limit . Some drivers traveled as fast as 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) on the road . In 1941 , speed limits of 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) for cars and 50 – 65 mph ( 80 – 105 km / h ) for trucks were enacted . During World War II , the turnpike adopted the national speed limit of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) ; after the war , the limit returned to 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) . 
 In 1953 , the speed limit on the portion of the highway between the Ohio border and Breezewood was lowered to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) to reduce the number of accidents , but returned to 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) when the measure proved ineffective . The limit on the turnpike was reduced to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) in 1956 for cars , buses and motorcycles , with other vehicles limited to 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . A minimum speed of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) was established in 1959 ; it was raised to 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) in 1965 . 
 With the passage of the 1974 National Maximum Speed Law , the speed limit on the turnpike was reduced to 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) . It was again raised to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) in 1995 , except for urban areas with a population greater than 50 @,@ 000 ; the latter retained the 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) speed limit . In 2005 , the turnpike commission approved raising the speed limit to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) for the entire length of the turnpike ( except the tunnels , mainline toll plazas and the winding portion near the Allegheny Mountain Tunnel , which retained the 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) limit ) . In 2014 , the speed limit on a portion of the turnpike was restored at 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) . On July 22 , 2014 , the speed limit increased to 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) between the Blue Mountain and Morgantown interchanges . On March 15 , 2016 , the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission approved raising the speed limit on the remainder of the turnpike to 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) , excluding sections that are posted with a 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) speed limit . On May 3 , 2016 , the speed limit increased to 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) on the 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) sections of the toll road . The speed limit remains 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) at construction zones , the tunnels , mainline toll plazas , the winding portion near the Allegheny Mountain Tunnel , and the section between Bensalem and the Delaware River Bridge . 
 = = Tolls = = 
 The Pennsylvania Turnpike uses the ticket system of tolling between the Warrendale and Neshaminy Falls toll plazas , as well as on the Northeast Extension to Wyoming Valley . When entering the turnpike , motorists receive a ticket listing the toll for each exit ; the ticket is surrendered when exiting , and the applicable toll is paid . If the ticket is lost , motorists are charged the maximum toll for that exit . An eastbound mainline toll plaza is located at Gateway near the Ohio border , charging a flat toll using cash or E @-@ ZPass , and an all @-@ electronic westbound mainline toll plaza is located at the Delaware River Bridge near the New Jersey border , charging a flat toll using toll @-@ by @-@ plate ( which uses license plate recognition to take a photo of the vehicle 's license plate and mail a bill to the vehicle owner ) or E @-@ ZPass at highway speeds . There is no toll between Gateway and Warrendale and between Neshaminy Falls and the Delaware River Bridge . E @-@ ZPass is accepted at all toll plazas . The PA 29 interchange and the westbound Virginia Drive and eastbound Street Road interchanges only accept E @-@ ZPass . 
 As of 2016 it costs a passenger vehicle $ 42 @.@ 30 to travel the length of the mainline turnpike between Warrendale and Neshaminy Falls using cash , and $ 30 @.@ 32 using E @-@ ZPass ; the eastbound Gateway toll plaza costs $ 6 @.@ 60 cash and $ 4 @.@ 61 with E @-@ ZPass for passenger vehicles while the westbound Delaware River Bridge toll plaza costs $ 6 @.@ 75 using toll @-@ by @-@ plate and $ 5 @.@ 00 using E @-@ ZPass . The average toll rate for the turnpike is $ 0 @.@ 13 per mile ( $ 0 @.@ 081 / km ) using cash and $ 0 @.@ 09 per mile ( $ 0 @.@ 056 / km ) using E @-@ ZPass . Since 2009 , the turnpike has raised tolls once a year , starting on January 1 , to provide funding for increasing annual payments to PennDOT , as mandated by Act 44 . As part of Act 89 signed in 2013 , the annual payments to PennDOT will end after 2022 ( 35 years earlier than the original proposal under Act 44 ) , but it is not known if the annual toll increases will continue after 2022 . With the annual rise in tolls , traffic has been shifting from the turnpike to local roads . 
 The turnpike commission announced plans to consider eliminating manned toll booths in favor of all @-@ electronic tolls . With this system , tolls will be paid with E @-@ ZPass or credit cards . Drivers unable to pay by either method will be billed by mail ( using license plate recognition ) , and a surcharge will be imposed . In addition to E @-@ ZPass , the turnpike commission offered other automated options to pay for tolls such as using a prepaid account that utilizes license plate recognition . McCormick Taylor and Wilbur Smith Associates have been hired to conduct a feasibility study on converting the road to all @-@ electronic tolls . On March 6 , 2012 , the turnpike commission announced that it was implementing an all @-@ electronic tolling plan . The turnpike commission will save $ 65 million annually on labor costs by eliminating toll collectors . Plans call for a 76 @-@ percent surcharge on motorists without E @-@ ZPass who are billed by mail ; this surcharge could raise the toll for a motorist without E @-@ ZPass to well over $ 50 to travel the entire turnpike . On January 3 , 2016 , all @-@ electronic tolling was introduced in the westbound direction at the Delaware River Bridge mainline toll plaza , while the eastern terminus of the ticket system was moved from the Delaware River Bridge to Neshaminy Falls . 
 = = Services = = 
 = = = Emergency assistance and information = = = 
 The turnpike has a <unk> every mile for its entire length . <unk> were first installed between New Stanton and New Baltimore in December 1988 , and in 1989 <unk> were extended along the length of the highway . Motorists may also dial * 11 on mobile phones . First @-@ responder service is available to all turnpike users via the State Farm Safety Patrol program . The free program checks for disabled motorists , debris and accidents along the road and provides assistance 24 hours daily year @-@ round . Each patrol vehicle covers a 20 @-@ to @-@ 25 @-@ mile ( 32 to 40 km ) stretch of the turnpike . Towing service is available from authorized service stations near the highway , and Pennsylvania State Police Troop T patrols the turnpike . The troop 's headquarters is in Highspire ; its turnpike substations are grouped into three sections : the western section has substations in <unk> , Somerset , and New Stanton ; the central section 's substations are in Bowmansville , Everett and Newville , and the eastern section 's substation is in King of Prussia . 
 The Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission broadcasts road , traffic , and weather conditions over highway advisory radio transmitters at each exit on 1640 kHz AM , with a range of approximately two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . Motorists can also receive alerts and information via the internet , mobile phone , a hotline and message boards at service plazas through the Turnpike Roadway Information Program ( TRIP ) . 
 = = = Service plazas = = = 
 The Pennsylvania Turnpike has 15 service plazas on the main highway throughout the state , as well as 2 on the northeastern extension . Each plaza has a gift shop , food franchises ( such as Burger King , Subway , Sbarro , Roy Rogers , Famous Famiglia Pizzeria , Auntie Anne 's , Hershey 's Ice Cream , Popeye 's , and Starbucks ) , a Sunoco gas station and an A @-@ Plus convenience store . Other amenities include ATMs , pay phones , picnic areas , restrooms , tourist information and Wi @-@ Fi . The King of Prussia plaza has a welcome center , and the New Stanton and Sideling Hill plazas feature seasonal farmers ' markets . A few plazas offer E85 while New Stanton offers compressed natural gas ; all of them offer conventional gasoline and diesel fuel . The Sunoco and A @-@ Plus locations as well as the Subway at North Midway are operated by Energy Transfer Partners ( who bought Pennsylvania @-@ based Sunoco in 2012 ) while the remaining restaurants and general upkeep of the service plazas are operated by HMSHost . 
 Throughout the Turnpike 's history , various plazas have been added or eliminated . Two of the original plazas ( at Laurel Hill and New Baltimore ) were closed in the 1950s while the bypassing of what is now the Abandoned Turnpike led to the closure of the Cove Valley Plaza and opening of the Sideling Hill plaza , which serves both westbound and eastbound traffic . In 1980 , the plazas at Denver , Pleasant Valley and Mechanicsburg were sold to outside bidders and in 1983 the Path Valley plaza closed due to declining business , as it was only 15 miles ( 24 km ) east of the dual @-@ access Sideling Hill plaza . Throughout the decade , the former Howard Johnson restaurants were converted to a variety of fast food outlets and sit @-@ down restaurants at some locations . In 1990 the Brandywine ( now Peter J. Camiel ) plaza was demolished and reconstructed , and in 2002 the Butler plaza closed to make room for the Warrendale Toll Plaza . 
 Starting in 2006 , the Turnpike Commission and HMSHost worked to rebuild the service plazas starting with Oakmont , which closed in 2006 and reopened in 2007 . This was followed by the reconstruction of the North Somerset and Sideling Hill plazas from 2007 @-@ 2008 , New Stanton from 2008 @-@ 2009 , King of Prussia from 2009 @-@ 2010 , Lawn and Bowmansville from 2010 @-@ 2011 , South Somerset , Blue Mountain and Plainfield from 2011 @-@ 2012 , South Midway and Highspire from 2012 @-@ 2013 , Peter J. Camiel from 2013 @-@ 2014 , and Valley Forge and North Midway from 2014 @-@ 2015 . During this process , four plazas were eliminated altogether : the Hempfield and South Neshaminy plazas were demolished in 2007 for additional lanes and a new slip ramp , respectively , the <unk> plaza closed in 2008 due to a lack of business since is located on the free stretch of the turnpike from Ohio to Warrendale , and the North Neshaminy plaza shut down in 2010 for an upcoming construction project . 
 = = History = = 
 The Pennsylvania Turnpike was planned in the 1930s to improve transportation across the Appalachian Mountains of central Pennsylvania . It used seven tunnels bored for the abandoned South Pennsylvania Railroad project during the 1880s . The highway opened on October 1 , 1940 between Irwin and Carlisle as the first long @-@ distance controlled @-@ access highway in the United States . Following its completion , other toll roads and the Interstate Highway System were built . The highway was extended east to Valley Forge in 1950 , and west to the Ohio border in 1951 . It was completed at the New Jersey border ( the Delaware River ) in 1954 ; the Delaware River Bridge opened two years later . During the 1960s , the entire highway was expanded to four lanes by adding a second tube at four of the tunnels and bypassing the other three . Other improvements have been made , including the addition of interchanges , the widening of portions of the highway to six lanes and the reconstruction of the original section . An interchange is planned at I @-@ 95 to meet a need on that route . 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 Before the turnpike , there were other forms of transportation across the Appalachians . Native Americans traveled across the mountains along wilderness trails ; later , European settlers followed wagon roads to cross the state . The Philadelphia and Lancaster Turnpike opened between Lancaster and Philadelphia in 1794 , the first successful turnpike in the United States . The road was paved with logs , an improvement on the dirt Native American trails . In 1834 , the Main Line of Public Works opened as a system of canals , railroads and cable railways across Pennsylvania to compete with the Erie Canal in New York . 
 The Pennsylvania Railroad was completed between Pittsburgh and Philadelphia in 1854 . During the 1880s , the South Pennsylvania Railroad was proposed to compete with the Pennsylvania . It received the backing of William Henry Vanderbilt , head of the New York Central Railroad ( the Pennsylvania 's chief rival ) . Andrew Carnegie also provided financial support , since he was unhappy with rates charged by the Pennsylvania Railroad . Construction began on the rival line in 1883 , but stopped when the railroads reached an agreement in 1885 . After construction halted , the only vestiges of the South Pennsylvania were nine tunnels , some roadbed and piers for a bridge over the Susquehanna River in Harrisburg . 
 During the early 20th century , the automobile gradually became the primary form of transportation . Motorists crossing the Pennsylvania mountains during the 1930s were limited to hilly , winding roads such as the Lincoln Highway ( US 30 ) or the William Penn Highway ( US 22 ) , which had grades exceeding nine percent . Due to their sharp curves and steep grades , the roads were dangerous and caused many fatal accidents from skids . 
 As a result of the challenge of crossing the Pennsylvania mountains by automobile , William Sutherland of the Pennsylvania Motor Truck Association and Victor Lecoq of the Pennsylvania State Planning Commission proposed a toll highway in 1934 . This highway would be a four @-@ lane limited @-@ access road modeled after the German autobahns and Connecticut 's Merritt Parkway . The turnpike could also serve as a defense road , using the abandoned tunnels of the South Pennsylvania Railroad project . 
 In 1935 Sutherland and Lecoq introduced their turnpike idea to state legislator Cliff Patterson , who proposed a feasibility study on April 23 , 1935 . The proposal passed , and the Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) explored the possibility of building the road . Its study estimated a cost of between $ 60 and $ 70 million ( between $ 1 @.@ 04 billion and $ 1 @.@ 21 billion in 2016 dollars ) to build the turnpike . Patterson introduced Bill 211 to the legislature , calling for the establishment of the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission . The bill was signed into law by Governor George Howard Earle III on May 21 , 1937 and on June 4 , the first commissioners were appointed . The highway was planned to run from US 30 in Irwin ( east of Pittsburgh ) east to US 11 in Middlesex ( west of Harrisburg ) , a length of about 162 miles ( 261 km ) . It would pass through nine tunnels along the way . 
 The road would have four lanes , with a median and no grade steeper than three percent . Access to the highway would be controlled by entrance and exit ramps . There would be no at @-@ grade intersections , driveways , traffic lights , crosswalks or at @-@ grade railroad crossings . Curves would be wide , and road signage large . The right @-@ of @-@ way for the turnpike would be 200 feet ( 61 m ) ; the road would be 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) wide , with 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) shoulders and a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) median . Through the tunnels the road would have two lanes , a 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) clearance and a 23 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) roadway . The turnpike 's design would be uniform for its entire length . 
 In February 1938 , the commission began investigating proposals for $ 55 million in bonds to be issued for construction of the turnpike . A month later , Van Ingen and Company purchased $ 60 million ( about $ 1 @.@ 01 billion in 2016 dollars ) in bonds they would offer to the public . President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved a $ 24 million ( about $ 403 million in 2016 dollars ) grant from the WPA in April 1938 for construction of the road ; the commonwealth also contributed $ 29 million towards the project . The WPA grant received final approval , but plans were still made to sell bonds ; the first issue was planned for about $ 20 million ( about $ 336 million in 2016 dollars ) . The reduced bond issue was due to the grant from the WPA . 
 In June , the Reconstruction Finance Corporation ( RFC ) announced they would lend the commission sufficient funds to build the road . The RFC loan totaled $ 32 million ( about $ 538 million in 2016 dollars ) , with a $ 26 million ( about $ 437 million in 2016 dollars ) grant from the Public Works Administration ( PWA ) , providing $ 58 million for the turnpike 's construction ; highway tolls would repay the RFC . In October 1938 the turnpike commission agreed with the RFC and PWA that the RFC would purchase $ 35 million in bonds , in addition to the PWA grant . That month , a banking syndicate purchased the entire bond amount from the RFC . The previous month , a proposed railroad from Pittsburgh to Harrisburg ( on the former South Pennsylvania Railroad right @-@ of @-@ way designated for the turnpike ) was turned down . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 In building the turnpike , boring the former railroad tunnels was completed . Since the Allegheny Mountain Tunnel bore was in poor condition , a new bore was drilled 85 feet ( 26 m ) to the south . The commission considered bypassing the Rays Hill and Sideling Hill Tunnels , but the cost of a bypass was considered too high . Crews used steam shovels to widen the tunnels ' portals , and temporary railroad tracks transported construction equipment in and out . Concrete was used in lining the tunnel portals . The tunnels include ventilation ducts , drainage structures , sidewalks , lighting , telephone and signal systems . Lighting was installed along the roadway approaching the tunnel portals . 
 A total of 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) of tunnel was bored through the seven mountains . The tunnels were Laurel Hill Tunnel , Allegheny Mountain Tunnel , Rays Hill Tunnel , Sideling Hill Tunnel , Tuscarora Mountain Tunnel , Kittatinny Mountain Tunnel and Blue Mountain Tunnel , and the road became known as the " tunnel highway " . 
 Many bridge designs were used for roads over the highway , including the concrete arch bridge , the through plate girder bridge and the concrete T @-@ beam bridge . Bridges used to carry the turnpike over other roads and streams included a concrete arch viaduct in New Stanton . At 600 feet ( 180 m ) , the New Stanton viaduct was the longest bridge along the original section of the turnpike . Other turnpike bridges included plate girder bridges like the bridge over <unk> Creek in the Bedford Narrows . Smaller concrete T @-@ beam bridges were also built ; a total of 307 bridges were constructed along the original section of the turnpike . 
 Eleven interchanges were built along the turnpike , most of which were trumpet interchanges where all ramps merge at the toll booths ; only the New Stanton , Carlisle and Middlesex interchanges did not follow this design . Lighting was installed approaching interchanges , along with acceleration and deceleration lanes . The road also featured guardrails , consisting of steel panels attached to I @-@ beams . Large exit signs were used , and road signs had cat 's @-@ eye reflectors to increase visibility at night ; billboards were prohibited . In September 1940 , the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission ruled that trucks and buses would be allowed to use the highway . 
 Since the first section of the highway was built through a rural part of the state , food or gasoline was not easily available to motorists . Because of this , the commission decided to provide service plazas at 30 @-@ mile ( 48 km ) intervals . The plazas would be constructed of native fieldstone , resembling Colonial @-@ era architecture . In 1940 , Standard Oil of Pennsylvania was awarded a contract for ten Esso service stations along the turnpike . Eight of the service plazas would consist of service stations and a restaurant , while the plazas at the halfway point ( in Bedford ) would be larger . The South Midway service plaza ( the largest ) contained a dining room , lunch counter , lounge and lodging for truckers ; a tunnel connected it to the smaller North Midway plaza . The remaining service plazas were smaller , with a lunch counter . Food service at the plazas was provided by Howard Johnson 's . After World War II , the food facilities were enlarged ; service stations sold gasoline , repaired cars and provided towing service . 
 = = = Construction of first section = = = 
 Before the first @-@ section groundbreaking , in 1937 the turnpike commission sent workers to assess the former railroad tunnels . In September of that year , a contract was awarded to drain water from the tunnels . After this , workers cleared rock slides and vegetation from the tunnel portals before evaluating the nine tunnels ' condition . It was decided that six of the nine former South Pennsylvania Railroad tunnels could be used for the roadway . The Allegheny Mountain Tunnel was in too poor a condition for use , and the <unk> and Negro Mountain tunnels would be bypassed with rock cuts through the mountains ; The <unk> Tunnel had been completed and used by the Pittsburgh , Westmoreland and Somerset Railroad . 
 The Pennsylvania Turnpike groundbreaking was held on October 27 , 1938 , near Carlisle ; Commission Chairman Walter A. Jones thrust the first shovel into the earth . Turnpike construction was on a tight schedule , since completion of the road was originally planned by May 1 , 1940 . After the groundbreaking , contracts for finishing the former South Pennsylvania Railroad tunnels , grading the turnpike 's right @-@ of @-@ way , constructing bridges and paving were awarded . By July 1939 , the entire length of the turnpike was under contract . 
 The first work to begin on the road was grading its right @-@ of @-@ way , which involved a great deal of earthwork because of the mountainous terrain . Building the highway required the acquisition of homes , farms , and a coal mine through eminent domain . A tunnel was originally planned across Clear Ridge near Everett , but the turnpike commission decided to build a cut into the ridge . Building the cut involved bulldozers excavating the mountain and explosives blasting the rock . Concrete culverts were built to carry streams and roads under the highway in the valley floor . The Clear Ridge cut was 153 feet ( 47 m ) deep ( the deepest highway cut at the time ) , and was known as " Little Panama " after the Panama Canal . West of Clear Ridge , cuts and fills were built for the turnpike to pass along the southern edge of <unk> . 
 Considerable work was also involved in building the roadway up the three @-@ percent grade at the east end of Allegheny Mountain , the steepest grade the turnpike traversed . The base of Evitts Mountain was blasted to carry the turnpike across Bedford Narrows along with US 30 , the <unk> Branch of the Juniata River and a Pennsylvania Railroad branch line . In New Baltimore , the turnpike commission had to purchase land from St. John 's Church ( which contained a cemetery ) ; as part of the agreement , stairways were built on either side of the turnpike to provide access to the church . 
 Paving began on August 31 , 1939 . The roadway would have a concrete surface , and concrete was poured directly onto the earth with no gravel roadbed . Concrete batch plants were set up along the road to aid in paving . Interchange ramps were paved with asphalt . The paving operations led to a delay in the projected opening of the highway ; by October 1939 the completion date was pushed back from May 1 to June 29 , 1940 , since paving could not be done during the winter . The commission rushed the paving , attempting to increase the distance paved from 1 to 5 miles ( 1 @.@ 6 to 8 @.@ 0 km ) a day . 
 Completion was postponed to July 4 , before being again postponed to late summer 1940 when rain delayed paving operations . Paving would conclude by the end of the summer , and on September 30 the turnpike commission announced that the road would open on October 1 , 1940 . Since the turnpike was opened on short notice , no ribbon @-@ cutting ceremony was held . 
 On August 26 , 1940 , a preview of the highway was organized by commission chairman Jones . It began the previous night with a banquet at The Hotel Hershey and proceeded west along the turnpike , stopping at the Clear Ridge cut before lunch at the Midway service plaza . The preview ended with dinner and entertainment at the Duquesne Club in Pittsburgh . That month , a military motorcade traveled portions of the turnpike . 
 The roadway took 770 @,@ 000 short tons ( 700 kt ) of sand , 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 short tons ( 1 @,@ 100 kt ) of stone , 50 @,@ 000 short tons ( 45 kt ) of steel and more than 300 @,@ 000 short tons ( 270 kt ) of cement to complete . It was built at a cost of $ 370 @,@ 000 per mile ( $ 230 @,@ 000 / km ) . A total of 18 @,@ 000 men worked on the turnpike ; 19 died during its construction . 
 When the highway was under construction in 1939 , its proposed toll was $ 1 @.@ 50 ( about $ 26 @.@ 00 in 2016 dollars ) for a one @-@ way car trip ; a round trip would cost $ 2 @.@ 00 ( about $ 34 @.@ 00 today ) . Trucks would pay $ 10 @.@ 00 ( about $ 170 @.@ 00 today ) one way . Varying tolls would be charged for motorists who did not travel the length of the turnpike . Upon its opening in 1940 , automobile tolls were set at $ 1 @.@ 50 ( about $ 25 @.@ 00 today ) one way and $ 2 @.@ 25 ( about $ 38 @.@ 00 today ) round trip . The tolls were to be used to pay off bonds to build the road , and were to be removed when the bonds were paid . Tolls continue to be charged to finance improvements to the turnpike system . The toll rate was about 1 cent per mile ( 0 @.@ 62 ¢ / km ) — 17 ¢ / mi ( 11 ¢ / km ) today — when the turnpike opened . The ticket system was used to pay for tolls . This toll rate remained the same for the turnpike 's first 25 years ; other toll roads ( such as the New York State Thruway and the Ohio , Connecticut and Massachusetts Turnpikes ) had a higher rate . 
 = = = Opening of first section = = = 
 The Pennsylvania Turnpike opened at midnight on October 1 , 1940 , between Irwin and Carlisle ; the day before the opening , motorists lined up at the Irwin and Carlisle interchanges . Homer D. <unk> , a feed and tallow driver from Carlisle , became the first motorist to enter the turnpike at Carlisle , and Carl A. Boe of McKeesport became the first motorist to enter at Irwin . Boe was flagged down by Frank <unk> and Dick <unk> , the first hitchhikers along the turnpike . On October 6 ( the first Sunday after the turnpike 's opening ) traffic was heavy , with congestion at toll plazas , tunnels and service plazas . 
 During its first 15 days of operation , the road saw over 150 @,@ 000 vehicles . By the end of its first year the road earned $ 3 million in revenue from 5 million motorists , exceeding the $ 2 @.@ 67 million needed for operation and bond payments . With the onset of World War II , revenue declined due to tire and gas rationing ; after the war , traffic again increased . 
 When it opened , the turnpike became the first long @-@ distance limited @-@ access road in the United States . It provided a direct link between the Mid @-@ Atlantic and Midwestern states , and cut travel time between Pittsburgh and Harrisburg from nearly six to about two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours . The road was given the nicknames " dream highway " and " the World 's Greatest Highway " by the turnpike commission , and was also known as " the <unk> of the Pikes . " Postcards and other souvenirs promoted the original stretch 's seven tunnels through the Appalachians . 
 The highway was considered a yardstick by which limited @-@ access highway construction would be measured . Commission chairman Jones called for more limited @-@ access roads to be built across the country for defense purposes , and the turnpike was a model for a proposed national network of highways planned during World War II . The Pennsylvania Turnpike led to the construction of other toll roads , such as the New Jersey Turnpike and ( eventually ) the Interstate Highway System . It has been designated a National Civil Engineering Landmark by the American Society of Civil Engineers . 
 The concrete highway pavement began to fail several years after the road opened , due to excessive transverse @-@ joint spacing and the lack of gravel between earth and concrete . As a result , in 1954 an eight @-@ year project began to repave the turnpike with a 3 @-@ inch ( 7 @.@ 6 cm ) layer of asphalt between Irwin and Carlisle . 
 = = = Extensions = = = 
 Before the first section of the Pennsylvania Turnpike opened , the commission considered extending it east to Philadelphia , primarily for defense purposes . In 1939 , the state legislature passed a bill allowing for an extension of the road to Philadelphia , which was signed into law by Governor Arthur H. James in 1940 as Act 11 . The extension was projected to cost between $ 50 and $ 60 million in 1941 . Funding for the Philadelphia extension was in place in 1948 . In July 1948 , the turnpike commission offered $ 134 million in bonds to pay for the extension , which was projected to cost $ 87 million . The Philadelphia extension was to run from Carlisle east to US 202 in King of Prussia . From there , the extension would connect to a state @-@ maintained freeway that would continue to Center City Philadelphia . Groundbreaking for the Philadelphia extension took place on September 28 , 1948 in York County . Governor James H. Duff and commission chairman Thomas J. Evans attended the ceremony . 
 The extension would look similar to the original section of the turnpike , but would use air @-@ entrained concrete poured onto stone . Transverse joints on the pavement were spaced at 46 @-@ foot ( 14 m ) intervals rather than the 77 @-@ foot ( 23 m ) ones on the original portion . Because it traversed through less mountainous terrain , the extension did not require as much earthwork as the original section . It required the construction of large bridges , including those that cross the Susquehanna River and the Swatara Creek . To save money , the Susquehanna River Bridge was constructed with a 4 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) <unk> concrete median and no shoulders . This extension of the turnpike would use the same style of overpasses as the original section ; the steel deck bridge was also introduced . With the construction of the Philadelphia extension , the Carlisle interchange was closed and the Middlesex interchange with US 11 was realigned to allow for the new extension ; it was renamed to the Carlisle interchange . 
 The extension 's completion was delayed by weather and a cement workers ' strike ; it was to have been finished by October 1 , 1950 — the tenth anniversary of the opening of the first section . On October 23 , 1950 , the Philadelphia extension was previewed in a ceremony led by Governor Duff . The extension opened to traffic on November 20 , 1950 ; the governor and chairman Evans cut the ribbon at the Valley Forge mainline toll plaza to the west of King of Prussia . 
 In 1941 , Governor James suggested building a western extension to Ohio . That June , Act 54 was signed into law to build the extension . In 1949 , the turnpike commission began enquiring into funding for this road , which would run from Irwin to the Ohio border near Youngstown , bypassing Pittsburgh to the north . That September , $ 77 million in bonds were sold to finance construction of the western extension . Groundbreaking for the extension took place on October 24 , 1949 . It was scheduled to take place at the Brush Creek viaduct in Irwin with Governor Duff in attendance . 
 Like the Philadelphia extension , the western extension required the building of long bridges , including those that cross the Beaver River and the Allegheny River . The overpasses along the road consisted of steel girder bridges and through plate girder bridges . Unlike the other segments , the concrete arch bridge was not used for overpasses , although it was used to carry the turnpike over other roads . On August 7 , 1950 , the roadway opened between the Irwin and Pittsburgh interchanges . Ohio Governor Frank Lausche led a dedication ceremony on November 26 , 1951 . The extension opened to the Gateway toll plaza near the Ohio border on December 26 , 1951 . At the time , the highway ended in a cornfield . Traffic followed a temporary ramp onto local rural roads until the connecting Ohio Turnpike could be built . On December 1 , 1954 , the Ohio Turnpike opened . 
 In 1951 , plans to extend the turnpike east to New Jersey at the Delaware River to connect with the New Jersey Turnpike were made . The construction of the Delaware River extension was approved by Governor John S. Fine in May of that year . A route for the extension , which would bypass Philadelphia to the north , was announced in 1952 . It would cross the Delaware River on a bridge north of Bristol near Edgely , where it would connect to a branch of the New Jersey Turnpike . That September , the turnpike commission announced $ 65 million in bonds would be issued to finance the project . Work on the Delaware River extension began on November 20 , 1952 ; Governor Fine dug the first shovel into the earth at the groundbreaking ceremony . As a result of building the extension , the Valley Forge mainline toll plaza was located farther east at the junction with the Schuylkill Expressway . The Delaware River extension included a bridge over the Schuylkill River that was built to the same standards as the Susquehanna River Bridge . The construction of the bridge required an amendment to the Pennsylvania Constitution , which barred the state from forming compacts with other states . On August 23 , 1954 , the Delaware River Extension opened between King of Prussia and US 611 in Willow Grove . The remainder of the road to the Delaware River opened on November 17 , 1954 . 
 In April 1954 , $ 233 million in bonds were issued to finance the building of the Delaware River Bridge and the Northeastern Extension . Groundbreaking for the Delaware River Bridge connecting the Pennsylvania Turnpike to the New Jersey Turnpike took place on June 26 , 1954 in Florence , New Jersey . The steel arch bridge , which opened to traffic on May 23 , 1956 , was funded jointly by the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission and the New Jersey Turnpike Authority . Pennsylvania Governor George M. Leader and New Jersey Governor Robert B. Meyner were present at the opening ceremony . A mainline toll barrier was built to the west of the bridge , marking the eastern end of the ticket system . This bridge was originally six lanes wide . It contained no median , but one was later installed and the bridge was reduced to four lanes . 
 With the construction of the extensions and connecting turnpikes , the highway was envisioned to be a part of a system of toll roads stretching from Maine to Chicago . When the Delaware River Bridge was completed in 1956 , a motorist could drive from New York City to Indiana on limited @-@ access toll roads . By 1957 , it was possible to drive from New York City to Chicago without encountering a traffic signal . 
 On the turnpike extensions , the service plazas were less frequent , larger , and further from the road . Gulf Oil operated service stations on the extensions , and Howard Johnson 's provided food service in sit @-@ down restaurants . 
 = = = Route numbers = = = 
 In August 1957 , the Bureau of Public Roads added the roadway to the Interstate Highway System upon the recommendations of various state highway departments to include toll roads in the system . I @-@ 80 was planned to run along the turnpike from the Ohio border to Harrisburg while I @-@ 80S would continue eastward toward Philadelphia . I @-@ 70 was also planned to follow the turnpike between Pittsburgh and Breezewood . At a meeting of the Route Numbering Subcommittee on the U.S. Numbered System on June 26 , 1958 , it was decided to move the I @-@ 80 designation to an alignment further north while the highway between the Ohio border and the Philadelphia area would become I @-@ 80S . I @-@ 70 was still designated on the turnpike between Pittsburgh and Breezewood . Between King of Prussia and Bristol , the turnpike was designated I @-@ 280 . 
 In April 1963 , the state of Pennsylvania proposed renumbering I @-@ 80S to I @-@ 76 and I @-@ 280 to I @-@ 276 because the spurs of I @-@ 80S did not connect to I @-@ 80 in northern Pennsylvania . The renumbering was approved by the Federal Highway Administration on February 26 , 1964 . With this renumbering , the tollway would carry I @-@ 80S between the Ohio border and Pittsburgh , I @-@ 76 between Pittsburgh and King of Prussia , I @-@ 70 between New Stanton and Breezewood , and I @-@ 276 between King of Prussia and Bristol . In 1971 , the state of Ohio wanted to eliminate I @-@ 80S , replacing it with a realigned I @-@ 76 . The state of Pennsylvania disagreed with the change and recommended that I @-@ 80S become I @-@ 376 instead . The Pennsylvania government later changed its mind and supported Ohio 's plan to renumber I @-@ 80S as I @-@ 76 . In December of that year , the change was approved by the American Association of State Highway Officials . As a result , I @-@ 76 would follow the highway between the Ohio border and King of Prussia . 
 With the creation of the Interstate Highway System , restaurants and gas stations were prohibited along Interstate Highways . When it joined the system the turnpike was grandfathered , allowing it to continue operating its service plazas . 
 = = = Tunnel modernization and realignment = = = 
 As traffic levels increased , bottlenecks at the two @-@ lane tunnels on the Pennsylvania Turnpike became a major problem . By the late 1950s , traffic jams formed at the tunnels , especially during the summer . In 1959 , four Senators urged state officials to work with the turnpike commission to study ways to reduce the traffic jams . That year , the commission began studies aimed at resolving the traffic jams at the Laurel Hill and Allegheny Mountain tunnels ; studies for the other tunnels followed . At the conclusion of the studies , the turnpike commission planned to make the entire turnpike four lanes by either adding a second tube at the tunnels or bypassing them . The new and upgraded tunnel tubes would feature white tiles , fluorescent lighting , and upgraded ventilation . 
 The turnpike commission announced plans to build a second bore at the Allegheny Mountain Tunnel and a four @-@ lane bypass of the Laurel Hill Tunnel in 1960 . A bypass was planned for the Laurel Hill Tunnel because traffic would be more quickly and less expensively relieved than it would by boring another tunnel . In 1962 , the turnpike commission approved these two projects . That August , $ 21 million in bonds were sold to finance the two projects . The Laurel Hill Tunnel was bypassed using a deep cut to the north ; it would feature a wide median , truck climbing lanes , and a 145 @-@ foot ( 44 m ) -deep cut into the mountain . Groundbreaking for the new alignment took place on September 6 , 1962 . This bypass opened to traffic on October 30 , 1964 at a cost of $ 7 @.@ 5 million . Work on boring the second tube at Allegheny Mountain Tunnel also began on September 6 , 1962 . The former South Pennsylvania Railroad tunnel was considered , but was again rejected because of its poor condition . On March 15 , 1965 , the new tube opened to traffic , after which the original tube was closed to allow updates to be made . It reopened on August 25 , 1966 . The construction of the second tube at Allegheny Mountain cost $ 12 million . 
 In 1965 , the turnpike commission announced plans to build second tubes at the Tuscarora , Kittatinny , and Blue Mountain tunnels while a 13 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 21 @.@ 7 km ) bypass of the Rays Hill and Sideling Hill tunnels would be built . A bypass of these two tunnels was considered in the 1930s , but at the time was determined to be too expensive . An early 1960s study concluded that a bypass would be the best option to handle traffic at Rays Hill and Sideling Hill . The turnpike commission sold $ 77 @.@ 5 million in bonds in January 1966 to finance this project . Construction of the bypass of the Rays Hill and Sideling Hill tunnels involved building a cut across both hills . The new alignment began at the Breezewood interchange , where a portion of the original turnpike was used to access US 30 . In building the cut across Rays Hill , a portion of US 30 had to be realigned . The cut over Sideling Hill passes over the Sideling Hill Tunnel . The new alignment ends a short distance east of the Cove Valley service plaza on the original segment . This bypass of the two tunnels would have a 36 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) -wide median with a steel barrier in the middle . The turnpike bypass of Rays Hill and Sideling Hill tunnels opened to traffic on November 26 , 1968 . When the highway was realigned to bypass the Rays Hill and Sideling Hill tunnels , the Cove Valley service plaza on the original section was closed and replaced with the Sideling Hill service plaza ( the only service plaza on the main turnpike serving travelers in both directions ) . 
 Meanwhile , studies concluded that a parallel tunnel was the most economical option at the Tuscarora , Kittatinny , and Blue Mountain tunnels . Work on the new tube at the Tuscarora Mountain Tunnel began on April 11 , 1966 while construction began at the Kittatinny and Blue Mountain tunnels a week later . The parallel tubes at these three tunnels would open on November 26 , 1968 ; the same day as the bypass of the Rays Hill and Sideling Hill tunnels . The original tubes were subsequently remodeled . Both the new and remodeled tunnels would have fluorescent lighting , white tile walls , and 13 ft ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) -wide lanes . The portals of the new tunnels were designed to resemble those of the original tunnels . Reconstruction of the original Tuscarora Mountain Tunnel was completed in October 1970 , while work on refurbishing the original Kittatinny and Blue Mountain tunnels was finished on March 18 , 1971 . With the completion of these projects , the entire length of the highway was four lanes wide . With the completion of these projects , the stretch of roadway passing through the Rays Hill and Sideling Hill tunnels became known as the Abandoned Pennsylvania Turnpike . The turnpike commission continued to maintain the tunnels for a few years , but eventually abandoned them . The abandoned stretch deteriorated ; signs and guardrails were removed , pavement started crumbling , trees grew in the median , and vandals and nature began taking over the tunnels . The turnpike commission still performed some maintenance on the abandoned stretch and used it for testing pavement marking equipment . In 2001 , the turnpike commission turned over a significant portion of the abandoned section to the Southern Alleghenies Conservancy ; bicycles and hikers could use the former roadway . The abandoned stretch of the turnpike is the longest stretch of abandoned freeway in the United States . 
 = = = Late 20th century = = = 
 The roadway 's median , while initially thought to be wide enough , was considered too narrow by 1960 . The turnpike commission installed median barriers at curves and high @-@ accident areas starting in the 1950s . In 1960 , it began to install 100 miles ( 160 km ) of median barrier along the turnpike . Work was completed in December 1965 at a cost of $ 5 million . In October 1963 , work began on replacing the New Stanton interchange , which required left turns across traffic on the ramps and was frequently congested . The new , grade @-@ separated interchange opened on November 12 , 1964 and provided access to I @-@ 70 at the western end of the turnpike stretch of I @-@ 70 / I @-@ 76 . A new interchange serving I @-@ 283 and PA 283 opened at Harrisburg East in 1969 . Due to the realignment of US 222 to a four @-@ lane freeway , a new Reading interchange was proposed . This was opened on April 10 , 1974 . 
 In 1968 , the turnpike commission proposed converting the section of the road between Morgantown and the Delaware River Bridge from a ticket to a barrier system . The project was canceled in 1971 , due to a decline in revenue caused by the completion of I @-@ 80 . In 1969 the turnpike commission announced a 75 @-@ percent toll hike , the first such increase for cars . This rise in tolls , which took place September 1 of that year , brought the toll rate to 2 cents per mile ( 1 @.@ 2 ¢ / km ) or 13 ¢ / mi ( 8 @.@ 1 ¢ / km ) today . 
 In 1969 , the turnpike commission said that because of increasing traffic , it was necessary to widen the turnpike . It proposed doubling the number of lanes from four to eight ; the portion in the Philadelphia area was to be ten lanes wide . Cars and trucks would be carried on separate roadways under this plan . The roadway would also have an 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) speed limit and holographic road signs . This widening would have kept much of the routing intact , but significant realignments were proposed between the Allegheny Mountain and Blue Mountain tunnels . Because of the $ 1 @.@ 1 billion cost and the 1973 oil crisis that resulted in the imposition of a 55 miles per hour ( 89 km / h ) speed limit , this plan was not implemented . By the 1970s , the Pennsylvania Turnpike started to see a decline in the volume of traffic because of the opening of I @-@ 80 — which provided a shorter route across the north of the state , and the 1973 oil crisis — which led to a decline in long @-@ distance travel . In the late 1970s , the turnpike commission proposed truck climbing lanes east of the Allegheny Mountain Tunnel near New Baltimore and near the Laurel Hill Bypass . These were completed on December 2 , 1981 . 
 In 1978 , as the Howard Johnson 's exclusive contract to provide food service was ending , the turnpike commission considered bids for competitors to provide food service . That year ARA Services was awarded a contract for food service at two plazas , ending the Howard Johnson 's monopoly . The highway became the first toll road in the country to offer more than one fast @-@ food chain at its service plazas . At this time , gas stations along the turnpike were operated by Gulf Oil , Exxon , and ARCO . Hardee 's also opened restaurants at the service plazas in 1980 to compete with Howard Johnson 's . With this , the turnpike became the first road in the world to offer fast food at its service plazas . Additionally , a toll increase of 22 percent was announced in 1978 , effective August 1 of that year ; this raised the rate to 2 @.@ 2 cents per mile ( 1 @.@ 4 ¢ / km ) , or 8 ¢ / mi ( 5 @.@ 0 ¢ / km ) today . 
 The portion of the turnpike in the Philadelphia area had become a congested commuter road by the 1980s . In 1983 , funding was approved to widen the turnpike to six lanes between the Valley Forge and Philadelphia interchanges . This planned project was put on hold because of disagreements between Governor Dick Thornburgh and the turnpike commission members , and differences between the commissioners . The Pennsylvania Legislature approved the project in 1985 ; the road would be widened between the Norristown and Philadelphia interchanges . Construction on the widening began on March 10 , 1986 , and was completed on November 23 , 1987 with a ribbon @-@ cutting at the Philadelphia interchange . The widening project cost $ 120 million . An interchange to serve the New Cumberland Defense Depot near Harrisburg was planned in the 1980s . In 1992 , the turnpike commission decided not to build it because it would instead build a connector road to the depot between PA 114 and Old York Road that would parallel the turnpike . 
 Burger King and McDonald 's opened on the Pennsylvania Turnpike in 1983 . This marked a transition from sit @-@ down to fast @-@ food dining on the turnpike by popular demand . The Marriott Corporation purchased the remaining Howard Johnson 's restaurants in 1987 , incorporating it into its Host Marriott division and replacing them with restaurants such as Roy Rogers and Bob 's Big Boy . 
 In 1986 , a toll hike of 30 percent was planned and the new rates went into effect on January 2 , 1987 . With this increase , the toll rate was 3 @.@ 1 cents per mile ( 1 @.@ 9 ¢ / km ) , or 6 ¢ / mi ( 3 @.@ 7 ¢ / km ) today . Motorists originally stopped at booths to receive toll tickets from turnpike staff , but in 1987 ticket machines replaced human workers . 
 Plans to build an interchange connecting to the north end of I @-@ 476 ( the Blue Route ) were made ; the turnpike commission approved a contract to build the interchange in March 1989 . That June , a losing bidder decided to challenge the turnpike commission , saying it violated female and minority contracting rules regarding the percentage of these employees that were used for the project . Under this rule , bidders were supposed to have at least 12 percent of contracts to minority @-@ owned companies and at least 4 percent to female @-@ owned companies . The losing bidder had 12 @.@ 4 percent of the contracts to minority companies and 4 @.@ 2 percent to female @-@ owned companies while the winning bidder had 6 @.@ 1 percent and 3 @.@ 7 percent respectively . The turnpike commission decided to rebid the contract , but was sued by the original contractor . This dispute delayed the construction of the interchange . The contract was rebid in November 1989 after the Pennsylvania Supreme Court permitted it . The interchange between I @-@ 476 and the turnpike mainline was completed in November 1992 ; the ramps to the Northeast Extension opened a month later . An official ribbon @-@ cutting took place on December 15 , 1992 . 
 In September 1990 , the Morgantown interchange was relocated to provide a direct connection to I @-@ 176 ; the overhead interchange lights at the new exit were a nuisance to nearby residents . An interchange was also proposed in 1990 with PA 743 between Elizabethtown and Hershey , but a study in 1993 determined that it would not improve traffic flow on area roads . The turnpike commission celebrated the highway 's 50th anniversary in 1990 . $ 300 @,@ 000 was spent to promote the turnpike through various means including a videotape , souvenirs , and a private party attended by politicians and companies that work with the turnpike . 
 Gulf Oil LP ( the Cumberland Farms @-@ owned successor to the original Gulf Oil after Standard Oil of California — now Chevron — bought Gulf in 1984 ) replaced the Exxon stations on the turnpike in 1990 ; Sunoco took over operation of the gas stations from Gulf in 1993 , outbidding Shell Oil . In 1995 , a farmers market was introduced to the Sideling Hill service plaza . 
 An electronic toll collection system was proposed in 1990 where a motorist would create an account and use an electronic device which would be read from an electronic tollbooth ; the motorist would be billed later . The multi @-@ state electronic tolling system , E @-@ ZPass , was planned to go into effect by 1998 ; however , implementation of the system was postponed until 2000 . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 Another 30 @-@ percent toll increase went into effect on June 1 , 1991 to fund expansion projects , bringing the rate to 4 cents per mile ( 2 @.@ 5 ¢ / km ) or 7 ¢ / mi ( 4 @.@ 3 ¢ / km ) today . 
 In 1996 , plans were made to reconstruct the Irwin to Carlisle section of the turnpike along with the western part to the Ohio border . A rebuilding project was proposed for the original section of the roadway in 1998 . The first portion planned for construction was a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) stretch east of the Donegal interchange ; a contract was awarded in June 1998 . This project involved the replacement of overpasses , widening of the median , and the complete repaving of the road . The rebuilding is due for completion in 2014 , with a projected cost of $ 5 million per mile ( $ 3 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 / km ) . During the reconstruction , the turnpike commission used a humorous advertising campaign called " Peace , Love and the Pennsylvania Turnpike " . It ran for 90 days in 2001 , and used tie @-@ dyed billboards that resembled those from the 1970s and carried phrases such as " Rome wasn 't built in a day " and " Spread the love . Let someone merge . " 
 Plans were made in 1993 to build a direct interchange between the turnpike and I @-@ 79 in Cranberry Township , Butler County . A contract was awarded to build this interchange in November 1995 . In 1997 , transportation officials agreed upon a design for the interchange . The project also included the movement the western end of the ticket system to a new toll plaza in Warrendale . The interchange project was delayed by a dispute with Marshall and Pine townships in Allegheny County , who wanted to prevent construction of the toll plaza as they thought it would cause noise , air and light pollution . Marshall Township eventually agreed to allow the toll plaza be built . Groundbreaking for the new interchange took place on February 22 , 2002 . The westbound Butler service plaza was closed because the Warrendale toll plaza was to be located at its site . On June 1 , 2003 , the plaza opened and the Gateway toll plaza became a flat @-@ rate toll plaza , while all the exit toll plazas west of Warrendale closed . The direct interchange between the turnpike and I @-@ 79 , connecting to US 19 , opened on November 12 , 2003 . The project cost $ 44 million . 
 Construction began in 1998 to improve the bridge over the Schuylkill River in Montgomery County . The work involved building a new bridge adjacent to the existing bridge ; the new bridge was wide enough to accommodate a future widening to six lanes . This project was completed in 2000 . 
 In 2000 , the turnpike commission announced plans to build a new bridge , a segmental concrete bridge wider than the original , over the Susquehanna River . In 2004 , work began on building the new , six @-@ lane bridge which cost $ 150 million . On May 16 , 2007 , a ribbon @-@ cutting took place to mark the completion of the westbound direction of the bridge , which opened to traffic the following day . The eastbound direction of the bridge opened a month later . 
 Plans were made to build a new pair of bridges over the Allegheny River in 2005 . Work began in May 2007 , and a dedication ceremony was held on October 23 , 2009 . The bridges , which cost $ 194 million , opened to traffic the following day , and the old bridge was demolished on July 13 , 2010 . 
 In October 2000 , the turnpike commission announced the road would be switching from sequential exit numbering to distance @-@ based exit numbering . At first , both exit numbers would exist , but the old numbers would be phased out . Work began on posting the new exit numbers in 2001 . 
 On June 1 , 2003 , the Warrendale toll plaza became the west end of the ticket system ; the Gateway toll plaza became a flat @-@ rate plaza and toll booths at the New Castle , Beaver Valley , and Cranberry interchanges were closed . Express E @-@ ZPass lanes opened at the Warrendale toll plaza in June 2004 , which allowed motorists to travel through the toll plaza at highway speeds . 
 A study began in 1999 to widen the road to six lanes between Valley Forge and Norristown . In October 2004 , work began on widening this stretch of road , which was completed in November 2008 at a cost of $ 330 million . 
 Plans were made to widen the highway to six lanes between Irwin and New Stanton in 2005 . Work on the project began in January 2006 ; it added a third lane in each direction , replaced several bridges , and realigned a portion of the turnpike , and was completed in November 2011 . As part of the project , in January 2007 the Hempfield service plaza was permanently closed . 
 HMSHost ( the successor to Marriott 's former Host Marriott division ) received a 2006 contract to reconstruct the turnpike service plazas . Improvements to the plazas , to cost $ 150 million , will include a food court layout and improved restrooms . Sunoco continues operating gas stations at the renovated service plazas . Most of the plazas were completely rebuilt , although the exterior structure of South Midway 's building was retained when it reopened in May 2013 due to its historical significance of being the flagship service plaza on the original section . Four service plazas were slated to be closed as part of the deal with HMSHost . Three plazas ( Hempfield , South Neshaminy , and North Neshaminy ) closed due to construction projects to the turnpike itself , while the <unk> service plaza ( which was originally slated to stay open ) closed due to its under @-@ use . 
 In November 2006 , Governor Ed Rendell and former Pennsylvania House Speaker John <unk> raised the idea of leasing the turnpike longterm to a private group to raise money to improve other infrastructure in the state . Such a lease was speculated to raise up to $ 30 billion for the state . In October 2007 , 34 companies submitted 14 proposals to lease the turnpike . On May 19 , 2008 , a record $ 12 @.@ 8 billion proposal by the Spanish firm <unk> Infraestructuras , SA and Citi Infrastructure Investors of New York City to lease the turnpike was submitted . The consortium withdrew the offer on September 30 , 2008 as they reasoned the proposal would be approved in the state legislature . 
 In 2007 , as part of a project to widen a section of the turnpike in Somerset and Bedford counties to six lanes that will last from 2016 to 2020 , the turnpike commission announced that it would remove the steps leading to St. John 's Church in New Baltimore because they are a safety hazard . 
 In 1996 , a study on improving the Allegheny Mountain Tunnel by either building another tube or by constructing a bypass was carried out . Based on the study , the turnpike commission planned to replace the deteriorating tunnel with a cut through the mountain . The plans were put on hold in 2001 because it would cost $ 93 @.@ 7 million . It resurrected the project in 2009 . The nearby Mountain Field and Stream Club prefers that the tunnels are improved or a new tube is built rather than building the bypass . These improvements are needed because the Allegheny Mountain Tunnel is narrow and deteriorating , with disintegrating ceiling slabs and outdated lighting and ventilation . 
 On December 2 , 2000 , E @-@ ZPass debuted on the turnpike between Harrisburg West and the Delaware River Bridge . By December 15 , 2001 , E @-@ ZPass could be used on the entire length of the Pennsylvania Turnpike . Commercial vehicles were allowed to use the system beginning on December 14 , 2002 . 
 On August 1 , 2004 tolls increased by 42 percent to a rate of 5 @.@ 9 cents per mile ( 3 @.@ 7 ¢ / km ) , or 7 ¢ / mi ( 4 @.@ 3 ¢ / km ) today , to provide money for road construction . On November 24 , 2004 ( the day before Thanksgiving ) , 2 @,@ 000 Teamsters Union employees went on the first strike in the turnpike 's history after contract negotiations failed . Since this is usually one of the busiest travel days in the United States , to avoid traffic jams tolls were waived for the rest of the day . Beginning on November 25 , turnpike management personnel collected flat @-@ rate cash passenger tolls of $ 2 and commercial tolls of $ 15 on the ticketed system , while E @-@ ZPass customers were charged the lesser amount of the toll or the flat rate . The strike ended after seven days , when both sides reached an agreement on November 30 ; normal toll collection resumed December 1 . 
 In 2004 , proposals to widen the highway to six lanes between Downingtown and Valley Forge were made . In 2007 , the western terminus of the widening project was scaled back from Downingtown to the proposed PA 29 slip ramp . Plans for the widening were presented to the public in 2009 . Later that year , the widening was put on hold because of engineering problems . The widening plans resumed in 2010 . Work was due to begin in 2013 , with completion in 2015 . In October 2012 , the project was postponed a year because of delays in the approval of permits . 
 In 2005 , the turnpike commission announced plans to convert the Gateway toll plaza to eastbound @-@ only in 2006 to reduce congestion and facilitate construction of Express E @-@ ZPass lanes . The Express E @-@ ZPass lanes at Gateway opened in July 2007 . 
 = = = Act 44 toll increases = = = 
 The turnpike commission raised tolls by 25 percent on January 4 , 2009 to provide funds to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for road and mass @-@ transit projects , as mandated by Act 44 . This toll hike brought the rate to travel the turnpike to 7 @.@ 4 cents per mile ( 4 @.@ 6 ¢ / km ) , or 8 ¢ / mi ( 5 @.@ 0 ¢ / km ) today . At this point , an annual toll increase was planned . 
 A three @-@ percent toll increase went into effect January 3 , 2010 , bringing the rate to 7 @.@ 7 cents per mile ( 4 @.@ 8 ¢ / km ) or 8 ¢ / mi ( 5 @.@ 0 ¢ / km ) today . The cash toll increased 10 percent on January 2 , 2011 , and E @-@ ZPass tolls increased three percent . The new toll rate was 8 @.@ 5 cents per mile ( 5 @.@ 3 ¢ / km ) or 9 ¢ / mi ( 5 @.@ 6 ¢ / km ) today using cash , and 7 @.@ 9 cents per mile ( 4 @.@ 9 ¢ / km ) or 8 ¢ / mi ( 5 @.@ 0 ¢ / km ) today using E @-@ ZPass . As part of this toll hike the turnpike commission initially planned to omit the toll amount from new tickets , and Pennsylvania Auditor Jack Wagner wondered if the commission was trying to hide the increase . The commission later decided to include the tolls on new tickets . 
 Cash tolls increased 10 percent on January 1 , 2012 , while E @-@ ZPass tolls were unchanged from the previous year . With this increase , the cash toll rate increased to 9 @.@ 3 cents per mile ( 5 @.@ 8 ¢ / km ) or 10 ¢ / mi ( 6 @.@ 2 ¢ / km ) today . Another 10 @-@ percent cash @-@ toll hike occurred January 6 , 2013 , and E @-@ ZPass tolls rose two percent . This increase brought the average cash toll rate for the turnpike to 10 @.@ 2 cents per mile ( 6 @.@ 3 ¢ / km ) or 10 ¢ / mi ( 6 @.@ 2 ¢ / km ) today , and the average E @-@ ZPass toll rate for the turnpike to 8 @.@ 1 cents per mile ( 5 @.@ 0 ¢ / km ) or 8 ¢ / mi ( 5 @.@ 0 ¢ / km ) today . On January 5 , 2014 , cash tolls increased 12 percent while E @-@ ZPass tolls went up two percent . This toll increase brought the cash rate to 11 @.@ 5 cents per mile ( 7 @.@ 1 ¢ / km ) , and the average E @-@ ZPass toll rate for the turnpike to 8 @.@ 3 cents per mile ( 5 @.@ 2 ¢ / km ) . Cash and E @-@ ZPass tolls both increased five percent on January 4 , 2015 . This toll hike brought average toll rate for the turnpike to $ 0 @.@ 13 per mile ( $ 0 @.@ 081 / km ) using cash and $ 0 @.@ 09 per mile ( $ 0 @.@ 056 / km ) using E @-@ ZPass . Tolls for both cash and E @-@ ZPass customers increased six percent on January 3 , 2016 . 
 = = = Slip ramps = = = 
 In 1996 , the turnpike commission considered adding " slip ramps " in the Philadelphia area , on which electronic toll collection technology would be used . Construction began on a westbound E @-@ ZPass @-@ only slip ramp at Virginia Drive ( exit 340 ) in Fort Washington in early 2000 ; it opened on December 2 , 2000 , having cost $ 5 @.@ 1 million . Work on the eastbound slip ramp at PA 132 ( exit 352 ) in Bensalem Township began in 2009 ; the ramp opened on November 22 , 2010 . This slip ramp , which cost $ 7 @.@ 4 million , has access to and from the eastbound direction of the tollway and was built to provide improved access to Parx Casino . 
 Other slip ramps were planned in the Philadelphia area at PA 29 near the Great Valley Corporate Center and at PA 252 in Valley Forge in the 1990s . Residents opposed the PA 29 ( exit 320 ) ramp , fearing it would spoil the rural area . In 1999 , the turnpike commission canceled plans to build a slip ramp at PA 252 and instead focused on building one at PA 29 . The turnpike commission approved funding for the PA 29 ramp in 2002 . The project was put on hold in 2009 because of engineering and design problems in widening the adjacent portion of the turnpike . It was announced that the turnpike commission would approve construction of the slip ramp at PA 29 in August 2010 , and construction began in March 2011 . The interchange , which has access to and from both directions of the tollway , opened on December 11 , 2012 ; Governor Tom Corbett cut the ribbon . 
 A slip ramp was also planned in 2000 to connect to Lafayette Street in Norristown as part of a revitalization plan for the community . The project would involve extending Lafayette Street to the new ramp . This proposed slip ramp is projected to cost $ 160 million . Montgomery County officials have proposed a surcharge for the new exit in to help pay for the project . Work on engineering and environmental approval for the interchange occurred in 2008 , and acquisition of land began in 2011 . On January 7 , 2015 , the turnpike commission committed $ 45 million to building this interchange . Construction on the interchange at Lafayette Street may begin as soon as 2018 . 
 In 2013 , Montgomery County officials announced they were considering adding more slip ramps along the turnpike to ease traffic congestion . Possible locations include PA 63 near Willow Grove , Upper Merion Township , and around Norristown and Plymouth Meeting . In addition , the county wants to add eastbound ramps at the existing Virginia Drive interchange . 
 = = = Interstate 95 interchange project = = = 
 Plans to build a direct interchange between the Pennsylvania Turnpike and I @-@ 95 in Bristol Township to allow a connection between the portions of I @-@ 95 in Pennsylvania and along the New Jersey Turnpike were first proposed in 1978 . The two roads did not have an interchange because earlier laws — since repealed — allowed only federal funds to be used to build connections to toll roads . In 1982 , the federal government mandated that the interchange be built in Pennsylvania . A gap exists in I @-@ 95 because of an unbuilt segment of the road in central New Jersey . Under the plan , I @-@ 95 would be rerouted to follow the tollway between the new interchange and the New Jersey border . In addition , the interchange will serve as the northern terminus of an extended I @-@ 295 . The area 's residents , who thought the interchange would lead to a decline in their quality of life , opposed this plan . An environmental impact statement was released in 2003 . The interchange received environmental approval in 2004 , the preliminary design was completed in 2008 , and the final design followed . 
 The project will involve building a high @-@ speed interchange between the two roadways . The turnpike commission will also widen the existing four @-@ lane road to six lanes east of the Bensalem interchange , build a new facility east of the Street Road interchange at Neshaminy Falls to mark the eastern end of the ticket system that will consist of high @-@ speed E @-@ ZPass lanes along with ticket and cash booths , and convert the present Delaware River Bridge toll barrier to a westbound all @-@ electronic facility . A second parallel bridge will also be built over the Delaware River . Work on the project began in late 2010 ; the replacement of two bridges over the tollway was completed in 2011 . Groundbreaking for the interchange with I @-@ 95 took place on July 30 , 2013 , with Governor Corbett in attendance . Construction of the first stage of the interchange began in fall 2014 . The flyover ramps between northbound I @-@ 95 and the eastbound turnpike , and between the westbound turnpike and southbound I @-@ 95 are due to be completed by 2018 . Work on the new mainline toll plaza and widening of the turnpike between I @-@ 95 and the Delaware River also began in 2013 , with completion in 2016 . In 2020 , construction is expected to begin on completion of the movements between the tollway and I @-@ 95 , along with the widening of the turnpike between the Bensalem interchange and I @-@ 95 . Work on building a second , parallel span of the Delaware River Bridge is planned to begin in 2025 . The first stage of the project , which includes the new toll plaza , widening , and the flyover ramps between I @-@ 95 and the turnpike , is to cost $ 420 million . The flyover ramps are expected to cost $ 142 @.@ 9 million , with $ 100 million coming from federal funds and the remainder from the turnpike commission . The Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission is borrowing money from foreign investors in order to provide funding for the project . The remaining stages of the project are unfunded , with a projected total cost of $ 1 @.@ 1 billion for the entire project . 
 = = = Allegheny Mountain Tunnel replacement = = = 
 Long term plans call for major maintenance to be performed on the Allegheny Mountain Tunnel ; however , this presents a major problem for traffic . On October 22 , 2013 , <unk> @-@ TV reported that the PTC had decided to replace the tunnel with either a new tunnel or a bypass . The reason for the replacement was that officials determined that the tunnel had reached old age and was becoming run @-@ down . By 2013 , the tunnel was 73 years old . Approximately 11 million vehicles drive through the tunnel every year . A local hunting group called Mountain Field and Stream Club owns 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 ha ) of land around the tunnel , and the group had opposed plans to replace the tunnel in 2001 . When the tunnel was built , it was considered an " engineering marvel . " 
 On December 24 , 2014 , the PTC announced it was going forward with plans to replace the Allegheny Mountain Tunnel . Six options are being considered , three of which would include building bypasses via rock blasting ( like what was done with the Laurel Hill Tunnel ) while the other three would include boring two new tunnels , presumably three lanes each to accommodate the PTC 's long @-@ term plans to widen the entire mainline turnpike to six lanes except at the existing tunnels . If the PTC goes through with building new tunnels , the existing Allegheny Mountain Tunnels would be shut down . Although the projected costs for building a bypass would be less than half of the projected costs to bore new tunnels ( as well as $ 3 million in annual maintenance on each tunnel ) , the aforementioned hunting group opposes the bypass options . Funding has not been identified for the project , which would open to traffic in a best @-@ case scenario in the early 2020s . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = HMS Tiptoe ( P332 ) = 
 HMS Tiptoe ( pennant number P332 ) was a British submarine of the third group of the T class . She was built by Vickers Armstrong , Barrow , and launched on 25 February 1944 . She was one of two submarines named by Winston Churchill , and so far has been the only ship of the Royal Navy to be named Tiptoe . In 1955 she was involved in a collision with a coastal steamer whilst in Tromsø harbour . She was involved in escape trials off Malta in 1962 , and the commanding officer was reprimanded in 1964 following an incident in the Firth of Clyde where she was run aground , and again in 1965 when she collided with HMS Yarmouth . Although originally named for the ability to sneak up on someone undetected , she maintained several links with ballet , including the Royal Ballet and ballet dancer Moira Shearer . She was scrapped in Portsmouth in 1975 , while her anchor is on display in Blyth , Northumberland . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 HMS Tiptoe was one of the group three of T @-@ class submarines . She was named by Winston Churchill , with the intention to imply that it could approach the enemy silently as if on tiptoe , although the Royal Navy naming committee was against the name , stating that " it was derogatory to one of His Majesty 's ships " , but the Prime Minister had his way . The only other Royal Navy vessel to be named by Churchill was HMS Varangian . 
 She was part of the second batch of the third group to be ordered , in 1941 . She was one of a number of boats which had an all @-@ welded hull which increased diving depth to 350 feet ( 110 m ) , an increase of 50 feet ( 15 m ) . The torpedo armament was the same as the earlier group two , although by the time group three was coming into service it was realised that external torpedo tubes had major problems and affected the streamlining of the boats ; the external tubes were abandoned in the following Amphion @-@ class submarines . Because of expected use in tropical climates , boats of group three were equipped with <unk> blowers in order to deal with the increased temperatures . 
 She was built by Vickers Armstrong and was laid down at their shipyard at Barrow on 10 November 1942 whilst still known as P332 . Following her launch on 25 February 1944 , she departed the builders yard on 10 June 1944 , arriving at Holy Loch on the following day , where she was commissioned on 12 June . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 After completing training on 10 September , she returned to Barrow in order to correct some defects . Between 5 October and 12 January 1945 , she was equipped with new radar equipment and other equipment to prepare her for deployment in the Far East . She arrived in Trincomalee , Sri Lanka on 1 March 1945 prior to her first war patrol . En route from Britain , she had stopped at Gibraltar , Malta , Port Said and Ismailia in Egypt and Aden , Yemen . 
 Her first patrol centred around the west coast of Burma and the Andaman Islands before heading onto Fremantle , Australia , and was uneventful . She departed Australia for her second patrol on 6 May with orders to patrol the Flores Sea . On 15 May , she sank a Japanese coaster of around 100 tons with gunfire near Dompo Bay , Sumbawa . The following day she sank another Japanese coaster with gunfire , this time around 200 tons , in <unk> harbour . On 1 June , she approached and sank the Japanese merchant cargo ship Tobi Maru near <unk> , one of the Laut Kecil Islands . Tiptoe was damaged during the attack as the cargo ship was about to rendezvous with an escort . The escort launched thirteen depth charges , putting all of Tiptoe 's torpedo tubes out of action and flooded her sonar equipment . She returned to Fremantle on 17 June , and remained there undergoing repairs until 16 July when she left on her third patrol in the Sunda Strait along with her sister HMS Trump . 
 On 31 July she attacked two small Japanese vessels , but broke off the attack when an aircraft was sighted . On 2 August , Tiptoe and Trump together destroyed two small vessels totalling 600 tons with gunfire . On 3 August , she carried out a torpedo attack against the Japanese army cargo vessel Tencho Maru whilst it was in a convoy defended by a patrol boat . The final action of Tiptoe 's last war patrol was on 9 August , when together with Trump , they destroyed an 800 ton coastal tanker in the northern part of the Sunda Strait . She returned to Fremantle on 21 August 1945 . 
 = = = Post war = = = 
 During the royal inspection of the home fleet in 1947 by George VI , Tiptoe demonstrated diving and surfacing , along with the firing of her deck gun . In November of the same year , she was part of a group of seven submarines with destroyer HMS <unk> to take part in anti – submarine training over the course of two weeks . 
 Tiptoe was one of several all @-@ welded T @-@ class submarines rebuilt for greater underwater performance . Extra batteries were installed below the control room and additional electric motors were accommodated by cutting through the pressure hull and adding in a new 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) hull section inserted aft of the control room . The diesel engines were modified and supercharged with output increased by 300 BHP . The gun armaments and external torpedo tubes were removed , and the bow reshaped . 
 The submarine was used in filming the 1950 film , Morning Departure , a naval film directed by Roy Ward Baker . During the course of filming , the submarine depot ship HMS Maidstone was used as a mother ship for Tiptoe . In 1952 a further cinematic link was made when ballet dancer Moira Shearer presented a pair of size 3 @.@ 5 satin ballet shoes to Tiptoe that she had worn in the 1948 film The Red Shoes . These are now at the Royal Navy Submarine Museum . Whilst in Tromsø harbour on 18 July 1955 Tiptoe was damaged when a coastal steamer collided with her . The steamer , a 2 @,@ 162 tonne vessel called Nordlys , was entering the harbour when she collided with the British destroyer HMS Chevron . The steamer bounced off the destroyer and collided with Tiptoe , snapping her moorings as she was pushed halfway under a wooden quay . 
 She took part in escape trials in 1962 , which were a series of trials conducted off Malta into escape from a submarine at extreme depths . Tests were conducted with men escaping from Tiptoe at depth of up to 71 metres ( 233 ft ) with ascent rates of up to 2 m / s . The trials included the use of buoyant ascent suits which involved a suit pulled over the sailor 's head which fed them air as they ascended to the surface . For their work in the escape trials , Chief Petty Officer Christopher Crossman was awarded a commendation , and Lieutenant – Commander L. Hamlyn was awarded an OBE . 
 Following a refit in Portsmouth , Tiptoe went to the Firth of Clyde for working up , arriving on 10 January 1964 , when she was ordered not to enter Gareloch due to dense fog . The boat was duly turned around and ran aground on a muddy bank . As the fog cleared it was realised the boat had run aground only 40 yards ( 37 m ) opposite that of the house of the Royal Navy 's Captain in Charge for the Clyde area , Captain G. D. Pound . Divers were sent out to assess damage , and after finding none , Tiptoe was refloated on the evening tide and pulled off the shore by two tugboats . The commanding officer at the time was Lieutenant – Commander David Brazier , who was in his first command . He was later ordered to be severely reprimanded for negligence at a court @-@ martial where he pleaded guilty to the charge . His defence statement read , " The ship was not worked up and it was a very green company . Unfortunately he ran into fog . He took all the precautions he considered necessary . Although he had all the theoretical knowledge , he was short of that tangible instinct of which we are all aware . " 
 Tiptoe was also damaged in a collision with HMS Yarmouth on 13 July 1965 . Tiptoe was at periscope depth 10 miles ( 16 km ) SE of Portland Bill . Following the collision , the commanding officer , Lieutenant – Commander Charles Henry Pope was ordered to be severely reprimanded after being found guilty of four out of five counts of negligence . 
 When she left for her final commission on 24 February 1967 , six ballet dancers from the Royal Ballet attended the departure ceremony . At the time she was already the oldest submarine in service with the Royal Navy . She attended Portsmouth Navy Days later in 1967 . 
 By the time she was decommissioned in 1969 , Tiptoe was the last active T @-@ class submarine in the Royal Navy . As she arrived at Spithead for decommissioning on 29 August 1969 , a 13 @-@ year @-@ old ballet dancer named Judy Wright danced on her upper deck . She was sold in 1971 and scrapped at Portsmouth in 1975 . Her anchor was saved , and was mounted on stone in 1979 in Blyth , Northumberland . The town was used as a training base for submarines during both World Wars . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 = Audie Murphy = 
 Audie Leon Murphy ( 20 June 1925 – 28 May 1971 ) was one of the most decorated American combat soldiers of World War II , receiving every military combat award for valor available from the U.S. Army , as well as French and Belgian awards for heroism . Murphy received the Medal of Honor for valor demonstrated at the age of 19 for single @-@ handedly holding off an entire company of German soldiers for an hour at the Colmar Pocket in France in January 1945 , then leading a successful counterattack while wounded and out of ammunition . 
 Murphy was born into a large sharecropper family in Hunt County , Texas . His father abandoned them , and his mother died when he was a teenager . Murphy left school in fifth grade to pick cotton and find other work to help support his family ; his skill with a hunting rifle was a necessity for putting food on the table . Murphy 's older sister helped him to falsify documentation about his birth date to meet the minimum @-@ age requirement for enlisting in the military , and after being turned down by the Navy and the Marine Corps he enlisted in the Army . He first saw action in the Allied invasion of Sicily and the Battle of Anzio , and in 1944 was part of the liberation of Rome and invasion of southern France . Murphy fought at Montélimar , and led his men on a successful assault at the L 'Omet quarry near Cleurie in northeastern France in October . 
 After the war , Murphy enjoyed a 21 @-@ year acting career . He played himself in the 1955 autobiographical To Hell and Back based on his 1949 memoirs of the same name , but most of his films were westerns . He made guest appearances on celebrity television shows and starred in the series Whispering Smith . Murphy was a fairly accomplished songwriter , and bred quarter horses in California and Arizona , becoming a regular participant in horse racing . 
 Suffering from what would today be termed posttraumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) , he slept with a loaded handgun under his pillow and looked for solace in addictive sleeping pills . In the last few years of his life he was plagued by money problems , but refused offers to appear in alcohol and cigarette commercials because he did not want to set a bad example . Murphy died in a plane crash in Virginia in 1971 shortly before his 46th birthday , and was interred with full military honors at Arlington National Cemetery . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Audie Leon Murphy was born the seventh of twelve children to Emmett Berry Murphy and his wife Josie Bell Killian in Kingston , Texas . The Murphys were sharecroppers of Irish descent . 
 As a child , Murphy was a loner with mood swings and an explosive temper . He grew up in Texas , around Farmersville , Greenville , and Celeste , where he attended elementary school . His father drifted in and out of the family 's life and eventually deserted them . Murphy dropped out of school in fifth grade and got a job picking cotton for a dollar a day to help support his family ; he also became skilled with a rifle , hunting small game to help feed them . After his mother died of endocarditis and pneumonia in 1941 , he worked at a radio repair shop and at a combination general store , garage and gas station in Greenville . Hunt County authorities placed his three youngest siblings in Boles Children 's Home , a Christian orphanage in Quinlan . After the war , he bought a house in Farmersville for his oldest sister Corinne and her husband Poland Burns . His other siblings briefly shared the home . 
 The loss of his mother stayed with Murphy throughout his life . He later stated : 
 She died when I was sixteen . She had the most beautiful hair I 've ever seen . It reached almost to the floor . She rarely talked ; and always seemed to be searching for something . What it was I don 't know . We didn 't discuss our feelings . But when she passed away , she took something of me with her . It seems I 've been searching for it ever since . 
 = = World War II service = = 
 Murphy had always wanted to be a soldier , and after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 , he tried to enlist , but the Army , Navy and Marine Corps all turned him down for being underweight and underage . After his sister provided an affidavit falsifying his birth date by a year , he was accepted by the U.S. Army on 30 June 1942 . After basic training at Camp Wolters , he was sent to Fort Meade for advanced infantry training . During basic training he earned the Marksman Badge with Rifle Component Bar and Expert Badge with Bayonet Component Bar . 
 = = = Mediterranean Theater = = = 
 Murphy was shipped to Casablanca in French Morocco on 20 February 1943 . He was assigned to Company B , 1st Battalion , 15th Infantry Regiment , 3rd Infantry Division , which trained under the command of Major General Lucian Truscott . He participated as a platoon messenger with his division at Arzew in Algeria in rigorous training for the Allied assault landings in Sicily , and was promoted to private first class on 7 May and corporal on 15 July . 
 When the 3rd Infantry landed at Licata , Sicily , on 10 July , Murphy was a division runner . On a scouting patrol , he killed two fleeing Italian officers near <unk> . Sidelined with illness for a week when Company B arrived in Palermo on 20 July , he rejoined them when they were assigned to a hillside location protecting a machine @-@ gun emplacement , while the rest of the 3rd Infantry Division fought at San Fratello en route to the Allied capture of the transit port of Messina . 
 Murphy participated in the September 1943 mainland Salerno landing at <unk> . While on a scouting party along the Volturno River , he and two other soldiers were ambushed by German machine @-@ gun fire , which killed one of the Americans . Murphy and the other survivor responded by killing five German soldiers with hand grenades and machine @-@ gun fire . While taking part in the October Allied assault on the Volturno Line , near Mignano Monte Lungo Hill 193 , he and his company repelled an attack by seven German soldiers , killing three and taking four prisoner . Murphy was promoted to sergeant on 13 December . 
 In January 1944 , Murphy was promoted to staff sergeant . He was hospitalized in Naples with malaria on 21 January , and was unable to participate in the initial landing at the Anzio beachhead . He returned on 29 January and participated in the First Battle of Cisterna , and was made a platoon sergeant in Company B following the battle . He returned with the 3rd Division to Anzio , where they remained for months . Taking shelter from the weather in an abandoned farmhouse on 2 March , Murphy and his platoon killed the crew of a passing German tank . He then crawled out alone close enough to destroy the tank with rifle grenades , for which he received the Bronze Star with " V " Device . Murphy continued to make scouting patrols to take German prisoners before being hospitalized for a week on 13 March with a second bout of malaria . Sixty @-@ one infantry officers and enlisted men of Company B , 15th Infantry , including Murphy , were awarded the Combat Infantryman Badge on 8 May . Murphy was also awarded a Bronze Oak Leaf Cluster for his Bronze Star . American forces liberated Rome on 4 June , and Murphy remained bivouacked in Rome with his platoon throughout July . 
 = = = European Theater = = = 
 Murphy received the Distinguished Service Cross for action taken on 15 August 1944 , during the first wave of the Allied invasion of southern France . After landing on Yellow Beach near <unk> , Murphy 's platoon was attacked by German soldiers while making their way through a vineyard . He retrieved a machine gun that had been detached from the squad and returned fire at the German soldiers , killing two and wounding one . Two Germans exited a house about 100 yards ( 91 m ) away and appeared to surrender ; when Murphy 's best friend responded , they shot and killed him . Murphy advanced alone on the house under direct fire . He killed six , wounded two and took eleven prisoner . 
 Murphy was with the 1st Battalion , 15th Infantry Regiment during the 27 – 28 August offensive at Montélimar that secured the area from the Germans . Along with the other soldiers who took part in the action , he received the Presidential Unit Citation . 
 Murphy 's first Purple Heart was for a heel wound received in a mortar shell blast on 15 September 1944 in northeastern France . His first Silver Star came after he killed four and wounded three at a German machine gun position on 2 October at L 'Omet quarry in the Cleurie river valley . Three days later , Murphy crawled alone towards the Germans at L 'Omet , carrying an SCR @-@ 536 radio and directing his men for an hour while the Germans fired directly at him . When his men finally took the hill , 15 Germans had been killed and 35 wounded . Murphy 's actions earned him a Bronze Oak Leaf Cluster for his Silver Star . He was awarded a battlefield commission to second lieutenant on 14 October , which elevated him to platoon leader . While en route to Brouvelieures on 26 October , the 3rd Platoon of Company B was attacked by a German sniper group . Murphy captured two before being shot in the hip by a sniper ; he returned fire and shot the sniper between the eyes . At the 3rd General Hospital at Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence , the removal of gangrene from the wound caused partial loss of his hip muscle and kept him out of combat until January . Murphy received his first Bronze Oak Leaf Cluster for his Purple Heart for this injury . 
 The Colmar Pocket , 850 square miles ( 2 @,@ 200 km2 ) in the Vosges Mountains , had been held by German troops since November 1944 . On 14 January 1945 , Murphy rejoined his platoon , which had been moved to the Colmar area in December . He moved with the 3rd Division on 24 January to the town of Holtzwihr , where they faced a strong German counterattack . He was wounded in both legs , for which he received a second Bronze Oak Leaf Cluster for his Purple Heart . As the company awaited reinforcements on 26 January , he was made commander of Company B. 
 The Germans scored a direct hit on an M10 tank destroyer , setting it alight , forcing the crew to abandon it . Murphy ordered his men to retreat to positions in the woods , remaining alone at his post , shooting his M1 carbine and directing artillery fire via his field radio while the Germans aimed fire directly at his position . Murphy mounted the abandoned , burning tank destroyer and began firing its .50 caliber machine gun at the advancing Germans , killing a squad crawling through a ditch towards him . For an hour , Murphy stood on the flaming tank destroyer returning German fire from foot soldiers and advancing tanks , killing or wounding 50 Germans . He sustained a leg wound during his stand , and stopped only after he ran out of ammunition . Murphy rejoined his men , disregarding his own wound , and led them back to repel the Germans . He insisted on remaining with his men while his wounds were treated . For his actions that day , he was awarded the Medal of Honor . The 3rd Infantry Division was awarded the Presidential Unit Citation for its actions at the Colmar Pocket , giving Murphy a Bronze Oak Leaf Cluster for the emblem . 
 On 16 February , Murphy was promoted to first lieutenant and was awarded the Legion of Merit for his service from 22 January 1944 to 18 February 1945 . He was moved from the front lines to Regimental Headquarters and made a liaison officer . 
 = = = Decorations = = = 
 The United States additionally honored Murphy 's war contributions with the American Campaign Medal , the European – African – Middle Eastern Campaign Medal with arrowhead device and campaign stars , the World War II Victory Medal , and the Army of Occupation Medal with Germany Clasp . France recognized his service with the French Legion of Honor – Grade of Chevalier , the French Croix de guerre with Silver Star , the French Croix de guerre with Palm , the French Liberation Medal and the French <unk> in Colors of the Croix de guerre , which was authorized for all members of the 3rd Infantry Division who fought in France during World War II . Belgium awarded Murphy the Belgian Croix de guerre with 1940 Palm . 
 Brigadier General Ralph B. Lovett and Lieutenant Colonel Hallet D. Edson recommended Murphy for the Medal of Honor . Near Salzburg , Austria on 2 June 1945 , Lieutenant General A.M. Patch presented Murphy with the Medal of Honor and Legion of Merit for his actions at Holtzwihr . When asked after the war why he had seized the machine gun and taken on an entire company of German infantry , he replied , " They were killing my friends . " Murphy received every U.S. military combat award for valor available from the U.S. Army for his World War II service . 
 = = = Postwar military service = = = 
 Inquiries were made through official channels about the prospect of Murphy attending West Point upon his return to the United States , but he never enrolled . Author Don Graham wrote that Murphy suggested the idea and then dropped it , possibly when he realized the extent of academic preparation needed to pass the entrance exam . Murphy was one of several military personnel who received orders on 8 June 1945 to report to Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio , Texas , for temporary duty and reassignment . Upon arrival on 13 June , he was one of four assigned to Fort Sam Houston Army Ground & Services Redistribution Station and sent home for 30 days of recuperation , with permission to travel anywhere within the United States during that period . While on leave , Murphy was feted with parades , banquets , and speeches . He received a belated Good Conduct Medal on 21 August . He was discharged with the rank of first lieutenant at a 50 percent disability classification on 21 September and transferred to the Officers ' Reserve Corps . 
 = = = Post @-@ traumatic stress = = = 
 Murphy had been plagued since his military service with insomnia and bouts of depression , and slept with a loaded pistol under his pillow . A post @-@ service medical examination on 17 June 1947 revealed symptoms of headaches , vomiting , and nightmares about war . His medical records indicated that he took sleeping pills to help prevent nightmares . During the mid @-@ 1960s , he recognized his dependence on <unk> , and locked himself alone in a hotel room for a week to break the addiction successfully . Post @-@ traumatic stress levels exacerbated his innate moodiness , and surfaced in episodes that friends and professional colleagues found alarming . His first wife , Wanda Hendrix , stated that he once held her at gunpoint . She witnessed her husband being guilt @-@ ridden and tearful over newsreel footage of German war orphans . Murphy briefly found a creative stress outlet in writing poetry after his Army discharge . His poem " The Crosses Grow on Anzio " appeared in his book To Hell and Back , but was attributed to the fictitious character Kerrigan . 
 In an effort to draw attention to the problems of returning Korean War and Vietnam War veterans , Murphy spoke out candidly about his own problems with posttraumatic stress disorder . It was known during Murphy 's lifetime as " battle fatigue " and " shell shock " , terminology that dated back to World War I. He called on the government to give increased consideration and study to the emotional impact of combat experiences , and to extend health care benefits to war veterans . As a result of legislation introduced by U.S. Congressman Olin Teague five months after Murphy 's death in 1971 , the Audie L. Murphy Memorial VA Hospital in San Antonio , now a part of the South Texas Veterans Health Care System , was dedicated in 1973 . 
 = = Texas Army National Guard = = 
 At the end of World War II , the 36th Infantry Division reverted to state control as part of the Texas Army National Guard , and Murphy 's friends Major General H. Miller Ainsworth and Brigadier General Carl L. Phinney were the 36th 's commander and deputy commander respectively . After the 25 June 1950 commencement of the Korean War , Murphy began a second military career and was commissioned as a captain in the 36th Infantry Division of the Texas Army National Guard . During his service he drilled new recruits in the summer training camps , and granted the Guard permission to use his name and image in recruiting materials . Although he wanted to join the fighting and juggled training activities with his film career , the 36th Infantry Division was never sent to Korea . At his request , he transferred to inactive status on 1 October 1951 because of his film commitments with MGM Studios , and returned to active status in 1955 . Murphy was promoted to the rank of major by the Texas Army National Guard in 1956 and returned to inactive status in 1957 . In 1969 , his official separation from the Guard transferred him to the United States Army Reserve . He remained with the USAR until his transfer to the Retired Reserve in 1969 . 
 = = Film career = = 
 Throughout an acting career spanning from 1948 to 1969 , Murphy made more than 40 feature films and one television series . When actor and producer James Cagney saw 16 July 1945 issue of Life magazine depicting Murphy as the " most decorated soldier " , he brought him to Hollywood . Cagney and his brother William signed him as a contract player for their production company and gave him training in acting , voice and dance . They never cast Murphy in a movie and a personal disagreement ended the association in 1947 . Murphy later worked with acting coach Estelle Harman , and honed his diction by reciting dialogue from William Shakespeare and William Saroyan . 
 Murphy moved into Terry Hunt 's Athletic Club in Hollywood where he lived until 1948 . Hollywood writer David " Spec " McClure befriended Murphy , collaborating with him on Murphy 's 1949 book To Hell and Back . McClure used his connections to get Murphy a $ 500 bit part in Texas , Brooklyn and Heaven . The agent of Wanda Hendrix , whom he had been dating since 1946 , got him a bit part in the 1948 Alan Ladd film Beyond Glory directed by John Farrow . His 1949 film Bad Boy gave him his first leading role . The film 's financial backers refused to bankroll the project unless Murphy was given the lead ; thus , Allied Artists put aside their reservations about using an inexperienced actor and gave him the starring role . 
 Universal Studios signed Murphy to a seven @-@ year studio contract at $ 2 @,@ 500 a week . His first film for them was as Billy the Kid in The Kid from Texas in 1950 . He wrapped up that year making Sierra starring Wanda Hendrix , who by that time had become his wife , and Kansas Raiders as outlaw Jesse James . Universal lent him to MGM in 1951 at a salary of $ 25 @,@ 000 to play the lead of The Youth in The Red Badge of Courage , directed by John Huston . Murphy and Huston worked together again in the 1960 film The Unforgiven . 
 The only film Murphy made in 1952 was The Duel at Silver Creek with director Don Siegel . Murphy worked with Siegel one more time in 1958 for The Gun Runners . In 1953 , he starred in Frederick de Cordova 's Column South , and played Jim Harvey in Nathan Juran 's Tumbleweed , an adaptation of the Kenneth Perkins novel Three Were Renegades . Director Nathan Juran also directed Gunsmoke and Drums Across the River . George Marshall directed Murphy in the 1954 Destry , a remake of Destry Rides Again , based on a character created by author Max Brand . 
 Although Murphy was initially reluctant to appear as himself in To Hell and Back , the 1955 adaptation of his book directed by Jesse Hibbs , he eventually agreed ; it became the biggest hit in the history of Universal Studios at the time . To help publicize the release of the film , he made guest appearances on television shows such as What 's My Line ? , Toast of the Town , and Colgate Comedy Hour . The Hibbs @-@ Murphy team proved so successful in To Hell and Back that the two worked together on five subsequent films . The partnership resulted in the 1956 western Walk the Proud Land , and the non @-@ westerns Joe Butterfly and World in My Corner . They worked together for the last time in the 1958 western Ride a Crooked Trail . 
 Joseph L. Mankiewicz hired Murphy to play the titular role in the 1958 film The Quiet American . Murphy formed a partnership with Harry Joe Brown to make three films , starting with The Guns of Fort Petticoat ( 1957 ) . The partnership fell into disagreement over the remaining two projects , and Brown filed suit against Murphy . Murphy featured in three westerns in 1959 : he starred opposite Sandra Dee in The Wild and the Innocent , collaborated as an uncredited co @-@ producer with Walter <unk> on the black and white Cast a Long Shadow , and performed as a hired killer in No Name on the Bullet , a film that was well received by critics . Thelma Ritter was his costar in the 1960 Startime television episode " The Man " . 
 During the early 1960s , Murphy donated his time and otherwise lent his name and image for three episodes of The Big Picture television series produced by the United States Army . He received the 1960 Outstanding Civilian Service Medal for his cooperation in the episode Broken Bridge , which featured his visits to military installations in Germany , Italy , Turkey and the U.S. state of New Mexico to showcase the military 's latest weaponry . 
 Writer Clair Huffaker wrote the 1961 screenplays for Murphy 's films Seven Ways from Sundown and Posse from Hell . Willard W. Willingham and his wife Mary Willingham befriended Murphy in his early days in Hollywood and worked with him on a number of projects . 
 Willard was a producer on Murphy 's 1961 television series Whispering <unk> and co @-@ wrote the screenplay for Battle at Bloody Beach that year . He collaborated on Bullet for a Badman in 1964 and Arizona Raiders in 1965 . The <unk> as a team wrote the screenplay for <unk> as well the script for Murphy 's last starring lead in the western 40 Guns to Apache Pass in 1967 . Murphy made Trunk to Cairo in Israel in 1966 . 
 He first met director Budd Boetticher when Murphy requested to be his boxing partner at Terry Hunt 's Athletic Club . He subsequently appeared in the 1951 title role of Boetticher 's first western The Cimarron Kid . Boetticher wrote the script in 1969 for Murphy 's last film A Time for Dying . Two other projects that Murphy and Boetticher planned to collaborate on – A Horse for Mr Barnum and When There 's Sumpthin ' to Do – never came to fruition . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Murphy married actress Wanda Hendrix on 8 January 1949 , and their divorce became final on 19 April 1951 . Four days later he married former airline stewardess Pamela Archer . He had two sons with Archer : Terry Michael Murphy , born on 14 March 1952 , and James Shannon " Skipper " Murphy , born in 1954 . 
 Murphy bred quarter horses at the Audie Murphy Ranch in what is now <unk> , California , and the Murphy Ranch in Pima County , Arizona . His horses raced at the Del Mar Racetrack and he invested large sums of money in the hobby . Murphy had a gambling habit that left his finances in a poor state . In 1968 , he stated that he lost $ 260 @,@ 000 in an Algerian oil deal and was dealing with the Internal Revenue Service over unpaid taxes . In spite of his financial difficulties , Murphy refused to appear in commercials for alcohol and cigarettes , mindful of the influence he would have on the youth market . 
 = = Death and commemorations = = 
 On 28 May 1971 , Murphy was killed when the private plane in which he was a passenger crashed into Brush Mountain , near Catawba , Virginia , 20 miles ( 32 km ) west of Roanoke in conditions of rain , clouds , fog and zero visibility . The pilot and four other passengers were also killed . The aircraft was a twin @-@ engine Aero Commander 680 flown by a pilot who had a private @-@ pilot license and a reported 8 @,@ 000 hours of flying time , but who held no instrument rating . The aircraft was recovered on 31 May . After her husband died , Pamela Murphy moved into a small apartment and got a clerk position at the Veterans Administration Hospital in Los Angeles , where she remained employed for 35 years . In 1975 , a court awarded Murphy 's widow and two children $ 2 @.@ 5 million in damages because of the accident . 
 On 7 June 1971 , Murphy was buried with full military honors at Arlington National Cemetery . In attendance were Ambassador to the U.N. George H.W. Bush , Army Chief of Staff William Westmoreland , and many of the 3rd Infantry Division . Murphy 's grave site is in Section 46 , headstone number 46 @-@ 366 @-@ 11 , located across Memorial Drive from the Amphitheater . A special flagstone walkway was later constructed to accommodate the large number of people who visit to pay their respects . It is the cemetery 's second most @-@ visited grave site , after that of President John F. Kennedy . 
 The headstones of Medal of Honor recipients buried at Arlington National Cemetery are normally decorated in gold leaf . Murphy previously requested that his stone remain plain and inconspicuous , like that of an ordinary soldier . The headstone contains the birth year 1924 , based upon purportedly falsified materials among his military records . In 1974 , a large granite marker was erected just off the Appalachian Trail at 37 @.@ <unk> ° N 80 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 37 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> ﻿ ( Audie Murphy monument ) at 3 @,@ 100 ′ elevation , near the crash site . 
 Civilian honors were bestowed on Murphy during his lifetime and posthumously , including a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . In 2013 , Murphy was honored by his home state with the Texas Legislative Medal of Honor . 
 Swedish power metal band Sabaton wrote a song on their 2014 studio album , Heroes , also named " To Hell and Back " , commemorating and recognizing Audie Murphy as one of the most decorated American veterans of World War II . 
 = = Song writing = = 
 David " Spec " McClure , his collaborator on the book To Hell and Back , discovered Murphy 's talent for poetry during their work on the memoir when he found discarded verses in Murphy 's Hollywood apartment . One of those poems , " The Crosses Grow on Anzio " , appears in To Hell and Back attributed to a soldier named Kerrigan . Only two others survived , " Alone and Far Removed " and " Freedom Flies in Your Heart Like an Eagle " . The latter was part of a speech Murphy had written at a 1968 dedication of the Alabama War Memorial in Montgomery , and later set to music by Scott Turner under the title " Dusty Old Helmet " . 
 Murphy was a fan of country music , in particular Bob Wills and Chet Atkins , but was not a singer or musician himself . Through his friend Guy Mitchell , Murphy was introduced to songwriter Scott Turner in 1961 . The two of them collaborated on numerous songs between 1962 and 1970 , the most successful of which was " <unk> and Boards " and " When the Wind Blows in Chicago " . 
 = Worle railway station = 
 Worle railway station , on the Bristol to Exeter Line , serves the Worle , West Wick and St Georges suburbs of Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare in North Somerset , England . It is 16 miles ( 26 km ) west of Bristol Temple Meads railway station , and 134 miles ( 216 km ) from London Paddington . Its three @-@ letter station code is WOR . It was opened in 1990 by British Rail . The station , which has two platforms , is managed by Great Western Railway , the seventh company to be responsible for the station , and the third franchise since privatisation in 1997 . They provide all train services at the station , mainly hourly services between Bristol Parkway and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and between Cardiff Central and Taunton . The station 's car park was significantly expanded in 2013 , with a bus interchange built at the same time . 
 The line through Worle is not electrified , but there is significant local support for it to be electrified as part of the 21st @-@ century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line , partly motivated by worries that unless the line is electrified , Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare will lose direct services to London . 
 = = Description = = 
 Worle railway station is located in the east of Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , Somerset , serving the suburbs of Worle , West Wick and St Georges . The surrounding area is primarily residential , but with several commercial developments , including the Worle Parkway office development next to the station . The station is located just off the <unk> Bristol Road , near the M5 motorway junction 21 and the A370 . There is a car park on the north , east and south sides of the station . The station is on the Bristol to Exeter Line , 16 miles 11 chains ( 26 @.@ 0 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads and 134 miles 42 chains ( 216 @.@ 5 km ) from London Paddington ( via Chippenham ) . It is the fifth station along the line from Bristol Temple Meads . The station is oriented along an axis at 57 degrees to the meridian . 
 There are two platforms , on either side of the two tracks through the station . The southern platform , platform 1 , serves westbound trains ( towards Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare and Taunton ) ; the northern platform , platform 2 , serves eastbound trains ( towards Bristol ) . Both platforms are 100 metres ( 110 yd ) long . The line through the station has a speed limit of 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) , and is not electrified . Access between the platforms is via an open footbridge with long , sloped ramps for step @-@ free access . Ticket machines are available , and a small ticket office operates during the weekday morning peak , but the station is otherwise unstaffed . Help points are provided , allowing travellers to ask questions of a call centre . There are metal and glass waiting shelters on both platforms – two on the eastbound platform and one on the westbound . 
 49 chains ( 0 @.@ 99 km ) west of the station is Worle Junction , where the single @-@ track loop line to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare diverges from the main line towards Taunton . The next station west along the loop is Weston Milton , the next station west on the main line is Highbridge & Burnham . The next station east of Worle is Yatton . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station is managed by Great Western Railway , who operate all rail services from the station . The basic service consists of two trains in each direction per hour : one is the Bristol Parkway to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare service , calling at all stations ; the second is the faster Cardiff Central to Taunton service , non @-@ stop between Bristol Temple Meads and Nailsea & Backwell , Worle and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . Some westbound services are extended to Exeter St Davids or Plymouth . There is one service to Avonmouth on weekday evenings . Each Sunday there are two services to and from the Severn Beach Line . During summer months these terminate at Severn Beach ; the rest of the year only one does , the other terminating at Avonmouth . The typical journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is 25 minutes , to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare is 8 minutes . 
 Services between London Paddington and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare call at Worle in the early morning and evening , running non @-@ stop between Bristol Temple Meads and Nailsea and Backwell . From Monday to Friday there are four morning services and one evening service to London , with seven services from London , all in the evening . One service from London is extended to Taunton , and another to Penzance . Saturday sees two services to London , all in the morning , and three services from London , all in the evening – one is extended to Exeter St David 's , another to Plymouth . There are five services to and six from London on Sundays , spread throughout the day , with one service extended to Taunton and another to Exeter . All trains call at Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare westbound , and at Yatton and Nailsea and Backwell eastbound , but not all stop at Weston Milton . The typical journey time to London is 2 hours 15 minutes . 
 Local services from Worle are operated by Class 150 , 153 and 158 diesel multiple @-@ unit trains . Until 2012 , Class 143 Pacer units were a regular sight , but these have been moved south to work in Devon and Cornwall following a cascade of Class 150 / 1 units from London Midland and London Overground . Services to and from London are formed of High Speed Train sets , which are longer than the station , so passengers in the front carriages have to move to a different carriage to get out . Passengers are prevented from getting out onto the tracks by a selective door @-@ opening system . 
 CrossCountry services pass through the station throughout the day , operating services between Cornwall and Scotland , but do not stop . Occasional Great Western Railway intercity services between London and Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare or Taunton and Exeter also pass through non @-@ stop . 
 = = History = = 
 The line through Worle saw its first use on 14 June 1841 , when the first section of the Bristol and Exeter Railway 's ( B & ER ) main line between Bristol and Bridgwater was opened . The line , engineered by Isambard Kingdom Brunel , was built as 7 ft ( 2 @,@ 134 mm ) broad @-@ gauge but was reconstructed as a mixed @-@ gauge line to accommodate local 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 435 mm ) -gauge traffic by 1 June 1875 . Services were operated by the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) on behalf of the B & ER until 1 May 1849 . The B & ER then took over its own workings until the company was amalgamated into the GWR on 1 January 1876 . Broad @-@ gauge trains ceased operation on 20 May 1892 . When the railways were nationalised by the Transport Act 1947 , the line became part of the Western Region of British Railways . 
 The modern Worle railway station is the fourth station to serve Worle . The first station , 47 chains ( 0 @.@ 95 km ) east of the modern station , was opened in 1841 as Banwell and was known as Worle from 1869 to 1884 , then as <unk> and Worle from 1922 until closure in 1964 . From 1884 to 1922 , there was a station called Worle on the loop line to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , 60 chains ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) west of the modern station . There was also a station on the nearby Weston , Clevedon and Portishead Light Railway , which was known as Worle from 1897 to 1913 , then as Worle ( Moor Lane ) until 1917 , and as Worle Town until closure in 1940 . 
 The station at Worle was developed as a joint initiative between British Rail and Avon County Council . It cost £ 700 @,@ 000 and was built using lightweight construction materials due to being sited on marshy ground . The station was opened on 24 September 1990 by Councillor Betty Perry , the chair of Avon Council . The first train was a westbound Regional Railways service , operated by Class 150 Sprinter DMU <unk> . All services were local ones – no scheduled intercity services would call at Worle until 2007 . 
 Upon the privatisation of British Rail in 1997 , services were franchised to Wales & West , which was in turn succeeded in 2001 by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup , which was later rebranded Great Western Railway . Great Western Railway services to and from London Paddington started calling at Worle in 2007 . Due to the trains being longer than the platforms , a selective door opening system was used to prevent passengers opening doors which were not adjacent to the platform . 
 In 2012 , plans to enhance the station 's facilities were approved by the Department for Transport . The works , part of a large transport scheme called the Weston Package , included expanded the car park by 320 spaces , better facilities for cyclists and motorcyclists , and a bus interchange . A bus link to the nearby Queensway retail park was also included in the scheme . The expansion took over unused land to the east and south of the station , and required the removal of slow worms and grass snakes to a nature reserve in Cheddar . The work , which started in April 2013 , was completed later the same year with the new car park opening on 3 September 2013 . 
 Worle has had a large number of incidents of railway vandalism and antisocial behaviour , and the stretch of line through Worle is considered one of the most vandalised in the United Kingdom – obstructions have been left on the line and stones have being thrown at railway staff . There have been several incidents of train guards being attacked by passengers who refused to pay their fares , including one incident where the guard was dragged from the train and knocked to the ground . Vandals have also damaged the station 's ticket machines , attacked passengers and slashed the tyres of cars parked at the station . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise ( of which services at Worle are a part ) beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . 
 With the impending upgrade , the main line from London to Bristol is due to be electrified . However , the electrification will not extend beyond Bristol to Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , so Worle will continue to be served by diesel trains . This could entail the removal of direct London services , as electric trains would not be able to operate beyond Bristol . Services could however continue using bi @-@ mode trains . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification continuing to Weston , as does MP for Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare John Penrose . Local services will still be diesel @-@ operated , with " Sprinter " units expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . 
 Worle is on the Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare / Yate corridor , one of the main axes of the Greater Bristol Metro , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance capacity in the Bristol area . The plan calls for longer and newer trains to prevent overcrowding . 
 = Secret Mountain Fort Awesome = 
 Secret Mountain Fort Awesome is an American animated television series created by Peter Browngardt that debuted in 2011 on Cartoon Network . The show revolves around a fraternity of five monsters who unleash wild stunts upon the public from their eponymous mountain fort . The show is loosely based on the antagonists that appeared in Browngardt 's animated short , Uncle Grandpa , and employs Mike Conte of the heavy metal band Early Man as composer . 
 The show premiered as a sneak peek on Cartoon Network on August 1 , 2011 , and had a formal premiere September 26 , 2011 . The show has been well received , and designers Robertryan Cory and Chris Tsirgiotis both won awards for " Outstanding Individual in Animation " at the 64th Primetime Emmy Awards ceremony . The Uncle Grandpa short that Browngardt had produced was eventually adapted as a full series of the same name , which he felt was a more lighthearted adaptation for children . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A fivesome of monsters known as the <unk> are banished from society due to their unruly behavior and ghastly appearances . From their sentient and eponymous mountain fort , they unleash crazy stunts on the public . Their leader , a purple , tusked creature named <unk> ( voiced by Peter Browngardt ) , is a macho party animal willing to do anything to help out his group , even when his help is less than desired . Dingle ( also voiced by Browngardt ) , scrawny and blue , acts as their faithful pet , intelligible only to the group . <unk> ( Steve Little ) , a black @-@ furred monster , is likewise blindly loyal , but lacks critical judgement skills — the more hazardous something is , the more likely he will be to follow it . <unk> ( Paul Rugg ) , an <unk> green ball , has a demanding attitude and an obsession with technology . The Fart ( Pat Duke ) — a monster made of buttocks who <unk> when touched — is the most sensitive and levelheaded of the group . 
 = = Production = = 
 At their 2011 upfront , Cartoon Network announced Secret Mountain Fort Awesome , along with various other series . Billed as a comedy , the show was created by Browngardt and based on his animated short Uncle Grandpa , which garnered praise , a cult following and an Emmy Award nomination . Both were produced at Cartoon Network Studios . Before landing his own show , Browngardt had worked at Augenblick Studios and MTV , as well as on individual programs , such as Futurama , The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack and Chowder . Browngardt 's work on the lattermost series began when its creator C.H. Greenblatt looked through one of his pitch bibles that he left at the studio . 
 The show borrows elements and its design style from his Uncle Grandpa short , which was pitched to the network as a pilot . According to Browngardt , they were unsure about having a series centered on the title character , and felt the monster characters from the pilot had more potential . Character designer Robertryan Cory and David P. Smith ( a director and storyboard artist on Dexter 's Laboratory and The Powerpuff Girls ) were brought on board to help shape the project 's development . 
 In an interview with Cartoon Brew , Browngardt called the process of pitching his pilot an " amazing learning experience " because it allowed him to propose an idea to the network and see " how it can manipulate and change while you 're working on it " . On the show , animation veteran Chris Reccardi served as creative director , whilst Sue Mondt ( who had previously art directed Cartoon Network 's Camp Lazlo ) handled art direction and Robert Alvarez and Larry Leichliter directed the animation . Browngardt depicted the production schedule as " really tight " , which called for them to manage their time and to pick their battles with the network . 
 In the United States , the show is rated TV @-@ PG . Referring to his encounters with the network regarding content , Browngardt learned to let go and find the " right balance " , as well as to ask himself , " Is my grandma going to notice this ? " For the music , Mike Conte of the heavy metal band Early Man was employed as composer . The score , which incorporates heavy metal elements and " lots of riffage " , was originally added to the animatics as a rough draft . Browngardt found that it harmonized with the imagery and what he envisioned for the design . Conte noted Browngardt 's inspirations from Garbage Pail Kids and Don Martin of Mad magazine , but called the result " definitely its own thing " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 Secret Mountain premiered on August 1 , 2011 on Cartoon Network as part of a sneak preview ; this broadcast was seen by 1 @.@ 8 million viewers . It premiered formally on September 26 as part of their Monday night programming block , where it was seen by 1 @.@ 3 million viewers , marking a slight decrease from the previous broadcast . The show was moved to Thursdays upon its second season premiere on December 30 , 2011 . Following the premiere of the eighth episode of the season on February 17 , 2012 , the show was pulled from broadcast . The network published the remaining eight episodes through iTunes a month later , from March 8 to March 29 , thus concluding the show . 
 Many critics were complimentary in regards to the series ' art style . In his website <unk> , Aaron Simpson compared it to Garbage Pail Kids and the works of Don Martin , two elements of his childhood . Amid Amidi of Cartoon Brew called Robertryan Cory 's character designs " impressive " and " distinctively styled " , though he felt the art style 's complexity made the animation quality suffer as a result . Abby Koenig of Houston Press compared its " ridiculous " nature to the film Little Monsters , and proposed that Howie Mandel ( featured in the latter work ) guest voice a monster on the show . Shannon O 'Leary of Publishers Weekly wrote that the show , along with others on the network such as Adventure Time and Superjail ! , bore resemblance to the aesthetics of established independent comics artists . Meanwhile , Jason Krell of io9 considered it a failure despite its influences from Adventure Time , which made way for many successful original series on the network . 
 The episode " Nightmare Sauce " received multiple accolades , including at the 2012 Annecy International Animated Film Festival for " Best TV Production " ( of which Browngardt was the recipient ) , and at the 64th Primetime Emmy Awards , where Cory and Chris Tsirgiotis were awarded " Outstanding Individual in Animation " . Cory also won at the 39th Annie Awards for " Character Design in a Television Production " , while Tsirgiotis , Sue Mondt , Daniel Elson and Mark Bodnar were collectively awarded " Production Design in a Television Production " . At the 40th Annie Awards , Thaddeus Paul <unk> was nominated for " Character Design in an Animated Television or Other Broadcast Venue Production " for his work on the episode " Secret Mountain Uncle Grandpa " . 
 = = Spin @-@ off = = 
 After Secret Mountain Fort Awesome got axed , the original Uncle Grandpa short that Browngardt produced was adapted as a full series of the same name , developed as part of Cartoon Network 's shorts development initiative . The series revolves around the title character , who is simultaneously the grandfather and uncle of everyone in the world . Browngardt explained that while the new series would retain some aspects of Secret Mountain , it would be a more lighthearted adaption for children . He ultimately expressed that he wanted " more variety in the music and be able to go [ sic ] sort of a happier place , though it does go dark and heavy at times " . 
 = = Work cited = = 
 = Phallus impudicus = 
 Phallus impudicus , known colloquially as the common stinkhorn , is a widespread fungus recognizable for its foul odor and its phallic shape when mature , the latter feature giving rise to several names in 17th @-@ century England . It is a common mushroom in Europe and western North America , where it occurs in habitats rich in wood debris such as forests and mulched gardens . It appears from summer to late autumn . The fruiting structure is tall and white with a slimy , dark olive colored conical head . Known as the gleba , this material contains the spores , and is transported by insects which are attracted by the odor — described as resembling carrion . Despite its foul smell , it is not poisonous and immature mushrooms are consumed in parts of France and Germany . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Botanist John Gerard called it the " <unk> mushroom " or " fungus virilis penis <unk> " in his General Historie of Plants of 1597 , and John Parkinson referred to it as " <unk> <unk> " or " phallus hollandicus " in his Theatrum botanicum of 1640 . Linnaeus described it in his 1753 Species Plantarum , and it still bears its original binomial name . Its specific epithet , impudicus , is derived from the Latin for " shameless " or " immodest " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Sometimes called the witch 's egg , the immature stinkhorn is whitish or pinkish , egg @-@ shaped , and typically 4 to 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 4 in ) by 3 to 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) . 
 On the outside is a thick whitish volva , also known as the peridium , covering the olive @-@ colored gelatinous gleba . It is the latter that contains the spores and later stinks and attracts the flies ; within this layer is a green layer which will become the ' head ' of the expanded fruit body ; and inside this is a white structure called the receptaculum ( the stalk when expanded ) , that is hard , but has an airy structure like a sponge . The eggs become fully grown stinkhorns very rapidly , over a day or two . The mature stinkhorn is 10 to 30 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 to 11 @.@ 8 in ) tall and 4 to 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 to 2 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter , topped with a conical cap 2 to 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) high that is covered with the greenish @-@ brown slimy gleba . In older fungi the slime is eventually removed , exposing a bare yellowish pitted and ridged ( reticulate ) surface . This has a passing resemblance to the common morel ( Morchella esculenta ) , with which it is sometimes mistaken . The rate of growth of Phallus impudicus has been measured at 10 – 15 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) per hour . The growing fruit body is able to exert up to 1 @.@ 33 kPa of pressure — a force sufficient to push up through asphalt . The spores have an elliptical to oblong shape , with dimensions of 3 – 5 to 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 µm . 
 In North America , Phallus impudicus can be distinguished from the very similar P. hadriani by the latter 's purplish @-@ tinted volva . 
 = = Spore dispersal = = 
 The dispersal of spores is different from most " typical " mushrooms that spread their spores through the air . <unk> instead produce a sticky spore mass on their tip which has a sharp , sickly @-@ sweet odor of carrion to attract flies and other insects . <unk> chemicals in the gleba include <unk> , hydrogen sulfide , <unk> , trans @-@ <unk> , <unk> , dimethyl sulfide , and dimethyl trisulfide . The latter compound has been found to be emitted from <unk> cancerous wounds . The mature fruiting bodies can be smelled from a considerable distance in the woods , and at close quarters most people find the cloying stink extremely repulsive . The flies land in the gleba and in doing so collect the spore mass on their legs and carry it to other locations . An Austrian study demonstrated that blow @-@ flies ( species <unk> <unk> , Lucilia caesar , Lucilia <unk> and <unk> <unk> ) also feed on the slime , and soon after leaving the fruit body , they deposit liquid feces that contain a dense suspension of spores . The study also showed that beetles ( <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> ) are attracted to the fungus , but seem to have less of a role in spore dispersal as they tend to feed on the hyphal tissue of the fruiting body . 
 There is also a possible ecological association between the P. impudicus and badger ( Meles meles ) setts . Fruiting bodies are commonly clustered in a zone 24 to 39 metres ( 79 to 128 ft ) from the entrances ; the setts typically harbor a regularly @-@ available supply of badger cadavers – the mortality rate of cubs is high , and death is more likely to occur within the sett . The fruiting of large numbers of stinkhorns attracts a high population of blowflies ( <unk> and Lucilla breed on carrion ) ; this ensures the rapid elimination of badger carcasses , removing a potential source of disease to the badger colony . The laxative effect of the gleba reduces the distance from the fruiting body to where the spores are deposited , ensuring the continued production of high densities of stinkhorns . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The common stinkhorn can be found throughout much of Europe and North America , and it has also been collected in Asia ( including China , Taiwan , and India ) , Costa Rica , Iceland , Tanzania , and southeast Australia . In North America , it is most common west of the Mississippi River ; Ravenel 's stinkhorn ( Phallus ravenelii ) is more common to the east . The fungus is associated with rotting wood , and as such it is most commonly encountered in deciduous woods where it fruits from summer to late autumn , though it may also be found in conifer woods or even grassy areas such as parks and gardens . It may also form mycorrhizal associations with certain trees . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 At the egg stage , pieces of the inner layer ( the receptaculum ) can be cut out with a knife and eaten raw . They are crisp and crunchy with an attractive <unk> taste . The fungus is enjoyed and eaten in France and parts of Germany , where it may be sold fresh or pickled and used in sausages . Similar species are consumed in China . 
 = = = Medicinal properties = = = 
 Venous thrombosis , the formation of a blood clot in a vein , is a common cause of death in breast cancer patients ; patients with recurrent disease are typically maintained on anticoagulants for their lifetimes . A research study has suggested that extracts from P. impudicus can reduce the risk of this condition by reducing the incidence of platelet aggregation , and may have potential as a supportive preventative nutrition . It was used in medieval times as a cure for gout and as a love potion . 
 = = = Folk uses = = = 
 In Northern Montenegro , peasants rub Phallus impudicus on the necks of bulls before bull fighting contests in an attempt to make them stronger . They are also fed to young bulls as they are thought to be a potent aphrodisiac . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Writing about life in Victorian Cambridge , Gwen <unk> ( granddaughter of Charles Darwin ) describes the ' sport ' of Stinkhorn hunting : 
 In our native woods there grows a kind of toadstool , called in the vernacular The Stinkhorn , though in Latin it bears a grosser name . The name is justified , for the fungus can be hunted by the scent alone ; and this was Aunt Etty 's great invention . Armed with a basket and a pointed stick , and wearing special hunting cloak and gloves , she would sniff her way round the wood , pausing here and there , her nostrils twitching , when she caught a whiff of her prey ; then at last , with a deadly pounce , she would fall upon her victim , and poke his putrid carcass into her basket . At the end of the day 's sport , the catch was brought back and burnt in the deepest secrecy on the drawing @-@ room fire , with the door locked ; because of the morals of the maids . 
 In Thomas Mann 's novel The Magic Mountain ( Der <unk> ) , the psychologist Dr. <unk> gives a lecture on the phallus impudicus : 
 And Dr. <unk> had spoken about one fungus , famous since classical antiquity for its form and the powers ascribed to it -- a morel , its Latin name ending in the adjective impudicus , its form reminiscent of love , and its odor , of death . For the stench given off by the impudicus was strikingly like that of a decaying corpse , the odor coming from greenish , viscous slime that carried its spores and dripped from the bell @-@ shaped cap . And even today , among the uneducated , this morel was thought to be an aphrodisiac . 
 = Maryland Route 23 = 
 Maryland Route 23 ( MD 23 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The state highway runs 20 @.@ 58 miles ( 33 @.@ 12 km ) from U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) in Hickory north and west to the Pennsylvania state line near Norrisville , where the highway continues as Pennsylvania Route 24 ( PA 24 ) . MD 23 is an L @-@ shaped highway in northwestern Harford County that consists of two major sections . Between US 1 and MD 165 in Jarrettsville , MD 23 is marked east – west along a two @-@ lane controlled access road named East – West Highway . From MD 165 to the state line , the state highway is marked north – south along Norrisville Road , a rural two @-@ lane highway that passes through the villages of Madonna and Shawsville . The two sections of MD 23 are connected by a short concurrency with MD 165 . 
 MD 23 from Hickory to Jarrettsville was one of the original state highways marked for improvement by the Maryland State Roads Commission in 1909 and one of the original state @-@ numbered highways in 1927 . The state road was constructed from Hickory to Jarrettsville and from Norrisville to the state line in the early to mid @-@ 1910s . The gaps between Jarrettsville and Shawsville and from Shawsville to Norrisville were filled in the early 1920s . East – West Highway was constructed in the early 1960s to replace the parallel Jarrettsville Road . MD 23 's eastern terminus was moved to US 1 's new bypass of Hickory in 2000 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 23 begins at an intersection with US 1 ( Hickory Bypass ) in Hickory . The state highway heads west as two @-@ lane East – West Highway . MD 23 passes through a commercial area where the highway intersects US 1 Business ( Conowingo Road ) and Water Tower Way before the road passes through a narrow forested corridor . The state highway intersects Commerce Road at a roundabout ; Commerce Road heads north into an industrial park surrounding Forest Hill Airport . After crossing over Bynum Run and the Ma and Pa Trail , a rail trail along the abandoned right @-@ of @-@ way of the Maryland and Pennsylvania Railroad , MD 23 intersects MD 24 ( Rocks Road / Rock Spring Road ) just south of Forest Hill . MD 23 continues west through a mix of farmland and forest , passing south of the hamlet of Fairview and crossing over Phillips Mill Road and Morse Road before East – West Highway reaches its western terminus at MD 165 ( Baldwin Mill Road ) south of Jarrettsville . 
 MD 23 turns north and joins MD 165 in a concurrency to the center of Jarrettsville . MD 165 continues north as Federal Hill Road and MD 23 turns west onto Norrisville Road ; the east leg of the intersection is Jarrettsville Road . MD 23 heads west through farmland and intersects MD 146 ( Jarrettsville Pike ) and Madonna Road in the village of Madonna . The state highway gradually curves to the north through Shawsville , where MD 23 intersects two highways that head west into Baltimore County , MD 138 ( Troyer Road ) and MD 439 ( Old York Road ) . The state highway makes a sharp , curvaceous descent to a crossing of Deer Creek , next to which is the historic Ivory Mills complex . MD 23 ascends out of the forested creek valley into Norrisville and meets the north end of MD 136 ( Harkins Road ) . The state highway continues north to just south of the Pennsylvania state line . MD 23 turns west and closely parallels the state line for about 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) before the highway veers northwest to cross the border . The highway continues north as PA 24 ( Barrens Road ) toward <unk> . 
 MD 23 is a part of the National Highway System as a principal arterial from US 1 in Hickory west to High Point Road west of Forest Hill . 
 = = History = = 
 The first section of MD 23 to be paved was the part of the Old York Turnpike from MD 138 to MD 439 , which was improved as a 12 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) macadam state @-@ aid road by 1910 . The portion of MD 23 from Hickory to Jarrettsville was designated one of the original state roads by the Maryland State Roads Commission in 1909 . The state road was constructed with a 14 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) macadam surface from Hickory to Grafton Shop Road in 1910 , from Morse Road to Jarrettsville in 1914 , and between Grafton Shop Road and Morse Road in 1915 . Another section of 12 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) macadam road was constructed under state aid from south of Norrisville to the Pennsylvania state line by 1915 . The highway from Jarrettsville to MD 138 was under construction as a concrete road by 1919 and completed in 1921 . The final portion of MD 23 , also paved in concrete , was completed from MD 439 to south of Norrisville in 1923 . MD 23 was one of the original state @-@ numbered highways designated by the roads commission in 1927 . The state highway was widened to a width of 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) from Hickory to Jarrettsville by 1930 . 
 Jarrettsville Road was replaced by East – West Highway , which was under construction by 1961 and completed in 1963 . The MD 23 designation was moved to the new highway and Jarrettsville Road was immediately transferred to county maintenance . At its eastern end , East – West Highway was constructed to tie into the Bel Air Bypass that was completed in 1965 and was proposed to continue to east of Hickory . Close to its eastern end , MD 23 curved south to an intersection with Granary Road . MD 23 turned east onto Granary Road for its eastern terminus at US 1 ( now US 1 Business ) . East – West Highway continued south as MD 23A ; at Bynum Road , MD 23A became a one @-@ lane ramp that joined the Bel Air Bypass . In 2000 , the Hickory Bypass was completed ; US 1 was moved to the new bypass and US 1 Business was extended along US 1 's old route through Hickory . As part of the same project , MD 23 was extended east to an new terminus at the Hickory Bypass . East – West Highway 's curve to the south was replaced with a perpendicular intersection with MD 23A , which was renamed Water Tower Way , extended north to new MD 23 , and gained a ramp from northbound US 1 at its southern end . The portion of Granary Road that formed MD 23 's terminus was designated MD 23B . Both MD 23A and MD 23B were transferred to Harford County maintenance in 2002 . MD 23 's roundabout at Commerce Road in Forest Hill was constructed in 2008 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 MD 23 is signed east – west east of MD 165 and north – south west of MD 165 . The entire route is in Harford County . 
 = = Auxiliary routes = = 
 MD 23 previously had two auxiliary routes . 
 MD 23A was the designation for the portion of East – West Highway between Granary Road and the ramp to southbound US 1 ( Bel Air Bypass ) . The 0 @.@ 38 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 61 km ) state highway was constructed in 1963 as a connection between MD 23 and southbound US 1 . In 2000 , MD 23A was extended north to the new MD 23 and a ramp from northbound US 1 to MD 23A was added . The highway had a new length of 0 @.@ 53 miles ( 0 @.@ 85 km ) and was renamed Water Tower Way . MD 23A was removed from the state highway system in 2002 . 
 MD 23B was the designation for the 0 @.@ 16 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 26 km ) section of Granary Road between US 1 Business and MD 23A ( Water Tower Way ) that was part of MD 23 from the construction of East – West Highway in 1963 until 2000 . MD 23B was assigned in 2000 and removed from the state system in 2002 . 
 = Alfred North Whitehead = 
 Alfred North Whitehead OM FRS ( 15 February 1861 – 30 December 1947 ) was an English mathematician and philosopher . He is best known as the defining figure of the philosophical school known as process philosophy , which today has found application to a wide variety of disciplines , including ecology , theology , education , physics , biology , economics , and psychology , among other areas . 
 In his early career Whitehead wrote primarily on mathematics , logic , and physics . His most notable work in these fields is the three @-@ volume Principia Mathematica ( 1910 – 13 ) , which he wrote with former student Bertrand Russell . Principia Mathematica is considered one of the twentieth century 's most important works in mathematical logic , and placed 23rd in a list of the top 100 English @-@ language nonfiction books of the twentieth century by Modern Library . 
 Beginning in the late 1910s and early 1920s , Whitehead gradually turned his attention from mathematics to philosophy of science , and finally to metaphysics . He developed a comprehensive metaphysical system which radically departed from most of western philosophy . Whitehead argued that reality consists of processes rather than material objects , and that processes are best defined by their relations with other processes , thus rejecting the theory that reality is fundamentally constructed by bits of matter that exist independently of one another . Today Whitehead 's philosophical works – particularly Process and Reality – are regarded as the foundational texts of process philosophy . 
 Whitehead 's process philosophy argues that " there is urgency in coming to see the world as a web of interrelated processes of which we are integral parts , so that all of our choices and actions have consequences for the world around us . " For this reason , one of the most promising applications of Whitehead 's thought in recent years has been in the area of ecological civilization and environmental ethics pioneered by John B. Cobb , Jr . 
 = = Life = = 
 Alfred North Whitehead was born in Ramsgate , Kent , England , in 1861 . His father , Alfred Whitehead , was a minister and schoolmaster of Chatham House Academy , a successful school for boys established by Thomas Whitehead , Alfred North 's grandfather . Whitehead himself recalled both of them as being very successful schoolmasters , but that his grandfather was the more extraordinary man . Whitehead 's mother was Maria Sarah Whitehead , formerly Maria Sarah Buckmaster . Whitehead was apparently not particularly close with his mother , as he never mentioned her in any of his writings , and there is evidence that Whitehead 's wife , Evelyn , had a low opinion of her . 
 Whitehead was educated at Sherborne School , Dorset , then considered one of the best public schools in the country . His childhood was described as over @-@ protected , but when at school he excelled in sports and mathematics and was head prefect of his class . 
 In 1880 , Whitehead began attending Trinity College , Cambridge , and studied mathematics . His academic advisor was Edward John Routh . He earned his BA from Trinity in 1884 , and graduated as fourth wrangler . Elected a fellow of Trinity in 1884 , Whitehead would teach and write on mathematics and physics at the college until 1910 , spending the 1890s writing his Treatise on Universal Algebra ( 1898 ) , and the 1900s collaborating with his former pupil , Bertrand Russell , on the first edition of Principia Mathematica . He was a Cambridge Apostle . 
 In 1890 , Whitehead married Evelyn Wade , an Irish woman raised in France ; they had a daughter , Jessie Whitehead , and two sons , Thomas North Whitehead and Eric Whitehead . Eric Whitehead died in action while serving in the Royal Flying Corps during World War I at the age of 19 . 
 In 1910 , Whitehead resigned his Senior Lectureship in Mathematics at Trinity and moved to London without first lining up another job . After being unemployed for a year , Whitehead accepted a position as Lecturer in Applied Mathematics and Mechanics at University College London , but was passed over a year later for the Goldsmid Chair of Applied Mathematics and Mechanics , a position for which he had hoped to be seriously considered . 
 In 1914 Whitehead accepted a position as Professor of Applied Mathematics at the newly chartered Imperial College London , where his old friend Andrew Forsyth had recently been appointed Chief Professor of Mathematics . 
 In 1918 Whitehead 's academic responsibilities began to seriously expand as he accepted a number of high administrative positions within the University of London system , of which Imperial College London was a member at the time . He was elected Dean of the Faculty of Science at the University of London in late 1918 ( a post he held for four years ) , a member of the University of London 's Senate in 1919 , and chairman of the Senate 's Academic ( leadership ) Council in 1920 , a post which he held until he departed for America in 1924 . Whitehead was able to exert his newfound influence to successfully lobby for a new history of science department , help establish a Bachelor of Science degree ( previously only Bachelor of Arts degrees had been offered ) , and make the school more accessible to less wealthy students . 
 Toward the end of his time in England , Whitehead turned his attention to philosophy . Though he had no advanced training in philosophy , his philosophical work soon became highly regarded . After publishing The Concept of Nature in 1920 , he served as president of the Aristotelian Society from 1922 to 1923 . In 1924 , Henry Osborn Taylor invited the 63 @-@ year @-@ old Whitehead to join the faculty at Harvard University as a professor of philosophy . 
 During his time at Harvard , Whitehead produced his most important philosophical contributions . In 1925 , he wrote Science and the Modern World , which was immediately hailed as an alternative to the Cartesian dualism that plagued popular science . A few years later , he published his seminal work Process and Reality , which has been compared ( both in importance and difficulty ) to Kant 's Critique of Pure Reason . 
 The <unk> spent the rest of their lives in the United States . Alfred North retired from Harvard in 1937 and remained in Cambridge , Massachusetts until his death on 30 December 1947 . 
 The two volume biography of Whitehead by Victor Lowe is the most definitive presentation of the life of Whitehead . However , many details of Whitehead 's life remain obscure because he left no Nachlass ; his family carried out his instructions that all of his papers be destroyed after his death . Additionally , Whitehead was known for his " almost fanatical belief in the right to privacy " , and for writing very few personal letters of the kind that would help to gain insight on his life . This led to Lowe himself remarking on the first page of Whitehead 's biography , " No professional biographer in his right mind would touch him . " 
 Currently , there is also no critical edition of Whitehead 's writings , though the Whitehead Research Project of the Center for Process Studies is currently working on one such edition . 
 = = Mathematics and logic = = 
 In addition to numerous articles on mathematics , Whitehead wrote three major books on the subject : A Treatise on Universal Algebra ( 1898 ) , Principia Mathematica ( co @-@ written with Bertrand Russell and published in three volumes between 1910 and 1913 ) , and An Introduction to Mathematics ( 1911 ) . The former two books were aimed exclusively at professional mathematicians , while the latter book was intended for a larger audience , covering the history of mathematics and its philosophical foundations . Principia Mathematica in particular is regarded as one of the most important works in mathematical logic of the 20th century . 
 In addition to his legacy as a co @-@ writer of Principia Mathematica , Whitehead 's theory of " extensive abstraction " is considered foundational for the branch of ontology and computer science known as " <unk> " , a theory describing spatial relations among wholes , parts , parts of parts , and the boundaries between parts . 
 = = = A Treatise on Universal Algebra = = = 
 In A Treatise on Universal Algebra ( 1898 ) the term " universal algebra " had essentially the same meaning that it has today : the study of algebraic structures themselves , rather than examples ( " models " ) of algebraic structures . Whitehead credits William Rowan Hamilton and Augustus De Morgan as originators of the subject matter , and James Joseph Sylvester with coining the term itself . 
 At the time structures such as Lie algebras and hyperbolic quaternions drew attention to the need to expand algebraic structures beyond the <unk> multiplicative class . In a review Alexander Macfarlane wrote : " The main idea of the work is not unification of the several methods , nor generalization of ordinary algebra so as to include them , but rather the comparative study of their several structures . " In a separate review , G. B. Mathews wrote , " It possesses a unity of design which is really remarkable , considering the variety of its themes . " 
 A Treatise on Universal Algebra sought to examine Hermann Grassmann 's theory of extension ( " <unk> " ) , Boole 's algebra of logic , and Hamilton 's quaternions ( this last number system was to be taken up in Volume II , which was never finished due to Whitehead 's work on Principia Mathematica ) . Whitehead wrote in the preface : 
 " Such algebras have an intrinsic value for separate detailed study ; also they are worthy of comparative study , for the sake of the light thereby thrown on the general theory of symbolic reasoning , and on algebraic symbolism in particular ... The idea of a generalized conception of space has been made prominent , in the belief that the properties and operations involved in it can be made to form a uniform method of interpretation of the various algebras . " 
 Whitehead , however , had no results of a general nature . His hope of " form [ ing ] a uniform method of interpretation of the various algebras " presumably would have been developed in Volume II , had Whitehead completed it . Further work on the subject was minimal until the early 1930s , when Garrett Birkhoff and Øystein Ore began publishing on universal algebras . 
 = = = Principia Mathematica = = = 
 Principia Mathematica ( 1910 – 1913 ) is Whitehead 's most famous mathematical work . Co @-@ written with former student Bertrand Russell , Principia Mathematica is considered one of the twentieth century 's most important works in mathematics , and placed 23rd in a list of the top 100 English @-@ language nonfiction books of the twentieth century by Modern Library . 
 Principia Mathematica 's purpose was to describe a set of axioms and inference rules in symbolic logic from which all mathematical truths could in principle be proven . Whitehead and Russell were working on such a foundational level of mathematics and logic that it took them until page 86 of Volume II to prove that 1 + 1 = 2 , a proof humorously accompanied by the comment , " The above proposition is occasionally useful . " 
 Whitehead and Russell had thought originally that Principia Mathematica would take a year to complete ; it ended up taking them ten years . To add insult to injury , when it came time for publication , the three @-@ volume work was so long ( more than 2 @,@ 000 pages ) and its audience so narrow ( professional mathematicians ) that it was initially published at a loss of 600 pounds , 300 of which was paid by Cambridge University Press , 200 by the Royal Society of London , and 50 apiece by Whitehead and Russell themselves . Despite the initial loss , today there is likely no major academic library in the world which does not hold a copy of Principia Mathematica . 
 The ultimate substantive legacy of Principia Mathematica is mixed . It is generally accepted that Kurt Gödel 's incompleteness theorem of 1931 definitively demonstrated that for any set of axioms and inference rules proposed to encapsulate mathematics , there would in fact be some truths of mathematics which could not be deduced from them , and hence that Principia Mathematica could never achieve its aims . However , Gödel could not have come to this conclusion without Whitehead and Russell 's book . In this way , Principia Mathematica 's legacy might be described as its key role in disproving the possibility of achieving its own stated goals . But beyond this somewhat ironic legacy , the book popularized modern mathematical logic and drew important connections between logic , epistemology , and metaphysics . 
 = = = An Introduction to Mathematics = = = 
 Unlike Whitehead 's previous two books on mathematics , An Introduction to Mathematics ( 1911 ) was not aimed exclusively at professional mathematicians , but was intended for a larger audience . The book covered the nature of mathematics , its unity and internal structure , and its applicability to nature . Whitehead wrote in the opening chapter : 
 " The object of the following Chapters is not to teach mathematics , but to enable students from the very beginning of their course to know what the science is about , and why it is necessarily the foundation of exact thought as applied to natural phenomena . " 
 The book can be seen as an attempt to understand the growth in unity and interconnection of mathematics as a whole , as well as an examination of the mutual influence of mathematics and philosophy , language , and physics . Although the book is little @-@ read , in some ways it prefigures certain points of Whitehead 's later work in philosophy and metaphysics . 
 = = Views on education = = 
 Whitehead showed a deep concern for educational reform at all levels . In addition to his numerous individually written works on the subject , Whitehead was appointed by Britain 's Prime Minister David Lloyd George as part of a 20 @-@ person committee to investigate the educational systems and practices of the UK in 1921 and recommend reform . 
 Whitehead 's most complete work on education is the 1929 book The Aims of Education and Other Essays , which collected numerous essays and addresses by Whitehead on the subject published between 1912 and 1927 . The essay from which Aims of Education derived its name was delivered as an address in 1916 when Whitehead was president of the London Branch of the Mathematical Association . In it , he cautioned against the teaching of what he called " inert ideas " – ideas that are disconnected scraps of information , with no application to real life or culture . He opined that " education with inert ideas is not only useless : it is , above all things , harmful . " 
 Rather than teach small parts of a large number of subjects , Whitehead advocated teaching a relatively few important concepts that the student could organically link to many different areas of knowledge , discovering their application in actual life . For Whitehead , education should be the exact opposite of the multidisciplinary , value @-@ free school model – it should be transdisciplinary , and laden with values and general principles that provide students with a bedrock of wisdom and help them to make connections between areas of knowledge that are usually regarded as separate . 
 In order to make this sort of teaching a reality , however , Whitehead pointed to the need to minimize the importance of ( or radically alter ) standard examinations for school entrance . Whitehead writes : 
 " Every school is bound on pain of extinction to train its boys for a small set of definite examinations . No headmaster has a free hand to develop his general education or his specialist studies in accordance with the opportunities of his school , which are created by its staff , its environment , its class of boys , and its endowments . I suggest that no system of external tests which aims primarily at examining individual scholars can result in anything but educational waste . " 
 Whitehead argued that curriculum should be developed specifically for its own students by its own staff , or else risk total stagnation , interrupted only by occasional movements from one group of inert ideas to another . 
 Above all else in his educational writings , Whitehead emphasized the importance of imagination and the free play of ideas . In his essay " Universities and Their Function " , Whitehead writes provocatively on imagination : 
 " Imagination is not to be divorced from the facts : it is a way of illuminating the facts . It works by eliciting the general principles which apply to the facts , as they exist , and then by an intellectual survey of alternative possibilities which are consistent with those principles . It enables men to construct an intellectual vision of a new world . " 
 Whitehead 's philosophy of education might adequately be summarized in his statement that " knowledge does not keep any better than fish . " In other words , bits of disconnected knowledge are meaningless ; all knowledge must find some imaginative application to the students ' own lives , or else it becomes so much useless trivia , and the students themselves become good at parroting facts but not thinking for themselves . 
 = = Philosophy and metaphysics = = 
 Whitehead did not begin his career as a philosopher . In fact , he never had any formal training in philosophy beyond his undergraduate education . Early in his life he showed great interest in and respect for philosophy and metaphysics , but it is evident that he considered himself a rank amateur . In one letter to his friend and former student Bertrand Russell , after discussing whether science aimed to be explanatory or merely descriptive , he wrote : " This further question lands us in the ocean of <unk> , onto which my profound ignorance of that science forbids me to enter . " Ironically , in later life Whitehead would become one of the 20th century 's foremost <unk> . 
 However , interest in metaphysics – the philosophical investigation of the nature of the universe and existence – had become unfashionable by the time Whitehead began writing in earnest about it in the 1920s . The ever @-@ more impressive accomplishments of empirical science had led to a general consensus in academia that the development of comprehensive metaphysical systems was a waste of time because they were not subject to empirical testing . 
 Whitehead was unimpressed by this objection . In the notes of one his students for a 1927 class , Whitehead was quoted as saying : " Every scientific man in order to preserve his reputation has to say he dislikes metaphysics . What he means is he dislikes having his metaphysics criticized . " In Whitehead 's view , scientists and philosophers make metaphysical assumptions about how the universe works all the time , but such assumptions are not easily seen precisely because they remain unexamined and unquestioned . While Whitehead acknowledged that " philosophers can never hope finally to formulate these metaphysical first principles , " he argued that people need to continually re @-@ imagine their basic assumptions about how the universe works if philosophy and science are to make any real progress , even if that progress remains permanently asymptotic . For this reason Whitehead regarded metaphysical investigations as essential to both good science and good philosophy . 
 Perhaps foremost among what Whitehead considered faulty metaphysical assumptions was the Cartesian idea that reality is fundamentally constructed of bits of matter that exist totally independently of one another , which he rejected in favor of an event @-@ based or " process " ontology in which events are primary and are fundamentally interrelated and dependent on one another . He also argued that the most basic elements of reality can all be regarded as experiential , indeed that everything is constituted by its experience . He used the term " experience " very broadly , so that even inanimate processes such as electron collisions are said to manifest some degree of experience . In this , he went against Descartes ' separation of two different kinds of real existence , either exclusively material or else exclusively mental . Whitehead referred to his metaphysical system as " philosophy of organism " , but it would become known more widely as " process philosophy . " 
 Whitehead 's philosophy was highly original , and soon garnered interest in philosophical circles . After publishing The Concept of Nature in 1920 , he served as president of the Aristotelian Society from 1922 to 1923 , and Henri Bergson was quoted as saying that Whitehead was " the best philosopher writing in English . " So impressive and different was Whitehead 's philosophy that in 1924 he was invited to join the faculty at Harvard University as a professor of philosophy at 63 years of age . 
 This is not to say that Whitehead 's thought was widely accepted or even well @-@ understood . His philosophical work is generally considered to be among the most difficult to understand in all of the western canon . Even professional philosophers struggled to follow Whitehead 's writings . One famous story illustrating the level of difficulty of Whitehead 's philosophy centers around the delivery of Whitehead 's Gifford lectures in 1927 – 28 – following Arthur Eddington 's lectures of the year previous – which Whitehead would later publish as Process and Reality : 
 Eddington was a marvellous popular lecturer who had enthralled an audience of 600 for his entire course . The same audience turned up to Whitehead 's first lecture but it was completely unintelligible , not merely to the world at large but to the elect . My father remarked to me afterwards that if he had not known Whitehead well he would have suspected that it was an imposter making it up as he went along ... The audience at subsequent lectures was only about half a dozen in all . 
 Indeed , it may not be inappropriate to speculate that some fair portion of the respect generally shown to Whitehead by his philosophical peers at the time arose from their sheer bafflement . Distinguished University of Chicago Divinity School theologian <unk> Mathews once remarked of Whitehead 's 1926 book Religion in the Making : " It is infuriating , and I must say embarrassing as well , to read page after page of relatively familiar words without understanding a single sentence . " 
 However , Mathews ' frustration with Whitehead 's books did not negatively affect his interest . In fact , there were numerous philosophers and theologians at Chicago 's Divinity School that perceived the importance of what Whitehead was doing without fully grasping all of the details and implications . In 1927 they invited one of America 's only Whitehead experts – Henry Nelson Wieman – to Chicago to give a lecture explaining Whitehead 's thought . Wieman 's lecture was so brilliant that he was promptly hired to the faculty and taught there for twenty years , and for at least thirty years afterward Chicago 's Divinity School was closely associated with Whitehead 's thought . 
 Shortly after Whitehead 's book Process and Reality appeared in 1929 , Wieman famously wrote in his 1930 review : 
 " Not many people will read Whitehead 's recent book in this generation ; not many will read it in any generation . But its influence will radiate through concentric circles of popularization until the common man will think and work in the light of it , not knowing whence the light came . After a few decades of discussion and analysis one will be able to understand it more readily than can now be done . " 
 Wieman 's words proved prophetic . Though Process and Reality has been called " arguably the most impressive single metaphysical text of the twentieth century , " it has been little @-@ read and little @-@ understood , partly because it demands – as Isabelle Stengers puts it – " that its readers accept the adventure of the questions that will separate them from every consensus . " Whitehead questioned western philosophy 's most dearly held assumptions about how the universe works , but in doing so he managed to anticipate a number of 21st century scientific and philosophical problems and provide novel solutions . 
 = = = Whitehead 's conception of reality = = = 
 Whitehead was convinced that the scientific notion of matter was misleading as a way of describing the ultimate nature of things . In his 1925 book Science and the Modern World , he wrote that 
 " There persists ... [ a ] fixed scientific cosmology which presupposes the ultimate fact of an irreducible brute matter , or material , spread through space in a flux of configurations . In itself such a material is senseless , valueless , purposeless . It just does what it does do , following a fixed routine imposed by external relations which do not spring from the nature of its being . It is this assumption that I call ' scientific materialism . ' Also it is an assumption which I shall challenge as being entirely unsuited to the scientific situation at which we have now arrived . " 
 In Whitehead 's view , there are a number of problems with this notion of " irreducible brute matter . " First , it obscures and minimizes the importance of change . By thinking of any material thing ( like a rock , or a person ) as being fundamentally the same thing throughout time , with any changes to it being secondary to its " nature " , scientific materialism hides the fact that nothing ever stays the same . For Whitehead , change is fundamental and inescapable ; he emphasizes that " all things flow . " 
 In Whitehead 's view , then , concepts such as " quality " , " matter " , and " form " are problematic . These " classical " concepts fail to adequately account for change , and overlook the active and experiential nature of the most basic elements of the world . They are useful abstractions , but are not the world 's basic building blocks . What is ordinarily conceived of as a single person , for instance , is philosophically described as a continuum of overlapping events . After all , people change all the time , if only because they have aged by another second and had some further experience . These occasions of experience are logically distinct , but are progressively connected in what Whitehead calls a " society " of events . By assuming that enduring objects are the most real and fundamental things in the universe , materialists have mistaken the abstract for the concrete ( what Whitehead calls the " fallacy of misplaced concreteness " ) . 
 To put it another way , a thing or person is often seen as having a " defining essence " or a " core identity " that is unchanging , and describes what the thing or person really is . In this way of thinking , things and people are seen as fundamentally the same through time , with any changes being qualitative and secondary to their core identity ( e.g. " Mark 's hair has turned gray as he has gotten older , but he is still the same person " ) . But in Whitehead 's cosmology , the only fundamentally existent things are discrete " occasions of experience " that overlap one another in time and space , and jointly make up the enduring person or thing . On the other hand , what ordinary thinking often regards as " the essence of a thing " or " the identity / core of a person " is an abstract generalization of what is regarded as that person or thing 's most important or salient features across time . Identities do not define people , people define identities . Everything changes from moment to moment , and to think of anything as having an " enduring essence " misses the fact that " all things flow " , though it is often a useful way of speaking . 
 Whitehead pointed to the limitations of language as one of the main culprits in maintaining a materialistic way of thinking , and acknowledged that it may be difficult to ever wholly move past such ideas in everyday speech . After all , each moment of each person 's life can hardly be given a different proper name , and it is easy and convenient to think of people and objects as remaining fundamentally the same things , rather than constantly keeping in mind that each thing is a different thing from what it was a moment ago . Yet the limitations of everyday living and everyday speech should not prevent people from realizing that " material substances " or " essences " are a convenient generalized description of a continuum of particular , concrete processes . No one questions that a ten @-@ year @-@ old person is quite different by the time he or she turns thirty years old , and in many ways is not the same person at all ; Whitehead points out that it is not philosophically or ontologically sound to think that a person is the same from one second to the next . 
 A second problem with materialism is that it obscures the importance of relations . It sees every object as distinct and discrete from all other objects . Each object is simply an inert clump of matter that is only externally related to other things . The idea of matter as primary makes people think of objects as being fundamentally separate in time and space , and not necessarily related to anything . But in Whitehead 's view , relations take a primary role , perhaps even more important than the relata themselves . A student taking notes in one of Whitehead 's fall 1924 classes wrote that : 
 " Reality applies to connections , and only relatively to the things connected . ( A ) is real for ( B ) , and ( B ) is real for ( A ) , but [ they are ] not absolutely real independent of each other . " 
 In fact , Whitehead describes any entity as in some sense nothing more and nothing less than the sum of its relations to other entities – its synthesis of and reaction to the world around it . A real thing is just that which forces the rest of the universe to in some way conform to it ; that is to say , if theoretically a thing made strictly no difference to any other entity ( i.e. it was not related to any other entity ) , it could not be said to really exist . Relations are not secondary to what a thing is , they are what the thing is . 
 It must be emphasized , however , that an entity is not merely a sum of its relations , but also a valuation of them and reaction to them . For Whitehead , creativity is the absolute principle of existence , and every entity ( whether it is a human being , a tree , or an electron ) has some degree of novelty in how it responds to other entities , and is not fully determined by causal or mechanistic laws . Of course , most entities do not have consciousness . As a human being 's actions cannot always be predicted , the same can be said of where a tree 's roots will grow , or how an electron will move , or whether it will rain tomorrow . Moreover , inability to predict an electron 's movement ( for instance ) is not due to faulty understanding or inadequate technology ; rather , the fundamental creativity / freedom of all entities means that there will always remain phenomena that are unpredictable . 
 The other side of creativity / freedom as the absolute principle is that every entity is constrained by the social structure of existence ( i.e. , its relations ) – each actual entity must conform to the settled conditions of the world around it . Freedom always exists within limits . But an entity 's uniqueness and individuality arise from its own self @-@ determination as to just how it will take account of the world within the limits that have been set for it . 
 In summary , Whitehead rejects the idea of separate and unchanging bits of matter as the most basic building blocks of reality , in favor of the idea of reality as interrelated events in process . He conceives of reality as composed of processes of dynamic " becoming " rather than static " being " , emphasizing that all physical things change and evolve , and that changeless " essences " such as matter are mere abstractions from the interrelated events that are the final real things that make up the world . 
 = = = Theory of perception = = = 
 Since Whitehead 's metaphysics described a universe in which all entities experience , he needed a new way of describing perception that was not limited to living , self @-@ conscious beings . The term he coined was " prehension " , which comes from the Latin <unk> , meaning " to seize . " The term is meant to indicate a kind of perception that can be conscious or unconscious , applying to people as well as electrons . It is also intended to make clear Whitehead 's rejection of the theory of representative perception , in which the mind only has private ideas about other entities . For Whitehead , the term " prehension " indicates that the perceiver actually incorporates aspects of the perceived thing into itself . In this way , entities are constituted by their perceptions and relations , rather than being independent of them . Further , Whitehead regards perception as occurring in two modes , causal efficacy ( or " physical prehension " ) and presentational immediacy ( or " conceptual prehension " ) . 
 Whitehead describes causal efficacy as " the experience dominating the primitive living organisms , which have a sense for the fate from which they have emerged , and the fate towards which they go . " It is , in other words , the sense of causal relations between entities , a feeling of being influenced and affected by the surrounding environment , unmediated by the senses . <unk> immediacy , on the other hand , is what is usually referred to as " pure sense perception " , unmediated by any causal or symbolic interpretation , even unconscious interpretation . In other words , it is pure appearance , which may or may not be delusive ( e.g. mistaking an image in a mirror for " the real thing " ) . 
 In higher organisms ( like people ) , these two modes of perception combine into what Whitehead terms " symbolic reference " , which links appearance with causation in a process that is so automatic that both people and animals have difficulty refraining from it . By way of illustration , Whitehead uses the example of a person 's encounter with a chair . An ordinary person looks up , sees a colored shape , and immediately infers that it is a chair . However , an artist , Whitehead supposes , " might not have jumped to the notion of a chair " , but instead " might have stopped at the mere contemplation of a beautiful color and a beautiful shape . " This is not the normal human reaction ; most people place objects in categories by habit and instinct , without even thinking about it . Moreover , animals do the same thing . Using the same example , Whitehead points out that a dog " would have acted immediately on the hypothesis of a chair and would have jumped onto it by way of using it as such . " In this way symbolic reference is a fusion of pure sense perceptions on the one hand and causal relations on the other , and that it is in fact the causal relationships that dominate the more basic mentality ( as the dog illustrates ) , while it is the sense perceptions which indicate a higher grade mentality ( as the artist illustrates ) . 
 = = = Evolution and value = = = 
 Whitehead believed that when asking questions about the basic facts of existence , questions about value and purpose can never be fully escaped . This is borne out in his thoughts on abiogenesis , or the hypothetical natural process by which life arises from simple organic compounds . 
 Whitehead makes the startling observation that " life is comparatively deficient in survival value . " If humans can only exist for about a hundred years , and rocks for eight hundred million , then one is forced to ask why complex organisms ever evolved in the first place ; as Whitehead humorously notes , " they certainly did not appear because they were better at that game than the rocks around them . " He then observes that the mark of higher forms of life is that they are actively engaged in modifying their environment , an activity which he theorizes is directed toward the three @-@ fold goal of living , living well , and living better . In other words , Whitehead sees life as directed toward the purpose of increasing its own satisfaction . Without such a goal , he sees the rise of life as totally unintelligible . 
 For Whitehead , there is no such thing as wholly inert matter . Instead , all things have some measure of freedom or creativity , however small , which allows them to be at least partly self @-@ directed . Process philosopher David Ray Griffin coined the term " <unk> " ( the idea that all entities experience ) to describe Whitehead 's view , and to distinguish it from panpsychism ( the idea that all matter has consciousness ) . 
 = = = God = = = 
 Whitehead 's idea of God differs from traditional monotheistic notions . Perhaps his most famous and pointed criticism of the Christian conception of God is that " the Church gave unto God the attributes which belonged exclusively to Caesar . " Here Whitehead is criticizing Christianity for defining God as primarily a divine king who imposes his will on the world , and whose most important attribute is power . As opposed to the most widely accepted forms of Christianity , Whitehead emphasized an idea of God that he called " the brief Galilean vision of humility " : 
 " It does not emphasize the ruling Caesar , or the ruthless moralist , or the unmoved mover . It dwells upon the tender elements in the world , which slowly and in quietness operates by love ; and it finds purpose in the present immediacy of a kingdom not of this world . Love neither rules , nor is it unmoved ; also it is a little oblivious as to morals . It does not look to the future ; for it finds its own reward in the immediate present . " 
 It should be emphasized , however , that for Whitehead God is not necessarily tied to religion . Rather than springing primarily from religious faith , Whitehead saw God as necessary for his metaphysical system . His system required that an order exist among possibilities , an order that allowed for novelty in the world and provided an aim to all entities . Whitehead posited that these ordered potentials exist in what he called the primordial nature of God . However , Whitehead was also interested in religious experience . This led him to reflect more intensively on what he saw as the second nature of God , the consequent nature . Whitehead 's conception of God as a " dipolar " entity has called for fresh theological thinking . 
 The primordial nature he described as " the unlimited conceptual realization of the absolute wealth of potentiality , " i.e. , the unlimited possibility of the universe . This primordial nature is eternal and unchanging , providing entities in the universe with possibilities for realization . Whitehead also calls this primordial aspect " the lure for feeling , the eternal urge of desire , " pulling the entities in the universe toward as @-@ yet unrealized possibilities . 
 God 's consequent nature , on the other hand , is anything but unchanging – it is God 's reception of the world 's activity . As Whitehead puts it , " [ God ] saves the world as it passes into the immediacy of his own life . It is the judgment of a tenderness which loses nothing that can be saved . " In other words , God saves and cherishes all experiences forever , and those experiences go on to change the way God interacts with the world . In this way , God is really changed by what happens in the world and the wider universe , lending the actions of finite creatures an eternal significance . 
 Whitehead thus sees God and the world as fulfilling one another . He sees entities in the world as fluent and changing things that yearn for a permanence which only God can provide by taking them into God 's self , thereafter changing God and affecting the rest of the universe throughout time . On the other hand , he sees God as permanent but as deficient in actuality and change : alone , God is merely eternally unrealized possibilities , and requires the world to actualize them . God gives creatures permanence , while the creatures give God actuality and change . Here it is worthwhile to quote Whitehead at length : 
 " In this way God is completed by the individual , fluent satisfactions of finite fact , and the temporal occasions are completed by their everlasting union with their transformed selves , purged into conformation with the eternal order which is the final absolute ' wisdom . ' The final summary can only be expressed in terms of a group of antitheses , whose apparent self @-@ contradictions depend on neglect of the diverse categories of existence . In each antithesis there is a shift of meaning which converts the opposition into a contrast . 
 " It is as true to say that God is permanent and the World fluent , as that the World is permanent and God is fluent . 
 " It is as true to say that God is one and the World many , as that the World is one and God many . 
 " It is as true to say that , in comparison with the World , God is actual eminently , as that , in comparison with God , the World is actual eminently . 
 " It is as true to say that the World is immanent in God , as that God is immanent in the World . 
 " It is as true to say that God transcends the World , as that the World transcends God . 
 " It is as true to say that God creates the World , as that the World creates God ... 
 " What is done in the world is transformed into a reality in heaven , and the reality in heaven passes back into the world ... In this sense , God is the great companion – the fellow @-@ sufferer who understands . " 
 The above is some of Whitehead 's most evocative writing about God , and was powerful enough to inspire the movement known as process theology , a vibrant theological school of thought that continues to thrive today . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 For Whitehead the core of religion was individual . While he acknowledged that individuals cannot ever be fully separated from their society , he argued that life is an internal fact for its own sake before it is an external fact relating to others . His most famous remark on religion is that " religion is what the individual does with his own <unk> ... and if you are never solitary , you are never religious . " Whitehead saw religion as a system of general truths that transformed a person 's character . He took special care to note that while religion is often a good influence , it is not necessarily good – an idea which he called a " dangerous delusion " ( e.g. , a religion might encourage the violent extermination of a rival religion 's adherents ) . 
 However , while Whitehead saw religion as beginning in <unk> , he also saw religion as necessarily expanding beyond the individual . In keeping with his process metaphysics in which relations are primary , he wrote that religion necessitates the realization of " the value of the objective world which is a community derivative from the interrelations of its component individuals . " In other words , the universe is a community which makes itself whole through the relatedness of each individual entity to all the others – meaning and value do not exist for the individual alone , but only in the context of the universal community . Whitehead writes further that each entity " can find no such value till it has merged its individual claim with that of the objective universe . Religion is world @-@ loyalty . The spirit at once surrenders itself to this universal claim and appropriates it for itself . " In this way the individual and universal / social aspects of religion are mutually dependent . 
 Whitehead also described religion more technically as " an ultimate craving to infuse into the insistent particularity of emotion that non @-@ temporal generality which primarily belongs to conceptual thought alone . " In other words , religion takes deeply felt emotions and <unk> them within a system of general truths about the world , helping people to identify their wider meaning and significance . For Whitehead , religion served as a kind of bridge between philosophy and the emotions and purposes of a particular society . It is the task of religion to make philosophy applicable to the everyday lives of ordinary people . 
 = = Influence and legacy = = 
 Isabelle Stengers wrote that " <unk> are recruited among both philosophers and theologians , and the palette has been enriched by practitioners from the most diverse horizons , from ecology to feminism , practices that unite political struggle and spirituality with the sciences of education . " Indeed , in recent decades attention to Whitehead 's work has become more widespread , with interest extending to intellectuals in Europe and China , and coming from such diverse fields as ecology , physics , biology , education , economics , and psychology . One of the first theologians to attempt to interact with Whitehead 's thought was the future Archbishop of Canterbury , William Temple . In Temple 's Gifford Lectures of 1932 @-@ 1934 ( subsequently published as " Nature , Man and God " ) , Whitehead is one of a number of philosophers of the emergent evolution approach Temple interacts with . However , it was not until the 1970s and 1980s that Whitehead 's thought drew much attention outside of a small group of philosophers and theologians , primarily Americans , and even today he is not considered especially influential outside of relatively specialized circles . 
 Early followers of Whitehead were found primarily at the University of Chicago 's Divinity School , where Henry Nelson Wieman initiated an interest in Whitehead 's work that would last for about thirty years . Professors such as Wieman , Charles Hartshorne , Bernard Loomer , Bernard Meland , and Daniel Day Williams made Whitehead 's philosophy arguably the most important intellectual thread running through the Divinity School . They taught generations of Whitehead scholars , the most notable of which is John B. Cobb , Jr . 
 Although interest in Whitehead has since faded at Chicago 's Divinity School , Cobb effectively grabbed the torch and planted it firmly in Claremont , California , where he began teaching at Claremont School of Theology in 1958 and founded the Center for Process Studies with David Ray Griffin in 1973 . Largely due to Cobb 's influence , today Claremont remains strongly identified with Whitehead 's process thought . 
 But while Claremont remains the most concentrated hub of Whiteheadian activity , the place where Whitehead 's thought currently seems to be growing the most quickly is in China . In order to address the challenges of modernization and industrialization , China has begun to blend traditions of Taoism , Buddhism , and Confucianism with Whitehead 's " constructive post @-@ modern " philosophy in order to create an " ecological civilization . " To date , the Chinese government has encouraged the building of twenty @-@ three university @-@ based centers for the study of Whitehead 's philosophy , and books by process philosophers John Cobb and David Ray Griffin are becoming required reading for Chinese graduate students . Cobb has attributed China 's interest in process philosophy partly to Whitehead 's stress on the mutual interdependence of humanity and nature , as well as his emphasis on an educational system that includes the teaching of values rather than simply bare facts . 
 Overall , however , Whitehead 's influence is very difficult to characterize . In English @-@ speaking countries , his primary works are little @-@ studied outside of Claremont and a select number of liberal graduate @-@ level theology and philosophy programs . Outside of these circles his influence is relatively small and diffuse , and has tended to come chiefly through the work of his students and admirers rather than Whitehead himself . For instance , Whitehead was a teacher and long @-@ time friend and collaborator of Bertrand Russell , and he also taught and supervised the dissertation of Willard Van Orman Quine , both of whom are important figures in analytic philosophy – the dominant strain of philosophy in English @-@ speaking countries in the 20th century . Whitehead has also had high @-@ profile admirers in the continental tradition , such as French post @-@ structuralist philosopher Gilles Deleuze , who once dryly remarked of Whitehead that " he stands provisionally as the last great Anglo @-@ American philosopher before Wittgenstein 's disciples spread their misty confusion , sufficiency , and terror . " French sociologist and anthropologist Bruno Latour even went so far as to call Whitehead " the greatest philosopher of the 20th century . " 
 Deleuze 's and Latour 's opinions , however , are minority ones , as Whitehead has not been recognized as particularly influential within the most dominant philosophical schools . It is impossible to say exactly why Whitehead 's influence has not been more widespread , but it may be partly due to his metaphysical ideas seeming somewhat counter @-@ intuitive ( such as his assertion that matter is an abstraction ) , or his inclusion of theistic elements in his philosophy , or the perception of metaphysics itself as passé , or simply the sheer difficulty and density of his prose . 
 = = = Process philosophy and theology = = = 
 Historically Whitehead 's work has been most influential in the field of American progressive theology . The most important early proponent of Whitehead 's thought in a theological context was Charles Hartshorne , who spent a semester at Harvard as Whitehead 's teaching assistant in 1925 , and is widely credited with developing Whitehead 's process philosophy into a full @-@ blown process theology . Other notable process theologians include John B. Cobb , Jr . , David Ray Griffin , Marjorie Hewitt <unk> , C. Robert <unk> , Roland Faber , and Catherine Keller . 
 Process theology typically stresses God 's relational nature . Rather than seeing God as impassive or emotionless , process theologians view God as " the fellow sufferer who understands " , and as the being who is supremely affected by temporal events . Hartshorne points out that people would not praise a human ruler who was unaffected by either the joys or sorrows of his followers – so why would this be a praise @-@ worthy quality in God ? Instead , as the being who is most affected by the world , God is the being who can most appropriately respond to the world . However , process theology has been formulated in a wide variety of ways . C. Robert <unk> , for instance , advocates a " process naturalism " , i.e. a process theology without God . 
 In fact , process theology is difficult to define because process theologians are so diverse and transdisciplinary in their views and interests . John B. Cobb , Jr. is a process theologian who has also written books on biology and economics . Roland Faber and Catherine Keller integrate Whitehead with poststructuralist , <unk> , and feminist theory . Charles Birch was both a theologian and a geneticist . Franklin I. <unk> writes on theology and political theory . In <unk> - Creating God in The Internet Age , <unk> Alexander Bard and Jan Söderqvist repeatedly credit Whitehead for the process theology they see rising out of the participatory culture expected to dominate the digital era . 
 Process philosophy is even more difficult to pin down than process theology . In practice , the two fields cannot be neatly separated . The 32 @-@ volume State University of New York series in constructive postmodern thought edited by process philosopher and theologian David Ray Griffin displays the range of areas in which different process philosophers work , including physics , ecology , medicine , public policy , nonviolence , politics , and psychology . 
 One philosophical school which has historically had a close relationship with process philosophy is American pragmatism . Whitehead himself thought highly of William James and John Dewey , and acknowledged his indebtedness to them in the preface to Process and Reality . Charles Hartshorne ( along with Paul Weiss ) edited the collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce , one of the founders of pragmatism . Noted <unk> Richard Rorty was in turn a student of Hartshorne . Today , Nicholas Rescher is one example of a philosopher who advocates both process philosophy and pragmatism . 
 In addition , while they might not properly be called process philosophers , Whitehead has been influential in the philosophy of Gilles Deleuze , <unk> Čapek , Isabelle Stengers , Bruno Latour , Susanne Langer , and Maurice Merleau @-@ Ponty . 
 = = = Science = = = 
 In recent years , Whiteheadian thought has become a stimulating influence in scientific research . Timothy E. Eastman and Hank Keeton 's Physics and Whitehead ( 2004 ) and Michael Epperson 's Quantum Mechanics and the Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead ( 2004 ) aim to offer Whiteheadian approaches to physics , while Brian G. Henning , Adam Scarfe , and Dorion Sagan 's Beyond Mechanism ( 2013 ) and Rupert Sheldrake 's Science Set Free ( 2012 ) are recent examples of Whiteheadian approaches to biology . 
 In physics , Whitehead 's thought has had some influence . He articulated a view that might perhaps be regarded as dual to Einstein 's general relativity , see Whitehead 's theory of gravitation . It has been severely criticized . Yutaka Tanaka , who suggests that the gravitational constant disagrees with experimental findings , proposes that Einstein 's work does not actually refute Whitehead 's formulation . Whitehead 's view has now been rendered obsolete , with the discovery of gravitational waves . They are <unk> observed locally that largely violate the kind of local flatness of space that Whitehead assumes . Consequently , Whitehead 's cosmology must be regarded as a local approximation , and his assumption of a uniform spatio @-@ temporal geometry , Minkowskian in particular , as an often @-@ locally @-@ adequate approximation . An exact replacement of Whitehead 's cosmology would need to admit a Riemannian geometry . Also , although Whitehead himself gave only secondary consideration to quantum theory , his metaphysics of processes has proved attractive to some physicists in that field . Henry Stapp and David Bohm are among those whose work has been influenced by Whitehead . 
 Other scientists for whom Whitehead 's work has been influential include physical chemist Ilya Prigogine , biologist Conrad Hal Waddington , and geneticists Charles Birch and Sewall Wright . 
 = = = Ecology , economy , and sustainability = = = 
 One of the most promising applications of Whitehead 's thought in recent years has been in the area of ecological civilization , sustainability , and environmental ethics . 
 " Because Whitehead 's holistic metaphysics of value lends itself so readily to an ecological point of view , many see his work as a promising alternative to the traditional mechanistic worldview , providing a detailed metaphysical picture of a world constituted by a web of interdependent relations . " 
 This work has been pioneered by John B. Cobb , Jr . , whose book Is It Too Late ? A Theology of Ecology ( 1971 ) was the first single @-@ authored book in environmental ethics . Cobb also co @-@ authored a book with leading ecological economist and steady @-@ state theorist Herman Daly entitled For the Common Good : Redirecting the Economy toward Community , the Environment , and a Sustainable Future ( 1989 ) , which applied Whitehead 's thought to economics , and received the Grawemeyer Award for Ideas Improving World Order . Cobb followed this with a second book , Sustaining the Common Good : A Christian Perspective on the Global Economy ( 1994 ) , which aimed to challenge " economists ' zealous faith in the great god of growth . " 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Whitehead is widely known for his influence in education theory . His philosophy inspired the formation of the Association for Process Philosophy of Education ( <unk> ) , which published eleven volumes of a journal titled Process Papers on process philosophy and education from 1996 to 2008 . Whitehead 's theories on education also led to the formation of new modes of learning and new models of teaching . 
 One such model is the <unk> model developed by Daniel C. Jordan , which sought to address a lack of understanding of the nature of people in current education systems . As Jordan and Raymond P. Shepard put it : " Because it has not defined the nature of man , education is in the untenable position of having to devote its energies to the development of curricula without any coherent ideas about the nature of the creature for whom they are intended . " 
 Another model is the <unk> model developed by Xie <unk> and deployed successfully in China . " <unk> " stands for five things in curriculum and education : Flexible @-@ goals , Engaged @-@ learner , Embodied @-@ knowledge , Learning @-@ through @-@ interactions , and Supportive @-@ teacher . It is used for understanding and evaluating educational curriculum under the assumption that the purpose of education is to " help a person become whole . " This work is in part the product of cooperation between Chinese government organizations and the Institute for the Postmodern Development of China . 
 Whitehead 's philosophy of education has also found institutional support in Canada , where the University of Saskatchewan created a Process Philosophy Research Unit and sponsored several conferences on process philosophy and education . Dr. Howard Woodhouse at the University of Saskatchewan remains a strong proponent of Whiteheadian education . 
 Two recent books which further develop Whitehead 's philosophy of education include : Modes of Learning : Whitehead 's Metaphysics and the Stages of Education ( 2012 ) by George Allan ; and The Adventure of Education : Process Philosophers on Learning , Teaching , and Research ( 2009 ) by Adam Scarfe . 
 = = = Business administration = = = 
 Whitehead has had some influence on philosophy of business administration and organizational theory . This has led in part to a focus on identifying and investigating the effect of temporal events ( as opposed to static things ) within organizations through an “ organization studies ” discourse that accommodates a variety of ' weak ' and ' strong ' process perspectives from a number of philosophers . One of the leading figures having an explicitly Whiteheadian and <unk> stance towards management is Mark Dibben , who works in what he calls " applied process thought " to articulate a philosophy of management and business administration as part of a wider examination of the social sciences through the lens of process metaphysics . For Dibben , this allows " a comprehensive exploration of life as perpetually active experiencing , as opposed to occasional – and thoroughly passive – happening . " Dibben has published two books on applied process thought , Applied Process Thought I : Initial Explorations in Theory and Research ( 2008 ) , and Applied Process Thought II : Following a Trail Ablaze ( 2009 ) , as well as other papers in this vein in the fields of philosophy of management and business ethics . 
 Margaret Stout and Carrie M. Staton have also written recently on the mutual influence of Whitehead and Mary Parker Follett , a pioneer in the fields of organizational theory and organizational behavior . Stout and Staton see both Whitehead and Follett as sharing an ontology that " understands becoming as a relational process ; difference as being related , yet unique ; and the purpose of becoming as harmonizing difference . " This connection is further analyzed by Stout and Jeannine M. Love in Integrative Process : <unk> Thinking from Ontology to Administration 
 = = Primary works = = 
 Books written by Whitehead , listed by date of publication . 
 A Treatise on Universal Algebra . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1898 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0032 @-@ 7 . Available online at http : / / <unk> / <unk> / <unk> . 
 The <unk> of Descriptive Geometry . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1907 . Available online at http : / / <unk> / u / <unk> / <unk> 
 with Bertrand Russell . Principia Mathematica , Volume I. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1910 . Available online at http : / / www.hti.umich.edu / cgi / b / bib / bibperm ? q1 = <unk> Vol . 1 to * 56 is available as a CUP paperback . 
 An Introduction to Mathematics . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1911 . Available online at http : / / <unk> / u / <unk> / <unk> Vol . 56 of the Great Books of the Western World series . 
 with Bertrand Russell . Principia Mathematica , Volume II . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1912 . Available online at http : / / www.hti.umich.edu / cgi / b / bib / bibperm ? q1 = <unk> 
 with Bertrand Russell . Principia Mathematica , Volume III . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1913 . Available online at http : / / www.hti.umich.edu / cgi / b / bib / bibperm ? q1 = <unk> 
 The Organization of Thought Educational and Scientific . London : Williams & Norgate , 1917 . Available online at https : / / archive.org / details / <unk> . 
 An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1919 . Available online at https : / / archive.org / details / <unk> . 
 The Concept of Nature . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1920 . Based on the November 1919 Tarner Lectures delivered at Trinity College . Available online at https : / / archive.org / details / <unk> . 
 The Principle of Relativity with Applications to Physical Science . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1922 . Available online at https : / / archive.org / details / <unk> . 
 Science and the Modern World . New York : Macmillan Company , 1925 . Vol . 55 of the Great Books of the Western World series . 
 Religion in the Making . New York : Macmillan Company , 1926 . Based on the 1926 Lowell Lectures . 
 Symbolism , Its Meaning and Effect . New York : Macmillan Co . , 1927 . Based on the 1927 Barbour @-@ Page Lectures delivered at the University of Virginia . 
 Process and Reality : An Essay in Cosmology . New York : Macmillan Company , 1929 . Based on the 1927 – 28 Gifford Lectures delivered at the University of Edinburgh . The 1978 Free Press " corrected edition " edited by David Ray Griffin and Donald W. Sherburne corrects many errors in both the British and American editions , and also provides a comprehensive index . 
 The Aims of Education and Other Essays . New York : Macmillan Company , 1929 . 
 The Function of Reason . Princeton : Princeton University Press , 1929 . Based on the March 1929 Louis Clark <unk> Foundation Lectures delivered at Princeton University . 
 Adventures of Ideas . New York : Macmillan Company , 1933 . Also published by Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1933 . 
 Nature and Life . Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 1934 . 
 Modes of Thought . New York : MacMillan Company , 1938 . 
 " Mathematics and the Good . " In The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead , edited by Paul Arthur <unk> , 666 – 681 . Evanston and Chicago : Northwestern University Press , 1941 . 
 " Immortality . " In The Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead , edited by Paul Arthur <unk> , 682 – 700 . Evanston and Chicago : Northwestern University Press , 1941 . 
 Essays in Science and Philosophy . London : Philosophical Library , 1947 . 
 with Allison <unk> Johnson , ed . The Wit and Wisdom of Whitehead . Boston : Beacon Press , 1947 . 
 = Kyle Kendrick = 
 Kyle Rodney Kendrick ( born August 26 , 1984 ) is an American professional baseball pitcher in the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim organization . He has played in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the Philadelphia Phillies and Colorado Rockies . He was born in Houston , Texas , but attended high school in Mount Vernon , Washington . While growing up , he was greatly influenced by his father , from whom he developed his composure when pitching . Upon graduation , he turned down a scholarship to play college football , instead signing a contract to begin his professional baseball career in the Phillies ' organization . After a slow ascent through the lower levels of the Phillies ' minor league system , he made his MLB debut in 2007 , and was a member of the starting rotation of the 2008 World Series Champion team . 
 Subsequently , he was demoted to the minor leagues to develop secondary pitches . From 2010 until 2012 , his role on the big @-@ league squad frequently fluctuated , but overall , was an underrated member of the pitching staff , according to several writers . Nevertheless , he drew the ire of Phillies fans , who were tired of his inconsistency during the course of his career . After a successful 2012 campaign , however , he firmly implanted himself in the Phillies ' starting rotation before the 2013 season . Again in 2013 , though , he was inconsistent , and entering 2014 , some suggested he should be traded to another team . 
 His pitching style is characterized by his poise on the mound that allows him to " go with the flow " of the game . He predominantly throws a sinker , and mixes in some secondary pitches in which he lacks confidence . He is married , has two children , and lives in Snohomish County , Washington during the offseason . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Houston , Texas , Kendrick was a three @-@ sport standout in football , basketball , and baseball at Mount Vernon High School in Mount Vernon , Washington . Throughout his adolescent athletic career , it was Kendrick 's father Maury from whom Kendrick drew guidance and direction , particularly on how to conduct oneself during a game . Maury advised Kendrick to show as little emotion as possible when pitching , and is the one from whom Kendrick draws his composure while pitching . Kendrick and his father discuss pitching before and after every one of Kendrick 's starts , which Maury watches from Seattle , Washington , and in 2013 , Maury was part of the Phillies ' Fathers Day celebration , a celebration of his guidance of Kendrick . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Philadelphia Phillies = = = 
 = = = = Minor leagues : 2003 – 2006 = = = = 
 The Phillies drafted Kendrick in the seventh round of the 2003 Major League Baseball Draft , which made Kendrick reject a football scholarship offer to Washington State University . He began his career in the lower levels of the minor league system , and struggled mightily . A feature article in Phillies magazine noted , 
 His first three seasons , in the Gulf Coast League , and various Class A stops , weren 't encouraging . He was a combined 10 – 28 with a 5 @.@ 27 ERA ( earned run average ) . He allowed 356 hits in 286 @.@ 2 innings . There were some steps forward , some steps back 
 Early in his career , many within the organization questioned his work ethic and maturity , which they thought may have contributed to his underachievement . In 2006 , however , the Phillies " patience was ... rewarded " ; pitching for the Lakewood BlueClaws for the third consecutive season , he earned Phillies Minor League Pitcher of the Month accolades for May , thus warranting a promotion to the Clearwater Threshers . In 20 starts with Clearwater , he posted a 3 @.@ 53 ERA , among the best in the Florida State League . This performance as well as the fact that he spent significant time working out and focusing on mechanical improvement allayed the previous fears of poor work ethic . Ultimately , 2007 would be his last in the low levels of the Phillies ' minor leagues , as he began the season with the Double @-@ A ( AA ) Reading Phillies , and finished it with the big league club . 
 = = = = Breaking through : 2007 – 2009 = = = = 
 Despite several options at Triple @-@ A ( AAA ) , when Freddy García got hurt , Pat Gillick promoted Kendrick to the major leagues , which drew skepticism , as Kendrick was just 22 years old , and had not pitched particularly well for Reading . However , according to Steve <unk> , Phillies assistant director of player development , Kendrick 's " mound presence and his maturity " , as well as the fact that " nothing really seemed to bother him " contributed to his promotion . His MLB debut came on June 13 against the Chicago White Sox at Citizens Bank Park . He pitched six innings and gave up three runs , receiving a no @-@ decision in an 8 – 4 Phillies ' victory . He pitched the second game of the 2007 National League Division Series against the Colorado Rockies , which the Phillies lost , en route to being swept in the series . He finished the season with a 10 – 4 win – loss record and a 3 @.@ 87 ERA in 121 MLB innings pitched . He came in fifth place , ultimately losing to Ryan Braun , in 2007 National League Rookie of the Year Award voting . 
 Before the 2008 season , Kendrick was a victim of an " elaborate practical joke " executed by Brett Myers that had Kendrick convinced he had been traded away to Japan . During the season , Kendrick 's performance slipped ; he posted a 5 @.@ 49 ERA in 30 starts . Despite his relative ineffectiveness , the Phillies won the 2008 World Series , and though he was left off the postseason roster , Kendrick received a World Series ring and co @-@ authored a diary from the series . Phillies pitching coach Rich Dubee attributed the decline to hitters discerning that Kendrick threw predominantly a sinker , and almost always in the strike zone , thus fostering predictability for hitters . As such , he spent the majority of the 2009 season in the minor leagues , working on developing his change up , which proved to be an arduous process . Ultimately , after learning a new grip from Justin Lehr , he had a eureka moment during a bullpen session in 2009 ; he developed the pitch , and made it back to the major leagues " for good " near the conclusion of the season . 
 = = = = An undefined role : 2010 – 2012 = = = = 
 The Phillies acquired Roy Halladay prior to the 2010 season , and during spring training , Kendrick sought the mentorship of Halladay , whom he aspired to emulate during his high school career . Halladay willingly obliged , and teammates endearingly referred to Kendrick as " Little Roy " due to the amount of time he spent working with Halladay . Despite initially losing a competition for the fifth spot in the Phillies starting rotation during spring training to Jamie Moyer , an injury to Joe Blanton thrust Kendrick into the fifth spot in the Phillies rotation , the fourth consecutive year during which he had held that role for at least a short time . After a decent first half of the 2010 season ( at the end of June , he had a 4 – 4 record with a 3 @.@ 23 ERA ) . Kendrick was briefly demoted to the Lehigh Valley IronPigs ( AAA ) , but did not make any starts there , as Moyer 's season ended due to injury , causing Kendrick 's recall . Overall , he earned 11 wins , which tied a career high , and started 31 games , which set a new career high , while , in total , posting an 11 – 10 record with a 4 @.@ 73 ERA in 1802 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . Pat Gallen , editor in chief of Phillies Nation , opined that Kendrick 's performance indicated he would never exceed being an average , " run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill starting pitcher " , who would never exceed that role . At the conclusion of the season , Kendrick and the Phillies avoided salary arbitration by agreeing to a one @-@ year , US $ 2 @,@ 450 @,@ 000 contract . 
 Kendrick 's inconsistency continued in 2011 , when he " flip @-@ flopped between the rotation and the bullpen all season " , performing as a spot starter and long reliever . His starts came during injuries to Blanton and Roy Oswalt , the latter of whom was a member of the " <unk> aces " that comprised the front @-@ end of the Phillies ' starting rotation ( Oswalt , Cliff Lee , Roy Halladay , and Cole Hamels ) . When making those spot starts , he was able to " keep the team in the game " . During the season , he improved against left @-@ handed hitters , performed strongly against divisional opponents , and posted a career @-@ best 3 @.@ 22 ERA . Overall , he totaled 34 appearances , 15 of which were starts , and recorded an 8 – 6 record in 1142 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . Again eligible for arbitration , this year , he signed a one @-@ year , US $ 3 @,@ 585 @,@ 000 pact with Philadelphia . 
 Once again , Kendrick was not a member of the opening day starting rotation , as Blanton and Vance Worley rounded out the final two spots after Hamels , Halladay , and Lee . However , once again , he joined the rotation due to injury , this season to Worley . He was a member of the rotation from the end of April to the beginning of July , in a relief role until the beginning of August , and then in the rotation for the remainder of the season . Ultimately , Kendrick started 25 games of a career @-@ high 37 appearances . He was especially strong after the all @-@ star game , posting a 3 @.@ 15 ERA and nine wins , the latter of which was tied for first in the National League . He also continued his success against NL East teams , posting a 3 @.@ 25 ERA against them . Though he had much success , he remained inconsistent , playing " the role Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde personified " – in 17 of his starts , he allowed two or fewer earned runs , and posted a combined 1 @.@ 73 ERA in those starts , while in the eight starts during which he surrendered more than two earned runs , he posted a 10 @.@ 40 ERA . 
 = = = = Middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rotation starter : 2013 – 14 = = = = 
 Thanks to his strong finish in 2012 , Kendrick entered spring training assured of a spot in the Phillies ' Opening Day starting rotation for the first time in five years and spent his first full season exclusively a member of the major league starting rotation . His 2013 season took the opposite trajectory of his 2012 campaign ; he held a 4 – 1 record with a 2 @.@ 47 ERA in his first eight starts , while he posted a 6 – 12 record with a 5 @.@ 65 ERA in his final 22 starts . Some suggested that because Kendrick is a contact pitcher ( i.e. , he focuses on getting outs via batters hitting the ball rather than striking out ) , his career @-@ worst batting average on balls in play indicated horrendous defense was the primary reason for his downturn , not necessarily poor pitching . However , both were likely contributing factors . On September 18 , he was scratched from his scheduled start due to right rotator cuff tendinitis , which may have contributed to his poor pitching down the stretch . It was the first time in Kendrick 's career he missed a start due to injury . He had initially planned on making his next start , but the Phillies announced on September 20 that Kendrick had been shut down for the remainder of the season after receiving a second opinion on the injury . The team placed him on the disabled list for his first career stint and Zach Miner took his spot in the rotation . Overall , he posted 10 – 13 with a 4 @.@ 70 ERA in 182 innings pitched . 
 At the conclusion of the 2013 season , there was suggestion that the Phillies should re @-@ sign Kendrick insofar as he would serve as a useful player to trade around the trade deadline for a prospect or two , as durable , mediocre starters are always in demand around that time . <unk> , one scout suggested that because he throws strikes with great frequency and has a propensity to induce groundballs , he would be a strong value option for the Phillies . Ultimately , the Phillies agreed with the latter , and signed him to a one @-@ year , US $ 7 @,@ 675 @,@ 000 contract in the final year before he is eligible to be a free agent . Kendrick preposterously struggled all season in the first inning , entering his final home start of the season with a 9 @.@ 31 ERA in the first inning . Overall , he pitched a career @-@ high 199 innings , but posted a 4 @.@ 61 ERA , second @-@ worst among qualifying NL starting pitchers . The prevailing consensus was that despite a sentimental attachment to Philadelphia , generally being liked by Phillies ' fans , and solid contributions to the back of the Phillies ' rotation since arriving in the major leagues , he was unlikely to return to Philadelphia for 2015 , but would be a " smart pickup " by a contending team . 
 = = = Colorado Rockies = = = 
 Kendrick signed a one @-@ year deal with the Colorado Rockies on February 4 , 2015 . He was later named the Rockies ' opening @-@ day starter for the 2015 season . 
 = = = Atlanta Braves = = = 
 On December 31 , 2015 , Kendrick signed a minor league contract with the Atlanta Braves . In addition , Kendrick received a non @-@ roster invite to spring training . He was released on March 12 , 2016 . 
 = = Pitching style = = 
 When Kendrick was first promoted to the major leagues , he relied almost exclusively on a sinker , but as he became more predictable , he had to adjust by adding pitches , including the changeup , cutter , and curveball that now comprise his repertoire . He throws from a slightly deceptive , deliberate windup , and his sinker ranges anywhere from 87 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) to 93 miles per hour ( 150 km / h ) . He lacks requisite confidence in his secondary pitches , however , which contributes to batters being able to consistently make solid contact against him . 
 Although they have improved throughout his career , Kendrick has had poor peripheral statistics , including WAR , FIP and BABIP . Because he manages to stay competitive on the mound and do his job , most assert that the poor peripheral statistics do not matter for him . When pitching , he maintains constant equanimity and seeks to avoid showing emotion , a trait he learned from his father and has embodied since playing Little League Baseball . He credits his composure as the reason he is able to consistently " go with the flow " , and avoid being flustered , even in adverse situations . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 2009 , Kendrick became engaged to Survivor contestant Stephenie <unk> . They were married at the Silverado Resort in Napa , California , on November 13 , 2010 . Kendrick and <unk> had their first child , a daughter named Sophia Marguerite on September 3 , 2011 , and their second child , a son named Kyle Jr . , on July 30 , 2013 . In March 2011 , his home was burglarized ; among the stolen items was his World Series ring . Subsequently , the ring was found in a swampy area of Bothell , Washington , by Snohomish County Sheriff 's deputies . His pitching intro music is " Radioactive " by Imagine Dragons . Among his hobbies are golf and fantasy football . 
 = Press Gang = 
 Press Gang is a British children 's television comedy @-@ drama consisting of 43 episodes across five series that were broadcast from 1989 to 1993 . It was produced by Richmond Film & Television for Central , and screened on the ITV network in its regular weekday afternoon children 's strand , Children 's ITV , typically in a 4 : 45 pm slot ( days varied over the course of the run ) . 
 Aimed at older children and teenagers , the programme was based on the activities of a children 's newspaper , the Junior Gazette , produced by pupils from the local comprehensive school . In later series it was depicted as a commercial venture . The show interspersed comedic elements with the dramatic . As well as addressing interpersonal relationships ( particularly in the Lynda @-@ Spike story arc ) , the show tackled issues such as solvent abuse , child abuse and firearms control . 
 Written by ex @-@ teacher Steven Moffat , more than half the episodes were directed by Bob Spiers , a noted British comedy director who had previously worked on classics such as Fawlty Towers . Critical reception was very positive , particularly for the quality of the writing , and the series has attracted a cult following with a wide age range . 
 = = Storyline = = 
 Famous journalist Matt Kerr ( Clive Wood ) arrives from Fleet Street to edit the local newspaper . He sets up a junior version of the paper , The Junior Gazette , to be produced by pupils from the local comprehensive school before and after school hours . 
 Some of the team are " star pupils " , but others have reputations for delinquency . One such pupil , Spike Thompson ( Dexter Fletcher ) , is forced to work on the paper rather than being expelled from school . He is immediately attracted to editor Lynda Day ( Julia Sawalha ) , but they bicker , throwing one @-@ liners at each other . Their relationship develops and they have an on @-@ off relationship . They regularly discuss their feelings , especially in the concluding episodes of each series . In the final episode of the third series , " Holding On " , Spike unwittingly expresses his strong feelings to Lynda while being taped . Jealous of his American girlfriend , Zoe , Lynda puts the cassette on Zoe 's personal stereo , ruining their relationship . The on @-@ screen chemistry between the two leads was reflected off @-@ screen as they became an item for several years . 
 Although the Lynda and Spike story arc runs throughout the series , most episodes feature self @-@ contained stories and sub @-@ plots . Amongst lighter stories , such as one about Colin accidentally attending a funeral dressed as a pink rabbit , the show tackled many serious issues . Jeff Evans , writing in the Guinness Television Encyclopedia , writes that the series adopts a " far more adult approach " than " previous efforts in the same vein " such as A Bunch of Fives . Some critics also compared it with Hill Street Blues , Lou Grant " and other thoughtful US dramas , thanks to its realism and its level @-@ headed treatment of touchy subjects . " The first series approached solvent abuse in " How To Make A Killing " , and the NSPCC assisted in the production of the " Something Terrible " episodes about child abuse . The team were held hostage by a gun enthusiast in series three 's " The Last Word " , while the final episode approaches drug abuse . The issue @-@ led episodes served to develop the main characters , so that " Something Terrible " is more " about Colin 's redemption [ from selfish capitalist ] , rather than Cindy 's abuse . " 
 According to the British Film Institute , " Press Gang managed to be perhaps the funniest children 's series ever made and at the same time the most painfully raw and emotionally honest . The tone could change effortlessly and sensitively from farce to tragedy in the space of an episode . " Although the series is sometimes referred to as a comedy , Moffat insists that it is a drama with jokes in it . The writer recalls " a long running argument with Geoff Hogg ( film editor on Press Gang ) about whether Press Gang was comedy . He insisted that it was and I said it wasn 't – it was just funny . " Some innuendo leads Moffat to claim that it " had the dirtiest jokes in history ; we got away with tons of stuff ... We nearly got away with a joke about anal sex , but they spotted it at the last minute . " In one episode Lynda says she 's going to " butter him up " , and , when asked while on a date in a restaurant if he was staying at the hotel , Colin replies " I shouldn 't think so : it 's only the first date . " 
 Jeff Evans also comments that the series was filmed cinematically , dabbling in " dream sequences , flashbacks , fantasies and , on one occasion , a Moonlighting @-@ esque parody of the film It 's a Wonderful Life . " The show had a strong awareness of continuity , with some stories , incidents and minor characters referred to throughout the series . Actors who played short @-@ term characters in the first two series were invited back to reprise their roles in future episodes . David Jefford ( Alex Crockett ) was resurrected from 1989 's " Monday – Tuesday " to appear in the final episode " There Are Crocodiles " , while the same actress ( <unk> Flitton ) who played a wrong number in " Love and the Junior Gazette " was invited to reprise her character for the third series episode " Chance is a Fine Thing . " " Attention to detail " such as this is , according to Paul Cornell , " one of the numerous ways that the series respects the intelligence of its viewers . " 
 After the team leaves school , the paper gains financial independence and runs commercially . Assistant editor Kenny ( Lee Ross ) leaves at the end of series three to be replaced by Julie ( Lucy Benjamin ) , who was the head of the graphics team in series one . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Inception = = = 
 Bill Moffat , a headmaster from Glasgow , had an idea for a children 's television programme called The Norbridge Files . He showed it to a producer who visited his school , Thorn Primary School in Johnstone , Renfrewshire , when it was used as the location for an episode of Harry Secombe 's Highway . Producer Sandra C. Hastie liked the idea and showed it to her future husband Bill Ward , co @-@ owner of her company Richmond Films and Television . When she requested a script , Moffat suggested that his 25 @-@ year @-@ old son Steven , an English teacher , should write it . Hastie said that it was " the best ever first script " that she had read . 
 All 43 episodes were written by Steven Moffat . During production of series two , he was having an unhappy personal life after the break @-@ up of his first marriage . His wife 's new lover was represented in the episode " The Big Finish ? " by the character Brian Magboy ( Simon Schatzberger ) , a name inspired by Brian : Maggie 's boy . Moffat brought in the character so that all sorts of unfortunate things would happen to him , such as having a typewriter dropped on his foot . This period in Moffat 's life would also be reflected in his sitcom Joking Apart . 
 Central Independent Television had confidence in the project , so rather than the show being shot at their studios in Nottingham as planned , they granted Richmond a £ 2 million budget . This enabled it to be shot on 16 mm film , rather than the regular , less expensive videotape , and on location , making it very expensive compared with most children 's television . These high production costs almost led to its cancellation at the end of the second series , by which time Central executive Lewis Rudd was unable to commission programmes by himself . 
 = = = Directors = = = 
 More than half of the episodes were directed by Bob Spiers , a noted British comedy director who had previously worked on Fawlty Towers amongst many other programmes . He would work again with Moffat on his sitcom Joking Apart and Murder Most Horrid , and with Sawalha on Absolutely Fabulous . According to Moffat , Spiers was the " principal director " taking an interest in the other episodes and setting the visual style of the show . Spiers particularly used tracking shots , sometimes requiring more dialogue to be written to accommodate the length of the shot . The other directors would come in and " do a Spiers " . All of the directors were encouraged to attend the others ' shoots so that the visual style would be consistent . 
 The first two episodes were directed by Colin Nutley . However , he was unhappy with the final edit and requested that his name be removed from the credits . Lorne <unk> directed many episodes , notably the two @-@ part stories " How To Make A Killing " and " The Last Word . " One of the founders of Richmond Films and Television , Bill Ward , directed three episodes , and Bren Simson directed some of series two . The show 's cinematographer James Devis took the directorial reigns for " Windfall " , the penultimate episode . 
 = = = Location = = = 
 Whilst the show was set in the fictional town of Norbridge , it was mostly filmed in Uxbridge , a suburb of London . Many of the scenes were shot at Haydon School in Pinner . The first series was filmed entirely on location , but after the demolition of the building used as the original newspaper office , interior shots were filmed in Pinewood Studios for the second series , and the exterior of the building was not seen beyond that series . Subsequent series were filmed at Lee International Studios at Shepperton ( series three and four ) and Twickenham Studios ( series five ) . 
 = = = Music and title sequences = = = 
 The theme music was composed by Peter Davis ( who after the second series composed the rest of the series alone as principal composer ) , John Mealing and John G. Perry . The opening titles show the main characters striking a pose , with the name of the respective actor in a typewriter style typeface . Steven Moffat and Julia Sawalha were not very impressed with the opening titles when discussing them for a DVD commentary in 2004 . They were re @-@ recorded for series three , in the same style , to address the actors ' ages and alterations to the set . 
 Many of the closing titles in the first two series were accompanied by dialogue from two characters . Episodes that ended on a particularly sombre tone , such as " Monday @-@ Tuesday " and " Yesterday 's News " , used only appropriately sombre music to accompany the end credits . After an emphatic climax , " At Last a Dragon " used an enhanced version of the main theme with more extravagant use of electric guitar . Moffat felt that the voiceovers worked well in the first series , but that they were not as good in the second . Hastie recalls that Moffat was " extremely angry " that Drop the Dead Donkey had adopted the style . They were dropped after the second series . The cast , according to Moffat , were " grumpy with having to turn up to a recording studio to record them . " 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 Lynda Day ( Julia Sawalha ) is the editor of the Junior Gazette . She is strong and opinionated , and is feared by many of her team . Moffat has said that the character was partly based on the show 's " ball @-@ breaking " producer , Sandra C. Hastie . Although she appears very tough , she occasionally exposes her feelings . She quits the paper at the end of " Monday @-@ Tuesday " , and in " Day Dreams " laments " Why do I get everything in my whole stupid life wrong ? " Intimidated by socialising , she hiccups at the idea . She is so nervous at a cocktail party , in " At Last a Dragon " , that she attempts to leave on several occasions . The mixture of Lynda 's sensitive side and her self @-@ sufficient attitude is illustrated in the series ' final episode " There Are Crocodiles . " <unk> the ghost of Gary ( Mark Sayers ) , who died after taking a drug overdose , she says : 
 Look , I 'm sorry you 're dead OK ? I do care . But to be perfectly honest with you , I don 't care a lot . You had a choice , you took the drugs , you died . Are you seriously claiming no one warned you it was dangerous ? ... I mean , have you had a look at the world lately ? ... There 's plenty of stuff going on that kills you and you don 't get warned at all . So sticking your head in a crocodile you were told about is not calculated to get my sympathy . 
 James " Spike " Thomson ( Dexter Fletcher ) is an American delinquent , forced to work on the paper rather than being excluded from school . He is immediately attracted to Lynda , and he establishes himself as an important member of the reporting team having been responsible for getting their first lead story . He usually has a range of one @-@ liners , though is often criticised , particularly by Lynda , for excessive joking . However , Spike often consciously uses humour to lighten the tone , such as in " Monday @-@ Tuesday " when he tries to cheer up Lynda after she feels responsible for David 's suicide . 
 The character was originally written as English , until producer Hastie felt that an American character would enhance the chance of overseas sales . This meant that English @-@ born Fletcher had to act in an American accent for all five years . Moffat says that he isn 't " sure [ that ] lumbering Dexter with that accent was a smart move . " The American accent had some fans surprised to learn that Fletcher is actually English . 
 Kenny Phillips ( Lee Ross ) is one of Lynda 's ( few ) long @-@ term friends and is her assistant editor in the first three series . Kenny is much calmer than Lynda , though is still dominated by her . Despite this , he is one of the few people able to stand up to Lynda , in his own quiet way . Although he identifies himself as " sweet " , he is unlucky in love : Jenny ( Sadie Frost ) , the girlfriend he meets in " How to Make a Killing " , dumps him because he is too understanding . His secret passion for writing music is revealed at the end of series two , which was influenced by Ross ' interests . Colin organizes and markets a concert for him , and the second series ends with Kenny performing " You Don 't Feel For Me " ( written by Ross himself ) . Lee Ross was only able to commit to the first six episodes of the 12 @-@ episode series three and four filming block because he was expecting a film role . Thus , by series four , Kenny has left for Australia . 
 Colin Mathews ( Paul Reynolds ) is the Thatcherite in charge of the paper 's finances and advertising . He often wears loud shirts , and his various schemes have included marketing defective half @-@ ping @-@ pong balls ( as ' pings ' ) , exam revision kits and soda that leaves facial stains . Rosie Marcel and Claire <unk> appear throughout the second series as Sophie and Laura , Colin 's mischievous young helpers . 
 Julie Craig ( Lucy Benjamin ) is the head of the graphics team in series one . Moffat was impressed with Benjamin 's performance , and expanded her character for the second series . However she had committed herself to roles in the LWT sitcom Close to Home and Jupiter Moon , so the character was replaced by Sam . The character returns in the opening episode of series four as researcher on the Saturday morning show Crazy Stuff . She arranges for Lynda and Spike to be reunited on live television , but the subsequent complaints about the violence ( face slapping ) results in Julie 's firing . After giving Lynda some home truths , Julie replaces Kenny as the assistant editor for the final two series . She is a flirt , and , according to Lynda , was the " official pin @-@ up at the last prison riot . " 
 Sarah Jackson ( <unk> Holmes ) is the paper 's lead writer . Although she is intelligent she gets stressed , such as during her interview for editorship of the Junior Gazette . Her final episode , " Friendly Fire " , shows the development of her friendship with Lynda , and how the latter saw her as a challenge when she first arrived to Norbridge High . Together they had established the underground school magazine : Damn Magazine . Her first attempt to leave the newspaper to attend a writing course at the local college is thwarted by Lynda , but she eventually leaves in series five to attend university ( mirroring the reason for Holmes ' departure ) . 
 Frazer " <unk> " Davis ( <unk> Chrystie ) is one of Spike 's co @-@ delinquents forced into working on the paper , his initial main task writing the horoscopes . <unk> is initially portrayed as " intellectually challenged " , such as not understanding the synonymous relationship between " the astrology column " and the horoscopes . Later episodes , however , show him to be devious , such as in " The Last Word : Part 2 " when he stuns the gunman using a large array of <unk> . 
 = = = Other recurring characters = = = 
 Sam Black ( Gabrielle Anwar ) replaced Julie as the head of the graphics team in the second series . Sam is very fashion conscious and a flirt , and is surprised when an actor rejects her advances in favour of Sarah . Anwar had auditioned for the role of Lynda . ( Many actors who unsuccessfully auditioned for main characters were invited back later for guest roles . ) Moffat had expanded the role of Julie after the first series , but Lucy Benjamin was unavailable for series two . Sam , therefore , was basically the character of Julie under a different name , especially in her earlier episodes . 
 Charlie Creed @-@ Miles , who played Danny McColl , the paper 's photographer , became disenchanted with his minor role and left after the first series . 
 Toni " <unk> " Tildesley ( Joanna Dukes ) is the junior member of the team , responsible for the junior section , Junior Junior Gazette . 
 Billy Homer ( Andy Crowe ) was also a recurring character . A <unk> , he is very competent with computer networks , sometimes hacking into the school 's database . His storylines are some of the first representations of the Internet in British television . Moffat felt that he was unable to sustain the character , and he appears only sporadically after the first series . 
 The main adults are deputy headmaster Bill Sullivan ( Nick Stringer ) , maverick editor Matt Kerr ( Clive Wood ) and experienced Gazette reporter Chrissie Stewart ( Angela Bruce ) . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical reaction was good , the show being particularly praised for the high quality and sophistication of the writing . The first episode was highly rated by The Daily Telegraph , The Guardian and the Times Educational Supplement . In his emphatic review , Paul Cornell writes that : 
 Press Gang has proved to be a series that can transport you back to how you felt as a teenager , sharper that the world but with as much angst as acute wit ... Never again can a show get away with talking down to children or writing sloppily for them . Press Gang , possibly the best show in the world . 
 Time Out said that " this is quality entertainment : the kids are sharp , the scripts are clever and the jokes are good . " The BBC 's William Gallagher called it " pretty flawless " , with The Guardian retrospectively commending the series . Others , such as Popmatters , have also commented upon how " the show is renowned ... for doing something kid television at the time didn 't do ( and , arguably , still doesn 't ) : it refused to treat its audience like children . " Comedian Richard Herring recalls watching the show as a recent graduate , commenting that it " was subtle , sophisticated and much too good for kids . " According to Moffat , " Press Gang had gone over very , very well in the industry and I was being touted and romanced all the time . " Press Gang 's complicated plots and structure would become a hallmark of Moffat 's work , such as Joking Apart and Coupling . 
 The series received a Royal Television Society award and a BAFTA in 1991 for " Best Children 's Programme ( Entertainment / Drama ) " . It was also nominated for two Writers ' Guild of Great Britain awards , one Prix Jeunesse and the 1992 BAFTA for " Best Children 's Programme ( Fiction ) " . Julia Sawalha won the Royal Television Society Television Award for " Best Actor – Female " in 1993 . 
 = = = Repeat showings = = = 
 The show gained an even wider adult audience in an early evening slot when repeated on Sundays on Channel 4 in 1991 . This crossover is reflected in the BBC 's review for one of the DVDs when they say that " Press Gang is one of the best series ever made for kids . Or adults . " 
 Nickelodeon showed nearly all of the episodes in a weekday slot in 1997 . The final three episodes of the third series , however , were not repeated on the children 's channel because of their content : " The Last Word " double episode with the gun siege , and " Holding On " with the repetition of the phrase " divorce the bitch " . On the first transmission of the latter on 11 June 1991 , continuity announcer Tommy Boyd warned viewers that it contained stronger than usual language . In 2007 , itv.com made the first series , with the exception of " Page One " , available to be viewed on its website free of charge . 
 2 episodes were broadcast on the CITV Channel on 5 & 6 January 2013 , as part of a weekend of archive programmes to celebrate CITV 's 30th anniversary . 
 = = = Fan following = = = 
 Press Gang has attracted a cult following . A fanzine , Breakfast at Czars , was produced in the 1990s . Edited by Stephen O 'Brien , it contained a range of interviews with the cast and crew ( notably with producer Hastie ) , theatre reviews and fanfiction . The first edition was included as a PDF file on the series two DVD , while the next three were on the series five disc . An e @-@ mail discussion list has been operational since February 1997 . Scholar Miles Booy observes that as Steven Moffat was himself a fan of Doctor Who , he was able to ingrate the elements that TV fans appreciated , such as : 
 series finales with big cliff @-@ hangers , rigorous continuity and a slew of running jokes and references which paid those who watched and rewatched the text to pull out its <unk> . At the end of the second series , it is remarked that the news team have been following the Spike / Lynda romance ' since page one ' , and only the fans remembered – or discovered on reviewing – that " Page One " was the title of the first episode . 
 Booy points out that Chris Carter and Joss Whedon would be acclaimed for these elements in the 1990s ( in the shows The X @-@ Files and Buffy the Vampire Slayer ) , but " Moffat got there first , and ... in a children 's TV slot . His was the first show to arrive with a Britain 's fan 's sensibility to formal possibilities . " 
 Two conventions were held in the mid @-@ 1990s in Liverpool . The events , in aid of the NSPCC , were each titled " Both Sides of the Paper " and were attended by Steven Moffat , Sandra Hastie , Dexter Fletcher , Paul Reynolds , <unk> Holmes and Nick Stringer . There were screenings of extended rough cuts of " A Quarter to Midnight " and " There Are Crocodiles " , along with auctions of wardrobe and props . When Virgin Publishing prevented Paul Cornell from writing an episode guide , the Press Gang Programme Guide , edited by Jim Sangster , was published by <unk> Publishing in 1995 . Sangster , O 'Brien and Adrian <unk> collaborated with Network DVD on the extra features for the DVD releases . 
 Big Finish Productions , which produces audio plays based on sci @-@ fi properties , particularly Doctor Who , was named after the title of the final episode of the second series . Moffat himself is an ardent Doctor Who fan , and became the programme 's lead writer and executive producer in 2009 . 
 Moffat has integrated many references to secondary characters and locations in Press Gang in his later work . His 1997 sitcom Chalk refers to a neighbouring school as Norbridge High , run by Mr Sullivan , and to the characters Dr <unk> ( " <unk> " ) , Malcolm Bullivant ( " Something Terrible " ) and David Jefford ( " Monday @-@ Tuesday " / " There are Crocodiles " ) , a pupil who Mr Slatt ( David Bamber ) reprimands for masturbating . The name " <unk> " appears as the name of streets in " A Quarter to Midnight " and Joking Apart , and as the surname of the protagonist in " Dying Live " , an episode of Murder Most Horrid written by Moffat , as well as the name of a librarian in his Doctor Who prose short story , " Continuity Errors " , which was published in the 1996 Virgin Books anthology <unk> 3 : Consequences . The name " Inspector Hibbert " , from " The Last Word " , is given to the character played by Nick Stringer in " Elvis , Jesus and Jack " , Moffat 's final Murder Most Horrid contribution . Most recently , in the first episode of Moffat 's Jekyll , Mr Hyde ( James Nesbitt ) whistled the same tune as Lynda in " Going Back to Jasper Street " . 
 = = = Proposed television movie = = = 
 A television film called " Deadline " was planned . It was set a few years after the series and aimed at a more adult audience . At one stage in 1992 , series 4 was intended to be the last , and the movie was proposed as a follow @-@ up . However , making of the film fell through when a fifth series was commissioned instead . The idea of the follow @-@ up film was reconsidered several times during the 1990s , but every time fell through for various reasons . 
 In June 2007 , The Stage reported that Moffat and Sawalha are interested in reviving Press Gang . He said : " I would revive that like a shot . I would love to do a reunion episode — a grown @-@ up version . I know Julia Sawalha is interested — every time I see her she asks me when we are going to do it . Maybe it will happen — I would like it to . " The Guardian advocated the show 's revival , arguing that " a revamped Press Gang with Moffat at the helm could turn the show from a cult into a national institution - a petri dish for young acting and writing talent to thrive . It 's part of our TV heritage and definitely worthy of resuscitation . " 
 At the Edinburgh International Television Festival in August 2008 , Moffat told how he got drunk after the wrap party for Jekyll and pitched the idea of a Press Gang reunion special to the Head of Drama at the BBC , John Yorke . Despite Yorke 's approval , the writer said that he was too busy with his work on Doctor Who to pursue the idea . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 Several products have been released , specifically four novelisations , a video and the complete collection on DVD . 
 Four novelisations were written by Bill Moffat and published by Hippo Books / Scholastic in 1989 and 1990 based on the first two series . First Edition was based on the first three episodes , with Public Exposure covering " Interface " and " How to Make a Killing . " The third book , Checkmate , covered " Breakfast at Czar 's " , " Picking Up the Pieces " and " Going Back to Jasper Street " , and reveals that Julie left the graphics department to go to art college . The fourth and final book , The Date , is a novelisation of " Money , Love and <unk> " , " Love and the Junior Gazette " and " At Last a Dragon . " Each book featured an eight @-@ page photographic insert . 
 VCI Home Video , with Central Video , released one volume on VHS in 1990 featuring the first four episodes : " Page One " , " Photo Finish " , " One Easy Lesson " and " Deadline . " The complete series of Press Gang is available on DVD ( Region 2 , UK ) from Network DVD and in Australia ( Region 4 ) from Force Entertainment . Four episodes of the second series DVD features an audio commentary by Julia Sawalha and Steven Moffat , in which the actress claims to remember very little about the show . Shooting scripts and extracts from Jim Sangster 's programme guide ( published by <unk> Publishing ) are included in PDF format from series two onwards . The second series DVD set also contains the only existing copy , in offline edit form , of an unaired documentary filmed during production of series two . 
 = Valley View ( Romney , West Virginia ) = 
 Valley View is a mid @-@ 19th @-@ century Greek Revival residence and farm overlooking the South Branch Potomac River north of Romney , West Virginia . Valley View is on Depot Valley Road . The South Branch Valley Railroad adjacent to the farm is currently utilized by the Potomac Eagle Scenic Railroad . 
 The Valley View property was part of the South Branch Survey of the Northern Neck Proprietary , a large tract that belonged to Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron . It was settled by the Collins family in 1749 , and acquired by the Parsons family before 1772 . The Valley View house was built by James Parsons Jr. in 1855 . After the Civil War , Parsons ' widow sold the farm to Charles Harmison . His wife Elizabeth Smith Harmison , inspired by her childhood Virginia home ( Western View ) and the scenic river views , named the farm Valley View . Following a series of owners , the property was purchased by the Mayhew family in 1979 . Valley View 's current proprietors , Robert and Kim Mayhew , have restored the historic residence and grounds . 
 The house at Valley View is a two @-@ story brick Greek Revival @-@ style structure with a rectangular architectural plan . The front entrance is covered by a small portico , topped with a pediment supported by wooden Doric columns . The rear of the house , with a two @-@ story ( double ) wood porch stretching across it , faces the South Branch Potomac River valley and Mill Creek Mountain . Each of the original eight large rooms of the 1855 structure contains a fireplace framed by a wooden trabeated mantelpiece with classical elements . The original windows , wooden trim , and materials in the main section of the house are intact . In 2012 , Valley View was listed on the National Register of Historic Places for its locally significant architecture . 
 = = History = = 
