 In the interim , he had also served as the university 's athletic director and head coach for the football and baseball teams . Byrd amassed a 119 – 82 – 15 record in football from 1911 to 1934 and 88 – 73 – 4 record in baseball from 1913 to 1923 . Byrd Stadium , the university 's current football field , and its predecessor were both named in his honor . In graduate school at Georgetown University , he became one of football 's early users of the newly legalized forward pass , and he had a brief baseball career including one season as pitcher for the San Francisco Seals . 
 Byrd resigned as university president in order to enter politics in 1954 . He ran an unsuccessful campaign as the Democratic candidate for Maryland Governor against Theodore McKeldin . Byrd later received appointments to state offices with responsibilities in the Potomac River and Chesapeake Bay . In the 1960s , he made unsuccessful bids for seats in each chamber of the United States Congress . Byrd was a proponent of a " separate but equal " status of racial segregation in his roles as both university administrator and political candidate . 
 In 2015 , the student government association agreed to a resolution in support of changing the name of Byrd Stadium because of Byrd 's segregationist history . On September 28 , 2015 , University of Maryland President Wallace Loh appointed task force to develop viewpoints and options . The University President then made a recommendation to the University System of Maryland Board of Regents — the governing body of Maryland state universities — to change the name to " Maryland Stadium " . The ultimate decision on any name change rests with the Board of Regents . On December 11 , 2015 , the Board of Regents voted 12 @-@ 5 to remove the " Byrd " from the stadium 's name , renaming it Maryland Stadium for the time being . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Harry Clifton Byrd was born on February 12 , 1889 , in Crisfield , Maryland . He was one of six children of <unk> and county commissioner William Franklin Byrd and his wife Sallie May Byrd . In his youth , Byrd worked in the Chesapeake Bay fishing industry , where he saved most of his money to finance his college education . He attended Crisfield High School , where he excelled on the baseball diamond , and was also known as his hometown 's first recreational jogger . 
 A later source described how he appeared in 1905 : 
 " He was tall , and as the saying goes , built like a whip . He had a startlingly handsome face , with big , flashing eyes , a splotch of florid red on each cheek , and a mane of black curly hair ... He looked like Rupert of <unk> , and had all of that worthy 's cold , sinister resolution about everything that he did . " 
 = = College career = = 
 In 1905 , Byrd graduated from Crisfield High School and enrolled at the Maryland Agricultural College , which is now known as the University of Maryland . Byrd was a star college athlete and participated in varsity football , baseball , and track . He served as the football team captain in 1907 , as the pitcher on the baseball team , and set a school record 10 @.@ 0 @-@ second 100 @-@ yard dash in track . Before leaving Crisfield , Byrd 's father warned him not to " try to play that thing called football . " He ignored the advice and reported for football practice where head coach Fred K. Nielsen told the undersized Byrd to " play with the kids " and that " football 's a man 's game . " He was allowed , however , to fill in as an end on the scout team due to a shortage of players . After sitting out the first three games , Nielsen sent Byrd in as a substitute against Navy , and his play was impressive enough to earn a position on the first team . After the elder Byrd read of his son 's newfound stardom in the newspaper , he wrote , " Since you 're going to play football , I 'm glad to see you 're doing it well . " During the summers and on weekends , Byrd supplemented his income by continuing work as a fisherman . He graduated second in his class with a Bachelor of Science degree in civil engineering in 1908 . 
 After graduation from Maryland , Byrd spent the next three years doing graduate work in law and journalism at George Washington University , Georgetown University , and Western Maryland College ( now known as McDaniel College ) . In a time before eligibility limitations , he played football at George Washington and Georgetown and ran track at Western Maryland . At Georgetown in 1909 , he was called the first quarterback in the East to master the forward pass , several years before Gus Dorais of Notre Dame did so in 1913 . According to The Georgetown Hoyas : A Story of A <unk> Football Team , Dorais 's " end @-@ over @-@ end ' discus ' throw was an exact copy " of Byrd 's passing technique , and the Irish " got the headlines because they had a press agent and Georgetown didn 't . " 
 Byrd also played for Maryland @-@ based semi @-@ professional baseball teams while pursuing his graduate studies . In 1910 , the Chicago White Sox signed Byrd , but he was soon traded to the San Francisco Seals , a semi @-@ professional Pacific Coast League baseball team with whom he pitched in 1912 . He returned to Maryland later that year , and in 1913 , married Katherine Dunlop Turnbull . Before they divorced twenty years later , the couple had three sons and a daughter : Harry , Sterling , William , and Evelyn . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 In 1911 , injuries claimed enough Maryland Agricultural football players that the team could no longer field a practice squad to scrimmage against . The college turned to Byrd , who was serving as coach at Western High School in Georgetown , and he was willing to help his alma mater with scrimmages . Byrd later replaced head coach Charley Donnelly , who resigned mid @-@ season after accumulating a 2 – 4 – 2 record . Byrd led the Aggies to wins in both of their final games of the season , against Western Maryland , 6 – 0 , and Gallaudet , 6 – 2 . 
 In 1913 , the Maryland Agricultural College hired Byrd as an instructor in English and history , and he was named the head coach of the track and baseball teams , the latter of which he coached through 1923 . According to author David <unk> in Tales from the Maryland Terrapins , the university initially offered Byrd $ 300 to coach football , but he demanded $ 1 @,@ 200 . The two parties came to agree upon that salary for all of his coaching and teaching duties which spanned nine months of the year . Byrd also worked as a sportswriter for The Washington Star , a job he held until 1932 . 
 As football coach , he developed a unique offensive scheme called the " Byrd system " , which combined elements of the single @-@ wing and double @-@ wing formations . One of Byrd 's track and football players , Geary Eppley , said , " He never yelled in practice or at a game ... He pointed out mistakes and explained what you did wrong . He took a calm approach . The strongest thing he 'd say was ' for <unk> sake . ' " 
 In 1915 , his duties were expanded to include those of athletic director . That same year , he requested funds for the construction of the campus 's first dedicated football stadium , which was named in his honor . During his tenure as head football coach from 1911 to 1934 , he compiled a 119 – 82 – 15 record . 
 = = Administrative career = = 
 Byrd was appointed to the post of assistant university president in 1918 . He became a proponent of unification of the Maryland Agricultural College and the Baltimore professional schools into a single public University of Maryland , and he was instrumental in what became the Consolidation Act of 1920 . Byrd named the student newspaper The Diamondback in 1921 , and in 1933 , he was the lead advocate for the adoption of the diamondback terrapin as the university 's official nickname and mascot . 
 In 1932 , Byrd was promoted to vice president of the university . In July 1935 , he was named the acting president of the university , and was officially appointed to the presidency in February 1936 . During his tenure , the budget , facilities , faculty , and enrollment increased significantly . The school budget was increased and the campus expanded largely due to Byrd 's deft political maneuvering in Annapolis and Washington . The school also saw a large growth in enrollment , due in part to returning veterans making use of the G.I. Bill after World War II . From 1945 to 1948 , the university budget increased from $ 4 @.@ 8 million to $ 9 @.@ 8 million . Between 1935 and 1954 , student enrollment grew from 3 @,@ 400 to 16 @,@ 000 . Over that same time period , the value of the campus rose from $ 5 million to $ 65 million . Byrd , however stood fast on faculty salaries . He reportedly said , " Ph.D.s are a dime a dozen . " For years , Byrd refused to release the university 's financial records to state legislators , and how exactly he secured funding for many of his projects was largely a mystery . According to booster Jack Heise , Byrd financed a new basketball arena through the out @-@ of @-@ state tuition , paid by the federal government , for Maryland high school graduates who attended the university on the G.I. Bill . The General Accounting Office calculated that the extra fees totaled more than $ 2 million , but determined that they were within the bounds of legality . 
 Byrd was a staunch supporter of a " separate but equal " state university system . The Princess Anne campus provided agricultural education and Morgan State College provided liberal arts education for the state 's black students , while the University of Maryland remained open only to white students . In 1951 , Governor Theodore McKeldin criticized the University of Maryland as an example of wasteful state spending , and was especially critical of expansions to the Princess Anne campus , which was geographically disconnected from the state 's black population and not attracting many students to study agriculture . Contractors had begun projects at the college before approval from the public works board , which was described as a usual practice under Byrd . Byrd acceded to McKeldin and secured approval from the board for both the Princess Anne expansions as well as a sizable increase to the university budget . 
 In 1945 , Byrd hired 32 @-@ year @-@ old Paul " Bear " Bryant to his first head coaching post . Bryant led the Terrapins to a 6 – 2 – 1 record , but the two personalities clashed . The tensions came to a head when Byrd reinstated a player Bryant had suspended for violating team rules . Bryant resigned as head coach an hour later , which caused an uproar among students until he interceded to restore order . 
 Two years later , Byrd hired Jim Tatum as football coach . The year prior at Oklahoma , Tatum fielded a winning team , but the athletic department ran up a huge deficit and some players were paid in violation of conference rules , which resulted in university president George Cross firing athletic director Jap Haskell . The media blamed Tatum for his termination . Tatum told Cross to refute Tatum 's role in the matter , and threatened to reveal the Oklahoma team had been paid $ 6 @,@ 000 after the 1947 Gator Bowl . Cross asked Byrd to persuade Tatum not to go public , and according to author Gary King in An Autumn Remembered , Byrd replied , " <unk> , hell ! I 'll tell him to keep his damn mouth shut ! " Tatum remained as coach at Maryland from 1947 to 1955 , and amassed a 73 – 15 – 4 record . 
 In 1948 , the National Collegiate Athletic Association passed a set of regulations called the Purity Code , later renamed the Sanity Code , which permitted student @-@ athletes free tuition and meals , but required that part @-@ time jobs be legitimate and their pay commensurate with the work . Schools found to be in violation could be expelled from the NCAA . In 1950 , seven schools , called the " Sinful Seven " — Virginia , Maryland , VMI , Virginia Tech , The Citadel , Boston College , and Villanova — admitted they were in violation of the code . Time magazine asserted violators were far more widespread than those seven that had confessed . Maryland was the only Sinful Seven school that was also a major football power with eighty scholarship players , and Byrd led them in their stand against the Sanity Code . University of Virginia president Colgate Darden called the code hypocritical , and The Citadel 's leadership refused to " lie to stay in the association " and requested termination of its NCAA membership . At the convention to decide Virginia 's fate , Byrd said , " Does Ohio State want to vote for expulsion of Virginia , when Ohio State has facilities to take care of four or five as many athletes as Virginia ? " The ensuing vote fell 25 short of the needed two @-@ thirds majority to expel the Sinful Seven . 
 In 1951 , the football team 's 10 – 0 season culminated in a 28 – 13 victory over first @-@ ranked Tennessee in the 1952 Sugar Bowl . Maryland 's participation , however , was in violation of a Southern Conference resolution passed mid @-@ season that banned participation in postseason bowl games . Byrd had Maryland accept the bowl invitation , despite Tatum 's objections . The coach thought the threatened sanctions , which prevented Maryland from playing any Southern Conference games the following season , would severely disadvantage his team . In 1952 , Maryland and Clemson , which had also violated the bowl game ban , were sanctioned , and the incident hastened the break @-@ up of the Southern Conference and formation of the Atlantic Coast Conference , of which both schools were founding members . 
 Opponents in The Baltimore Sun alleged that Byrd emphasized athletics over academics and belittled him as the only college football coach to rise to the position of university president . Among the campus expansions , Byrd was responsible for the construction of Byrd Stadium in 1950 and Cole Field House in 1955 , which at the time was the largest basketball arena in the Southern Conference . Critics alleged that both facilities were constructed at the expense of campus libraries . Byrd also built the University of Maryland Golf Course in 1959 . Byrd resigned from the post in 1953 and his tenure ended effectively on December 31 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Byrd resigned from the presidency in January 1954 to embark upon an unsuccessful campaign for Governor of Maryland . He narrowly beat perennial candidate George P. Mahoney in the Democratic primary by 50 @.@ 64 % to 49 @.@ 37 % and faced Republican incumbent McKeldin in the general election . Byrd campaigned on his stance of separate but equal . McKeldin won comfortable majorities in Baltimore 's black , Jewish , and upper @-@ middle class white districts , while Byrd took all of the blue @-@ collar white South and East Baltimore neighborhoods , including McKeldin 's boyhood home along Eutaw Street . Elsewhere in the state , however , middle @-@ class white voters did not support Byrd . Byrd lost by 54 @.@ 46 % to 45 @.@ 54 % . He went on to make unsuccessful bids for the Democratic nominations to the U.S. Senate in 1964 and the U.S. Congress in 1966 . 
 Despite his lack of success in campaigning , Byrd did receive several gubernatorial appointments : Chairman of the Maryland Tidewater Fisheries Commission , Maryland Commissioner to the Potomac River Fisheries Commission , and Chairman of the Commission on Chesapeake Bay Affairs . In 1959 , Governor J. Millard Tawes appointed Byrd as commissioner of tidewater fisheries . When a fisheries officer killed a Virginian waterman illegally dredging , Byrd disarmed the force . The action was credited with helping to end the long @-@ standing Potomac River Oyster Wars . Following the example of other oyster @-@ producing states , Byrd authorized fossil shell mining to produce <unk> , crushed shells used to form oyster beds . Byrd ignored Tawes ' warning to " stay away from private planting " by promoting the formation of leasing cooperatives , but his plan failed due to opposition in the Maryland General Assembly . 
 = = Business career = = 
 Byrd was also active in business and civic organizations . In 1951 , he was involved in the merger that formed the Suburban Trust Company , which in 1960 was the largest bank in Maryland outside of Baltimore City . He later served as the company 's vice president . Byrd also did business in real estate and construction . Byrd was active with service organizations . In 1962 , he became a member of the Loyal Order of the Moose . Byrd organized the College Park Rotary Club and served as its first president . Byrd was a member of the Defense Orientation Conference Association ( <unk> ) , an organization which educates civilians on the Defense Department 's programs and policies . 
 = = Death = = 
 Byrd died of a heart condition on October 2 , 1970 at the University of Maryland Hospital in Baltimore , Maryland . He is interred at Asbury United Methodist Church Cemetery in Crisfield , Maryland , and his epitaph reads : " Harry Clifton ' Curley ' Byrd , Educator – Statesman – Conservationist , President Emeritus , Father and Builder of the Greater Consolidated University of Maryland , Founded 1920 . " Byrd was inducted into the University of Maryland Athletic Hall of Fame in 1982 . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = = = Football = = = 
 = = = Baseball = = = 
 = Bart Star = 
 " Bart Star " is the sixth episode in the ninth season of the American animated television series The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 9 , 1997 . Written by Donick Cary and directed by Dominic Polcino , the episode guest starred Joe Namath , Roy Firestone , and Mike Judge . The episode sees Homer becoming the coach of a pee @-@ wee football team and expresses nepotism for Bart by making him the quarterback which receives backlash from the whole team , including Bart himself . The episode was critically well received . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following a Health convention held in Springfield , the children of Springfield ( including Bart ) are deemed to be overweight . To help them stay in shape , the parents enroll their children in pee @-@ wee football . The coach , Ned Flanders , helps keep the team undefeated , but Homer heckles him relentlessly . Flanders finally snaps and turns the job over to Homer . 
 Homer initially acts tough towards Bart , but when he is reminded of how his father was hard on him as a child , he decides to be nicer to Bart. The next day , he decides to cut many players from the team , and replaces star quarterback Nelson with Bart , causing an uproar from the team . Bart is unable to play the position well and causes the team 's first loss . While training at night Bart meets Joe Namath , who promises to help him , but soon after Joe 's wife fixes the car , which had broken down due to vapor lock , Joe leaves without helping Bart. 
 Lisa suggests that Bart pretend he is injured to get out of quarterbacking , which he eagerly does , but Homer claims that without Bart the team must forfeit . This causes Bart to become angry and quit the team . The next game , Nelson is made quarterback again and the team wins , but Homer has nobody to celebrate with and becomes lonely . Afterwards , Homer finds Bart and persuades him to rejoin the team . The next day , during the championship game , the score is tied when Chief Wiggum comes to arrest Nelson . Bart decides to pretend he is Nelson and the team finally wins the championship . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Donick Cary , who obtained inspiration from an experience in high school he had with a football coach who had a son on the team . Similarly , show runner Mike Scully had been on a soccer team whose coach would give his son special treatment . 
 George Meyer obtained inspiration for the scene toward the beginning of the episode where Rainier Wolfcastle is taunting the children from an experience he had with Arnold Schwarzenegger . He was following Schwarzenegger during a hike , and overheard him taunting his children . Schwarzenegger 's influence was seen in the same scene , as he was appointed to be the chairman of the President 's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports , on which he served from 1990 to 1993 . 
 The final scene took a long time to write . The writing staff found it difficult to come up with a resolution that would end on positive terms for Bart and Homer , and was originally different when it was read at the writing table . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Joe Namath , Roy Firestone , and Mike Judge guest starred in the episode . Scully claims that Judge was paid $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to appear in the episode , where he voiced the cameo of Hank Hill . The appearance was actually a cross @-@ promotion for Judge 's animated show King of the Hill which followed The Simpsons on Fox 's Sunday schedule in 1997 . Other King of the Hill characters ( Hank 's niece <unk> , Hank 's wife Peggy , Hank 's son Bobby , and Hank 's friends , Dale Gribble , Bill <unk> , and Boomhauer ) were present in the scene , although none of them spoke . Marv Albert was originally going to play Firestone 's part as a sports radio host , but was dropped following sexual assault charges that were made against him around the time the episode was in pre @-@ production . Albert would later appear , however , in the season 20 episode " The Burns and The Bees " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Bart Star " finished 27th in ratings for the week of November 3 – 9 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 10 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files and King of the Hill . 
 Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , thought well of the episode , saying , " A fun episode , where you root for Bart and , unusually , Nelson - all the way through . Homer is just too stupid for words , but that 's excusable because we finally see Ned Flanders lose it , big time ! " In 2011 , Keith Plocek of LA Weekly 's Squid Ink blog named the scene in which Homer tries to purchase " beer that has candy floating in it " ( which Homer calls <unk> ) at the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart as the fourth best food moment on the show . 
 The director of the episode , Dominic Polcino , greatly enjoyed the episode , and claims that it is his favorite episode that he directed . 
 = Yugoslav submarine Smeli = 
 The Yugoslav submarine Smeli ( Daring ) was the second of the Osvetnik @-@ class diesel @-@ electric submarines built by Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire , Nantes , France for the navy of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) . She was launched in 1928 , and was built to a partial double hull Simonot design similar to the French Circé class . She was armed with six 550 mm ( 22 in ) torpedo tubes , one 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) gun , and one 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun , and could dive to 80 metres ( 260 ft ) . 
 Prior to World War II she participated in several cruises to Mediterranean ports . During the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , she was captured by Italian forces at the Bay of Kotor . Initially designated N2 , her armament was changed and her conning tower modified . Due to her age and shallow diving depth , when she was commissioned into the Regia Marina as Antonio Bajamonti her service was limited to training and experimentation . She was scuttled at La Spezia in Liguria by the Italians in September 1943 the day after the Italian surrender . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 Yugoslav naval policy in the interwar period lacked direction until the mid @-@ 1920s , although it was generally accepted that the Adriatic coastline was effectively a sea frontier that the naval arm was responsible for securing with the limited resources made available to it . In 1926 , a modest ten @-@ year construction program was initiated to build up a force of submarines , coastal torpedo boats , torpedo bombers and conventional bomber aircraft to perform this role . The Osvetnik @-@ class submarines were one of the acquisitions aimed at developing a naval force capable of meeting this challenge . 
 Smeli was built for the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) by the Ateliers et Chantiers de la Loire company at Nantes , France . Her partial double hull design , was based on a Simonot design , similar to the French Circé @-@ class . Her Serbo @-@ Croatian name translates as " Daring " . Along with her sister submarine of the class , Osvetnik , she had an overall length of 66 @.@ 5 m ( 218 ft 2 in ) , a beam of 5 @.@ 4 m ( 17 ft 9 in ) , and a surfaced draught of 3 @.@ 8 m ( 12 ft 6 in ) . Her surfaced displacement was 630 long tons ( 640 t ) or 809 long tons ( 822 t ) submerged , and her crew consisted of 43 officers and enlisted men . She had an operational depth of 80 m ( 260 ft ) . 
 She had two shafts driven by two MAN ( Maschinenfabrik ) diesel engines ( when surfaced ) or two Nancy electric motors ( when submerged ) , and carried 25 tonnes ( 25 long tons ) of fuel oil . The diesel engines were rated at 1 @,@ 480 bhp ( 1 @,@ 100 kW ) and the electric motors at 1 @,@ 000 shp ( 750 kW ) , and she was designed to reach a top speed of 14 @.@ 5 knots ( 26 @.@ 9 km / h ; 16 @.@ 7 mph ) under diesel power while surfaced , and 9 @.@ 2 knots ( 17 @.@ 0 km / h ; 10 @.@ 6 mph ) on her electric motors when submerged . She was armed with six 550 mm ( 22 in ) torpedo tubes ( four bow @-@ mounted , two stern @-@ mounted ) , one 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) gun , and one 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . She had a surfaced radius of action of 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ; 4 @,@ 000 mi ) at 9 knots ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) , and 75 nautical miles ( 139 km ; 86 mi ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ; 5 @.@ 8 mph ) submerged . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Smeli was the second of her class , and the fourth submarine of the navy of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes , which subsequently became the Royal Yugoslav Navy . She and Osvetnik arrived in the Bay of Kotor on 9 December 1929 . In 1932 , the British naval attaché reported that Yugoslav ships engaged in few exercises , manoeuvres or gunnery training due to reduced budgets . In October 1934 , Smeli visited Bizerte in the French protectorate of Tunisia , and the Kelibia Roads off the coast of Tunisia . In August and September 1937 , Smeli , along with the British @-@ made submarine Hrabri and the depot ship Zmaj visited Greece , including the port of Piraeus , and the islands of Crete and Corfu . 
 When the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia began on 6 April 1941 , she was located in the Bay of Kotor on the southern Adriatic coast along with the three other submarines of the flotilla . She was subsequently captured by the Italian XVII Corps at the Bay of Kotor . Still in good condition , she was taken as war booty , and initially designated N2 . She was refitted and modernised at Pola in the upper Adriatic , which involved the replacement of some of her armament and modifications to her conning tower . After these modifications , her displacement was 665 long tons ( 676 t ) ( 822 long tons ( 835 t ) submerged ) . She was commissioned by the Italians as the Bajamonti @-@ class Antonio Bajamonti , named after Antonio Bajamonti , the 19th @-@ century politician and mayor of the Dalmatian port of Split . Despite her submerged stability and good diving rate , her age and shallow diving depth meant that she was only used for training and experimentation . She was scuttled by the Italians at La Spezia in Liguria on 9 September 1943 , the day after the Italian surrender . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = Robert Keable = 
 Robert Keable ( 6 March 1887 – 22 December 1927 ) was a British novelist , formerly a missionary and priest in the Church of England . He resigned his ministry following his experiences in the First World War and caused a scandal with his 1921 novel Simon Called Peter , the tale of a priest 's wartime affair with a young nurse . The book sold 600 @,@ 000 copies in the 1920s alone , was referenced in The Great Gatsby , and was cited in a double murder investigation . <unk> in the United States , but critically less than well @-@ received , Keable moved to Tahiti where he continued to write , producing both novels and theological works , until his death at age 40 of a kidney complaint . 
 Keable was raised in Bedfordshire and educated at Magdalene College , Cambridge . He entered a theological college after graduation and was ordained a priest in 1911 . He spent the next several years as a missionary in Africa , stationed on Zanzibar and in Basutoland , before returning to Europe as an army chaplain during the First World War . There , he met and fell in love with a young nurse , Grace Eileen Joly Beresford Buck , a development over which he eventually quit the Church of England and left his wife , Sybil . Returning to England after the war , Keable resigned his ministry and began to write novels : his first , 1921 's Simon Called Peter , became a runaway success and launched Keable into a life of literary celebrity . Increasingly disillusioned with the hypocrisies he saw in contemporary British life , he and Buck left Europe for Tahiti in 1922 . The couple lived there happily until Buck 's death in childbirth in 1924 , after which Keable 's health began to fade . He nonetheless struck up a later relationship with a Tahitian woman , Ina , with whom he had a son , and continued to publish novels until his death of a kidney condition in 1927 . 
 Keable 's most famous publication was his first novel , Simon Called Peter , but he produced a prodigious literary output , spanning theological tracts through poetry to travel guides . Simon Called Peter 's sequel , Recompense , was made into a film , and his later novels all attracted substantial attention . His writings generally met with much greater popular than critical approbation , and Simon Called Peter was sufficiently incendiary to be banned . The book nonetheless became a contemporary best @-@ seller . 
 Much of Keable 's fiction contained autobiographical elements , often centring on his attitudes toward and experience of the Christian religious establishment . As well as these fictional explorations he produced a final , non @-@ fiction work , The Great Galilean , outlining the religious views he developed during a lifetime 's uneasy relationship to Anglicanism and Catholicism . He came to believe that the historical Jesus bore little relationship to the Jesus of Christian tradition , and , in The Great Galilean , attempted to reconcile his ambivalence about the orthodoxies of the Church with his enduring belief in an all @-@ loving God . Keable 's views earned him many unfavourable reviews and the contempt of the church in which he had practised , but foreshadowed ideas of free love that became prominent later in the 20th century . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Keable was named after his father , Robert Henry Keable , a successful businessman who in 1904 , when his son was 17 , was ordained an Anglican priest and became vicar at <unk> , Bedfordshire . Robert Keable had a younger brother , Henry , who died of typhoid <unk> The young Keable attended Whitgift School in Croydon , Surrey , where he was nicknamed " <unk> " and noted for his " fluent and facetious " contributions to the school paper , the <unk> . Influenced by his father 's piety he became an active lay preacher and member of the YMCA as a teenager . Keable 's was an austere , Anglican upbringing , the effect of which , his biographer Hugh Cecil has suggested , was to leave the young man industrious , somewhat <unk> in his writing style , and with a <unk> not particularly tied to the specific faith in which he 'd been raised . 
 Keable went up to Magdalene College , Cambridge , in 1905 . His peers there included the future Everest explorer George Mallory and Arthur Tedder , 1st Baron Tedder . Though his contemporaries described him as a quiet , devout student who initially associated only with other " religious @-@ minded " men , he later became more sociable and rowed in the college second eight . He took a first in the History Tripos , graduating with his BA in 1908 and receiving his MA in 1914 . At Magdalene he was a great friend of Arthur Grimble , the future commissioner of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands . Grimble 's daughter , in a biography of her father , described the undergraduate Keable as devout , " earnest , somewhat introspective " and deeply literary . She records that he spent his university vacations on missionary work . He is known also to have taught in East Africa under YMCA auspices , and to have climbed Mount Kilimanjaro . 
 Among the most significant acquaintances Keable made at Cambridge were two brothers among the fellowship , Arthur and Hugh Benson . The Bensons were sons of a highly accomplished academic and religious family ; their father , Edward White Benson , was Archbishop of Canterbury and their mother , Mary Sidgwick Benson , the sister of the philosopher Henry Sidgwick , had set up a lesbian household with Lucy Tait ( daughter of the previous archbishop of Canterbury ) after her husband 's death . In the years just before Keable came to Cambridge Hugh Benson ( the inspiration for Keable 's character " Father Vassall " in Peradventure ( 1921 ) ) had departed from the Anglicanism of his upbringing in favour of the Roman Catholic Church , being ordained a Catholic priest in 1904 . According to Keable 's contemporaries , the two met when <unk> <unk> , a neighbour on Keable 's staircase , invited them both to lunch : " Keable ... fell under the spell of Fr Benson 's winning personality , " wrote James I. James , a college acquaintance of Keable 's : " Keable 's Anglican loyalty remained , but it was a new kind of loyalty . He spoke no more of Protestantism but always of Catholicism ... in Chapel he now <unk> and crossed himself . A strange mystic element deep down in his being began to stir ... I often suspected that Fr Benson had posed to this clever mind – for Keable was clever – the arguments that had recently brought himself to Catholicism . " Benson was also a novelist and , under his influence , the sensory , aesthetic dimension of Keable 's own writing ( and of his faith ) began to develop . Benson sensed in Keable an " inclination to Rome " , but Keable elected for the Anglican priesthood , joining the theological college of Westcott House and serving as canon at Bradford after completing his studies . 
 = = Priesthood = = 
 In 1911 Keable was ordained a priest of the Church of England at Ripon . His friend Hugh Benson regretted that Keable had not turned to Catholicism , a decision Benson felt would lead Keable to ultimate disenchantment with the Church . In a letter he told Keable : 
 You are the first I ever met of whom I could say ' I know that he knows Christ , and that he is turning his back on him ; and I know he knows it <unk> 
 = = = African missions = = = 
 From 1912 – 1914 Keable was sent overseas with the Universities ' Mission to Central Africa , a decision perhaps intended to " save him from Rome " . He served under Frank Weston , the Bishop of Zanzibar , a staunch Anglican with whom Keable clashed : Keable objected to Weston 's unorthodox methods for training black African priests ; Weston , a vehement supporter of these priests , saw prejudice in Keable 's views . Weston was to inspire the " Bishop of Moçambique " character in Keable 's 1921 novel Peradventure . In Africa , Keable wrote his first two books : 1912 's Darkness or Light , a history of the Universities ' Mission to Central Africa , and the manuscript for City of the Dawn ( published in 1915 ) , a portrait of Zanzibar that " showed genuine religious fervour , as well as a characteristic sentimentality . " 
 Keable returned to the UK in 1914 as a result of illness , precipitated perhaps by the rigour of service upon which Weston insisted in Zanzibar . He was offered a church posting in Sheffield but declined , fearing " the pull of Rome " if left within reach of Catholic influences in Britain . Instead , he made two attempts to enlist for armed service during the First World War ; ill health thwarted both , so he returned to Africa for mission work , becoming rector of three parishes ( including <unk> , Basutoland ) , under the diocese of the Bishop of Bloemfontein . He published some ten devotional works and works on missionary practice during this time , including The Loneliness of Christ , and a book of verse titled Songs of the narrow way . The damaging effects of the illness he had suffered were compounded by an assault while in the field : accounts vary , with some friends recalling that Keable received a blow to the head from a " powerful native " , and others describing a gunshot wound to the thigh , inflicted by a ( probably drunk or deranged ) <unk> . Keable 's biographer Cecil has suggested that the whole incident may have been a fabrication of Keable 's . 
 In 1915 Keable married Sybil Armitage at Durban . The pair had met in Bradford ; Sybil was " passionately religious , with a strong social conscience and robust health ... a big , handsome ( some thought beautiful ) woman with auburn hair . " She was well suited to the demands of life as a missionary 's wife , and inspired the character Edith in Keable 's later novel Peradventure , but the pair were temperamentally ill @-@ matched ( and described by Keable 's biographer Cecil as " sexually incompatible " ) . They had no children ; Hugh Benson suspected that the marriage had been a gesture on Keable 's part to render impossible the lingering prospect that he might become a monk . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 Keable eventually achieved his wish of going to war in 1917 , when a South African contingent was mustered for military service in France and Keable volunteered to go with them as chaplain . His experiences there were to form the basis for his first and most successful novel , Simon Called Peter . Appointed an army chaplain on 26 May 1917 , Keable travelled to the Rouen sector with a Native Labour Contingent of 21 @,@ 000 men . These men were paid £ 3 per month to unload supply ships and provide infrastructure support for military operations in Europe . As a chaplain , with the rank of captain , Keable was expected to be at the disposal of the army at large , and ministered to those seeing active infantry service as well as to labourers . Padres were formally required to remain behind the lines , but it is apparent that Keable nonetheless saw something of the realities of the frontline . 
 Like many padres during the First World War , Keable reassessed his approach to his congregation . The men to whom he ministered , he came to believe , cared nothing for the finer points of Anglican theological dispute : from the church they wanted only " entertainment and a barely spiritual form of practical Christianity . " Keable argued as much openly , suggesting that the Protestant chaplaincy in France should be amalgamated into the operations of the YMCA , and that only the Roman Catholic padres – who seemed to have quite a different , more immediate relationship with their Celtic and Lancastrian companies – should remain . His public airing of these views attracted censure from the church ( and particularly from Frank Weston , who was also serving ) , but reflected the openness that made him popular with the officers in France . A smoker , he was known to share whisky and sodas in the officers ' mess , and – as does the title character in Simon Called Peter – to have become acquainted with a devoutly religious French prostitute . 
 Another transformative experience of Keable 's war was his acquaintance with Grace Eileen Joly Beresford Buck , known as " Jolie " , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old nurse from a prominent British family ( the daughter of William Tenant Buck and Beatrice Elinor Biddulph Beresford ; her ancestors included the Dukes of Rutland ) who was driving trucks for the Canadian Lumber Corps when the two met . The pair began a lifelong affair , though Keable did not yet leave his wife . Instead , at the war 's close , he returned to <unk> . He remained until 1919 , torn by his increasing alienation from the church and his experiences during the war . There he wrote his first novel , Simon Called Peter , in an intensive 20 @-@ day spell : " I laid a parson 's life bare " , he said of his writing , " and didn 't care a damn . " At last , in 1919 , Keable resigned his ministry and left the Anglican church . 
 = = Literary career = = 
 After leaving the church Keable and Sybil moved back to England , settling at West <unk> , Cambridgeshire , where both began to explore the Roman Catholic Church . Sybil converted and became a devout Catholic , but Keable also read works in contemporary philosophy and the books of Charles Darwin , and appears briefly to have lost his faith altogether . He wrote , of the history of Christianity , " I can see creative evolution at work . What is behind it , I don 't know . But I 'm inclined to think that I do not believe it is anything which the old concept of God really covers . " 
 To support the family Keable worked during 1921 as an assistant @-@ master at Dulwich College , and served the following year at Dunstable Grammar School . He continued to write : the manuscript for Simon Called Peter had found a publisher , Michael Sadleir at Constable , who liked its prospects and commissioned from Keable a second novel . He commenced The Mother of All Living , " an intense love @-@ drama set in South Africa " , which reflected his new interest in African traditional religion and featured a <unk> concept of " life @-@ force " as an alternative to theology . 
 Then Simon Called Peter was published , and met with astonishing success . The book reportedly sold over 600 @,@ 000 copies during the 1920s , reaching a 66th edition by 1922 . A largely autobiographical work , Simon Called Peter is the tale of a priest , Peter Graham , who has an affair in wartime France with a nurse named Julie . The title character almost abandons his faith for love , but experiences a direct revelation of Christ while watching a Catholic mass and is given up by his lover , who sees his sincerity . Its runaway popularity won Keable a level of celebrity : he spent a lot of time in London and took up again with Buck , who was now usually known as " Betty " ( she , by her token , called Keable " Bill " ) . The two met often at Gwen Otter 's salon at No. 1 Ralston Street , in Chelsea , near to where Keable had lodgings ; they made many friends , though refrained from fully overt displays of <unk> out of deference to Buck 's distressed parents and Keable 's wife . At this time , Keable appears to have become , in some measure , a proponent of open relationships and free love . He concluded that Buck had a right to pursue relationships with other men , though there is no firm evidence that she did , and " that a warm and spontaneous sexual nature , far from being in conflict with Christian love , was in fact a manifestation of it . " 
 Keable 's developing attitudes and relationship with " Betty " disgusted his wife , Sybil , but as a devout Catholic she refused to divorce . This left Keable unable to marry Buck , and contributed to a growing sense on his part of alienation from English society . At last , in 1922 , he managed legally to separate from his wife . He took up the suggestion of former college friend Arthur Grimble , by then a colonial administrator in the Ellice Islands , that he visit the South Pacific , a fashionable destination for 1920s Europeans . To Keable the South Seas appeared to offer escape from the hypocrisies of British society , as well as furnishing a climate better suited to his never @-@ hearty constitution . In 1922 Keable and Buck sailed aboard the Bendigo for the South Pacific via Australia , where Keable undertook a book tour , giving lectures in which he broadcast his new sexual ethics : that unmarried couples in love could have deeply moral relationships , while loveless spouses who stayed together for convention 's sake were committing acts of deep immorality . His views scandalised the contemporary press , but Frank Weston noted in correspondence that Keable as a " shipwrecked priest " made quite a useful cautionary tale for novices . 
 = = Tahiti = = 
 Keable was to remain resident in Tahiti for the rest of his life . He wrote once of his regret that the Tahitians had not succeeded in converting William Ellis , a nineteenth @-@ century Christian missionary sent there to attempt to proselytise them . " Bill and Betty " settled at first in Paul Gauguin 's former home at <unk> . The house was quite luxurious , overlooking a bay with views of Moorea island . Buck drove a Dodge and enjoyed Tahiti 's ample supplies of cheap French wine ; Keable " brooded on Gauguin 's gesture against spiritual suffocation " , and eventually moved the household further inland , to a native @-@ style house in the wilder surrounds of <unk> , near <unk> . The couple made friends with the Swedish artist Paul <unk> . Keable continued to write copiously , adding to his oeuvre the novel Recompense , a sequel to Simon Called Peter . He undertook several book tours of the United States and spent his spare time answering fanmail , swimming , and sailing . 
 Then , in 1924 , Buck fell pregnant . The couple agreed that she should return to England for better healthcare during the birth , and she went there to set up a home with her mother 's help . In early November 1924 she gave birth prematurely to a son , Anthony , and a few days later died of poisoning from chloroform administered against the pain of delivery . The grief @-@ stricken Keable 's own health worsened and he was advised to return to Tahiti ; the baby , too weak to travel , was left in England with Jack and Rita Elliott , friends of the couple 's since the Ralston Street salon days . The <unk> were eventually to adopt him . 
 Keable remained in Tahiti , his health worsening . He suffered weight loss , diabetes , high blood pressure and fever , all stemming from a kidney illness . Nonetheless , he completed the novel Numerous Treasure , which he had begun before Buck 's death ; the bittersweet tale of a Polynesian woman who shared her name with a cocktail and a brand of cigarettes was a commercial success , and has been considered a valuable portrait of early @-@ century Tahitian life . His health and spirits rallied in the years after Buck 's death : he completed a travel book , Tahiti , Isle of Dreams , and a book tour of the United States and Europe . On returning to Tahiti he struck up a relationship with a mixed @-@ race islander named Ina , and made many new friends including the writers Alec Waugh ( elder brother of Evelyn ) , who had been inspired to visit Tahiti by Numerous Treasure , Zane Grey , and James Norman Hall . Waugh described the Keable of this period " reclined among cushions , clad only in a <unk> , while his Tahitian princess , bare @-@ shouldered and bare @-@ footed , her black hair falling to her waist and a white flower behind her ear , glided negligently about the house " – and yet noted that , on suggesting a cup of tea , Keable 's voice still took on " the <unk> intonation with which fifteen years earlier he had summoned the parish children to a Sunday school treat . " 
 1927 's Lighten Our Darkness ( or Ann Decides ) was his last important novel . The tale of a Catholic priest restored to faith by a woman 's love was , however , poorly received , and the follow @-@ up Madness of Monty , a " kindly , innocuous comedy " , went over worse still . Instead , helped by James Norman Hall to overcome his failing eyesight , Keable devoted his attention to The Great Galilean , a non @-@ fictional account of the historical Jesus and his relationship to the Jesus of religious tradition . 
 Away from his writing , he and Ina conceived a child : Ina gave birth to a son , named Henry <unk> ( meaning " glorious warrior " ) , with whom Keable was delighted and to whom he bequeathed all his Tahitian properties . In November 1927 he initiated formal divorce proceedings against Sybil in an attempt to legitimise this son . 
 In December 1927 Keable contracted a worsened kidney infection , became septic and delirious , and , on 22 December , died at home . The New York Times obituary identified the illness that killed him as Bright 's disease ; the term was used to refer to a number of nephritic kidney conditions . 
 Though , according to acquaintances , many of his friends had heard nothing from him since his departure for Tahiti , his will made provision for a scholarship at Magdalene and named the college as his residuary legatee . His literary assets at death were valued at £ 5 @,@ 007 . Though Keable received a Protestant burial in Papeete , some accounts suggest that in the last weeks of his life he formally converted to Catholicism . Other commentators suggest the pagan sentiments he expressed about the birth of his new son as a riposte to social convention tend to indicate otherwise . Hugh Cecil argues that , at his death , Keable most likely just became " able to reconcile his two ideals , romantic @-@ erotic and religious , and could die peacefully accepting the rituals he loved . " 
 = = Religious views = = 
 The religious views Keable developed after leaving the Church of England influenced his novels ; he eventually articulated his own theology in his final book , The Great Galilean , a theological work . The unorthodoxy of his views was not always well received . A reviewer of his novel Peradventure observed " Peradventure starts as a Church of England tract , becomes what would appear to be a Roman Catholic tract , and before the end is reached the reader is in doubt as to just what sort of tract it is . " 
 His last book , The Great Galilean , has been characterised by one biographer as Keable 's attempt " to <unk> his love of Jesus with his failure to believe in him as a God . " The book sought to distinguish the " historical Jesus " of record from the " traditional Jesus " of church worship . The historical Jesus , Keable said , was so poorly known that there survived too little information for a three @-@ line obituary . Instead , the figure that Christians worshipped was a " traditional Jesus " , recorded in the Gospels from an oral tradition that was not really biographical . This " traditional Jesus " became a " literary Jesus " , the central figure of the four gospels , and it is on this figure – quite distinct from the actual , historical Jesus – that the contemporary church centred . Keable sought to criticise the attitude in the contemporary church toward " traditional Jesus " , given how much of the rest of " traditional " religion Protestantism had discarded . However , Keable was at pains to stress that the " traditional " Jesus should not be seen as an imposture , or something to be discarded . The <unk> of the traditional Jesus , he said , should not be a reason to leave the church . Without this traditional Jesus , he predicted , Western civilisation would fade and fall . He was , then , critical of the specific ways in which the contemporary church construed Jesus , in its attempts to conflate the traditional Jesus with historical Jesus , which Keable considered impossible . He blamed these actions of the church for the declining numbers of worshippers , and accused it of draining Christianity of profundity by relying too heavily on rationalism and rigid structure . 
 Though he believed that the historical Jesus was barely known , Keable nonetheless devoted much attention in The Last Galilean to trying to understand the figure . He emphasised the humanity of historical Jesus , who , he wrote , had shared humanity 's ignorance – though had also been blessed with an extraordinarily undistorted mind . He wrote of a Jesus tolerant – even fond – of sinners , and one who , understanding the importance of love and sex to the average man , advocated love as the most important thing , above any church rule or regulation . This Jesus was a great prophet of free love , associated and in harmony with a " spirit of all life " . 
 The Great Galilean was not well received . The New York Times reviewer called it hopelessly muddled , finding Keable 's claims about the <unk> of Jesus contrary to his efforts to understand and worship him : " Frankly , we do not know what to make of it . We can only suppose that street preaching at Cambridge , and even climbing Kilimanjaro , are not conducive to logic . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Keable 's novels won him immense international popularity and intense controversy . His novels were equated with Mrs Humphry Ward 's Robert Elsmere , a similarly scandalous tale of religious doubt among the clergy published 40 years earlier : <unk> Major , editor of the Modern Churchman magazine , made this comparison with respect to Keable 's Peradventure , noting " It is slighter , but it has need to be . The twentieth century novel reader is intellectually and morally lighter than the nineteenth . " Reporting his death , the Melbourne Argus attributed the best @-@ selling popularity of Keable 's novels to the licentiousness of their contents : " they have no literary value " . His former college acquaintance James later wrote that " his friends sought to dissuade him from publication . The transition from the beautiful book on The Loneliness of Christ ( 1914 ) – of his Central African period – to Simon Called Peter ( 1921 ) came as a great shock to all who had known and loved him in earlier days . " Where Rosemary Grimble calls Keable 's novels " splendidly erotic " , a Birmingham News correspondent in Birmingham , Alabama , accused Keable of " fashioning abnormalities " . Other critics called his success " undeserved " and attributed it to <unk> on the part of his readers . Reviewers also suggested that the contrast between Keable 's ecclesiastical background and the frank , often sexual , content of his novels attracted curiosity in itself . A Time columnist , " J.F. " , expressed the fascination of this disconnect overtly , responding to a piece titled " The censorship of thought " that Keable had contributed to a 1922 volume , <unk> ( sic ) , after Simon Called Peter 's publication had made him notorious . " Surely , here is a modern personality worth the study of the psychologists , " J.F. wrote , noting the romance of Keable 's unusual circumstances : " From a quiet English clergyman to the author of a sensational best @-@ seller who has taken up his permanent residence in the South Seas seems a long jump . " In person , he said , Keable was the antithesis of his novels ' striking directness : 
 He does not impress one as a radical gentleman . There is nothing to suggest the resigned clergyman , author of books marked by their sex frankness and melodrama . In fact , his scholarly bearing and gentleness mark him rather as the country curate , who should be acting as a character in a novel by May Sinclair and passing out crumpets to maiden ladies in a decorous drawing @-@ room instead of writing of Tahitian damsels as he has done in his new novel , Numerous Treasure . 
 It was for Simon Called Peter , a tale of a wartime romance between an English priest and a Red Cross nurse , that Keable acquired most of his notoriety . As well as its best @-@ selling print editions , the story was adapted as a stage play by Jules Eckert Goodman and Edward Knoblock in 1924 . The show enjoyed popular success in Chicago before moving on to New York . 
 A great deal of media coverage of Simon Called Peter concerned its involvement in a prominent United States court case , over the double murder in New Brunswick , New Jersey of Edward Wheeler Hall , a rector , and <unk> Mills , a married member of his congregation , with whom he had been conducting an affair . During their courtship Hall had presented Mills with copies of Simon Called Peter , which also featured a romance between a priest and a woman , and The Mother of All Living . John Sumner , the secretary of the Society for the Suppression of Vice , seized upon this fact and tried to have the books ' American publisher arrested . He claimed that Simon Called Peter could be used to corrupt and seduce the innocent : " Published with a title savouring of religion and written by a clergyman , it had an innocent look which admitted it to society where the ordinary licentious novel could not circulate . " A magistrate , declining the request to issue an arrest warrant against the publisher , nonetheless agreed that the book was " nasty " and " particularly objectionable because written by a clergyman . " 
 Shortly afterwards , a Boston judge deemed the book obscene , and fined a librarian ( who protested that she had a long queue of patrons waiting to borrow the book ) US $ 100 for circulating it . Keable himself professed surprise at the intensity of the reaction to the book , saying that his missionary and military experiences must have " blunted [ his ] perceptions as to what the general public felt . " In response to the banning in Boston of another of his books , Numerous Treasure , he wrote to his editor George Putnam that he had in the past month received fanmail from a bookseller , a request for his photograph from a girls ' high school library , and " an intimation that I had been adopted as the literary patron of a class at an American university . I feel vaguely that Boston ought to be told . " 
 The net effect of the Simon Called Peter controversy was to make Keable a celebrity . The book became so well known that F. Scott Fitzgerald , who described the novel as " really immoral " , gave it to protagonist Nick Carraway to read in his famous novel The Great Gatsby , and had the character pronounce " Either it was terrible stuff or the whiskey distorted things , because it didn 't make sense to me . " The book 's sequel , Recompense , was optioned as a film by Warner Brothers , starring Marie Prevost and Monte Blue . Keable himself found the screenplay so altered from the original text , he wryly proposed that he write another novel based on it . His first visit to the United States , in autumn 1924 , was announced in the New York Times ; he took in a production of the Simon Called Peter stage play in New York before returning to Polynesia via New Orleans , Los Angeles , and San Francisco . On his return , the Times printed a very lengthy letter from Keable on the subject of the origins of the cocktail , headlining it " Robert Keable , in His Tahiti Retreat , Makes a Case for Englishmen , or Their " Greek and Roman Ancestors , " as the Inventors . " 
 The same paper had received Keable 's second novel , 1922 's The Mother of All Living , favourably ; reviewer Louise <unk> Fields called it " Not only ... better from an artistic point of view [ than Simon Called Peter ] ... its general outlook is both steadier and more mature . [ ... ] the book has in it so much that is well done and worth while that one does not feel inclined to carp at its comparatively few weaknesses . " On the whole , other reviews were less favourable . The characters in both Peradventure and Recompense were criticised for lacking depth : reviewers said they served only as vehicles for conveying different theoretical points of view . A later book , 1927 's Ann Decides , was dismissed succinctly by the Chicago Daily Tribune as " tosh " . 
 P.W. Wilson , in a New York Times piece on contemporary religious literature two years after Keable had died , called Keable 's life " a spiritual tragedy " , and described his thinking as fundamentally contradictory : 
 " His mind , like rock , reveals by strata the volcanic and other experiences to which it has been subjected . " 
 Keable 's distinction between the historical and the traditional Jesus , Wilson argued , was ultimately muddled and internally inconsistent , his verdicts on the <unk> of the contemporary church at odds with his own abiding conviction . 
 Late in the 20th century Keable received some revisionist attention . Simon Called Peter came back into print , with a recent edition published in 2008 . Biographer Hugh Cecil , including Keable in his 1995 anthology of neglected Great War writers , concluded : 
 From early in his career he had used his talents to the full and seized life with both hands . His works , though seldom read now , were no mean achievement , intellectually or artistically , even if their high quality was rarely sustained throughout a whole book ... Robert Keable was quintessentially the divided twentieth century man , yearning for self @-@ realization and for a faith , and full of guilt and self @-@ hatred . Yet as we have seen , Simon Called Peter is not an unhappy book ... Robert 's experience of war ... seemed to reveal the nature of real goodness , loyalty , and love . 
 = Fire Station No. 23 ( Los Angeles , California ) = 
 Fire Station No. 23 is a former fire station in Downtown Los Angeles . Built in 1910 as an operating fire station , it was also the Los Angeles Fire Department 's headquarters until 1920 and the residence of every fire chief from 1910 @-@ 1928 . When it opened , it spawned a political firestorm due to the ornate interior and expensive imported materials , leading to its being called the " Taj Mahal " of firehouses . After 50 years of operation , the station was closed in 1960 as the department began replacing older stations with new facilities . Since the 1980s , Fire Station No. 23 has been a popular filming location . Motion pictures filmed at the station include the Ghostbusters movies , The Mask , Police Academy 2 , Flatliners , Firehouse and National Security . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction controversy = = = 
 In June 1909 , the city of Los Angeles announced plans to build a three @-@ story fire station in the heart of the wholesale and manufacturing district that would also serve as the fire department 's headquarters . The projected cost of the station was placed at $ 35 @,@ 000 . 
 When the station opened in September 1910 at a final cost of $ 53 @,@ 000 , a controversy arose over the cost and use of expensive materials , including Peruvian mahogany in the chief 's living quarters . It was considered the " most elaborate and richest engine @-@ house west of New York " and maybe the " most ornate ... in this or any other world . " The Los Angeles Times reported on its opulence as follows : 
 " It is the interior which is to reincarnate man and beast in the fire department . It is the interior which is a sort of Nirvana for a soulful legion of blue @-@ shirted civil service graduates . Its spell will be hypnotic , for if the visitor starts in with the third floor he will leave by Winston Street in stupefaction . " 
 The building was an unusually narrow structure , only 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) wide but 167 feet ( 51 m ) deep stretching the entire distance from Fifth to Winston Streets . The main floor was an arcade connecting Fifth and Winston Streets with stalls for ten horses , repressed vitrified brick , walls of white enamel tiling , and pressed steel ceilings 21 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) above the floor . More than anything else , it was the extravagant third floor living quarters , described as " the chief 's boudoir " and a " palace for chiefs , " that drew the most attention . Access to the third floor was by a private elevator that " moves noiselessly and stealthily to the upper haven . " The third floor was covered in Peruvian mahogany with French bevel glass mirrors , a mantel of Vermont marble , polished inlaid oak floors , a private slide pole , a massive brass bed , private roof garden , and " a tub big enough for two chiefs . " The Times reported : " Notice the Peruvian mahogany carefully , and you will see that the heart of the log has been chosen and that its grain has been placed so that it gives the appearance of real flames . Certainly the esthetic for the reception room of the engine @-@ house de luxe . " The chief 's apartment alone was reported to have cost $ 25 @,@ 000 . The Times noted that the quarters rivaled the finest suites in the country , referred to it as a " <unk> effort , " and offered its sarcastic speculation that the house captain would be expected to " wear evening dress after 6 o 'clock , at least . " 
 The unveiling of the ornate fire station set off " a political and civic storm . " It was called a waste of taxpayer funds , as critics contended " three station houses could be built for what this cost . " Amid the outcry , city fire commissioners denied knowledge that the fire house was to have been so luxurious , though newspapers reported that the commissioners had approved the plans . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 Fire Station No. 23 remained an active firehouse from 1910 @-@ 1960 . When it opened , it was manned by fifteen firefighters and ten horses . The original equipment included a horse wagon , chief 's buggy , and a pumper that used a vertical tube boiler . The company 's first major call was a fire in the old Byrne Building that took ten hours to extinguish . 
 The station also served as the department 's headquarters from 1910 – 1920 , and the home for every fire chief from 1910 to 1928 , including chief Ralph J. Scott . Chief Scott 's wife , Addie Scott , lived with him on the third floor and later recalled the station 's early days : " I remember the horses . They really knew what to do . When the bell would ring , they would come out and stand there to be hitched up . ... It was a nice life here for us . ... I remember trying to wax all these floors , and I just couldn 't do it . So someone came and helped me . This is a lot of floor space you know . " 
 Fire Station No. 23 was closed in November 1960 as the Los Angeles Fire Department began replacing older stations with newer stations with modern facilities . At the time of its closure , some of the 1 @,@ 100 men who had worked there attended a ceremony as the building was " mustered out of service . " 
 = = Museum = = 
 = = = Historic status = = = 
 In 1966 , the station was declared a Historic Cultural Monument by the Los Angeles Cultural Heritage Commission ; at the time of the declaration the Los Angeles Times called it the " Taj Mahal of fire stations . " A Library of Congress survey of 250 firehouses concluded that Station 23 's interior was " unmatched in its beauty . " It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1980 . 
 = = = Controversy over restoration = = = 
 Through the 1960s and 1970s , the station deteriorated . The surrounding neighborhood became part of the city 's Skid Row and the station became " a hangout for the street people . " Looters stole most of the copper tubing and brasswork , banisters , doorknobs , <unk> , and even the five brass <unk> . 
 By the mid @-@ 1970s , concerns were raised that the building had become a hazard , and some proposed tearing it down . However , in 1979 , the Fire Commission announced plans to restore the rooms back to their 1910 condition and turn the station into a museum . The City Council placed the station under control of the fire department , but provided that no city funds were to be used in creating the museum . 
 In 1981 , officials of the fire department set up a nonprofit organization called Olde 23 to raise funds to build the museum , but sufficient funds were never raised . The projected cost of the museum , even in 1982 , was $ 1 million , and critics questioned the wisdom of building a museum in Skid Row . In 1988 , the city settled on a different location for the Los Angeles Fire Department Museum — Engine Co . No. 27 in Hollywood . 
 Fire Station No. 23 became the subject of controversy again in 1995 when the Los Angeles Times ran a 2 @,@ 200 @-@ word , front @-@ page article reporting on alleged misuse of city funds by Olde 23 , the nonprofit charged with restoration of the station . Even though plans for the fire department museum had shifted to another location years earlier , Olde 23 continued to live on , banking more than $ 200 @,@ 000 in fees from film and television producers using the station house as a shooting location . The Times reported that ex @-@ Chief Donald O. Manning had not told other city agencies about Olde 23 's continued operations , and Olde 23 had failed to turn over the income , as required by city law . Investigations by the Times and the City Controller also revealed that some filming fees had been paid in cash to James Croak , an American artist who leased the building from the City of Los Angeles from 1978 – 85 , but no illegality was found as Mr. Croak had the right to sub @-@ lease the property for short periods as long as he notified the landlord that he was doing so . Notably Mr. Croak used most of the money to replace missing brass fire poles , balustrades and other period fixtures that were missing . Other fees were not accounted for , and Olde 23 the museum Non @-@ Profit had even collected fees for use of other city fire stations as shooting locations . Also , even after the city chose a new location for a fire department museum , the chief did not use the funds collected by " Olde 23 " for the museum . The controversy came to light after an angry official for Warner Bros. wrote a memorandum complaining about " donations " to the Fire Department and referring to such donations as " extortion . " 
 = = Filming location = = 
 Since 1978 when James Croak occupied the building after an 18 @-@ year vacancy , Fire Station No. 23 became a popular filming location for motion pictures , television productions , commercials , and music videos . In 1995 , the Los Angeles Times wrote : " With its finely restored interior and turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century architecture , old Fire Station 23 in Downtown Los Angeles is one of the choicest filming locations in town . " One producer called it " a great raw architectural space that you can do a lot with . " 
 The first major motion picture filmed at Station 23 was Hammett ( 1982 ) by German director Wim Wenders , followed two years later by Ghostbusters . The station was used in the 1984 production as the location for the interior scenes of the headquarters of Drs. <unk> , <unk> and Spengler and Winston <unk> . Another station in New York , the Hook & Ladder Company 8 firehouse , was used for the exterior shots . The success of Ghostbusters helped popularize the station as a shooting location , and Fire Station No. 23 has since then been used in more than 50 productions , including Big Trouble in Little China ( 1986 ) , Ghostbusters II ( 1989 ) , The Mask ( 1994 ) , Police Academy 2 ( 1985 ) , A @-@ Team ( 1986 ) and V.I. <unk> ( 1991 ) , Flatliners ( 1991 ) , Lost Highway ( 1997 ) , National Security ( 2003 ) , and RE ( e ) <unk> ( 2005 ) . 
 = British Library = 
 The British Library is the national library of the United Kingdom and the largest library in the world by number of items catalogued . A Grade I listed building , the library is a major research library , holding around 170 million items from many countries , in many languages and in many formats , both print and digital : books , manuscripts , journals , newspapers , magazines , sound and music recordings , videos , play @-@ scripts , patents , databases , maps , stamps , prints , drawings . The Library 's collections include around 14 million books , along with substantial holdings of manuscripts and historical items dating back as far as 2000 BC . 
 As a legal deposit library , the British Library receives copies of all books produced in the United Kingdom and Ireland , including a significant proportion of overseas titles distributed in the UK . It also has a programme for content acquisitions . The British Library adds some three million items every year occupying 9 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 0 mi ) of new shelf space . 
 The library is a non @-@ departmental public body sponsored by the Department for Culture , Media and Sport . It is located on the north side of Euston Road in St Pancras , London ( between Euston railway station and St Pancras railway station ) and has a document storage centre and reading room near Boston Spa , 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) east of Wetherby in West Yorkshire . 
 In 1973 , the British Library Act 1972 detached the library department from the British Museum , but it continued to host the now separated British Library in the same Reading Room and building as the museum until the library moved to a purpose @-@ built building at St Pancras , London . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 The British Library was created on 1 July 1973 as a result of the British Library Act 1972 . Prior to this , the national library was part of the British Museum , which provided the bulk of the holdings of the new library , alongside smaller organisations which were folded in ( such as the National Central Library , the National Lending Library for Science and Technology and the British National Bibliography ) . In 1974 functions previously exercised by the Office for Scientific and Technical Information were taken over ; in 1982 the India Office Library and Records and the HMSO <unk> became British Library responsibilities . In 1983 , the Library absorbed the National Sound Archive , which holds many sound and video recordings , with over a million discs and thousands of tapes . 
 The core of the Library 's historical collections is based on a series of donations and acquisitions from the 18th century , known as the " foundation collections " . These include the books and manuscripts of Sir Robert Cotton , Sir Hans Sloane , Robert Harley and the King 's Library of King George III , as well as the Old Royal Library donated by King George II . 
 For many years its collections were dispersed in various buildings around central London , in places such as Bloomsbury ( within the British Museum ) , Chancery Lane , Bayswater , and Holborn with an interlibrary lending centre at Boston Spa , Wetherby in West Yorkshire ( situated on Thorp Arch Trading Estate ) and the newspaper library at Colindale , north @-@ west London . 
 Initial plans for the British Library required demolition of an integral part of Bloomsbury – a seven @-@ acre swathe of streets immediately in front of the Museum , so that the Library could be situated directly opposite . After a long and hard @-@ fought campaign led by Dr George Wagner , this decision was overturned and the library was instead constructed by John Laing plc on a site at Euston Road next to St Pancras railway station . 
 From 1997 to 2009 the main collection was housed in this single new building and the collection of British and overseas newspapers was housed at Colindale . In July 2008 the Library announced that it would be moving low @-@ use items to a new storage facility in Boston Spa in Yorkshire and that it planned to close the newspaper library at Colindale , ahead of a later move to a similar facility on the same site . From January 2009 to April 2012 over 200 km of material was moved to the Additional Storage Building and is now delivered to British Library Reading Rooms in London on request by a daily shuttle service . Construction work on the Newspaper Storage Building was completed in 2013 and the newspaper library at Colindale closed on 8 November 2013 . The collection has now been split between the St Pancras and Boston Spa sites . The British Library Document Supply Service ( BLDSS ) and the Library 's Document Supply Collection is based on the same site in Boston Spa . Collections housed in Yorkshire , comprising low @-@ use material and the newspaper and Document Supply collections , make up around 70 % of the total material the library holds . The Library previously had a book storage depot in Woolwich , south @-@ east London , which is no longer in use . 
 The new library was designed specially for the purpose by the architect Colin St John Wilson . Facing Euston Road is a large piazza that includes pieces of public art , such as large sculptures by Eduardo Paolozzi ( a bronze statue based on William Blake 's study of Isaac Newton ) and Antony Gormley . It is the largest public building constructed in the United Kingdom in the 20th century . 
 In the middle of the building is a six @-@ storey glass tower inspired by a similar structure in the Beinecke Library , containing the King 's Library with 65 @,@ 000 printed volumes along with other pamphlets , manuscripts and maps collected by King George III between 1763 and 1820 . In December 2009 a new storage building at Boston Spa was opened by Rosie Winterton . The new facility , costing £ 26 million , has a capacity for seven million items , stored in more than 140 @,@ 000 bar @-@ coded containers , which are retrieved by robots , from the 162 @.@ 7 miles of temperature and humidity @-@ controlled storage space . 
 On Friday , 5 April 2013 , Lucie Burgess , the British Library 's head of content strategy , announced that , starting that weekend , the Library would begin saving all sites with the suffix .uk ( every British website , e @-@ book , online newsletter , and blog ) in a bid to preserve the nation 's " digital memory " ( which as of then amounted to about 4 @.@ 8 million sites containing 1 billion web pages ) . The Library would make all the material publicly available to users by the end of 2013 , and would ensure that , through technological advancements , all the material is preserved for future generations , despite the fluidity of the Internet . 
 The building was Grade I listed on 1 August 2015 . 
 = = Legal deposit = = 
 In England , Legal Deposit can be traced back to at least 1610 . The Copyright Act 1911 established the principle of the legal deposit , ensuring that the British Library and five other libraries in Great Britain and Ireland are entitled to receive a free copy of every item published or distributed in Britain . The other five libraries are : the Bodleian Library at Oxford ; the University Library at Cambridge ; the Trinity College Library at Dublin ; and the National Libraries of Scotland and Wales . The British Library is the only one that must automatically receive a copy of every item published in Britain ; the others are entitled to these items , but must specifically request them from the publisher after learning that they have been or are about to be published , a task done centrally by the Agency for the Legal Deposit Libraries . 
 Further , under the terms of Irish copyright law ( most recently the Copyright and Related Rights Act 2000 ) , the British Library is entitled to automatically receive a free copy of every book published in Ireland , alongside the National Library of Ireland , the Trinity College Library at Dublin , the library of the University of Limerick , the library of Dublin City University and the libraries of the four constituent universities of the National University of Ireland . The Bodleian Library , Cambridge University Library , and the National Libraries of Scotland and Wales are also entitled to copies of material published in Ireland , but again must formally make requests . 
 In 2003 the Ipswich MP Chris Mole introduced a Private Member 's Bill which became the Legal Deposit Libraries Act 2003 . The Act extends United Kingdom legal deposit requirements to electronic documents , such as CD @-@ ROMs and selected websites . 
 The Library also holds the Asia , Pacific and Africa Collections ( APAC ) which include the India Office Records and materials in the languages of Asia and of north and north @-@ east Africa . 
 = = Using the library 's reading rooms = = 
 The Library is open to everyone who has a genuine need to use its collections . Anyone with a permanent address who wishes to carry out research can apply for a Reader Pass ; they are required to provide proof of signature and address . 
 Historically , only those wishing to use specialised material unavailable in other public or academic libraries would be given a Reader Pass . The Library has been criticised for admitting numbers of undergraduate students , who have access to their own university libraries , to the reading rooms . The Library replied that it has always admitted undergraduates as long as they have a legitimate personal , work @-@ related or academic research purpose . 
 The majority of catalogue entries can be found on Explore the British Library , the Library 's main catalogue , which is based on Primo . Other collections have their own catalogues , such as western manuscripts . The large reading rooms offer hundreds of seats which are often filled with researchers , especially during the Easter and summer holidays . 
 British Library Reader Pass holders are also able to view the Document Supply Collection in the Reading Room at the Library 's site in Boston Spa in Yorkshire as well as the hard copy newspaper collection from 29 September 2014 . Now that access is available to legal deposit collection material , it is necessary for visitors to register as a Reader to use the Boston Spa Reading Room . 
 = = Material available online = = 
 The British Library makes a number of images of items within its collections available online . Its Online Gallery gives access to 30 @,@ 000 images from various medieval books , together with a handful of exhibition @-@ style items in a proprietary format , such as the Lindisfarne Gospels . This includes the facility to " turn the virtual pages " of a few documents , such as Leonardo da Vinci 's notebooks . Catalogue entries for a large number of the illuminated manuscript collections are available online , with selected images of pages or miniatures from a growing number of them , and there is a database of significant <unk> . British Library Sounds provides free online access to over 60 @,@ 000 sound recordings . 
 The British Library 's commercial secure electronic delivery service was started in 2003 at a cost of £ 6 million . This offers more than 100 million items ( including 280 @,@ 000 journal titles , 50 million patents , 5 million reports , 476 @,@ 000 US dissertations and 433 @,@ 000 conference proceedings ) for researchers and library patrons worldwide which were previously unavailable outside the Library because of copyright restrictions . In line with a government directive that the British Library must cover a percentage of its operating costs , a fee is charged to the user . However , this service is no longer profitable and has led to a series of restructures to try to prevent further losses . When Google Books started , the British Library signed an agreement with Microsoft to digitise a number of books from the British Library for its Live Search Books project . This material was only available to readers in the US , and closed in May 2008 . The scanned books are currently available via the British Library catalogue or Amazon . 
 In October 2010 the British Library launched its Management and business studies portal . This website is designed to allow digital access to management research reports , consulting reports , working papers and articles . 
 In November 2011 , four million newspaper pages from the 18th and 19th centuries were made available online . The project will scan up to 40 million pages over the next 10 years . The archive is free to search , but there is a charge for accessing the pages themselves . 
 = = Electronic collections = = 
 Explore the British Library is the latest iteration of the online catalogue . It contains nearly 57 million records and may be used to search , view and order items from the collections or search the contents of the Library 's website . The Library 's electronic collections include over 40 @,@ 000 <unk> , 800 databases and other electronic resources . A number of these are available for remote access to registered St Pancras Reader Pass holders . 
 = = Digital Library System = = 
 In 2012 , the UK legal deposit libraries signed a memorandum of understanding to create a shared technical infrastructure implementing the Digital Library System developed by the British Library . The <unk> was in anticipation of the Legal Deposit Libraries ( Non @-@ Print Works ) Regulations 2013 , an extension of the Legal Deposit Libraries Act 2003 to include non @-@ print electronic publications from 6 April 2013 . Four storage nodes , located in London , Boston Spa , Aberystwyth , and Edinburgh , linked via a secure network in constant communication automatically replicate , self ‐ check , and repair data . A complete crawl of every .uk domain ( and other TLD 's with UK based server <unk> ) has been added annually to the <unk> since 2013 , which also contains all of the Internet Archive 's 1996 @-@ 2013 .uk collection . The policy and system is based on that of the Bibliothèque nationale de France , which has crawled ( via IA until 2010 ) the <unk> domain annually ( <unk> 's in 2015 ) since 2006 . 
 = = Exhibitions = = 
 A number of books and manuscripts are on display to the general public in the Sir John Ritblat Gallery which is open seven days a week at no charge . Some of the manuscripts in the exhibition include Beowulf , the Lindisfarne Gospels and St Cuthbert Gospel , a Gutenberg Bible , Geoffrey Chaucer 's Canterbury Tales , Thomas Malory 's Le Morte d 'Arthur ( King Arthur ) , Captain Cook 's journal , Jane Austen 's History of England , Charlotte Brontë 's Jane Eyre , Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures Under Ground , Rudyard Kipling 's Just So Stories , Charles Dickens 's Nicholas Nickleby , Virginia Woolf 's Mrs Dalloway and a room devoted solely to Magna Carta , as well as several Qu <unk> and Asian items . 
 In addition to the permanent exhibition , there are frequent thematic exhibitions which have covered maps , sacred texts , the history of the English language , and law , including a celebration of the 800th anniversary of the Magna Carta . 
 = = Business and IP Centre = = 
 In May 2005 , the British Library received a grant of £ 1 million from the London Development Agency to change two of its reading rooms into the Business & IP Centre . The Centre was opened in March 2006 . It holds arguably the most comprehensive collection of business and intellectual property ( IP ) material in the United Kingdom and is the official library of the UK Intellectual Property Office . 
 The collection is divided up into four main information areas : market research , company information , trade directories , and journals . It is free of charge in hard copy and online via approximately 30 subscription databases . Registered readers can access the collection and the databases . 
 There are over 50 million patent specifications from 40 countries in a collection dating back to 1855 . The collection also includes official gazettes on patents , trade marks and Registered Design ; law reports and other material on litigation ; and information on copyright . This is available in hard copy and via online databases . 
 Staff are trained to guide small and medium enterprises ( SME ) and entrepreneurs to use the full range of resources . 
 Since 2012 , Stephen Fear is currently the British Library 's Entrepreneur in Residence and Ambassador . 
 = = Document Supply Service = = 
 As part of its establishment in 1973 , the British Library absorbed the National Lending Library for Science and Technology ( NLL ) , based near Boston Spa in Yorkshire , which had been established in 1961 . Before this , the site had housed a World War II Royal Ordnance Factory , ROF Thorp Arch , which closed in 1957 . When the NLL became part of the British Library in 1973 it changed its name to the British Library Lending Division , in 1985 it was renamed as the British Library Document Supply Centre and is now known as the British Library Document Supply Service , often abbreviated as BLDSS . 
 BLDSS now holds 87 @.@ 5 million items , including 296 @,@ 000 international journal titles , 400 @,@ 000 conference proceedings , 3 million monographs , 5 million official publications , and 500 @,@ 000 UK and North American theses and dissertations . 12 @.@ 5 million articles in the Document Supply Collection are held electronically and can be downloaded immediately . 
 The collection supports research and development in UK , overseas and international industry , particularly in the pharmaceutical industry . BLDSS also provides material to Higher Education institutions , students and staff and members of the public , who can order items through their Public Library or through the Library 's BL Document Supply Service ( BLDSS ) . The Document Supply Service also offers Find it For Me and Get it For Me services which assist researchers in accessing hard @-@ to @-@ find material . 
 In April 2013 , BLDSS launched its new online ordering and tracking system , which enables customers to search available items , view detailed availability , pricing and delivery time information , place and track orders , and manage account preferences online . 
 = = Sound archive = = 
 The British Library Sound Archive holds more than a million discs and 185 @,@ 000 tapes . The collections come from all over the world and cover the entire range of recorded sound from music , drama and literature to oral history and wildlife sounds , stretching back over more than 100 years . The Sound Archive 's online catalogue is updated daily . 
 It is possible to listen to recordings from the collection in selected Reading Rooms in the Library through their <unk> and Listening and Viewing Service , which is based in the Rare Books & Music Reading Room . 
 In 2006 the Library launched a new online resource British Library Sounds which makes over 60 @,@ 000 of the Sound Archive 's recordings available online for UK higher and further education and the general public . 
 = = Newspapers = = 
 The Library holds an almost complete collection of British and Irish newspapers since 1840 . This is partly because of the legal deposit legislation of 1869 , which required newspapers to supply a copy of each edition of a newspaper to the library . London editions of national daily and Sunday newspapers are complete back to 1801 . In total the collection consists of 660 @,@ 000 bound volumes and 370 @,@ 000 reels of microfilm containing tens of millions of newspapers with 52 @,@ 000 titles on 45 km of shelves . From earlier dates , the collections include the Thomason Tracts , comprising 7 @,@ 200 17th @-@ century newspapers , and the Burney Collection , featuring nearly 1 million pages of newspapers from the late 18th and early 19th centuries . The section also holds extensive collections of non @-@ British newspapers , in numerous languages . 
 The Newspapers section was based in Colindale in North London until 2013 , when the buildings , which were considered to provide inadequate storage conditions and to be beyond improvement , were closed and sold for redevelopment . The physical holdings are now divided between the sites at St Pancras ( some high @-@ use periodicals , and rare items such as the Thomason Tracts and Burney collections ) and Boston Spa ( the bulk of the collections , stored in a new purpose @-@ built facility ) . 
 A significant and growing proportion of the collection is now made available to readers as surrogate facsimiles , either on microfilm , or , more recently , in digitised form . In 2010 a ten @-@ year programme of digitisation of the newspaper archives with commercial partner DC Thomson subsidiary <unk> began , and the British Newspaper Archive was launched in November 2011 . A dedicated newspaper reading room opened at St Pancras in April 2014 , including facilities for consulting microfilmed and digital materials , and , where no surrogate exists , hard @-@ copy material retrieved from Boston Spa . 
 = = Moving image services = = 
 Launched in October 2012 , the British Library 's moving image services provide access to nearly a million sound and moving image items onsite , supported by data for over 20 million sound and moving image recordings . The three services , which for copyright reasons can only be accessed from terminals within the Reading Rooms at St Pancras , Colindale or Boston Spa , are : 
 BBC Pilot / Redux : A collaboration with BBC Research & Development to mirror its archive which has , since June 2007 , been recording 24 / 7 of all of the BBC 's national and some regional broadcast output . BBC Pilot includes 2 @.@ 2 million catalogue records and 190 @,@ 000 playable programmes , but unlike BBC Redux it does not include any broadcasts beyond 2011 . 
 Broadcast News : Since May 2010 , the British Library has been making off @-@ air recordings of daily TV and radio news broadcasts from seventeen channels , including BBC , ITV , Channel 4 , Sky News , Al @-@ Jazeera English , NHK World , CNN , France 24 , Bloomberg , Russia Today and China 's CCTV News . Many of the programs come with subtitles , which can be electronically searched , greatly enhancing the value of the collection as a research tool . 
 Television & Radio Index for Learning & Teaching ( <unk> ) : Produced by the British Universities Film & Video Council ( <unk> ) , <unk> is a database of all UK television and radio broadcasts since 2001 ( and selectively back to 1995 ) . Its 16 million records , growing by a million per year , cover every channel , broadcast and repeat . 
 = = Philatelic Collections = = 
 The British Library Philatelic Collections are held at St Pancras . The collections were established in 1891 with the donation of the Tapling collection , they steadily developed and now comprise over 25 major collections and a number of smaller ones , encompassing a wide range of disciplines . The collections include postage and revenue stamps , postal stationery , essays , proofs , covers and entries , " <unk> stamp " material , specimen issues , airmails , some postal history materials , official and private posts , etc . , for almost all countries and periods . 
 An extensive display of material from the collections is on exhibit , which may be the best permanent display of diverse classic stamps and philatelic material in the world . Approximately 80 @,@ 000 items on 6 @,@ 000 sheets may be viewed in 1 @,@ 000 display frames ; 2 @,@ 400 sheets are from the Tapling Collection . All other material , which covers the whole world , is available to students and researchers . As well as these collections , the library actively acquires literature on the subject . This makes the British Library one of the world 's prime philatelic research centres . The Head Curator of the Philatelic Collections is Paul Skinner . 
 = = Highlights of the collections = = 
 Highlights , some of which were selected by the British Library , include : 
 Diamond Sutra , the world 's earliest dated printed book printed in 868 during the Tang Dynasty 
 Codex Sinaiticus , the major portion of the world 's second @-@ oldest manuscript of the Bible in koine Greek ( 4th century ) . 
 Codex Alexandrinus , an early manuscript of the Bible in koine Greek 
 Lindisfarne Gospels , an illuminated Latin Gospel book from Anglo @-@ Saxon Northumbria 
 St Cuthbert Gospel , a Northumbrian gospel book with the oldest Western binding 
 Two Gutenberg Bibles , two copies of a Latin Bible printed at Mainz , Germany ( 1450s ) 
 Giant medieval bibles such as the Worms Bible , Stavelot Bible , Parc Abbey Bible and <unk> Bible 
 <unk> Gospels , an early illuminated gospel book produced in Baden , Germany 
 Bible from <unk> @-@ <unk> Abbey , one of three illustrated bibles made in Tours in the 9th century 
 Two 1215 copies of Magna Carta 
 The sole surviving manuscript copy of the poem Beowulf 
 Bedford Hours a richly illustrated late medieval book of hours once owned by the Duke of Bedford 
 Gospels of Tsar Ivan Alexander , 1355 – 56 , the most important medieval Bulgarian manuscript . 
 Codex Arundel , one of Leonardo da Vinci 's notebooks . 
 William Tyndale 's 1534 English translation New Testament , the personal copy of Anne Boleyn . 
 Original manuscript of Handel 's Messiah 
 Manuscript of Alice 's Adventures Under Ground by Lewis Carroll ( given to the British Library by a consortium of American bibliophiles " in recognition of Britain 's courage in facing Hitler before America came into the war " ) 
 = = Collections of manuscripts = = 
 = = = Foundation collections = = = 
 The three foundation collections are those which were brought together to form the initial manuscript holdings of the British Museum in 1753 : 
 Cotton manuscripts 
 Harley manuscripts 
 Sloane manuscripts 
 = = = Other named collections = = = 
 Other " named " collections of manuscripts include ( but are not limited to ) the following : 
 Arundel Manuscripts 
 Egerton manuscripts 
 King 's manuscripts 
 Lansdowne manuscripts 
 Royal manuscripts 
 Stefan Zweig Collection 
 Stowe manuscripts 
 = = = Additional manuscripts = = = 
 The Additional Manuscripts series covers manuscripts that are not part of the named collections , and contains all other manuscripts donated , purchased or bequeathed to the Library since 1756 . The numbering begins at <unk> , as the series is considered to be a continuation of the collection of Sloane manuscripts , which are numbered 1 to 4100 . 
 = = Chief Executives of the British Library = = 
 Sir Harry <unk> , the first Chief Executive ( 1973 to 1984 ) 
 Dame Lynne Brindley ( 2000 to 2012 ) 
 Roly Keating ( 2012 to present ) 
 = Hurricane Inga ( 1969 ) = 
 Hurricane Inga is the third longest @-@ lived Atlantic hurricane on record . The 11th tropical cyclone and 9th named storm of the 1969 Atlantic hurricane season , Inga developed on September 20 in the central Atlantic and tracked westward . After attaining tropical storm status , the system deteriorated into a depression , but once again intensified several days later . The storm eventually peaked in strength on October 5 , with winds corresponding to Category 3 on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . Throughout its path , Inga underwent several changes in direction and oscillations in strength , before dissipating on October 15 , 25 days after it formed . Despite its duration , Inga caused little damage , and mostly remained over open waters . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 20 , a tropical disturbance in the Atlantic Ocean developed into a tropical depression . On the next morning , the National Hurricane Center reported that the system became a tropical storm while centered about 930 mi ( 1 @,@ 500 km ) east @-@ southeast of San Juan , Puerto Rico . At the time , the storm was moving towards the west at 14 mph ( 23 km / h ) . At the time , Inga was a very small tropical cyclone ; gale @-@ force winds extended less than 100 mi ( 160 km ) from the center . However , by September 23 , the storm had become disorganized and sprawling . Later that day , Inga weakened back into a tropical depression . 
 The depression continued west @-@ northwestward , passing north of the Leeward Islands , before drifting northwestward . It once again attained tropical storm status on September 28 , while situated well to the east of the Bahamas . Inga continued to intensify , and achieved hurricane status at 0000 UTC on September 30 , at which point it turned northeastward . The storm then abruptly , yet gradually , turned towards the south , and ultimately completed a counter @-@ clockwise loop as it bent back westward . Steering currents were weak , and the hurricane continued to proceed slowly . Late on October 3 , it turned to the northwest , still as a Category 1 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . The storm then curved northeastward and intensified to Category 2 status at 0000 UTC on October 5 . 
 Inga accelerated somewhat as it passed to the southeast of Bermuda . By the morning hours of October 5 , it was determined that the hurricane posed no significant threat to the island . At 1200 UTC , the storm 's lowest known barometric pressure of 964 millibars was recorded . Shortly thereafter , it briefly strengthened to Category 3 status ; the cyclone peaked with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . As it moved towards the open waters of the Atlantic and entered a cooler environment , it deteriorated to Category 1 intensity on October 6 . The hurricane slowed again , and as cold air became entrained into its circulation , it began to lose tropical characteristics . 
 However , Inga once again intensified and reattained Category 2 intensity on October 7 . At this point , the hurricane was drifting generally eastward . However , in time the storm turned towards the south and began to weaken . Operationally , the storm was believed to have downgraded to a tropical storm on October 8 and regained hurricane status thereafter , but instead it likely maintained Category 1 intensity steadily until October 10 . After the storm finally degenerated into a tropical storm , it curved southwestward . The storm 's center became ill @-@ defined and elongated at the storm continued to lose strength . Heading westward , Inga was downgraded to a tropical depression before dissipating fully on October 15 , about 290 mi ( 470 km ) from where it initially attained hurricane status . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 Hurricane Inga lasted for nearly 25 days between September 20 and October 15 . This made it the third longest @-@ tracked Atlantic hurricane on record , behind the Hurricane San Ciriaco in August – September 1899 and Hurricane Ginger in September – October 1971 . The fourth , fifth , and sixth longest @-@ lived storms are Hurricane Nadine in 2012 , Hurricane Kyle in 2002 , and Hurricane Four in 1926 . At the time of its existence , however , Inga was believed to have been the longest @-@ lived Atlantic tropical cyclone on record . The National Hurricane Center issued 72 total advisories on the storm . 
 While Inga remained predominately over the open ocean , its outer fringes produced 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) wind gusts on Bermuda . The strong winds caused power failures , which were promptly restored . Residents were advised to monitor the storm in case of sudden changes in direction . 
 = Djibril Cissé = 
 Djibril Cissé ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 12 August 1981 ) is a former professional French footballer . 
 Cissé started his career at AC Arles in 1989 at the age of eight . After seven years at the club , he had a six @-@ month spell at Nîmes Olympique before moving to Auxerre joining the club 's youth system . Cissé spent two years in the system before graduating to the first team in 1998 . After playing for Auxerre for six seasons , scoring 90 goals in 166 appearances , he moved to Premier League club Liverpool in 2004 . 
 During his time at Anfield , Cissé played 79 games , scoring 24 times and winning the 2004 – 05 UEFA Champions League and 2005 – 06 FA Cup . He went on to play in Greece with Panathinaikos , Italy with S.S. Lazio , Qatar with Al @-@ Gharafa and Russia with Kuban <unk> . He also had further spells in English football with Sunderland and Queens Park Rangers , and France with Olympique de Marseille and SC Bastia . In 2015 , Cissé made one appearance for Réunion based club JS Saint @-@ Pierroise before retiring from professional football . In the course of his career , Cissé suffered from two leg breaks , breaking his left leg in 2004 and his right leg in 2006 . 
 Cissé represented the France national football team at the 2002 and 2010 FIFA World Cups and was also part of les Bleus ' 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup winning squad . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Auxerre = = = 
 After starting his career with Nîmes Olympique , Cissé signed for AJ Auxerre at the age of 15 . Playing for the youth team in 1999 , Cissé won the Coupe Gambardella , the equivalent of the FA Youth Cup . After promotion to the first team squad by coach Guy Roux , Cissé made his Ligue 1 debut at the age of 17 as a substitute against Paris Saint @-@ Germain on 20 March 1999 . His first goal came at the start of the 2000 – 01 season in a 2 – 1 defeat of FC Metz . He ended this season , his first as a regular in the first team , with eight goals from 25 games . 
 In the 2001 – 02 season , Cissé was the top scorer in Ligue 1 with 22 goals from 29 matches as Auxerre finished in third place and qualified for the 2002 – 03 UEFA Champions League . Cissé 's form saw him make his debut for the French national team and earn a place in the team 's squad for the 2002 FIFA World Cup . 
 Cissé was again amongst the league 's top scorers in 2002 – 03 with 14 goals . He also scored six goals in six matches in Auxerre 's successful Coupe de France campaign , including both goals in the semi @-@ final defeat of Stade <unk> and the <unk> in the 2003 Coupe de France Final victory over PSG . 
 2003 – 04 proved to be Cissé 's most successful goalscoring season , with 30 goals in all competitions , including 26 in Ligue 1 to win the golden boot for the second time . 
 Overall , Cissé scored 70 goals in 128 league games for Auxerre before signing for Liverpool in a deal worth over £ 14 million in the summer of 2005 . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 At Liverpool , Cissé scored 5 goals in 24 first @-@ team games in all competitions for Liverpool in the 2004 – 05 season . He had only played 19 games for Liverpool when a freak accident occurred while playing against Blackburn Rovers on 30 October 2004 . While Cissé and Blackburn 's Jay <unk> were challenging for the ball , Cissé 's boot got caught in the turf and his leg snapped . This resulted in a broken tibia and fibula , and physio Daryl Martin said " It could take six to nine months for a recovery and the absolute worst @-@ case scenario is 18 months ... " Cissé later revealed that had it not been for prompt attention from the trainers at the stadium , he would probably have lost the leg below the knee . He had pins inserted in the leg , and was expected to be out of action for the rest of the 2004 – 05 season. l 
 However , in an unexpected return , Cissé was able to come on as a 75th @-@ minute substitute in the second leg of Liverpool 's Champions League quarter @-@ final tie with Juventus on 13 April 2005 . He went on to score both Liverpool goals in their last Premiership match of the season , a 2 – 1 win over Aston Villa and also converted a penalty in Liverpool 's penalty shootout win over AC Milan in the Champions League final . During the 2005 – 06 season , Liverpool manager Rafael Benítez deployed Cissé on the right wing on numerous occasions . While his pace made him well suited to such a role , it was doubtful whether he would be happy to continue in this role rather than in his preferred position as striker . He scored two goals as Liverpool won the 2005 UEFA Super Cup . Cissé also scored Liverpool 's opening goal in the 2006 FA Cup Final with a sliding shot past West Ham United keeper Shaka Hislop . Liverpool went on to win 3 – 1 on penalties . He ended the 05 / 06 season with 19 goals in all competitions . 
 = = = Marseille = = = 
 From summer 2005 , the media had linked Cissé with a move away from Anfield . Speculation intensified as the season went on . In early June 2006 , it was reported that a transfer to Olympique de Marseille had been agreed . The very same day Cissé broke his leg during France 's final warm up match against China on 7 June 2006 . It was thought that even though a relatively quick recovery was expected , Cissé 's transfer would be postponed until at least the January transfer window . However , the two teams agreed a loan deal in July 2006 . 
 Cissé made his return to training on 20 October 2006 , and scored his first goal for Olympique de Marseille on 22 December 2006 when they beat AS Saint @-@ Étienne 2 – 1 . With only four goals in 14 appearances by April , Cissé 's performances were drawing such criticism that former player Jean @-@ Pierre Papin urged Cissé 's critics to be more patient while the striker recovered from his career @-@ threatening injury . Despite the slow start , Cissé managed to score 4 goals in his final 7 league appearances to finish with 8 goals in 21 league appearances , helping Marseille to finish 2nd in the 2006 – 07 season and guarantee a Champions League place for the 2007 – 08 season . On 12 May 2007 , he scored 2 goals in the French Cup Final against Sochaux , although Marseille still lost the match 5 – 4 on penalties , after a 2 – 2 stalemate after extra time following a late equaliser by another Liverpool player on loan Anthony Le <unk> . 
 On 7 July 2007 , Marseille president Pape Diouf announced that the club had struck a deal with Liverpool to sign Cissé permanently , for an estimated fee of € 8 million . But subsequently , Cissé was linked with a return to the English Premier League with Blackburn Rovers , Wigan Athletic , Tottenham Hotspur , Portsmouth and Bolton Wanderers said to be interested . Manchester City had their approach for Cissé rejected by Marseille boss , who said , " He is wanted , that is for sure , I myself have been approached by Manchester City ( about Cissé ) but I turned it down categorically " . On 26 January 2008 , Cissé scored a hat @-@ trick in Marseille 's 6 – 1 win against Caen . 
 = = = Sunderland = = = 
 On 20 August 2008 , Cisse secured a loan switch to Premier League club Sunderland . At the same ground where he had scored on his Liverpool debut , Cissé scored the winning header on his debut against Tottenham to make it 2 – 1 to Sunderland . A few days later , Cissé announced his desire to secure a permanent deal with the club . Manager Roy Keane also expressed his desire to sign Cissé , telling The News of the World , " I 'd be happy to break the transfer record if Djibril 's doing the business " . In the Tyne @-@ Wear derby , Cissé scored his third Sunderland goal on 25 October 2008 , with Sunderland winning 2 – 1 . After scoring in a 4 – 1 victory against Hull , Cissé stated that despite the departure of Roy Keane from Sunderland , he still wished to complete a permanent move to the club . On 18 April 2009 , Cisse scored his 10th league goal of the season in a 1 – 0 victory over Hull City at the Stadium of Light . On 24 May , it was confirmed that Sunderland would not be taking up the option to sign Cissé permanently , and he subsequently returned to Marseille . 
 = = = Panathinaikos = = = 
 On 25 June 2009 , Cissé signed a four @-@ year contract with Panathinaikos . It was reported that the player would earn € 2 @.@ 5 million per year , while French club Marseille would get an estimated € 8 million as a transfer fee . The total cost of the transfer is about € 20 million , taking into account the various bonuses . He scored his first goal in Greece against Crete @-@ based <unk> and soon he became the new leader of the team . He was the Superleague topscorer for the 2009 – 10 leading his team to win the double . In his first year in Greece , Cissé scored 23 goals in 28 matches . 
 Cissé 's performances made Panathinaikos fans love him . He had stated that after making the double in Greece he would love to play again in the Champions League with Panathinaikos and looking for a successful season also in Greece . On 30 October 2010 , he scored two goals ( one penalty ) in the Derby of the eternal enemies against arch @-@ rivals Olympiacos in a 2 – 1 home win . At the MVP award ceremony for the 8th fixture , Cissé said " I am not only a player of Panathinaikos , but I am also a fan . " In the new season , he has already scored 18 goals in 20 matches in the Greek League and one goal in the Greek Cup . He was also the team captain of Panathinaikos and the most valuable player of the club . 
 On 21 February 2011 , Olympiacos beat Panathinaikos in <unk> Stadium ( 2 – 1 ) , after a controversial ( regarding the referees decisions ) game . After the game , Cisse had an wrangle with Olympiacos ' president Evangelos <unk> . He was beaten by Olympiakos ' fans ( later called them " barbarians " ) and stated that he was going to appeal to the UEFA . He stated also that he had lost his patience with the questionable , according to his opinion , refereeing in Greece : " I will make my decisions but believe me , I ’ ve had enough . I can ’ t go on under these conditions . " One month later , Cissé reached 50 goals as a Panathinaikos player in domestic and European competitions . He celebrated this goal by wearing a T @-@ shirt of Panathinaikos supporters group Gate 13 . Cisse left Greece and Panathinaikos after celebrating in a farewell party with him as the DJ and he gave a promise to Panathinaikos fans that he will return . 
 = = = Lazio = = = 
 Cissé was transferred to Serie A club Lazio on 12 July 2011 for € 5 @.@ 8 million . He signed a four @-@ year contract with the Italian side . He made his debut in a UEFA Europa League match against FK Rabotnički on 18 August , scoring two goals in a 6 – 0 win for the home side . Cissé scored his only league goal for Lazio on his league debut in a 2 – 2 draw with Milan at the San Siro on 9 September . 
 = = = Queens Park Rangers = = = 
 On 31 January 2012 , Cissé signed a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year deal with Queens Park Rangers for an undisclosed fee . He was Mark Hughes ' fourth signing since taking over as manager . He scored on his debut , against Aston Villa in a 2 – 2 draw at Villa Park on 1 February . He was then given a straight red card in his second game for violent conduct , when he reacted to a late challenge by Wolverhampton Wanderers player Roger Johnson by grabbing Johnson by the throat . With QPR down to ten men , they went on to lose the game 2 – 1 . On 21 March 2012 , Cissé scored QPR 's equalising goal in a 3 – 2 victory against his former club Liverpool . Three days later , he was sent off for the second time in his first five games for QPR when he received a straight red card for a two @-@ footed lunge on Sunderland 's Fraizer Campbell . He then returned from suspension on 29 April 2012 , and scored a late consolation goal against Chelsea in a 6 – 1 loss at Stamford Bridge . Cissé went on to score his fifth goal in seven matches to win the match against Stoke City . On 13 May 2012 Cisse scored the goal to make it 1 – 1 against Manchester City . This was his sixth goal in eight matches for QPR . QPR went on to lose the match 3 – 2 , as City scored two goals in stoppage time , but avoided relegation as Bolton succumbed to a 2 – 2 draw at Stoke . Cissé picked the number nine for his jersey and scored his first goal in the 2012 – 13 season in a 3 – 2 loss against Reading in the League Cup and his first Premier League goal of the season , also against Reading on 4 November . In January 2013 he joined Qatari club Al Gharafa on loan until the end of the season . His loan ended on 30 June , he made nine league appearances and scored one goal in the championship and four in the AFC Champions League . Cissé left QPR by mutual consent on 28 June 2013 . 
 = = = Kuban Krasnodar = = = 
 On 3 July 2013 , Cissé signed a one @-@ year contract ( plus one in option ) with Kuban Krasnodar . 
 = = = Bastia = = = 
 On 1 January 2014 , Cissé signed an 18 @-@ month deal with Bastia . 
 = = = JS Saint @-@ Pierroise = = = 
 In June 2015 , Cissé signed for JS Saint @-@ Pierroise of the Réunion Premier League on a month @-@ long contract starting in September of the same year . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 On 20 October 2015 , Cissé announced his retirement from football at the age of 34 due to injury . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Youth career = = = 
 Cissé played for the France Under @-@ 19 team in the 2001 FIFA World Youth Championship , where they reached the quarter @-@ finals , with the player scoring six goals in five games . These goals included a hat @-@ trick against Iran on 18 June 2001 in a 5 – 0 win on their opening game , and two goals against Germany on 27 June 2001 in the round of 16 . 
 He was on the France Under @-@ 21 <unk> in the 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship . Cissé scored two goals against Portugal in the first leg of qualification playoffs , winning 2 – 1 . In the second leg , Cissé scored a goal but for kicking Mário Sérgio he was sent off . France went on to lose the game 4 – 1 on penalties , after drawing 3 – 3 on aggregate . As a result of the sending off , he was given a five match ban and missed UEFA Euro 2004 . 
 = = = Senior career = = = 
 Cissé made his international debut , age 21 , against Belgium coming on as a 48th @-@ minute substitute for David Trezeguet on 18 May 2002 . The team manager Roger <unk> included Cissé in his 23 @-@ man squad for the 2002 FIFA World Cup . In the tournament he played in all of the group matches against Senegal , Uruguay , and Denmark , coming on as a substitute in all three games but France were eliminated in the World Cup group stages . His first goal in the senior tournament came on 7 September 2002 against Cyprus in the Euro <unk> . Cissé was part of the 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup championship team . He scored his only goal of the tournament from the penalty spot in France 's 1 – 0 win against Colombia on 18 June 2003 . 
 After being banned from UEFA Euro 2004 , Cisse was next in the 2006 FIFA World Cup tournament in Germany . In France 's final warm @-@ up match against China on 7 June 2006 , he suffered another broken leg when ten minutes into the game he was knocked off balance by the China captain Zheng Zhi and fell with his leg twisting under him . " It 's so tough to hear Djibril scream like that , " said fellow French striker Thierry Henry . " You lose a teammate and also a friend . But he is tough ; he will come back . " He needed immediate surgery to repair his open fractured tibia so was out of the tournament . During the UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying campaign , Cissé played three games , but did not win a place in the France squad for the finals . 
 After demonstrating his goal @-@ scoring form for Panathinaikos , in March 2010 , Cissé was recalled to the French squad for a friendly against Spain in Paris . When introduced into the match as a substitute , he had a considerable impact , heading on a Florent Malouda cross only for Iker Casillas to push it onto the post . On 11 May 2010 , he was included by manager Raymond Domenech in France 's final 23 @-@ man squad for the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa . On 22 June , he was in France 's starting eleven for the team 's final game of the group stage versus South Africa . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 13 January 2015 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Auxerre 
 Coupe de France ( 1 ) : 2002 – 03 
 Liverpool 
 FA Cup ( 1 ) : 2005 – 06 
 UEFA Champions League ( 1 ) : 2004 – 05 
 UEFA Super Cup ( 1 ) : 2005 
 Panathinaikos 
 Superleague Greece ( 1 ) : 2009 – 10 
 Greek Football Cup ( 1 ) : 2010 
 = = = International = = = 
 France 
 FIFA Confederations Cup : 2003 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Ligue 1 Top Scorer : 2001 – 02 , 2003 – 04 
 UNFP Young Player of the Year : 2001 – 02 
 Super League Greece Top Scorer : 2010 , 2011 
 Super League Greece Best Foreign Player : 2010 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Cissé was born to Ivorian parents in France . His late father <unk> Cissé was a professional footballer and had captained his country before his parents moved to France in 1974 . Djibril was the seventh and last child of his family , after siblings <unk> , <unk> , Abou , Fode , Seni and Hamed . After his move to Liverpool , Cissé purchased a house in the village of Frodsham , Cheshire , and in doing became Lord of the Manor of Frodsham . Soon after buying the house , his decision to refuse the Cheshire Forest Hunt permission to hunt on his land received substantial press coverage . On 18 June 2005 , Djibril Cissé married former hairdresser Jude Littler . The wedding took place at <unk> Castle , with notable guests including Shaun Wright @-@ Phillips and Cissé 's French national teammates Louis Saha and Sylvain Wiltord . Cissé got married in a tuxedo in the red of Liverpool . 
 The now @-@ divorced couple had three children , Cassius , Prince Kobe and Marley Jackson , and Cissé has a daughter , Ilona , from a previous relationship . 
 Cissé also had a cameo role in a French action comedy film Taxi 4 , featuring in a high @-@ speed driving scene . 
 Cissé has his own clothing range and fragrance , branded " Mr Lenoir " . 
 In October / September 2015 he will be participating in the French version of Dancing with the Stars season 6 of Danse avec les stars . 
 In October 2015 , Cissé was one of four people arrested in France over an alleged attempt to blackmail an international footballer in a sex tape extortion plot . 
 Cissé is a Roman Catholic convert from Islam . 
 = Going , Going , Gone ( Grey 's Anatomy ) = 
 " Going , Going , Gone " is the first episode of the ninth season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the show 's 173rd episode overall . Written by Stacy McKee and directed by Rob Corn , the episode was originally broadcast on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on September 27 , 2012 . The initial airing was viewed by 11 @.@ 73 million people and garnered a 4 @.@ 4 Nielsen rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , registering the show as the week 's highest rated television drama . 
 Grey 's Anatomy centers around a group of physicians struggling to balance their professional lives with their personal lives . In this episode , the doctors of Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital cope with the physical and emotional reverberations of the aviation accident that took place in the season eight finale , while several surgical residents are promoted . Further storylines include Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) relocating to a different hospital , and a group of new interns being intimidated by Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) . 
 The episode saw the death of Dr. Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) ; the actor was let go due to budget cuts by the producers . Excessive spoilers were not released , in order to keep the fates of select characters unknown . However , multiple cast members leaked pictures from the set . Jason George returned in guest capacity , along with newcomers William Daniels , Steven Culp , Philip Casnoff , Gaius Charles , Camilla Luddington , Tina Majorino , and Jerrika Hinton . Critics generally regarded " Going , Going , Gone " as disconsolate . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the season eight finale , Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , Dr. Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) , Dr. Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , and Dr. Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) are caught in an aviation accident , leaving Lexie Grey dead , and the rest of the doctors stranded . " Going , Going , Gone " picks up about one month after the crash , and throughout the episode , features home videos of Sloan . The episode begins with Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital 's new interns , Dr. Shane Ross ( Gaius Charles ) , Dr. Jo Wilson ( Camilla Luddington ) , Dr. Heather Brookes ( Tina Majorino ) , and Dr. Stephanie Edwards ( Jerrika Hinton ) , expressing fear of Meredith Grey , who is now an attending general surgeon . It is revealed that former resident Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) will be pursuing a pediatric surgical fellowship at Johns Hopkins Hospital . The scene switches to Minnesota , where Yang is now a cardiothoracic surgical fellow . 
 Back in Seattle , Dr. Ben Warren ( Jason George ) surprises his fiancée Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) with a visit . The couple reunites with constant sexual activity , for which the interns tease Bailey . Meanwhile , Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) allows Shepherd to operate on a spinal cord , despite his hand being broken from the plane crash . Thereafter , it is revealed that Sloan is in a comatose state , and will be taken off of life support that evening . In the hospital cafeteria , Meredith Grey announces that Wilson will be given the honor of performing a supervised appendectomy , a procedure historically used as a reward for interns . The hospital 's chief of surgery , Dr. Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) , introduces the new pediatric surgery attending , Dr. Mel Barnett ( Philip Casnoff ) , to Torres and Karev . Barnett informs Karev that he will not be continuing with the African orphan charity program ( a function to treat ill children from Third World countries ) , something that was initially finalized by the latter and former chief of pediatric surgery , Robbins . Karev becomes upset about this , and asks Torres to prevent Barnett from discontinuing the program , though Torres shows no interest in helping Karev . 
 During Shepherd 's surgery , his hand becomes numb , and he frustratedly exits the operating room . In the intern appendectomy , Wilson makes a mistake and freezes , leading to a scolding from Meredith Grey . Back in Minnesota , Yang is annoyed by the peppy attitudes of her superiors at Mayo Clinic , Dr. Craig Thomas ( William Daniels ) and Dr. Parker ( Steven Culp ) , so she decides to take a trip to Seattle for Sloan 's death . However , her PTSD hinders her from boarding the plane , and she ultimately remains in Minnesota . Meanwhile , Dr. Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams ) , now a plastic surgical fellow , sits by Sloan 's bedside and talks of medical cases to him . Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) enters Sloan 's hospital room and removes him from life support . Unable to cope with Sloan 's death , Meredith Grey boards a plane to visit Yang , but panics before it takes off . Shortly thereafter , Meredith Grey finds Karev at the airport bar , where he reveals that he will be staying at Seattle Grace Mercy West Hospital . The next morning , Hunt visits Dr. April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) at her family 's farm , and asks her to begin working in Seattle again . At the conclusion of the episode , Torres returns home to Robbins , who is revealed to have had her lower left leg amputated as a result of the crash . 
 = = Production = = 
 Running for approximately 43 minutes , the episode was written by Stacy McKee and directed by Rob Corn . The episode featured the songs " Body of Work " , " My Heart Goes Boom Boom " , " My Oh My " , " Feels Like the End " , " Portions for Foxes " , " Without You " , and " Into You " . George returned to the episode as Warren , while Daniels , Culp , Casnoff , Charles , Luddington , Majorino , and Hinton made their first appearances as Thomas , Parker , Barnett , Ross , Wilson , Brookes , and Edwards , respectively . The episode 's initial script read @-@ through took place on July 16 , 2012 . Scenes in the operating room were filmed at the Prospect Studios in Los Feliz , Los Angeles . While creating the visual of Robbins ' amputated leg , the special effects crew digitally removed Capshaw 's real leg , and replaced it with a graphically created limb . 
 Prior to broadcast , series creator Shonda Rhimes did not release much information about the season premiere . However , it was revealed prior to broadcast that there would be a time jump in the episode . After it was announced that Dane would be departing shortly after the commencement of the ninth season , Dempsey uploaded a set picture on Twitter of Sloan in bad condition . Due to the unwanted release of spoilers , the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) requested that he delete the photo , and it was subsequently removed . The cast and crew of Grey 's Anatomy were being particularly quiet about the fate of Capshaw 's character . This secrecy was compromised when McKidd posted a picture on his Twitter account of the editing room , in which there was a picture of Robbins alive on the screen . The picture has since been taken down . 
 Discussing Robbins ' storyline in " Going , Going , Gone " , Capshaw revealed that she was " shocked " when it was made known to her that the character 's leg would be amputated . The actress additionally noted that it was difficult to keep the fate of her character a secret . Following the premiere , E ! Online reported that Dane 's death and departure in the premiere were results of budgetary cuts , mandated by ABC . Speaking of Sloan 's death , Rhimes said it was the " most tragic " , adding that " he 's part of the fabric of the show " . Rhimes wrote that anything other than the character dying would entail him leaving his daughter behind , something the writers did not want . However , she noted that the writing team considered having him move to Los Angeles to be with Dr. Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) after her departure from Private Practice , but they feared it would have given the impression that his love confession for Lexie Grey was forgotten . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and ratings = = = 
 " Going , Going , Gone " was originally broadcast on Thursday , September 27 , 2012 in the United States on ABC . The episode 's total viewership of 11 @.@ 73 million ranked the show second in its 9 : 00 EST time slot , trailing CBS 's Person of Interest ( 14 @.@ 28 million ) , and fifth for the night , behind CBS 's Two and a Half Men ( 12 @.@ 54 million ) , Elementary ( 13 @.@ 41 million ) , and The Big Bang Theory ( 15 @.@ 66 million ) . The installment 's 4 @.@ 4 Nielsen rating in the target 18 – 49 demographic ranked the series first in its time slot and second for the night , trailing only CBS 's The Big Bang Theory ( 5 @.@ 0 ) . In the key 18 – 34 demographic , the episode earned a 3 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating , qualifying Grey 's Anatomy as the top television program of the night in that demographic . " Going , Going , Gone " ' s total viewership and 18 – 49 rating tallied the show 's highest numbers since " Suddenly " on Thursday , January 5 , 2012 ( 4 @.@ 5 18 – 49 rating , 12 @.@ 12 million viewers ) . 
 The 11 @.@ 73 million people tuned into the episode marked a 3 percent viewership increase from the season eight finale ( 11 @.@ 44 million ) , and a 13 percent increase from the previous season premiere ( 10 @.@ 38 million ) . The episode 's 4 @.@ 4 Nielsen rating in the 18 – 49 demographic was a 7 percent increase from the season eight finale and previous season premiere , which both received 4 @.@ 1 18 – 49 ratings . The Nielsen score additionally registered the show as the week 's highest rated drama and third @-@ highest rated scripted series in the 18 – 49 demographic , placing behind CBS 's The Big Bang Theory ( 5 @.@ 0 ) and ABC 's Modern Family ( 5 @.@ 5 ) . Seven days of time @-@ shifted viewing added on an additional 1 @.@ 5 rating points in the 18 – 49 demographic and 3 @.@ 28 million viewers , bringing the total viewership for the episode to 15 @.@ 01 million viewers with a 5 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Critical reviews = = = 
 The majority of critics concluded that the episode was disconsolate . E ! Online 's Kristin dos Santos called the installment " gut @-@ wrenching " , saying it was the type of episode that " rips out your heart and feeds it to you with a spoon " . Ann Oldenburg of USA Today summarized that the episode required viewers to " reach for the Kleenex " . TV Guide 's Natalie Abrams called the episode " heartbreaking " , and praised the performances by Dempsey and Ramirez for their realism . Writing for Newsday , Verne Gay called Sloan 's death scene " touching " , and opined that the show will be different without the character 's presence . 
 Kelly Schremph of Hollywood.com said the installment was " emotionally exhausting " , adding that it foreshadowed a " drama @-@ packed season " . Schremph commented that all of the changes made it feel like an alternative reality episode , such as was featured in season eight . Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Tanner Stransky expressed similar viewpoints with Schremph , commenting that the installment paved the way for a great season , and that it resembled season eight 's alternative reality episode . Stransky appreciated the " dignity " provided in Sloan 's death scene , noting that the song played during the scene was " killer " and " so fitting " . Jason Hughes of The Huffington Post called Sloan 's death day " fateful " . TV Fanatic gave a largely positive review to the season , " Grey 's Anatomy always knows how to bring the drama and they did not fail in the Season 9 Premiere . " 
 The International Business Times ' Arlene Paredes concluded that the episode " raised the bar for deeply emotional yet again " , and noted that it was " one of the most high @-@ anticipated TV [ returns ] this fall " . TVLine 's Michael Ausiello opined that the attempt to hide Robbins ' fate was the " worst kept secret in TV land " . Writing for AfterEllen , Bridget McManus threatened to boycott the show if Capshaw 's character was killed , but thought the FaceTime calls between Yang and Meredith Grey were humorous . Mark A. Perigard of the Boston Herald was critical of the time it took to rescue the doctors , and deemed the flashbacks featuring Sloan " unconvincing " . Zap2it 's Carina Adly MacKenzie opined that it " became increasingly clear " that Sloan would die as the episode progressed , and praised Capshaw 's performance , noting that it was " brief but truly striking " . 
 = Jon Cryer = 
 Jonathan Niven " Jon " Cryer ( born April 16 , 1965 ) is an American actor , screenwriter , television director , and film producer . Born into a show business family , Cryer made his motion picture debut as a teenaged photographer in the 1984 romantic comedy No Small Affair ; his breakout role came in 1986 , playing " Duckie " Dale in the John Hughes @-@ written film Pretty in Pink . In 1998 , he wrote and produced the independent film Went to Coney Island on a Mission from God ... Be Back by Five . 
 Although Cryer gained fame with his early film roles , it took several years to find success on television ; none of his star vehicles , including The Famous Teddy Z , Partners , and The Trouble with Normal , lasted more than 22 episodes . In 2003 , Cryer was cast as Alan Harper on the CBS sitcom Two and a Half Men , for which he won two Primetime Emmy Awards in 2009 and 2012 . Cryer received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for Television in 2011 . 
 Cryer 's other film appearances include Hiding Out ( 1987 ) , Hot Shots ( 1991 ) , Tortured ( 2008 ) , Shorts ( 2009 ) , and Hit by Lightning ( 2014 ) . He also has a recurring role in the CBS drama series , NCIS , playing Dr. Cyril Taft . 
 After appearing on the podcast Crime Writers On ... it was announced Cryer is joining the team at the <unk> podcast for their second season . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Cryer was born in New York City , New York . His mother , Gretchen Cryer ( née Kiger ) , is a playwright , songwriter , actress , and singer ; his father , Donald David Cryer , is an actor and singer who originally studied to be a minister . Cryer 's paternal grandfather , Rev. Dr. Donald W. Cryer , was a well @-@ known Methodist minister . He has two sisters , Robin and Shelly . 
 When Cryer was twelve years old , he decided that he wanted to become an actor . When his mother heard this , she thought he should have a backup plan , and joked : " Plumbing is a pretty good career . " Cryer attended <unk> Manor Performing Arts Training Center for several summers as a teenager , and is a 1983 graduate of the Bronx High School of Science . He was classmates with screenwriter and film director Boaz Yakin . To his mother 's " great disappointment " , Cryer skipped college and went to study acting at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) in London , United Kingdom . 
 = = Career = = 
 Cryer 's first professional acting effort was as David in the Broadway play Torch Song Trilogy , replacing Matthew Broderick , whom he " closely resembled " . Cryer was later an understudy and replacement for Broderick in Neil Simon 's Brighton Beach Memoirs in 1989 . 
 At age 19 , Cryer appeared in the 1984 romantic comedy film No Small Affair , in the lead role as Charles Cummings , after the original production with Matthew Broderick was shut down due to a heart attack by director , Martin Ritt . He went on to have small roles in films and television movies , and he made his breakthrough as Phil " Duckie " Dale in the John Hughes @-@ scripted film Pretty in Pink . In an interview with the Daily News , Cryer 's mother said that after Pretty in Pink , she started getting calls from teenage girls from all over the world , who would leave hysterical , giggling messages on her answering machine . In 1989 , he got the lead role in the TV comedy series , The Famous Teddy Z. His performance gained poor reviews and the show was canceled after the first season . 
 A year later , he starred with Charlie Sheen in the Jim Abrahams comedy Hot Shots ! , which was received very positively . Cryer is frequently linked to the Brat Pack . In a March 2009 interview on Anytime with Bob Kushell , Cryer stated that he had auditioned for St. Elmo 's Fire but was not cast in a role . In 1993 , he was asked to audition for the role of Chandler Bing on Friends , while doing a play in London . His reading was videotaped by a British casting agent but the tape failed to arrive in the U.S. before the network had made its final decision . 
 In 1995 , he was cast as Bob in the sitcom Partners , which , like his prior show The Famous Teddy Z , was canceled after its first season . In an interview with Time Out New York he stated , " Hey , every show I 'm in goes down . Think about this : George Clooney was in 28 pilots , or something . It means nothing " . After guest starring on shows such as Dharma & Greg and The Outer Limits , he successfully wrote and produced the film , Went to Coney Island on a Mission from God ... Be Back by Five . It debuted in 1998 at the Los Angeles Film Festival and gained positive reviews from critics . Leonard Maltin from Playboy Magazine called it " A breath of fresh air " . In 2000 , he was cast as the lead in a comedy series called The Trouble With Normal . For the third time , Cryer starred in a show which was canceled after its first season . 
 Cryer 's long run of unsuccessful TV projects finally ended three years later . Against the wishes of CBS executives ( who were aware of his past failures ) and due to a friendship with Charlie Sheen , he was cast in 2003 to portray Alan Harper on the hit comedy series Two and a Half Men . He has earned seven Primetime Emmy Award nominations and two wins for his acting work on the show . In a comment on the show 's high ratings , he said : " When you ’ re on a show that 's fighting for survival every week , you stop trusting your instincts , because you think , ‘ My instincts haven 't worked so far . ’ But when people clearly like the show and are watching it in great numbers , it takes a huge amount of pressure off you . It allows you to trust your instincts and go with what has worked for you before . " After former co @-@ star Charlie Sheen 's departure from the series , Cryer 's character became the show 's main protagonist ( with Ashton Kutcher being cast as the co @-@ lead ] ] ) throughout the final four seasons , mainly due to the show 's retooled plot . At the end of the series of Two and a Half Men , Cryer is the only actor to have appeared in every episode of the series , since Sheen was fired in March 2011 and his on @-@ screen son Angus T. Jones left the series at the end of season 10 , after expressing the show as " filth " and that Jones is a " paid hypocrite " . All appeared to be forgiven , however , as Jones , contrary to Charlie Sheen , appeared to great <unk> in the finale . Before being cast for Two and a Half Men , Cryer auditioned for the role of Gaius Baltar on the Sci @-@ Fi Channel 's reimagined Battlestar Galactica , but the role went to James Callis . In 2008 , Cryer appeared with Laurence Fishburne and James Cromwell in the film Tortured , and in 2009 co @-@ starred with James Spader in the film Shorts . 
 Cryer made a guest appearance on the sitcom series Husbands in its second season . He was initially cast to voice the lead character in DisneyToon Studios ' animated film Planes , a spin @-@ off of Pixar 's Cars franchise , but later dropped out and was replaced by Dane Cook . Cryer did however receive a credit on the film for " additional story material . " 
 In 2015 , Cryer released a book titled So That Happened , a breezy , often comic tale chronicling Cryer 's 30 @-@ year career on stage , film and television . 
 Cryer currently appears in the highly popular CBS drama series , NCIS where he currently plays Navy Dr. Cyril Taft who treats NCIS Special Agent Leroy Jethro Gibbs ( Mark Harmon ) . Cryer had expressed a desire to appear in NCIS since it premiered on September 23 , 2003 . 
 Pursuing a passion for criminal justice Cryer joined the team of the popular podcast <unk> where he will be voicing the weekly addendum episode for the second season . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Cryer married British actress Sarah Trigger in 1999 , with whom he has a son , Charlie Austin . The pair divorced in 2004 . In February 2007 , on an episode of The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , he announced that he would marry entertainment reporter Lisa Joyner ; the couple married in Mexico in June 2007 . On September 29 , 2009 , Jon and Lisa announced that they adopted a baby girl , whom they named Daisy . 
 When Pretty in Pink co @-@ star Molly Ringwald told Out magazine in 2012 that she believed Cryer 's character was gay , Cryer defended Duckie and other " slightly effeminate dorks , " and said he has had to live with others ' " faulty " gaydar . Also in 2012 , Joyner told Jeff Probst that when she and Cryer started dating , she wondered if he might be gay because " he never kissed me . " Cryer was asked in 2014 if he was " mistaken for gay " ; he again called himself " an effeminate heterosexual dork " and cracked a joke about never being propositioned : " Fellas , you 're dropping the ball . " 
 Prior to the 2008 presidential election , Cryer attended a fundraiser hosted by the McCain campaign and , according to news reports , endorsed Senator John McCain . When Cryer did not make a public endorsement for the 2012 race , his spokeswoman said that the 2008 report aligning him with the Republican Party was a " mistake " and that Cryer is " not really political . " He had attended events for both Republicans and Democrats " because he wanted to hear what both sides had to say . " 
 With regards to presumptive 2016 GOP nominee Donald J. Trump , Cryer shared his feelings on the May 5 , 2016 episode of the podcast Never Not Funny . Cryer stated , " I have been pointing out , and I have been screaming to the rooftops , that Donald Trump is the Charlie Sheen of politics . [ ... ] I have to tell you , I love Charlie Sheen , I loved working with him when he was sober , but he was , he 's full of shit . He has been full of shit , you know , he has serious addiction . You know , his addiction is obviously serious , drugs , and , but , Trump is just addicted to feeling important . You know , and I think if anybody is under the delusion that he cares about , uh , uh , anybody in America besides himself , they are , they are stoned and need to rethink their priorities , ' cause he 's , you know , ' cause it 's just ridiculous that 's he 's gotten as far as he has . " 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = 13th Airborne Division ( United States ) = 
 The 13th Airborne Division was an airborne forces formation of division @-@ size of the United States Army that was active during World War II . The division was commanded for most of its existence by Major General Eldridge G. Chapman . It was officially activated in the United States in August 1943 at Fort Bragg in North Carolina , remaining active until February 1946 , but never saw combat . 
 After activation the division remained in the United States to complete its training . This training was completed by September 1944 , but had to be extended by a further four months when the division provided replacements for the 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions . The division also encountered delays in mounting large @-@ scale training exercises due to a lack of transport aircraft in the United States . This shortage was caused by the 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions taking priority over the 13th in terms of equipment due to the two divisions serving in combat in Europe . As a consequence of these delays the division was only fully trained and combat @-@ ready by January 1945 , and was transferred to France and the European Theater of Operations in February . 
 When the division arrived in France , it came under the command of the First Allied Airborne Army , which controlled all Allied airborne formations . The division , along with two others , was selected to participate in Operation Varsity , the airborne operation to support the Anglo @-@ Canadian 21st Army Group crossing the River Rhine , but was removed from the operation due to there being insufficient transport aircraft to carry all three divisions into combat . Several other operations were planned for the division after the end of Operation Varsity , but these operations were cancelled when their objectives were captured by the rapid advance of Allied ground forces and they became superfluous . After the end of the conflict in Europe , the 13th Airborne was shipped to the United States to stage there before it was to participate in the planned invasion of Japan , but the conflict in the Far East ended before it was required and it remained in the United States . The 13th Airborne Division was finally inactivated on 26 February 1946 and its combat personnel were transferred to the command of the 82nd Airborne Division . 
 = = Formation = = 
 The 13th Airborne Division was the fifth airborne division to be formed in the United States during World War II , and was officially activated on Friday the 13th of August 1943 at Fort Bragg , North Carolina , under the command of Major General George W. Griner Jr . Only a few months after the activation of the division , however , Major General Griner was ordered to take command of the 98th Infantry Division , and was replaced by Major General Eldridge G. Chapman , who would go on to command the division for the rest of the conflict . Chapman was one of the early pioneers of the American airborne concept , commanding the experimental 88th Airborne Infantry Battalion in late 1941 when he was a lieutenant colonel , before going on to take command of the 13th Airborne Division . The 88th Airborne Infantry Battalion would be renamed as the 88th Airborne Infantry Regiment , and then finally become the 88th Glider Infantry Regiment on 21 September 1942 , forming the core of the 13th Airborne Division . When it was activated , the 13th Airborne Division was initially composed of the 515th Parachute Infantry Regiment , the 88th Glider Infantry Regiment and the 326th Glider Infantry Regiment . 
 = = Shoulder sleeve insignia = = 
 The division 's shoulder patch , a winged unicorn in orange on an ultramarine blue , the branch of service colours of the United States Army Air Corps , was approved on 2 June 1943 . A gold on black " Airborne " tab was worn above the insignia . 
 The unicorn is associated , by tradition , with qualities of virtue , courage and strength . The horn of the unicorn signifies extreme courage . All of such virtues should be cultivated in all units . It is hoped that these virtues will be conspicuous in the 13th Airborne Division . The unicorn has been winged to represent its travel in the air as " Airborne . " The blue background is the color of the Infantry , which is the basic arm of the Division , and also indicates the sky , which is the distinctive medium of travel for the Division . 
 = = Actions during World War II = = 
 = = = Training = = = 
 Between August 1943 and February 1945 , the 13th Airborne Division remained in the United States and did not serve overseas or participate in any airborne operations , as it began training to become a combat @-@ ready formation . In comparison , the 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions had been assigned as active combat formations to serve overseas in Europe , the 11th Airborne Division was scheduled to be deployed to the Pacific Theater of Operations , and the 17th Airborne Division had been assigned as the United States strategic reserve formation . During this period , the activities of the division primarily involved airborne training , as well as taking part in several training exercises . However , while airborne training for the first four American airborne divisions was conducted during 1943 , the 13th encountered considerable difficulties when it came to its turn for training . By the last few months of 1943 the 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions had conducted airborne exercises and finished their training , and had then been transferred to Europe ; to ensure the divisions could conduct airborne operations , a majority of the transport aircraft available in the United States had been sent with them , and even more were transferred to Europe as replacements after the American airborne landings in Normandy in June 1944 . Consequently , very few transport aircraft were available for use by the 13th , and the original training exercise for the division that had been scheduled for June 1944 had to be postponed until 17 September , and then once again until 24 September . 
 The divisional training exercise took place around Camp Mackall , North Carolina , and suffered from a number of difficulties and problems . Poor weather delayed the beginning of the exercise until the night of 25 September , and it was only then that the aircraft carrying the first three battalions of paratroopers could take off and attempt to drop the airborne troops on three separate drop zones . A combination of poor visibility , and a lack of sufficient training for the pilots of the transport aircraft , resulted in the paratroopers being dispersed widely when dropped . Only sixty @-@ five percent of the airborne troops and equipment dropped on the first drop zone were ready for action ninety minutes later , and in the second drop zone the airborne troops were so scattered that by 10 : 00 the next morning the commander of the battalion only had control over twenty percent of his men . A similar number of paratroopers missed the third drop zone , although the majority were dropped in a relatively small area where they could gather . Further problems were encountered , as a plane crash killed eight paratroopers and four aircrew , and the glider @-@ borne elements of the division due to land were delayed by poor weather . After the initial night , the exercise continued for a further three days and included a complex supply mission designed to test whether it was possible to supply an isolated battalion of airborne troops . 
 Overall , observers present for the exercise reported that they had been impressed with the performance of the glider @-@ borne elements of the division . However , several noted that the training of the aircraft pilots for night formation flying and navigation was far from satisfactory . A recommendation was made that night that glider landings should be considered only when an emergency existed , and that otherwise gliders should take off during the night and land during daylight to avoid the wide dispersal of airborne troops and a decrease in efficiency . After these exercises had ended , the division continued to train , but encountered further delays . These were caused when 1 @,@ 652 men were removed from the division to provide reinforcements for U.S. Airborne units in the European Theater ; this drastically reduced the strength of the division and forced it to extend its training period for a further four months . After completing its training in January the division was preparing to transfer to the Pacific Theatre in early 1945 . However , the rapid advances made by German forces during the Battle of the Bulge led to the division being transferred to the European Theatre of Operations to reinforce Allied divisions already in combat . 
 = = = European Theater of Operations = = = 
 The division arrived in the European Theater of Operations in early February , coming under the command of the First Allied Airborne Army , and Major General Chapman was informed that there was a possibility that the division would be required to conduct airborne operations during the closing stages of the Battle of the Bulge . However , the campaign in the Ardennes ended before the division could be transported there . The next chance for the 13th to participate in an airborne operation , and to actually see combat , was in March 1945 when the Allies had penetrated into Germany itself and reached the River Rhine . A few weeks before the division was to participate in a combat jump over the Rhine it was reorganized , after a conference by the War Department had decided that a more efficient composition for an airborne division was two Parachute Infantry Regiments and only a single Glider Infantry Regiment . Subsequently the 517th Parachute Infantry Regiment , a veteran unit that had served in Italy , Southern France and the Ardennes , joined the division in early March , and the 88th Glider Infantry Regiment was combined into the 326th Glider Infantry Regiment that remained as the division 's sole glider @-@ based element . The 517th had recently fought during the Ardennes campaign , and had received a Presidential Unit Citation for its actions . 
 The Rhine river was a formidable natural obstacle to the Allied advance , but if breached would allow the Allies access to the North German Plain and ultimately to advance on Berlin and other major cities in Northern Germany . Following the ' Broad Front Approach ' laid out by General Dwight D. Eisenhower , the Supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force , it was decided to attempt to breach the Rhine in several areas . Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery , commanding the Anglo @-@ Canadian 21st Army Group , devised a plan to allow the forces under his command to breach the Rhine , which he titled Operation Plunder , and which was subsequently authorized by Eisenhower . Plunder envisioned the British Second Army , under Lieutenant @-@ General Miles C. Dempsey , and the U.S. Ninth Army , under Lieutenant General William Simpson , crossing the Rhine at Rees , Wesel , and an area south of the Lippe Canal . To ensure that the operation was a success , Montgomery insisted that an airborne component was inserted into the plans for the operation to support the amphibious assaults that would take place , which was code @-@ named Operation Varsity . Three airborne divisions were initially chosen to take part in Varsity , these being the British 6th Airborne Division , the U.S. 17th Airborne Division , and finally the 13th , all of which were assigned to U.S. XVIII Airborne Corps , commanded by Major General Matthew Ridgway . However , it was discovered that there were only enough transport aircraft available in Europe to transport two airborne divisions into combat , and as such it was removed from Operation Varsity due to its lack of combat experience . 
 After its removal from Operation Varsity , the division remained in reserve as the Allied armies advanced even further into Germany , moving to Oise , France , on 3 April for supply and administrative tasks . The division was scheduled to participate in several other airborne operations ; however , these were all cancelled before they could take place . The first of these was Operation Arena , which envisioned landing between six and ten divisions into what was termed a ' strategic airhead ' in the Kassel region of Northern Germany ; the planners of the operations envisioned that the operation would deny a large swathe of territory to the German defenders and give the Allied armies a staging area for further advances into Germany . The 13th was chosen to participate , along with the 17th , 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions and the British 6th and 1st Airborne Divisions . A preliminary date for 1 May was set for the operation once all of the required airborne and air @-@ landed infantry divisions had been located and supplied , but it was ultimately cancelled on 26 March due to the rapid movement of Allied ground forces negating the need for the operation . Two other airborne operations were planned to include the 13th . Operation <unk> II was to be an airborne landing on the east bank of the Rhine near Worms , Germany ; planning for the operation got to an advanced stage , and the division was only hours from taking off from airfields in France when the operation was cancelled due to Allied ground forces overrunning the proposed landing areas . Operation Effective was designed to land the 13th south of Stuttgart , seize a nearby airfield and create an airhead for further forces to land in near the Black Forest . The operation was scheduled for 22 April , but was cancelled on 18 April due to Allied units encircling the Black Forest region and making it unnecessary . 
 = = Inactivation = = 
 The conflict with Germany came to an end a few weeks after Operation Effective was cancelled , and shortly afterwards it was announced that the division would be redeployed to the Pacific to participate in the invasion of Japan after a brief stop @-@ over in the United States . The deactivation of the 17th Airborne Division meant that the 13th acquired several combat units from that division to bolster it for its envisioned action in Japan . The division arrived in New York City on 23 August , but did not leave the United States before the surrender of Japan in September 1945 . With the conflict at an end , the division was no longer required by the United States Army , and it was permanently inactivated at Fort Bragg , North Carolina , on 25 February 1946 , with its personnel transferred to the command of the 82nd Airborne Division . 
 = = Divisional order of battle = = 
 Units of the 13th Airborne Division included : 
 88th Glider Infantry Regiment ( disbanded 1 March 1945 , assets to the 326th GIR ) 
 189th Glider Infantry Regiment ( disbanded 4 – 8 December 1943 , replaced by 88th GIR and 326th GIR ) 
 190th Glider Infantry Regiment ( disbanded 4 – 8 December 1943 , replaced by 88th GIR and 326th GIR ) 
 326th Glider Infantry Regiment 
 515th Parachute Infantry Regiment 
 517th Parachute Infantry Regiment , ( assigned 1 March 1945 ; replaced 88th GIR ) 
 <unk> , Division Artillery 
 458th Parachute Field Artillery Battalion ( 75 mm ) 
 460th Parachute Field Artillery Battalion ( 75 mm ) ( assigned 22 February 1945 ) 
 <unk> Glider Field Artillery Battalion ( 75 mm ) 
 <unk> Glider Field Artillery Battalion ( 75 mm ) 
 129th Airborne Engineer Battalion 
 153rd Airborne Antiaircraft Battalion 
 222nd Airborne Medical Company 
 13th Parachute Maintenance Company 
 Headquarters Special Troops 
 Headquarters Company , 13th Airborne Division 
 Military Police Platoon 
 <unk> Airborne Ordnance Maintenance Company 
 513th Airborne Signal Company 
 409th Airborne Quartermaster Company 
 = Myrmeciites = 
 Myrmeciites is an extinct form genus of bulldog ants in the subfamily Myrmeciinae of the family Formicidae , which contains three described species and two fossils not placed beyond the genus level . Described in 2006 from Ypresian stage ( Early Eocene ) deposits , all three of the described species and one unplaced fossil are from British Columbia , Canada , while the second unplaced fossil is from Washington State , USA . These ants were large , with the largest specimens collected reaching 3 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) . The behaviour of these ants would have been similar to extant Myrmeciinae ants , such as solitary foraging , nesting either in the soil or trees , and leaving no pheromone trail to food sources . Due to the poor preservation of these ants , their phylogenetic position among Myrmeciinae is unclear , and no type species has been designated . These ants are classified as incertae sedis in Myrmeciinae , but some writers have classified it as incertae sedis within the insect order Hymenoptera . This reclassification however has not been accepted ; instead , Myrmeciites remains in Myrmeciinae . 
 = = History and classification = = 
 Fossils of Myrmeciites were first studied and described by Bruce Archibald , Stefan Cover and Corrie Moreau of the Museum of Comparative Zoology in Cambridge , Massachusetts . They published their 2006 description of the form genus ( which is a collection of species formally described but cannot be identified to genus level ) in an Annals of the Entomological Society of America journal article . The genus name is a combination of the ant subfamily name " Myrmeciinae " and the Latin suffix " ites " , meaning " having the nature of " , which is commonly used in the naming of fossil taxa . Its phylogenetic position within Myrmeciinae is unclear , due to the incomplete and poor preservation of the collected specimens . The paper that described the form genus included the description of three species , including Myrmeciites herculeanus , Myrmeciites ( ? ) goliath , and Myrmeciites ( ? ) tabanifluviensis . 
 Archibald and colleagues classified Myrmeciites as incertae sedis ( Latin for " of uncertain placement " ) within the ant subfamily Myrmeciinae , as the specimens are too poorly preserved to be assigned to any tribe . However , in a 2008 paper , Cesare Baroni Urbani of the University of Basel , Switzerland , classified Myrmeciites as incertae sedis within the insect order Hymenoptera ( which comprises the sawflies , wasps , bees and ants ) because the critical characters used to identify Myrmeciinae ants , or even the family Formicidae cannot be carried out on Myrmeciites . Despite these comments , a 2012 report by Russian palaeoentomologist Gennady M. Dlussky does not make any comment in regard to Baroni Urbani 's views ; instead , he accepts the classification of Archibald and colleagues . 
 = = Description = = 
 Archibald , Cover , and Moreau erected the form genus as an encompassing category for all fossil ants which , while belonging to the subfamily Myrmeciinae , lack details needed for placement in other described genera . This may be due to preservation quality or positioning of the individual ant resulting in obscured details . As Myrmeciites is a form genus it does not have a designated type species per the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature . 
 = = = M. herculeanus = = = 
 M. herculeanus was described from a single side of a compression fossil found at the Middle Ypresian McAbee Fossil Beds , Kamloops Group , near Cache Creek , British Columbia . The incomplete specimen numbered UCCIPR L @-@ 18 F @-@ 974 , is currently preserved in the paleontology collections housed at the Thompson Rivers University , Kamloops , British Columbia . Archibald , Cover , and Moreau coined the specific epithet " herculeanus " from the Latin name " Hercules " in reference to the notably sturdy and large morphology of the type specimen , and after the divine hero Heracles in Greek mythology , who was the son of Zeus and Alcmene . The species is discernible from the other species of Myrmeciinae by its notably larger size , the worker caste ant is estimated at over 20 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) in life . Its size is comparable to ants in the genus Ypresiomyrma . The shape of the petiole , a narrow waist that is located between the mesosoma and gaster is distinct from other species and is similar in structure to the genus Prionomyrmex though the shape and size of the mandibles are distinct . Overall , M. herculeanus was assigned to Myrmeciinae due to its mandible length , despite them being poorly preserved , and due to the appearance of its petiole and propodeum . The legs are long in comparison to its body length , and the gaster is robust . It is unknown if the species had a sting , due to the preservation of the specimen . The size of the single known worker is larger than any of the studied queens ; as Myrmeciinae queens are slightly larger than the other castes in a species , this indicates M. herculeanus is most likely a distinct species . Due to the incomplete nature of the type specimen , the species was placed in Myrmeciites . 
 = = = M. ( ? ) goliath = = = 
 The second species described from the McAbee Fossil Beds is M. ( ? ) goliath and as with M. herculeanus , it is known from one specimen , though both the part and counterpart are known for M. ( ? ) goliath . The holotype is housed in the Thompson Rivers University , Kamloops , collections as UCCIPR L @-@ 18 F @-@ 999 and UCCIPRL @-@ 18 F @-@ 1000 for each side respectively . The species name " goliath " was chosen by Archibald , Cover and Moreau in reference to the mythological Goliath , due to the notable size of the ant . The holotype specimen is a partial worker or queen which is incomplete , with a notable portion of the gaster missing . The species can be separated from other ants by the large size , the holotype approaching 3 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) . The only other Eocene ants in this size range are members of the genus Titanomyrma , that were formerly placed in <unk> . M. ( ? ) goliath is distinguishable from Titanomyrma by the shape and structure of the antennae and length of the legs , which are notably shorter in Titanomyrma . The head is very round and flattened , compound eyes are present and the mandibles are small , less than half the length of the head . The head is also small in proportion to the mesosoma . The legs are large and long , and a poorly preserved petiole is known . Most of the specimen is preserved in fine detail , but some characters are so poorly preserved that the exact placement of M. ( ? ) goliath within Myrmeciinae cannot be confirmed . Only future fossils that are better preserved can clarify the position of M. ( ? ) goliath . 
 = = = M. ( ? ) tabanifluviensis = = = 
 Unlike the other described Myrmeciites species , M. ( ? ) tabanifluviensis is the only species not from the McAbee Fossil Beds . The holotype , currently deposited in the Courtenay and District Museum paleontology collections as 2003 @.@ 2 @.@ 10 CDM 034 was recovered from shale of an unnamed formation outcropping near the town of Horsefly , British Columbia . The specimen is incomplete with both the head and portions of the mesosoma and gaster missing . The adult had an estimated length in life of over 1 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) . The right portions of the legs are well preserved while the left legs are missing with two <unk> spurs , one of which is long and the other is short and narrow . Due to the incomplete nature of the specimen and position of the preserved portions , the gender is not identifiable , though the presence of wings indicates it to be a reproductive adult . The small size of the specimen , with a fore @-@ wing length of approximately 12 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) , separates this species from other members of the British Columbia Myrmeciinae . The type locality for the species , near the Horsefly River , was the basis for Archibald , Cover and Moreau choosing the specific epithet tabanifluviensis , combined with the horsefly genus name Tabanus , the Latin word <unk> meaning " river " and the <unk> <unk> meaning " origin " or " place " . The justification of placing this ant in Myrmeciites is due to incomplete preservation . 
 = = = Unplaced specimens = = = 
 Two additional specimens were placed within the form genus but not into a specific species . The Courtenay and District Museum specimen 2003 @.@ 2 @.@ 9 CDM 03 a & b is a 2 centimetres ( 20 mm ) long partial male recovered from the Falkland site , near Falkland , British Columbia . The generally robust nature of the specimen excludes it from the genus Avitomyrmex , but the details needed for placement between the genera Ypresiomyrma and Macabeemyrma are not present . The <unk> Interpretive Center specimen " SR 05 @-@ 03 @-@ 01 " is a possible queen or worker which would have been an estimated 1 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 15 mm ) long in life . Due to the lateral preservation of the specimen , most characters for placing the specimen into one of the defined species are obscured or absent . The specimen was recovered from outcrops of the Klondike Mountain Formation north west of Republic , Washington . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Archibald and colleagues suggested that the behavioural habits for Myrmeciites ants , like that of other extinct Myrmeciinae taxa , may have been similar to its extant relatives . Workers would forage onto trees or vegetation to capture arthropod prey or to feed on nectar , soiling either in the ground or in the trees , making them an arboreal nesting insect . Like other <unk> ants , Myrmeciites most likely did not lay pheromone trails or recruit nestmates to food sources ; these ants may have been solitary foragers , relying on their eyes to hunt for prey and for navigational purposes . The nuptial flight of M. ( ? ) tabanifluviensis probably occurred during the late spring or summer , as in extant relatives . 
 = DJ Hero = 
 DJ Hero is a music video game , developed by FreeStyleGames and published by Activision as a rhythm game spin @-@ off of the Guitar Hero franchise . It was released on October 27 , 2009 in North America and on October 29 , 2009 in Europe . The game is based on turntablism , the act of creating a new musical work from one or more previously recorded songs using record players and sound effect generators , and features 94 remixes of two different songs from a selection of over 100 different songs across numerous genres . 
 To score points , the player must press buttons to activate accented beats , adjust their crossfade between the two songs , and " scratch " the turntable on the game 's custom controller in time to marks that scroll on the screen to score points and perform well for the virtual crowd . The game features both a single player Career mode and cooperative and competitive multiplayer modes . The game also features a mode for selected songs for a DJ player to play alongside another player using a Guitar Hero guitar controller . Many DJ and mix artists have contributed to the game both in the game 's development , the creation of mixes , and in lending their images for playable avatars in the game ; these including DJ Shadow , Z @-@ Trip , DJ AM , Grandmaster Flash , DJ Jazzy Jeff , and Daft Punk . 
 DJ Hero was generally well received by game journalists , praising the departure from the Guitar Hero series @-@ style of gameplay , the use of the turntable controller to simulate the motions of a DJ and how the game 's difficulty curve helps the player to become skilled on it , and the game 's soundtrack ; several smaller issues were identified as potential improvements for a possible sequel . However , the game did not perform as strongly as expected by industry analysts , believed to be due to the waning interest in music games during 2009 ; regardless , DJ Hero is stated by NPD Group to be the highest @-@ grossing new intellectual property of 2009 in North America . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 DJ Hero primarily simulates turntablism , a musical style used by disc jockeys to create a new mashup song by incorporating one or more previously recorded songs played on record players along with sound effect generators . The game features score attack gameplay similar to the Guitar Hero games . The controller consists of a wireless deck consisting of a movable turntable that supports 3 " stream " buttons , an effects dial , a crossfader , and a " Euphoria " button ; a hidden panel contains additional controller buttons to interact with the gaming console outside of the game . A portion of the controller can be detached and reattached to adapt the unit for left @-@ handed players . Notes travel in an arc across a spinning record on screen , and the player holds down one of the 3 stream buttons to play notes ; two buttons reflect the two songs used in that particular mix , and the third represents samples to add to the mix which can be adjusted with the effects dial . The player must also constantly adjust the crossfader to match onscreen symbols , which alters the relative volume of the songs as to bring one song to the forefront of the mix for a short time . Certain tracks are shown on screen as a series of up or down arrow , representing scratching sections , requiring the player to turn the turntable in the direction of the arrows while holding down the button to score points , mimicking the scratching of the record needle on vinyl albums . " Euphoria " is equivalent to Guitar Hero 's Star Power , collected by successfully completing specific phrases in the song mix , called Perfect Regions , and can be released by pressing the Euphoria button , doubling the player 's current multiplier as well as automatic crossfading when active . There is also a " Rewind " meter that builds through consistent successful playing , and once full , allows the player to rewind the song to fix errors in their performance . The player must continue to perform well or their performance meter will drop and the music track will cut out . Failing the song is not possible , unlike in Guitar Hero games . 
 A single player career mode is available , as well both competitive and cooperative multiplayer modes ( " DJ vs DJ " ) , playable locally or remotely . Ten songs have been specially mixed to also support gameplay with Guitar Hero and other compatible guitar controllers in a " DJ vs Guitar " mode . Players can also use a microphone for a non @-@ scoring addition to the mix . A Party Play mode allows the game to automatically play the songs with the ability for a player to jump in and play at any time . 
 = = Development = = 
 Activision had initially applied for a trademark on the name DJ Hero in early 2008 , leading to speculation that Activision was making plans to compete against Konami 's Beatmania series of music video games with their own DJ game as a possible spinoff of their popular Guitar Hero series . FreeStyleGames , a small developer of music games , was employed to help produce localized downloadable content for Guitar Hero games and develop another yet @-@ to @-@ be announced music game . This game was later revealed to be DJ Hero . Activision CEO Robert Kotick confirmed the existence of DJ Hero in an interview with CNBC on January 20 , 2009 , revealing a release " later this year " . Activision CFO Thomas <unk> stated that DJ Hero would be aimed at a broader audience than the Guitar Hero games primarily through the use of more contemporary music in its soundtrack . Producer Will Townsend stated they opted for a wide variety of music to " make sure that everybody has something in there that they want . " DJ Hero was designed as a party game and to make the player " the life of the party " , giving ways for them to be " in control of the music " , according to Townsend . 
 FreeStyleGames teamed up with London based music production company <unk> Cartel owned by <unk> <unk> and Dan Neil to ensure the overall quality of the soundtrack . The 16 man music production team used a combination of MIDI software along with the music sequencer program , Ableton Live ; the MIDI information was used to construct the gameplay elements such as crossfading and scratching with additional custom export software . Because of this nature , Neil stated that it was much easier to alter a mix to meet certain gameplay goals , taking only a few minutes to complete , compared with the development of songs for Guitar Hero . 
 The team worked alongside artists and DJ 's for incorporation of songs into the game . Neil stated they brought to artists and DJ 's working prototypes of the game and hardware to show them what the sampled music and final mixes sounded like , garnering interest from these groups . This led to securing of rights from several groups for their songs , though this did occur late in the development process . Mixing with celebrity DJ 's was performed either though electronic communications , or at FreeStyleGames ' studios or the homes or studios of the DJ 's themselves ; the team outlined the goals of the game and requested mixes that emphasized the gameplay featured , but avoided hampering the creativity of the artists . 
 DJ Shadow was brought in by Activision during November and December 2008 , at least a year into the development into the game , to help select individual songs , help with creating the mixes , and provide additional input for the game , and will also be a playable DJ avatar in the game . He was able to identify old effects samples that were used in the past for scratching for the developers to include the game . To create the mixes , DJ Shadow first created a " dry version " of each mix which did not include any embellishments . DJ Shadow then proceeded to build off that to create the " wet version " with added effects that was used as the base for the gameplay 's mixes . Artists Eminem and Jay @-@ Z have also served as consultants for the game ; a special edition of DJ Hero was branded with their names , and included a limited edition of the controller , a music CD of their songs , a DJ stand , and a travel case for the units . This version is titled " Renegade Edition . " Jay @-@ Z stated that he " [ loved ] the freedom " that the game gives him , and was able to work closely with Activision to put in new mixes that he envisioned , and considered the game " a DJ 's universe " , while Eminem believed DJ Hero was a game that he could " see [ himself ] actually playing " . DJ 's Z @-@ Trip and DJ AM both created mixes for the game and will also be playable DJ 's in the game ; Z @-@ Trip will also help demonstrate the game at the 2009 E3 Conference . Cut Chemist and <unk> will also be assisting in creating mixes for the game . Grandmaster Flash , DJ Jazzy Jeff , and Daft Punk have contributed remixes to the soundtrack and will also appear as playable avatars . In the case of Daft Punk , a special venue inspired by the group 's Alive 2007 tour was created , that Tim Riley , Vice President for Music Affairs at Activision , considered to be " the next best thing to being at a Daft Punk concert " . David Guetta has also contributed three mixes that were made available as downloadable content for the game ; Guetta would also serve as a spokesperson in the game 's European marketing . As part of the game 's promotion , the DJ Hero controller appears in the music video for Kid Cudi 's " Make Her Say " . 
 On August 28 , 2009 , DJ AM , a significant contributor to DJ Hero , was found dead in his apartment in New York City . His death did not affect the release of the game . Tim Riley , vice president of music affairs for Activision , stated that " We are deeply saddened by the loss of DJ AM . We hope that his work on the game will be a fitting tribute to his creative spirit and musical talent " . Also , at least one promotional video for the game has included a screen commemorating the deceased DJ , with the message " DJ AM , 1973 – 2009 . In memory of a visionary . " 
 Neversoft 's Brian Bright revealed that the use of Guitar Hero guitar controllers within DJ Hero arose when they tried to create mixes of guitar @-@ heavy and rock tracks in the game ; they felt something was missing in these mixes and added in the Guitar Hero @-@ style of play alongside it . Bright has stated that , while too late for the planned release of Guitar Hero 5 , they are looking towards future instrument controller interoperability , including use of the DJ Hero controller into gameplay for future Guitar Hero titles , or using drum controllers within DJ Hero . 
 = = = DJ Hero 2 = = = 
 DJ Hero 2 was officially announced in June 2010 and was released in October 2010 , featuring more than 70 mashups from over 85 artists . The game includes several new gameplay modes , including a " Empire " career mode , head @-@ to @-@ head DJ battles , social multiplayer modes , and a jump @-@ in and out Party Play mode similar to Guitar Hero 5 . The game includes more vocal options for singing and rapping to songs , and a freestyle mode for players . Artists include Eminem , Daft Punk , Chamillionaire , Dr. Dre , Chemical Brothers , Kanye West , Metallica , Lady Gaga , and Rihanna , while Deadmau5 , DJ Qbert , David Guetta and Tiësto are playable avatars in the game . 
 Prior to the game 's announcement , Activision revealed a month before the game 's release that it is actively seeking artists for downloadable content and a sequel to the game . One DJ in speculation to appear is DJ BJ , including mixer DJ Qbert . David Guetta has stated that he is set to work on the game 's sequel to arrive late in 2010 . Activision CEO Bobby Kotick stated that despite low sales of DJ Hero , they are committed to continuing the series , with the sequel due in 2010 . The sequel , DJ Hero 2 , was further confirmed during an Activision investors report for 2009 , citing it as one of only 2 major Guitar Hero titles to be expected from Activision in 2010 , with an expected late @-@ 2010 release date . 
 = = = DJ Hero 3D = = = 
 At Nintendo 's E3 press conference on June 15 , 2010 , the Nintendo 3DS handheld console was revealed . At the conference Nintendo listed a number of publishers and franchises coming to the 3DS , one of whom was Activision with DJ Hero 3D , a new installment in the DJ Hero series and the first handheld DJ Hero title . The gameplay is similar in nature to DJ Hero , where the stylus and touchscreen are used to mimic scratching and crossfading between songs . It is unknown if the game is still in development after Activision stopped production of the Guitar Hero and DJ Hero franchises . 
 = = = Legal conflicts = = = 
 On April 15 , 2009 , the publishers of Scratch : The Ultimate DJ , Genius Products and <unk> , sued against Scratch 's developer , 7 Studios and Activision . The lawsuit contends that Activision purchased 7 Studios to both gain access to proprietary technology and to delay publication of the game so DJ Hero could come out first . The Los Angeles Superior Court in which the suit was filed did not grant the requested restraining order against Activision on DJ Hero . Activision states that Scratch was already delayed by as early as October 2008 , before they made contact with 7 Studios , and their acquisition of the developers did not impede them from completing Scratch . However , on April 20 , the court reversed its decision , awarding Genius and <unk> a temporary restraining order , and ordered the " immediate return " of all of the material from 7 Studios from Activision , including all source code related to Scratch . 7 Studios subsequently filed a counter @-@ suit against Genius Products , claiming that they engaged in " unlawful and unsavoury business practices " that limited 7 Studios from completing the game as planned . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Over 100 individual songs based on master recordings were licensed by Activision , composed into 93 DJ mixes by both participating internationally known DJs and an in @-@ house remix team . Unusually , the audio team also acted as the design team , playtesting all mixes and creating gameplay in tandem with producing the mixes . All mixes were produced using Ableton Live , with most of the scratch routines being performed by former DMC World DJ Champion DJ Blakey . All mixes used in the soundtrack were unique at the time of the game 's release . Celebrity mix artists include DJ Shadow , DJ Z @-@ Trip , DJ AM , and Daft Punk in addition to other mix artists listed below , although Daft Punk did not create their levels - they were all created by the in @-@ house remix team . Initial industry speculation stated that DJ Tiësto would be involved with the game , but this was eventually denied . Mix Master Mike of the Beastie Boys was reported to have signed an exclusivity deal with 7 Studios to appear in their game Scratch : The Ultimate DJ , meaning that he would also not appear on DJ Hero . 
 The individual songs themselves were pulled from a large number of music genres , including Pop , Grunge , Soul , R & B , Techno , Hip Hop , House , Drum & Bass . Most mashup concepts were conceived by the in @-@ house remix team . In addition to mixes using individual songs from both Eminem and Jay @-@ Z , including Jay @-@ Z 's " Izzo ( <unk> ) " and " Dirt Off Your Shoulder " . Eminem also stated that he will have additional songs included later in the year as downloadable content for the game , such as the " Jay @-@ Z vs. Eminem Mix Pack " released in March 2010 , featuring three mash up @-@ style songs combining the works of both artists . Universal Music Group is providing much of the content for the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 DJ Hero has received positive reviews from the gaming press , who consider the title as a fresh restart of the music genre given the large number of titles based on guitar play . The turntable peripheral was considered to be well designed to meet the needs of the game . The unit 's weight , size , and shape , and ability to cater to both left- and right @-@ handed players was commended . Many reviewers noted a need to alter the action of the crossfader , either by having better physical feedback to the player to indicate the center of the knob 's track , or by reducing the width of the track to better handle the rapid crossfade maneuvers . Reviewers also noted that there was a certain weight to the turntable portion of the controller which made scratching imprecise , particularly with the inner blue button where only minimal torque can be applied . The learning curve of the game across the various mixes was highly commended by reviewers for helping players to get used to the new controller . When progressing from " Medium " to " Hard " and " Expert " levels and encountering more complex mixes , reviewers thought the game felt transformed , bringing a difficult but more rewarding experience to the player as they begin emulating every part of a real DJ 's motions . Johnny Minkley of Eurogamer considered that while the learning curve is steep , with the " Easy " difficulty being " less thrilling and engaging " compared to Guitar Hero , the game was " structured fabulously to nudge you gradually closer to the summit " with each successive career set and difficulty mode . Cam Shae of IGN Australia felt that the changes in " Hard " mode over " Medium " were somewhat excessive , introducing both more crossfade effects and button @-@ pressing , and felt these could have been introduced separately in " Hard " and " Expert " modes . Richard Li of 1UP.com noted that the inability to fail a song is both " a bane and a boon " ; newer players would not feel frustration at trying to get used to the controller and would be able to quickly unlock all the sets in the game 's career mode , but without knowing where they failed , they would not have an idea of where they need to hone their skills to improve their performance at the game . The omission of a practice mode was noted by Daemon Hatfield of IGN , believing it would help in some of the more complex mixes by the DJ celebrities . Reviewers believed that the small faults in DJ Hero can be easily fixed for potential sequels . 
 Reviewers found the on @-@ disc soundtrack to be generally strong ; Hatfield believed that " the entire soundtrack is superb and could easily stand on its own outside the game " . Matt Helgeson of Game Informer considered it to be one of the " most adventurous " soundtracks of any music game , and said though it often relied too much on pop hits , it remained true to the spirit of the DJ mix scene . Minkley thought the game to have " vital , varied , surprising and vast musical content " and to be a fresh experience compared to previous music games . Other reviewers felt the soundtrack had some weak areas . Shae noted that many of the mixes felt like " random mash @-@ ups that take disparate songs " , which would be appropriate for a live DJ , but does not reflect well on the art of mixing that can be performed today . Li noted a clear distinction in the quality of the mixes between the early sets — those mostly created in @-@ house by FreeStyleGames — and the latter sets centered on the work of famous DJs . While Ben Kuchera of Ars Technica felt the soundtrack was good , he asserted that individual songs were unrecognizable because of modifications made to them for the mixes , and that they were more difficult to adjust to within the gameplay itself . 
 Many reviews for DJ Hero felt the addition of the non @-@ scoring freeform samples during certain parts of mixes were unnecessary and difficult to use , and with the limited number of samples available , ultimately would lead to overuse and make the mixes sound worse . Reviewers were critical of the game 's lackluster multiplayer modes . The DJ @-@ vs @-@ DJ mode was considered poor as both players play the same mix , in consideration of current band @-@ based music games where different players can play different parts of a song . This leads to minimal engagement between players , with each just attempting to maximize their score whenever possible on the controller . While some reviewers considered the DJ @-@ vs @-@ Guitar modes to be fun , others felt it was more a novelty due to the current tracks offered for this mode in the game . The game 's graphics were also considered as a negative , often using many strobing lights and creating concerns about possible <unk> seizures that could occur while watching the game . The character designs of the non @-@ celebrity avatars also continued to have the same Muppet @-@ like appearances that occur in the Guitar Hero series , and are overly stereotyped . 
 Time named DJ Hero one of the ten best video games of 2009 , considering it " the new contender for best party game " . USA Today considered DJ Hero the best music game of the year . DJ Hero also won Best Soundtrack at the Spike Video Game Awards 2009 . DJ Hero has been nominated for the " Outstanding Achievement in Soundtrack " Interactive Achievement Award from the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Prior to DJ Hero 's release , game industry analysts had projected the title would sell 1 @.@ 6 million units in its first fiscal quarter ; however , after disappointing sales performances of Guitar Hero 5 and The Beatles : Rock Band in the month prior to DJ Hero 's release , analysis had lowered that expectation to 600 @,@ 000 units . NPD Group figures for the month of October reported only 123 @,@ 000 units of the game were sold in the United States , below the 175 @,@ 000 units projected by analysts . November sales in North America were estimated at 211 @,@ 000 units . Through January 2010 , the game has sold 789 @,@ 000 units in North America . Ars Technica , in considering the game as a " flop " in its present market due to these numbers , attributes the failure being due to four factors : the game was not suited for social play , the cost was prohibitive in the current market , the mixes in the game were relatively unknown despite the individual songs being well @-@ known , and there was a lack of familiarity with how a turntable works for mixing compared with a guitar or drum kit . However , despite these figures , Activision claims that DJ Hero is the highest @-@ grossing new intellectual property of 2009 in North America based on NPD data , which reporters attribute to the game 's higher cost . Activision 's Dan <unk> cited total North American sales of over 1 @.@ 2 million units by June 2010 , and commented on the " long tail " of sales that made DJ Hero initially appear to be a failure but instead has been considered a successful title by his company but they ran out of business . They still make money off their games today . 
 = The Griffin Family History = 
 " The Griffin Family History " ( also known as " Untitled Griffin Family History " ) is the 27th episode of the fourth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on May 14 , 2006 . The episode begins after robbers break into the Griffin family home , so the family flees to safety in their panic room . Trapped with no way out , Peter decides to pass the time by telling his family the story of the Griffin family history , narrating a chain of events that describe their equally exotic and dysfunctional ancestry . 
 The episode was written by John Viener and directed by Zac Moncrief . The episode featured guest performances by Lori Alan as Diane Simmons , and featured Chris Sheridan , Joey Slotnick , Danny Smith and Phil LaMarr as various characters . The episode received generally negative reviews from television critics , who dismissed it as clichéd . According to Nielsen rating , it was viewed in 8 @.@ 03 million homes in its original airing . The episode writer , John Viener , was nominated for an Annie Award for Writing in an Animated Television Production . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While attempting to make Peter brush his teeth , Lois hears a noise from downstairs and discovers burglars have entered the house . The rest of the family awakens and flee to Peter 's self @-@ built panic room and begin to monitor what the robbers are doing through hidden cameras . Due to the room not having a telephone or an inside door handle , they cannot escape , and Peter begins to tell stories about the history of the Griffin family . 
 The stories begin with the big bang , and then moves to the Paleolithic Age , where it is revealed that Peter 's ancestor invented the wheel . The second story sees another Moses as a member of the Griffin family during the Bronze Age leading the Israelites to freedom . The family soon discovers that Meg can fit through the vent , so they force Meg through the vent and into the kitchen . Peter uses a loud speaker to contact Meg from the panic room , therefore alerting the burglars to the fact that somebody is in the kitchen . In order to take the family 's mind off Meg being captured , Peter tells the story of Nate Griffin . Nate lived in the small village of <unk> , but was captured by a white version of Cleveland Brown from South Carolina and taken to the United States . He , along with <unk> and Joe Mama , prank the ship captain . While sleeping , they push his bed into the ocean . Nate is caught after briefly escaping and forced to work on a plantation . He falls in love with the owner 's daughter , Lois 's relatives , and together , they bring up a secret family . After being discovered by his lover 's father , the couple and their children escape , where Nate sets up the Department of Motor Vehicles to " get back at the white man " . 
 After finishing the story , Peter carelessly aims a flare gun through an air vent , causing the sprinklers to come on . Meanwhile , Meg is trying to persuade the burglars to rape her but they are not interested . The rest of the family , still trapped in the panic room , are preparing to potentially drown from the sprinklers filling the room up with water . Peter tells the story of his ancestor , Willie " Black @-@ Eye " Griffin , who was a silent film star in the 1920s , but whose career later faltered due to his voice ( much like Bobcat Goldthwait 's ) not being cut out for talking pictures . Peter then tells his family about his great uncle , Peter Hitler , who was able to provide Adolf Hitler with success at his Munich speech , although annoying Adolf greatly . As the water from the sprinklers almost reaches its peak , Peter admits to the family that he did not care for The Godfather and a heated debate ensues , ending with Peter declaring his love for The Money Pit . At the last minute Joe rescues them , draining the water out of the room , thus saving their lives . Joe informs the family he has arrested the burglars , but they are pressing sexual harassment charges against Meg . Joe warns that they will need a lawyer to combat the charges , but the family ignores him , and Joe finally gives up and takes Meg away while the family ignores her cries for help . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Griffin Family History " was written by John Viener and was directed by Zac Moncrief . It guest starred Lori Alan as Diane Simmons and featured Chris Sheridan , Joey Slotnick , Danny Smith and Phil LaMarr as various characters . During the episode 's depiction of how the universe was created , God exclaims " ah , you smell that ? " after holding a lighter to his butt when performing <unk> ; this segment of audio was not broadcast on the Fox version of the episode . An additional scene not shown during the televised version was when the Griffins are depicted as dinosaurs . Originally , a Michael Jackson @-@ related scene was to be included in the episode , but it was re @-@ scheduled for a later episode due to limited time on this episode . In the original draft of the episode , Brian 's speech informing Peter of the dangers in the woods during the Nate Griffin story was intended to be longer , including Brian talking about automobile ratings , though it was shortened for unknown reasons . MacFarlane praises the animation sequence showing a horse running around Lois ' bedroom , describing it as " a piece of brilliance " . 
 Show producers removed a sketch which would include a rape joke upon Carter 's discovery of his daughter , Lois , with her secret family on the southern plantation . Unlike past requests to cut and / or alter jokes , this was not one imposed by the broadcast standards and practices ; this was done on the writers ' own accord . The sequence showing Peter 's silent film star ancestor being stabbed in a card fight was omitted from television broadcasting to save time . Near the end of the episode , the Griffins are shown arguing over the quality of The Godfather ; this scene is drawn from an actual argument that has taken place in the Family Guy writing room over its quality . MacFarlane prefers The ' <unk> and The Money Pit , both of which were received very poorly . Adolf Hitler talking to his wife about his annoyance at Peter Hitler , was also removed from television broadcasting for timing purposes . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The basic premise of the episode , as well as the design of Peter 's panic room , are based on the movie Panic Room . When Peter 's Paleolithic ancestor is attempting to market the wheel , Brian tells him " You so money , you don 't even know it " , a reference to the film Swingers . The story of Nate Griffin , an ancestor of Peter , makes references to the first installment of Roots , as well as the LAPD 's low @-@ speed pursuit of O. J. Simpson following his wife 's murder and the song " Hot for Teacher " . The scene in which the slave ship captain is thrown overboard uses the song " Are You Ready For the Summer " , from the film Meatballs . The story about Peter 's ancestor who was a silent film star is a spoof of Singin ' in the Rain , as the girl in Singin ' in the Rain did not have a good voice for the talking pictures . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Untitled Griffin Family History " finished 49th in the weekly ratings for the week of May 8 – 14 , 2006 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 03 . The episode received generally negative reviews from critics . In his review of the episode , Bob Sassone of TV Squad commented " All in all , a so @-@ so episode . It started rather strong but got weaker as it went along " . In his review of Family Guy , volume four , Michael Drucker of IGN stated " Untitled Griffin Family History " to be " as cliché as the tropes they 're mocking " . Despite this , John Viener , the writer of the episode was nominated for an Annie Award for Writing in an Animated Television Production . 
 = Scream ( roller coaster ) = 
 Scream ( originally stylised as Scream ! ) is a floorless roller coaster at Six Flags Magic Mountain . Manufactured by Bolliger & Mabillard , Scream was the park 's sixteenth roller coaster and is located in <unk> District area of the park . The 150 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 46 m ) ride consists of a series of roller coaster elements including seven inversions ranging from a zero @-@ g roll to interlocking corkscrews . The ride is a mirror image of Bizarro at Six Flags Great Adventure . Unlike its counterpart , Scream has been criticized for its lack of theming . Scream is one of the less popular rides at the park with a wait time that is often 5 minutes or shorter . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1999 , Six Flags Great Adventure spent $ 42 million on new attractions including a prototype Floorless Coaster , Medusa ( later renamed Bizarro ) , developed and built by Bolliger & Mabillard . The immediate popularity of the ride led to several parks installing Floorless Coasters in the early 2000s . 
 In November 2002 , parts for Scream began arriving at Six Flags Magic Mountain . On November 14 , 2002 , the park officially announced that they would be adding Scream for the 2003 season , making it the park 's sixteenth roller coaster . According to the park , the ride was added to fill the " missing link to our coaster collection " . After five months construction , Scream officially opened to the public on April 12 , 2003 . 
 On April 9 , 2004 , a park employee was killed when they were hit by one of Scream 's trains during an after @-@ hours test run . According to a statement issued by the park , the employee " deviated from safety training procedures and walked underneath the ride " . The ride was closed immediately pending clearance by the California Occupational Safety and Health Administration . The administration cleared the ride for operation within two weeks . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 The 3 @,@ 985 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @,@ 215 m ) Scream stands 150 feet ( 46 m ) tall . With a top speed of 63 miles per hour ( 101 km / h ) , the ride features seven inversions including a 128 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 39 m ) vertical loop , a 96 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 29 m ) dive loop , a zero @-@ g roll , a 78 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 24 m ) cobra roll , and two interlocking corkscrews . Although the ride is a mirrored clone of the first Floorless Coaster ( Medusa / Bizarro at Six Flags Great Adventure ) , they feature a slight difference in height of about 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) , and a difference in speed of 2 miles per hour ( 3 @.@ 2 km / h ) . 
 = = = Trains = = = 
 Scream operates with three floorless trains . Each train seats 32 riders in eight rows of four . This gives the ride a theoretical capacity of 1 @,@ 440 riders per hour . The open @-@ air trains feature seats which leave riders ' legs dangling above the track . Riders are restrainted with over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraints . As the trains are floorless , the station has a retractable floor for safe boarding . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 Once the train is loaded and secured , the floor is retracted and the train departs the station . A U @-@ turn to the right leads to the 150 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 46 m ) chain lift hill . Once riders reach the top , they go through a small pre @-@ drop before dropping 141 feet ( 43 m ) to the right . The train then reaches a top speed of 63 miles per hour ( 101 km / h ) and enters the 128 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 39 m ) vertical loop followed by a turn to the left into the 96 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 29 m ) dive loop . After the diving loop , the train passes the station and goes through a zero @-@ g roll , where riders experience a feeling of weightlessness . The train then goes through the 78 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 24 m ) cobra roll , a roller coaster element which inverts riders twice . Riders then enter the mid @-@ course brake run which is located next to the lift hill . The train drops out of the brake run to the right and enters a 270 @-@ degree helix followed by the two interlocking corkscrews . Riders to through a small dip then enter the final brake run before returning to the station . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The reception of Scream has been mixed . Arthur Levine of About.com gives the ride 4 out of 5 stars . He states " it 's remarkably smooth , loaded with airtime , and has plenty of surprises to warrant its name " . Levine did criticise the lack of theming and landscaping around the ride noting the immediate area surrounding the ride " includes a bone yard of coaster seats and parts " . Robert Niles of the Los Angeles Times shared a similar sentiment , stating " Scream creates an effective illusion that you are alone , flying above the track " but questions the ride 's location on a former parking lot . He highlights " a good story can elicit extreme thoughts and emotions . [ ... ] Why ignore those opportunities when building a thrill ride ? " . Niles concluded by stating " I feel a little neglected as I shuffle off the otherwise exciting ride " , referring to the lack of theming or storyline . Lynn <unk> of the Deseret News praised the ride , rating it alongside the Riddler 's Revenge for the best rides in the park . 
 Scream has never featured in Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket Awards top 50 steel roller coasters . The mirrored clone at Six Flags Great Adventure peaked at position 16 in its debut year before ranking a further six times in the list . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll , Scream entered at position 52 in 2003 , before dropping to a low of 159 in the 2012 poll . The ride 's ranking in the poll is summarised in the table below . 
 = Omaha , Nebraska = 
 Omaha ( / <unk> / OH @-@ mə @-@ <unk> ) is the largest city in the state of Nebraska and the county seat of Douglas County . Omaha is located in the Midwestern United States on the Missouri River , about 10 miles ( 15 km ) north of the mouth of the Platte River . Omaha is the anchor of the Omaha @-@ Council Bluffs metropolitan area , which includes Council Bluffs , Iowa , across the Missouri River from Omaha . According to the 2010 census , Omaha 's population was 408 @,@ 958 , making it the nation 's 43rd @-@ largest city . According to the 2014 Population Estimates , Omaha 's population was 446 @,@ 599 . Including its suburbs , Omaha formed the 60th @-@ largest metropolitan area in the United States in 2013 , with an estimated population of 895 @,@ 151 residing in eight counties . The Omaha @-@ Council Bluffs @-@ Fremont , Nebraska @-@ IA Combined Statistical Area is 931 @,@ 667 , according to the U.S. Census Bureau 's 2013 estimate . There are nearly 1 @.@ 3 million residents within the Greater Omaha area , comprising a 50 @-@ mile ( 80 km ) radius of Downtown Omaha , the city 's center . 
 Omaha 's pioneer period began in 1854 , when the city was founded by speculators from neighboring Council Bluffs , Iowa . The city was founded along the Missouri River , and a crossing called Lone Tree Ferry earned the city its nickname , the " Gateway to the West " . Omaha introduced this new West to the world in 1898 , when it played host to the World 's Fair , dubbed the Trans @-@ Mississippi Exposition . During the 19th century , Omaha 's central location in the United States spurred the city to become an important national transportation hub . Throughout the rest of the 19th century , the transportation and jobbing sectors were important in the city , along with its railroads and breweries . In the 20th century , the Omaha Stockyards , once the world 's largest , and its meatpacking plants gained international prominence . 
 Today , Omaha is the home to the headquarters of five Fortune 500 companies : mega @-@ conglomerate Berkshire Hathaway ; packaged @-@ food giant ConAgra Foods ; one of the world 's largest construction companies , Kiewit Corporation ; insurance and financial firm Mutual of Omaha ; and the United States ' largest railroad operator , Union Pacific Corporation . Berkshire Hathaway is headed by local investor Warren Buffett , one of the richest people in the world , according to a decade 's worth of Forbes Magazine rankings , some of which have ranked him as high as No. 1 . Omaha is also the home to five Fortune 1000 headquarters : Green Plains Renewable Energy , TD Ameritrade , Valmont Industries , Werner Enterprises , and West Corporation . Also headquartered in Omaha are First National Bank of Omaha , the largest privately held bank in the United States ; three of the nation 's largest 10 architecture / engineering firms : DLR Group , HDR , Inc . , and Leo A Daly ; the Gallup Organization , of Gallup Poll fame ; and its riverfront Gallup University . Enron began in Omaha as Northern Natural Gas in 1930 , before taking over a smaller Houston company in 1985 to form InterNorth , which Kenneth Lay moved permanently to Houston , in 1987 . 
 The modern economy of Omaha is diverse and built on skilled knowledge jobs . In 2009 , Forbes identified Omaha as the nation 's number one " Best Bang @-@ For @-@ The Buck City " and ranked it number one on " America 's Fastest @-@ Recovering Cities " list . Tourism in Omaha benefits the city 's economy greatly , with the annual College World Series providing important revenue and the city 's Henry Doorly Zoo serving as the top attraction in Nebraska as well as being named the best zoo in the world by Trip Advisor in 2014 . Also , Omaha hosted the U.S. Olympic swim trials in 2008 , 2012 and 2016 . There is speculation that the swim trials , which serve as a major tourist attraction , will take place in Omaha again in 2020 
 Notable modern Omaha inventions include : the bobby pin and the " pink hair curler " , at Omaha 's Tip Top ; Butter <unk> Ice Cream and the Reuben sandwich , conceived by a chef at the then @-@ Blackstone Hotel on 33rd and Farnam Streets ; cake mix , developed by Duncan Hines , then a division of Omaha 's Nebraska Consolidated Mills , the forerunner to today 's ConAgra Foods ; center @-@ pivot irrigation by the Omaha company now known as Valmont Corporation ; Raisin Bran , developed by Omaha 's Skinner Macaroni Co . ; the ski lift , in 1936 , by Omaha 's Union Pacific Corp ; the " Top 40 " radio format , pioneered by Todd Storz , scion of Omaha 's Storz Brewing Co . , and head of Storz Broadcasting , which was the first in the U.S. to use the " Top 40 " format at Omaha 's <unk> Radio ; and the TV dinner , developed by Omaha 's Carl Swanson Co . 
 A character in a Rudyard Kipling essay claimed " dice were invented in Omaha , and the man who invented ' em , he made a colossal fortune . " 
 = = History = = 
 Various Native American tribes had lived in the land that became Omaha , including since the 17th century , the Omaha and Ponca , <unk> @-@ Siouan @-@ language people who had originated in the lower Ohio River valley and migrated west by the early 17th century ; Pawnee , Otoe , Missouri , and <unk> . The word Omaha ( actually <unk> or <unk> ) means " Dwellers on the bluff " . 
 In 1804 the Lewis and Clark Expedition passed by the riverbanks where the city of Omaha would be built . Between July 30 and August 3 , 1804 , members of the expedition , including Meriwether Lewis and William Clark , met with Oto and Missouria tribal leaders at the Council Bluff at a point about 20 miles ( 30 km ) north of present @-@ day Omaha . Immediately south of that area , Americans built several fur trading outposts in succeeding years , including Fort Lisa in 1812 ; Fort Atkinson in 1819 ; <unk> 's Trading Post , built in 1822 , and Fontenelle 's Post in 1823 , in what became Bellevue . There was fierce competition among fur traders until John Jacob Astor created the monopoly of the American Fur Company . The Mormons built a town called Cutler 's Park in the area in 1846 . While it was temporary , the settlement provided the basis for further development in the future . 
 Through 26 separate treaties with the United States federal government , Native American tribes in Nebraska gradually ceded the lands currently comprising the state . The treaty and cession involving the Omaha area occurred in 1854 when the Omaha Tribe ceded most of east @-@ central Nebraska . Logan Fontenelle , an interpreter for the Omaha and signatory to the 1854 treaty , played an essential role in those proceedings . 
 = = = Pioneer Omaha = = = 
 Before it was legal to claim land in Indian Country , William D. Brown was operating the Lone Tree Ferry to bring settlers from Council Bluffs , Iowa to the area that became Omaha . Brown is generally credited as having the first vision for a city where Omaha now sits . The passage of the Kansas – Nebraska Act in 1854 was presaged by the staking out of claims around the area to become Omaha by residents from neighboring Council Bluffs . On July 4 , 1854 , the city was informally established at a picnic on Capital Hill , current site of Omaha Central High School . Soon after , the Omaha Claim Club was formed to provide vigilante justice for claim jumpers and others who infringed on the land of many of the city 's founding fathers . Some of this land , which now wraps around Downtown Omaha , was later used to entice Nebraska Territorial legislators to an area called <unk> . The Territorial capitol was located in Omaha , but when Nebraska became a state in 1867 , the capital was relocated to Lincoln , 53 miles ( 85 km ) south @-@ west of Omaha . The U.S. Supreme Court later ruled against numerous landowners whose violent actions were condemned in Baker v. Morton . 
 Many of Omaha 's founding figures stayed at the Douglas House or the <unk> House Hotel . Dodge Street was important early in the city 's early commercial history ; North 24th Street and South 24th Street developed independently as business districts , as well . Early pioneers were buried in Prospect Hill Cemetery and Cedar Hill Cemetery . Cedar Hill closed in the 1860s and its graves were moved to Prospect Hill , where pioneers were later joined by soldiers from Fort Omaha , African Americans and early European immigrants . There are several other historical cemeteries in Omaha , historical Jewish synagogues and historical Christian churches dating from the pioneer era , as well . The city 's pioneering history is celebrated at two sculpture parks , Pioneer Courage and Spirit of Nebraska 's Wilderness and The Transcontinental Railroad . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The economy of Omaha boomed and busted through its early years . Omaha was a stopping point for settlers and prospectors heading west , either overland or via the Missouri River . The steamboat Bertrand sank north of Omaha on its way to the goldfields in 1865 . Its massive collection of artifacts is on display at the nearby <unk> National Wildlife Refuge . The jobbing and <unk> district brought new jobs , followed by the railroads and the stockyards . Groundbreaking for the First Transcontinental Railroad in 1863 , provided an essential developmental boom for the city . The Union Pacific Railroad was authorized by the U.S. Congress to begin building westward railways in 1862 ; in January 1866 it commenced construction out of Omaha . 
 Equally as important , the Union Stockyards were founded in 1883 . Within twenty years of the founding of the Union Stockyards in South Omaha , four of the five major meatpacking companies in the United States were located in Omaha . By the 1950s , half the city 's workforce was employed in meatpacking and processing . Meatpacking , jobbing and railroads were responsible for most of the growth in the city from the late 19th century through the early decades of the 20th century . 
 Immigrants soon created ethnic enclaves throughout the city , including Irish in <unk> in South Omaha ; Germans in the Near North Side , joined by the European Jews and black migrants from the South ; Little Italy and Little Bohemia in South Omaha . Beginning in the late 19th century , Omaha 's upper class lived in posh enclaves throughout the city , including the south and north Gold Coast neighborhoods , Bemis Park , Kountze Place , Field Club and throughout Midtown Omaha . They traveled the city 's sprawling park system on boulevards designed by renowned landscape architect Horace Cleveland . The Omaha Horse Railway first carried passengers throughout the city , as did the later Omaha Cable Tramway Company and several similar companies . In 1888 , the Omaha and Council Bluffs Railway and Bridge Company built the Douglas Street Bridge , the first pedestrian and wagon bridge between Omaha and Council Bluffs . Gambling , drinking and prostitution were widespread in the 19th century , first rampant in the city 's Burnt District and later in the Sporting District . Controlled by Omaha 's political boss Tom Dennison by 1890 , criminal elements enjoyed support from Omaha 's " perpetual " mayor , " Cowboy Jim " Dahlman , nicknamed for his eight terms as mayor . <unk> such as the Great Flood of 1881 did not slow down the city 's violence . In 1882 , the Camp Dump Strike pitted state militia against unionized strikers , drawing national attention to Omaha 's labor troubles . The Governor of Nebraska had to call in U.S. Army troops from nearby Fort Omaha to protect strikebreakers for the Burlington Railroad , bringing along Gatling guns and a cannon for defense . When the event ended , one man was dead and several were wounded . In 1891 , a mob hanged Joe Coe , an African @-@ American porter after he was accused of raping a white girl . There were several other riots and civil unrest events in Omaha during this period as well . 
 In 1898 , Omaha 's leaders , under the guidance of Gurdon Wattles , held the Trans @-@ Mississippi and International Exposition , touted as a celebration of agricultural and industrial growth throughout the Midwest . The Indian Congress , which drew more than 500 American Indians from across the country , was held simultaneously . More than 2 million visitors attended these events , located at Kountze Park and the Omaha Driving Park in the Kountze Place neighborhood . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 With dramatically increasing population in the 20th century , there was major civil unrest in Omaha , resulting from competition and fierce labor struggles . In 1900 , Omaha was the center of a national uproar over the kidnapping of Edward Cudahy , Jr . , the son of a local meatpacking magnate . 
 The city 's labor and management clashed in bitter strikes , racial tension escalated as blacks were hired as strikebreakers , and ethnic strife broke out . A major riot by ethnic whites in South Omaha destroyed the city 's Greek Town in 1909 , completely driving out the Greek population . 
 The civil rights movement in Omaha has roots that extend back to 1912 , when the first chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People west of the Mississippi River was founded in the city . 
 The Omaha Easter Sunday Tornado of 1913 destroyed much of the city 's African @-@ American community , in addition to much of Midtown Omaha . 
 Six years later , in 1919 , the city was caught up in the Red Summer riots when thousands of ethnic whites marched from South Omaha to the courthouse to lynch a black worker , Willy Brown , a suspect in an alleged rape of a white woman . The mob burned the Douglas County Courthouse to get the prisoner , causing more than $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 damage . They hung and shot Will Brown , then burned his body . Troops were called in from Fort Omaha to quell the riot , prevent more crowds gathering in South Omaha , and to protect the black community in North Omaha . 
 The culture of North Omaha thrived throughout the 1920s through 1950s , with several creative figures , including Tillie Olsen , Wallace Thurman , Lloyd Hunter , and Anna Mae Winburn emerging from the vibrant Near North Side . 
 Musicians created their own world in Omaha , and also joined national bands and groups that toured and appeared in the city . 
 After the tumultuous Great Depression of the 1930s , Omaha rebounded with the development of Offutt Air Force Base just south of the city . The Glenn L. Martin Company operated a factory there in the 1940s that produced 521 B @-@ 29 Superfortresses , including the Enola Gay and Bockscar used in the atomic bombing of Japan in World War II . 
 The construction of Interstates 80 , 480 and 680 , along with the North Omaha Freeway , spurred development . There was also controversy , particularly in North Omaha , where several neighborhoods were bisected by new routes . Creighton University hosted the <unk> Club , an early civil rights group whose sit @-@ in strategies for integration of public facilities predated the national movement , starting in 1947 . 
 Following the development of the Glenn L. Martin Company bomber manufacturing plant in Bellevue at the beginning of World War II , the relocation of the Strategic Air Command to the Omaha suburb in 1948 provided a major economic boost to the area . 
 From the 1950s through the 1960s , more than 40 insurance companies were headquartered in Omaha , including Woodmen of the World and Mutual of Omaha . By the late 1960s , the city rivaled , but never surpassed , the United States insurance centers of Hartford , Connecticut , New York City and Boston , Massachusetts . 
 After surpassing Chicago in meat processing by the late 1950s , Omaha suffered the loss of 10 @,@ 000 jobs as both the railroad and meatpacking industries restructured . The city struggled for decades to shift its economy as workers suffered . Poverty became more entrenched among families who remained in North Omaha . 
 In the 1960s , three major race riots along North 24th Street destroyed the Near North Side 's economic base , with recovery slow for decades . In 1969 , Woodmen Tower was completed and became Omaha 's tallest building and first major skyscraper at 478 feet ( 146 m ) , a sign of renewal . 
 Since the 1970s , Omaha has continued expanding and growing , mostly to available land to the west . West Omaha has become home to the majority of the city 's population . North and South Omaha 's populations continue to be centers of new immigrants , with economic and racial diversity . In 1975 a major tornado , along with a major blizzard , caused more than $ 100 million in damages in 1975 dollars . 
 Downtown Omaha has since been rejuvenated in numerous ways , starting with the development of Gene Leahy Mall and W. Dale Clark Library in the late 1970s . In the 1980s , Omaha 's fruit warehouses were converted into a shopping area called the Old Market . 
 The demolition of Jobber 's Canyon in 1989 led to the creation of the ConAgra Foods campus . Several nearby buildings , including the Nash Block , have been converted into condominiums . The stockyards were taken down ; the only surviving building is the Livestock Exchange Building , which was converted to multi @-@ use and listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 A historic preservation movement in Omaha has led to a number of historic structures and districts being designated Omaha Landmarks or listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Much of the push toward preservation came after Omaha gained the notorious designation of having , in 1989 , demolished the largest @-@ ever National Register historic district in the United States , a record that still stands as of 2013 . The Jobbers Canyon Historic District , along the Missouri River , was felled for a new headquarters campus for ConAgra Foods , a company which threatened to relocate if Omaha did not allow them to raze the city 's historic district . The Jobber 's Canyon warehouses had before then been allowed to deteriorate and were the scene of several fires set by the homeless population that had come to live in the abandoned buildings . At the time , there were no plans in place for revitalizing the buildings . 
 In the 1980s and 1990s , Omaha also saw major company headquarters leave the city , including Enron , founded in the city in 1930 and taken to Houston in 1987 by the now @-@ notorious Kenneth Lay . First Data Corporation , a large credit @-@ card processor , also was founded in Omaha in 1969 ; as of 2009 , its headquarters are in Atlanta . 
 <unk> , founded in Omaha in 1991 , was a technology company that customized computer systems for large businesses , and was on the Fortune 500 list from 1997 until 2000 , when it filed for bankruptcy . Northwestern Bell , the Bell System affiliate for Northwestern states , had its headquarters in Omaha from its founding in 1896 until it moved to Denver in 1991 as US West . Level 3 Communications , a large Tier 1 network provider , was founded in Omaha in 1985 as Kiewit Diversified Group , a division of Kiewit Corporation , a Fortune 500 construction and mining company still headquartered in Omaha ; Level 3 moved to Denver in 1998 . World Com was founded by a merger with Omaha 's MFS Communications , started as Metropolitan Fiber Systems in 1993 . MFS , backed by Kiewit Corporation CEO Walter Scott and Warren Buffett , purchased <unk> , one of the largest Internet backbones in the world , for $ 2 billion in 1996 . The now @-@ infamous Bernie <unk> purchased the much larger MFS for $ 14 @.@ 3 billion in 1997 under his World Com . He moved headquarters of the merged company from Omaha to Mississippi . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 Around the start of the 21st century , several new downtown skyscrapers and cultural institutions were built . One First National Center was completed in 2002 , surpassing the Woodmen Tower as the tallest building in Omaha as well as in the state at 634 feet ( 193 m ) . The creation of the city 's new North Downtown included the construction of the CenturyLink Center and the <unk> / Film Streams development at North 14th and Webster Streets . Construction of the new TD Ameritrade Park began in 2009 and was completed in 2011 , also in the North Downtown area , near the CenturyLink Center . 
 New construction has occurred throughout the city since the start of the 21st century . Important retail and office developments have occurred in West Omaha such as the Village Pointe shopping center and several business parks including First National Business Park and parks for Bank of the West and C & A Industries , Inc and Morgan Stanley Smith Barney and several others . Downtown and Midtown Omaha have both seen the development of a significant number of condominiums in recent years . In Midtown Omaha significant mixed @-@ use projects are underway . The site of the former Ak @-@ Sar @-@ Ben arena has been redeveloped into a mixed use development Aksarben Village . In January 2009 Blue Cross Blue Shield of Nebraska announced plans to build a new 10 story , $ 98 million headquarters , in the Aksarben Village , completed in Spring 2011 . Gordmans is also currently building their new corporate headquarters in Aksarben . The other major mixed @-@ use development is Midtown Crossing at Turner Park . Developed by Mutual of Omaha , the development includes several condominium towers and retail businesses built around Omaha 's Turner Park . 
 The Holland Performing Arts Center opened in 2005 near the Gene Leahy Mall and the Union Pacific Center opened in 2004 . 
 There have also been several developments along the Missouri River waterfront in downtown . The Bob Kerrey Pedestrian Bridge was opened to foot and bicycle traffic on September 28 , 2008 . Started in 2003 , <unk> Place <unk> first phase was completed in 2006 and is fully occupied and the second phase was opened in 2011 . The development along Omaha 's riverfront is attributed with prompting the City of Council Bluffs to move their own riverfront development time line forward . 
 In the summers of 2008 , 2012 and 2016 the United States Olympic Team swimming trials were held in Omaha , at the Qwest / Century Link Center . The event was a highlight in the city 's sports community , as well as a showcase for redevelopment in the downtown area . 
 = = Geography = = 
 See also : Geography of Omaha , Omaha @-@ Council Bluffs metropolitan area . 
 Omaha is located at 41 ° 15 ′ N 96 ° 0 ′ W. According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 130 @.@ 58 square miles ( 338 @.@ 20 km2 ) , of which 127 @.@ 09 square miles ( 329 @.@ 16 km2 ) is land and 3 @.@ 49 square miles ( 9 @.@ 04 km2 ) is water . Situated in the Midwestern United States on the bank of the Missouri River in eastern Nebraska , much of Omaha is built in the Missouri River Valley . Other significant bodies of water in the Omaha @-@ Council Bluffs metropolitan area include Lake Manawa , Papillion Creek , Carter Lake , Platte River and the Glenn Cunningham Lake . The city 's land has been altered considerably with substantial land grading throughout Downtown Omaha and scattered across the city . East Omaha sits on a flood plain west of the Missouri River . The area is the location of Carter Lake , an oxbow lake . The lake was once the site of East Omaha Island and Florence Lake , which dried up in the 1920s . 
 The Omaha @-@ Council Bluffs metropolitan area consists of eight counties ; five in Nebraska and three in Iowa . The metropolitan area now includes Harrison , Pottawattamie , and Mills Counties in Iowa and Washington , Douglas , Sarpy , Cass , and Saunders Counties in Nebraska . This area was formerly referred to only as the Omaha Metropolitan Statistical Area and consisted of only five counties : Pottawattamie in Iowa , and Washington , Douglas , Cass , and Sarpy in Nebraska . The Omaha @-@ Council Bluffs combined statistical area comprises the Omaha @-@ Council Bluffs metropolitan statistical area and the Fremont Micropolitan statistical area ; the CSA has a population of 858 @,@ 720 ( 2005 Census Bureau estimate ) . Omaha ranks as the 42nd @-@ largest city in the United States , and is the core city of its 60th @-@ largest metropolitan area . There are currently no consolidated city @-@ counties in the area ; the City of Omaha studied the possibility extensively through 2003 and concluded , " The City of Omaha and Douglas County should merge into a municipal county , work to commence immediately , and that functional consolidations begin immediately in as many departments as possible , including but not limited to parks , fleet management , facilities management , local planning , purchasing and personnel . " 
 Geographically , Omaha is considered as being located in the " Heartland " of the United States . Important environmental impacts on the natural habitat in the area include the spread of invasive plant species , restoring prairies and bur oak savanna habitats , and managing the whitetail deer population . 
 Omaha is home to several hospitals , located mostly along Dodge St ( US6 ) . Being the county seat , it is also the location of the county courthouse . 
 = = = Neighborhoods = = = 
 Omaha is generally divided into six geographic areas : Downtown , Midtown , North Omaha , South Omaha , West Omaha , and East Omaha . West Omaha includes the Miracle Hills , Boys Town , Regency , and Gateway areas . There is also a small community in East Omaha . The city has a wide range of historical and new neighborhoods and suburbs that reflect its socioeconomic diversity . Early neighborhood development happened in ethnic enclaves , including Little Italy , Little Bohemia , Little Mexico and Greek Town . According to U.S. Census data , five European ethnic enclaves existed in Omaha in 1880 , expanding to nine in 1900 . 
 Around the start of the 20th century. the City of Omaha annexed several surrounding communities , including Florence , Dundee and Benson . At the same time , the city annexed all of South Omaha , including the Dahlman and Burlington Road neighborhoods . From its first annexation in 1857 ( of East Omaha ) to its recent and controversial annexation of Elkhorn , Omaha has continually had an eye towards growth . 
 Starting in the 1950s , development of highways and new housing led to movement of middle class to suburbs in West Omaha . Some of the movement was designated as white flight from racial unrest in the 1960s . Newer and poorer migrants lived in older housing close to downtown ; those residents who were more established moved west into newer housing . Some suburbs are gated communities or have become edge cities . Recently , Omahans have made strides to revitalize the downtown and Midtown areas with the redevelopment of the Old Market , Turner Park , Gifford Park , and the designation of the Omaha Rail and Commerce Historic District . 
 = = = Landmark preservation = = = 
 Omaha is home to dozens of nationally , regionally and locally significant landmarks . The city has more than a dozen historic districts , including Fort Omaha Historic District , Gold Coast Historic District , Omaha Quartermaster Depot Historic District , Field Club Historic District , Bemis Park Historic District , and the South Omaha Main Street Historic District . Omaha is notorious for its 1989 demolition of 24 buildings in the Jobbers Canyon Historic District , which represents to date the largest loss of buildings on the National Register . The only original building surviving of that complex is the Nash Block . 
 Omaha has almost one hundred individual properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places , including the Bank of Florence , Holy Family Church , the Christian Specht Building and the Joslyn Castle . There are also three properties designated as National Historic Landmarks . 
 Locally designated landmarks , including residential , commercial , religious , educational , agricultural and socially significant locations across the city , honor Omaha 's cultural legacy and important history . The City of Omaha Landmarks Heritage Preservation Commission is the government body that works with the mayor of Omaha and the Omaha City Council to protect historic places . Important history organizations in the community include the Douglas County Historical Society . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Omaha , due to its latitude of 41 @.@ 26 ˚ N and location far from moderating bodies of water or mountain ranges , displays a humid continental climate ( Köppen Dfa ) , with hot summers and mild to cold , relatively dry winters . July averages 76 @.@ 7 ° F ( 24 @.@ 8 ° C ) , with moderate , to sometimes high humidity which then leads to relatively frequent thunderstorms . Temperatures reach 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) on 29 days and 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) on 1 @.@ 7 days annually . The January daily average is 23 @.@ 5 ° F ( − 4 @.@ 7 ° C ) , with lows reaching 0 ° F ( − 18 ° C ) on 11 days annually . The lowest temperature recorded in the city was − 32 ° F ( − 36 ° C ) on January 5 , 1884 , and the highest 114 ° F ( 46 ° C ) on July 25 , 1936 . Average yearly precipitation is 30 @.@ 6 inches ( 777 mm ) , falling mostly in the warmer months . What precipitation that does fall in winter usually takes the form of snow , with average seasonal snowfall being 28 @.@ 7 inches ( 73 cm ) . 
 Based on 30 @-@ year averages obtained from NOAA 's National Climatic Data Center for the months of December , January and February , Weather Channel ranked Omaha the 5th coldest major U.S. city as of 2014 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = 2010 census = = = 
 As of the census of 2010 , there were 408 @,@ 958 people , 162 @,@ 627 households , and 96 @,@ 477 families residing in the city . The population density was 3 @,@ 217 @.@ 9 inhabitants per square mile ( 1 @,@ 242 @.@ 4 / km2 ) . There were 177 @,@ 518 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 396 @.@ 8 per square mile ( 539 @.@ 3 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was 73 @.@ 1 % White , 13 @.@ 7 % African American , 0 @.@ 8 % Native American , 2 @.@ 4 % Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 6 @.@ 9 % from other races , and 3 @.@ 0 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 13 @.@ 1 % of the population . Non @-@ Hispanic Whites were 68 @.@ 0 % of the population . 
 There were 162 @,@ 627 households of which 31 @.@ 3 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 40 @.@ 6 % were married couples living together , 13 @.@ 7 % had a female householder with no husband present , 4 @.@ 9 % had a male householder with no wife present , and 40 @.@ 7 % were non @-@ families . 32 @.@ 3 % of all households were made up of individuals and 9 @.@ 3 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 45 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 14 . 
 The median age in the city was 33 @.@ 5 years . 25 @.@ 1 % of residents were under the age of 18 ; 11 @.@ 4 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 27 @.@ 9 % were from 25 to 44 ; 24 @.@ 4 % were from 45 to 64 ; and 11 @.@ 4 % were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was 49 @.@ 2 % male and 50 @.@ 8 % female . 
 = = = 2000 census = = = 
 As of the census of 2000 , there were 390 @,@ 007 people , 156 @,@ 738 households , and 94 @,@ 983 families residing within city limits . The population density was 3 @,@ 370 @.@ 7 people per square mile ( 1 @,@ 301 @.@ 5 / km2 ) . There were 165 @,@ 731 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 432 @.@ 4 per square mile ( 553 @.@ 1 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was 78 @.@ 4 % White , 13 @.@ 3 % African American , 0 @.@ 7 % Native American , 1 @.@ 7 % Asian , 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 3 @.@ 9 % from other races , and 1 @.@ 9 % from two or more races . 7 @.@ 5 % of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race . 
 The median income for a household in the city was US $ 40 @,@ 006 , and the median income for a family was $ 50 @,@ 821 . Males had a median income of $ 34 @,@ 301 versus $ 26 @,@ 652 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 21 @,@ 756 . 11 @.@ 3 % of the population and 7 @.@ 8 % of families lived below the poverty line . Out of the total population , 15 @.@ 6 % of those under the age of 18 and 7 @.@ 4 % of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line . 
 = = = People = = = 
 Native Americans were the first residents of the Omaha area . The city of Omaha was established by European Americans from neighboring Council Bluffs who arrived from the Northeast United States a few years earlier . While much of the early population was of Yankee stock , over the next 100 years numerous ethnic groups moved to the city . In 1910 , the Census Bureau reported Omaha 's population as 96 @.@ 4 % White and 3 @.@ 6 % Black . Irish immigrants in Omaha originally moved to an area in present @-@ day North Omaha called " <unk> " , as they lived in dirt dugouts . That population was followed by Polish immigrants in the <unk> neighborhood , and many immigrants were recruited for jobs in South Omaha 's stockyards and meatpacking industry . The German community in Omaha was largely responsible for founding its once @-@ thriving beer industry , including the Metz , Krug , Falstaff and the Storz breweries . 
 Since its founding , ethnic groups in the city have clustered in enclaves in north , south and downtown Omaha . In its early days , the sometimes lawless nature of a new frontier city included crime , such as illicit gambling and riots . 
 In the early 20th century , Jewish immigrants set up numerous businesses along the North 24th Street commercial area . It suffered with the loss of industrial jobs in the 1960s and later , the shifting of population west of the city . The commercial area is now the center of the African American community , concentrated in North Omaha . The African @-@ American community has maintained its social and religious base , while it is currently experiencing an economic revitalization . 
 The Little Italy neighborhood grew south of downtown , as many Italian immigrants came to the city to work in the Union Pacific shops . Scandinavians first came to Omaha as Mormon settlers in the Florence neighborhood . Czechs had a strong political and cultural voice in Omaha , and were involved in a variety of trades and businesses , including banks , wholesale houses , and funeral homes . The Notre Dame Academy and Convent and Czechoslovak Museum are legacies of their residence . Today the legacy of the city 's early European immigrant populations is evident in many social and cultural institutions in Downtown and South Omaha . 
 Mexicans originally immigrated to Omaha to work in the rail yards . Today they compose the majority of South Omaha 's Hispanic population and many have taken jobs in meat processing . Other significant early ethnic populations in Omaha included Danes , Poles , and Swedes . 
 A growing number of African immigrants have made their homes in Omaha in the last twenty years . There are approximately 8 @,@ 500 Sudanese living in Omaha , comprising the largest population of Sudanese refugees in the United States . Most have immigrated since 1995 because of warfare in their nation . Ten different tribes are represented , including the Nuer , Dinka , <unk> , <unk> and Nubians . Most Sudanese people in Omaha speak the Nuer language . Other Africans have immigrated to Omaha as well , with one @-@ third from Nigeria , and significant populations from Kenya , Togo , Cameroon and Ghana . 
 With the expansion of railroad and industrial jobs in meatpacking , Omaha attracted many new immigrants and migrants . As the major city in Nebraska , it has historically been more racially and ethnically diverse than the rest of the state . At times rapid population change , overcrowded housing and job competition have aroused racial and ethnic tensions . Around the start of the 20th century , violence towards new immigrants in Omaha often erupted out of suspicions and fears . 
 The Greek Town Riot in 1909 flared after increased Greek immigration , Greeks ' working as strikebreakers , and the killing of an Irish policeman provoked violence among earlier immigrants such as ethnic Irish . That mob violence forced the Greek immigrant population to flee from the city . By 1910 , 53 @.@ 7 % of Omaha 's residents and 64 @.@ 2 % of South Omaha 's residents were foreign born or had at least one parent born outside of America . Six years after the Greek Town Riot , in 1915 , a Mexican immigrant named Juan Gonzalez was killed by a mob near Scribner , a town in the Greater Omaha metropolitan area . The event occurred after an Omaha Police Department officer was investigating a criminal operation selling goods stolen from the nearby railroad yards . Racial profiling targeted Gonzalez as the culprit . After escaping the city , he was trapped along the Elkhorn River , where the mob , including several policemen from Omaha , shot him more than twenty times . Afterward it was discovered that Gonzalez was unarmed , and that he had a reliable alibi for the time of the murder . Nobody was ever indicted for his lynching . In the fall of 1919 , following Red Summer , postwar social and economic tensions , the earlier hiring of blacks as strikebreakers , and job uncertainty contributed to a mob from South Omaha lynching Willy Brown and the ensuing Omaha Race Riot . Trying to defend Brown , the city 's mayor , Edward Parsons Smith , was lynched also , surviving only after a quick rescue . 
 Similar to other industrial cities in the U.S. , Omaha suffered severe job losses in the 1950s , more than 10 @,@ 000 in total , as both the railroad and meatpacking industries restructured . Stockyards and packing plants were located closer to ranches , and union achievements were lost as wages declined in surviving jobs . Many workers left the area if they could get to other jobs . Poverty deepened in areas of the city whose residents had depended on those jobs , specifically North and South Omaha . At the same time , with reduced revenues , the city had less financial ability to respond to longstanding problems . Despair after the assassination of Dr. Martin Luther King , Jr. in April 1968 contributed to riots in North Omaha , including one at the Logan Fontenelle Housing Project . For some , the Civil Rights Movement in Omaha , Nebraska evolved towards black nationalism , as the Black Panther Party was involved in tensions in the late 1960s . Organizations such as the Black Association for Nationalism Through Unity became popular among the city 's African @-@ American youth . This tension culminated in the cause célèbre trial of the Rice / Poindexter Case , in which an Omaha Police Department officer was killed by a bomb while answering an emergency call . 
 Whites in Omaha have followed the white flight pattern , <unk> to West Omaha over time . In the late 1990s and early 2000s , gang violence and incidents between the Omaha Police and black residents undermined relations between groups in North and South Omaha . More recent Hispanic immigrants , concentrated in South Omaha , have struggled to earn living wages in meatpacking , adapt to a new society , and deal with discrimination . 
 = = Economy = = 
 According to USA Today , Omaha ranks eighth among the nation 's 50 largest cities in both per @-@ capita billionaires and Fortune 500 companies . With diversification in several industries , including banking , insurance , telecommunications , architecture / construction , and transportation , Omaha 's economy has grown dramatically since the early 1990s . In 2001 Newsweek identified Omaha as one of the Top 10 high @-@ tech havens in the nation . Six national fiber optic networks converge in Omaha . 
 Omaha 's most prominent businessman is Warren Buffett , nicknamed the " Oracle of Omaha " , who is regularly ranked one of the richest people in the world . Five Omaha @-@ based companies : Berkshire Hathaway , ConAgra Foods , Union Pacific Railroad , Mutual of Omaha , and Kiewit Corporation , are among the Fortune 500 . 
 Omaha is the headquarters of several other major corporations , including the Gallup Organization , TD Ameritrade , <unk> , Werner Enterprises , First National Bank , <unk> and First Comp Insurance . Many large technology firms have major operations or operational headquarters in Omaha , including Bank of the West , First Data , PayPal and LinkedIn . The city is also home to three of the 30 largest architecture firms in the United States , including HDR , Inc . , DLR Group , Inc . , and Leo A Daly . Omaha has the fifth highest percentage of low @-@ income African Americans in the country . In 2013 , Forbes ' named Omaha among its list of the Best Places for Business and Careers . 
 = = = Top employers = = = 
 According to the Greater Omaha Economic Development Partnership , the largest regional employers are : 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 Tourist attractions in Omaha include history , sports , outdoors and cultural experiences . Its principal tourist attractions are the Henry Doorly Zoo and the College World Series . The Old Market in Downtown Omaha is another major attraction and is important to the city 's retail economy . The city has been a tourist destination for many years . Famous early visitors included British author Rudyard Kipling and General George Crook . In 1883 Omaha hosted the first official performance of the Buffalo Bill 's Wild West Show for eight thousand attendees . In 1898 the city hosted more than 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 visitors from across the United States at the Trans @-@ Mississippi and International Exposition , a world 's fair that lasted for more than half the year . 
 Research on leisure and hospitality situates Omaha in the same tier for tourists as the neighboring cities of Des Moines , Iowa , Topeka , Kansas , Kansas City , Missouri , Oklahoma City , Oklahoma , Denver , Colorado , and Sioux Falls , South Dakota . A recent study found that investment of $ 1 million in cultural tourism generated approximately $ 83 @,@ 000 in state and local taxes , and provided support for hundreds of jobs for the metropolitan area , which in turn led to additional tax revenue for government . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The city 's historical and cultural attractions have been lauded by numerous national newspapers , including the Boston Globe and The New York Times . Omaha is home to the Omaha Community Playhouse , the largest community theater in the United States . The Omaha Symphony Orchestra and its modern Holland Performing Arts Center , the Opera Omaha at the Orpheum theater , the Blue Barn Theatre , and The Rose Theater form the backbone of Omaha 's performing arts community . Opened in 1931 , the Joslyn Art Museum has significant art collections . Since its inception in 1976 , Omaha Children 's Museum has been a place where children can challenge themselves , discover how the world works and learn through play . The Bemis Center for Contemporary Arts , one of the nation 's premier urban artist colonies , was founded in Omaha in 1981 , and the Durham Museum is accredited with the Smithsonian Institution for traveling exhibits . The city is also home to the largest singly funded mural in the nation , " Fertile Ground " , by Meg <unk> . The annual Omaha Blues , Jazz , & Gospel Festival celebrates local music along with the Omaha Black Music Hall of Fame . 
 In 1955 Omaha 's Union Stockyards overtook Chicago 's stockyards as the United States ' meat packing center . This legacy is reflected in the cuisine of Omaha , with renowned steakhouses such as <unk> 's and the recently closed Mister C 's , as well as the retail chain Omaha Steaks . 
 = = = Henry Doorly Zoo = = = 
 The Henry Doorly Zoo is widely considered one of the premier zoos in the world . The zoo is home to the world 's largest nocturnal exhibit and indoor swamp ; the world 's largest indoor rainforest , the world 's largest indoor desert , and the largest geodesic dome in the world ( 13 stories tall ) . The Zoo is Nebraska 's number one paid attendance attraction and has welcomed more than 25 million visitors over the past 40 years . 
 = = = Old Market = = = 
 The Old Market is a major historic district in Downtown Omaha listed on the National Register of Historical Places . Today , its warehouses and other buildings house shops , restaurants , bars , coffee shops , and art galleries . Downtown is also the location of the Omaha Rail and Commerce Historic District , which has several art galleries and restaurants as well . The Omaha Botanical Gardens features 100 acres ( 40 ha ) with a variety of landscaping , and the new <unk> Park recognizes Union Pacific Railroad 's long history in Omaha . North Omaha has several historical cultural attractions including the Dreamland Historical Project , Love 's Jazz and Art Center , and the John Beasley Theater . The annual River City Roundup is celebrated at Fort Omaha , and the neighborhood of Florence celebrates its history during " Florence Days " . Native Omaha Days is a biennial event celebrating Near North Side heritage . 
 Religious institutions reflect the city 's heritage . The city 's Christian community has several historical churches dating from the founding of the city . There are also all sizes of congregations , including small , medium and <unk> . Omaha hosts the only Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints temple in Nebraska , along with a significant Jewish community . There are 152 parishes in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Omaha , and several Orthodox Christian congregations throughout the city . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Omaha 's rich history in rhythm and blues , and jazz gave rise to a number of influential bands , including Anna Mae Winburn 's Cotton Club Boys and Lloyd Hunter 's <unk> . Rock and roll pioneer Wynonie Harris ; jazz great Preston Love ; drummer Buddy Miles ; and Luigi <unk> are among the city 's homegrown talent . Doug Ingle from the late 1960s band Iron Butterfly was born in Omaha as was indie @-@ folk singer / songwriter Elliott Smith , though both were raised elsewhere . 
 Today , the diverse culture of Omaha includes a variety of performance venues , museums , and musical heritage , including the historically significant jazz scene in North Omaha and the modern and influential " Omaha Sound " . 
 Contemporary music groups either located in or originally from Omaha include Mannheim Steamroller , Bright Eyes , The Faint , Cursive , Azure Ray , Tilly and the Wall and 311 . During the late 1990s , Omaha became nationally known as the birthplace of Saddle Creek Records , and the subsequent " Omaha Sound " was born from their bands ' collective style . 
 Omaha also has a fledgling hip hop scene . Long @-@ time bastion Houston Alexander , a one @-@ time graffiti artist and professional Mixed Martial Arts competitor , is currently a local hip @-@ hop radio show host . Cerone Thompson , known as " <unk> " , has had a number one single on college radio stations across the United States . He has also had several number one hits on the local hip hop station respectively titled , " Lose Control " and " Do What U Do " . More recently , in 2009 Eric Scheid , also known as " Titus " , released a single called " What Do You Believe " featuring <unk> Bone from the nationally known hip hop group Bone Thugs @-@ n @-@ Harmony . The single was produced by Omaha producer J <unk> . The record was released by <unk> Publishing and Timeless Keys Music Publishing which are two Omaha @-@ based music publishing companies . South Omaha 's OTR Familia , consisting of <unk> and <unk> aka XP , have worked with Fat Joes Terror Squad on several songs and have participated in summer concerts with Pitbull , Nicky Jam , and Aventura . 
 A long heritage of ethnic and cultural bands have come from Omaha . The Omaha Black Music Hall of Fame celebrates the city 's long history of African @-@ American music and the Strathdon Caledonia Pipe Band carries on a Scottish legacy . Internationally renowned composer Antonín Dvořák wrote his Ninth ( " New World " ) Symphony in 1893 based on his impressions of the region after visiting Omaha 's robust Czech community . In the period surrounding World War I Valentin J. Peter encouraged Germans in Omaha to celebrate their rich musical heritage , too . Frederick Metz , Gottlieb Storz and Frederick Krug were influential brewers whose beer gardens kept many German bands active . 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 In 1939 , the world premiere of the film Union Pacific was held in Omaha , Nebraska and the accompanying three @-@ day celebration drew 250 @,@ 000 people . A special train from Hollywood carried director Cecil B. DeMille and stars Barbara Stanwyck and Joel McCrea . Omaha 's Boys Town was made famous by the Spencer Tracy and Mickey Rooney movie Boys Town . Omaha has been featured in recent years by a handful of relatively big budget motion pictures . The city 's most extensive exposure can be accredited to Omaha native Alexander Payne , the Oscar @-@ nominated director who shot parts of About Schmidt , Citizen Ruth and Election in the city and suburbs of Papillion and La Vista . 
 Built in 1962 , Omaha 's Cinerama was called Indian Hills Theater . Its demolition in 2001 by the Nebraska Methodist Health System was unpopular , with objections from local historical and cultural groups and luminaries from around the world . The Dundee Theatre is the lone surviving single @-@ screen movie theater in Omaha and still shows films . A recent development to the Omaha film scene was the addition of Film Streams 's Ruth <unk> Theater in North Downtown . The two @-@ screen theater is part of the <unk> facility . It features new American independents , foreign films , documentaries , classics , themed series , and director retrospectives . There are many new theaters opening in Omaha . In addition to the five Douglas Theatres venues in Omaha , two more are opening , including Midtown Crossing Theatres , located on 32nd and Farnam Streets by the Mutual of Omaha Building . Westroads Mall has opened a new multiplex movie theater with 14 screens , operated by Rave Motion Pictures . 
 Songs about Omaha include " Omaha " by Moby Grape , " Omaha " , by the indie rock band Tapes ' n Tapes , " Omaha " by Counting Crows , " Omaha Celebration " by Pat Metheny , " Omaha " sung by Waylon Jennings , " Greater Omaha " by <unk> , " Omaha <unk> " by 311 and " ( Ready Or Not ) Omaha Nebraska " by Bowling for Soup . 
 Popular young adult novel " Eleanor & Park " by Rainbow Rowell ( St. Martin 's Press , 2013 ) takes place in Omaha . 
 The 1935 winner of the Triple Crown of Thoroughbred Racing was named Omaha , and after traveling the world the horse eventually retired to a farm south of the city . The horse made promotional appearances at Ak @-@ Sar @-@ Ben during the 1950s and following his death in 1959 was buried at the racetrack 's Circle of Champions . 
 = = Sports and recreation = = 
 Sports have been important in Omaha for more than a century , and the city currently plays host to three minor @-@ league professional sports teams . It is perhaps more known as the home of the College World Series , to which it has played host since 1950 . The Kings , an NBA franchise , called Omaha and Kansas City home from 1972 to 1978 . The Kansas City @-@ Omaha Kings split their time between the two cities , playing at Kansas City 's Municipal Auditorium and the Omaha Civic Auditorium , before <unk> solely to Kansas City until 1985 , when the team moved to its current home of Sacramento . 
 The Omaha Sports Commission is a quasi @-@ governmental nonprofit organization that coordinates much of the professional and amateur athletic activity in the city , including the 2008 , 2012 and 2016 US Olympic Swimming Team Trials and the building of a new stadium in North Downtown . The University of Nebraska and the Commission co @-@ hosted the 2008 National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) Division One Women 's Volleyball Championship in December of that year . The 2016 Big 10 Baseball Championship was also played at the College World Series Stadium . Another quasi @-@ governmental board , the Metropolitan Entertainment and Convention Authority ( <unk> ) , was created by city voters in 2000 , and is responsible for maintaining the CenturyLink Center Omaha . 
 Omaha 's Johnny Rosenblatt Stadium was home to the Omaha Storm Chasers ( at the time known as the Omaha Royals ) minor @-@ league baseball team ( the AAA affiliate of the Kansas City Royals ) . From 1950 to 2010 , it hosted the annual NCAA College World Series , or CWS , men 's baseball tournament in mid @-@ June . 
 After Rosenblatt Stadium closed , its tenants moved to new venues . On April 16 , 2011 , the Omaha Storm Chasers moved to Werner Park . The CWS moved to the downtown TD Ameritrade Park in 2011 . Omaha is also home to the Omaha Diamond Spirit , a collegiate summer baseball team that plays in the <unk> league . 
 Omaha was home to a new expansion team in the United Football League that play from 2010 to 2011 . The Omaha Beef indoor football team played at the Omaha Civic Auditorium until 2012 when they moved to the new Ralston Arena . 
 The Creighton University Bluejays compete in a number of NCAA Division I sports as members of the Big East Conference . Baseball is played at TD Ameritrade Park Omaha , soccer is played at Morrison Stadium , and basketball is played at the 18 @,@ 000 seat CenturyLink Center . The Jays annually rank in the top 15 in attendance each year , averaging more than 16 @,@ 000 people per game . The Omaha Mavericks , representing the University of Nebraska Omaha ( UNO ) , also play Basketball , Baseball and Soccer in NCAA Division I as members of The Summit League . The UNO men 's ice hockey team plays in the National Collegiate Hockey Conference . 
 Ice hockey is a popular spectator sport in Omaha and there are two Omaha @-@ area teams . The Omaha Lancers , a United States Hockey League team play at the Ralston Arena . The Omaha Mavericks play in the on @-@ campus Baxter Arena . 
 Omaha has a thriving running community and many miles of paved running and biking trails throughout the city and surrounding communities . The Omaha Marathon involves a half @-@ marathon and a 10 @-@ kilometer ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) race that take place annually in September . Omaha also has a history of curling , including multiple junior national champions . The city 's historic boulevards were originally designed by Horace Cleveland in 1889 to work with the parks to create a seamless flow of trees , grass and flowers throughout the city . Florence Boulevard and Fontenelle Boulevard are among the remnants of this system . Omaha boasts more than 80 miles ( 129 km ) of trails for pedestrians , bicyclists and hikers . They include the American Discovery Trail , which traverses the entire United States , and the Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail passes through Omaha as it travels 3 @,@ 700 miles ( 5 @,@ 950 km ) westward from Illinois to Oregon . Trails throughout the area are included in comprehensive plans for the city of Omaha , the Omaha metropolitan area , Douglas County , and long @-@ distance coordinated plans between the municipalities of southeast Nebraska . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 Omaha has a strong mayor form of government , along with a city council that is elected from seven districts across the city . The current mayor is Jean Stothert , who was elected in May 2013 . The longest serving mayor in Omaha 's history was " Cowboy " Jim Dahlman , who served 20 years over eight terms . He was regarded as the " wettest mayor in America " because of the flourishing number of bars in Omaha during his tenure . Dahlman was a close associate of political boss Tom Dennison . During Dahlman 's tenure , the city switched from its original strong @-@ mayor form of government to a city commission government . In 1956 , the city switched back . 
 The city clerk is Buster Brown . The City of Omaha administers twelve departments , including finance , police , human rights , libraries and planning . The Omaha City Council is the legislative branch and is made up seven members elected from districts across the city . The council enacts local ordinances and approves the city budget . Government priorities and activities are established in a budget ordinance approved annually . The council takes official action through the passage of ordinances and resolutions . Nebraska 's constitution grants the option of home rule to cities with more than 5 @,@ 000 residents , meaning they may operate under their own charters . Omaha is one of only three cities in Nebraska to use this option , out of 17 eligible . The City of Omaha is currently considering consolidating with Douglas County government . 
 Although registered Republicans outnumbered Democrats in the 2nd congressional district , which includes Omaha , Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama opened three campaign offices in the city with 15 staff members to cover the state in fall 2008 . Mike Fahey , the former Democratic mayor of Omaha , said he would do whatever it took to deliver the district 's electoral vote to Obama ; and the Obama campaign considered the district " in play " . Former Nebraska U.S. Senator Bob Kerrey and former Senator Ben Nelson campaigned in the city for Obama , and in November 2008 Obama won the district 's electoral vote . This was an exceptional win , because with Nebraska 's split electoral vote system Obama became the first Democratic presidential candidate to win an electoral vote in Nebraska since 1964 . 
 In 2011 , Nebraska lawmakers moved Offutt Air Force Base and the town of Bellevue — an area with a large minority population — out of the Omaha @-@ based 2nd District and shifted in the Republican @-@ heavy Omaha suburbs in Sarpy County . The move is expected to dilute the city 's urban Democratic vote . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 Omaha 's rate of violent crimes per 100 @,@ 000 residents has been lower than the average rates of three dozen United States cities of similar size . Unlike Omaha , those cities have experienced an increase in violent crime overall since 2003 . Rates for property crime have decreased for both Omaha and its peer cities during the same time period . In 2006 , Omaha was ranked for homicides as 46th out of the 72 cities in the United States of more than 250 @,@ 000 in population . 
 As a major industrial city into the mid @-@ 20th century , Omaha shared in social tensions of larger cities that accompanied rapid growth and many new immigrants and migrants . By the 1950s , Omaha was a center for illegal gambling , while experiencing dramatic job losses and unemployment because of dramatic restructuring of the railroads and the meatpacking industry , as well as other sectors . Persistent poverty resulting from racial discrimination and job losses generated different crimes in the late 20th century , with drug trade and drug abuse becoming associated with violent crime rates , which climbed after 1986 as Los Angeles gangs made affiliates in the city . Gambling in Omaha has been significant throughout the city 's history . From its founding in the 1850s through the 1930s , the city was known as a " wide @-@ open " town , meaning that gambling of all sorts was accepted either openly or in closed quarters . By the mid @-@ 20th century , Omaha reportedly had more illicit gambling per capita than any other city in the nation . From the 1930s through the 1970s the city 's gambling was controlled by an Italian criminal element . Today , gambling in Omaha is limited to keno , lotteries , and parimutuel betting , leaving Omahans to drive across the Missouri River to Council Bluffs , Iowa , where casinos are legal and there are numerous businesses operating currently . Recently a controversial proposal by the Ponca tribe of Nebraska was approved by the National Indian Gaming Commission . It will allow the tribe to build a casino in Carter Lake , Iowa , which sits geographically on the west side of the Missouri River , adjacent to Omaha , where casinos are illegal . 
 = = Education = = 
 Education in Omaha is provided by many private and public institutions . Omaha Public Schools is the largest public school district in Nebraska , with more than 47 @,@ 750 students in more than 75 schools . After a contentious period of uncertainty , in 2007 the Nebraska Legislature approved a plan to create a learning community for Omaha @-@ area school districts with a central administrative board . The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Omaha maintains numerous private Catholic schools with 21 @,@ 500 students in 32 elementary schools and nine high schools . St. Cecilia Grade School at <unk> Webster St. in Midtown Omaha and St. Stephen the Martyr School at 168th and Q street in western Omaha earned national distinction when they received the U.S. Department of Education Blue Ribbon School award . Omaha is also home to Brownell @-@ Talbot School , the only preschool through grade 12 , independent college preparatory school in the state of Nebraska . 
 There are eleven colleges and universities among Omaha 's higher education institutions , including the University of Nebraska Omaha . The University of Nebraska Medical Center is located in midtown Omaha and is home to the Eppley Cancer Center , one of 66 designated Cancer Centers by the National Cancer Institute in the United States . The University of Nebraska College of Medicine , also located on the UNMC campus , is ranked 7th in the country by US News and World Report for primary care medical education . Omaha 's Creighton University is ranked the top non @-@ doctoral regional university in the Midwestern United States by U.S. News and World Report . Creighton maintains a 132 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 5 km2 ) campus just outside Downtown Omaha in the new North Downtown district , and the Jesuit institution has an enrollment of around 6 @,@ 700 in its undergraduate , graduate , medical , and law schools . There are more than 10 other colleges and universities in Omaha in the Omaha metro area . 
 = = Media = = 
 The city is the focus of the Omaha designated market area , and is the 76th largest in the United States . 
 Magazines 
 Omaha Magazine ( a weekly ) 
 Newspapers 
 The major daily newspaper in Nebraska is the Omaha World @-@ Herald , which is the largest employee @-@ owned newspaper in the United States . Weeklies in the city include the Midlands Business Journal ( weekly business publication ) ; American <unk> ( Formerly Thrifty Nickel ) , a weekly classified newspaper ; The Reader , as well as The Omaha Star . Founded in 1938 in North Omaha , the Star is Nebraska 's only African @-@ American newspaper . 
 Television networks and cable TV 
 Omaha 's four television news stations were found not to represent the city 's racial composition in a 2007 study . Cox Communications provides cable television services throughout the metropolitan area . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 In 2008 Kiplinger 's Personal Finance magazine ranked Omaha the No. 3 best city in the United States to " live , work and play " . Omaha 's growth has required the constant development of new urban infrastructure that influence , allow and encourage the constant expansion of the city . 
 Retail natural gas and water public utilities in Omaha are provided by the Metropolitan Utilities District . Nebraska is the only public power state in the nation . All electric utilities are non @-@ profit and customer @-@ owned . Electricity in the city is provided by the Omaha Public Power District . Public housing is governed by the Omaha Housing Authority , and public transportation is provided by Metro Area Transit . CenturyLink and Cox provide local telephone and internet services . The City of Omaha maintains two modern sewage treatment plants . 
 Portions of the Enron corporation began as Northern Natural Gas Company in Omaha . Northern currently provides three natural gas lines to Omaha . Enron formerly owned <unk> United , Inc . , which became Aquila , Inc .. Peoples Natural Gas , a division of Aquila , Inc . , currently serves several surrounding communities around the Omaha metropolitan area , including <unk> . 
 There are several hospitals in Omaha . Research hospitals include the Boys Town National Research Hospital , the University of Nebraska Medical Center and the Creighton University Medical Center . The Boys Town facility is well known for researchers in hearing @-@ related research and treatment . The University of Nebraska Medical Center hosts the Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases , a world @-@ renowned cancer treatment facility named in honor of <unk> Eugene Eppley . 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Omaha 's central role in the history of transportation across America earned it the nickname " Gate City of the West . " Despite President Lincoln 's decree that Council Bluffs , Iowa , be the starting point for the Union Pacific Railroad , construction began from Omaha on the eastern portion of the first transcontinental railroad . By the middle of the 20th century , Omaha was served by almost every major railroad . Today , the Omaha Rail and Commerce Historic District celebrates this connection , along with the listing of the Burlington Train Station and the Union Station on the National Register of Historic Places . First housed in the former Herndon House , the Union Pacific Railroad 's corporate headquarters have been in Omaha since the company began . Their new headquarters , the Union Pacific Center , was opened in Downtown Omaha in 2004 . Amtrak , the national passenger rail system , provides service through Omaha . The Greyhound lines terminal is at 1601 Jackson St in downtown Omaha . Megabus has a stop at Crossroads Mall – N 72nd St between Dodge St and Cass St , and provides service to Des Moines , Iowa City , and Chicago . Metro Transit , previously known as Metro Area Transit , is the local bus . 
 Omaha 's position as a transportation center was finalized with the 1872 opening of the Union Pacific Missouri River Bridge linking the transcontinental railroad to the railroads terminating in Council Bluffs . In 1888 , the first road bridge , the Douglas Street Bridge , opened . In the 1890s , the Illinois Central drawbridge opened as the largest bridge of its type in the world . Omaha 's Missouri River road bridges are now entering their second generation , including the Works Progress Administration @-@ financed South Omaha Bridge , now called Veteran 's Memorial Bridge , which was added to the National Register of Historic Places . In 2006 , Omaha and Council Bluffs announced joint plans to build the Missouri River Pedestrian Bridge , which opened in 2008 . 
 Today , the primary mode of transportation in Omaha is by automobile , with I @-@ 80 , I @-@ 480 , I @-@ 680 , I @-@ 29 , and U.S. Route 75 ( JFK Freeway and North Freeway ) providing freeway service across the metropolitan area . The expressway along West Dodge Road ( U.S. Route 6 and Nebraska Link 28B ) and U.S. Route 275 has been upgraded to freeway standards from I @-@ 680 to Fremont . City owned Metro Transit formerly as MAT Metro Area Transit provides public bus service to hundreds of locations throughout the Metro . 
 A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Omaha 21st most walkable of fifty largest U.S. cities . There is an extensive trail system throughout the city for walkers , runners , bicyclists , and other pedestrian modes of transportation . 
 Omaha is laid out on a grid plan , with 12 blocks to the mile with a north @-@ to @-@ south house numbering system . Omaha is the location of a historic boulevard system designed by <unk> Cleveland who sought to combine the beauty of parks with the pleasure of driving cars . The historic Florence and Fontenelle Boulevards , as well as the modern Sorenson Parkway , are important elements in this system . 
 Eppley Airfield , Omaha 's airport , serves the region with over 4 @.@ 2 million passengers in 2006 . United Airlines , Southwest Airlines , Delta Air Lines , American Airlines , Alaska Airlines , Allegiant Air and Frontier Airlines serve the airport with direct and connecting service . Eppley is situated in East Omaha , with many users driving through Carter Lake , Iowa and getting a view of Carter Lake before getting there . General aviation airports serving the area are the Millard Municipal Airport , North Omaha Airport and the Council Bluffs Airport . Offutt Air Force Base continues to serve as a military airbase ; it is located at the southern edge of Bellevue , which in turn lies immediately south of Omaha . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Omaha has six sister cities : 
 Braunschweig , Lower Saxony , Germany 
 Naas , County Kildare , Leinster , Ireland 
 Yantai , Shandong , China 
 Šiauliai , Lithuania 
 Xalapa , Veracruz , Mexico 
 Shizuoka , Shizuoka , Japan 
