 = Marquise Walker = 
 Marquise Walker ( born December 11 , 1978 ) is a former professional American football wide receiver and punt returner who signed to play in the National Football League ( NFL ) . He played college football at the University of Michigan where he set many of the school 's receiving records and became an 2001 College Football All @-@ American . In 2001 , he led the Big Ten Conference in receptions . In 2004 , Braylon Edwards surpassed most of his school records . In high school , Walker set several important New York State Public High School Athletic Association ( <unk> ) football records for receptions and reception yardage . All of these records have since been broken . Walker is remembered for a pair of spectacular one @-@ handed catches during the 2001 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season . 
 He was selected by the Tampa Bay Buccaneers with the 86th overall pick in the third round of the 2002 NFL Draft . He was injured during his first year with Tampa Bay and had several brief stints with several other NFL teams over the next two seasons . Walker has yet to succeed as a professional football player . Several scouts have noted that he is not fast enough to dominate at the professional level the way he did at lower levels using other skills such as balance , strength , and size . He had signed to play in the Arena Football League in 2006 , but did not play . 
 = = High school = = 
 Walker was born in Syracuse , New York , and was a high school football All @-@ American for Henninger High School in Syracuse . He was also a standout basketball player who averaged over twenty points a game as a sophomore and junior , but abandoned the sport for football . In high school , he established numerous <unk> football records : career receptions ( 181 ) , single @-@ season receptions ( 80 ) , and career receiving yards ( <unk> ) . In addition , he recorded the second highest single @-@ season yardage total ( 1190 ) . His 13 single @-@ season touchdowns was third in state history , and he totaled thirty @-@ five career touchdowns for Henninger . He played defensive back and accumulated two hundred tackles and fourteen interceptions . Walker was named as the Gatorade High School Football Player of the Year for New York State , and he was named to the 1997 USAToday All @-@ USA high school football team . He was ranked as the ninth best high school football prospect in the country in 1998 by the Sporting News . 
 Walker 's career high school records were broken in 2004 by Bruce Williams out of Syracuse 's Christian Brothers Academy , who played for the Syracuse Orange football team from 2005 through 2008 . Williams took four years to break Walker 's record which was set during only three years . Walker 's single season receptions record was broken in 2001 by Anthony <unk> of Rome , New York 's " Free Academy " who later played Division III football at State University of New York at Cortland from 2003 – 2006 and earned 2006 first team All @-@ conference honors . Harold Jasper , whose career receiving yards record Walker broke , later played for the Iowa Hawkeyes football team and two Arena football teams . Jasper also was the only receiver to have had more single @-@ season yards in New York State history than Walker . 
 = = College career = = 
 Walker is best remembered for a pair of one @-@ handed catches he made in 2001 . Prior to the 2002 NFL Draft , Baltimore Ravens Senior vice president of football operations , Ozzie Newsome referred to Walker 's collegiate catches as some of the best catches he has seen in college in a long time . One of the one @-@ handed catches was a touchdown catch in the back of the end zone against the Iowa Hawkeyes football team in a 32 – 26 comeback from a 21 – 7 deficit on October 27 , 2001 . The Post @-@ Standard , Walker 's hometown newspaper , described his grab in the Iowa game this way : " There he was in the corner of the end zone , as two Iowa defensive backs stalked him like sentries . The ball , delivered high and wide , seemed an improbable stretch , an impossible goal . And yet , as it spiraled toward him , Marquise Walker leaped and lifted his right arm . His fingertips grazed the leather and tipped it skyward . And then , as he tumbled back to earth , he wrapped his hands around the ball and caressed it to his chest . Touchdown Michigan . " 
 Walker seriously considered playing for Syracuse University of the Big East Conference , but Syracuse Orange quarterback Donovan McNabb only had one more year remaining . McNabb , who was the Big East Conference offensive player of the decade for the 1990s , was not likely to be replaced by a quarterback of equal skill . Thus , Walker went on to wear # 4 at Michigan . Walker played football at Michigan from the 1998 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season through the 2001 season , finishing his career with 176 receptions for 2 @,@ 269 yards and 17 touchdowns . During his career he played on two Big Ten Championship teams ( 1998 , 2000 ) , but neither team went to the Rose Bowl . During his career , the two teams that he compiled the most total single @-@ opponent receiving yards against were Michigan 's fiercest conference opponents : He had 256 yards against Ohio State and 251 yards against Michigan State . His highest career single @-@ opponent touchdown and single @-@ opponent reception totals were also in the Michigan – Ohio State football rivalry games and his Paul Bunyan Trophy game totals were tied for second in both of these statistics . 
 Playing at Washington on September 8 , 2001 , Walker set the Michigan record for the most receptions in a game with 15 , surpassing Tai Streets and Brad Myers . He tied his mark later in season against Ohio State . This record continued to stand through the 2009 NCAA Division I FBS football season . Both of Walker 's 15 @-@ reception efforts came in losses . He first recorded 15 receptions against the Washington Huskies football team in a 23 – 18 loss where he accumulated 159 yards and two touchdowns from quarterback John Navarre . On that day he added a 13 @-@ yard run and a 15 @-@ yard punt return . Then on the November 24 , 2001 day that he surpassed Carter as the career receptions leader , he totaled 15 receptions in a 26 – 20 loss to the Ohio State Buckeyes football team while accumulating 160 yards and two touchdowns . These two games with 160 and 159 yards receiving were Walker 's career highs . His other 150 yard game came against the Michigan State football team during the same season on November 3 , 2001 with nine receptions . Walker had two touchdowns in each of his three 150 @-@ yard reception games . 
 Walker set several other records at Michigan that have been surpassed . His career reception total surpassed that of Anthony Carter as the most in school history . During his senior year in 2001 , Walker set Michigan single @-@ season records with 86 receptions and 1 @,@ 143 receiving yards , surpassing Jack Clancy ( who still holds the record for receptions for ten games ) and David Terrell , respectively . Walker also broke Mercury Hayes ' school record for most consecutive games with a reception ( 32 games ) . These marks were all surpassed by Braylon Edwards in 2004 . He also set the single @-@ season 100 @-@ yard games record with six . This mark has been surpassed by both Edwards and Mario Manningham . 
 During his time at Michigan he blocked a total of four punts . One block set up a field goal in Michigan 's 2001 20 – 17 victory against Wisconsin at Camp Randall Stadium . The NCAA Division I @-@ A career record was seven when he completed his eligibility and is now ten , and the Big Ten record was five and is now six based on the NCAA record book . The total continues to be a Michigan record by virtue of the fact that the NCAA record book does not recognize any Michigan player as having recorded more than four . However , some press reports credit Ed <unk> with five punt blocks during the eight @-@ game 1940 season . 
 Walker 's statistics ranked him highly in Big Ten Conference history . Both his single @-@ game reception total of 15 and his single @-@ season reception total of 86 were sixth in Big Ten history at the end of his career although both were ninth all time through the 2006 NCAA season . Walker won both the Big Ten Conference games and Big Ten all games receptions titles in 2001 . He ranked sixth in the nation in receptions per game with 7 @.@ 36 and 17th in reception yards per game with 94 @.@ 82 . During the 2001 season , his 1177 yards from scrimmage ( 1143 yards receiving and 34 rushing ) edged out B. J. Askew 's 1138 yards ( 236 yards receiving and 902 rushing ) for the team lead in yards from scrimmage . In addition , he threw a 51 @-@ yard pass completion to Jermaine Gonzales , and he compiled 206 yards as a punt returner . As a result , he also led the team in All @-@ purpose yards . In a game against the Purdue Boilermakers on October 13 , 2001 he totaled 249 yards of total offense , including 134 yards on seven receptions and 112 yards on seven punt returns . Walker earned team MVP honors for the 2001 season . He was a Biletnikoff Award finalist . Among his All @-@ American recognitions were a first @-@ team selection by the American Football Coaches Association , a second @-@ team selection by the Associated Press , and an honorable mention by <unk> 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Scouts for the professional football teams described Walker as a " Big physical receiver , who uses his size to muscle the ball away from defenders ... <unk> explosive speed , but has exceptional body control and balance . " In another scouting report he was described as a " Striding @-@ type runner who is not quick or sudden . <unk> average defensive backs but has a hard time getting separation vs. a good corner " In direct questioning during interviews , Walker confessed that he never had run a 40 @-@ yard dash and did not practice straight line speed . Thus , there was some consensus that he did not have the speed to play wide receiver in the National Football League and that he did not work on his speed . It was also said that he " <unk> soft hands and will do a lot of double @-@ catching and body @-@ catching . Has a lot of drops for a featured No. 1 receiver . " 
 When Jon Gruden took over the head coaching job of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers from Tony Dungy , he made Walker his first draft selection in the 2002 NFL Draft with the 86th overall selection that came in the third round of the draft . Although Walker was property of the Buccaneers for the 2002 NFL season he did not appear in any games . Walker had been behind Keyshawn Johnson , Joe Jurevicius and Keenan McCardell on the Buccaneer 2002 depth chart . Then , he injured his ankle in August and was inactive for the first four games of the season . He was injured in September with torn ligaments in his thumb and had season ending surgery , which caused the Buccaneers to place him on injured reserve in October . Thus , he was not on the game roster for the Super Bowl XXXVII Champion Buccaneers . He was traded to the Arizona Cardinals for running back Thomas Jones prior to the 2003 NFL season after the Cardinals lost their top three wide receivers ( including David Boston and Frank Sanders ) to free agency . He was cut by the Cardinals on August 23 , 2003 and picked up by the Cincinnati Bengals on August 25 , 2003 who released him on August 27 , 2003 . The Tennessee Titans briefly placed him on their practice squad while trying to convert him to tight end later during the season , and the Miami Dolphins worked him out at different times during the season . 
 Walker , who had signed with the Super Bowl Champion New England Patriots in February prior to the 2004 NFL season for the league minimum $ 305 @,@ 000 , was released by the Patriots on July 21 , 2004 . Walker signed with the Orlando Predators of the Arena Football League to play wide receiver and linebacker for Predator head coach Jay Gruden during the 2006 Arena Football League season . Gruden was also an offensive assistant coach with the Super Bowl XXXVII champion Buccaneers . Walker was waived by the Predators , and he has yet to play in the Arena Football League . 
 = Buildings of Nuffield College , Oxford = 
 The buildings of Nuffield College , one of the colleges of the University of Oxford , are to the west of the city centre of Oxford , England , and stand on the site of the basin of the Oxford Canal . Nuffield College was founded in 1937 after a donation to the University by the car manufacturer Lord Nuffield ; he gave land for the college , as well as £ 900 @,@ 000 ( approximately £ 246 million in present @-@ day terms ) to build and endow it . The architect Austen Harrison , who had worked in Greece and Palestine , was appointed by the University to design the buildings . His initial design , heavily influenced by Mediterranean architecture , was rejected by Nuffield , who called it " un @-@ English " and refused to allow his name to be associated with it . Harrison reworked the plans , aiming for " something on the lines of Cotswold domestic architecture " , as Nuffield wanted . 
 Construction of the second design began in 1949 and was finished in 1960 . Progress was hampered by post @-@ war building restrictions , and the effects of inflation on Nuffield 's donation led to various cost @-@ saving changes to the plans . In one change , the tower , which had been planned to be ornamental , was redesigned to hold the college 's library . It was the first tower built in Oxford for 200 years and is about 150 feet ( 46 m ) tall , including the flèche on top . The buildings are arranged around two quadrangles , with residential accommodation for students and fellows in one , and the hall , library and administrative offices in the other . The chapel has stained glass windows designed by John Piper . 
 The architectural historian Sir Howard Colvin said that Harrison 's first design was Oxford 's " most notable architectural casualty of the 1930s " ; it has also been described as a " missed opportunity " to show that Oxford did not live " only in the past " . Reaction to the architecture of the college has been largely unfavourable . In the 1960s , it was described as " Oxford 's biggest monument to barren reaction " . The tower has been described as " ungainly " , and marred by repetitive windows . The travel writer Jan Morris wrote that the college was " a hodge @-@ podge from the start " . However , the architectural historian Sir Nikolaus Pevsner , although unimpressed with most of the college , thought that the tower helped the Oxford skyline and predicted it would " one day be loved " . The writer Simon Jenkins doubted Pevsner 's prediction , and claimed that " vegetation " was the " best hope " for the tower – as well as the rest of the college . 
 = = Lord Nuffield 's donation = = 
 The history of Nuffield College dates from 16 November 1937 , when the university entered a Deed of Covenant and Trust with Lord Nuffield . Nuffield , known as William Morris before he was raised to the peerage , was an industrialist and the founder of Morris Motors , which was based in Cowley , east Oxford . For the creation of Nuffield College and for his other donations ( which included funding a chair of Spanish studies and donating £ 2 million in 1936 for a school of medical research ) , he was described in 1949 by an editorial in The Times as " the greatest benefactor of the University since the Middle Ages " . He donated land on New Road , to the west of the city centre near the mound of Oxford Castle , on the site of the largely disused basin of the Oxford Canal . In 1937 , The Times described the half @-@ mile between the railway station and the city ( an area including the site of the proposed college ) as " something between a refuse heap and a slum " ; Nuffield had originally bought the canal basin to beautify that part of the city before he had the idea of building a college to accomplish this . As well as the land , Nuffield gave £ 900 @,@ 000 to build the college and to provide it with an endowment fund . 
 His plan was to create a college that specialised in engineering and business methods to provide a link between academia and industry , for which he initially offered the University £ 1 million ; £ 100 @,@ 000 was used for a physical chemistry laboratory ( completed in 1941 ) , of which he approved . However , although he was persuaded to put the remainder towards a college for social science studies instead , he still felt " cheated " . He later described the college as " that bloody Kremlin " , " where left @-@ wingers study at my expense " . He was sufficiently pleased with the work of the college to leave it most of his remaining fortune ( which was more than £ 3 million ) when he died in 1963 , although most of the bequest did not reach the college as it was needed to pay inheritance tax on Nuffield 's estate . 
 = = First design = = 
 Administration of Nuffield 's donation was the responsibility of the University , as the college did not become an independent body until after the Second World War . A sub @-@ committee , consisting of three heads of Oxford colleges ( Sir William Beveridge from University College ; Alfred Emden from St Edmund Hall ; and Linda Grier from Lady Margaret Hall ) , was appointed to choose the architect ; Emden appears to have played the major part in the group 's work . Eight architects were initially asked to compete , including Louis de Soissons , Vincent Harris , Austen Harrison , Charles Holden , Edward Maufe , and Hubert Worthington . All but Holden and Maufe submitted photographs of their work , and the sub @-@ committee then recommended Harrison , a decision confirmed after he was interviewed on 17 June 1938 . At that time , Harrison had never worked in Britain : although he had qualified there , he had practised in Greece and Palestine . Indeed , the college seems to have been his only project in the country , and remains his best known work , along with his later University of Ghana . Harrison was not given any restrictions or limitations on style ; Nuffield agreed to Harrison 's appointment , but was not consulted on the architectural style of the college before Harrison started work . When Nuffield 's donation was announced , it was reported that the " general idea " was that the college buildings should be sited behind gardens , similar to the memorial gardens at Christ Church , Oxford , so that those entering Oxford from the west would be faced with a " beautiful vista of well @-@ planned gardens seen through railings " ; this idea did not form part of Harrison 's designs . 
 After Harrison 's preliminary studies , it became clear that the proposed site could not contain a college and an institute for social science research as planned ; Nuffield agreed to provide an additional plot of land on the opposite side of Worcester Street . Harrison proposed to build the college on the main site , with the institute on the second site . The hall was to be at the east end of the main site , aligned east to west , with a tower at the west end ; the upper quadrangle , to the immediate west of the hall and aligned north to south , would have the Warden 's Lodging at the north end and the chapel at the south end ; steps would lead down from the upper quadrangle into the lower quadrangle , again aligned east to west , with the main entrance at the far east end of the lower quadrangle . The proposed institute would face the main college entrance across Worcester Street . The sub @-@ committee recommended that Harrison 's plans be adopted in January 1939 , and a model of the design was shown to Nuffield in June 1939 – he had been abroad for much of the intervening period . 
 Harrison 's design had " little that was English , still less that was recognisably Oxonian " , said the architectural historian Sir Howard Colvin . There were no pitched roofs , battlements , or pinnacles . Instead , the proposed building had " a strongly Mediterranean character " , inspired by medieval buildings in that region . White Portland stone was the chosen building material ; there were to be " stark " external walls and flat roofs , and a large semi @-@ circular doorway at the main entrance , with facetted voussoirs demonstrating the influence of the Muslim architecture of Norman Sicily . The tower , which was to have an internal dome and an external polygonal design , showed ( in Colvin 's view ) influences of Byzantium and parts of southern France . In the hall , there were to be aisles on the north and south sides of the main body of the hall , as in a basilica , with the arches and columns of the aisles designed in a Greek Doric style . The hall and its grand staircase , said Colvin , would have rivalled those of Christ Church . Although Harrison had not finished plans for the common rooms , the initial sketches had oriental touches , including fireplaces reminiscent of the Topkapı Palace in Istanbul . The Warden 's Lodging would have been " one of the most handsome and commodious of its kind " . However , Colvin thought that the chapel design was better suited to Mediterranean sunlight than Oxford gloom . 
 Colvin said that the " relationship between the principal buildings " was " elegantly worked out " and , " in a university of self @-@ contained spaces " , a design using two intersecting axes – one from the entrance to the hall and tower , the other from the chapel to the lodging – " represented an innovation in planning that was highly effective " . Colvin 's view was that the failure to construct the college according to this " impressive " design led to it being Oxford 's " most notable architectural casualty of the 1930s " . Had it been built , he said , it " would have taken its place among the major architectural monuments of Oxford " . 
 = = Second design = = 
 Nuffield was dismayed by the model of Harrison 's plans , as the buildings were not in the general Oxford collegiate style that he was known to favour . After a meeting with the University 's Vice @-@ Chancellor , A. D. Lindsay , Nuffield wrote to him on 15 August 1939 to say that he felt " obliged to adhere to my adverse judgement of the plans " . The design was " un @-@ English and out of keeping with the best tradition of Oxford architecture " , said Nuffield , adding that " if a building of this type were to be erected , I would not allow my name to be associated therewith " . 
 Harrison protested that the so @-@ called Oxford architectural tradition was a vague concept and also an accident of history : there was no uniform style uniting the buildings of the university and colleges , but instead different designs had been used , with varying modifications , over many centuries . Only a compromise would suit " a 20th century donor with an industrial background who sighs for romance , a committee of economists who are after results [ and ] the governing committee of a University steeped in its tradition " . Nevertheless , Harrison agreed to attempt to satisfy Nuffield 's desire for " something on the lines of Cotswold domestic architecture " , and produced a second design . The amount of accommodation provided was reduced . The main entrance was moved from the west to the south of the college , under the chapel ; it was to have an arcaded vestibule , allowing the quadrangle to be seen from the street , as Nuffield wanted . The flat roofs were replaced with pitched roofs with gable ends and dormer windows . The staircase leading to the hall was removed , and the hall repositioned on ground level , without aisles but with a hammerbeam roof of oak trusses . The tower , which would now contain the common room , was moved from the area of the former hall staircase to the east end of the chapel . When the plans were shown to Nuffield in early 1940 , the only change that he requested before giving his approval was for a " more conventional " tower to replace the spire on Harrison 's design . 
 = = Construction and completion = = 
 The Second World War meant that construction work on the main college buildings could not begin until 21 April 1949 , when the foundation stone was laid ; work on the warden 's residence had begun in October 1948 . Before the buildings were erected , the college operated from rented houses elsewhere in Oxford , on Banbury Road and Woodstock Road . There were further changes to Harrison 's second design , as not only had inflation between 1937 and 1949 reduced the value of Nuffield 's original donation , but additional savings had to be made in the difficult post @-@ war economic situation . A scale model , created in 1949 as work started , showed the alterations : a shortened tower , a plainer main entrance , and no arcades within the quadrangles . Further changes were made once work was under way , including the indefinite postponement of construction of the institute opposite the college . The plans of the tower were altered so that it would hold a library , instead of being purely ornamental , windows were added at regular intervals , and it was topped by a copper flèche , or small spire . 
 A further delay in construction was announced in 1951 , when labour and materials were restricted because of a government rearmament drive . Work to complete the quadrangle , including a hall , kitchen and the library tower , began in 1955 at a cost of £ 200 @,@ 000 . This money was donated to the college by the Nuffield Foundation upon Lord Nuffield 's recommendation . Until it was required for books , the fellows of the college used the upper floor as a Senior Common Room . The tower was completed in 1956 , and the college as a whole ( without the institute on the site opposite , which is now used as a car park ) was finished in 1960 . Work was still under way when the college was incorporated by royal charter in 1958 , thereby becoming a self @-@ governing entity . The charter was presented to the college by the Duke of Edinburgh on 6 June 1958 , at the first lunch to be served in the hall . 
 Colvin commented that , apart from the flèche which was similar to the initial plan , the college as finally built contained none of the elements that had given Harrison 's first design " interest and distinction " . The remaining " vestiges " of the first plan , he said , were the two main axes within the college , although " no longer focussed on major architectural incidents " , and the masonry around the main doors , cut to resemble the buildings of medieval Italy rather than those of Tudor England . 
 = = Buildings = = 
 The college presents a symmetrical front to New Road and the castle mound , with four small gables between a larger gable at either end . There are two quadrangles , with steps leading down from the upper quadrangle ( to the east ) to the lower quadrangle ( to the west ) . Residential accommodation for students and fellows is located in the lower quadrangle , whilst the hall , library , and administrative offices are in the upper quadrangle . The buildings are two storeys high , with dormers above . There are pools in the centre of the quadrangles ( the one in the lower quadrangle is the longer of the two ) ; the writer Simon Jenkins said that these are " almost puddles " , and saw them as relics of Harrison 's Mediterranean plan . The writer Peter Sager , however , thought that the pond represents the canal basin that previously occupied the site . The main entrance leads into the upper quadrangle , which has the hall on its east side . The square @-@ mullioned windows facing the quadrangles are arranged in close @-@ set groups of three ; at the east end of the upper quadrangle , the common room has a larger bay window . An abstract sculpture by Hubert Dalwood , from 1962 , has been positioned on the lawn inside the college . Dalwood also designed the fountain in the pool in the upper quadrangle , although his plan for a spray of water was not implemented , " leaving the sculpture with no obvious purpose " . 
 The hall has a floor of black and white marble and arches made of concrete supporting an oak roof with red panels . The furniture in the hall was designed by , and the chairs were built by , Edward Barnsley . Lord Nuffield 's coat of arms are displayed over the fireplace , carved from a single piece of stone , and his portrait , painted by Sir Arthur Cope , hangs in the hall . The chapel , on the south side of the college , can seat forty people . It has five abstract stained glass windows that were designed by John Piper and executed by Patrick <unk> , and a metal reredos with a bronze crucifix . The roofs are finished with <unk> slates from Northamptonshire . Many other Oxford colleges are roofed with Stonesfield slate from a quarry 10 miles ( 16 km ) northwest of Oxford , but these were no longer available when Nuffield was built . The main building stone used is Clipsham stone . The tower , which has nine floors , is about 90 feet ( 27 m ) tall , with the flèche taking the total height to about 150 feet ( 46 m ) . It was the first tower built in Oxford for 200 years . Work was carried out in the library in 1999 to extend the total shelf @-@ length to just under 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) . The library contains paintings of " Spring " and " Winter " by Derrick Greaves and " Summer " and " Autumn " by Edward Middleditch . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The architectural writer Geoffrey Tyack has written that Nuffield College was Oxford 's " most important architectural project of the immediate post @-@ war years " . Opinions about the architecture merits of the college have varied , although most have been unfavourable . The authors of a 1961 booklet on the architecture of modern Oxford said that it was " Oxford 's biggest monument to barren reaction " . The Cotswold style was " taken absurdly out of context and mercilessly stretched " , and did not " harmonise with the clumsy tower " , whilst the spire " [ perched ] uneasily ... despite its elaborate base " . An unnamed journalist wrote in The Times in 1959 that the main buildings of the quadrangles were " somewhat oddly wedded to small basins which irresistibly suggest a Lilliputian Versailles " . The same writer said that the tower rose " Manhattan @-@ wise for 10 storeys through the twentieth century , only to have a diminutive spire , escaped from the fifteenth , push through its top to steal the last laugh " . Peter Sager , too , thought that the " high @-@ rise library " could " easily stand on the Hudson " . Sir Howard Colvin said that the " utilitarian function " of the tower " accorded ill with its original ornamental purpose " , and that the architects had " failed to find a satisfactory solution " to the " repetitive uniformity of fenestration " . Of the flèche , Colvin said that it " makes its contribution to the Oxford skyline without any overt reference to historical precedent " . Geoffrey Tyack also disliked the tower , describing it as " an ungainly structure " that was " lit by a monotonous array of windows punched out of the wall surface " ; however , he thought the hall was " an effective reinterpretation of the traditional collegiate pattern " . 
 The architectural historian Sir Nikolaus Pevsner compared the college unfavourably to the designs of the Danish architect Arne Jacobsen for St Catherine 's College , Oxford , construction of which began in 1960 ( the year that Nuffield College was completed ) : St Catherine 's , in his view , was " the most perfect piece of architecture of 20th @-@ century Oxford " and made Nuffield " look even more absurd " . Nevertheless , he " proposed forgiveness " for the " mighty tower " , which " positively helps the famous skyline of Oxford " , adding that it has " enough identity to be sure that one day it will find affection " . He said that the tower had something of the architect Edwin Lutyens ' " felicitous manipulation of period details into a non @-@ period whole and will , I prophesy , one day be loved " , although he was less sure that this fate awaited the rest of the buildings . Simon Jenkins said of Pevsner 's prophecy about the tower , " I doubt it " ; he described it as " at best ungainly " , with a " weak spire " , and said that " vegetation was its best hope , as for the rest of Nuffield " . The college , in his view " required a sense of humour " . 
 Writing in 1952 , after the first section of the buildings was complete , J. M. Richards , the editor of the Architectural Review , said that Nuffield was " a large @-@ scale example of period @-@ style architecture which has no justification whatever on grounds of consideration for the neighbours and represents missed opportunity of a really tragic kind " . As the site was away from the " ancient colleges " of the city centre and in an area of " undistinguished nineteenth century commercial building " , there had been a " rare opportunity " of building something " belonging ... to the twentieth century , and of showing that Oxford does not live only in the past " . He said that the " compromise between contemporary needs and what is imagined to be the English collegiate tradition is quite unworthy of the educational enterprise the new foundation represents " . He was , however , " thankful " that the building used smooth @-@ faced stone " in the proper Oxford style " rather than rubble facing , which he said had been used elsewhere in Oxford " with extraordinarily <unk> results " . 
 The architectural correspondent of The Times wrote that the architecture of the college was incongruous – it was " remarkable " that a college with connections to modern industry should be looking backwards in this way . " That a college devoted to modern scientific studies should be dressed up [ in the style of an antique Cotswold manor house ] has already been the subject of puzzled comment by many foreign visitors to Oxford . " Writing in The Observer , Patience Gray also disliked the college 's design , referring to the " Cotswold dementia " of the architecture , and the college 's " pokey windows and grotesque sugarloaf tower . " The chapel was described by the travel writer Jan Morris as " one of the sweetest little sanctuaries in Oxford " ; " very simple , almost stern " with a contrast between the black and white pews and the " rich colour " of the stained glass . However , she said that whilst Oxford colleges change in style over time as buildings are added or altered , " Nuffield was a hodge @-@ podge from the start , with a faintly Levantine tower upon a Cotswold Gothic base " . 
 The writer Miles Jebb considered the contrast between the hall 's black and white floor and red @-@ panelled roof to be " most effective " . He thought that the enclosed layout of the college was " a principal attraction " , but wrote that the tower 's " palpably utilitarian function detracts from its aesthetic attraction " , even though it made the " emphatic addition " to the skyline of Oxford that Nuffield wanted . A. R. Woolley , author of an Oxford University Press guide to the city and university , was more positive . He described the tower as " an exciting breakaway from the conventional " , with its spire as a " secular contribution to the sky @-@ line " . He said that the buildings " make a picturesque group of gabled Cotswold roofs " , adding that " [ t ] heir design is simple and depends for its effects upon its just proportions . It is at once traditional and original . " 
 In 1993 , the college became a Grade II listed building , a designation given to buildings of national importance and special interest . The kerbstones around the pool in the west quadrangle have been given separate Grade II listing , as an " integral part of the Nuffield College scheme " . 
 = Nutrition Assistance for Puerto Rico = 
 Nutrition Assistance for Puerto Rico ( NAP ) — Spanish : Programa de Asistencia <unk> ( PAN ) commonly known in Puerto Rican Spanish as <unk> ( English : Food Stamps ) — is a federal assistance nutritional program provided by the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) solely to Puerto Rico . It provides over $ 1 @.@ 5 billion USD in supplemental economic resources to help just over 1 million impoverished residents cope with their nutritional needs . It is based on , though not directly part of , the USDA 's national Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program . 
 Since its inception in 1982 , the program has been providing low @-@ income families living in Puerto Rico with cash benefits used for food purchases . It is a collaborative effort between the USDA and the island 's government , where the former provides annual federal appropriations for the Puerto Rican government to distribute individually among eligible participants . Although the methods of providing such benefits have changed over the years , the program 's basic objective of helping low @-@ income families meet their nutritional needs has remained constant . 
 It has , however , been controversial throughout its existence . Federal reviews and assessments have revealed deficiencies in its operations and management , requiring the implementation of various changes , including increased scrutiny . It has also attracted both criticism and advocacy from Puerto Rico and the United States over its effectiveness in helping poor families , and its impact on Puerto Rico 's social classes and economy . 
 = = History = = 
 Food stamps have been issued in the United States since World War II , but the program did not include Puerto Rico until the early 1970s , when U.S. Public Laws 91 @-@ 671 of January 11 , 1971 and 93 @-@ 86 of November 1 , 1974 partially extended the Food Stamp Program to U.S. territories . The Food Stamp program was later expanded to provide full coverage and benefits to Puerto Rico and other territories under Section 19 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 . 
 By 1977 , the Food Stamp Program in Puerto Rico was larger , in terms of both the percentage of the population participating and expenditures , than any of the programs operating in the 50 U.S. States , with 56 % of the Puerto Rican population participating in the program . In total , it accounted for approximately 8 percent of the national program 's beneficiaries , and its operations and benefits awarded accounted for 8 percent of the national program 's total federal expenditures . 
 To address these issues , the 1981 Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act ( <unk> ) eliminated Puerto Rico from the national Food Stamp program and created the Nutrition Assistance Program for Puerto Rico as a block grant to provide more administrative flexibility to the Commonwealth while reducing Federal expenditures . After a year of studies and design , it commenced operations on July 1 , 1982 with an annual appropriation of $ 825 million . 
 The new block grant program differed significantly from the former Food Stamp program in three major ways . First , the new NAP program was designed to distribute the benefits through physical cheques , ensuring that the benefit would be payable only to the beneficiary while at the same time reducing administrative costs , since the former physical vouchers ( <unk> in Spanish ) were subject to storage and accountability problems , theft , counterfeiting and even trafficking . Second , the benefits were no longer restricted to vouchers redeemable only for food , but were provided in cash . The beneficiary could then elect to purchase a product or select services other than food . < ref " > <unk> @-@ 19 @-@ 3 , Chapter 11 , pg . 286 , par . 7 < / ref > Third , the overall assistance provided to Puerto Rico was limited to an annual block appropriation , requiring the Puerto Rican government to adjust its program management to allocate the funds . Between 1982 and 1986 , the U.S. Congress awarded $ 825 million annually in block grants for NAP program , and since then the appropriations have steadily increased by an estimated 3 % to 4 % to compensate for inflation . It has surpassed $ 1 billion annually since the early 1990s , and increased 30 % from 1993 to 2002 . Since fiscal year 2006 , the appropriation has reached over $ 1 @.@ 5 billion annually . 
 Over the years there has been a gradual decline in participation in the nutrition assistance program . Participation in the previous Food Stamp program was estimated at 56 % , more than 1 @.@ 5 million island residents , before the creation of the block grant . By 1994 , participation in the NAP program had decreased to 1 @.@ 3 million , and by 2006 it had decreased to just over 1 million . While the Puerto Rican population has steadily increased throughout those periods , the percentage of the population participating in the nutrition assistance program has significantly declined . With Puerto Rico 's current population estimated at 3 @,@ 944 @,@ 000 residents and a current estimated NAP participation of 1 million beneficiaries , the program 's participation rate is roughly 26 % , almost half of the participation under the original Food Stamp program in 1981 . 
 Since its creation , the program has received much criticism both within and outside Puerto Rico . Critics argue that , since the program provides non @-@ taxable income without any employment requirements , recipients receive free money without incentives for work , which hinders the economic output and development of the island , especially when Puerto Rico 's employment participation and unemployment rates have been consistently inferior to U.S. national levels , while the average aid provided in Puerto Rico has exceeded the U.S. national average ( $ 94 versus $ 74 @.@ 79 , respectively ; 2001 estimate ) . Because of this , Puerto Rico has been called the " welfare island " . People from the Dominican Republic do many of the jobs in Puerto Rico that pay too little to attract the locals . However , proponents of the program argue that Puerto Rico 's social condition is in far worse shape than any of the 50 U.S. states . Approximately half of the island 's population lives below the U.S. Federal poverty guidelines , and many have difficulties in meeting their nutritional needs due to increasing inflation and economic stagnation in the island . Furthermore , the relation between the NAP program 's benefits and the low employment participation and high unemployment rates has not been studied , and there is no consensus on their actual causes . 
 = = Program administration = = 
 The Food and Nutrition Service ( FNS ) , a component of the USDA , provides the funds to the Puerto Rican government 's Department of the Family to operate the program through an annual block grant , which covers the full cost of the benefits to participants , as well as fifty percent ( 50 % ) of the costs required to administer the program ( the remaining 50 % must be provided by the Puerto Rican government ) . Although federal regulations require Puerto Rico to pay the benefits during the year for which the annual block grant was awarded , since 2002 the federal government has allowed Puerto Rico to use 2 % of an annual surplus for benefits in future years . 
 As a condition of receiving the grant , the P.R. Department of the Family must submit an annual plan of operation to the FNS , which describes how it will distribute the funds assigned as nutrition assistance to qualifying persons . This includes identifying the island population which is eligible for the NAP benefits ( i.e. , family income limits , family status limits , etc . ) , establishing the process in which individual participants are selected , and the process of determining the benefit amount for each participant . The plan of operation is reviewed and approved by the FNS before funds are disbursed . 
 The Puerto Rico Department of the Family currently provides the benefits to each participating family through a debit card , which replaced the physical cheques in the early 2000s . The monthly benefit is deposited through an electronic benefit transfer ( EBT ) system into a government @-@ designated personal bank account , which can be accessed at any time with the debit card to withdraw cash or to make food purchases from authorized retailers . Since September 2001 , 75 % of each family ’ s monthly benefit has been designated exclusively for making direct food and grocery purchases , while the remaining 25 % can be withdrawn as a cash benefit . The EBT debit card system has improved the program ’ s payment accuracy rate to 96 @.@ 4 % in 2003 , 4 years ahead of its 2007 goal of 95 % accuracy . 
 The FNS also requires the Puerto Rican government to submit financial and performance reports on a regular basis , including quarterly Federal Cash Transactions Reports , quarterly and annual Financial Status Reports , and monthly Program Participation and Benefits Reports . These reports provide details on the program 's obligations and actual expenditures , and help the FNS monitor the use of program funds and reconcile the program ’ s budget with actual expenditures . 
 = = = Management assessment = = = 
 In a collaborative effort by the United States Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) and various other Federal agencies , the NAP program was recently assessed and given a 44 % and 40 % score ( out of a possible 100 % ) in its Program Management and Program Results / Accountability performance indicators , respectively , stating that " the program 's financial management practices need improvement . " The assessment revealed that the Puerto Rican government has not established short @-@ term goals , objectives , and targets to evaluate the program ’ s performance and results , that the program 's oversight has been lax in previous years , and that the program 's impact and results in Puerto Rico 's society have not been evaluated in recent years . The financial management and oversight concerns were later emphasized when , on March 15 , 2007 , a U.S. investigative task force uncovered a $ 30 million fraud scheme involving 31 participants , including retailers and beneficiaries , who were withdrawing the funds as cash from the benefits designated exclusively for food purchases , and charging the customers a 20 % to 25 % fee for the transaction . 
 The Puerto Rican government 's Departments of Family , Education , and Health have since combined efforts to create a 5 @-@ year strategic plan to improve the program 's long @-@ term performance and financial management . The Family Department has recently implemented a quality control @-@ like program titled Measure of Efforts and Results System , which evaluates the quality and promptitude of services while reviewing various eligibility elements , to improve customer services and program management . The Department has also agreed to switch from a biennial audit to an annual Single Audit , and subject the program to periodic audits by its Administration for Socio @-@ Economic Development , to detect and correct problems more quickly . Furthermore , the USDA 's Office of Inspector General ( OIG ) has performed regular audits to assure compliance and identify areas for improvement . 
 Regardless of deficiencies , the federal government 's assessment revealed that the current NAP program is actually an improvement over the former Food Stamp program provided in Puerto Rico . In its 2005 assessment report , it concluded : 
 = = Program benefits = = 
 Under the NAP , participating families receive monthly cash benefits to supplement their incomes which must be used to purchase foods for preparation and consumption at home . In order to qualify for the program , potential beneficiaries must meet several conditions , listed as follows : 
 The candidate must be living in Puerto Rico to receive the benefits . 
 The candidate must maintain a maximum bank balance ( all checking and savings accounts combined ) of : 
 $ 2 @,@ 000 if the candidate is responsible for one or more persons age 60 or younger , or 
 $ 3 @,@ 000 if the candidate is responsible for one or more persons age 61 or older . 
 The candidate 's annual household income must not exceed the predefined income limits set by the Puerto Rico government ( see table , right ) . 
 The amount of a family ’ s monthly benefit payment depends on that family 's specific characteristics and financial circumstances , as well as the overall amount of program funds available for distribution . The latest statistics show that benefits average $ 103 each month ( 2003 , see table below right ) . It is the Puerto Rico government 's responsibility to establish the eligibility requirements and benefit levels for participation in the program . The benefits are revised annually every October 1 to consider the nutritional needs of Puerto Rico 's impoverished population , analyze the impact of inflation in Puerto Rico , and plan the distribution of available funds accordingly . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 Since the program started in 1982 , only three formal studies over the nutritional impact of the benefits provided to each family have been publicly released , in 1985 , 1993 , and 1996 , respectively . All studies were designed to analyze the impact of the program with respect to the previous food stamps program , focusing on changes in household nutrient availability , while the 1985 and 1993 studies also focused on changes in household food expenditures ( the amount of money households spent on acquiring food ) . 
 The first and most widely recognized study , published by Mathematica Policy Research , Inc. in 1985 , found that the NAP program increased household food expenditures for beneficiaries when compared to non @-@ participating families , just as its predecessor did . It also found that the program had the same relevant impact on increasing household food expenditures as the previous food stamp program , however this has been contested by subsequent studies performed on the national food stamp program , which found that " stamp " or " coupon " -type benefits are more effective at increasing food expenditures than direct " cash " benefits . The 1993 study , which also researched the impact on household expenditures , formed a completely different conclusion : that the average beneficiaries under the NAP program spent $ 5 less per week on food than non @-@ participating families , considering if both would have the same amount of resources available . Nevertheless , this conclusion has also been questioned by subsequent research , attributing this result on the author 's determination of the population sample . 
 All studies revealed minor improvements in household nutrient availability , with the 1985 study revealing an improvement of vitamin and mineral consumption over non @-@ participating families and the 1993 study partially confirming these results . The most extensive study on nutrient availability was published in 1996 , which concluded that nutrition did not change significantly after the implementation of the NAP program for all beneficiaries , however most improvements were noted for very low @-@ income beneficiaries versus their non @-@ participating equivalents . 
 Although these three studies have been used by the federal government and other entities to understand the impact of the NAP program 's benefits , the data used by the authors dates back to the periods between 1977 and 1984 , providing limited relevant information for the current program of today . Additionally , subsequent research and analysis have revealed insufficiencies in the methodology applied by the authors of all three publications , thereby casting doubt on whether a definitive conclusion of the program 's overall impact has been established . A 2004 report published by USDA 's Economic Research Service evaluated the reliability and relevancy of these studies , concluding that they are not sufficient to determine the program 's current impact and performance , and stating : 
 = Interstate 80 Business ( West Wendover , Nevada – Wendover , Utah ) = 
 Interstate 80 Business ( BL @-@ 80 ) is an unofficial business loop of Interstate 80 ( I @-@ 80 ) that is 2 @.@ 26 miles ( 3 @.@ 64 km ) long and serves as the main street for the US cities of West Wendover , Nevada , and Wendover , Utah , along a roadway named Wendover Boulevard . Wendover Boulevard was originally part of U.S. Route 40 ( US 40 ) , which connected California to New Jersey via Nevada and Utah . A portion of the Nevada segment is concurrent with U.S. Route 93 Alternate ( US 93 Alt . ) , and the entire portion in Utah is coterminous with Utah State Route 58 ( SR @-@ 58 ) . The Nevada Department of Transportation ( Nevada DOT ) applied for the business loop designation in the early 1980s but the designation has never been approved ; nevertheless , signs are posted in both states . Between July 1976 and 1993 , BL @-@ 80 was concurrent with State Route 224 ( SR 224 ) in Nevada . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Starting at the easternmost Nevada exit of I @-@ 80 , BL @-@ 80 heads south , concurrent with US 93 Alt. until it intersects with , and turns east onto , Wendover Boulevard . Just west of the intersection , the highway passes the West Wendover City Hall , which houses the West Wendover Municipal Court and <unk> Justice Court . Traveling east along Wendover Boulevard , BL @-@ 80 passes by the <unk> casino , the West Wendover Visitors Center and Scobie Park . US 93 Alt. turns south towards Ely , while BL @-@ 80 continues east until it reaches the Montego Bay Resort and Wendover Nugget casinos . The casinos are connected via a sky bridge that allows pedestrian access between the hotels without crossing the highway . A line painted on the street marks the Nevada – Utah border . At the border , BL @-@ 80 becomes coterminous with Utah State Route 58 for the final stretch through Wendover , Utah . 
 BL @-@ 80 continues to the east past Aria Boulevard , which to the north connects to I @-@ 80 , and to the south leads to the historic Wendover Air Force Base , where the 509th Composite Group was stationed while it prepared to conduct atomic bomb attacks against Japan during 1944 and 1945 . The highway briefly parallels the Shafter Subdivision of the Union Pacific Railroad 's Central Corridor , which was formerly part of the Feather River Route of the Western Pacific Railroad . As the highway travels east towards a half trumpet interchange with I @-@ 80 , the number of lanes drops from five to two . Traffic from BL @-@ 80 can access eastbound I @-@ 80 or turn off onto Frontage Road ; however , to access westbound I @-@ 80 , travelers must continue eastbound until the next exit and turn around . Traffic into Wendover can access BL @-@ 80 from both directions of I @-@ 80 , and from Frontage Road . 
 The Utah segment of BL @-@ 80 is codified into Utah law as Utah Code § 72 @-@ 4 @-@ 111 . Every year , the Utah Department of Transportation ( UDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of average traffic volume for any day of the year . In 2009 , UDOT calculated that an average of 2 @,@ 370 vehicles per day traveled on BL @-@ 80 at the state line . This is a significant decrease from the traffic counts earlier in the decade , which measured 11 @,@ 205 vehicles in 2006 , 10 @,@ 345 in 2005 , and 13 @,@ 840 in 2004 . Twenty @-@ one percent of this traffic consists of trucks . 
 = = History = = 
 A roadway , now named Wendover Boulevard , has existed since June 23 , 1925 , when the Victory Highway was completed through Wendover . Then governors George H. Dern of Utah and James G. <unk> of Nevada , as well as the Secretary of Agriculture William M. Jardine were present to open the highway . Bill Smith and Herman Eckstein opened a filling station at the present location of the Wendover Nugget Casino at a cost of $ 500 early in 1926 ( equivalent to $ 33 thousand in 2015 ) . To welcome travelers to his station , he installed a light bulb at the top of a tall pole , which served as the only light in the desert . The earlier Lincoln Highway was re @-@ routed to follow the Victory Highway through the region by an order of the Lincoln Highway Association executive committee on October 18 , 1926 . 
 Wendover Boulevard was numbered US 40 through what are now the cities of West Wendover and Wendover beginning in 1926 . US 40 was the major thoroughfare between San Francisco , in the west , and Atlantic City , New Jersey , in the east . US 40 was routed along the Wendover Cut @-@ off , now known as Frontage Road , which was retained as a service road after the completion of the I @-@ 80 . The US 40 designation was removed by 1976 or 1977 , when I @-@ 80 was completed through the area . The designation of roadway now numbered US 93 Alt. has changed twice in the past . Between 1932 and 1953 , it was designated US 50 , and between 1954 and either 1978 and 1979 , it was designated US 50 Alt . 
 Two other roads have been numbered Utah SR @-@ 58 in the past . The first route designated SR @-@ 58 was formed in 1945 between SR @-@ 36 and Clover , but was decommissioned in 1953 . The second road to use the designation was formed in 1965 between I @-@ 15 in New Harmony back to I @-@ 15 via <unk> , but that road was decommissioned in 1969 . The current SR @-@ 58 was codified into Utah law in 1969 between the state line and the junction with Frontage Road , which was formerly US 40 . Wendover Boulevard between US 93 Alt. and the state line was designated SR 224 between July 1 , 1976 , and April 28 , 1993 , when the highway was transferred to Elko County . 
 Even though BL @-@ 80 is signed in both Nevada and Utah , the route has never been officially designated a business loop by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ( AASHTO ) or by the Utah State Legislature . Nevada DOT applied for the designation , but in July 1982 the application was deferred by AASHTO until Utah submitted a request for a business loop . No such request has ever been submitted . 
 Prior to 2007 , BL @-@ 80 was the only connection to the city of Wendover from Utah . However , a new partial diamond interchange , which allows traffic from I @-@ 80 to exit going westbound and for traffic to enter I @-@ 80 eastbound , at Aria Boulevard was constructed . The Aria Boulevard interchange was first planned in 2005 , and was completed without using any federal funding . 
 In 2007 , the City of West Wendover had two historical markers installed along BL @-@ 80 , one at the state line , and the other at the intersection of US 93 Alt. to commemorate the Victory Highway and US 40 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Invocation ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Invocation " is the fifth episode of the eighth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on December 3 , 2000 . The episode was written by David Amman and directed by Richard Compton . " Invocation " is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 2 and was viewed by 13 @.@ 9 million viewers . Overall , the episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 The series centers on FBI special agents Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and her new partner John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) — following the alien abduction of her former partner , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) — who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , a little boy mysteriously reappears after having been kidnapped for ten years . However , he has not aged one bit after his disappearance . While the case stirs up painful memories for Doggett , suspicion stirs that the boy is not all he seems . 
 " Invocation " would introduce both the character of Luke Doggett , the deceased son of John Doggett , as well as a story arc involving his father trying to solve his murder . A majority of the episode was filmed in Pasadena , California . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1990 , Billy Underwood goes missing at a school fair in Dexter , Oklahoma . Ten years later , Billy 's mother Lisa Underwood arrives at the local elementary school to find the principal and staff waiting for her . Billy has mysteriously re @-@ appeared at the school , but doesn 't seem to have aged in the decade he was missing . 
 Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) arrive at the police station to see Billy . Doggett interviews the boy , who seems to be mute . In attempt to get Billy to speak , Doggett keeps his backpack from him . This infuriates Lisa and leads Scully to question Doggett ’ s expertise in child abduction cases . Scully suggests that Billy is an alien abductee , but Doggett believes Ronald Purnell , a local delinquent , may have been involved in the boy 's disappearance . Doggett questions Purnell , who expresses confusion when the agent suggests that he should meet Billy . As Doggett sits in his car , he pulls out a photo of his deceased son , Luke . 
 When Billy is returned home , his brother and father are uneasy about his presence ; Lisa is blind to these problems . While Lisa and her husband argue about Billy , he goes into his brother ’ s room with a knife . The next morning , Lisa finds a bloody knife in his brother 's bed , although the boy is unscathed . Billy stands in the room staring at Josh . Forensic analysis shows the blood to be Billy 's , although there are no injuries on him . The knife bears a symbol that Billy drew while being interrogated by Doggett , which was also drawn by a psychic investigator ten years earlier . Meanwhile , Cal Jeppy shows up at Purnell 's trailer and hassles him . Purnell goes into the woods and digs up a skull . Later , Jeppy blackmails Purnell into silence over something related to Billy . 
 Scully and Doggett bring the psychic , Sharon Pearl , to meet Billy . After touching Billy , Pearl says that she feels powerful forces acting through him , and that she senses emanations from Doggett as well . She then goes into a seizure , the mysterious symbol forming on her forehead . Scully and Doggett later notice Purnell drive up to the Underwood home . Purnell panics when he sees Billy in his car , but after a short pursuit , Purnell is arrested . The agents fail to find Billy in the vehicle . Elsewhere , Josh Underwood is abducted at a gas station while looking at a horse trailer . The symbol appears on the trailer . 
 After interrogation by Doggett , Purnell confesses to snatching Billy in 1990 on behalf of someone else . Doggett recognizes Purnell was also a victim , and with enough prodding , gets a name : Cal Jeppy . The police and the two FBI agents go to Jeppy ’ s home and find Josh in a compartment under the floor of his horse trailer . Doggett chases Jeppy into the woods , catches him , and discovers the skull of Billy that Purnell dug up earlier . As the Underwoods stand over the shallow grave of their long dead son , Scully and Doggett discuss the case . Scully believes it was justice from beyond the grave and that the important thing is that it saved Josh Underwood . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Invocation " was written by producer David Amann , and marked his fifth script contribution to the series . " Invocation " was the first of two episode of The X @-@ Files to be directed by Richard Compton ; he would later go on to direct the eighth season episode " Medusa " . Although the episode was the fifth aired in the season , it was actually the sixth one filmed , as evidenced by its production number . A majority of the episode was filmed in Pasadena , California . Many of the extras from the episode auditioned via General Casting , a casting agency . The song that Ronald Purnell sang to Billy to keep him quiet and that was featured as a backmasked message on Scully 's tape @-@ recorder is a traditional African American lullaby from the southern United States called " All the Pretty Horses " . 
 In the episode , Doggett is told by a psychic that his very own son was kidnapped and murdered ; thus , " Invocation " would mark the first appearance of Luke Doggett , the son of John . Luke 's story would develop into an arc featuring Doggett trying to find out the truth about his son 's murder . Robert Patrick noted " [ ' Invocation ' started ] a very important arc , because you start to see the vulnerability of the Doggett character , what drives him . That 's where we first realize something 's happened to him . There 's a tragedy that 's involved with him . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Invocation " first aired on Fox on December 3 , 2000 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 2 , meaning that it was seen by 8 @.@ 2 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 27 million households , and 13 @.@ 9 million viewers . The episode ranked as the 41st most @-@ watched episode for the week ending December 3 . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on March 8 , 2000 and received 0 @.@ 64 million viewers , making it the eighth most watched episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " How can a child disappear for ten years ... and not age a single day ? Tonight , a family 's miracle may be a gift from hell . " 
 Television Without Pity writer Jessica Morgan rated the episode a B – , and , despite the moderate praise , finished her review with the statement , " I miss Mulder . " Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B – " , writing that it is " an okay entry that ’ s kept from being completely forgettable by some memorable shots [ … ] and some decent Scully / <unk> banter . " Handlen held a mixed feeling toward 's Doggett 's backstory , noting that its introduction " does push the character in ways that undermine some of his strongest traits " . 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . The two praised Amman 's ability to " elicit real @-@ world reactions out of fantastical situations " . However , Shearman and Pearson took issue with the way Doggett 's backstory was extrapolated . They noted that Doggett had been portrayed , up to the point in the series , as a " solid and reliable " character . However , " Invocation " sees him " [ break ] protocol and [ behave ] like a bully " because of a case reminiscent of that of his deceased son 's , a situation that , the two reason , is too similar to Mulder 's own search for the truth about his sister , Samantha . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it two stars out of four . Vitaris bluntly wrote , " ' Invocation ' is a masterpiece , but only if you grade it on a ' Roadrunners ' bell @-@ curve . " She elaborated , calling it " a run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill stand @-@ alone , a combination of ' Revelations ' and ' The Calusari ' " 
 = Through the Looking Glass ( Lost ) = 
 " Through the Looking Glass " is the third season finale of the ABC television series Lost , consisting of the 22nd and 23rd episodes of the third season . It is also the 71st and 72nd episodes overall . It was written by co @-@ creator / executive producer Damon Lindelof and executive producer Carlton Cuse , and directed by executive producer Jack Bender . When first aired on May 23 , 2007 , in the United States and Canada , it was watched by an average of 14 million American viewers . Like the previous two season finales , it was two hours long with advertisements , twice the length of a normal episode . It was edited into two individual episodes when released on DVD . The season finale is considered by some to be one of the best episodes of television ever broadcast . The episode garnered a number of awards and nominations , including three Primetime Emmy Awards nominations and a Directors Guild of America Award nomination . 
 The episode begins its narrative in late December 2004 , over ninety days after the crash of Oceanic Airlines Flight 815 . The battle between the crash survivors and the dangerous and mysterious island inhabitants referred to as the " Others " comes to a head as ten of the Others attack and are then ambushed at the survivors ' camp and are subsequently killed . Meanwhile , Jack Shephard ( played by Matthew Fox ) leads most of the survivors to the island 's radio tower to communicate with a nearby ship . Intercut with this story are off @-@ island scenes spotlighting Jack , who has become suicidally depressed and addicted to painkillers . In a twist ending , it is revealed that these scenes are flashforwards to sometime in the future , after Jack has left the island , rather than flashbacks as in previous episodes of Lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Others intend to attack the camp and kidnap pregnant women for scientific research . The survivors are tipped off by the " Other " Karl ( Blake Bashoff ) and plan to kill the Others with dynamite @-@ rigged tents . Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) , Jin Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) , and Bernard Nadler ( Sam Anderson ) remain at the beach , tasked with shooting the tents while the rest of the survivors journey with Danielle Rousseau ( Mira Furlan ) to the radio tower to communicate with Naomi Dorrit 's ( Marsha Thomason ) nearby ship . The Others arrive , and while Sayid and Bernard detonate their tents , Jin misses his target , which results in their capture . After hearing only two explosions , James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) and Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) turn back to see if they can help . Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) , who was not allowed to accompany Sawyer and Juliet because of his weight , drives the van he found onto the beach , and the captives gain the upper hand , killing the remaining Others with the help of Sawyer and Juliet . Tom ( M.C. Gainey ) surrenders but Sawyer shoots him anyway . 
 In The Looking Glass , a research station of the Dharma Initiative , Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) is captured by the resident Others Greta ( Lana Parrilla ) and Bonnie ( Tracy Middendorf ) . Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) learns of Charlie 's infiltration and sends Mikhail Bakunin ( Andrew Divoff ) to the station to kill the three to preserve the signal jamming . Mikhail arrives and kills Greta and Bonnie , only to be shot through the chest with a spear gun by Desmond Hume ( Henry Ian Cusick ) who emerges from a closet where he had hidden after diving down a short time after Charlie . Getting the code from Bonnie before she dies ( the notes to the middle eight of " Good Vibrations " by The Beach Boys ) , Charlie disables the jammer , and is contacted by Penny Widmore ( Sonya Walger ) via video transmission . Penny informs Charlie that she does not know Naomi , and did not send the boat that Naomi claims to be from . Despite his injury , Mikhail manages to swim out of the station and blasts the window of the jamming room with a grenade , killing himself and flooding the communications room . Charlie locks the door to save Desmond from drowning with him , but before he drowns , Charlie writes on his hand so Desmond can read : " NOT <unk> 'S BOAT " . 
 John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) , one of the survivors , has been shot by Ben . Finding his legs paralyzed again , Locke is about to commit suicide , when he is stopped by what appears to be Walt Lloyd ( Malcolm David Kelley ) . Meanwhile , Ben tells Richard Alpert ( Nestor Carbonell ) to lead the rest of the Others to the " Temple " and then leaves the Others , with his adopted daughter Alex ( Tania Raymonde ) – Rousseau 's daughter and Karl 's girlfriend – to meet up with the survivors to persuade Jack not to call Naomi 's ship for rescue . 
 Kate is upset about Sawyer not wanting her to come back to the beach with him to rescue Sayid , Jin and Bernard . Jack tells her it is because Sawyer was trying to protect her . When she asks why Jack is defending Sawyer , Jack informs Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) that it is because he loves her . Kate also witnessed a kiss between him and Juliet . Ben and Alex intercept Jack 's group ; Ben informs Jack that Naomi is not who she says she is , and making contact with her boat will be disastrous for everyone . Ben orders the shooting of Sayid , Jin , and Bernard , and when Jack hears three shots , he attacks Ben and punches him in the face repeatedly . Unknown to Jack , the shots were fired into the sand , following earlier orders from Ben . Rousseau meets her sixteen @-@ year @-@ old daughter Alex , who was kidnapped by the Others shortly after her birth , and they tie Ben up . The trek party , now able to get a signal , arrives at the radio tower . Rousseau disables her distress signal , freeing the frequency for Naomi . However , Naomi is knifed in the back by Locke , who threatens to kill Jack if he calls Naomi 's boat . Locke cannot bring himself to kill Jack , who communicates with George Minkowski ( Fisher Stevens ) on Naomi 's boat . Minkowski tells the survivors they will be sending rescue . 
 In the flash sequences , Jack is shown to be depressed , bearded , heavily drinking and addicted to <unk> . After reading about the death of someone he knew , Jack appears to be ready to commit suicide by jumping off the Sixth Street Viaduct bridge . However , he is distracted by a car crash and goes to save the victims . Later , Jack visits the memorial service for the person he read about and finds himself to be the only attendee . In the last of the flashes , Kate appears and Jack discusses the island with her . It becomes clear that the sequences are actually flashforwards rather than flashbacks . Jack tells Kate about the memorial service . Kate says that she did not know about it , but she would not have attended even if she did . Jack also talks about using the " golden pass " they had received from Oceanic Airlines to fly back and forth across the Pacific Ocean every Friday , hoping that he will crash in the island . Jack laments that they should have never left and must return . However , Kate disagrees and leaves , not wanting to continue a conversation that they have apparently had before . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode 's title is an allusion to Lewis Carroll 's novel Through the Looking @-@ Glass and a reference to the fictitious Dharma Initiative station featured in the previous episode . Shooting began on April 13 , 2007 and ended on May 7 , 2007 . The writers were so far behind schedule that parts of the episode were shot while later parts were still being written . Filming mostly took place on Oahu , Hawaii , with additional scenes shot in Los Angeles . The hospital scenes were filmed on the same sets used for the ABC show Grey 's Anatomy . 
 Despite not being mentioned in the official press release , then @-@ 15 @-@ year @-@ old Malcolm David Kelley returned to reprise his role as 10 @-@ year @-@ old Walt Lloyd , and received credit as a " special guest star " . Kelley ’ s character had left the island in the second season finale , only 26 days prior to the events of " Through the Looking Glass " ; however , Kelley had not filmed an episode in over a year . In his single scene , Walt has visibly aged , appears taller and has a deeper voice . The producers had hoped that Harold Perrineau , who plays Walt 's father Michael Dawson , would return in this episode , but he was busy filming the pilot for CBS ' Demons . Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse lent their voices for the unseen roles of the flight captain and newscaster , respectively . 
 This episode concluded the story arc about Charlie 's death , which began earlier in the season when Desmond prophesied Charlie 's death . Throughout the season , Charlie escaped death ; however , Desmond told Charlie that he had to die in order for his girlfriend , Claire Littleton , to get rescued from the island . The storyline of Charlie 's death was conceived while producing the latter part of the second season , after the storyline of Charlie 's drug addiction finished . The news of his character 's death was broken to Monaghan two episodes in advance , to which Monaghan felt " relief " for knowing the future of his job on the show . On the night of Monaghan 's second @-@ to @-@ last day on set , he was presented with a canoe paddle that had been made by the cast and crew . Monaghan hoped to return to Lost as a guest star in flashbacks or dreams . 
 Jack Bender stated that Matthew Fox " really commits body and soul into the story he 's telling " and Fox questioned whether he had ever been more tired than while shooting the double episode . Like the other Lost season finales , the final cliffhanger scene was given a codename — " The Rattlesnake in the Mailbox " — and kept top secret . After Lindelof and Cuse wrote the scene , only Fox , Lilly , Bender , and co @-@ executive producer Jean Higgins were given copies of the script . The scene was shot with a green screen in an abandoned Honolulu parking lot with the airport edited in . Despite the security measures , a complete and detailed episode synopsis was uploaded online over a week before the episode aired . Disney investigated the leak . The leak prompted Lindelof and Cuse to enter " radio silence " , which was temporarily broken at Comic @-@ Con International 2007 . The funeral parlor that Jack visits is called " Hoffs / <unk> " , which is an anagram of " flashforward " . The idea of flashforwards was conceived by creators Lindelof and Abrams during the show 's conception . However , Cuse and Lindelof only started fleshing out the idea at the end of the first season , after they realized that flashbacks would eventually stop being revelatory and knew that they would eventually have to switch to flashforwards . With the announcement that the series would conclude 48 episodes after " Through the Looking Glass " , they felt comfortable playing flashforwards as early as the third season finale . 
 Post @-@ production wrapped on May 21 , 2007 , only two days before it aired on television . The score was composed by series musician Michael Giacchino , while popular music was also featured throughout the episode . Charlie also sings a song in the episode that was written by Dominic Monaghan , who plays him . A Lost season finale is approximately twice as long the average Lost episode . Due to the episode 's length , it was split into two parts in some countries and when released on DVD . Unlike most episodes , this episode did not feature a " previously on Lost … " recap at the start of the episode when it first aired ; however , it was originally preceded by a clip @-@ show titled " Lost : The Answers " , which recapped the third season . Cuse said that he and Lindelof think the finale is " very cool [ and ] we 're very proud of it . " Stephen McPherson , the president of ABC Entertainment , called " Through the Looking Glass " " one of the best episodes " of the series . Buena Vista Home Entertainment released " Through the Looking Glass " on the season 's DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc sets on December 11 , 2007 in Region 1 . A featurette called " Lost : On Location " features cast and crew discussing production of select episodes , including " Through the Looking Glass " . The episode was rerun for the first time on January 30 , 2008 with on @-@ screen text in the lower third of the screen , similar to VH1 's Pop @-@ up Video . These pop @-@ ups were not written by Lost 's writers due to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike ; they were written by the marketing company Met / Hodder . This enhanced edition was viewed by almost 9 million Americans . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In the U.S. , the episode brought in the best ratings for Lost in fifteen episodes . The two @-@ hour Wednesday broadcast on ABC made Lost the fourth most watched series of the week with an average of 13 @.@ 86 million American viewers , below the third season average of 14 @.@ 6 million . The first hour was viewed by 12 @.@ 67 million , and the audience increased to 15 @.@ 04 million in the second hour . The episode received a 5 @.@ 9 / 15 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic . In the United Kingdom , the episode attracted 1 @.@ 21 million viewers , and was the second most watched program of the week on the non @-@ terrestrial channels , beaten only by Katie & Peter : The Next Chapter . In Australia , Lost was the thirty @-@ seventh most viewed show of the week , bringing in 1 @.@ 17 million viewers . In Canada , the episode placed sixteenth for the first half , with 911 @,@ 000 viewers and fifteenth for the second half , with 938 @,@ 000 viewers . The episodes were broadcast before and after American Idol . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The episode garnered universal critical acclaim and is largely considered to be one of the greatest television episodes of all time . The Los Angeles Times wrote that the episode was " an unusually action @-@ packed and sanguinary spring cleaning that … left a host of … characters … dead " , Access Atlanta said " it was deeply satisfying . The first hour started a bit slow but the second hour had great twists , wonderfully emotional moments , both happy and sad " , and the Associated Press said that " the powerful season @-@ ending episode redeemed the series with the shrewdness and intrigue that made it so addictive in the first place . " The San Francisco Chronicle wrote that " not only was the pace fast , the teases taut , and the answers plenty , the writers took a compelling gamble … [ by telling ] viewers that in the future … maybe all … of the people on the Lost island get off . They get their wish . But in Jack , our guide through this series , the writers definitively say , ' Be careful what you wish for . ' " The San Jose Mercury News called the finale a " jaw @-@ dropping exercise in good storytelling . " The Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette commented that the flashforward " twist gave the saga renewed momentum as it begins its march toward a 2010 finish . " The season finale was summed up as " a mind @-@ blower , for sure , a radical two hours that gave us major fake @-@ outs , an army of dead bodies , the possibility of rescue [ and ] diverse portraits of heroism " by The Boston Globe , who added that the death of Charlie was " the most touching loss of the series so far . " The Palm Beach Post and Wizard named it the " Best Cliffhanger " of 2007 . The Chicago Tribune called it " a qualified success " with excellent pacing and action , however , the flashforward scenes were thought to be uninteresting and " clumsy " . Time ranked the episode as the best of 2007 and the " Rattlesnake in the Mailbox " as one of the ten best scenes of 2007 television . 
 The Futon Critic placed the episode first in the site 's annual " 50 Best Episodes " list . E ! said that " Through the Looking Glass " was possibly " the best episode ever of the entire series . " TV Guide described " Through the Looking Glass " as " a dizzying exercise in adventure , sustained tension and time @-@ shifting rug pulling [ that was ] spectacularly produced , amazingly directed and gloriously acted . " IGN gave the double episode a perfect 10 / 10 – the best review of the season – saying it was " nothing short of a masterpiece of storytelling with a brilliantly paced narrative . " IGN would conclude that the flashforward was the " Biggest Shock " in 2007 television . Both IGN and The Los Angeles Times would later declare " Through the Looking Glass " as the second best Lost episode , behind " The Constant " . BuddyTV praised the unpredictability , saying that " no other show can even attempt to do what Lost does . " BuddyTV would later call " Through the Looking Glass " the best finale of 2007 and Charlie 's death the saddest TV death of 2007 . " Through the Looking Glass " was TV.com 's " Editor 's Choice " for " Best Episode " of 2007 . AOL 's TV Squad gave the episode a 7 / 7 , noting that " the writers followed through on Desmond 's premonitions and successfully delivered the highly anticipated game @-@ changer . " Television Without Pity gave the third season finale an " A " . The Sydney Morning Herald wrote that Lost " may have <unk> [ the shark ] with [ the ] flashforward . " Entertainment Weekly ranked it as one of the top ten episodes of 2007 , saying that the cliffhanger " [ revealed ] new dimensions to [ Lost 's ] creative world . " Zap2It questioned " whether to be deeply frustrated ( again ) , really , really confused ( a distinct possibility ) or just in awe of the incredible <unk> ( ahem ) show runners … have pulled off . " The writing for Locke was criticized , and one IGN writer said that " it seems irrational that he would go and [ stab Naomi ] in the back without explaining himself . " Lindelof stated " that we might be willing to give [ Locke ] the benefit of the doubt for any action he took in response to [ lying , <unk> , in a pit of Dharma corpses for two days and on the verge of taking his own life ] , even if considered slightly ' out of character ' . " Film and television director and writer Kevin Smith said that " to do [ 3 ] seasons and then suddenly throw a massive curveball is just so dramatically satisfying , you just take your hats off to the writers in a big , bad way . " 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 This episode was nominated for Outstanding Directing , Outstanding Writing , and Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Drama Series for the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards , but failed to win in any of the categories . This episode was also submitted for consideration for Outstanding Drama Series " ; however , it was not nominated . For his work on this episode , Jack Bender was nominated for the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Drama Series . 
 = Grapico = 
 Grapico is a caffeine @-@ free , artificially flavored carbonated soft drink with a purple color and a grape taste that is sold in the Southeastern United States . When introduced in 1916 , the product quickly became a success , which in part was due to implying that Grapico contained real grape juice even though it did not . In the spring of 1926 , J. Grossman 's Sons sold the Grapico business to New Orleans business Pan American Manufacturing Co . Pan American continued J. Grossman 's Sons ' improper practice of implying that Grapico contained real grape juice and lost the right to use the word " Grapico " to designate their artificial grape drink in 1929 . 
 Although the J. Grossman 's Sons line of the brand had ended , the Grapico brand continued on through Alabama businessman R. R. Rochell and his Birmingham , Alabama @-@ based Grapico Bottling Works . R. R. Rochell had first become a wholesale syrup customer of J. Grossman 's Sons in the Summer of 1917 to serve the Alabama soft drink market . By the time Pan American had lost their artificial grape drink name in 1929 , Rochell was selling bottled Grapico in Alabama , Florida , Georgia , Mississippi , and Louisiana . 
 Rochell received the federal trademark on Grapico in 1940 , giving his Grapico Company of America the right to use the name " Grapico " everywhere in the United States . In 1955 , Grapico Company of America attempted to expand its fruit @-@ flavored brands with Orangico , a sister product to Grapico that included real orange juice . The orange juice @-@ based Orangico did not sell well and the federal trademark eventually expired . In September 1981 , both the franchising rights to the Grapico brand name and The Pepsi Bottling Group in Newnan , Georgia were acquired by Buffalo Rock , an independent Pepsi bottler based in Birmingham , Alabama . Buffalo Rock revived the Orangico trademark in 1999 for an artificially flavored orange drink and introduced Diet Grapico in 2005 . Grapico is now produced at Buffalo Rock 's Birmingham , Alabama bottling facility . 
 = = History = = 
 Grapico was first sold in 1914 in New Orleans , Louisiana by J. Grossman 's Sons . In the Summer of 1917 , businessman R. R. Rochell and his Birmingham , Alabama based Grapico Bottling Works purchased Grapico syrup barrels from J. Grossman 's Sons and bottled and sold Grapico to the Alabama soft drink market . Present Grapico distributor Buffalo Rock , an independent Pepsi bottler based in Birmingham , Alabama , purchased the Grapico business in 1981 . The J. Grossman 's Sons ' Grapico retail sales line ended in 1929 and the present Grapico traces its roots to the Summer of 1917 in Birmingham , Alabama through R. R. Rochell 's Grapico . 
 = = = J. Grossman 's Sons ' Grapico = = = 
 J. Grossman 's Sons was a business that had been operating in New Orleans , Louisiana since at least 1884 . By the early 1900s , the business was being run by both Adolph Grossman and Isidore Grossman . Prior to developing Grapico , J. Grossman 's Sons served as creditors . In 1905 for example , a collection attorney successfully sued J. Grossman 's Sons to recover legal fees for reducing to judgment a debt of $ 875 owed to J. Grossman 's Sons . Also in 1905 , J. Grossman 's Sons unsuccessfully prevented the sale of their securing collateral , a debtor 's home , to the debtor 's daughter . In January 1912 , J. Grossman 's Sons lent $ 1000 to a Lewisburg , Louisiana saloon owner who they successfully sued eleven months later to recover the amount against his real estate . 
 J. Grossman 's Sons began manufacturing Grapico in 1914 . At that time , Grapico consisted of a syrup that , when mixed with soda water , had the taste , smell , and color of a genuine grape drink . The product was artificially colored and flavored with only an infinitesimal amount of grape juice or fruit of the grape . 
 Prior to 1916 , J. Grossman 's Sons contacted American jazz composers Peter DeRose and Ivan Reid to write a song about Grapico . DeRose , who would later be inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame , produced the piano accompanied song , Meet Me in the Land of Grapico . Meet Me in the Land of Grapico is a sentimental ballad from Tin Pan Alley that imagined a faraway Land of Grapico where love lives forever . The song ( see below ) and its cover sheet alluded to a grape vine @-@ covered arbor in the Land of Grapico , even though Grapico contained no grape juice . Dedicating the song to all the drinkers of Grapico , J. Grossman 's Sons published the song in 1916 and provided it free on request . 
 In the Summer of 1917 , businessman R. R. Rochell and his Birmingham , Alabama based Grapico Bottling Works began purchasing Grapico syrup barrels from J. Grossman 's Sons to bottle and sell the Alabama soft drink market . In that same year , Laurel , Mississippi based Grapico Bottling Company also became a wholesale customer of J. Grossman 's Sons and began bottling and selling Grapico in Mississippi . In 1918 , Rochell 's Grapico Bottling Works opened a bottling plant in Hattiesburg , Mississippi as a second Mississippi bottler and seller of Grapico . 
 By 1919 , Grapico manufacturer J. Grossman 's Sons was successful enough in their efforts to distribute Grapico that they awarded the Grapico advertising account to the Chambers Agency , Inc. of New Orleans . As early as November 1919 , businessman J. C. Kramer was doing business in Louisiana under the name of the Grapico Bottling Works ( Louisiana ) , a business unconnected with Rochell 's Grapico Bottling Works . 
 In 1920 , the demand for soft drinks significantly increased as a result of the prohibition against alcohol in the United States that began on January 29 , 1920 . The Grapico product was so successful by 1920 , that Grapico specifically was listed in the Louisiana law among generic items , Coca @-@ Cola , and RC Cola as items to be taxed : Section 22 of Act No. 233 of 1920 , which read : 
 That all persons , associations of persons , firms and corporations engaged in the sale of soda water , ice cream , confections , soda pop , Coca Cola , <unk> @-@ Cola , Grapico or other similar soft drinks or beverages or refreshments , shall pay license based on the gross annual sales , and such licenses are hereby fixed and graded as follows . 
 In addition to experiencing taxes as a result of its success , the Grapico efforts found labor troubles . In 1920 , the International Union of United Brewery , Flour , Cereal , Soft Drink and Distillery Workers presented Grapico Bottling Company ( Mississippi ) with a union agreement . When the company refused to sign the agreement , the 112 employees at Grapico Bottling Company were called to strike . The Grapico Bottling Co. eventually signed the agreement . 
 In June 1922 , Grapico Bottling Works furthered the connection between the artificially flavored beverage and real grape juice through an advertisement campaign . On June 1 , 1922 , The Jacksonville Metropolis published a Grapico Bottling Works advertisement announcing a ten @-@ day writing contest that offered US $ 116 in prize money for essays on why a consumer would prefer " Sparkling Grapico " over real , fresh grapes . The advertisement indicated that Grapico was made from Pure Grape Juice with pure sugar and carbonated water and had no coloring or preservatives . Although not true , this information was consistent with the Grapico product labels used by J. Grossman 's Sons on the barrels that were shipped to and received by R. R. Rochell . 
 Mississippi based Grapico Bottling Company troubles did not end with its union problems . In September 1924 , John Henry Ennis of <unk> , Mississippi purchased a Grapico . On drinking it , Ennis discovered that the contents were filled with filthy flies , some of which he swallowed and became sick . On filing a lawsuit against Grapico Bottling Company and its sole stockholder , Philip Carriere , Ennis learned that Grapico Bottling Company had filed for and successfully dissolved itself as a corporation between the time Ennis consumed the flies and filed suit against Grapico Bottling . On appeal , the Supreme Court of Mississippi issued an opinion that serve as precedent in Mississippi for the rule that a stockholder of a corporation is not liable for the debts , liabilities , and other acts of the corporation . After Grapico Bottling Company ( Mississippi ) dissolved in 1925 , Rochell 's Grapico Bottling Works became the sole supplier of Grapico to Mississippi . 
 = = = = Unfair competition through deceptive advertising = = = = 
 Since almost its inception in 1914 , Grapico was associated with real grape juice by J. Grossman 's Sons through its advertisements and business stationery . Publicly associating Grapico with genuine grape juice allowed J. Grossman 's Sons to compete directly with real grape juice producers such as Welch Grape Juice Co. and have an advantage over other imitation grape flavored beverage producers . A problem with this approach was that Grapico was an artificial grape drink that included neither real grape juice nor fruit from the grape . 
 In May 1926 , J. Grossman 's Sons became a defunct corporation and sold its Grapico formula and all rights connected to that formula to Pan American Manufacturing Co . , Inc . , a Louisiana corporation that had been manufacturing and selling extracts , ice cream powder , and syrups and flavors for soft drinks from New Orleans since 1911 . Pan American began manufacturing Grapico syrup and concentrate and continued supplying its wholesale customers outside of Louisiana with one @-@ gallon bottles of concentrated Grapico to allow them to make Grapico . In addition , through its subsidiary corporation , World Bottling Co . , Pan American continued supplying its retail customers in Louisiana with bottled Grapico for consumption . At the time Pan American acquired the Grapico business , it had three wholesale Grapico customers : Rochell 's Grapico Bottling Works in Birmingham , Alabama and two bottling plants operating in Mississippi . Grapico concentrate was sold by Pan American to its wholesale customers for $ 7 @.@ 50 per gallon and the finished bottled Grapico was by sold by Pan American and its three wholesale customers at 5 cents per 7 @-@ oz bottle . 
 Pan American continued associating their artificial grape drink with real grape juice in advertisements in trade periodicals , display cards , newspapers , boys ' caps for customers ' use , and in its company stationery . Typically , advertising material displayed images of grape vineyards and bunches of grapes together with the qualifying statements : 
 Sparkling 
 Grapico 
 Naturally Good 
 Acknowledged 
 The Best 
 Grape Drink 
 On The Market 
 Sparkling 
 Grapico 
 Naturally Good 
 The Drink of The Nation 
 In addition , Pan American continued J. Grossman 's Sons practice of using 7 @-@ oz clear bottles with molded labels prominently featuring a pictorial representation of a bunch of grapes with word " Grapico " . Given that the product was artificially colored and flavored to simulate the appearance , taste and smell of grape juice , the combination of the advertisements , the bottle grape bunch mold , and the product itself implied to others that the Grapico product was composed of pure grape juice . 
 In July 1928 , the Federal Trade Commission charged Pan American with unfair methods of competition and deceptive practices . After learning of the Federal Trade Commission complaint , Pan American altered the labels it used on its one @-@ gallon concentrate jugs . However , the efforts were too little , too late and Pan American and its " representatives , agents , servants , employees , and successors " lost the right to use the word " Grapico " to designate their artificial grape drink as of 1929 . Pan American 's wholesale customers , including R. R. Rochell , were seen as victims of Pan American 's unfair competition and the cease and desist order regarding the Grapico name did not extend to them . 
 = = = R. R. Rochell 's Grapico = = = 
 R. R. Rochell was a successful business man operating in Birmingham , Alabama . His success came despite the fact that he was illiterate . He was one of two major stock holders in the Edgewood Amusement Company , which dissolved in 1924 . Rochell began selling bottled Grapico in Alabama in 1917 and then in Mississippi in 1918 . In June 1920 , Rochell 's Grapico Bottling Works formally incorporated in Alabama as " The Grapico Bottling Works " . 
 Rochell 's early Grapico efforts were not without problems . For example , in November 1921 , Grapico Bottling Works acquired a US $ 648 Baltimore Semi @-@ Automatic Machine , Model B @-@ 1485 from New Orleans based Crown Cork and Seal Co. to cork and seal soda water bottles . Within three months , the bottle capper began to fail . Frequently , the neck of the moving bottles became stuck in the machine , which additionally broke bottles whose contents drenched workers . In addition , the caps made by the machine did not seal properly so that carbonation gas escaped from the Grapico bottles . After Grapico refused to pay the US $ 358 balance , the Sheriff seized the bottling machine from Grapico . The matter was resolved 3 ½ years later by the Louisiana First Circuit Court of Appeal , who set aside the machine sales contract so that Grapico Bottling Works no longer owed the balance . 
 By 1922 , R. R. Rochell 's Grapico had been expanded into the Florida soft drink market . With Grapico Bottling Company ( Mississippi ) dissolved in 1925 and Pan American prohibited from using the name " Grapico " in connection with the Grapico artificial grape drink , Rochell became the sole supplier of bottled Grapico in Alabama , Florida , Georgia , Mississippi , and Louisiana in 1929 . 
 In 1938 , R. R. Rochell was doing business in Alabama as " Orange Crush 7 @-@ Up Bottling Company . " At that time , it cost <unk> cents to produce a case of Grapico at Rochell 's plant in Birmingham and to deliver that same case approximately 100 miles ( 160 km ) away cost <unk> cents , making a total cost of approximately <unk> cents per case to deliver a case of soft drinks to the areas surrounding Birmingham . The product was sold at <unk> a case , for a <unk> cent profit per case . 
 Just before he died in early 1940 , R. R. Rochell filed for a federal trademark on Grapico on behalf of Orange Crush 7 @-@ Up Bottling Company . The federal trademark issued just after <unk> secured the national rights to the Grapico mark to the Orange Crush 7 @-@ Up Bottling Company . In that same year , Grapico was sold using the trademarked slogan , 
 " The Drink of the Nation • Made its Way by the Way its Made . " 
 In June 1947 , Rochell 's business began using the names " The Grapico Bottling Company " and " The Grapico Company of America . " In October 1949 , " The Grapico Bottling Company " name was changed to " Orange Crush 7 Up Bottling Company " to reflect the work it was doing in Alabama on behalf of the Seven @-@ up Company . Despite the Alabama company 's efforts , the Seven @-@ up Company refused to grant The Grapico Company of America a bottling franchise to handle Seven @-@ up soft drinks . The business was operating as Orange Crush @-@ Grapico Bottling Company by 1953 . In July 1957 , the bottling business name was officially changed to " Orange Crush Grapico Company . " 
 In 1955 , Grapico Company of America expanded its fruit flavored brands into orange with Orangico , a play on the name Grapico . Orangico was to include real orange juice . The orange juice based Orangico did not sell well and the federal trademark eventually expired in 1999 . 
 In September 1981 , both the franchising rights to the Grapico brand name and The Pepsi Bottling Group in Newnan , Georgia were acquired by Buffalo Rock , an independent Pepsi bottler founded in Birmingham , Alabama in 1901 . Both Buffalo Rock and R.R. Rochell 's businesses were located in Birmingham since the early 1900s . For example , in October 1940 , R.R. Rochell 's business was located at 1031 11th Avenue North and Buffalo Rock 's business was located at 10th Avenue and 26th Street North — a distance of about three miles ( 5 km ) . 
 Between at least 1981 and 1988 , Grapico was distributed in only three states : Alabama , Florida and Georgia . In August 1988 , Buffalo Rock announced that they would expand distribution of Grapico the rest of the Southeastern United States . The announcement coincided with the new , more contemporary Grapico packaging . By June 1990 , Grapico was being sold in South Carolina . 
 Buffalo Rock revived the Orangico trademark in 1999 , this time to be used on an artificial orange syrup rather than a real orange based drink . Buffalo Rock introduced Diet Grapico in 2005 . Grapico is produced by Buffalo Rock through its Columbus , Georgia bottling facility , Sun Fresh Beverages , Inc . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Grapico is mentioned in Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle Stop Cafe , 1987 best selling novel by Fannie Flagg . Anne George 's 1996 novel Murder on a Bad Hair Day : A Southern Sisters Mystery , and the 2004 novel Making Waves by Cassandra King , Grapico mixed with Absolut <unk> jalapeño flavored vodka is a drink called the Ex @-@ girlfriend . It 's called the Ex @-@ girlfriend because " it 's sweet and seems like a good idea , but eventually it 's going to burn you and make you sick . " Grapico and coconut rum is called a " <unk> . " 
 = = Gallery = = 
 Meet Me in the Land of Grapico 
 = The Tip @-@ Off = 
 " The Tip @-@ Off " is the third episode of series seven of the British espionage television series Spooks , and the 59th episode overall . It was originally broadcast on digital channel BBC Three on 28 October 2008 , and repeated on frontline channel BBC One on 3 November . The episode was written by Russell Lewis ; with additional writing by Ben Richards ; and directed by Peter Hoar . In the episode , Ben Kaplan ( Alex Lanipekun ) goes undercover to infiltrate an Al @-@ Qaeda cell in London during a dry run before an expected attack . However , it later becomes apparent the terrorists are going to attack during the dry run . 
 Actor Alex Lanipekun believed the episode became a sort of " coming of age " for his character , as he had to deal with issues dealing with undercover operations including not to get close to a terrorist . The episode introduces the " Sugarhorse " story arc , which continues through to the series finale . In making the scene where Lucas North was waterboarded , Richard Armitage who portrays him was subjected to the actual torture to ensure the scene 's authenticity . It was seen by over five million viewers after its original broadcast , and was given generally positive reviews . However , it received criticism for featuring the waterboarding scene . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Chief of Section D Ros Myers ( Hermione Norris ) introduces Lucas North ( Richard Armitage ) to one of Adam Carter 's assets , Pakistani intelligence officer Marlin ( Emilio <unk> ) . Marlin has information about a planned attack by Al @-@ Qaeda ; a cell intends to create Internet chatter , followed by a dry run , after which they will commence a series of suicide attacks . The ringleader behind this is <unk> Abdelrashid ( <unk> Bakare ) who was previously responsible for similar attacks in Turkey and Somalia . Ben Kaplan is in his first undercover operation disguised as a recent convert to Islam and becomes part of the cell . As part of his cover , Ben shares a flat with Jawad ( Tariq Jordan ) , another member . However , over the course of the operation Ben becomes close to Jawad , which Ben 's handler Lucas advises against , as Jawad is not an innocent . 
 When Malcolm Wynn @-@ Jones ( Hugh Simon ) discovers the chatter , Ben relays to the team that the dry run will commence the following day . On the day , Ben finds that Abdelrashid intends to carry out the attack ahead of schedule and during the dry run after Ben , Jawad , and two other men are given bombs . Ben relays this message to Lucas . Ros dispatches CO19 to apprehend <unk> in his office , who intends to remote detonate the bombs . Another CO19 squad , as well as Lucas and Jo Portman ( Miranda Raison ) follow the cell members to a street market , which they will use to maximise civilian casualties . Ben admits he is MI5 to Jawad , who runs in panic and attempts to manually detonate his bomb ; this results in getting gunned down by CO19 officers , much to Ben 's dismay . After stopping another two bombs , Jawad 's mobile phone rings , revealing Abdelrashid is not the " Mr. Big " ; it is Marlin . He remote detonates the last bomb , killing the terrorist and the two CO19 officers holding him . 
 Although one bomb did detonate , Harry Pearce ( Peter Firth ) views the operation a success , as the other three did not , and no civilians were killed . Ben tells Lucas he was right about Jawad ; he chose to become a bomber over seeing his family . Lucas receives a call from Marlin , who asks to meet with him . During the confrontation , Marlin admits he was forced to become Mr. Big when terrorists kidnapped his family . Now knowing he has failed , he commits suicide . 
 In a subplot , rainwater falls onto Lucas 's face , which triggers a flashback where he was tortured by FSB interrogators during his eight @-@ year imprisonment in Russia . The interrogators question him on " Sugarhorse . " Lucas relays this to Harry , who claims not knowing what Sugarhorse is . However , he later visits a retired <unk> Bernard Qualtrough ( Richard Johnson ) believing there is high level mole within MI5 . He only reveals that Sugarhorse is MI5 's " best kept secret " that only five people , including Richard Dolby ( Robert East ) , the Director General , and himself , know the details of . Harry later returns to Qualtrough 's bookstore to find out who the mole might be , starting by looking into Dolby 's file . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Russell Lewis , with additional writing by Ben Richards . Ben Kaplan became the central character of the episode . Actor Alex <unk> , who portrays Ben , stated that " The Tip @-@ Off " was a " kind of a coming of age " for the character , dealing with his first undercover operation . Lanipekun expanded : 
 The episode also introduces a story @-@ arc , about Sugarhorse , that would be resolved by the end of the seventh series . Hermione Norris describes Sugarhorse as " a group of spies who were brought together after the ending of the cold war to infiltrate , at the highest level , all forms of Russian intelligence so that if a nuclear power ever came into being and was at the hands of the Russian people , MI5 and MI6 could infiltrate it and stop it . " The cast read the brief on Sugarhorse , but were then told to shred it in order to maintain its secrecy from fans . 
 In a flashback sequence of the episode , Lucas is subjected to waterboarding , a method of torture . In order to ensure the authenticity of the sequence , Armitage was subjected to the actual torture . He agreed to perform the sequence after he was convinced by consultants from the FSB and CIA . Armitage was only waterboarded for a short time , and was filmed in slow motion to make it appear as if he was on for longer . Kudos film and television , the production company behind Spooks , had to follow several health and safety provisions from an advisor to ensure the sequence strictly adheres to the advice . The advisor and a medic were present during filming . The ambient temperature of the room was raised to make Armitage as comfortable as possible . However , after the sequence was shot , Armitage changed his opinion entirely , stating ; " I only lasted five to ten seconds , and the sound of my voice crying out to stop isn 't me acting . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 The episode was originally broadcast on the digital channel BBC Three from 11 pm on Tuesday , 28 October 2008 , after the broadcast of the second episode on BBC One . The episode would later be repeated on BBC One on Monday , 3 November 2008 during the 9 pm to 10 pm time slot , except in Northern Ireland , where it was withheld until 10 : 35 pm . There is no ratings data available for the BBC Three broadcast . On the BBC One broadcast , the episode was seen by 5 @.@ 2 million viewers , an improvement of 140 @,@ 000 from the previous episode , with a 21 @.@ 6 per cent audience share , winning its time slot against the return of detective series Taggart on ITV1 , and other terrestrial channels . According to the Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board , the episode received final viewing figures of 5 @.@ 59 million , making the episode the 17th most seen broadcast on BBC One , and 32nd in overall television the week it was shown . 
 Mof Gimmers of TV Scoop was positive towards the episode , calling it " a tense week for Section D " and added " our guys did a pretty good job . " Gimmers also thought Ben " did well on his first undercover mission too , didn 't you think ? Apart from verging on sympathy for the young brainwashed bombers . Still , he 's young . He 'll get over it . " On Ros ' role in the episode , Gimmers said " I don 't think I 'll ever be able to say I 'm " warming " to such an ice queen as Ros , but I will admit to a growing admiration . " Scott Matthewman of The Stage stated " the seventh series of the spy show continues apace , " and praised the episode for " the superb performance of Hermione Norris as Ros Myers , fast becoming the twisted moral centre of the show . Both she and Peter Firth 's Harry Pearce get some great dialogue every week , so it 's a shame that the rest of the cast aren ’ t afforded the same luxury . " 
 The Guardian columnist Zoe Williams criticised the actual waterboarding in the torture scene , saying " it 's really unpleasant , [ Armitage ] concurred . ' I only lasted five to 10 seconds , and the sound of my voice crying out to stop isn 't me acting . ' Pal , that 's nice that you 're not showing off but this is all wrong and despicable : it 's like locking yourself and 10 friends into a loo on a commuter train , to see what it would be like on the train to Auschwitz . If you can make it stop whenever you like , you 're learning nothing and kicking people in the face while you 're at it . " 
 = Dance Again ... the Hits = 
 Dance Again ... the Hits is the first greatest hits album of American entertainer Jennifer Lopez . It was released on July 20 , 2012 , by Epic Records , to coincide with the launch of her first world tour , the Dance Again World Tour . Lopez previously conceived plans for a greatest hits album in 2009 , but instead opted to use the material recorded for her seventh studio album , Love ? , which was released by Island Records in May 2011 after her departure from Epic Records in 2010 . As Lopez owed the label one last album to fulfill her contract , she began work on a new greatest hits album in November 2011 . She later became unsure whether she wanted to go along with plans to release a greatest hits album or a new studio album , eventually deciding on the former . 
 Dance Again ... the Hits comprises eleven previously released tracks , and two new recordings : " Dance Again " and " Goin ' In " . A deluxe edition of the album was also released , featuring three additional previously released tracks , and a DVD featuring a selection of eleven music videos . The album received generally positive reviews from music critics , who praised it as a reflection of Lopez 's success . Some critics expressed their disappointment in the absence of several successful singles , but deemed this as impressive , noting that this may have been due to the large volume of hit singles she has released over the years . Dance Again ... The Hits was a moderate commercial success , peaking within the top ten in fourteen national charts , and the top twenty in ten national charts . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Following the commercial failure of her sixth studio album Brave ( 2007 ) — and while pregnant with twins Max and <unk> — Lopez began working on new music for a future project in 2008 . The project was kept under wraps until February 2009 when a new song from the recording sessions titled " Hooked on You " leaked online . Following the leak of " Hooked on You " , " One Love " and " What Is Love ? " were subsequently leaked online in May . The leaked songs were , at the time , meant to appear on a greatest hits album that later turned into a studio album . 
 " Louboutins " , a song written and produced by The @-@ Dream and C. " Tricky " Stewart , was released as the lead single from her seventh studio album , Love ? , in November 2009 . However , upon release , the song failed to garner enough airplay to chart , despite topping the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . Lopez subsequently left Epic Records in February 2010 , citing that she had fulfilled her contractual obligations and now wished to release Love ? under a new label . Her departure from the label temporarily halted production on the album , however upon signing a new contract with Island Records , recording resumed on the album . The New York Daily News revealed that Lopez would be taking some of the records recorded under Epic Records to Island Records so that they could be included on the album . 
 " On the Floor " , Lopez 's first single with the label , was released in February 2011 . The song topped the charts across the globe , becoming one of the most successful singles of the year . Following the release of " On the Floor " , Love ? produced two moderately successful singles : " I 'm Into You " and " Papi " , both of which topped the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . Love ? itself was a moderate commercial success and was viewed as a humble comeback from Lopez , as many had considered her recording career over . It was announced in November that Lopez was again working on new material for a greatest hits album . The following month , Lopez revealed that she had been playing some of her new music for L.A. Reid , who signed her to Island Records and left the label to become the CEO and chairman of Epic Records . This led further speculation that Lopez had moved back to Epic Records , which was first reported in July . The reports were later confirmed untrue , as Lopez was back with Epic Records because she owed the label one final album to end her contract , despite previously announcing that she had fulfilled her contract with them . 
 = = New material = = 
 Lopez began working on a " collection of songs " in 2011 , unaware of what she was " going to do with them " . At the time , she was deciding whether she wanted to release a greatest hits album or a new studio album . Lopez stated that when it comes time to make an album , she doesn 't sit down and write for the entire thing . She revealed that she is always working on new music and that her albums " happen organically " when she has recorded enough material . Lopez explained : " I don 't ever stop . I keep going with it . These records , like ' Follow the Leader , ' [ a collaboration with Puerto Rican duo Wisin & Yandel ] they just kind of came about . It wasn 't something like , ' Oh , I 'm going to sit down and make a record right now . ' " Among the songs she recorded , two were chosen to be included on Dance Again ... The Hits : " Dance Again " and " Goin ' In " . 
 The album 's title and opening track , " Dance Again " , was written by RedOne , Enrique Iglesias , Bilal " The Chef " , AJ Junior and Pitbull , who is also featured in the song . After hearing a demo version of the track , she begged Iglesias to let her record the song , telling him that it was " her song " . Lopez , who was going through a divorce with Marc Anthony and the " breakup of a family " , felt as if the song had come to her at the " perfect moment " . According to Lopez , the period was devastating because family is very important to her . Lopez revealed : " I had to turn that into something better " ; she thought : " I don 't want to just survive it , I want to come out better than that . " Lopez didn 't want to be " the woman who stayed in bed for months " . " I knew I had to get through it . I 'd dance every day , I 'd work out , I 'd say a little prayer and I still wouldn 't feel any better . Then I 'd go to bed and get up the next day and do it all again . It was a process , and it very gradually got a little easier ... I had to do it for my kids . I had to get through it for them . " She re @-@ wrote parts of the verses to better relate to her experiences . The song " helped lift her out of the darkness " and gave her hope again . Looking back on the song in December 2012 , Lopez stated that : " ' Dance Again ' became my anthem ... an expression of what I needed to do at that time in my life and for what I was taking on with [ my career ] . It was a beautiful metaphor that became my reality . " 
 Lopez 's vocals for " Dance Again " were arranged by RedOne and produced by Kuk Harrell . They were recorded at Pinky 's Palace . Pitbull 's vocals were recorded by Al Burna at Al Burna Studios , Miami , Florida . Chris " Tek " O 'Ryan and Trevor Muzzy handled audio engineering of the song , with assistance from Anthony Falcone and Peter Mack . O 'Ryan and Trevor Muzzy were in charge of vocal editing . All instruments in the song were played and programmed by RedOne , who also produced the song . The song was later mixed by Trevor Muzzy . In an interview with Ryan Seacrest , Lopez revealed that she loved being able to collaborate with RedOne and Pitbull again . She stated : " We had a great chemistry the last time , and it was like ' We 're going to have to do something again . ' And this was the perfect song . I love the message of the song . That when something bad happens , your life is not over . You have to get up . You 're gonna live . You 're gonna to be okay . You 're gonna dance again . " 
 " Goin ' In " was written by Michael Warren , Jamahl <unk> , Joseph Angel , Coleridge Tillman , David Quiñones and <unk> Dillard . Lopez 's vocals were produced by Harrell and recorded at Pinky 's Palace . Josh Gudwin and O 'Ryan handled audio engineering of the song , with assistance from Falcone and Mack . The song features additional vocals from American rapper Lil Jon . <unk> produced and later mixed the song alongside Kenny Moran at The House on the Hill Studios in Los Angeles , California . Of <unk> , Lopez commented by stating that he is " very forward with his sound " . After recording her vocals for the song , Flo Rida recorded a rap verse for the song . Those involved in the production of the song were extremely happy with the song before Flo Rida 's rap appeared on it , but once his vocals were on the song it " took it over the top top " . When choosing who she wanted to feature on the song , Lopez had several other rappers in mind , such as Big Sean . Lopez revealed : " We had a couple of people who said yes , that they would get on it , but [ Flo Rida ] just seemed like the perfect one . " She further explained that the style of the song " really fit Flo Rida " ; " It was half @-@ dance , but half kind of hard too . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Dance Again ... The Hits received generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 72 , based on four reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . Sal <unk> of Slant Magazine wrote that the " most immediately striking thing " about the compilation is " just how many hits [ she ] has racked up over the years " . " So many , in fact , that there 's a hefty handful of singles missing from the standard edition of the album " , using her number @-@ one single " All I Have " as an example of this . He stated that Lopez 's " output has been nothing if not on trend " , and that Dance Again ... The Hits plays not only as a chronicle of her music career , but of " pop music as a whole since just before the turn of the century " , with genres spanning Latin pop , dance , and R & B. According to <unk> , the album also serves as a " historical record " of who the rappers du jour were " over the last dozen years or so " , from Big Pun , Fat Joe , Ja Rule , and Lil Wayne . He concluded by stating that if the compilation " proves anything " it 's that Lopez is , " if not the queen , then at least the duchess of reinvention and should never be counted out " . 
 Michael Cragg of BBC Music wrote that it 's " surprising that she hadn 't unleashed a hits collection before now given that she 's what you might politely call a ' singles artist ' " . He questioned the song choices , writing that the person who made the decision to not include " Papi " needs to have a " long , hard look in the mirror " , although it 's " hard to argue with most of what 's on offer " , Lopez " slipping effortlessly into different guises with each song " . He concluded by stating that : " A cipher for good songs rather than the reasons those songs are good she may be , but there are few that do it better " . Lewis Corner of Digital Spy too questioned the decisions of which songs appeared on the album , but wrote that : " the very fact that she can 't fit all her classics on to one disc can be seen as nothing more than a testament to her enduring career " . AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine pointed out that Lopez 's other well or moderately charted songs such as " Play " , " I 'm Gonna Be Alright " , " I 'm Glad " , and " Hold You Down " were not present on the compilation , while also writing that her older hits didn 't fit neatly with her newer songs and that it 's sequencing was " scattershot " . Erlewine , nonetheless , said that " [ the album ] does have the familiar tunes , so it serves its purpose " . 
 Irving Tan of Sputnikmusic put Dance Again ... The Hits into the category of a greatest hits album that " you get facial <unk> of moderate @-@ to @-@ raw disappointment at the discovery of how thin and forced the artist 's discography really is " . He wrote that having another artist featured on nine of the thirteen tracks " gives the impression that as a product , having Jennifer Lopez alone is simply not enough " . He further criticized the decision to include the Murder remixes of " Ain 't It Funny " and " I 'm Real " over the original studio versions , stating that it was almost like " Sony Music held their hands up and admitted that the initial cuts that they published simply weren 't up to scratch " . Tan concluded that for a greatest hits album , the track listing is " simply all over the place " , with no indication that the record executives or Lopez " looked around for a logical start " or an " easy access ramp to her seven @-@ album canon " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Dance Again ... the Hits enjoyed moderate commercial success in the United States , peaking at number 20 on the Billboard 200 the week of its debut with sales of 14 @,@ 000 copies . The album performed better on the Billboard R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums component chart , where it managed to reach number six . Dance Again ... the Hits performed significantly lower on the Billboard 200 than Lopez 's seventh studio album Love ? , which peaked at number five , as well as her previous compilation album J to tha L – O ! The Remixes ( 2002 ) , which peaked at number one . After a month , the album had sold 38 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . As of December 2012 , Dance Again ... the Hits is Lopez 's second lowest performing album in the country ; only The Reel Me achieved a lower chart position in 2003 , peaking at number 69 . On the UK Albums Chart , Dance Again ... the Hits debuted at number four with sales of 9 @,@ 213 copies in its first week of release , matching the peak of J to Tha L @-@ O ! : The Remixes in that country . 
 Overseas , Dance Again ... the Hits performed well in most music markets , reaching the top ten in fourteen national charts , five of which were in the first five positions . Its highest position came from the Canadian Albums chart , where the album achieved number three . The album reached the same peak on the Italian Albums chart . Other countries where the album managed to score a high peak were Spain ( number five ) , Taiwan ( number three ) , the Czech Republic ( number six ) and Switzerland ( number seven ) . On the Australian Albums Chart , the album had a moderate commercial performance , reaching number 20 ; her previous compilation album , J to tha L – O ! The Remixes , achieved a higher position of number 11 . In Latin America , the album appeared on the Mexican Album chart , reaching a peak of number 10 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies a vocal producer 
 ^ b signifies an executive producer 
 ^ c signifies a remixer 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for Dance Again ... the Hits adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Super Mario Strikers = 
 Super Mario Strikers , known as Mario Smash Football in Europe and Australia , is a five @-@ on @-@ five football ( soccer ) game developed by Next Level Games for the GameCube . The game was released in Europe and North America in late 2005 , and in Japan and Australia in 2006 . The game 's sequel , Mario Strikers Charged , was also developed by Next Level Games and is available for the Wii . The game 's developers had worked on the NHL series before development of Strikers , which served as an influence for the fast @-@ paced and physical nature of the game . 
 Strikers is a sports game incorporating characters and themes from the Mario franchise . The game features the basic aspects and objectives of a football game , although no referees are present and characters can legitimately shove others out of possession of the ball . As in other games such as Mario Power Tennis , the player can use Mario @-@ themed items such as bananas and red shells to hinder the opposition and gain the advantage . Each team 's captain can use " Super Strikes " that , if timed accurately , will result in two points scored for the striker 's team . Each team comprises a goal keeper , a main Mario character ( captain ) , and three of the same secondary Mario characters known as " side kicks " . 
 The game received " generally favorable reviews " according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . In general , reviewers lauded Strikers ' accessibility and multiplayer gameplay , but criticised the lack of gameplay modes and single @-@ player offerings . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Super Mario Strikers is a five @-@ a @-@ side football console video game comprising characters and themes from the Mario series . Each team consists of a captain character from the Mario series and three secondary Mario characters known as " sidekicks " . <unk> is the goalkeeper for all sides except the " Super Team " , which consists of four captain robots and a Robo @-@ <unk> . Both sidekicks and captains have varying gameplay attributes with " balanced " and " defensive " play types available . Strikers follows the basic gameplay featured in most football video games , including the ability to dash , tackle players , and lob the ball . Despite this , characters not in possession can legitimately hit opponents with or without the ball ( " Big Hit " ) , resulting in a more arcade @-@ like style of gameplay . The game also features " Perfect " passes and shots , which trigger in sequence if both a pass and shot are applied close to the opponent 's goal . The most powerful shot possible is the " Super Strike " , which only the captain can make and will account for two points if successful . Once charged , the player must time button presses accurately on a visible gauge to trigger a successful shot at goal , resulting in a character @-@ specific animation . 
 As in other Mario sports titles such as Mario Power Tennis , the player can use items — bananas , red shells , etc . — to impede the opponent . Some " power ups " can aid the user by granting temporary <unk> while others immobilize and hinder the opponent . The central antagonist of the Mario universe , Bowser , will also appear occasionally as a non @-@ player character to obstruct the players from each side . Strikers include six stadia , each having barriers to prevent the ball going out of play . These stadia only vary aesthetically and do not affect gameplay , featuring different surfaces such as grass and wood . The player can adjust the match settings to limit or expand the match time and select whether features such as the Super Strike will be included . As the player advances through the game , further adjustments can be made called " cheats " , that can render goalkeepers weaker and grant an infinite number of items . 
 Strikers includes multiple gameplay modes such as the " Grudge Match " , which is the standard single and multiplayer match mode of the game . <unk> sessions come in the form of " Strikers 101 " , where the player can practice individual aspects such as shooting and dashing . " Cup Battles " allows up to four players to compete in tournaments against artificial intelligence opponents to advance through more difficult cups for rewards , with " Super " denoting the higher @-@ ranked tournaments . 
 = = Development = = 
 Strikers was developed by Next Level Games , who revealed the game at the E3 conference of 2005 in the form of a playable demonstration . In an interview , game director Mike Inglehart and marketing director Grace Kim revealed that Strikers was originally intended to be a more realistic Mario sports game , but the development team opted for an " over @-@ the @-@ top " style after numerous consultations with Nintendo . Next Level Games cited a connection between Strikers and NHL Hitz Pro in terms of gameplay mechanics , claiming that the latter influenced the " responsive gameplay " in Strikers , as well as the use of goalkeepers and on @-@ field collisions . The developers revealed that the character system would be " balanced and fun " , although Nintendo had " the ultimate say " in regards to character design , wanting strong and aggressive styles that did not deviate from past characterisations too much . For this reason , voice recording for Strikers required more lines and sounds than in other Mario sports titles . 
 Assisted by producer Ken <unk> , Inglehart stated in an interview a willingness to link any new feature of Strikers with the sport of football . With this , they decided to accentuate " the exciting parts " of the game , with Inglehart using the electric fences in the stadia as an example in reference to the physicality of the sport . They also explained reasons for not using a penalty or card system , rating the power @-@ up system as compensation for this considering power @-@ ups are awarded to the team of a player that has been pushed or shoved . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Super Mario Strikers received generally positive reviews from critics , with reviewers lauding the game 's characterisation and visual style , being reminiscent to that of Kazuto Nakazawa . GameSpot 's Brian Ekberg praised the game 's accessibility , stating that " Strikers ' pick @-@ up @-@ and @-@ play design will have you playing like a cartoon Pele in no time " . Similarly , critics welcomed the developers ' choice to forgo traditional football rules in the favour of a more arcade @-@ like style of gameplay . Despite this , IGN complained of a " disappointingly slim " variety of modes , as well as the perceived small roster of characters and inflexibility when choosing teams . On a similar note , Eurogamer criticised the vague presentation of characters attributes , making it difficult to determine what their respective strengths and weaknesses are . Despite enjoying the variety and appearance of Striker 's stadia , GameSpot noted only cosmetic differences among them , and criticised a lack of physical features to make them more interesting . 
 Strikers ' multiplayer gameplay in particular was welcomed by reviewers , who praised the developers for providing aggressive and fast @-@ paced action . Conversely , the game 's single player offerings gained a less enthusiastic response , with critics noting " boring " and repetitive gameplay . GameSpot thought some features were " overpowered " in parts , including the big @-@ hit tackles and the ability to dash constantly given the absence of a stamina meter . Despite this , Eurogamer remarked that it was deeper than first anticipated , while IGN lauded the game 's " tight controls " and use of Super Strikes . The ability to push enemies into the electric barrier and the use of items was also welcomed as a means to make the game entertaining while playing defensively . 
 The game 's visuals received a mixed response , with critics reporting occasional problems with Striker 's framerate . While praising the character models and goal animations , GameSpot bemoaned the absence of a " Mario feel " when appraising the menu and settings . IGN noted " blurry textures , uninspired stadium designs , and almost incomprehensibly a sometimes sluggish framerate " , despite enjoying the characters art style . The audio received a mediocre response , with critics praising the use of character and audience chants while criticising a lack of variety and repetitiveness . GameSpot thought the menu music had " some nice flair to it " , despite noting sounds such as Luigi 's goal celebration that , while charming when first heard , became tedious . In Japan , Famitsu gave the game a score of three sevens and one six for a total of 27 out of 40 ; Famitsu Cube + Advance , on the other hand , gave it a score of one nine , two eights , and one seven , for a total of 32 out of 40 . 
 Not all non @-@ video game publications gave the same praise for the game . Common Sense Media gave it all five stars and called it " a perfect game for a bunch of teenagers to play because it 's wacky , fast @-@ paced , and just plain fun . " However , Maxim gave it a score of seven out of ten and stated that " With matches of five @-@ on @-@ five taking place on small fields with really basic controls , Strikers is classic arcade @-@ style soccer , but the game gets an extra kick from power @-@ ups , random Bowser attacks , and a Telemundo @-@ style announcer . " The Sydney Morning Herald gave it a similar score of three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five and called it " immediately likable " . 
 = = = Awards and sales = = = 
 In GameSpot 's E3 2005 coverage , this game was given the award " Best Sports Game " , and was nominated a finalist for " Best Game of Show " . It received GameSpy 's " Game of the Year 2005 " awards for " Best GameCube Sports " , " Best GameCube Multiplayer " , and was ranked second for all GameCube games in 2005 . It was a finalist for " Sports Game of the Year " by the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences for the 2006 Interactive Achievement Awards . Super Mario Strikers has sold 950 @,@ 000 in North America as of December 27 , 2007 . 
 = = = Top Players = = = 
 Since the release of the game , there have been many tournaments . Kevin " <unk> " Bongiovanni has been known to be the best player to have ever touched the game with his total earnings of $ 300 @,@ 000 in prize money . His combo of Yoshi and Birdo can matchup to anyone . Other Honorable Mentions : Kevin " Sully " Sullivan . Keith " I <unk> " Watkins . 
 = Tropical Storm Norman ( 2000 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Norman was a tropical cyclone that hit Mexico in September 2000 . The sixteenth cyclone and fourteenth named storm of the 2000 Pacific hurricane season , Norman originated in a tropical wave that emerged from the coast of Africa on September 4 , and moved westward across the Atlantic Ocean ; the wave entered the Pacific on September 16 . The disturbance organized into a tropical depression on early on September 20 , and later that day the storm reached its peak intensity of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) , and subsequently made landfall to the west of Lázaro Cárdenas , Michoacán . After weakening to a tropical depression over land , the storm re @-@ emerged over open waters , and made a second landfall before dissipating shortly thereafter . The storm produced heavy rain that resulted in flooding and mudslides , killing about nine people . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Tropical Storm Norman were from the same tropical wave that spawned Atlantic Hurricane Gordon , which emerged off the coast of Africa on September 4 . The wave moved westward , with the southern portion of the wave crossing Central America while Gordon formed in the northwest Caribbean Sea . When the wave reached the eastern Pacific Ocean on September 16 , it interacted with a pre @-@ existing low @-@ level circulation , which produced a large area of disturbed weather . On September 18 , the convection began contracting and organizing , gradually developing a circular area of thunderstorms with well @-@ defined outflow . It is estimated that at 0000 UTC on September 20 , the system developed into Tropical Depression Sixteen @-@ E , about 205 miles ( 335 km ) south @-@ southeast of Manzanillo , Colima . 
 Upon first becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression was located within an area of weak steering currents . Initially it was forecast to remain offshore ; with warm waters and light wind shear , the depression was forecast to intensify into a strong tropical storm , and possibly attain hurricane status . However , the circulation was difficult to locate , and as such its exact motion was uncertain . Ships in the region confirmed the center of the storm as further northeast than previously thought , but also confirmed tropical storm force winds ; as a result , the National Hurricane Center upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Norman . Strengthening continued , and Norman attained peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) , shortly prior to making landfall west of Lázaro Cárdenas , Michoacán , late on September 20 . 
 Initially , the storm was forecast to dissipate quickly over land , although the possibility was noted for a westward turn , due to an anticyclone located over central Mexico . About 10 hours after moving ashore , Norman weakened to tropical depression status , and while moving further inland its track turned to the northwest . The center became very ill @-@ defined over the mountainous terrain of southwest Mexico , although stronger rainbands persisted offshore . Late on September 21 , the poorly defined center of Norman emerged into open waters near Puerto Vallarta , Jalisco , and subsequently turned northward . At first , the depression was forecast to re @-@ intensify into a minimal tropical storm ; however , its previous land interaction prevented it from ever re @-@ strengthening . The circulation remained close to the coastline , and at 1500 UTC on September 22 , Norman made landfall near Mazatlán , Sinaloa , as a weak tropical depression . Within a few hours , the cyclone dissipated over land . 
 = = Impact and preparations = = 
 In response to Norman 's upgrade into a tropical storm , a tropical storm warning was issued for the coast from Zihuatanejo to Manzanillo on September 20 . The warning was dropped after Norman made landfall the next day . No additional warnings were issued upon Norman 's reemergence over water because it was never expected to restrengthen . 
 Norman produced heavy rainfall across western Mexico , officially peaking at 14 in ( 360 mm ) at <unk> , Colima . At La Villita , Michoacán , total rainfall reached 9 @.@ 5 in ( 240 mm ) . However , the highest amount was actually at <unk> / La Union . The rainfall caused severe flooding and mudslides , which killed about nine people . Additionally , the heavy precipitation flooded streets and homes as well as down trees . Four of the deaths occurred in the State of Chiapas as a result of a mudslide . Two more were swept away by raging rivers in the State of Veracruz , and another two people drowned in the State of Guerrero . In Chiapas , authorities evacuated about 300 families due to the flooding . 
 = Shiva = 
 Shiva / <unk> / ; Sanskrit : Śiva , Tamil : <unk> ் meaning " The Auspicious " is one of the three major deities of Hinduism . He is the chief within Shaivism , one of the three most influential denominations in contemporary Hinduism . He is one of the five primary forms of God in the Smarta Tradition , and " the Destroyer " . 
 At the highest level , Shiva is regarded as formless , limitless , transcendent , and unchanging as well . Shiva also has many benevolent and fearsome depictions . In benevolent aspects , he is depicted as an omniscient Yogi who lives an ascetic life on Mount Kailash , as well as a householder with wife Parvati and his two children , Ganesha and Kartikeya , and in fierce aspects , he is often depicted slaying demons . Shiva is also regarded as the patron god of yoga , meditation , and arts . 
 The main iconographical attributes of Shiva are the third eye on his forehead , the snake Vasuki around his neck , the adorning crescent moon , the holy river Ganga flowing from his matted hair , the trishula as his weapon and the damaru as his musical instrument . Shiva is usually worshiped in the aniconic form of Lingam . 
 The worship of Shiva is a pan @-@ Hindu tradition , practiced widely across all of India , Nepal , Sri Lanka and parts of Pakistan . 
 = = Etymology and other names = = 
 The Sanskrit word " Shiva " ( Devanagari : <unk> , śiva ) comes from the Shri <unk> <unk> of the Taittiriya Shakha ( TS 4 @.@ 5 , 4 @.@ 7 ) of the Krishna Yajurveda . The word means auspicious and it is used as an adjective only in the Rig Veda . In simple English transliteration it is written either as Shiva or Siva . The adjective śiva , is used as an attributive epithet for several Rigvedic deities , including Rudra . Other popular names associated with Shiva are Mahadeva , <unk> , Maheshvara , Shankara , <unk> , Rudra , <unk> ( man of knowledge ) , Hara , <unk> , Devendra ( chief of the gods ) , Neelakanta , <unk> and <unk> ( meaning Lord of the three realms ) . 
 The Sanskrit word <unk> means " relating to the god Shiva " , and this term is the Sanskrit name both for one of the principal sects of Hinduism and for a member of that sect . It is used as an adjective to characterize certain beliefs and practices , such as Shaivism . 
 Some authors associate the name with the Tamil word <unk> meaning " red " , noting that Shiva is linked to the Sun ( <unk> , " the Red one " , in Tamil ) and that Rudra is also called <unk> ( brown , or red ) in the Rigveda . 
 Adi Shankara , in his interpretation of the name Shiva , the 27th and 600th name of Vishnu sahasranama , the thousand names of Vishnu interprets Shiva to have multiple meanings : " The Pure One " , or " the One who is not affected by three Guṇas of Prakṛti ( Sattva , Rajas , and Tamas ) " or " the One who purifies everyone by the very utterance of His name . " <unk> Saraswati , in his translation of the Vishnu sahasranama , further elaborates on that verse : Shiva means " the One who is eternally pure " or " the One who can never have any contamination of the imperfection of Rajas and Tamas " . 
 Shiva 's role as the primary deity of Shaivism is reflected in his epithets Mahādeva ( " Great god " ; mahā " Great " and deva " god " ) , <unk> ( " Great Lord " ; mahā " great " and <unk> " lord " ) , and <unk> ( " Supreme Lord " ) . 
 There are at least eight different versions of the Shiva Sahasranama , devotional hymns ( stotras ) listing many names of Shiva . The version appearing in Book 13 ( <unk> ) of the Mahabharata is considered the kernel of this tradition . Shiva also has Dasha @-@ <unk> ( 10 @,@ 000 names ) that are found in the <unk> . The Shri <unk> <unk> , also known as the <unk> , is a devotional hymn to Shiva hailing him by many names . 
 = = Historical development and literature = = 
 Early prehistorical paintings at the <unk> rock shelters , depict Shiva dancing , Shiva 's trident , and his mount Nandi but no other Vedic gods . The worship of Shiva is a pan @-@ Hindu tradition , practiced widely across all of India , Nepal and Sri Lanka . 
 = = = Assimilation of traditions = = = 
 The figure of Shiva as we know him today was built up over time , with the ideas of many regional sects being amalgamated into a single figure . How the persona of Shiva converged as a composite deity is not well documented . According to Vijay Nath : 
 Vishnu and Siva [ ... ] began to absorb countless local cults and deities within their folds . The latter were either taken to represent the multiple facets of the same god or else were supposed to denote different forms and appellations by which the god came to be known and worshipped . [ ... ] Siva became identified with countless local cults by the sheer suffixing of Isa or Isvara to the name of the local deity , e.g. , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> . " 
 An example of assimilation took place in Maharashtra , where a regional deity named Khandoba is a patron deity of farming and herding castes . The foremost center of worship of Khandoba in Maharashtra is in Jejuri . Khandoba has been assimilated as a form of Shiva himself , in which case he is worshipped in the form of a lingam . Khandoba 's varied associations also include an identification with Surya and Karttikeya . 
 = = = Indus Valley origins = = = 
 Many Indus valley seals show animals but one seal that has attracted attention shows a figure , either horned or wearing a horned headdress and possibly ithyphallic figure seated in a posture reminiscent of the Lotus position and surrounded by animals was named by early excavators of Mohenjo @-@ daro Pashupati ( lord of cattle ) , an epithet of the later Hindu gods Shiva and Rudra . 
 Some academics like Gavin Flood and John Keay have expressed doubts about this claim . John Keay writes that " He may indeed be an early manifestation of Lord Shiva as <unk> pati " , but a couple of his specialties of this figure does not match with Rudra . Writing in 1997 Doris Meth Srinivasan rejected Marshall 's package of proto @-@ Shiva features , including that of three heads . She interprets what John Marshall interpreted as facial as not human but more bovine , possibly a divine buffalo @-@ man . 
 Writing in 2002 , Gregory L. <unk> concluded that while it would be appropriate to recognize the figure as a deity , its association with the water buffalo , and its posture as one of ritual discipline , regarding it as a proto @-@ Shiva would " go too far . " 
 = = = Vedic origins = = = 
 Shiva 's rise to a major position in the pantheon was facilitated by his identification with a host of Vedic deities , including Rudra , Agni , Indra , Prajapati , Vayu , and others . 
 = = = = Rudra = = = = 
 Shiva as we know him today shares many features with the Vedic god Rudra , and both Shiva and Rudra are viewed as the same personality in Hindu scriptures . The two names are used synonymously . Rudra , the god of the roaring storm , is usually portrayed in accordance with the element he represents as a fierce , destructive deity . 
 The oldest surviving text of Hinduism is the Rig Veda , which is dated to between 1700 and 1100 BC based on linguistic and philological evidence . A god named Rudra is mentioned in the Rig Veda . The name Rudra is still used as a name for Shiva . In RV 2 @.@ 33 , he is described as the " Father of the Rudras " , a group of storm gods . 
 The identification of Shiva with the older god <unk> is not universally accepted , as Axel Michaels explains : 
 Rudra is called " The Archer " ( Sanskrit : <unk> ) , and the arrow is an essential attribute of Rudra . This name appears in the Shiva Sahasranama , and R. K. Sharma notes that it is used as a name of Shiva often in later languages . 
 The word is derived from the Sanskrit root <unk> , which means " to injure " or " to kill " , and Sharma uses that general sense in his interpretive translation of the name <unk> as " One who can kill the forces of darkness " . The names <unk> ( " Bowman " ) and <unk> ( " Archer " , literally " Armed with arrows in his hands " ) also refer to archery . 
 = = = = Agni = = = = 
 Rudra and Agni have a close relationship . The identification between Agni and Rudra in the Vedic literature was an important factor in the process of Rudra 's gradual development into the later character as Rudra @-@ Shiva . The identification of Agni with Rudra is explicitly noted in the <unk> , an important early text on etymology , which says , " Agni is also called Rudra . " The interconnections between the two deities are complex , and according to Stella Kramrisch : 
 The fire myth of Rudra @-@ Śiva plays on the whole gamut of fire , valuing all its potentialities and phases , from conflagration to illumination . 
 In the <unk> , some epithets of Rudra , such as <unk> ( " Of golden red hue as of flame " ) and <unk> ( " Flaming bright " ) , suggest a fusing of the two deities . Agni is said to be a bull , and Lord Shiva possesses a bull as his vehicle , Nandi . The horns of Agni , who is sometimes characterized as a bull , are mentioned . In medieval sculpture , both Agni and the form of Shiva known as Bhairava have flaming hair as a special feature . 
 = = = = Indra = = = = 
 According to Wendy Doniger , the Puranic Shiva is a continuation of the Vedic Indra . Doniger gives several reasons for her hypothesis . Both are associated with mountains , rivers , male fertility , fierceness , fearlessness , warfare , transgression of established mores , the Aum sound , the Supreme Self . In the Rig Veda the term śiva is used to refer to Indra . ( 2 @.@ 20 @.@ 3 , 6 @.@ 45 @.@ 17 , and 8 @.@ 93 @.@ 3 . ) Indra , like Shiva , is likened to a bull . In the Rig Veda , Rudra is the father of the <unk> , but he is never associated with their warlike exploits as is Indra . 
 The Vedic beliefs and practices of the pre @-@ classical era were closely related to the hypothesised Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European religion , and the Indo @-@ Iranian religion . According to Anthony , the Old Indic religion probably emerged among Indo @-@ European immigrants in the contact zone between the <unk> River ( present @-@ day Uzbekistan ) and ( present @-@ day ) Iran . It was " a syncretic mixture of old Central Asian and new Indo @-@ European elements " , which borrowed " distinctive religious beliefs and practices " from the Bactria – <unk> Culture . At least 383 non @-@ Indo @-@ European words were borrowed from this culture , including the god Indra and the ritual drink Soma . According to Anthony , 
 Many of the qualities of Indo @-@ Iranian god of might / victory , <unk> , were transferred to the adopted god Indra , who became the central deity of the developing Old Indic culture . Indra was the subject of 250 hymns , a quarter of the Rig Veda . He was associated more than any other deity with Soma , a stimulant drug ( perhaps derived from Ephedra ) probably borrowed from the <unk> religion . His rise to prominence was a peculiar trait of the Old Indic speakers . 
 = = = Later literature = = = 
 Rudra 's transformation from an ambiguously characterized deity to a supreme being began in the Shvetashvatara Upanishad ( 400 @-@ 200 BC ) , which founded the tradition of Rudra @-@ Shiva worship . Here they are identified as the creators of the cosmos and liberators of souls from the birth @-@ rebirth cycle . The period of 200 BC to 100 AD also marks the beginning of the Shaiva tradition focused on the worship of Shiva , with references to Shaiva ascetics in Patanjali 's <unk> and in the Mahabharata . 
 The Shaiva Puranas , particularly the Shiva Purana and the Linga Purana , discuss the various forms of Shiva and the cosmology associated with him . The Tantras , composed between the 8th and 11th centuries , regard themselves as Sruti . Among these the Shaiva Agamas , are said to have been revealed by Shiva himself and are foundational texts for Shaiva Siddhanta . 
 = = Position within Hinduism = = 
 = = = Shaivism = = = 
 Shaivism is one of the four major sects of Hinduism , the others being Vaishnavism , Shaktism and the Smarta Tradition . Followers of Shaivism , called " Shaivas " , revere Shiva as the Supreme Being . Shaivas believe that Shiva is All and in all , the creator , preserver , destroyer , revealer and <unk> of all that is . The tantric Shaiva tradition consists of the <unk> , Kashmir Shaivism and Shaiva Siddhanta . The Shiva Purana is one of the puranas , a genre of Hindu religious texts , dedicated to Shiva . Shaivism is widespread throughout India , Nepal , and Sri Lanka , mostly . Areas notable for the practice of Shaivism include parts of Southeast Asia , especially Malaysia , Singapore , and Indonesia . Indologist Axel Michaels suggests that Shaivism , like Vaishnavism , implies a unity which cannot be clearly found either in religious practice or in philosophical and esoteric doctrine . Furthermore , practice and doctrine must be kept separate . 
 = = = Panchayatana puja = = = 
 Panchayatana puja is the system of puja ( worship ) in the Smarta Tradition . It is said to have been introduced by Adi Shankara , the 8th century Hindu philosopher . It consists of the worship of five deities : Shiva , Vishnu , Devi , Surya and Ganesha . Depending on the tradition followed by Smarta households , one of these deities is kept in the center and the other four surround it . Worship is offered to all the deities . The five are represented by small murtis , or by five kinds of stones , or by five marks drawn on the floor . 
 = = = Trimurti = = = 
 The Trimurti is a concept in Hinduism in which the cosmic functions of creation , maintenance , and destruction are personified by the forms of Brahmā the creator , Vishnu the maintainer or preserver and <unk> the destroyer or transformer . These three deities have been called " the Hindu triad " or the " Great Trinity " . 
 = = Attributes = = 
 Third eye : Shiva is often depicted with a third eye , with which he burned Desire ( <unk> ) to ashes , called " <unk> " ( Sanskrit : त ् र ् यम ् <unk> ् ) , which occurs in many scriptural sources . In classical Sanskrit , the word <unk> denotes " an eye " , and in the Mahabharata , Shiva is depicted as three @-@ eyed , so this name is sometimes translated as " having three eyes " . However , in Vedic Sanskrit , the word <unk> or <unk> means " mother " , and this early meaning of the word is the basis for the translation " three mothers " . These three mother @-@ goddesses who are collectively called the <unk> . Other related translations have been based on the idea that the name actually refers to the oblations given to Rudra , which according to some traditions were shared with the goddess <unk> . It has been mentioned that when Shiva loses his temper , his third eye opens which can reduce most things to ashes . 
 Crescent moon : Shiva bears on his head the crescent moon . The epithet <unk> ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् द ् <unk> " Having the moon as his crest " - <unk> 
 = " moon " ; <unk> = 
 " crest , crown " ) refers to this feature . The placement of the moon on his head as a standard iconographic feature dates to the period when Rudra rose to prominence and became the major deity Rudra @-@ Shiva . The origin of this linkage may be due to the identification of the moon with Soma , and there is a hymn in the Rig Veda where Soma and Rudra are jointly implored , and in later literature , Soma and Rudra came to be identified with one another , as were Soma and the moon . The crescent moon is shown on the side of the Lord 's head as an ornament . The waxing and waning phenomenon of the moon symbolizes the time cycle through which creation evolves from the beginning to the end . 
 Ashes : Shiva smears his body with ashes ( <unk> ) . The ashes are said to represent the end of all material existence . Some forms of Shiva , such as Bhairava , are associated with a very old Indian tradition of cremation @-@ ground asceticism that was practiced by some groups who were outside the fold of <unk> orthodoxy . These practices associated with cremation grounds are also mentioned in the Pali canon of Theravada Buddhism . One epithet for Shiva is " inhabitant of the cremation ground " ( Sanskrit : <unk> , also spelled <unk> ) , referring to this connection . 
 <unk> hair : Shiva 's distinctive hair style is noted in the epithets <unk> , " the one with matted hair " , and <unk> , " endowed with matted hair " or " wearing his hair wound in a braid in a shell @-@ like ( <unk> ) fashion " . A <unk> is a cowrie shell , or a braid of hair in the form of a shell , or , more generally , hair that is shaggy or curly . 
 Blue throat : The epithet <unk> ( Sanskrit <unk> ् <unk> ; <unk> 
 = " blue " , <unk> = 
 " throat " ) . Since Shiva drank the <unk> poison churned up from the Samudra Manthan to eliminate its destructive capacity . Shocked by his act , Goddess Parvati strangled his neck and hence managed to stop it in his neck itself and prevent it from spreading all over the universe , supposed to be in Shiva 's stomach . However the poison was so potent that it changed the color of his neck to blue . ( See Maha Shivaratri . ) 
 Sacred Ganga : The epithet Gangadhara , " Bearer of the river Ganga " ( Ganges ) . The Ganga flows from the matted hair of Shiva . The <unk> ( Ganga ) , one of the major rivers of the country , is said to have made her abode in Shiva 's hair . The flow of the Ganga also represents the nectar of immortality . 
 Tiger skin : Shiva is often shown seated upon a tiger skin , an honour reserved for the most accomplished of Hindu ascetics , the <unk> . 
 Serpents : Shiva is often shown garlanded with a snake . 
 Trident ( Trishula ) : Shiva 's particular weapon is the trident . 
 Drum : A small drum shaped like an hourglass is known as a damaru . This is one of the attributes of Shiva in his famous dancing representation known as Nataraja . A specific hand gesture ( mudra ) called <unk> @-@ hasta ( Sanskrit for " <unk> @-@ hand " ) is used to hold the drum . This drum is particularly used as an emblem by members of the <unk> sect . 
 Axe ( <unk> ) and Deer are held in Shiva 's hands in south Indian icons . 
 <unk> : <unk> , also known as " <unk> " , is the name of the bull that serves as Shiva 's mount ( Sanskrit : <unk> ) . Shiva 's association with cattle is reflected in his name <unk> , or Pashupati ( Sanskrit : <unk> ) , translated by Sharma as " lord of cattle " and by Kramrisch as " lord of animals " , who notes that it is particularly used as an epithet of Rudra . " Rishabha " or the bull represents Dharma Devata ( lord ) . Lord Siva rides on the bull . This denotes that Lord Siva is the protector of Dharma , is an embodiment of Dharma or righteousness . 
 Mount <unk> : Mount Kailash in the Himalayas is his traditional abode . In Hindu mythology , Mount <unk> is conceived as resembling a Linga , representing the center of the universe . 
 <unk> : The <unk> are attendants of Shiva and live in Kailash . They are often referred to as the <unk> , or ghostly hosts , on account of their nature . Generally benign , except when their lord is transgressed against , they are often invoked to intercede with the lord on behalf of the devotee . His son Ganesha was chosen as their leader by Shiva , hence Ganesha 's title gaṇa @-@ <unk> or gaṇa @-@ pati , " lord of the <unk> " . 
 Varanasi : Varanasi ( Benares ) is considered to be the city specially loved by Shiva , and is one of the holiest places of pilgrimage in India . It is referred to , in religious contexts , as Kashi . 
 = = Forms and depictions = = 
 According to Gavin Flood , " Shiva is a god of ambiguity and paradox , " whose attributes include opposing themes . The ambivalent nature of this deity is apparent in some of his names and the stories told about him . 
 = = = Destroyer and Benefactor = = = 
 In Yajurveda , two contrary sets of attributes for both malignant or terrific ( Sanskrit : rudra ) and benign or auspicious ( Sanskrit : śiva ) forms can be found , leading Chakravarti to conclude that " all the basic elements which created the complex Rudra @-@ Śiva sect of later ages are to be found here " . In the Mahabharata , Shiva is depicted as " the standard of invincibility , might , and terror " , as well as a figure of honor , delight , and brilliance . 
 The duality of Shiva 's fearful and auspicious attributes appears in contrasted names . The name Rudra reflects Shiva 's fearsome aspects . According to traditional etymologies , the Sanskrit name Rudra is derived from the root <unk> , which means " to cry , howl " . Stella Kramrisch notes a different etymology connected with the adjectival form <unk> , which means " wild , of rudra nature " , and translates the name Rudra as " the wild one " or " the fierce god " . R. K. Sharma follows this alternate etymology and translates the name as " terrible " . Hara is an important name that occurs three times in the <unk> version of the Shiva sahasranama , where it is translated in different ways each time it occurs , following a <unk> tradition of not repeating an interpretation . Sharma translates the three as " one who captivates " , " one who consolidates " , and " one who destroys " . Kramrisch translates it as " the <unk> " . Another of Shiva 's fearsome forms is as Kāla " time " and Mahākāla " great time " , which ultimately destroys all things . The name Kāla appears in the Shiva Sahasranama , where it is translated by Ram Karan Sharma as " ( the Supreme Lord of ) Time . " Bhairava " terrible " or " frightful " is a fierce form associated with annihilation . 
 In contrast , the name <unk> , " beneficent " or " conferring happiness " reflects his benign form . This name was adopted by the great Vedanta philosopher Adi Shankara ( c . 788 @-@ 820 ) , who is also known as Shankaracharya . The name <unk> ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् <unk> ) , " causing happiness " , also reflects this benign aspect . 
 = = = Ascetic and <unk> = = = 
 Shiva is depicted as both an ascetic yogi and as a householder , roles which have been traditionally mutually exclusive in Hindu society . When depicted as a yogi , he may be shown sitting and meditating . His epithet <unk> ( " the great Yogi : Mahā 
 = " great " , Yogi = 
 " one who practices Yoga " ) refers to his association with yoga . While Vedic religion was conceived mainly in terms of sacrifice , it was during the Epic period that the concepts of tapas , yoga , and asceticism became more important , and the depiction of Shiva as an ascetic sitting in philosophical isolation reflects these later concepts . Shiva is also depicted as a corpse below Goddess Kali , it represents that Shiva is a corpse without Shakti . He remains inert . While Shiva is the static form , Mahakali or Shakti is the dynamic aspect without whom Shiva is powerless . 
 As a family man and householder , he has a wife , Parvati and two sons , Ganesha and Kartikeya . His epithet <unk> ( " The husband of <unk> " ) refers to this idea , and Sharma notes that two other variants of this name that mean the same thing , <unk> and <unk> , also appear in the sahasranama . <unk> in epic literature is known by many names , including the benign <unk> . She is identified with Devi , the Divine Mother ; Shakti ( divine energy ) as well as goddesses like Tripura Sundari , Durga , Kamakshi and <unk> . The consorts of Shiva are the source of his creative energy . They represent the dynamic extension of Shiva onto this universe . His son Ganesha is worshipped throughout India and Nepal as the <unk> of Obstacles , Lord of Beginnings and Lord of Obstacles . Kartikeya is worshipped in South India ( especially in Tamil Nadu , Kerala and Karnataka ) by the names Subrahmanya , Subrahmanyan , <unk> , Swaminathan and Murugan , and in Northern India by the names Skanda , Kumara , or Karttikeya . 
 Some regional deities are also identified as Shiva 's children . As one story goes , Shiva is enticed by the beauty and charm of Mohini , Vishnu 's female avatar , and <unk> with her . As a result of this union , Shasta - identified with regional deities <unk> and Aiyanar - is born . Shiva is also mentioned in some scriptures to have had daughters like the serpent @-@ goddess Manasa and Ashokasundari . The demons Andhaka and Jalandhara and the god Mangala are considered children of Shiva . 
 = = = Nataraja = = = 
 The depiction of Shiva as Nataraja ( Sanskrit : <unk> , " Lord of Dance " ) is popular . The names <unk> ( " dancer " ) and <unk> ( " eternal dancer " ) appear in the Shiva Sahasranama . His association with dance and also with music is prominent in the Puranic period . In addition to the specific iconographic form known as Nataraja , various other types of dancing forms ( Sanskrit : <unk> ) are found in all parts of India , with many well @-@ defined varieties in Tamil Nadu in particular . The two most common forms of the dance are the Tandava , which later came to denote the powerful and masculine dance as Kala @-@ Mahakala associated with the destruction of the world . When it requires the world or universe to be destroyed , Lord Śiva does it by the <unk> and Lasya , which is graceful and delicate and expresses emotions on a gentle level and is considered the feminine dance attributed to the goddess Parvati . Lasya is regarded as the female counterpart of Tandava . The Tandava @-@ Lasya dances are associated with the destruction @-@ creation of the world . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> ) literally describes a form ( <unk> ) of Shiva facing south ( <unk> ) . This form represents Shiva in his aspect as a teacher of yoga , music , and wisdom and giving exposition on the shastras . This iconographic form for depicting Shiva in Indian art is mostly from Tamil Nadu . Elements of this motif can include Shiva seated upon a deer @-@ throne and surrounded by sages who are receiving his instruction . 
 = = = Ardhanarishvara = = = 
 An iconographic representation of Shiva called Ardhanārīśvara shows him with one half of the body as male and the other half as female . According to Ellen Goldberg , the traditional Sanskrit name for this form is best translated as " the lord who is half woman " , not as " half @-@ man , half @-@ woman " . According to legend , Lord Shiva is pleased by the difficult <unk> performed by the goddess Parvati , grants her the left half of his body . This form of Shiva is quite similar to the Yin @-@ Yang philosophy of Eastern Asia , though Ardhanārīśvara appears to be more ancient . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Shiva is often depicted as an archer in the act of destroying the triple fortresses , Tripura , of the Asuras . Shiva 's name <unk> , " ender of Tripura " , refers to this important story . In this aspect , Shiva is depicted with four arms wielding a bow and arrow , but different from the <unk> murti . He holds an axe and a deer on the upper pair of his arms . In the lower pair of the arms , he holds a bow and an arrow respectively . After destroying Tripura , <unk> Shiva smeared his forehead with three strokes of Ashes . This has become a prominent symbol of Shiva and is practiced even today by <unk> . 
 = = = Lingam = = = 
 Apart from anthropomorphic images of Shiva , the worship of Shiva in the form of a lingam , is also important . These are depicted in various forms . One common form is the shape of a vertical rounded column . Shiva means auspiciousness , and lingam means a sign or a symbol , so the Shivalinga is regarded as a " symbol of the great God of the universe who is all @-@ auspiciousness " . Shiva also means " one in whom the whole creation sleeps after dissolution " . Since , according to Hinduism , it is the same god that creates , sustains and withdraws the universe , the Shivalinga represents symbolically God Himself . Some scholars , such as Monier Monier @-@ Williams and Wendy Doniger , also view linga as a phallic symbol , although this interpretation is disputed by others , including Swami Vivekananda , Sivananda Saraswati , and S. N. <unk> . 
 The worship of the lingam originated from the famous hymn in the Atharva @-@ Veda <unk> sung in praise of the Yupa @-@ Stambha , the sacrificial post . In that hymn , a description is found of the <unk> and endless Stambha or Skambha , and it is shown that the said Skambha is put in place of the eternal Brahman . Just as the Yajna ( sacrificial ) fire , its smoke , ashes , and flames , the Soma plant , and the ox that used to carry on its back the wood for the Vedic sacrifice gave place to the conceptions of the brightness of Shiva 's body , his tawny matted hair , his blue throat , and the riding on the bull of the Shiva , the Yupa @-@ Skambha gave place in time to the Shiva @-@ Linga . In the text Linga Purana , the same hymn is expanded in the shape of stories , meant to establish the glory of the great Stambha and the superiority of Shiva as Mahadeva . Jyotirlinga means " The Radiant sign of The Almighty " . The <unk> are mentioned in the Shiva Purana . 
 = = = The five mantras = = = 
 Five is a sacred number for Shiva . One of his most important mantras has five syllables ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 Shiva 's body is said to consist of five mantras , called the <unk> . As forms of God , each of these have their own names and distinct iconography : 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 These are represented as the five faces of Shiva and are associated in various texts with the five elements , the five senses , the five organs of perception , and the five organs of action . Doctrinal differences and , possibly , errors in transmission , have resulted in some differences between texts in details of how these five forms are linked with various attributes . The overall meaning of these associations is summarized by Stella Kramrisch : 
 Through these transcendent categories , Śiva , the ultimate reality , becomes the efficient and material cause of all that exists . 
 According to the <unk> Upanishad : 
 One should know all things of the phenomenal world as of a fivefold character , for the reason that the eternal verity of Śiva is of the character of the fivefold Brahman . ( <unk> Upanishad 31 ) 
 = = = Other forms = = = 
 Shiva , like some other Hindu deities , is said to have several incarnations , known as Avatars . Although Puranic scriptures contain occasional references to " <unk> " avatars of Shiva , the idea is not universally accepted in Saivism . The Linga Purana speaks of twenty @-@ eight forms of Shiva which are sometimes seen as avatars . According to the Svetasvatara Upanishad , he has four avatars . 
 In the Hanuman Chalisa , Hanuman is identified as the eleventh avatar of Shiva and this belief is universal . Hanuman is popularly known as “ <unk> ” “ Rudra ” being a name of “ Shiva ” . Rama – the Vishnu avatar is considered by some to be the eleventh avatar of Rudra ( Shiva ) . Some traditions regard the sage Durvasa , the sage Agastya , the philosopher Adi Shankara and <unk> as avatars of Shiva . Other forms of Shiva include Virabhadra and Sharabha . 
 = = Festivals = = 
 Maha Shivratri is a festival celebrated every year on the 13th day in the Krishna Paksha of the month of Phalguna in the Hindu calendar . This festival is of utmost importance to the devotees of Shiva . <unk> marks the night when Shiva performed the Tandava and it is the day that Shiva was married to Parvati . The holiday is often celebrated with special prayers and rituals offered up to Shiva , notably the Abhishek . This ritual , practiced throughout the night , is often performed every three hours with water , milk , yogurt , and honey . Bel ( <unk> <unk> ) leaves are often offered up to the Hindu god , as it is considered necessary for a successful life . The offering of the leaves are considered so important that it is believed that someone who offers them without any intentions will be rewarded greatly . 
 = = Beyond Hinduism = = 
 Shiva is mentioned in Buddhist Tantra . Shiva as <unk> and Shakti as Prajna . In cosmologies of Buddhist tantra , Shiva is depicted as passive , with Shakti being his active counterpart . 
 The <unk> Sahib of the Guru Granth Sahib says , " The Guru is Shiva , the Guru is Vishnu and Brahma ; the Guru is <unk> and <unk> . " In the same chapter , it also says , " Shiva speaks , and the <unk> listen . " In <unk> Granth , Guru Gobind Singh has mentioned two <unk> of Rudra : Dattatreya <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 The worship of Shiva became popular in Central Asia through the Hephthalite Empire , and Kushan Empire . Shaivism was also popular in Sogdia and the Kingdom of <unk> as found from the wall painting from <unk> on the river <unk> . In this depiction , Shiva is portrayed with a sacred halo and a sacred thread ( " Yajnopavita " ) . He is clad in tiger skin while his attendants are wearing Sogdian dress . A panel from <unk> shows Shiva in His Trimurti form with Shakti kneeling on her right thigh . Another site in the Taklamakan Desert depicts him with four legs , seated cross @-@ legged on a cushioned seat supported by two bulls . It is also noted that Zoroastrian wind god Vayu @-@ Vata took on the iconographic appearance of Shiva . 
 In Indonesia , Shiva is also worshiped as Batara Guru . In the ancient times , all kingdoms were located on top of mountains . When he was young , before receiving his authority of power , his name was Sang <unk> <unk> . He is first of the children who hatched from the eggs laid by <unk> <unk> , wife of god <unk> na Bolon . This avatar is also worshiped in Malaysia . Shiva 's other form in Indonesian Hinduism is " <unk> " ( Mahadeva ) . 
 <unk> , one of the Seven Lucky Gods in Japan , is considered to be evolved from Shiva . The god enjoys an exalted position as a household deity in Japan and is worshipped as the god of wealth and fortune . The name is the Japanese equivalent of Mahākāla , the Buddhist name for Shiva . 
 = Super Smash Bros. = 
 Super Smash Bros. , known in Japan as Dairantō Smash Brothers ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Dairantō <unk> Burazāzu , lit . " Great Melee Smash Brothers " ) , is a series of crossover fighting games published by Nintendo , that primarily featuring characters from franchises established on its systems . All five games have been directed by Masahiro Sakurai . 
 The gameplay objective differs from that of traditional fighters by aiming to knock opponents out of the stage instead of depleting life bars . The original Super Smash Bros. , released in 1999 for the Nintendo 64 , had a small budget and was originally a Japan @-@ only release , but its domestic success led to a worldwide release . The series achieved even greater success with the release of Super Smash Bros. Melee , which was released in 2001 for the GameCube and became the best @-@ selling game on that system . A third installment , Super Smash Bros. Brawl , was released in 2008 for the Wii . Although HAL Laboratory has been the developer of the first two titles , the third game was developed through the collaboration of several companies . The fourth and fifth installments , Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U , were released in 2014 for the Nintendo 3DS and Wii U , respectively . The 3DS installment was the first series title to be released on a handheld platform . 
 The series features many characters from Nintendo 's most popular franchises , including Mario , Fox McCloud , Link , Kirby , Samus Aran and Pikachu . The original Super Smash Bros. had 12 playable characters , and the roster count has risen to 26 characters in Melee , 39 in Brawl , and 58 in 3DS / Wii U ( seven of which are downloadable ) . Some characters are able to transform into different forms that have different styles of play and sets of moves . The games also feature non @-@ playable Nintendo characters , like Ridley and Petey Piranha . In Brawl , two third @-@ party characters were added , Solid Snake and Sonic the Hedgehog . Additional third @-@ party characters Mega Man , Pac @-@ Man , Ryu , Cloud Strife and Bayonetta appeared in 3DS and Wii U , while Solid Snake was removed from the line @-@ up . 
 Every title in the series has been well received by critics , with much praise given to the multiplayer mode experience . The Super Smash Bros. games have spawned a large competitive community and have been featured in several high profile gaming tournaments . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Super Smash Bros. ( 1999 ) = = = 
 Super Smash Bros. was introduced in 1999 for the Nintendo 64 . It was released worldwide after selling over a million copies in Japan . It featured eight characters from the start ( Mario , Donkey Kong , Link , Samus , Yoshi , Kirby , Fox , and Pikachu ) , with four unlockable characters ( Luigi , Captain Falcon , Ness , and <unk> ) , all of them created by Nintendo or one of its second @-@ party developers . 
 In Super Smash Bros. , up to four players can play in multiplayer ( Versus ) mode , with the specific rules of each match being predetermined by the players . There are two match types that can be chosen : Time , where the person with the most KOs at the end of the set time wins ; and stock , where each player has a set amount of lives and are eliminated from play when their lives are depleted . 
 This game 's one @-@ player mode included one adventure mode that always followed the same series of opponents although the player could change the difficulty . Other single player modes exist such as Training and several mini @-@ games , including " Break the Targets " and " Board the Platforms " . All of these were included in the sequel , with the exception of " Board the Platforms " . 
 There are nine playable stages in Versus mode , eight based on each of the starting characters ( such as Princess Peach 's Castle for Mario , Zebes for Samus , and Sector Z for Fox ) and the unlockable Mushroom Kingdom , based around motifs from the original Super Mario Bros. , even containing original sprites and the original version of the Overworld theme from that game . 
 = = = Super Smash Bros. Melee ( 2001 ) = = = 
 Super Smash Bros. Melee was released November 21 , 2001 , in Japan ; December 3 , 2001 , in North America ; May 24 , 2002 , in Europe ; and May 31 , 2002 , in Australia for the GameCube video game console . It had a larger budget and development team than Super Smash Bros. did and was released to much greater praise and acclaim among critics and consumers . Since its release , Super Smash Bros. Melee has sold more than 7 million copies and was the best @-@ selling game on the GameCube . Super Smash Bros. Melee features 26 characters , of which 15 are available initially , more than doubling the number of characters in its predecessor . There are also 29 stages . 
 It introduced two new single @-@ player modes alongside the Classic mode : Adventure mode and All @-@ Star mode . Adventure mode has platforming segments similar to the original 's " Race to the Finish " mini @-@ game , and All @-@ Star is a fight against every playable character in the game , allows the player only one life in which damage is accumulated over each battle and a limited number of heal items in between battles . 
 There are also significantly more multiplayer modes and a tournament mode allowing for 64 different competitors whom can all be controlled by a human player , although only up to four players can participate at the same time . Additionally , the game featured alternative battle modes , called " Special Melee , " which allows players to make many different alterations to the battle , along with alternative ways to judge a victory , such as through collecting coins throughout the match . 
 In place of Super Smash Bros. ' character profiles , Melee introduced trophies ( called " figures " in the Japanese version ) . The 293 trophies include three different profiles for each playable character , one unlocked in each single @-@ player mode . In addition , unlike its predecessor , Melee contains profiles for many Nintendo characters who are either non @-@ playable or do not appear in the game , as well as Nintendo items , stages , enemies , and elements . 
 = = = Super Smash Bros. Brawl ( 2008 ) = = = 
 Although a third Super Smash Bros. game had been announced long before E3 2006 , Nintendo unveiled its first information in the form of a trailer on May 10 , 2006 , and the game was named Super Smash Bros. Brawl . The trailer featured Solid Snake , of Konami 's Metal Gear fame , marking the first time that a third @-@ party character had been introduced as a playable character in a Super Smash Bros. title . A second third @-@ party character , Sonic the Hedgehog , from Nintendo 's former rival Sega was also confirmed as a playable character on October 10 , 2007 . Super Smash Bros. Brawl was released in Japan on January 31 , 2008 , in North America on March 9 , 2008 , in Australia on June 26 , 2008 , and Europe on June 27 , 2008 . Brawl is also the first game in the franchise to support online play , via the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection , and to offer the ability for players to construct their own original stages . The game features a total of 39 playable characters and 41 stages . 
 Brawl also features compatibility with four kinds of controllers ( the Wii Remote on its side , the Wii Remote and Nunchuk combination , the Classic Controller , and the GameCube controller ) , while its predecessors only used the one controller designed for that system . The player also has the ability to change the configuration of controls and the controller type . 
 Super Smash Bros. Brawl features a new Adventure Mode titled Super Smash Bros. Brawl : The Subspace Emissary . This mode features unique character storylines along with numerous side scrolling levels and multiple bosses to fight , as well as CG cut scenes explaining the storyline . The Subspace Emissary features a new group of antagonists called the Subspace Army , who are led by the Ancient Minister . Some of these enemy characters appeared in previous Nintendo video games , such as Petey Piranha from the Mario series and a squadron of R.O.B.s based on classic Nintendo hardware . The Subspace Emissary also boasts a number of original enemies , such as the Roader , a robotic unicycle ; the <unk> , a one @-@ eyed ball @-@ like creature which can replicate itself if left alone ; and the <unk> , enemies that come in many variations . Though primarily a single @-@ player mode , The Subspace Emissary allows for cooperative multiplayer . There are five difficulty levels for each stage , and there is a method of increasing characters ' powers during the game . This is done by placing collected stickers onto the bottom of a character 's trophy between stages to improve various aspects of a fighter . 
 = = = Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U ( 2014 ) = = = 
 At E3 2011 , it was confirmed that Super Smash Bros. will be coming to the Nintendo 3DS and Wii U , with the two games being cross @-@ compatible with each other in some way . Sakurai stated that the announcement was made public in order to attract developers needed for the games , as development for the titles did not start until May 2012 due to production on Kid Icarus : Uprising . On June 21 , 2012 , Nintendo announced that the creation of the games would be a co @-@ production between Sakurai 's Sora Ltd. and Bandai Namco Entertainment . The titles were officially revealed at E3 2013 , with new information being released via trailers , Nintendo Direct presentations , and developer posts on Miiverse . The game features 58 characters ( seven of which are downloadable ) with 19 brand new fighters , including third @-@ party characters Mega Man , Pac @-@ Man , Ryu , Cloud Strife , and Bayonetta . The game was released for Nintendo 3DS in Japan on September 13 , 2014 , and in North America and Europe on October 3 , 2014 , and in Australia on October 4 , 2014 . The Wii U version was released on November 21 , 2014 in North America , in Europe on November 28 , 2014 , in Australia on November 29 , 2014 , and in Japan on December 6 , 2014 . 
 = = = Future = = = 
 In April 2014 , Bandai Namco Entertainment posted a recruitment advertisement on a Japanese career job opportunity website . The recruitment page consisted of a listing for programmers for Super Smash Bros. 6 , which was expected to be released in 2015 for both the Wii U and Nintendo 3DS . The page noted there were 120 game developers working on the project at the time , and that the Bandai Namco expected that number to increase to 200 . However , shortly after its publication , the page was taken down . 
 In January 2015 in his column in Weekly Famitsu , Sakurai alluded to the possibility of retirement , expressing doubt that he would be able to continue making games if his career continued to be as stressful as it was . In December 2015 , Sakurai once again stated that he wasn 't sure if there will be another Smash Bros. game in the series . In January 2016 , it was rumoured that a new Super Smash Bros. game was being developed by Bandai Namco and that the game was planned as a launch title for Nintendo 's upcoming NX platform . However , it is currently unknown as to whether it will be another installment in the series or an enhanced port of the 3DS and Wii U versions . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Gameplay in the Super Smash Bros. series differs from many fighting games . Instead of winning by depleting an opponent 's life bar , players seek to launch their opponents off the stage and out of the map . Characters have a damage total which rises as they take damage , represented by a percentage value that measures up to 999 % . As a character 's percentage rises , the character can be knocked progressively farther by an opponent 's attacks . To knock out an opponent , the player must knock that character outside the arena 's boundaries in any direction . When a character is launched off the stage , the character can attempt to " recover " by using jumping moves and abilities to return to the stage . Some characters have an easier time recovering onto the stage than others due to their moves and abilities . Additionally , some characters vary in weight , with lighter characters being easier to launch than heavy characters . 
 Smash Bros. ' controls are greatly simplified in comparison to other fighting games , with one button used for standard attacks and another used for special attacks . Players can perform different types of moves by holding the directional controls up , down , to the side , or in a neutral position while pressing the attack or special button . As such , each character has four types of ground attacks , mid @-@ air attacks , and special attacks that can be performed . Quickly pressing or tapping a directional input and the attack button together while on the ground allows players to perform a chargeable " Smash Attack " , which is generally more powerful than other attacks . When characters are hit by attacks , they receive <unk> that temporarily disallows any attacks to be made . This allows combos to be performed . A shield button allows players to put up a defensive shield which weakens with repeated use and will leave the player unable to move if broken . Combining the shield button with directional inputs and attack buttons allows the player to also perform dodges , rolls , grabs , and throws . The three basic actions in Super Smash Bros. , attacking , grabbing , and shielding , are often described using a Rock @-@ paper @-@ scissors analogy : attacking beats grabbing , grabbing beats shielding , and shielding beats attacking . When a player knocks another player off of the main platform , they may perform an action called edge @-@ guarding . At the same time the player that has been knocked off will try to recover by jumping back onto the stage and avoiding the other players ' edge @-@ guarding . 
 Another element in the Super Smash Bros. series is battle items , the abundance of which players can adjust the before matches . There are conventional " battering items " , with which a player may hit an opponent , such as a baseball bat or a sword , throwing items , including Bob @-@ <unk> and shells , and shooting items , either single shot guns or rapid fire blasters . Recovery items allow the user to reduce their damage percentage by varying amounts . Poké Balls are special items that release a random Pokémon onto the battlefield to assist the user . Brawl introduced the Assist Trophy item which serves a similar purpose ; instead of releasing Pokémon , it summons a character from a Nintendo franchise . Brawl also introduces the Smash Ball , which when broken allows fighters to perform a character @-@ specific super attack known as a " Final Smash " . 
 The rules that can be used in a match vary depending on the game , but the most commonly used settings across all games are Time and Stock . Time mode uses a point based system in which fighters earn points for knocking out their opponents and lose points for being knocked out or self @-@ destructing ( i.e. falling out of the arena by themselves ) . The player with the highest score at the end of the set time limit wins the match . Survival uses a life @-@ based system in which players are given a set number of lives , known as stock , with each fighter losing a life whenever they are knocked out , becoming eliminated if they run out of lives . The winner is the last fighter standing once all other fighters are eliminated or , if a time @-@ limit is applied to the match , the fighter with the most lives remaining once time runs out . In the event of a tie , such as two or more fighters sharing the highest score / life count at the end of the time limit or remaining fighters losing their last life simultaneously , a Sudden Death match takes place . Here , each of the tied fighters are given a starting damage percentage of 300 % , making them easier to launch off the stage , and the last fighter standing wins the match . In some games this process is repeated if the match ends in another tie . 
 Gameplay using competitive Smash Bros. rules is usually played in stock mode and with a timer . Items are turned off and the only tournament legal stages are those that do not feature hazards and other disruptive elements . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 Each game in the series has a number of playable characters ( referred in the games as " fighters " ) taken from various Nintendo franchises . Starting with Brawl , characters from third @-@ party franchises have also made playable appearances . At the start of each game , some of the fighters will be locked from play . To unlock a hidden fighter , players need to clear certain conditions , such as playing a certain number of matches , and defeat that fighter in a match . In Brawl , players can also unlock fighters by encountering them in the Subspace Emissary mode . In Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U , players are able to customise existing fighters with altered movesets and statistics , or make their own Mii Fighters that can be given different fighting styles , though these cannot be played in online matches with strangers . 
 Notes 
 = = = Non @-@ playable characters = = = 
 The following characters are non @-@ playable characters unless using glitches or cheat cartridges , that appear only in the various Single Player modes throughout the series , controlled by the computer , or as hazards in specific stages , or in Smash Run . Most of the non @-@ playable characters were created for use in the Super Smash Bros. series although some of them , such as Goombas , come from other game franchises . 
 = = = = Bosses = = = = 
 Throughout the Super Smash Bros. series , most single @-@ player modes have included several non @-@ playable boss characters . These bosses generally have a number of advantageous characteristics , such as extreme resistance to being knocked off the screen . Most of these bosses were created specifically for the Super Smash Bros. franchise , though some have made appearances in other games . 
 Master Hand ( <unk> , Masutā <unk> ) is a glove @-@ like being that appears in all games to date , serving as the final boss of Classic Mode and , in Super Smash Bros. Melee , the 50th Event Match " Final Destination Match " . In Melee , Master Hand is playable via a system glitch . Super Smash Bros. Melee introduced a left @-@ hand counterpart to Master Hand named Crazy Hand ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , which appears alongside Master Hand in some scenarios . Master Hand makes several appearances in Kirby & the Amazing Mirror as a miniboss , and partnered with Crazy Hand as the bosses of Candy Constellation . Master Hand and Crazy Hand look identical aside from their chirality , but Crazy Hand 's fingers act in a more impulsive and destructive way . While Master Hand is more relaxed and mature , Crazy Hand evokes the bizarre and his fingers move differently when he 's preparing for an attack . His attacks are also wilder and faster than those of Master Hand . UGO.com listed Master Hand first on their list of " The 25 Awesomest Hidden Characters " citing the glitch which allows him to be playable . In Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U , fighting against Master Hand and Crazy Hand on a high intensity will lead to a battle against Master Core , a shape @-@ shifting being of dark energy that can take various forms , including that of the player 's fighter . After defeating these forms , the Master Core shows its true , vulnerable form . 
 Super Smash Bros. also features Metal Mario ( originally from Super Mario 64 ) and Giant Donkey Kong , who are simply enhanced versions of their respective characters . Metal Mario is simply Mario with increased resistance to being knocked out of the stage as well as a faster falling speed and more attack power , while Giant Donkey Kong is simply a larger and more powerful version of Donkey Kong . Both characters reappear in Super Smash Bros. Melee 's Adventure Mode along with Giant Kirby , Metal Luigi and two Tiny Donkey Kongs . However , due to items introduced in Melee ( the Metal Box , Super Mushroom , and Poison Mushroom , specifically ) , all of these seemingly non @-@ playable characters ( including the enhanced characters that were unplayable bosses in the first game ) are indeed playable for short amounts of time . Dark Link , a completely black form of Link , appears in Melee and Brawl as an opponent in an Event Match , and in Brawl and 3DS and Wii U is also a playable costume for Link . 
 Giga Bowser is a gigantic , enhanced version of Bowser introduced in Melee . He is the secret final boss of Melee 's Adventure mode , only appearing if certain conditions are met . Giga Bowser becomes playable for short periods of time in Brawl and 3DS and Wii U when Bowser performs his " Final Smash " attack . Bowser transforms into Giga Bowser , and is near invincible until the effect of the Final Smash wears off . 
 Tabuu ( <unk> , <unk> ) is the villain of Super Smash Bros. Brawl 's story mode , The Subspace Emissary . He is a human @-@ shaped apparition composed of pure energy , with a single eye @-@ shaped object located where a person 's stomach would be . He is able to conjure several weapons for use in battle , including a rapier and large chakram . His other powers include the ability to change his size at will and teleportation . Towards the end of The Subspace Emissary , it is revealed that Tabuu is the entity that controlled Master Hand and the true antagonist behind the events of the story . 
 The Subspace Emissary also features other boss characters . Some of these characters , such as Petey Piranha , Ridley , Porky , and Rayquaza , are from other franchises . Three original bosses are also featured : the aforementioned Tabuu , <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) and Duon ( <unk> , <unk> ) . <unk> is a giant cyborg that is fought two times in The Subspace Emissary . It usually attacks with its fists and body , but can also shoot missiles and transform into a tank @-@ like form . It also has a built in Subspace bomb that it uses to self @-@ destruct in the story mode . Duon is a giant robot that has two upper bodies positioned on top of a wheel . Its pink side uses projectile attacks , while the blue side uses blades on its arms and head . It is created when multiple Mr. Game and Watch clones fuse together . 
 = = = = Other characters = = = = 
 In each of the games , there is a group of characters that resemble the designs for the initial characters . In the Japanese versions of the games , these characters have always been called the " Mysterious Small Fry Enemy Corps " ( <unk> , Nazo no <unk> <unk> Gundan ) . In the English <unk> versions of the games , they are given names that describe their physical form . These include the Fighting Polygon Team , the Fighting Wire Frames , the Fighting Alloy Team and the Fighting Mii Team . Along with Melee 's Adventure Mode came the inclusion of minor , generic enemies , such as Goombas from the Super Mario series and <unk> from The Legend of Zelda series . This trend continues into Super Smash Bros. Brawl , which also includes an assortment of original characters to serve as non @-@ playable generic enemies led by the Subspace Army . 
 The Subspace Army ( <unk> , <unk> ) are the antagonists of Super Smash Bros. Brawl , appearing in The Subspace Emissary and led by the Ancient Minister ( <unk> , <unk> Kyō ) . Their goal is to bring the entire world to Subspace piece by piece with devices called Subspace bombs ( detonated with the aid of two R.O.B.s , requires 3 minutes of waiting time ) . The Sandbag ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ kun ) appears in the " Home @-@ Run Contest " minigame since Super Smash Bros. Melee . The object is to strike it as far as possible with either a Home @-@ Run Bat or a fighting move . Sandbag also appears randomly as an item that drops other items when hit in various other modes in Brawl . 
 = = Music = = 
 Super Smash Bros. features music from some of Nintendo 's popular gaming franchises . While many are newly arranged for the game , some pieces are taken directly from their sources . The music for the Nintendo 64 game was composed by Hirokazu Ando , who later returned as sound and music director in Melee . Melee also features tracks composed by Tadashi Ikegami , <unk> Sakai , and Takuto <unk> . Brawl features the collaboration of 38 composers , including Final Fantasy series composer Nobuo Uematsu , who composed the main theme . Like the previous game in the series , Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U features many original and re @-@ arranged tracks from various different gaming franchises . Both versions have multiple musical tracks that can be selected and listened to using the returning " My Music " feature , including pieces taken directly from earlier Super Smash Bros. titles . The 3DS version features less music altogether than the Wii U version however , and only has two songs per stage because of size limitations . The 3DS version also has a " Play in Sleep Mode " option , allowing players to listen to the game 's music from the sound menu whilst the system is in sleep mode . On August 22 , 2014 , the Super Smash Bros. website revealed the list of composers and arrangers for the game . Various well known musicians such as Masashi Hamauzu , Yuzo Koshiro , Yasunori Mitsuda , Motoi Sakuraba , Yoko Shimomura , Mahito Yokota , along with many others , provided new arrangements for both versions of the game . The original music was created by Bandai Namco 's in @-@ house sound team . The Wii U specific musicians were revealed on October 23 , 2014 , and feature contributions from Akari Kaida , Michiru Yamane , Koji Kondo , Kazumi Totaka , and Hiroshi Okubo , among others . 
 Three soundtrack albums for the series have been released . An album with the original music for Super Smash Bros. was released in Japan by <unk> Records in 2000 . In 2003 , Nintendo released Smashing ... Live ! , a live orchestrated performance of various pieces featured in Melee by the New Japan Philharmonic . A two @-@ disc promotional soundtrack was available for Club Nintendo members who registered both the 3DS and Wii U games between November 21 , 2014 and January 13 , 2015 . 
 = = Development = = 
 Super Smash Bros. was developed by HAL Laboratory , a Nintendo first @-@ party developer , during 1998 . It began as a prototype created by Masahiro Sakurai and Satoru Iwata in their spare time titled " Dragon King : The Fighting Game " , and originally featured no Nintendo characters . However , Sakurai hit on the idea of including fighters from different Nintendo franchises in order to provide " atmosphere " which he felt was necessary for a home console fighting game , and his idea was approved . The game had a small budget and little promotion , and was originally a Japan @-@ only release , but its huge success saw the game released worldwide . 
 HAL Laboratory developed Super Smash Bros. Melee , with Masahiro Sakurai as the head of production . The game was one of the first games released on the GameCube and highlighted the advancement in graphics from the Nintendo 64 . The developers wanted to pay homage to the debut of the GameCube by making an opening full motion video sequence that would attract people 's attention to the graphics . HAL worked with three separate graphic houses in Tokyo to make the opening sequence . On their official website , the developers posted screenshots and information highlighting and explaining the attention to physics and detail in the game , with references to changes from its predecessor . 
 At a pre @-@ E3 2005 press conference , the president of Nintendo , Satoru Iwata , announced the next installment of Super Smash Bros. was not only already in development for their next gaming console , but hoped it would be a launch title with Wi – Fi compatibility for online play . The announcement was unexpected to the creator of the Super Smash Bros. series , Masahiro Sakurai . Back in 2003 , he had left HAL Laboratory , the company that was in charge with the franchises ' development and was never informed of this announcement despite the fact shortly after resigning from the company , Iwata said if a new game was to be made , he would be in charge . It was not until after the conference Sakurai was called to Satoru Iwata 's room on the top floor of a Los Angeles hotel , where he was told by Iwata " We 'd like you to be involved in the production of the new Smash Bros. , if possible near the level of director " . Although Iwata had said he was hoping for it to be a launch title , Sakurai stated " I decided to become director . And as of May 2005 , I was the only member of the new Smash Bros. development team " . Development of the game never actually started until October 2005 , when Nintendo opened a new office in Tokyo just for its production . Nintendo also enlisted outside help from various developer studios , mainly Game Arts . Sakurai also stated that these people had spent excessive amounts of time playing Super Smash Bros. Melee . This team was given access to all the original material and tools from the development of Melee , courtesy of HAL Laboratory . Also , several Smash Bros. staff members that reside around the area of the new office joined the project 's development . 
 On the game 's official Japanese website , the developers explain reasons for making particular characters playable and explain why some characters were not available as playable characters upon release . Initially , the development team wanted to replace Ness with Lucas , the main character of Mother 3 for the Game Boy Advance , but they retained Ness in consideration of delays . The game 's creators have included Lucas in the game 's sequel , Super Smash Bros. Brawl . Video game developer Hideo Kojima originally requested Solid Snake , the protagonist of the Metal Gear series , to be a playable character in Super Smash Bros. Melee , but the game was too far in development for him to be included . As with Lucas , development time allowed for his inclusion in Brawl . Roy and Marth were initially intended to be playable exclusively in the Japanese version of Super Smash Bros. Melee . However , they received favorable attention during the game 's North American localization , leading to the decision for the developers to include them in the Western version . Comparisons have been formed by the developers between characters which have very similar moves to each other on the website . Such characters have been referred to as " clones " in the media . 
 At the Nintendo Media Conference at E3 2007 , it was announced by Nintendo of America president Reggie Fils @-@ Aime that Super Smash Bros. Brawl would be released on December 3 , 2007 in the Americas . However , just 2 months before its anticipated December release , the development team asked for more time to work on the game . During the Nintendo Conference on October 10 , 2007 , Nintendo Co . , Ltd. president Iwata announced the delay . 
 On October 11 , 2007 , George Harrison of Nintendo of America announced that Super Smash Bros. Brawl would be released on February 10 , 2008 in North America . On January 15 , 2008 , the game 's release was pushed back one week in Japan to January 31 and nearly a month in the Americas to March 9 . On April 24 , 2008 , it was confirmed by Nintendo of Europe that Brawl will be released in Europe on June 27 . 
 Director Masahiro Sakurai first announced that a new Super Smash Bros. game was planned for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U at E3 2011 in June 2011 , but development only officially began following the completion of Sakurai 's other project , Kid Icarus : Uprising , in March 2012 . The game was later revealed to be a joint @-@ project between Sora Ltd. and Bandai Namco Games , with various staff members from Bandai Namco 's Soulcalibur and Tekken series assisting Sakurai in development . Sakurai , who was previously the sole person responsible for balance in the series ' multiple fighters , has involved more staff to further improve the game 's competitive balance . The game was officially revealed at E3 2013 on June 11 , 2013 during a Nintendo Direct presentation . Along with screenshots being posted each weekday on the game 's official website and Miiverse community , various cinematic trailers were released , introducing each of the brand new fighters . Sakurai chose to use these trailers , which benefit from Internet sharing , as opposed to including a story campaign similar to the Subspace Emissary mode featured in Brawl , as he believed the impact of seeing the mode 's cinematic cutscenes for the first time was ruined by people uploading said scenes to video sharing websites . 
 At E3 2013 , Sakurai stated that the tripping mechanic introduced in Brawl was removed , with him also stating that the gameplay was between the fast @-@ paced and competitive style of Melee and the slower and more casual style of Brawl . While the games didn 't feature cross @-@ platform play between the Wii U and 3DS , due to each version featuring certain exclusive stages and gamemodes , there is an option to transfer customized characters and items between the two versions . The game builds upon the previous game 's third @-@ party involvement with the addition of third @-@ party characters such as Capcom 's Mega Man and Bandai Namco 's Pac @-@ Man , as well as the return of Sega 's Sonic the Hedgehog . This involvement expands beyond playable characters , as other third @-@ party characters , such as Ubisoft 's Rayman , are also included in the game as trophies . The addition of Mii characters was made in response to the growing number of requests from fans to have their dream characters included in the game . To prevent potential bullying , as well as to maintain game balance online , Mii Fighters cannot be used in online matches against strangers . The decision to release the Wii U version at a later date from the 3DS version was made to allow each version to receive a dedicated debugging period . Hardware limitations on the Nintendo 3DS led to various design choices , such as the removal of mid @-@ match transformations , the absence of the Ice Climbers , and the lack of Circle Pad Pro support . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews for the Super Smash Bros. series are usually positive . The multiplayer mode in every title has been highly praised . However , single player modes have not been viewed as highly . 
 Super Smash Bros. has received praise for its multiplayer mode . Nintendo Power listed the series as being one of the greatest multiplayer experiences in Nintendo history , describing it as infinitely replayable due to its special moves and close @-@ quarters combat . There were criticisms , however , such as the game 's scoring being difficult to follow . In addition , the single @-@ player mode was criticized for its perceived difficulty and lack of features . 
 Super Smash Bros. Melee generally received a positive reception from reviewers , most of whom credited Melee 's expansion of gameplay features from Super Smash Bros. Focusing on the additional features , GameSpy commented that " Melee really scores big in the ' we 've added tons of great extra stuff ' department . " Reviewers compared the game favorably to Super Smash Bros. — IGN 's Fran Mirabella III stated that it was " in an entirely different league than the N64 version " ; GameSpot 's Miguel Lopez praised the game for offering an advanced " classic @-@ mode " compared to its predecessor , while detailing the Adventure Mode as " really a hit @-@ or @-@ miss experience . " Despite a mixed response to the single @-@ player modes , most reviewers expressed the game 's multiplayer mode as a strong component of the game . In their review of the game , GameSpy stated that " you 'll have a pretty hard time finding a more enjoyable multiplayer experience on any other console . " 
 Brawl received a perfect score from the Japanese magazine Famitsu . The reviewers praised the variety and depth of the single @-@ player content , the unpredictability of Final Smashes , and the dynamic fighting styles of the characters . Thunderbolt Games gave the game 10 out of 10 , calling it " a vastly improved entry into the venerable series " . Chris Slate of Nintendo Power also awarded Brawl a perfect score in its March 2008 issue , calling it " one of the very best games that Nintendo has ever produced " . IGN critic Matt Casamassina , in his February 11 Wii @-@ k in Review podcast , noted that although Brawl is a " solid fighter , " it does have " some issues that need to be acknowledged , " including " long loading times " and repetition in The Subspace Emissary . 
 Super Smash Bros. for 3DS and Super Smash Bros. for Wii U both garnered critical praise and were commercially successful , holding current ratings of 85 / 100 and 92 / 100 on Metacritic and 86 @.@ 10 % and 92 @.@ 39 % on GameRankings . Reviewers have particularly noted the large , diverse character roster , the improvements to game mechanics , and the variety of multiplayer options . Some criticisms in the 3DS version include a lack of single player modes and issues concerning the 3DS hardware , such as the size of characters on the smaller screen when zoomed out and latency issues during both local and online multiplayer . There were also reports of players damaging their 3DS Circle Pads while playing the game excessively . The Wii U version 's online play quality was mildly criticized for some inconsistency , but has overall been critically acclaimed . Daniel <unk> of Game Revolution stated " It 's true that Super Smash Bros. evolves every time with regard to new features , items , and characters to choose from . While your favorite character may not return or a few annoying pickups may force you to turn off items altogether , this represents the biggest leap forward Smashers have seen yet . " Daniel Starky at GameSpot criticized the inconsistent online performance in the game , but still called it an " incredible game " , noting " With the Wii U release , Smash Bros. has fully realized its goals . " Jose Otero from IGN , praising the replayability of the game , states " Nearly every aspect of Smash Wii U seems fine @-@ tuned not only to appeal to the nostalgia of long @-@ time Nintendo fans , but also to be accessible to new players . " 
 Super Smash Bros sold 1 @.@ 4 million copies in Japan , and 2 @.@ 3 million in the U.S. Melee sold over 7 million units worldwide , becoming the best @-@ selling GameCube title . Brawl sold 1 @.@ 524 million units in Japan as of March 30 , 2008 , and sold 1 @.@ 4 million units in its first week in the United States , becoming Nintendo of America 's fastest selling title . The 3DS version sold over a million copies in its first weekend on sale in Japan , and has sold more than 3 @.@ 22 million copies worldwide as of October 2014 . Super Smash Bros. for Wii U became the fastest @-@ selling Wii U game to date , selling 3 @.@ 39 million units worldwide within just two months of availability , beating the record previously held by Mario Kart 8 . 
 = = Competitive play = = 
 The Super Smash Bros. series has been widely played as competitive video games and has been featured in several high @-@ profile tournaments . The first publicized Super Smash Bros. Melee tournaments were held in early 2002 . From 2004 to 2007 , Melee was on Major League Gaming 's tournament roster . In 2010 MLG picked up Brawl for its pro circuit for a year . During this time , Nintendo prohibited MLG from live streaming Brawl matches . At 2014 MLG Anaheim Melee was once again hosted at an MLG event . Melee was also included at the Evolution Championship Series ( Evo ) in 2007 , a fighting game tournament held in Las Vegas . Melee was again hosted at Evo 2013 after it won a charity drive to decide the final game to be featured in its tournament lineup . Due to the large turnout and popularity that year , Evo again included a Melee at their 2014 event and plans to do so in 2015 . New Jersey based Apex is another prominent Super Smash Bros. tournament , and has a series of qualifying events that are a prerequisite to playing at Apex . In 2015 Apex announced that they were officially sponsored by Nintendo of America . EVO 2015 was the largest Smash tournament in history and featured Super Smash Bros. for Wii U and Super Smash Bros. Melee with the former having 1 @,@ 926 entrants and the latter having 1 @,@ 869 . 
 = Hyde Park Township , Cook County , Illinois = 
 Hyde Park Township is a former civil township in Cook County , Illinois , United States that existed as a separate municipality from 1861 until 1889 when it was annexed into the city of Chicago . Its borders are Pershing Road ( formerly 39th Street ) on the north , State Street on the west , Lake Michigan and the Indiana state line on the east , and 138th Street and the Calumet River on the south . This region comprised most of what is now known as the South Side of Chicago . 
 During Chicago 's initial explosive growth , it developed from an adjacent rural area to a developed residential , commercial and resort community . However , due to infrastructure limitations , legislative incentives and the lure of better municipal services it , along with numerous adjoining townships , agreed to be annexed into the city of Chicago , creating the largest city in the United States at that time . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The township was founded by Paul Cornell , who paid for a topographical survey of the lakefront south of the city in 1852 . In 1853 , following the advice of Senator Stephen Douglas , he bought 300 acres ( 1 @.@ 21 km2 ) of speculative property between 51st Street and 55th Street and set about developing the first Chicago railroad suburb . This area was 7 miles ( 11 @.@ 27 km ) south of the mouth of the Chicago River and 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 66 km ) south of downtown Chicago . In the 1850s , Chicago was still a walkable urban area well contained within a 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 22 km ) radius of the center . He selected the name Hyde Park to associate the area with the elite neighborhood of Hyde Park in New York as well as the famous royal park in London . By 1855 he began acquiring large land tracts , which he would subdivide into lots for sale in the 1870s . 
 In 1837 , the City of Chicago incorporated , and by the 1870s the surrounding townships had followed suit . After 1850 , Cook County was divided into basic governmental entities , which were designated as townships as a result of the new Illinois Constitution . Illinois 's permissive incorporation law empowered any community of 300 resident citizens to petition the Illinois legislature for incorporation as a municipality under a municipal charter with more extensive powers to provide services and tax local residents . Hyde Park Township was created by the Illinois General Assembly in 1861 within Cook County . This empowered the township to better govern the provision of services to its increasingly suburban residents . 
 = = = Annexation and current status = = = 
 Following the June 29 , 1889 elections , several suburban townships voted to be annexed to the city , which offered better services , such as improved water supply , sewerage , and fire and police protection . Hyde Park Township , however , had installed new waterworks in 1883 just north of 87th Street . Nonetheless , the majority of voters in 1889 supported annexation perhaps because of the city ’ s water system for fire prevention or because of the belief that township government had become too unwieldy . After the 1889 annexation Chicago was able to leverage efficiencies as the largest United States city in area and second largest in population . 
 The township has no current governmental structure or functions , other than being used by the Cook County Assessor 's office for taxation valuation and record keeping purposes . The Hyde Park Historical Society also offers middle school and high school awards with eligibility based on the historical boundaries . Hyde Park was the site of the Columbian Exposition of 1893 , and is also the location of the University of Chicago , which was founded two years after Hyde Park was annexed into Chicago , in 1891 . 
 = = Location = = 
 Hyde Park included the entirety of the following community areas ( see map , below right ) : Hyde Park ( 41 ) , Kenwood ( 39 ) , Woodlawn ( 42 ) , South Shore ( 43 ) , South Chicago ( 46 ) , East Side ( 52 ) , Hegewisch ( 55 ) , Avalon Park ( 45 ) , Calumet Heights ( 48 ) , South Deering ( 51 ) , Burnside ( 47 ) , Pullman ( 50 ) , and Riverdale ( 54 ) as well as the Southern part of Oakland ( 36 ) and the eastern parts of Grand Boulevard ( 38 ) , Washington Park ( 40 ) , Greater Grand Crossing ( 69 ) , Chatham ( 44 ) , Roseland ( 49 ) , and West Pullman ( 53 ) . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 When first created the township had only 350 residents . The creation of the Union Stock Yards in 1865 changed the evolutionary path of Hyde Park and the neighboring Lake Township , which became the industrial center while Hyde Park became the middle class enclave . The population of the township grew from 3 @,@ 600 in 1870 to 15 @,@ 700 ten years later . By 1889 the population had reached 85 @,@ 000 . 
 = Grantham Canal = 
 The Grantham Canal is a canal that runs for 33 miles ( 53 km ) from Grantham , falling through 18 locks to West Bridgford where it joins the River Trent . It was built primarily to allow for the transportation of coal to Grantham . It opened in 1797 , and its profitability steadily increased until 1841 . It was then sold to a railway company , after which it declined , and was finally closed in 1936 . 
 Because it was used as a water supply for agriculture , most of the channel remained in water , although bridges were lowered . Since the 1970s , the Grantham Canal Society have been working towards its restoration , and two stretches are navigable to small vessels . Full restoration will require a new route where the canal joins the Trent , as road building has effectively severed the original route . 
 = = History = = 
 The concept of a canal from the River Trent to Grantham was first raised on 27 August 1791 , as a way of supplying the district with cheaper coal . The intent was for the navigation to join the Trent below Nottingham at Radcliffe @-@ on @-@ Trent . As William Jessop was surveying the Nottingham Canal at the time , he was <unk> to survey the Grantham route as well , and a bill was put before Parliament in 1792 . It was defeated , as there was opposition from coal suppliers , who delivered coal by road to Grantham , and from those who thought that the River Witham would be damaged by the project . A revised route was developed , with the junction now at West Bridgford , and an additional 3 @.@ 6 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 8 km ) branch to Bingham . A second bill was put forward and the act of Parliament received the Royal Assent on 30 April 1793 . Building work on the canal started in 1793 , with Jessop in overall charge , but with James Green and William King as resident engineers : Green , who was from Wollaton , was appointed engineer for the section of canal from the Trent to the Leicestershire border , while King , who was the agent for the Duke of Rutland , was responsible for the rest of the canal , including two reservoirs , one at Denton and the other at <unk> on the River Devon . 
 The act authorised an initial £ 75 @,@ 000 to be raised to pay for construction , together with an option to raise a further £ 30 @,@ 000 , of which £ 20 @,@ 000 should be raised by shares of £ 100 each among the initial subscribers , and £ 10 @,@ 000 by mortgaging the future income of the canal . However , this amount proved insufficient , and there was also disagreement between the shareholders as to their liability to raise the additional £ 20 @,@ 000 . As a result , a second act was sought . This received the Royal Assent on 3 March 1797 , and made clear the obligations of existing shareholders to pay the extra subscription , and also authorised an additional £ 24 @,@ 000 to be raised . The second act also removed restrictions in the first act , and allowed the company to set whatever rates it chose for using the canal . 
 The eastern section from the Leicestershire border was opened on 1 February 1797 , with the rest of the canal later that year . The canal was built with locks 75 by 14 feet ( 22 @.@ 9 by 4 @.@ 3 m ) , the same size as those on the Nottingham Canal to allow boats to use both . The branch to Bingham authorised by the first act was not built . The 18 locks raised the level of the canal by 140 feet ( 43 m ) from the Trent to Grantham . Eleven of them were located in the first 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) above the Trent , after which there was a level pound of around 20 miles ( 32 km ) before a flight of seven locks at Woolsthorpe , and a much shorter upper pound to Grantham . At <unk> , the canal passed through a deep cutting ( effectively crossing the watershed between the River Witham and the River Trent ) , which was only wide enough for a single boat , but this situation was partially rectified in 1801 when the cutting was widened in two places to allow boats travelling on opposite directions to cross . At Cropwell Bishop and Cropwell Butler , the route passed through gypsum beds , which resulted in problems with leakage . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 The canal made sufficient money to repay substantial debts in 1804 and 1805 , after which dividends were paid to the shareholders , beginning at 2 per cent in 1806 , rising to 5 per cent in 1815 , and reaching their highest level of 8 @.@ 6 per cent in 1839 . The tolls brought in an income which remained below £ 9 @,@ 000 until 1823 , but then rose steadily to reach £ 13 @,@ 079 in 1841 . Traffic towards Grantham included coal and coke , lime , groceries and building materials . Some of it supplied villages along the line of the canal , and some of that which travelled the full distance was distributed by land to villages beyond Grantham . Downward traffic was largely agricultural produce , including corn , beans , malt and wool . Such produce was normally loaded at Grantham or Harby . 
 Initially , some of the coal carried on the canal had been transported in boats owned by the canal company , but they had given up this practice in 1812 . They resumed carrying coal in 1827 , because they felt that coal stocks at Grantham were not adequate , but were accused of price @-@ fixing . Although the penalty imposed by Lincoln Assizes was small , they ceased this trade , and the coal merchants agreed to maintain stocks of 2 @,@ 660 tons at Grantham . In 1833 , J. Rofe and his son made a proposal for a canal to connect Grantham and Sleaford , but this was not pursued . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 In common with most canals , competition from railways posed a major threat , and in 1845 the canal owners agreed to sell it to the <unk> , Nottingham , Boston and Eastern Junction Railway when their line from <unk> to Grantham was opened . Although the railway was completed in 1850 , the railway company did not honour the agreement . The canal company brought a large number of cases against the railway company , and successfully opposed several bills which the railway were trying to get passed in Parliament . Eventually the railway company agreed to pay , and shareholders received £ 45 per share in cash , with the balance being in railway mortgages . The agreement was reached on 1 June 1854 , and the transfer of ownership took place on 20 December . Railway mergers meant that the canal came under the control of the Great Northern Railway in 1861 , and later the London and North Eastern Railway . 
 Traffic declined as the railway companies neglected the canal , and were down to 18 @,@ 802 tons in 1905 , on which the tolls amounted to £ 242 and an Act of Parliament was passed in 1936 , formally closing the canal , though there had been no boat traffic since 1929 . The closure act stipulated that water levels should be maintained at 2 feet ( 60 cm ) to support agricultural needs . This effectively guaranteed the continued existence of the canal channel , but structures such as locks and bridges deteriorated , and in the 1950s 46 of the 69 bridges over the canal were lowered as part of road improvement schemes . Although the low bridges act as barriers to navigation , large parts of the canal are still in water . 
 In 1948 Britain 's railways , and hence the canal , were nationalised , and became the responsibility of the British Transport Commission . In 1963 control of the canal passed to British Waterways . Under the terms of the Transport Act 1968 , all waterways within the jurisdiction of British Waterways were classified as commercial , cruising or remainder waterways . Remainder waterways were those that were deemed to have no economic future , and maintenance would only be carried out where failure to do so would create health or safety issues . The Grantham Canal was listed in this latter category . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 A plan to fill in a section of the canal in Nottingham resulted in a number of letters appearing in the local press in 1963 , and a student at Kesteven College produced a report on the state of the canal , which was presented to the Grantham Civic Society . In 1970 , the British Waterways Board attempted to obtain an act of parliament which would have allowed them to cease maintaining the water levels of the canal . The Inland Waterways Association campaigned against the bill , and the clause was amended . The Grantham Canal Society was formed soon afterwards , to promote restoration of the waterway . In 1974 , a National Boat Rally was held at Nottingham , to gain support for the restoration scheme , and to promote the idea of a new link to the Trent , which would pass through old gravel workings . 
 Together with British Waterways , the Inland Waterways Association and the Waterway Recovery Group , the Society began the work of restoration of the canal to navigation , a process which is still ongoing . A major development was the granting of permission in 1992 to remove an old railway embankment , which blocked the route near the top of the Woolsthorpe flight of locks . The task was completed by a number of Waterway Recovery Group <unk> . New gates were fitted to the top three locks , and rebuilding of <unk> bridge was funded by Lincolnshire County Council , opening up 4 @.@ 4 miles ( 7 @.@ 1 km ) of the canal for navigation . Further down the canal , restoration of a 2 @.@ 3 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) section between Hickling Basin and Hose was funded by a derelict land grant of £ 400 @,@ 000 , received in 1993 . The Grantham Canal Partnership was formed in 1997 , as a way to take the project forwards . It consisted of representatives from each of the six local authorities through which the route passes , British Waterways , the Inland Waterways Association , the Grantham Canal Restoration Society and the Grantham Navigation Association , a group which had split off from the Canal Society in 1992 . As a result of the co @-@ operation , British Waterways formulated a draft business plan for the canal . 
 Following the restoration of the top three locks at Woolsthorpe in the 1990s , a 10 @-@ mile ( 16 @-@ km ) section from the A1 to <unk> will be completed once the bottom four locks of the flight are restored . The rebuilding of locks 6 and 7 , completed in 2000 , brought the number of locks restored to five , and approximately one quarter of the canal has been restored to navigable standard . Much improvement of the towpath has also taken place , and access to it is possible at most of the bridges . 
 A major setback occurred in 2007 , when one of the walls of Woolsthorpe top lock had to be propped to prevent it collapsing , and British Waterways took the decision to fill it in , as funding was not available to rebuild it . The Inland Waterways Association received a legacy of £ 100 @,@ 000 from the estate of Fredrick Woodman , designated for the Grantham Canal , but British Waterways ruled that no work could start until the whole cost of £ 175 @,@ 000 had been found . The balance was made up by grants of £ 40 @,@ 000 from Lincolnshire County Council and £ 35 @,@ 000 from the East Midlands Development Agency . The wall was demolished and rebuilt in three sections , utilizing 290 cubic yards ( 220 m3 ) of concrete and 7 @,@ 500 new bricks . 
 Restoration of most of the canal does not present major problems , but challenges are presented by the final sections at both ends . The original route to join the Trent has been severed by the building of the A52 road . A route was identified which followed the course of the <unk> Brook , which passes under the A52 to the north of the canal , but by 2009 , three possible solutions were under consideration . These pose additional problems in finding funding , since they do not count as restoration , and many of the traditional funding sources are not then available . At Grantham , an embankment carrying the A1 road blocks the line of the canal , and the terminal basin has been filled in . There are plans for a tunnel under the A1 as part of a cycle route to improve access to Grantham , and the basin could be redeveloped in due course . 
 There is also a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 km ) dry section between Cotgrave and <unk> , which has presented problems since construction in the 18th century : gypsum in the soil reacted with the waterproof clay leading to leaking . 
 In early 2005 , the Grantham Canal Partnership appointed a full @-@ time Grantham Canal restoration manager , Kevin Mann , for an initial 18 @-@ month trial period . He would be responsible for planning and managing funding schemes for the restoration , identifying development opportunities and the promotion and interpretation of the canal . The trial proved to be successful , as he was still doing the job in 2009 . 
 = = Points of interest = = 
 = = Belvoir tramway = = 
 The Duke of Rutland also constructed a private wagonway or tramway between the wharf at Muston Gorse and Belvoir Castle . It was constructed in 1793 in anticipation of the opening of the canal . It was constructed with fish @-@ belly rail set into stone chairs , some of which , and some wagons , still exist in the castle cellars . The gauge was 4 ft 4 1 ⁄ 2 in ( 1 @,@ 333 mm ) , and the rails were supplied by The Butterley Company . Some are in the collection of the science museum , and the National Railway Museum where there is the chassis of one of the wagons . 
 = Bridgwater and Taunton Canal = 
 The Bridgwater and Taunton Canal is a canal in the south @-@ west of England between Bridgwater and Taunton , opened in 1827 and linking the River Tone to the River Parrett . There were a number of abortive schemes to link the Bristol Channel to the English Channel by waterway in the 18th and early 19th centuries . These schemes followed the approximate route eventually taken by the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal , but the canal was instead built as part of a plan to link Bristol to Taunton by waterway . 
 The early years of operation were marred by a series of legal disputes , which were resolved when the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal Company and the Conservators , who managed the River Tone Navigation , agreed that the Canal Company should take over the Tone Navigation . The canal originally terminated at a basin at Huntworth , to the east of Bridgwater , but was later extended to a floating harbour at Bridgwater Docks on its western edge . Financially this was a disaster , as the extension was funded by a mortgage , and the arrival of the railways soon afterwards started the demise of the canal . The canal was rescued from bankruptcy by the Bristol and Exeter Railway in 1866 . 
 Despite commercial traffic ceasing in 1907 , the infrastructure was maintained in good order , and the canal was used for the transport of potable water from 1962 . The Countryside Act 1968 provided a framework for Somerset County Council to start the restoration of the canal as a leisure facility , which was completed in 1994 , when the canal was reopened throughout . Bridgwater Docks have been restored as a marina , but there is no navigable connection to the River Parrett , as the canal still transports drinking water for the people of Bridgwater . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the building of the canal , navigation between the towns of Bridgwater and Taunton was possible by using the River Parrett and the River Tone . The Tone had been improved by its Conservators , who had obtained Acts of Parliament in 1699 and 1707 , which had allowed them to straighten and dredge the river and parts of the Parrett , and to build locks and half @-@ locks to manage the water levels . The initial work was completed by 1717 , although further improvements including more locks continued to be made until the early 19th century . 
 = = = Precursors = = = 
 From 1768 there were a number of grand schemes proposed , all with the aim of linking the Bristol Channel to the English Channel by a waterway , thereby avoiding the need to navigate by sea around Cornwall and Devon . James Brindley was the first to survey a route , which would have run from the Bristol Channel to Exeter , following the course of the River Tone for part of its route . In 1769 , Robert Whitworth looked at a shorter route from Bridgwater Bay to Seaton , following the River Parrett and the River Axe . He was asked to reassess the route in the 1790s . William Jessop surveyed a route between Taunton and Exeter in 1794 , while another group proposed a canal linking Bristol , Nailsea , Bridgwater and Taunton , which was surveyed by William White . Jessop 's assistant , Josiah Easton , suggested a route from Uphill ( on the Bristol Channel ) to Seaton , again in 1794 , and the previous two schemes sought parliamentary approval as the Grand Western Canal and the Bristol and Western Canal , respectively . Only the first was authorised , but the economic downturn caused by the Napoleonic Wars meant that construction did not begin immediately . 
 John Rennie surveyed the line for a ship canal from the mouth of the River Parrett to Seaton in 1810 , which was designed for ships of 120 long tons ( 120 t ) , but it was felt that the economic situation would not support the projected expenditure of over £ 1 million . He then considered a more modest proposal , based on the original Bristol and Western plans , and the scheme , now renamed the Bristol and Taunton Canal , was authorised by an Act of Parliament dated 14 May 1811 . The company had powers to raise £ 420 @,@ 000 in shares and an additional £ 150 @,@ 000 if required , but economic concerns meant that the project did not start immediately . Powers for the Bristol to Bridgwater section lapsed in 1815 , but work finally commenced in 1822 , to be halted by an injunction because the authorised route was not being followed . A further Act , of 17 June 1824 , authorised the revised route , and changed the name of the project to the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal Company . The predicted costs for the construction of the shorter canal were £ 34 @,@ 145 , as opposed to £ 429 @,@ 990 for the longer scheme . 
 Three further schemes were proposed before the idea of a Channel @-@ to @-@ Channel link was abandoned . James Green proposed a tub @-@ boat canal in 1822 , capable of handling 5 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 5 @.@ 1 t ) boats , which would have used inclines instead of locks , and would have cost £ 120 @,@ 000 . Thomas Telford revived the idea of a ship canal in 1824 , which would have taken over the line of the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal – enabling 200 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 200 t ) boats to reach the south coast – at a cost of £ 1 @.@ 75 million . This was authorised in 1825 , but no further action occurred . Finally , a barge canal between Bridgwater and Beer , costing £ 600 @,@ 000 , was proposed in 1828 , but enthusiasm for large canal schemes was waning , and the advent of iron @-@ hulled steamships meant that the risks of navigation around the south @-@ west peninsula were reduced . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Construction of the canal began in 1822 , with James <unk> as the engineer and John Easton as the senior surveyor . The Bristol and Taunton scheme had incorporated a high @-@ level crossing of the River Parrett , but the shortened canal would now join the Parrett at Huntworth , where a basin was to be constructed . This change of route resulted in the Reverend Robert Gray obtaining an injunction , and work on the lower half of the canal stopped until the new route could be properly authorised by the 1824 Act . By this time , the estimated cost had risen to £ 60 @,@ 000 . Below Durston , the canal was cut into the clay subsoil , the clay forming a naturally waterproof channel ; but from Durston to Taunton the canal bed had to be puddled with clay to make it watertight , as the underlying ground was shale . 
 The canal was to be about 12 miles ( 19 km ) long . It included a 700 @-@ yard ( 640 m ) embankment at Lyng , which was 40 feet ( 12 m ) high , two short cuttings , eleven brick @-@ built bridges to carry roads over the canal , and more than twelve timber swing bridges , built to provide accommodation crossings for farms which had been divided by the line of the canal . The lock at Firepool ( Taunton ) had a set of reverse @-@ facing gates , to prevent the canal draining if the level of the River Tone dropped . There were four more locks on the main line , and a lock at the entrance to Huntworth Basin . One final lock connected the basin to the river , and again it had a set of reverse @-@ facing gates , so that the basin could be drained at low tide , and the low level retained for maintenance if required . A system of paddle gearing – using metal ball weights at the top and metal cylinder weights at the bottom – is unique to the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal . Over fifty culverts were built to carry streams and drainage ditches under the canal . The work was completed with no recorded incidents of serious injury or death among the workforce . 
 By mid @-@ 1826 , the Canal Company had insufficient funds to complete the work , and a special meeting authorised the taking out of a mortgage to cover the £ 15 @,@ 000 deficit . The canal was an obvious competitor to the River Tone Navigation , which was managed by the Conservators of the River Tone , a legal body created for that purpose by Act of Parliament in 1699 . There was animosity between the Company and the Conservators , with the Company maintaining that they had a right to use the Tone to reach the centre of Taunton , and the Conservators maintaining that they did not . The canal was scheduled to be opened on 1 January 1827 , but the opening was delayed until 3 January , as the connection to the River Tone was not made until 2 January . The opening celebrations were hampered by snow and bitter cold weather . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 The early years of the new canal were marred by legal disputes with the Conservators of the River Tone . The connection to the Tone at Taunton had been made forcibly , by the Canal Company breaching the bank of the river . In August 1827 they announced that they were taking over the Tone , and evicted William Goodland , the river superintendent , from his cottage . Despite a ruling by the Court of King 's Bench that their action was illegal , the Canal Company held on to the river until a High Court judgement in February 1830 . The Conservators promptly built a dam , to prevent boats reaching the river and water entering the canal , which they removed after further legal action and an Order of the Chancery Court . Reconciliation finally came in late 1831 , when the two parties proposed a new Act of Parliament to authorise the sale of the Tone Navigation to the Canal Company . This was obtained in July 1832 , and required the Canal Company to erect a new iron bridge to replace the existing North Town Bridge , which hampered access to the wharfs in Taunton . They also had powers to construct a lock and a short length of canal at French Weir , to connect with the Grand Western Canal , while the Conservators were allowed to conduct an annual inspection of the canal , and to resume their ownership of the river if the canal was not maintained in good order . 
 At the Bridgwater end , navigation onto the River Parrett was not easy , and the Corporation of Bridgwater had commissioned a number of surveys to construct a floating harbour . All came to nothing , but in 1836 the Bristol and Exeter Railway Company obtained an Act to construct a railway which would pass through Bridgwater . Subsequently the Canal Company , in order to protect their trade , sought their own Act to construct a floating harbour to the west of Bridgwater , and to extend the canal to join it . This was obtained on 21 April 1837 , and the works were started . The construction work involved a deep cutting from Albert Street to West Street , a short tunnel at West Street . There it entered Bridgwater Docks , which consisted of : 
 Inner basin that covered 4 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) 
 Outer basin covering 0 @.@ 5 acres ( 0 @.@ 20 ha ) 
 The two basins were connected by a lock , whilst towards the river a ship lock consisting of a single 40 @-@ foot ( 12 m ) gate , and a barge lock , consisting of a pair of 14 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) gates . The whole outer basin could be used as a lock by larger ships up to 600 tons . The estimated cost of £ 25 @,@ 000 for the scheme escalated to nearly £ 100 @,@ 000 , most of which was raised by mortgage . 
 The new facilities were opened on 25 March 1841 , after which the basin and locks at Huntworth were filled in . Trade increased from 90 @,@ 000 long tons ( 91 @,@ 000 t ) in 1840 , before the harbour opened , to 120 @,@ 000 long tons ( 120 @,@ 000 t ) shortly afterwards . Around 2 @,@ 400 vessels per year were using the port by 1853 . The Canal Company had hoped that the opening of the Grand Western Canal in 1838 and the Chard Canal in 1842 would increase traffic significantly , but their impact was marginal . Despite commercial success , the interest payments on the mortgage were crippling , and in 1846 the company obtained an Act to convert the canal into a railway , although its powers were never used . Trade halved as railway competition increased , and the company was in the hands of receivers by the early 1850s . 
 In 1866 the Bristol and Exeter Railway stepped in and bought the canal . The main attraction was the dock , with its large volume of coal traffic , but they purchased both the canal and the dock for £ 64 @,@ 000 , under the terms of an Act of Parliament obtained that year , which included a requirement that there should always be " a good and sufficient water communication between the towns of Taunton and Bridgwater " . Unlike many such acquisitions , the canal was seen as a useful adjunct to the railway network , and was maintained in good order for several years , with the Conservators of the River Tone continuing their annual inspections , and reporting any defects to the railway company . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 The canal was increasingly affected by water supply problems . The main source of water was the River Tone , although this was not fed into the canal at Firepool , in order to ensure that the mills on the upper section could function . Instead water was pumped out of the river at Creech , by the Charlton Pumping Station , where the river and canal were only 300 yards ( 270 m ) apart . Large volumes of water were discharged from the canal every fortnight , when the Bridgwater Dock was scoured , in order to free it from silt , while the Railway Company was extracting water to supply the station and steam locomotive sheds at Taunton . During the summer months there was often not enough water to go round . 
 The canal gradually became clogged with weed , and the railway took much of the trade . Between 1870 and 1874 , income dropped from £ 2 @,@ 500 to £ 1 @,@ 700 . Three years later , the Bristol and Exeter Railway merged with the Great Western Railway . The new owners were remote , and were more interested in the water supply for Taunton station and for the Bridgwater Dock , than running the canal as a going concern , with the result that the canal deteriorated further . The Conservators continued their annual inspections , but had little hope of any improvements being made . 
 The opening by the Great Western Railway of the Severn Tunnel in 1886 brought further decline , for the imports of coal and slate from South Wales to Bridgwater Dock and the canal could now be moved more directly . The provision in 1902 of water troughs on the railway near Creech , to enable non @-@ stop trains to pick up water , required another 100 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 450 m3 ) a day , which was extracted from the Tone . The remaining traffic moved to the railway , the last commercial boats used the canal , from Bridgwater dock to a wharf in North Town , Taunton , in 1907 , and the canal was effectively closed . 
 = = = Closure = = = 
 After the First World War the canal remained in a state of limbo – with minimal maintenance by the railway company – and was the haunt of fishermen and walkers . The Conservators continued their annual inspections , and the infrastructure remained in remarkably good order , compared to many other closed canals . The section near Creech St Michael was even used for swimming lessons for the local school children in the 1930s . 
 During the Second World War the route of the canal was employed as part of the Taunton Stop Line , a defensive line which followed the course of canals and railway embankments from the mouth of the Parrett to Seaton on the south coast . All permanent bridges were mined with demolition chambers . Hamp Bridge was prepared for demolition with four small charge chambers under the east side of the arch containing a total of 30 lb ( 14 kg ) of the explosive , ammonal . Anti @-@ tank obstacles were placed at bridge sites or locks to hinder bridging operations . All of the swing bridges were removed , but were then replaced with fixed timber bridges at towpath level . Only essential maintenance was carried out , to ensure a water supply for fire @-@ fighting and to prevent flooding . Although the physical structure of the canal was not damaged by enemy action , all of the Company records and traffic receipts , together with those of the Bristol and Exeter Railway , were destroyed during a bombing raid . 
 Control of the canal passed into public ownership with the Transport Act 1947 . Despite concerted efforts , the Conservators could not make any progress with the removal of the fixed low @-@ level bridges , which prevented maintenance from being carried out . The Inland Waterways Association started to take an active interest in the restoration of the canal from 1952 , but this was resisted by the British Transport Commission , who padlocked the lock gates to prevent them being used . Despite this , a team of seven men was employed to maintain the infrastructure through this period . The maintenance of the channel enabled the canal to become one of the first to be used for the commercial transport of water , which was pumped from the canal to Durleigh reservoir from 1962 onwards . 
 The canal was absorbed by the British Waterways Board in 1962 . The Conservators carried out an annual inspection in 1965 , the first since 1947 , but had to use a motor coach for most of the journey , as the locks were unusable . With the passing of the Transport Act 1968 , the canal was classified as a remainder waterway – little more than a drainage channel . Only essential maintenance to keep it safe was to be carried out . Soon afterwards , part of the cutting wall between West Street and Albert Street collapsed , and although the bed of the canal was cleared to ensure water could reach the dock , the towpath remained blocked for another nine years . Bridgwater Docks , which had been used by a small amount of coastal shipping , were finally closed in 1971 : the connection at the docks was stopped up , and the British Waterways Board were granted permission to cease maintaining the canal for navigation . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 From the late 1960s , there was a growing awareness of the benefits of retaining the canal . The Inland Waterways Association produced a report , entitled The Bridgwater and Taunton Canal - Waterway with a Future , suggesting that the canal had the potential for development as a linear Country Park , and the County Planning Officer for Somerset County Council produced a second report , suggesting that funds should be made available for maintenance and restoration , which the County Council duly adopted . The Countryside Act 1968 provided a framework for such action , and a visit in 1971 to see the work being done on the Monmouthshire and Brecon Canal as part of the creation of the Brecon Beacons National Park convinced the Council of the wisdom of such a course of action . By 1974 , Higher and Lower Maunsel locks , which are listed buildings , had been refurbished by the British Waterways Board , with funding from the County Council . Funding for towpath maintenance and weed cutting was also provided . 
 In December 1974 , the Council bought Bridgwater Dock from British Railways . The concrete wall across the barge lock was removed , but there was no intention to restore the ship lock . By 1980 , the Council had invested over £ 50 @,@ 000 in the restoration , which included Kings and Standards locks , and the bottom gates of Newtown Lock . Some bridges had been raised , but only to 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) , which allowed canoeing , but prevented bigger boats from using the waterway . Work on the deep cutting between West Street and Albert Street started in September 1978 , jointly funded by the County Council and Sedgemoor District Council , using direct labour , while a Manpower Services Commission scheme to dredge the canal from the dock to the cutting and to widen the towpath was funded by the District Council in 1981 . 
 The condition of the swing bridge at Bathpool caused a change in policy . There were objections to the plan to replace it with a fixed bridge with limited headroom , and the planning application was deferred . By 1983 , a six @-@ year plan to restore the canal was fully costed , and it was adopted by the British Waterways Board , the County Council , Sedgemoor District Council and Taunton Deane Borough Council in the following year . The scheme was supported by the West Country Branch of the Inland Waterways Association , who offered the services of the Waterway Recovery Group , to do some of the work . The swing bridges at <unk> , Boat and Anchor , and <unk> were rebuilt , and by 1987 , 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) of canal were available for navigation . After some teething problems , it was decided that many of the rest of the accommodation bridges would be raised to give 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) of headroom , rather than rebuilding them as swing bridges . Restoration of the bridges at the Taunton end continued during the early 1990s , and the canal was finally re @-@ opened in 1994 . 
 = = Current use = = 
 Boating on the canal is encouraged , although the lack of a link to the River Parrett at Bridgwater is restrictive . At this point , the Parrett is a salt water river , and is laden with silt , whereas the canal contains fresh water . Not only is there a risk of silt entering the canal , but the salt water cannot be allowed to contaminate the fresh , as the canal is still used for the transport of drinking water for the population of Bridgwater . The canal forms part of the local flood relief system , in winter taking water from the River Tone at Taunton and discharging it into the Parrett at a sluice in the western fringe of Bridgwater , near the Bridgwater <unk> Centre . 
 Bridgwater Docks , in which the tidal basin , locks , quaysides , bridges and fittings are listed buildings , is now a marina , and the old warehouse , built in 1840 – 50 has been converted into apartments , with new apartment blocks built nearby . The only commercially active industry located at the docks is <unk> 's Animal Feed Mill . The towpath forms part of Sustrans ' National Cycle Network route NCR @-@ 3 connecting Bath and Cornwall , and attracts numerous travellers . Plans have been proposed for the upgrading of the towpath and development of a visitor centre at Maunsel . 
 = = The Somerset Space Walk = = 
 The Taunton @-@ Bridgwater canal is also home to an installation termed the ' Somerset Space Walk ' , a scale model ( 530 million : 1 ) of the Solar System centred around the ' Sun ' at Maunsel lock with the planets located along the towpath in both directions . The Space Walk was designed by local man , Pip Youngman , in order to demonstrate the scale of the Solar System in an interactive way . The trail can be walked either from Taunton 's Brewhouse Theatre to Maunsel Lock ( Pluto to the Sun ) or from Bridgwater 's Morrison 's Supermarket to Maunsel Lock ( also Pluto to the Sun ) or of course , vice versa . From Pluto to the Sun from either town is an 11 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) walk . 
 = = Route = = 
 = HMS Royal Sovereign ( 1891 ) = 
 HMS Royal Sovereign was the lead ship of the seven ships in her class of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Royal Navy in the 1890s . The ship was commissioned in 1892 and served as the flagship of the Channel Fleet for the next five years . She was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1897 and returned home in 1902 , and was briefly assigned as a coast guard ship before she began a lengthy refit in 1903 – 04 . Royal Sovereign was reduced to reserve in 1905 and was taken out of service in 1909 . The ship was sold for scrap four years later and subsequently broken up in Italy . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The design of the Royal Sovereign @-@ class ships was derived from that of the Admiral @-@ class ironclad battleships , greatly enlarged to improve seakeeping and to provide space for a secondary armament as in the preceding Trafalgar @-@ class ironclad battleships . The ships displaced 14 @,@ 150 long tons ( 14 @,@ 380 t ) at normal load and 15 @,@ 580 long tons ( 15 @,@ 830 t ) at deep load . They had a length between perpendiculars of 380 feet ( 115 @.@ 8 m ) and an overall length of 410 feet 6 inches ( 125 @.@ 1 m ) , a beam of 75 feet ( 22 @.@ 9 m ) , and a draught of 27 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 4 m ) . Their crew consisted of 670 officers and ratings . 
 The Royal Sovereigns were powered by a pair of three @-@ cylinder , vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft . Her Humphrys & Tennant engines were designed to produce a total of 11 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 8 @,@ 200 kW ) and a maximum speed of 17 @.@ 5 knots ( 32 @.@ 4 km / h ; 20 @.@ 1 mph ) using steam provided by eight cylindrical boilers with forced draught . Royal Sovereign was the first ship of the class to be completed , and was put through a lengthy set of steam trials of which only a few sets of figures have survived . She made 16 @.@ 41 knots ( 30 @.@ 39 km / h ; 18 @.@ 88 mph ) over eight hours from 9 @,@ 661 ihp ( 7 @,@ 204 kW ) using normal draught and 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) over three hours from 13 @,@ 360 ihp ( 9 @,@ 960 kW ) using forced draught . Some of her boiler tubes were observed to crack and leak under the pressures involved ; as a result , the Navy decided not to push the boilers of the Royal Sovereign class past 11 @,@ 000 ihp to prevent similar damage . The ships carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 420 long tons ( 1 @,@ 443 t ) of coal , which gave them a range of 4 @,@ 720 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 740 km ; 5 @,@ 430 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Their main armament consisted of four breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 343 mm ) guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun barbettes , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . Each gun was provided with 80 rounds . Their secondary armament consisted of ten quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns . 200 rounds per gun were carried by the ships . Sixteen QF 6 @-@ pounder ( 2 @.@ 2 in ( 57 mm ) ) and a dozen QF 3 @-@ pounder ( 1 @.@ 9 in ( 47 mm ) ) Hotchkiss guns were fitted for defence against torpedo boats . The two 3 @-@ pounders in the upper fighting top were removed in 1903 – 04 and all of the remaining light guns from the lower fighting tops and main deck followed in 1905 – 09 . The Royal Sovereign @-@ class ships mounted seven 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes , although Royal Sovereign had four of hers removed in 1903 – 04 . 
 The Royal Sovereigns ' armour scheme was similar to that of the Trafalgars , as the waterline belt of compound armour only protected the area between the barbettes . The 14 – 18 @-@ inch ( 356 – 457 mm ) belt and transverse bulkheads 14 – 16 inches ( 356 – 406 mm ) thick closed off the ends of the belt . Above the belt was a strake of 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) Harvey armour closed off by 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) oblique bulkheads . The barbettes were protected by compound armour , ranging in thickness from 11 to 17 inches ( 279 to 432 mm ) and the casemates for the 6 @-@ inch guns were protected by an equal thickness of armour . The thicknesses of the armour deck ranged from 2 @.@ 5 to 3 inches ( 64 to 76 mm ) . The walls of the forward conning tower were 12 – 14 inches ( 305 – 356 mm ) thick and the aft conning tower was protected by 3 @-@ inch plates . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The Royal Sovereign class was ordered as part of the Naval Defence Act 1889 that was a supplement to the normal naval estimates . Royal Sovereign , the seventh ship of her name to serve with the Royal Navy , was laid down on 30 September 1889 in a drydock because Portsmouth Dockyard lacked a slipway long enough to accommodate her . The ship was floated out of dock on 26 February 1891 and christened by Queen Victoria . She completed her sea trials in May 1892 and was commissioned on 31 May at a cost of £ 913 @,@ 986 . Royal Sovereign relieved the battleship HMS Camperdown as flagship of the Channel Squadron . From then until 13 August 1892 , she served as the flagship of the " Red Fleet " in the annual manoeuvres off the coast of Ireland . She reprised her role as the flagship of the Red Fleet , from 27 July to 6 August 1893 during the manoeuvres in the Irish Sea and the Western Approaches . To reduce her rolling , she was fitted with bilge keels in 1894 – 95 . In June 1895 , Royal Sovereign and three of her sister ships were part of a British naval squadron that attended the opening of the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal in Germany . During the third week of July 1896 , the ship took part in annual manoeuvres in the Irish Sea and off the southwest coast of England as part of " Fleet A " . 
 On 7 June 1897 , Royal Sovereign paid off and her crew was transferred to the battleship Mars which relieved her in the Channel Squadron . The next day , she recommissioned to relieve the battleship Trafalgar in the Mediterranean Sea . Before departing for the Mediterranean , she took part in the Fleet Review for the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria at Spithead on 26 June 1897 , and from 7 – 11 July took part in annual manoeuvres off the coast of Ireland . She finally departed England for the Mediterranean in September . Upon arrival , Royal Sovereign joined the Mediterranean Fleet . On 18 January 1899 , Rear @-@ Admiral Gerard Noel , Second @-@ in @-@ Command of the Mediterranean Fleet , hoisted his flag aboard the ship and Captain Charles Henry Adair was appointed in command two days later . The following month the ship toured Italian waters , visiting Naples , Genoa , Palermo and Syracuse . On 14 July , she visited Fiume ( modern Rijeka ) , Croatia , in company with four other battleships , departing five days later . On the 28th , one man was killed aboard Royal Sovereign in a gun accident and he was buried at sea that evening . 
 On 9 November 1901 , off Greece , one of her six @-@ inch guns exploded when the breech was not fully closed , killing one officer and five Royal Marines and injuring one officer ( Sir Robert Keith Arbuthnot , 4th Bt ) and 19 seamen . Captain Frederick Inglefield was appointed in command on 26 November 1901 . After being relieved in the Mediterranean by the battleship London , Royal Sovereign departed Gibraltar on 9 July 1902 , arriving at Portsmouth , England , on 14 July 1902 . On 30 August 1902 , she commissioned under Captain George Primrose as a coast guard ship there . From 5 – 9 August 1903 , the ship participated in manoeuvres off the coast of Portugal . From 1903 to 1904 , she underwent an extensive refit at Portsmouth during which six @-@ inch armoured casemates were added for the six @-@ inch guns . On 9 February 1907 , Royal Sovereign commissioned as a special service vessel in reserve . As such , she was incorporated into the 4th Division of the Home Fleet with other such vessels in April 1909 . In September 1909 , Royal Sovereign was taken out of service and she was sold for scrap to G. Clarkson & Son for £ 40 @,@ 000 on 7 October 1913 . They resold her to GB <unk> of Genoa and the ship was demolished there . 
 = William of York = 
 William of York ( late 11th century – 8 June 1154 ) , also known as William fitzHerbert , William I fitzHerbert and William of <unk> , was an English priest and Archbishop of York . William has the unusual distinction of having been Archbishop of York twice , both before and after his rival Henry Murdac . He was a relative of King Stephen of England , and the king helped secure FitzHerbert 's election to York after a number of candidates had failed to secure papal confirmation . William faced opposition from the Cistercians who , after the election of the Cistercian Pope Eugene III , managed to have the archbishop deposed in favour of the Cistercian Murdac . From 1147 until 1153 , William worked to secure his restoration to York , which he finally achieved after the deaths of both Murdac and Eugene III . He did not retain the see long , as he died shortly after returning to York , allegedly having been poisoned . After William 's death miracles were reported at his tomb from the year 1177 onwards , and in the year 1227 he was declared a saint . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born William fitzHerbert in York , William was the son of Herbert of Winchester , or Herbert <unk> , chancellor and treasurer of King Henry I. Most sources say his mother was Emma , half @-@ sister of King Stephen and Henry of Blois , Bishop of Winchester , and that she was an illegitimate daughter of Stephen II , Count of Blois , Stephen 's father . New research , however , suggests that Emma might have been a daughter of Hunger <unk> , who held lands in Dorset in the Domesday survey . William was born sometime before the 1090s , but the exact date of birth is unknown . 
 William held the prebendary of Weighton in the diocese of Yorkshire between 27 June 1109 and 24 February 1114 . Sometime between 1109 and 1114 he was appointed Treasurer of York . He was also appointed archdeacon of the East Riding of Yorkshire at an unknown date between 1125 and 1133 . The influence of his rich and powerful father , who had many landholdings in Yorkshire may have been of benefit in gaining him these offices at a relatively early age . William apparently held both of these offices until his election as archbishop . Serving under Archbishop Thurstan of York , William became involved in Thurstan 's dispute with King Henry I after Henry demanded that the Archbishops of York should accept subordination to the Archbishops of Canterbury . William accompanied Thurstan into exile in Europe and on embassies to the papal court . Reconciliation with Henry allowed a return to York in 1121 . A papal ruling in favour of the independence of the Archbishops of York was finally delivered in 1127 . 
 = = Election problems = = 
 In January 1141 William was elected Archbishop of York . Originally , the cathedral chapter of York had elected Waltheof in 1140 , but that election was set aside because one of Waltheof 's supporters had made an uncanonical gift to secure Waltheof 's election . Then Henry of Blois tried to secure the see for Henry de Sully , another nephew of Stephen and Henry 's . Sully 's election was opposed by Pope Innocent II , who refused to confirm him as archbishop while he retained his post as Abbot of Fécamp . It was only at a third election , held in January 1141 , that William was selected . Whether he had been a candidate in the previous two elections is unknown . 
 The election was opposed by the Cistercian monasteries of Yorkshire , and by the archdeacons of York . The Cistercians opposed on the grounds that the Second Lateran Council in 1139 had given the religious houses of a diocese the right to participate in the election of the bishop . Theobald of Bec , the Archbishop of Canterbury , refused to recognise William 's election due to allegations of simony , or the acquisition of church positions by bribery , and of interference by King Stephen . In 1143 , Pope Innocent II ruled that FitzHerbert could be confirmed in office if he swore under oath that the allegations were false . After he swore the oath , Henry of Blois , who was also papal legate , found William innocent , and he was consecrated as archbishop on 26 September 1143 . 
 = = First archiepiscopate and deposition = = 
 As archbishop , William undertook a number of ecclesiastical reforms , and became popular with the people of York . However , he still needed a pallium , the sign of an archbishop 's authority from the pope , which he had not yet received . The Cistercians , who were still adamantly opposed his being archbishop , were determined to prevent his receiving it . William travelled to Rome in an attempt to obtain the pallium . The election of Pope Eugene III , a Cistercian , in 1145 , was a setback for FitzHerbert 's cause . Bernard of Clairvaux , the famous Cistercian abbot and religious leader , exerted all his influence to ensure William 's suspension , sending a series of complaints to the new pope that William had been intruded by secular powers into the see , that he was oppressing the Cistercian monasteries and that he had irregularly appointed William of St. Barbara as Dean of York . In the winter of 1145 – 46 Eugene re @-@ examined the case , declared that William had not been validly consecrated , and suspended him from office . William was required to obtain an in @-@ person refutation of the old charges by William of St. Barbara , who was now the Bishop of Durham . 
 While awaiting the final decision in his case , William took up residence with one of his friends , Roger II , King of Sicily . Hearing of his suspension , some of William 's supporters in York launched a damaging attack upon Fountains Abbey which destroyed many of the buildings . William was formally deposed as archbishop by Eugene in early 1147 and the deposition was confirmed at the Council of Reims on 21 March 1148 . Another election to York was held , and the candidates included Hilary of Chichester who was the king 's candidate , and Henry Murdac , the Cistercian abbot of Fountains Abbey . Murdac 's supporters included the Cistercians and most of the clergy of the diocese , including William 's former ally , William of St. Barbara . Both sides appealed to the pope , and the pope confirmed Murdac as the successful candidate . FitzHerbert then returned to Winchester , the city he had left forty years earlier to begin his career in York . 
 = = Second archiepiscopate = = 
 King Stephen refused to accept William 's deposition and the appointment of Murdac , and prevented Murdac from taking up residence in York . Stephen probably wished to trade recognition of Murdac for support for his son Eustace . Stephen was trying to secure the coronation of Eustace as his successor during his own lifetime , to defeat the rival claims to the throne of Henry of Anjou . Within a few years , however , both Murdac and the pope had died , so William travelled to Rome to plead with the new pope , Anastasius IV , for restoration to office . The pope concurred , and William 's reappointment was confirmed on 20 December 1153 . On his return to York , while crossing the Ouse Bridge in York in triumphal procession , the bridge collapsed , yet no one was killed . 
 = = Death and sainthood = = 
 However , after less than a month back in York , William died , on 8 June 1154 , allegedly due to poison administered in the chalice at Mass . One of FitzHerbert 's clerks accused Osbert de Bayeux , an archdeacon of York , of the murder , and Osbert was summoned before the king to be tried at the royal court . Before the trial could take place , however , Stephen died , and the trial never took place . William was buried in York Minster and within a few months of his death , miracles were attributed to his intervention and a sweet smell came from his tomb when it was damaged during a fire . Nor was the body decayed or burnt in the fire . Pope Honorius III then ordered an investigation into the miracles . In 1227 , he was canonised in Rome by Pope Honorius III . 
 William 's feast day is celebrated on 8 June , the day of his death , although his veneration is largely localised to York . Traditional iconography and windows often depict William 's crossing of the Tweed ; some iconography shows him crossing in a boat . William 's coat of arms traditionally depicts seven <unk> or lozenges . St William 's College , which was named for him is next to York Minster . It was established between 1465 and 1467 with the permission of King Edward IV as the home for chantry priests of the Cathedral . His remains were rediscovered in the 1960s and are now in the crypt at York Minster . 
 = Ontario Highway 136 = 
 King 's Highway 136 , commonly referred to as Highway 136 , was a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario that connected former Highway 24 near Caledon with Highway 9 in Orangeville . The majority of the route was located in the Regional Municipality of Peel ; however , the section in Orangeville was in Dufferin County . The route of Highway 136 was originally part of Highway 24 ; it was created in 1962 when Highway 24 was rerouted along Highway 51 . The highway remained unchanged until 1997 , when it was transferred to the Regional Municipality of Peel and the Town of Orangeville . 
 The majority of the former highway is rural in nature , passing through farmland on the highlands of the Niagara Escarpment , located a short distance south of the southern terminus of the route . Near its northern terminus , the surrounds are suburban as the highway enters Orangeville . The only notable community on the route outside of Orangeville is Alton . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 136 was a short route through the northern section of Caledon . The former route is mostly rural , surrounded by the expanse of farmland that sits atop the Niagara Escarpment . The route follows several concession roads along its length , and is known locally by the names of those roads today . It begins at a junction with former Highway 24 ( Charleston Sideroad ) immediately north of Forks of the Credit Provincial Park , which straddles the escarpment northwest of Brampton . The route proceeds northwest alongside the Charles Sauriol Conservation Area for approximately 3 @.@ 75 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 33 mi ) before entering the community of Alton . Within Alton , the route follows Main Street until a broad 90 ° curve directs traffic northeast onto Queen Street . It follows this road out of the community , encountering a railway crossing and the Credit River at the town limits . 
 The route takes another 90 ° curve to the northwest , intersecting Porterfield Road , after which the route takes that name . It crosses the same railway line and proceeds north for 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) between farm fields . South of Orangeville , the route intersects the Orangeville Bypass ( Riddell Road ) , after which the farmland transitions to suburbs . It takes a broad curves to the northeast and becomes Townline Road , which acts as the boundary between Peel Region and Dufferin County as well as the town limits of Orangeville . After following this road for a kilometre , it intersects John Street . The final section of the route follows John Street northwest to end at former Highway 9 ( Broadway ) . 
 = = History = = 
 While the route dates back to 1962 as Highway 136 , it is a former alignment of Highway 24 , which was re @-@ routed along Highway 51 towards Highway 10 that year . The road was first designated on February 10 , 1937 as part of an extension of Highway 24 north from Guelph to Collingwood via Orangeville . Highway 136 was a gravel road at the time of the renumbering . The section between Cataract and Alton was paved first , in 1965 ; this was followed by the section between Alton and Orangeville in 1966 . 
 The primary purpose of Highway 136 as a provincial highway was to maintain the former routing of Highway 24 . However , as the route served a generally local and regional need , the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario transferred responsibility for signage and maintenance of the highway to the Regional Municipality of Peel and Town of Orangeville on April 1 , 1997 , at which point the majority of it was designated Peel Regional Road 25 . To avoid confusing motorists and to make the regional route numbers consistent with former provincial route numbers , Peel redesignated several roads on March 26 , 1998 . Regional Road 25 was renumbered as Regional Road 136 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 136 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = M @-@ 78 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 78 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan . The western terminus is the intersection with M @-@ 66 north of Battle Creek in <unk> Township . The roadway runs 10 @.@ 744 miles ( 17 @.@ 291 km ) through rural farmland and the community of Bellevue as it approaches its eastern terminus at an interchange with Interstate 69 ( I @-@ 69 ) near Olivet . The highway is used by between 3 @,@ 100 and 5 @,@ 300 vehicles on a daily basis . 
 When the state highway system was signed in 1919 , M @-@ 78 followed a similar routing . At Bellevue , it turned northeast to terminate at Charlotte . In the 1920s , the highway was extended southerly to the Indiana state line near Sturgis and northeasterly into the Lansing area . In the 1930s , M @-@ 78 was extended further on its northern and eastern end to Flint . The highway was converted into a freeway in sections starting in the 1960s . During that decade , the southern extension from the 1920s was removed from M @-@ 78 and added to other state highways , and in the 1970s , the northeastern extensions , now mostly freeways , were removed from M @-@ 78 as well . Two special routes were created as a result of the various reroutings in the Lansing area , both of which are no longer part of the state highway system . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 78 begins at an intersection with M @-@ 66 in <unk> Township , north of Battle Creek in Calhoun County . The trunkline passes through rural farm lands as it runs due east and northeast . It briefly crosses the southeast corner of Barry County as it enters Eaton County . There M @-@ 78 follows Battle Creek Highway past some small ponds and into the town of Bellevue . The trunkline becomes Capitol Avenue in town and turns south onto Main Street in the middle of the central business district . M @-@ 78 crosses a branch line of the Canadian National Railway before leaving town . Main Street turns easterly and becomes Butterfield Highway . M @-@ 78 crosses the Battle Creek River before terminating at I @-@ 69 's exit 48 in Bellevue Township . 
 M @-@ 78 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 78 were the 5 @,@ 256 vehicles daily on Capitol Avenue in Bellevue ; the lowest counts were the 3 @,@ 176 vehicles per day in Calhoun County . No part of M @-@ 78 has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 When the original state highway system was designated c . July 1 , 1919 , M @-@ 78 ran along a route similar that of today . It started north of Battle Creek at a junction with then M @-@ 79 and cut through the corner of Barry County to Bellevue , but it turned northeasterly to end at Charlotte at a junction with M @-@ 29 . By 1927 , M @-@ 78 was extended southward , replacing M @-@ 79 to the Indiana state line , connecting with State Road 9 ( SR 9 ) south of Sturgis . At the same time , a northerly addition extended the highway concurrently along US Highway 27 ( US 27 ) to Dewitt and then solo to a junction with M @-@ 47 near Pittsburg . The section north of Lansing was changed in 1929 . The section from Dewitt Pittsburg was redesignated M @-@ 104 , and M @-@ 78 was extended through East Lansing to Haslett . By 1936 , the highway was extended all the way into Flint to end at M @-@ 21 . Around the same time , a second routing through downtown Lansing for US 27 / M @-@ 78 was designated along Capitol Avenue ; the former route along Main , Kalamazoo and Larch streets and Grand Avenue was given the Truck M @-@ 78 designation . 
 In the latter half of 1941 or the beginning of 1942 , a section of the concurrent M @-@ 78 / M @-@ 86 was rerouted west of Colon in St. Joseph County . In 1950 , the bridge across the Grand River on Main Street was completed ; after completion , the mainline M @-@ 78 was routed over the bridge and up Larch Street , replacing Truck M @-@ 78 in the process . The former car @-@ only route on Capitol Avenue was removed from the state highway system . By the middle of 1960 , the first section of freeway along M @-@ 78 was opened in the Lennon area . The next year , the freeway had been extended as far southwest as Durand from the end at Lennon . By the start of 1962 , M @-@ 78 was a freeway from Perry at the junction with M @-@ 47 all the way to Swartz Creek near Flint . 
 On December 12 , 1962 , the I @-@ 96 freeway was completed around the south and west sides of Lansing , and a year later , the I @-@ 496 freeway was completed north into downtown from I @-@ 96 . M @-@ 78 was rerouted from the I @-@ 96 / US 27 interchange southwest of Lansing east along I @-@ 96 and then north on I @-@ 496 . From there , M @-@ 78 followed the one @-@ way pairing of Homer and Howard streets from the northern end of the freeway up to the one @-@ way couplet of Saginaw Street and Grand River Avenue , returning to its previous routing . The former route through downtown along US 27 was redesignated Business M @-@ 78 ( Bus . M @-@ 78 ) at the same time . 
 M @-@ 66 was extended southerly from Assyria through Battle Creek to the Indiana state line replacing sections of M @-@ 78 in 1965 . The US 127 freeway was completed from Mason north to Lansing in 1966 , adding the US 127 designation along the I @-@ 496 / M @-@ 78 freeway . The next year , M @-@ 78 's freeway was extended eastward to I @-@ 75 / US 10 / US 23 in Flint . The US 127 / M @-@ 78 freeway was extended north of I @-@ 496 in 1969 , and a discontinuous section of M @-@ 78 freeway east of Flint was completed around the same time frame . In 1970 , the I @-@ 496 freeway was completed and the Bus . M @-@ 78 designation was removed through Lansing . In 1972 , the highway was rerouted to run east of Bellevue to Olivet instead of northeast to Charlotte . The next year , all of M @-@ 78 northeast of Olivet was removed when I @-@ 69 between Charlotte and I @-@ 96 southwest of Lansing was completed ; this truncation produced the modern routing of M @-@ 78 in the state . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Related routes = = 
 = = = Truck route = = = 
 Truck M @-@ 78 was a former truck route through the city of Lansing . It started at the corner of Capitol Avenue and Main Street and ran along Main Street to Grand Avenue . There , it turned north on Grand Avenue to Kalamazoo Street and turned east on Kalamazoo over the Grand River . At Larch Street , Truck M @-@ 78 continued north to rejoin the mainline at the corner of Larch and Saginaw streets . 
 By the middle of 1936 , the US 27 / M @-@ 78 routing through Lansing was split into two . The mainline was restricted to cars only and moved to run along Capitol Avenue . The former routing was restricted to trucks only and designed as a truck route . In 1950 , the bridge for Main Street over the Grand River was completed and mainline US 27 was rerouted to use it to connect to Larch Street . From there north , US 27 / M @-@ 78 followed Larch Street supplanting the truck route , which was decommissioned at that time . 
 = = = Business route = = = 
 Business M @-@ 78 ( Bus . M @-@ 78 ) was a business loop through the city of Lansing . It ran from an interchange between US 27 / M @-@ 78 and I @-@ 96 on the southwest side of Lansing along US 27 ( Lansing Road ) into downtown . From there , it ran east on Main Street and north on Larch Street . At Saginaw Street , Bus . M @-@ 78 turned east to reconnect to M @-@ 78 . 
 The business loop was created in 1963 when M @-@ 78 was rerouted along the newly completed sections of the I @-@ 96 and I @-@ 496 freeways in the Lansing area . The designation was decommissioned in 1970 when I @-@ 496 was completed through downtown Lansing . 
 = Tropical cyclone track forecasting = 
 Tropical cyclone track forecasting involves predicting where a tropical cyclone is going to track over the next five days , every 6 to 12 hours . The history of tropical cyclone track forecasting has evolved from a single station approach to a comprehensive approach which uses a variety of meteorological tools and methods to make predictions . The weather of a particular location can show signs of the approaching tropical cyclone , such as increasing swell , increasing cloudiness , falling barometric pressure , increasing tides , squalls , and heavy rainfall . 
 The forces that affect tropical cyclone steering are the higher latitude westerlies , the subtropical ridge , and the beta effect caused by changes of the coriolis force within fluids such as the atmosphere . Accurate track predictions depend on determining the position and strength of high and low pressure areas , and predicting how those areas will migrate during the life of a tropical system . Computer forecast models are used to help determine this motion as far out as five to seven days in the future . 
 = = History = = 
 The methods through which tropical cyclones are forecast have changed with the passage of time . The first known forecasts in the Western Hemisphere were made by Lt. Col. William Reed of the Corps of Royal Engineers at Barbados in 1847 . Reed mostly utilized barometric pressure measurements as the basis of his forecasts . Benito Viñes , S.J. , introduced a forecast and warning system based on cloud cover changes in Havana during the 1870s . Forecasting hurricane motion was based on tide movements , as well as cloud and barometer changes over time . In 1895 , it was noted that cool conditions with unusually high pressure preceded tropical cyclones in the West Indies by several days . Before the early 1900s , most forecasts were done by direct observations at weather stations , which were then relayed to forecast centers via telegraph . It was not until the advent of radio in the early twentieth century that observations from ships at sea were available to forecasters . Despite the issuance of hurricane watches and warnings for systems threatening the coast , forecasting the path of tropical cyclones did not occur until 1920 . By 1922 , it was known that the winds at 3 kilometres ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) to 4 kilometres ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) in height above the sea surface within the storms ' right front quadrant were representative of a storm 's steering , and that hurricanes tended to follow the outermost closed isobar of the subtropical ridge . 
 In 1937 , radiosondes were used to aide tropical cyclone forecasting . The next decade saw the advent of aircraft @-@ based reconnaissance by the military , starting with the first dedicated flight into a hurricane in 1943 , and the establishment of the Hurricane Hunters in 1944 . In the 1950s , coastal weather radars began to be used in the United States , and research reconnaissance flights by the precursor of the Hurricane Research Division began in 1954 . The launch of the first weather satellite , TIROS @-@ I , in 1960 , introduced new techniques to tropical cyclone forecasting that remain important to the present day . In the 1970s , buoys were introduced to improve the resolution of surface measurements , which until that point , were not available at all over sea surfaces . 
 = = Single station forecasting of a tropical cyclone passage = = 
 About four days in advance of a typical tropical cyclone , an ocean of 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) in height will roll in about every 10 seconds , moving towards the coast from the direction of the tropical cyclone 's location . The ocean swell will slowly increase in height and frequency the closer a tropical cyclone gets to land . Two days in advance of the center 's passage , winds go calm as the tropical cyclone interrupts the environmental wind flow . Within 36 hours of the center passage , the pressure begins to fall and a veil of white cirrus clouds approaches from the cyclone 's direction . Within 24 hours of the closest approach to the center , low clouds begin to move in , also known as the bar of a tropical cyclone , as the barometric pressure begins to fall more rapidly and the winds begin to increase . Within 18 hours of the center 's approach , squally weather is common , with sudden increases in wind accompanied by rain showers or thunderstorms . Winds increase within 12 hours of the center 's approach , occasionally reaching hurricane force . The ocean 's surface becomes whipped with foam . Small items begin flying in the wind . Within 6 hours of the center 's arrival , rain becomes continuous and the storm surge begins to come inland . Within an hour of the center , the rain becomes very heavy and the highest winds within the tropical cyclone are experienced . When the center arrives with a strong tropical cyclone , weather conditions improve and the sun becomes visible as the eye moves overhead . At this point , the pressure ceases to drop as the lowest pressure within the storm 's center is reached . This is also when the peak depth of the storm surge occurs . Once the system departs , winds reverse and , along with the rain , suddenly increase . The storm surge retreats as the pressure suddenly rises in the wake of its center . One day after the center 's passage , the low overcast is replaced with a higher overcast , and the rain becomes intermittent . By 36 hours after the center 's passage , the high overcast breaks and the pressure begins to level off . 
 = = Basics = = 
 The large scale synoptic scale flow determines 70 to 90 percent of a tropical cyclone 's motion . The deep @-@ layered mean flow through the troposphere is considered to be the best tool in determining track direction and speed . If storms experience significant vertical wind shear , use of a lower level wind such as the 700 hPa pressure level ( at a height of 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) above sea level ) will work out as a better predictor . Knowledge of the beta effect can be used to steer a tropical cyclone , since it leads to a more northwest heading for tropical cyclones in the Northern Hemisphere due to differences in the coriolis force around the cyclone . For example , the beta effect will allow a tropical cyclone to track poleward and slightly to the right of the deep layer steering flow while the system lies the south of the subtropical ridge . Northwest moving storms move quicker and left , while northeast moving storms move slower and left . The larger the cyclone , the larger the impact of the beta effect is likely to be . 
 = = = Fujiwhara effect = = = 
 When two or more tropical cyclones are in proximity to one another , they begin to rotate cyclonically around the midpoint between their circulation centers . In the northern hemisphere , this is in a counterclockwise direction , and in the southern hemisphere , a clockwise direction . Usually , the tropical cyclones need to be within 1 @,@ 450 kilometres ( 900 mi ) of each other for this effect to take place . It is a more common phenomenon in the northern Pacific ocean than elsewhere , due to the higher frequency of tropical cyclone activity which occurs in that region . 
 = = = <unk> motions = = = 
 Small wobbles in a tropical cyclone 's track can occur when the convection is distributed unevenly within its circulation . This can be due to changes in vertical wind shear or inner core structure . Because of this effect , forecasters use a longer term ( 6 to 24 hours ) motion to help forecast tropical cyclones , which acts to smooth out such wobbles . 
 = = Forecast models = = 
 High @-@ speed computers and sophisticated simulation software allow meteorologists to run computer models that forecast tropical cyclone tracks based on the future position and strength of high- and low @-@ pressure systems . Combining forecast models with increased understanding of the forces that act on tropical cyclones , and a wealth of data from Earth @-@ orbiting satellites and other sensors , scientists have increased the accuracy of track forecasts over recent decades . The addition of <unk> missions around tropical cyclones in what are known as synoptic flow missions in the Atlantic Basin decreased track error by 15 @-@ 20 percent . Using a consensus of forecast models , as well as ensemble members of the various models , can help reduce forecast error . However , regardless how small the average error becomes , large errors within the guidance are still possible . An accurate track forecast is important , because if the track forecast is incorrect , forecasts for intensity , rainfall , storm surge , and tornado threat will also be incorrect . 
 = = Length of forecast period = = 
 Forecasts within hurricane advisories were issued one day into the future in 1954 before being extended to two days into the future in 1961 , and three days into the future in 1964 . Starting in the mid to late 1990s , research into tropical cyclones and how forecast models handle the systems led to substantial improvements in track error . By 2001 , the error had reduced sufficiently to extend track out to 5 days in the future on public advisories . In addition , at 1700 UTC during the hurricane season , a medium range coordination call takes place between the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center and the National Hurricane Center to coordinate tropical cyclone placement on the medium range pressure forecasts 6 and 7 days into the future for the northeast Pacific and Atlantic basins . Every so often , even at this time range , successful predictions can be made . 
 In forecasts , the National Hurricane Center uses a track forecast cone for the graphical representation of the uncertainty in its forecasts of a tropical cyclone 's future location . The cone represents the probable position of a tropical cyclone 's circulation center , and is made by drawing a set of circles centered at each forecast point — 12 , 24 , 36 , 48 , and 72 hours for a three @-@ day forecast , as well as 96 and 120 hours for a five @-@ day forecast . The radius of each circle is equal to encompass two @-@ thirds of the historical official forecast errors for the preceding five @-@ year period . The cone is then constructed by drawing a tangent line that connects the outside boundary of all the circles . The National Hurricane Center states that the entire track of the tropical cyclone " can be expected to remain within the cone roughly 60 @-@ 70 % of the time . " 
 = Devon County War Memorial = 
 The Devon County War Memorial is a First World War memorial designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens situated on the cathedral green in Exeter , the county town of Devon , in the south west of England . It is one of fifteen War Crosses designed by Lutyens to a similar specification , and one of two to serve as a civic memorial in a city . The authorities in Devon originally planned to complete the construction of a cloister at Exeter Cathedral , which would be dedicated to the county 's war dead , but this scheme was abandoned due to lack of funds . The Devon County War Memorial Committee commissioned Lutyens to design a War Cross instead , deciding on the green of Exeter Cathedral after scouting for several locations . A war memorial for Exeter itself was being considered concurrently , but the two committees failed to work together , resulting in two separate memorials — the county memorial by the cathedral and Exeter City War Memorial in <unk> Gardens . 
 The memorial , a simple granite cross hewn from a single stone quarried from Haytor on Dartmoor stands just to the west of the cathedral , in alignment with the altar . The cross sits on a granite plinth , which itself sits on three steps . It was unveiled by Edward , Prince of Wales on 16 May 1921 . The area around the memorial was remodelled after archaeological excavations in the 1970s . A processional way was added , leading to the cathedral close from the cathedral itself , along with a set of steps to a platform in front of the memorial , which emphasises its connection to the cathedral . The memorial is a grade II * listed building and , since 2015 , all of Lutyens ' war memorials in England have been protected by listed building status . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the aftermath of the First World War , thousands of war memorials were built across Britain . Amongst the most prominent designers of memorials was architect Sir Edwin Lutyens , described by Historic England as " the leading English architect of his generation " . Lutyens designed the Cenotaph on Whitehall in London , which became the focus for the national Remembrance Sunday commemorations , as well as the Thiepval Memorial to the Missing — the largest British war memorial anywhere in the world — and the Stone of Remembrance which appears in all large Commonwealth War Graves Commission cemeteries . Lutyens was also responsible for Castle Drogo , to the north of Exeter . The Devon County memorial is one of fifteen War Crosses designed by Lutyens to a similar specification between 1920 and 1925 . Most of Lutyens ' War Crosses were commissioned for small villages , but the Devon County memorial is one of two commissioned as a civic memorial in a city — the other being the York City War Memorial . 
 The idea of building a war memorial at all proved controversial ; the chairman of the local branch of the National Federation of Discharged and <unk> Sailors and Soldiers was of the opinion that the funds would be better spent caring for surviving veterans and condemned the memorial as a " useless waste of money " . Despite this , the authorities were determined to erect some sort of memorial to the county 's war dead . The original plan was for the completion of the cloister of Exeter Cathedral to serve as a war memorial , but the idea was abandoned due to a lack of funds and instead Lutyens ' War Cross was commissioned in 1920 . The County War Memorial Committee , chaired by Hugh Fortescue , 4th Earl Fortescue , realised that it was unlikely to raise a large sum of money , and that communities across Devon would be focusing on their own commemorations and commissioning individual war memorials . Thus , they sought a simple but elegant monument . Several sites were considered , including Cawsand Beacon on Dartmoor and the Haldon Hills , but the committee 's preferred location was Exeter 's Cathedral Close , Exeter being the county town of Devon . The specific site was chosen so that the memorial would be visible from the High Street and Broadgate . 
 The memorial is one of two civic war memorials in Exeter , the other being the Exeter City War Memorial in <unk> Gardens . Exeter Cathedral also contains memorials to the Devonshire Regiment and the Wessex Field Ambulance . The Devon County War Memorial Committee agreed to support the construction of a battlefield memorial at La Ville @-@ aux @-@ Bois @-@ lès @-@ <unk> in France to honour the 2nd Battalion of the Devonshire Regiment , who endured particularly heavy fighting at Bois des Buttes during the Third Battle of the Aisne . The city war memorial , on the other hand , was the responsibility of a separate committee ; the city and county memorial committees conspicuously failed to work together . According to Sir James Owen , chairman of the city committee , the city offered a joint committee but the county " slammed the door in our face " , while Lord Fortescue accused the city of proceeding with its own project without any discussion with the county . The result was that two very different memorials were constructed in Exeter — the city 's memorial takes the form a figure of Victory on a large pedestal surrounded by further sculptures to form a cross . 
 = = History and design = = 
 The project proceeded simply once the original idea of completing the cloisters was abandoned . The memorial stands on the Cathedral Green , just to the west of the cathedral itself , in alignment with the altar . It takes the form of a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 @-@ metre ) granite cross , quarried from Haytor on Dartmoor to the north of Exeter , and hewn from a single stone — the largest Lutyens was able to acquire . The cross has a diamond @-@ shaped tapered shaft with chamfered arms , no wider than the base , close to the top to form a cross . The cross sits on a three @-@ tiered base and a rectangular plinth , which itself sits on three stone steps as is customary for Lutyens ' war memorials . The central tier of the base bears the inscription " THE <unk> OF <unk> TO HER <unk> DEAD / 1914 – 1919 / TE <unk> <unk> / 1939 – 1945 " . 
 The memorial was unveiled on Whit Monday , 16 May 1921 by Edward , Prince of Wales ( later King Edward VIII ) , the heir to the throne , with Lutyens in attendance . Upon its completion , Lutyens said of the monument , " it is very simple and a monolith and its subtlety in line means labour , care and thought . [ ... ] It should endure forever " . At the unveiling ceremony , Lord Fortescue — chairman of the County War Memorial Committee — estimated that 11 @,@ 600 men and women from Devon had been killed while serving in the war ; he later estimated that a total of 63 @,@ 700 ( 8 @,@ 000 regulars , 36 @,@ 700 volunteers , and 19 @,@ 000 conscripts ) had served . The names of the fallen were recorded on a roll of honour , of which three copies were made : one for Exeter Cathedral , one to be held by the county , and one which the Prince of Wales placed in a hollow in the base of the war memorial . The prince 's visit generated considerable excitement in the area ; local people lined the street to welcome his motorcade and banners were flown from businesses on the High Street . After the unveiling , he spent ten days touring the local area . 
 In 1971 , archaeological excavations were undertaken around the western fringe of the cathedral and the remains of several Roman buildings were discovered . As a result , the area was remodelled by Sir Geoffrey Jellicoe who created a processional way leading to the cathedral from Cathedral Close , past the war memorial . At the same time , Jellicoe introduced a set of steps and a platform leading to the memorial which emphasises the memorial 's alignment with the altar and strengthens the visual connection between the memorial and the cathedral . A set of metal railings was erected around the foot of the memorial in 2006 — described by Lutyens researcher Tim Skelton as " an unfortunate addition " . 
 On 16 April 2009 , the memorial — including the processional way — were designated by English Heritage ( now Historic England ) a grade II * listed building for its special architectural or historic interest , a status which offers legal protection from unauthorised demolition or unauthorised modification . 
 In November 2015 , as part of commemorations for the centenary of the First World War , Lutyens ' war memorials were recognised as a " national collection " and all 44 of his free @-@ standing memorials were listed or had their listing status reviewed and their National Heritage List for England list entries were updated and expanded . 
 = Somerset Coal Canal = 
 The Somerset Coal Canal ( originally known as the Somersetshire Coal Canal ) was a narrow canal in England , built around 1800 starting in basins at Paulton and Timsbury to nearby Camerton , over two aqueducts at Dunkerton , through a tunnel at Combe Hay , then via Midford and Monkton Combe to Limpley Stoke where it joined the Kennet and Avon Canal . This link gave the Somerset coalfield , ( which at its peak contained 80 collieries ) , access east toward London . The longest arm was 10 @.@ 6 miles ( 17 km ) long with 23 locks . From Midford an arm also ran via Writhlington to Radstock , with a tunnel at Wellow . 
 A feature of the canal was the variety of methods used at Combe Hay to overcome height differences between the upper and lower reaches , initially by the use of caisson locks and when this failed an inclined plane trackway and then finally a flight of 22 conventional locks . 
 The Radstock arm was never commercially successful and was replaced first with a tramway in 1815 and later incorporated into the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway . The Paulton route flourished for nearly 100 years and was very profitable , carrying very high tonnages of coal for many decades ; this canal helped carry the fuel that powered the nearby city of Bath . 
 By the 1880s coal production declined as the various pits either ran out of coal or were flooded and subsequently closed . In 1896 the main pump at Dunkerton which maintained the canal water level failed . The resultant lowering in level meant that only small loads could be transported . A factor which reduced revenue from the canal still further . The declining income meant that the canal company could not afford to pay for a replacement pump . 
 The canal became disused after 1898 and officially closed in 1902 , being sold off to the various railway companies who were expanding their networks . The land bordering the canal route was then used for a few years to construct a railway . In October 2006 a grant was obtained from the Heritage Lottery Fund to carry out a technical study on one of the locks and its associated structures at Combe Hay . 
 In September 2014 restoration work began on the canal section from Paulton to Radford , with the aim of restoring the entire canal to navigation in the near future . The largest canal drydock in England has been revealed at Paulton ; culverts and bridges nearby are being reinstated or rebuilt ; and about 2 / 3 mile of canal from Paulton to Radford is likely to be in water by summer 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In 1763 coal was discovered in Radstock and mining began in the area , however transport was a major problem because of the poor state of the roads . This cost and the potential for cheaper delivery of coal from south Wales via the Monmouthshire Canal led to the proposal for a canal which could transport the coal to Bath and Wiltshire . Initial surveys were conducted during 1793 by William Jessop and William Smith under the direction of John Rennie who presented the report on 14 October 1793 estimating the cost of construction of the canal at £ 80 @,@ 000 . Smith , who also worked at the Mearns Pit at High Littleton , made the original observations leading to his important stratification theory by observing the dips in the geological strata through which the canal was cut . Smith became Surveyor to the company , but was dismissed in April 1799 , apparently because he had used his position as surveyor to buy a local house at advantageous terms . He then set himself up in a private practice in Bath but was re @-@ engaged by the company in 1811 , to provide advice when repairs became necessary to the canal bed . 
 The canal was authorised by an Act of Parliament entitled " An Act for making and maintaining a navigable Canal , with certain Railways and Stone Roads , from several Collieries in the county of Somerset , to communicate with the intended Kennet and Avon Canal , in the parish of Bradford , in the county of Wilts " of 1794 , and further detailed surveys were carried out by Robert Whitworth and John Sutcliffe , who was then appointed as chief engineer . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 In May 1795 tenders were invited for the first section to be built from the meadows near <unk> ( or <unk> ) near Paulton to <unk> in the Parish of Camerton . In June 1795 a contractor , ( Houghton & Son from Shropshire ) , started the terminus at Paulton meadows using local labour . This first section of the canal was completed on Monday 1 October 1798 ; the first load of coal along the canal was delivered to Bath via Dunkerton . Some 14 collieries at Timsbury & Paulton were connected to their respective basins in the meadow terminus by tramways . This involved the construction of three tramway bridges over the Cam brook . A further bridge at Upper Radford was required over the canal ; at this point tramways connected the Withy Mills and Radford workings . The course of the Cam brook was modified at various places to protect the canal from erosion . In 1799 William Whitmore and his partner , Norton , offered to build a balance ( or geometrical ) lift without payment , on condition that if successful they were to have £ 17 @,@ 300 and a royalty of 4 pence per ton of goods passed . 
 The design of the caisson lock at Combe Hay was not a success , on 15 February 1798 the first descent failed . Mr. Weldon ( the inventor ) , made one successful descent on 7 June and said " I will undertake to pass 1 @,@ 500 tons of goods through the lock in 12 hrs " . Tenders were invited on 28 June for further constructions . Two more attempts to use the caisson lock took place on 11 April & 2 May ( only the latter was successful ) . By 22 August 1799 the second rebuilding of the caisson had been abandoned . It was replaced by three locks and an inclined plane trackway , but the trackway was not successful either , and the company proposed to raise more money to finance the building of a flight of 19 locks to replace it , the use of which would incur an additional toll of one shilling per ton on all traffic . This was vigorously opposed by the owners of the Kennet and Avon Canal and the Wilts and Berks Canal , on the grounds that the price of coal to their customers would be too high . After negotiation , the company obtained a new Act of Parliament on 30 April 1802 , which authorised the formation of a separate body called " The Lock Fund of the Somerset Coal Canal Company " , with powers to raise the sum of £ 45 @,@ 000 . The money was raised by the Kennet and Avon , the Wilts and Berks and the Somerset Coal Canal each contributing £ 15 @,@ 000 , and the one shilling surcharge was to be levied until the capital had been repaid , after which it would cease . The act set the tonnage rates to be charged : 
 Fractions of a Mile to pay for Half a Mile , and of a Ton as a Quarter of a Ton ; Rates for <unk> to be determined by the Company . In addition to the above Rates , One Shilling per Ton is paid on all Goods to the Lock Fund , which also receives Three <unk> per Ton from the Coal Canal company . The boats were weighed at Midford where a Weigh house was constructed in 1831 . The boats would be floated into a one @-@ ended lock , the gate closed and the water drained . This left the boat resting on a cradle suspended by angled rods attached to a beam which took the weight of the boat . One @-@ pound weights were then added to a pan with one pound being equivalent to one hundredweight until the system was in equilibrium and the weight was recorded . The weigh house at Midford was one of only four known to have been built in England and Wales . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 The canal opened in 1805 and was used for passenger traffic as well as coal . In 1814 the Benedictine monks who came to Downside Abbey are said to have used the canal for the last stage of their journey . Another cargo carried by the canal was limestone from Combe Down . The peak level of cargo carried was in 1838 at 138 @,@ 403 tons resulting in over £ 17 @,@ 000 of tolls being paid . Cargoes of over 100 @,@ 000 tons were common until the 1870s when the decline in output of coal from the various Somerset <unk> , along with competition from the railways , dramatically reduced the canal 's profitability . When the main pump at Dunkerton failed it was not replaced and there was not sufficient water for continual operation of the locks . The canal went into liquidation in 1894 ; it closed in 1898 and was finally abandoned in 1904 when it was sold to the Great Western Railway for £ 2 @,@ 000 , and used as a branch of the Bristol and North Somerset Railway . The closure caused problems across the Somerset coalfield especially to the pits along the Paulton branch , which had relied on the canal for transportation . 
 = = = The Radstock branch = = = 
 When the Radstock branch was constructed , it was intended to link it to the main line of the Paulton branch at Midford , which was at a lower level at this point . The Lock Fund created in 1802 was to have paid for the construction of the locks , but because there was little regular traffic on the branch , the company built one lock , an aqueduct over the Midford Brook , and a short tramway to bridge the gap . This contributed to the economic failure of the branch , and its replacement by a tramway in 1815 . The tramway was laid along the former canal 's towpath . It was single @-@ line with passing places every 600 yards ( 549 m ) , and was originally laid using cast iron plates on stone block sleepers , but was relaid using wrought iron plates . 
 = = = Engineers and surveyors = = = 
 William Bennet ( d . 1826 ) 
 John Hodgkinson 
 Benjamin Outram ( 1764 – 1805 ) 
 John Rennie ( 1761 – 1821 ) 
 William Smith ( 1769 – 1839 ) 
 John Sutcliffe 
 Robert Weldon ( ? 1754 – 1810 ) 
 Robert Whitworth ( d . 1799 ) 
 Data from Jim <unk> 's Waterways Information . 
 = = = Combe Hay and the caisson lock = = = 
 The fall over the route is 135 ft ( 41 m ) , which meant problems with supplying adequate water . The Cam brook was an inadequate source of water above Camerton , and the mills along it had water rights . Each narrow boat travelling through the series of locks ( 22 of them each 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) deep ) with a 25 @-@ ton load of coal caused 85 tons of water to be discharged into the brook below the locks . As a result , the canal was designed with all 22 locks in one flight near Combe Hay and a pumping engine to raise water from the Cam this was the first canal to entirely depend on pumping . 
 A potential solution to the water supply problem was the use of caisson locks as proposed by Robert Weldon , three of which could replace the 22 conventional locks , because it wasted no water , however the technology had only been tried in a one @-@ third scale prototype . Each lock was 80 ft ( 24 m ) long and 60 ft ( 18 m ) deep and contained a closed wooden box which could take a barge . This box moved up and down in the 60 ft ( 18 m ) deep pool of water , which never left the lock . The box was demonstrated to the Prince Regent ( later George IV ) , but had engineering problems and was never successful commercially or built elsewhere . 
 It was temporarily replaced with an inclined plane by Benjamin Outram who had successfully installed inclined planes at the Peak Forest Canal in Derbyshire , whilst 22 locks and a Boulton & Watt Steam Pumping Station , capable of lifting 5 @,@ 000 tons of water in 12 hours , were built to the latest design with metal plate clad wooden gates . 
 Construction . The two images show a recently uncovered ( 2009 – 10 ) Spillway / Drain ( <unk> ) at Upper Midford , a location where a caisson to take the canal from the 180 ft level to the 134 ft level at Midford Aqueduct was proposed . 
 Each caisson would have had such a drain for maintenance purposes over the exit arch made to the same dimensions . The following extract from the Bath Herald newspaper provides the details of the chosen sites . 
