 " 14 Jun 1798 Travel : Somerset coal canal – caisson cisterns to be formed at Combe Hay & nr . Midford . Sealed proposals <unk> on embanking & excavation with the masonry ; or each separately – send to sub @-@ committee , Waldegrave Arms , Radstock 20 Jul Plans & <unk> on <unk> . " 
 For further Newspaper articles see here : - s : Bath Georgian Newspaper - Somerset Coal Canal 
 = = = Paulton and Timsbury basins = = = 
 located between the villages of Paulton and Timsbury was the terminus of the northern branch of the Somerset Coal Canal and was a central point for at least 15 collieries around Paulton , Timsbury and High Littleton , which were connected to the canal by tramroads . Timsbury basin was some <unk> to the west of Paulton basin . 
 On the northern side of Timsbury basin was the terminus for the tramroads which served Old Grove , Prior 's , <unk> and <unk> pits , with a branch line to Amesbury and Mearns pits . Parts of this line were still in use in 1873 , probably all carrying horse @-@ drawn wagons of coal . <unk> on the southern side of the Paulton basin served Brittens , <unk> , Paulton Ham , Paulton Hill , Simons Hill terminating at Salisbury Colliery . In addition the Paulton Foundry used this line . The entire line was disused by 1871 as were the collieries it served . 
 The area has been designated as an ' area of special architectural or historic interest , the character or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance ' under section 69 of the Planning ( Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas ) Act 1990 . 
 = = = Coming of the railway = = = 
 The first railway to affect the canal was the Bristol and North Somerset Railway 's Frome to Radstock line completed in 1854 which took traffic away from the tramway . It finally closed in 1874 with the Somerset and Dorset Railway 's extension to Bath , built along its route from Radstock to Midford . Another branch line was constructed in 1882 from Hallatrow to Camerton , running alongside the canal for the last 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 km ) of its route . 
 The Great Western Railway built a railway line ( the Bristol and North Somerset Railway ) over some parts of the canal route from Limpley Stoke to Camerton , where it joined the existing 1882 branch line from Hallatrow to Camerton . This opened in 1910 for passenger and goods traffic , closed for the First World War , re @-@ opened after the war but ran for passengers only for two more years in the mid @-@ 1920s and finally closed to all traffic in the 1950s . The line was used in the 1950s Ealing comedy film The Titfield Thunderbolt . 
 = = Today = = 
 The route of the canal lies in a largely agricultural area dotted with small villages and minor roads . There are several <unk> of the Paulton and Timsbury basins branch of the canal that are easily visible , and various stretches and features have been surveyed during 2014 . Full restoration of the entire length from Paulton to Dundas is being explored . Four locks on the original canal route at Combe Hay have been buried ; one by a <unk> railway embankment , and three overfilled by 10 - <unk> with building waste since the 1960s . It may no longer be feasible to reinstate the original locks 16 , 17 , 18 and 19 structures for this section . 
 At Upper Midford the canal is blocked entirely at the Accommodation bridge [ 1 ] by the <unk> high embankment of the railway that crosses it . [ 2 ] Most of the canal features along the entire route are on private land but the towpath survives in places as a right of way , while the later railway between Midford to Wellow has been surfaced to form part of National Cycle Route 24 . It has been proposed that a statue , commissioned by Sustrans , of William Smith , the father of English Geology , will be sited next to the path on the line of the canal commemorating his work as its surveyor and his recognition of the significance of rock strata . 
 = = Restoration works = = 
 = = = Limpley Stoke = = = 
 The quarter @-@ mile stretch at <unk> Basin where the canal joins the Kennet and Avon at Dundas Aqueduct was restored during the 1980s and is now a thriving marina with moorings . Excavations of the old stop lock ( at the junction with the Kennet and Avon canal ) showed that this had originally been a broad ( 14 feet ( 4 m ) ) lock that at some point was narrowed to 7 feet ( 2 m ) by moving the lock wall . 
 = = = Paulton and Timsbury basins = = = 
 Work started in 2013 to reveal and excavate the drydock next to the eastern Paulton Basin . This drydock appears to be the largest drydock anywhere on the canal system in England , being about 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) wide and 83 feet ( 25 m ) long , large enough for three full @-@ length narrowboats to be worked on at the same time . 
 The drainage culvert at the southeast corner of the drydock was rebuilt in December 2013 , and the drydock itself completely excavated in April 2014 . The entrance to the drydock , at the western end , was surmounted by a bridge , partially demolished in 2002 but rebuilt during 2014 . 
 = = = Withy Mills = = = 
 Excavations began in May , 2014 at Terminus Bridge ; the arch was missing and the abutments were found to be in poor condition ; an earth bund between the abutments carried the public footpath and stopped the water draining from the Paulton and Timsbury Basins . A new earth bund was installed about 25 metres ( 82 ft ) west of Terminus Bridge to stop the water and allow work to continue on the bridge . 
 During excavations a drainage culvert was discovered about 20 metres ( 66 ft ) west of Terminus bridge . Work resumed in September and November 2014 to batter and reshape the canal embankments . Excess topsoil was removed and the towpath reinstated on the stretch to the east from Terminus bridge for about 200 metres ( 660 ft ) . On the same stretch a retaining wall was discovered in the south embankment continuing for about 100 metres ( 330 ft ) , possibly built as a repair to a weak section of canal banking . Vertical <unk> of white clay have been used along this wall . 
 = = = Grant to study history of the canal = = = 
 The canal has been studied for many years with exploration and restoration work being undertaken in Wellow and elsewhere . Particular effort , so far unsuccessful , has been put into trying to find the site of the second and third caisson locks at Combe Hay . In October 2006 a grant of £ 20 @,@ 000 was obtained from the Heritage Lottery Fund , by the Somersetshire Coal Canal Society in association with Bath & North East Somerset Council and the Avon Industrial Buildings Trust to carry out a technical study on one of the locks and associated structures at Combe Hay . Many of the locks and associated workings are listed buildings . 
 = = Route and points of interest = = 
 = Blackrock ( play ) = 
 Blackrock is a play by Australian playwright Nick Enright that was first performed in 1995 . It was adapted from a 1992 play by Enright , entitled A Property of the Clan , which was inspired by the murder of Leigh Leigh in Stockton , Australia in 1989 . The plays were both well received critically , though they did attract criticism from both Leigh 's family and the media due to the fictionalisation of an actual murder . Despite repeated statements from Enright that the plays were a work of fiction , they have both often been considered by viewers to be a factual account . A Property of the Clan was shortlisted for a New South Wales Premier 's Literary Award in 1993 , and Blackrock won the AWGIE Award for Best Play in 1996 . Blackrock was developed into a feature film of the same name in 1997 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Blackrock is an Australian beachside working @-@ class suburb where surfing is popular among youths like Jared . He has his first serious girlfriend , Rachel , who comes from a much wealthier part of the city . One day Ricko , the local surfing legend , returns from an 11 @-@ month trip . Rachel 's brother Toby 's 18th birthday party is being held at the local beach club a few days later , and Jared decides to merge a ' welcome home ' party for Ricko with the event . The party is unsupervised with alcohol freely available . The following morning , it is revealed that 15 @-@ year @-@ old Tracy Warner was killed at the party . 
 Three youths from the party , Davo , Scott , and Toby , tell Ricko that they raped Tracy , though left her alive . The three boys are later arrested for the sexual assault . Ricko confesses to Jared that he killed Tracy . He says he was attempting to have sex with her when she bit him and kicked him , so in a moment of rage he grabbed a rock and struck her . He has already told police that he was with Jared all night and asks Jared to confirm his alibi in the name of mateship ; Jared is torn between telling the truth and protecting his friend . After witnessing Ricko 's abusive behaviour towards their friend Tiffany , Jared decides to tell the truth . Ricko is detained by police and hangs himself in his cell . 
 Jared 's silence leads to the breakdown of his relationships with both Rachel and his mother Diane . In the play 's last scene , Jared confesses to Diane that he witnessed the three youths raping Tracy , though he did not intervene . He is unsure why he did nothing though he believes it was out of loyalty to the boys who were his mates . Ricko left Jared a suicide note giving him his panel van , though Jared asks his cousin Cherie to throw the keys to the vehicle in the ocean when she goes out surfing . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins as A Property of the Clan = = = 
 The play originated as Enright 's A Property of the Clan , a theatre @-@ in @-@ education piece written for Freewheels Theatre in Education in Newcastle which premiered in 1992 . Enright was approached by the director of Freewheels , Brian Joyce , who suggested the murder of Leigh Leigh as a subject for a play . Enright initially refused , but Joyce argued that the actual subject of the play would be the victim 's peer @-@ groups . Enright agreed , after being convinced a play could be made out of the conflicting responses to the crime . The title was taken from a quote in the psychological report that was made on Mathew Webster , the man who murdered Leigh , in preparation for his trial . The first decision regarding the play was to omit the criminal acts and the actual murder from it , instead focusing on the drama , its participants and the aftermath of the murder . 
 = = = Redevelopment as Blackrock = = = 
 In 1994 the Sydney Theatre Company commissioned Enright to develop the original 45 @-@ minute play into a full @-@ length production . Blackrock retained the original four characters but also added nine others . Associate professor Donna Lee Brien of Central Queensland University considered it to be a more fictionalised version of Leigh 's murder , though many viewers still considered it to be a factual account of the crime . The narrative and emphasis were reshaped for an adult audience outside of a specifically educational environment , also shifting the play 's focus . While A Property of the Clan focused on the possible motives for rape , Blackrock was said to centre on the boys involved in the crime , portraying them as victims of their society . 
 Blackrock was first performed at Wharf I , a theatre run by the Sydney Theatre Company , on 30 August 1995 . It also played at the Australian Theatre Festival in Canberra that same year . Blackrock continued to be performed at the Sydney Theatre Company throughout 1995 , and performed a sold @-@ out season at Wharf I in 1996 . It has since had many productions throughout Australia , including being performed by a Newcastle @-@ based theatre company , Tantrum Theatre , in 2010 . The 2010 version contained a few minor updates , such as referring to surfer Layne <unk> instead of Wendy Botha . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = A Property of the Clan = = = 
 Leigh 's family , who had learned of the play , attended a private screening of it ; some of them had not seen each other for two years . Leigh 's mother Robyn objected to the fictionalisation of her daughter 's murder , stating she would have preferred a documentary account . The rape and murder victim in A Property of the Clan was named Tracy , which Leigh 's family also objected to , as ' Tracey ' was the name of Leigh 's cousin and best friend . One of Leigh 's aunts asked Brian Joyce to change the character 's name out of respect for the family , however , the name remain unchanged , even after the play was rewritten and retitled Blackrock . The local media reported on the family objections to the play , and the day after the play opened , Freewheels faced " mounting disapproval " , and attempted to distance themselves from Leigh 's murder . Both Enright and Freewheels chairperson Sharon McMillan respond to the growing controversy . McMillan wrote in The Newcastle Herald , stating that media coverage of the play was " unfortunately " focusing on Leigh 's murder instead of the play 's message , also stating that some people reporting on it in this manner had not even watched the play . Enright stated that while the comparison to Leigh 's murder was of interest to the media , the play was actually about how any group of boys abuse any girl , and how they came to do it . Nevertheless , many viewers considered the play to be a factual account of the murder . Even though the rape and murder were not shown in the play , the audience were said to be able to fill in their blanks from their knowledge of Leigh 's killing . 
 Despite the controversy , the play was shown at various high schools in the Newcastle area , and following its positive critical reception , was shown nationally at high schools across the country over a period of eighteen months . However Newcastle High School , where both Leigh and Webster had been students , declined to book the play . The play was also shown at the National Institute of Dramatic Art in 1993 , and was shortlisted for a New South Wales Premier 's Literary Award that year . 
 = = = Blackrock = = = 
 John McCallum from The Australian gave a favourable review of the redeveloped play , also stating that the decision to transform the play from its original educational environment to a mainstream audience was a " bold move " that was " triumphantly successful . " Blackrock won an AWGIE Award for Best Play in 1996 . When the play was shown in Sydney , Joyce expressed disappointment at how it was misinterpreted as being about Leigh and " that community " . 
 People came up to me after and said " Is it really like that in Newcastle ? " ... I was very disheartened because I grew up on the Northern Beaches in Sydney and I didn 't see it as any different whatsoever . It was happening 20 years ago when I was young . I remember there was violence , there was rape , there was party rape and there was party rape with alcohol and a lot of violence associated with that . 
 When interviewed in 1996 while Blackrock was being adapted into a film , Joyce expressed regret that the media continually drawing connections between the play and Leigh 's murder had caused additional suffering for Leigh 's family , as he had initiated the play with the intention of aiding in the healing process of all the people affected by the murder . Reviewing a version of the play that was performed in 2010 , Caroline Wake from RealTime Arts likened the actors performing in the play to several of the initiation ceremonies that occur in the play itself , stating that to perform in Blackrock is to be " initiated into Newcastle ’ s history , to learn that along with the mines and the beaches , the death of Leigh Leigh too is your ambivalent inheritance . " 
 The New South Wales Department of Education and Communities hosts curriculum material for high school classwork on both plays . 
 = = Premiere production = = 
 Blackrock 's premiere production was directed by David Berthold , and featured the following cast : 
 Jared : Simon Lyndon 
 Cherie : Rebecca Smart 
 Ricko : Paul Bishop 
 Davo : Dan Wyllie 
 Scott : Teo Gebert 
 Toby : Joel Edgerton 
 Tiffany : Kristina <unk> 
 Stewart / Len / Roy : John Walton 
 Marian / Glenys : Julie Godfrey 
 Rachel : Kym Wilson 
 Diane : Angela Punch McGregor 
 All other roles were played by members of the company . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 While the revisions to the play Blackrock were still being finalised , Enright started working with first @-@ time director Steven Vidler to produce a film version , which would also be titled Blackrock . Blackrock was released in 1997 . Rebecca Smart reprised her role as Cherie in the film . Simon Lyndon who portrayed Jared in the play was cast as Ricko in the film . 
 = The Little Hero of Holland = 
 The Little Hero of Holland is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . It is an adaptation of the short fictional story popularized in Hans Brinker , or The Silver Skates , about a boy who plugs a leaking dike with his finger to prevent it from bursting . The role of the boy was played by Marie Eline , but little else is known about the production and cast of the film . The director may have been Barry O 'Neil and the writer may have been Lloyd Lonergan . Parts of the film were shot on Glen Park Island in New Rochelle , New York . The film was released on June 17 , 1910 and saw a wide release , including the United Kingdom . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis of the film was published in The Moving Picture World on June 18 , 1910 . It states : " Hans is a little Dutch boy , the son of a poor fisherman . He , like all children of Holland , is early impressed with the fact that the safety of the whole community depends on the strength of the dike . He is sent upon an errand to his aunt late one evening . Walking along the foot of the dike , he discovers a tiny hole , through which the water is pouring . Realizing that if left to flow through even this small aperture , the water would soon break down the dike and flood the village , he sticks his tiny finger in the hole , and waits for someone to come to his assistance . Night comes on . His family decided he has stayed with his aunt , and do not worry about him . In the morning he is found almost unconscious from fatigue and exposure , by his little sister who has been searching for him . She runs back and notifies the villagers , who come to his assistance , repair the dike , and carry the little hero back to the village in triumph . He is received by the burgomaster and praised by the minister . By his night 's heroism he has made himself a place in history , and will always be known as ' the little hero of Holland . ' " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . He was the most important script writer for Thanhouser , averaging 200 scripts a year from 1910 to 1915 . The film was an adaptation of the fictional story that was popularized in Hans Brinker , or The Silver Skates . The name of the boy , Hans , may be a reference to the erroneous association to unnamed character in the book . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . Many of the scenes for the film were shot at Glen Park in New Rochelle , New York . 
 Only Marie Eline 's credit as Hans , the young boy , is credited . Eline had previously played an Italian boy in The Two Roses . The other members cast may have included the leading players of the Thanhouser productions , Anna Rosemond and Frank H. Crane . Rosemond was one of two leading ladies for the first year of the company . Crane was also involved in the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company and acted in numerous productions before becoming a director at Thanhouser . 
 = = Release = = 
 The single reel drama , approximate 650 feet long , was released on June 17 , 1910 . Some trade publications list the length of the film as 1000 feet though . The United Kingdom release of the film may have had the name of the hero changed to Peter . A synopsis in The Bioscope on October 27 , 1910 refers to the hero by the name Peter . This alternative name for the hero of the story can be found in the 1910 publication of Reader 1st @-@ 4th by D. Appleton and Company . A review in The Moving Picture World was neutral because it lacked specific praise or criticism of the production . The film had a wide release , advertisements for the showing in theaters include those in Pennsylvania , Oklahoma , Indiana , and Missouri . The film is presumed lost . 
 = Crystal Palace , London = 
 Crystal Palace is a residential area in south London , England , within the London Boroughs of Bromley , Croydon , Lambeth , Southwark and Lewisham . It is named after the former local landmark , the Crystal Palace , which stood in the area from 1854 to 1936 . The area is located approximately eight miles ( 13 km ) south east of Charing Cross and includes one of the highest points in London , at 367 feet ( 112 m ) , offering views over the capital . The area has no defined boundaries and straddles the convergence of five London boroughs and three postal districts , although an electoral ward named Crystal Palace and Crystal Palace Park are entirely contained within the London Borough of Bromley . It is contiguous with Anerley , Dulwich Wood , Gipsy Hill , Penge , South Norwood , Sydenham and Upper Norwood . 
 The district was a natural oak forest until development began in the 19th century , and before the arrival of the Crystal Palace the area was known as Sydenham Hill . The Norwood Ridge and an historic oak tree were used to mark parish boundaries . Today , the area is represented by three different parliamentary constituencies , four London Assembly constituencies and fourteen local authority councillors . After the Crystal Palace had burned down in 1936 , the site of the building and its grounds became Crystal Palace Park , which is the location of the National Sports Centre , containing an athletics track , stadium and other sports facilities . Crystal Palace Park has also been the setting for a number of concerts and films , including scenes from The Italian Job and The Pleasure Garden . Two television transmitter masts make the district a landmark location , visible from many parts of Greater London . Local landmarks include the Crystal Palace Triangle , a shopping district made up of three streets forming a triangle ; Westow Park , a smaller park that lies off the triangle to the south west of Crystal Palace Park ; and the Stambourne Woodland Walk . 
 A pneumatic railway was briefly trialled in the area in 1864 . Once the railways had arrived , Crystal Palace was eventually served by two railway stations , the high level and low level stations , built to handle the volume of passengers visiting the Crystal Palace . After the palace was destroyed by fire , and with railway travel declining in the UK more generally , passenger numbers fell and the high level station was closed in 1954 and demolished 7 years later . Rail services gradually declined , and for a period in the 1960s and 1970s there were plans to construct an urban motorway through the area as part of the London Ringways plan . More recently , rail travel has seen a resurgence in Crystal Palace , with rising passenger numbers , additional London Overground services stopping at the station , a major station redevelopment in 2012 and proposals to extend the Croydon Tramlink service to the railway and bus stations . 
 = = History = = 
 The ridge and the historic oak tree known as The Vicars Oak ( located at the present @-@ day crossroads of the A212 Church Road and A214 Westow Hill ) were used to mark parish boundaries . This has led to the Crystal Palace area straddling the boundaries of five London Boroughs ; Bromley , Croydon , Lambeth , Southwark and Lewisham . The area also straddles three postcode districts : <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . The ancient boundary between Surrey and Kent passes through the area and from 1889 to 1965 the area lay on the south eastern boundary of the County of London . It included parts of Kent and Surrey until 1889 and then parts of Kent , London and Surrey between 1889 and 1965 . 
 For centuries the area was occupied by the Great North Wood , an extensive area of natural oak forest that formed a wilderness close to the southern edge of the then expanding city of London . The forest was a popular area for Londoners ' recreation right up to the 19th century , when it began to be built over . It was also a home of Gypsies , with some local street names and pubs recording the link . The area still retains vestiges of woodland . The third quarter of the 19th Century brought the Crystal Palace and the railways . 
 = = = The Crystal Palace = = = 
 The Crystal Palace was a cast @-@ iron and glass building originally erected in Hyde Park to house the Great Exhibition of 1851 . Following the success of the exhibition , the palace was moved and reconstructed in 1854 in a modified and enlarged form in the grounds of the Penge Place estate at Sydenham Hill . The buildings housed the Crystal Palace School of Art , Science , and Literature and Crystal Palace School of Engineering . It attracted visitors for over seven decades . 
 Sydenham Hill is one of the highest locations in London ; 109 metres ( 357 ft ) above sea level ( spot height on Ordnance Survey Map ) ; and the size of the palace and prominence of the site made it easy to identify from much of London . This led to the residential area around the building becoming known as Crystal Palace instead of Sydenham Hill . The palace was destroyed by fire on 30 November 1936 and the site of the building and its grounds is now known as Crystal Palace Park . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = Crystal Palace Triangle = = = 
 The " Crystal Palace Triangle " , formed by Westow Street , Westow Hill and Church Road , has a number of restaurants and several independent shops , as well as an indoor secondhand market and a farmer 's market on Haynes Lane . The triangle also contains a range of vintage furniture and clothing stores , as well as galleries , arts and crafts shops and other businesses . There is an ongoing campaign to turn a building recently converted into a church at 25 Church Road back into a cinema , after the former bingo hall was purchased by the Kingsway International Christian Centre . 
 Crystal Palace still retains much of its Victorian architecture , although housing styles are mixed , including Victorian terraces , mid @-@ war terraces and blocks of modern flats . Crystal Palace Park is surrounded by grand Victorian villas , many of which have been converted into flats and apartments . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Television transmission has been taking place from Crystal Palace since at least the 1930s and two TV transmitter towers — Crystal Palace Transmitter – 640 feet ( 200 m ) tall — and Croydon Transmitter – 500 feet ( 150 m ) tall — stand on the hill at Upper Norwood , making the district a landmark location visible from many parts of the London area . The towers may appear similar in height and design , but the Crystal Palace mast , constructed in 1956 , stands on a slightly higher elevation . The current Croydon tower was built in 1962 . 
 = = = Crystal Palace Park = = = 
 Crystal Palace Park is a large Victorian pleasure ground occupying much of the land within Crystal Palace and is one of the major London public parks . The park was maintained by the LCC and later the GLC , but with the abolition of the GLC in 1986 control of the entire park was given to the London Borough of Bromley . Crystal Palace railway station is located by the park , as is the National Sports Centre . The park was formerly used for motor racing and has been a venue for concerts , often performed at the site of the Crystal Palace Park Concert Platform . In July 2013 Chinese property developer <unk> Holdings announced it was drawing up plans to build a replica of the Crystal Palace on its original site in Crystal Palace Park . However , in February 2015 the developer 's sixteen @-@ month exclusivity agreement with Bromley to re @-@ develop the Palace expired and the project was cancelled . 
 The park is situated halfway along the Norwood Ridge at one of its highest points . This ridge offers views northward to central London , east to the Queen Elizabeth II Bridge and Greenwich , and southward to Croydon and the North Downs . 
 It is also one of the starting points for the Green Chain Walk , linking to places such as Chislehurst , Erith , the Thames Barrier and Thamesmead . Section 3 of the Capital Ring walk round London goes through the park . 
 = = = Westow Park = = = 
 A smaller park occupying 2 @.@ 73 hectares ( 6 @.@ 7 acres ) lies to the south west of the triangle on Church Road . Westow Park hosts the annual Crystal Palace Overground festival , a free community festival held over four days during the summer . 
 = = = Stambourne Woods = = = 
 To the south of the triangle is a small area of woodland occupying 1 @.@ 92 hectares , containing the Stambourne Woodland Walk . It was opened in 1984 and covers an area of land between developments on Stambourne Way and Fox Hill . The land originally formed the gardens of Victorian villas built on the hill overlooking Croydon , but fell into disrepair . In 1962 Croydon Council approved terms for buying the land from the Church Commissioners and other local freeholders , allowing the construction of a link . Paths and benches were installed but much of the vegetation was left undisturbed , creating a woodland pathway . 
 = = Geography = = 
 As the name Crystal Palace is relatively new , the borders of the area are not clearly defined and include parts of Anerley , Dulwich Wood , Gipsy Hill , Penge , South Norwood , Sydenham and Upper Norwood . Crystal Palace lies approximately eight miles ( 13 km ) to the south east of Charing Cross on the Norwood Ridge and includes one of the highest points of London at 112 metres above the mean sea level ( OS map reference <unk> ) . The Crystal Palace National Sports Centre , in the centre of the park , lies at 88 metres above the mean sea level . The soil in the area has been classified as typically " Slowly permeable , seasonally wet , slightly acid but base @-@ rich loamy and clayey soils " , with impeded drainage , moderate fertility and a loamy profile . The nearest Met Office climate station is based in Greenwich Park . 
 = = Local government = = 
 Crystal Palace sits on the boundary of four London boroughs – Bromley , Croydon , Lambeth and Southwark . A fifth borough – Lewisham – is nearby . As a result , the area is served by a diverse range of local government bodies and members of Parliament . 
 = = = Local authorities = = = 
 Several local authority councillors in the area were elected on 22 May 2014 , at the same time as the European Elections . All seats are now held by Labour party candidates , after 2 Liberal Democrats in Bromley and 1 Conservative in Southwark lost their seats . The elected officials by ward for Crystal Palace local authorities in May 2016 were : 
 = = = London Assembly = = = 
 The area is represented by four constituencies in the London Assembly . Their elected assembly members in May 2016 were : 
 = = = Westminster Parliament = = = 
 The area is represented by three constituencies in the Westminster Parliament . In May 2015 , their elected MPs were : 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 The Italian Job has a scene filmed at the athletics track in the Crystal Palace sports centre , in which Michael Caine says , " You were only supposed to blow the bloody doors off ! " The Pleasure Garden was also filmed in the park and Our Mother 's House has a scene featuring Dirk Bogarde with several children on the park 's boating lake . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The park features prominently as the setting of an outdoor rave in the music video for The Chemical Brothers ' number 1 single " Setting Sun " . 
 A mini @-@ album about the history of the local area , entitled Fire & Glass : A Norwood Tragedy , was released in September 2007 by the Anglo @-@ Dutch group , <unk> 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Arthur Conan Doyle was active in the area between 1891 and 1894 . Although he lived in nearby South Norwood he visited the Crystal Palace and Upper Norwood area regularly in connection with the Upper Norwood Literary and Scientific Society . The Foresters Hall on Westow Street was then known as the Welcome Hall ( or just Welcome ) and it was in that hall in May 1892 that Arthur Conan Doyle was elected president of the society . He was re @-@ elected to the post in 1893 and resigned in 1894 . Each occasion was in the same hall . 
 The writer Deborah Crombie sets her 2013 mystery , The Sound of Broken Glass , in the Crystal Palace area of London . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Crystal Palace has had a long association with sports and Crystal Palace F.C. ( 1861 ) which was an amateur football club , was one of the 12 founder members of The Football Association . The original football club disappeared from historical records in 1876 and it was not until 1905 that the current Crystal Palace F.C. club was re @-@ formed . The club played inside the grounds of The Crystal Palace , at the FA Cup Final venue which is now the site of the National Sports Centre , until it was forced to move out in 1915 because of the First World War . Despite eventually moving to a new stadium at Selhurst Park , the club retained the Crystal Palace name , which is in use to the present day . 
 The historical grounds also hosted the first England Rugby Union match against New Zealand in 1905 , which New Zealand won by 15 @-@ 0 , and the short @-@ lived London County Cricket Club . 
 In 1964 , a 15 @,@ 500 seater athletics stadium and sports centre was built on the site of the football grounds in Crystal Palace Park . The athletics stadium was known as the National Sports Centre and between 1999 and 2012 hosted the London Athletics Grand Prix among other international athletics meetings . The Crystal Palace <unk> club is also based here . Since the London 2012 Olympics , the status of the stadium and aquatics centre as the main facilities for their sports in London has been superseded by the London Aquatics Centre and Olympic Stadium . This led to Crystal Palace F.C. submitting plans to rebuild the stadium as a 40 @,@ 000 capacity football stadium , without the running track . 
 A motor racing circuit was opened around the Park in 1927 and the remains of the track now make up some of the access roads around the park . The track was extended to two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) in 1936 , before being taken over by the Ministry of Defence at the start of World War II . Race meetings resumed in 1953 , and the circuit hosted a range of international racing events , continuing until the last races in 1974 . 
 = = Education = = 
 Crystal Palace contains three primary schools , Paxton Primary School , <unk> Primary School and All Saints C of E Primary School , and one secondary school , Harris City Academy . Crystal Palace Park also contains a branch of Capel Manor College , offering courses in Animal Care , Arboriculture and Countryside , Horticulture and Landscaping and Garden Design along with other short courses . 
 In 2013 , due to a shortage of primary school places in both Crystal Palace and London , proposals to open a new primary school by September 2015 were put forward , with plans submitted to the Department for Education in January 2014 . The proposals were approved as part of wave 6 of the Free Schools Programme and the school is scheduled to open in September 2015 . As of October 2014 , the school is considering three possible building configurations – with the Greater London Authority running a public consultation on each option – all of which would involve demolishing one of the existing seated stands around the athletics track at the National Sports Centre . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Roads = = = 
 The area is served by the A212 , A214 , <unk> and <unk> roads . The roads that make up the triangle ( Westow Hill , Westow Street and Church Road ) form part of a one @-@ way system and are in a 24 @-@ hour controlled parking and loading zone . There is a coach park inside Crystal Palace Park . 
 The area would have been affected by the cancelled London Ringways motorway plans , as one of the radial routes connecting the South Cross Route to Ringway 2 ( the South Cross Route to Parkway D Radial ) would have run through a part of Crystal Palace Park , following the railway line . 
 = = = = Cycle routes = = = = 
 London Cycle Network routes 23 and 27 travel through Crystal Palace . Route 27 runs from Anerley Hill through part of Crystal Palace Park towards Bromley and route 23 through the Crystal Palace triangle to connect to Borough and Croydon . 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 Crystal Palace is accessible by rail from Crystal Palace railway station , where Southern trains run between Victoria on the Crystal Palace Line and London Bridge on the Brighton Main Line , and where London Overground trains run to Highbury & Islington on the East London Line . In addition , Southern services run to Beckenham Junction , Sutton and Epsom Downs . Crystal Palace railway station is one of the few stations to border two zones , Zones 3 and 4 . The South Gate of the Park is accessible by rail via Penge West , which is served by Southern trains from London Bridge and London Overground services . 
 Crystal Palace used to have a second railway station , the Crystal Palace ( High Level ) railway station . The station was built to serve passengers visiting the Crystal Palace , but after the fire in 1936 traffic on the branch line declined . During World War II the line serving the station was temporarily closed due to bomb damage . Although repairs were made and the line was reopened , the requirement for reconstruction work and the drop in traffic led to the decision to close the station and branch line in 1954 , followed by the demolition of the station in 1961 . Despite the demolition , a Grade II listed subway remains under Crystal Palace Parade . The Crystal Palace pneumatic railway was also built in Crystal Palace circa 1864 . 
 The low level station remained open , although passenger numbers at that station also fell after the fire of 1936 and many services were diverted to serve London – Croydon routes instead of the Victoria – London Bridge route . Rail travel was in decline across the UK in the 1960s and 1970s when the Beeching Axe was imposed . During the 1970s , two outer platforms used by terminating trains were abandoned and the third rail was removed . 
 More recently rail travel at the station has seen a resurgence and new services have started running . Passenger numbers increased each year between 2004 and 2013 . Since May 2010 , the station has served the East London Line branch of the London Overground , connecting with the Docklands and Shoreditch . In 2011 services were extended to Highbury and Islington . The station underwent redevelopment in 2012 , which brought the original Victorian booking hall back into use , created a new cafe in the station building and provided wheelchair access through the installation of three lifts ; this work was completed by the end of March 2013 . 
 = = = Tram = = = 
 There have been past proposals to connect the Croydon Tramlink to Crystal Palace , with mayoral candidates citing the desirability of the initiative . 
 = = = Bus = = = 
 The area is served by multiple bus routes , many of which terminate at Crystal Palace Bus Station . These services include routes N2 , 3 / N3 , <unk> , 122 , N137 , 157 , 202 , 227 , 249 , 322 , 358 , 363 , 410 , 417 , 432 , 450 and 931 . 
 = = = Air = = = 
 The nearest major international airports are Heathrow and Gatwick . London City Airport and Biggin Hill Airport are also nearby . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Marie Stopes , early promoter of sex education and contraception , was raised in a house on Cintra Park shortly after her birth in Edinburgh , in 1880 . 
 Benjamin Waterhouse Hawkins , artist and sculptor who created the Crystal Palace Dinosaurs in the park , lived on Belvedere Road between 1856 and 1872 . 
 Jim Bob , Carter USM frontman , currently lives in Crystal Palace . 
 The African @-@ American Shakespearian Actor Ira Aldridge lived in the Crystal Palace area . 
 The French novelist Émile Zola lived in what is now the Queen 's Hotel on Church Road between October 1898 and June 1899 . Zola fled to England after being convicted of criminal libel in France on 23 February 1898 , a direct consequence of the publication of his open letter " J <unk> " . 
 Francis Pettit Smith , one of the inventors of the screw propeller and a contributor to the construction of the SS Archimedes , lived in the area between 1864 and 1870 . 
 British rapper Speech <unk> was born in Crystal Palace . She left the area because of " traffic and parking problems " . 
 Author , musician and National anarchist activist Troy Southgate was born and raised in Crystal Palace . 
 Camille Pissarro , Danish @-@ French Impressionist and Neo @-@ Impressionist painter , stayed in Crystal Palace between 1870 and 1871 . 
 = = Nearest places = = 
 = Northern Lites = 
 " Northern Lites " is the ninth single by Super Furry Animals . It was the first single to be taken from the Guerrilla album and reached number 11 in the UK Singles Chart after its release on 10 May 1999 . The song was written by singer Gruff Rhys and was inspired by the El Niño phenomenon . The track 's title refers to the Aurora Borealis , a natural light display which the band were convinced they had seen prior to the song being written . Rhys wrote the melody for " Northern Lites " several years before it was completed but only decided on a calypso style after he wrote the lyrics . The steel drums on the track are played by keyboardist Cian Ciaran and were added on the spur of the moment after the group saw them " lying around " Real World Studios during recording . 
 Critical reaction was largely positive with the song being named " Single of the Week " in both the Melody Maker and NME , with the latter also listing the song at number 3 in their single of the year list for 1999 . The music video for " Northern Lites " was directed by Super Furry Animals and Martin McCarthy and features footage of curling and Irish road bowling although Rhys has blamed the song 's failure to chart higher on the fact that it " didn 't have a video " . 
 = = Themes and recording = = 
 " Northern Lites " was written by singer Gruff Rhys about " the weather " , and was particularly inspired by coverage of the " terrifying , worldwide , seven @-@ year phenomenon " of the west Pacific El Niño climate pattern on " weather channels " in 1998 . The song 's title refers to the Aurora Borealis , a natural light display which can be observed particularly in the polar regions , and usually at night . The band were convinced that they had seen the lights before the track was written but , as no @-@ one else was present , they could not get confirmation that what they had witnessed was not simply a " Furry fantasy " . Rhys has claimed that he would have called the song " Aurora Borealis " but " Latin song titles are out of the question " . Although Rhys has said that the song is " about asking Jesus if he decides to seek his revenge on us , to get it over with as soon as possible and blow us away to the Northern Lights " he has also stated that , although some critics have interpreted the track as being about " questioning one 's faith " , it is really " just a song about the weather " . 
 The melody of " Northern Lites " was written by Rhys several years before the track was released . The band experimented with reggae and " <unk> rock " styles before Rhys wrote the lyrics and , because they were inspired by adverse weather conditions affecting Latin America , tried playing along to a preset calypso rhythm track which was on his keyboard . The singer has stated that , although he does not think the band have " any right to make Latin @-@ influenced " songs , they did not choose a calypso style for the track in a cynical attempt to " crack South America " . The group are not " purists " and feel that Latin music is " part of [ a ] cultural <unk> " . 
 The track was recorded in the middle of 1998 at Real World Studios , Box , Wiltshire , along with the rest of Guerrilla , and was produced by Super Furry Animals . The band allowed " the music to dictate itself " during recording sessions , choosing to add steel drums on the spur of the moment after seeing the instruments " lying around " Real World during recording . The steel drum parts were performed by keyboardist Cian Ciaran , despite the fact he did not know how to play them . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Northern Lites " is 3 minute and 31 seconds long and is in the key of E minor . The song begins with an intro with steel drums , featuring a flanging effect , before a brass section enters after 6 seconds playing a melody line accompanied by a güiro , sparse drums and an acoustic guitar playing the chords Em7 and A. The melody line plays twice after which Gruff Rhys begins singing the first verse alongside the güiro , guitar and steel drums which no longer have a flange effect . Towards the end of the verse a distorted guitar melody line plays alongside Rhys 's vocal and harmony backing vocals enter . The song 's first chorus begins at 48 seconds with Rhys singing " There 's a distant light , a forest fire burning everything in sight " . During the second verse the brass section rejoins , playing the same melody line from the intro . After another chorus the song 's extended " play @-@ out " section begins at 2 minutes and 13 seconds with Rhys repeating the lines " Don 't worry me , or hurry me , blow me far away to the Northern Lites " accompanied by harmony backing vocals . The track breaks down to just drums and vocals at 2 minutes and 40 seconds after which the band and brass section rejoin . A prominent lead guitar melody begins after 2 minutes and 47 seconds and plays alongside the vocals , acoustic guitar , brass and drums until the track fades out and ends at 3 minutes and 31 seconds . 
 = = Release and critical reception = = 
 " Northern Lites " was released on CD , cassette and 7 " on 10 May 1999 and reached number 11 on the UK Singles Chart . The cover features a model of a " three @-@ eyed , four @-@ armed , squid @-@ headed Eskimo warrior " designed by artist Pete Fowler . The warrior is shown holding " two portable poles of latitude and longitude " and has " the heating regulator of the world " around his neck . The track was included on the band 's greatest hits compilation album Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 , issued in 2004 . 
 " Northern Lites " received mostly positive reviews . The NME listed the song as the " Single of the Week " on its release , with reviewer Johnny Cigarettes stating that the track was " head and shoulders above anything released this or most other weeks " . Cigarettes saw " Northern Lites " as indicative of the Super Furry Animals ' " genius idiosyncrasy and elegantly eccentric class " and described the song as " somewhere between a Mexican cocktail bar , a ' 60s surf party , a Vegas lounge show and a really good acid trip " . Cigarettes compared the vocal harmonies on the track to those of The Beach Boys and stated that the song has a " classic , Bacharach " quality " although he did criticise the indecipherable lyrics which he felt could prevent the record from " its deserved 23 @-@ week residence at Number One " . In a later review of Guerrilla , the NME described the song as a " seamless fusion of tumbling xylophones and Caribbean brass " . The magazine listed the track at number 3 in their single of the year list for 1999 . " Northern Lites " was also awarded " Single of the Week " in the 15 May 1999 issue of the Melody Maker by guest reviewers Gay Dad , who described the song as " twisted and psychedelic " . Echoing the views of Johnny Cigarettes , Gay Dad likened the song to the work of Bacharach and Hal David and complained that they could not fully understand Rhys 's lyrics , as his vocals were too low in the mix . 
 Writing for Mojo , James McNair described " Northern Lites " as a mix of " Tijuana brass , steel drums , and itch @-@ scratching Latin percussion " and claimed that the " great " song was " one of the most <unk> inventive pop confections " since Super Furry Animals ' 1998 track , " Ice Hockey Hair " . In Q , reviewer Peter Kane stated that the song 's combination of " cheesy calypso sway " and " Tijuana brass " were wonderful . Dave Simpson , writing in The Guardian , claimed that the song was " possibly the first hit to be massively influenced by Tito Puente . " In The Independent , Tim Perry stated that the " undeniably brilliant " " Northern Lites " was one of the highlights of the Guerrilla album . In a 2005 review of the reissued Guerrilla , Pitchfork 's Marc Hogan described the track as " horn @-@ laden <unk> " ; in an earlier review of Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 , he had called " Northern Lites " " ' Deadweight ' -era Beck <unk> " . Reviewing Songbook ... for PopMatters , Zeth Lundy described " Northern Lites " as " Brazilian @-@ infected " , while Ian Wade , reviewing the album for the BBC , called the song an " indie / calypso crossover " and Alan Woodhouse , reviewing Songbook ... for the NME labelled the track an " irresistible Caribbean @-@ flavoured tune . " Marc Hogan of Pitchfork claimed that the single 's b @-@ sides , including the " shiny , distorted mid @-@ tempo number " " This , That and the Other " , pale beside " Northern Lites " and the other tracks on Guerilla although they " do manage to scratch the itch for more SFA " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Music video = = 
 A promotional music video , directed by Super Furry Animals and Martin McCarthy , was produced to accompany the release of " Northern Lites " as a single . The video begins with a shot of Super Furry Animals ' ' SFA ' logo , which appears on the cover of " Northern Lites " , displayed above the words " Public information service " . This shot fades to show a full @-@ screen translucent , fluorescent blue , image of the " warrior " , also from the single 's cover , which moves from the centre to the bottom right before shrinking and remaining stationary in the top right for the duration of the video . The SFA logo from the introduction is shown in the top left , opposite the " warrior " image , and also remains throughout the video . The island Ailsa Craig is briefly shown , the island where in 2004 when the single was released , 60 to 70 % of all curling stones in use were made from granite from the island and is one of only two sources for all stones in the sport , the other being the Trefor Granite Quarry in Wales . Next , images of the sea and birds in flight are shown before footage of a bearded man , sitting on rocks beside the sea and singing along to the first verse is shown . This footage is intercut with shots of a man using a hammer and chisel on some boulders before walking away with a large rock . The rock is shown being spun and polished into a curling stone . A yellow handle is added to the stone and it is placed into a wooden box alongside another stone with a red handle . The box is closed and the word Nagano is seen printed on the lid . The video then cuts to shots of a Boeing 747 before wintery scenes of Nagano are shown , including a shot of people with umbrellas stood in the snow in front of a sign that reads " Nagano Olympics " . Footage from curling events are then shown until 2 minutes and 40 seconds when the video cuts to show a man in a grey suit dropping a handful of grass on a road . The video then ends with shots of Irish road bowling – several men are shown throwing a bowl down a road surrounded by spectators alongside scenes of men with measuring sticks and men exchanging banknotes . In a 2008 interview with Uncut , Gruff Rhys stated that " Northern Lites " " didn 't have a video " and suggested this as the reason the track was not a bigger hit than it was . The director who was originally scheduled to work on the video took up an offer of a Red Stripe commercial in Jamaica , leaving the band to collaborate with McCarthy . According to Rhys the group met the original director later and told him " We understand , we 'd have done the same . " Despite this , bassist Guto Pryce has described the " Northern Lites " music video as one of only a handful of the group 's videos that he actually likes . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by Super Furry Animals . 
 CD ( <unk> ) , MC ( <unk> ) , 7 " ( <unk> ) 
 " Northern Lites " – 3 : 30 
 " Rabid Dog " – 3 : 47 
 " This , That and the Other " – 5 : 59 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Singles chart position = = 
 = Childhood 's End = 
 Childhood 's End is a 1953 science fiction novel by the British author Arthur C. Clarke . The story follows the peaceful alien invasion of Earth by the mysterious Overlords , whose arrival begins decades of apparent utopia under indirect alien rule , at the cost of human identity and culture . 
 Clarke 's idea for the book began with his short story " Guardian Angel " ( 1946 ) , which he expanded into a novel in 1952 , incorporating it as the first part of the book , " Earth and the Overlords " . Completed and published in 1953 , Childhood 's End sold out its first printing , received good reviews , and became Clarke 's first successful novel . The book is often regarded by both readers and critics as Clarke 's best novel , and is described as " a classic of alien literature " . Along with The Songs of Distant Earth ( 1986 ) , Clarke considered Childhood 's End one of his favourite own novels . The novel was nominated for the Retro Hugo Award for Best Novel in 2004 . 
 Several attempts to adapt the novel into a film or miniseries have been made with varying levels of success . Director Stanley Kubrick expressed interest in the 1960s , but collaborated with Clarke on 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( 1968 ) instead . The novel 's theme of transcendent evolution also appears in Clarke 's Space Odyssey series . In 1997 , the BBC produced a two @-@ hour radio dramatization of Childhood 's End that was adapted by Tony Mulholland . The Syfy Channel produced a three @-@ part , four @-@ hour television mini @-@ series of Childhood 's End , which was broadcast on December 14 – 16 , 2015 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The novel is divided into three parts , following a third @-@ person omniscient narrative with no main character . 
 = = = Earth and the Overlords = = = 
 In the late 20th century , the United States and the Soviet Union are competing to launch the first spaceship into orbit , for military purposes . When vast alien spaceships suddenly position themselves above Earth 's principal cities , the space race ceases . After one week , the aliens announce they are assuming supervision of international affairs , to prevent humanity 's extinction , under the name of Overlords . They interfere only twice : in South Africa , where sometime before their arrival Apartheid had collapsed and was replaced with savage persecution of the white minority ; and in Spain , where they put an end to bull fighting . Some humans are suspicious of the Overlords ' benign intent , as they never visibly appear . Overlord Karellen , the " Supervisor for Earth , " who speaks directly only to Rikki Stormgren , the UN Secretary @-@ General , tells Stormgren that the Overlords will reveal themselves in 50 years , when humanity will have become used to their presence . Stormgren smuggles a device onto Karellen 's ship in an attempt to see Karellen 's true form . He succeeds , is shocked , and chooses to keep silent . 
 = = = The Golden Age = = = 
 Humankind enters a golden age of prosperity at the expense of creativity . Five decades after their arrival the Overlords reveal their appearance , resembling the traditional Christian folk images of demons : large bipeds with cloven hooves , leathery wings , horns , and tails . The Overlords are interested in psychic research , which humans suppose is part of their anthropological study . Rupert Boyce , a prolific book collector on the subject , allows one Overlord , Rashaverak , to study these books at his home . To impress his friends with Rashaverak 's presence , Boyce holds a party , during which he makes use of a Ouija board . An astrophysicist and Rupert 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Jan Rodricks , asks the identity of the Overlords ' home star . George <unk> 's future wife Jean faints as the Ouija board reveals a star @-@ catalog number consistent with the direction in which Overlord supply ships appear and disappear . With the help of an oceanographer friend Jan Rodricks stows away on an Overlord supply ship and travels 40 light @-@ years to their home planet . Due to the time dilation of special relativity at near @-@ light speeds , the elapsed time on the ship is only a few weeks , and he arranges to endure it in drug @-@ induced hibernation . 
 = = = The Last Generation = = = 
 Although humanity and the Overlords have peaceful relations , some believe human innovation is being suppressed and that culture is becoming stagnant . One of these groups establishes New Athens , an island colony in the middle of the Pacific Ocean devoted to the creative arts , which George and Jean <unk> join . The Overlords conceal a special interest in the <unk> ' children , Jeffrey and Jennifer Anne , and intervene to save Jeffrey 's life when a tsunami strikes the island . The Overlords have been watching them since the incident with the Ouija board , which revealed the seed of the coming transformation hidden within Jean . 
 Sixty years after the Overlords ' arrival , human children , beginning with the <unk> ' , begin to display clairvoyance and telekinetic powers . Karellen reveals the Overlords ' purpose ; they serve the Overmind , a vast cosmic intelligence , born of amalgamated ancient civilizations , and freed from the limitations of material existence . The Overlords themselves are unable to join the Overmind , but serve it as a bridge species , fostering other races ' eventual union with it . For the transformed children 's safety , they are segregated on a continent of their own . No more human children are born , and many parents die or commit suicide . The members of New Athens destroy themselves with a nuclear bomb . 
 Jan Rodricks emerges from hibernation on the Overlord supply ship and arrives on their planet . The Overlords permit him a glimpse of how the Overmind communicates with them . When Jan returns to Earth ( approximately 80 years after his departure by Earth time ) he finds an unexpectedly altered planet . Humanity has effectively become extinct , and he is now the last man alive . Hundreds of millions of children – no longer fitting what Rodricks defines as " human " – remain on the quarantined continent , having become a single intelligence readying themselves to join the Overmind . 
 Some Overlords remain on Earth to study the children from a safe distance . When the evolved children mentally alter the Moon 's rotation and make other planetary manipulations , it becomes too dangerous to remain . The departing Overlords offer to take Rodricks with them , but he chooses to stay to witness Earth 's end , and transmit a report of what he sees . 
 Before they depart , Rodricks asks Rashaverak what encounter the Overlords had with humanity in the past , according to an assumption that the fear that humans had of their " demonic " form was due to a traumatic encounter with them in the distant past ; but Rashaverak explains that the primal fear experienced by humans was not due to a racial memory , but a racial premonition of the Overlords ' role in their metamorphosis . 
 The Overlords are eager to escape from their own evolutionary dead end by studying the Overmind , so Rodricks 's information is potentially of great value to them . By radio , Rodricks describes a vast burning column ascending from the planet . As the column disappears , Rodricks experiences a profound sense of emptiness when the Overlords have gone . Then material objects and the Earth itself begin to dissolve into transparency . Jan reports no fear , but a powerful sense of fulfillment . The Earth evaporates in a flash of light . Karellen looks back at the receding Solar System and gives a final salute to the human species . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The novel first took shape in July 1946 , when Clarke wrote " Guardian Angel " , a short story that would eventually become Part I of Childhood 's End . Clarke 's portrayal of the Overlords as devils was influenced by John W. Campbell 's depiction of the devilish Teff @-@ <unk> species in The Mightiest Machine , first serialized in Astounding Stories in 1934 . After finishing " Guardian Angel " , Clarke enrolled at King 's College London and served as the chairman of the British Interplanetary Society from 1946 to 1947 , and later from 1951 to 1953 . He earned a first @-@ class degree in mathematics and physics from King 's in 1948 , after which he worked as an assistant editor for Science Abstracts . " Guardian Angel " was submitted for publication but was rejected by several editors , including Campbell . At the request of Clarke 's agent and unbeknown to Clarke , the story was edited by James Blish , who rewrote the ending . Blish 's version of the story was accepted for publication in April 1950 by Famous Fantastic Mysteries magazine . Clarke 's original version of " Guardian Angel " was later published in the Winter 1950 issue of New Worlds magazine . The latter version published in New Worlds more closely resembles Part I of the novel , " Earth and the Overlords " . 
 After Clarke 's nonfiction science book The Exploration of Space ( 1951 ) was successfully received , he began to focus on his writing career . In February 1952 , Clarke started working on the novelization of " Guardian Angel " ; he completed a first draft of the novel Childhood 's End in December , and a final revision in January 1953 . Clarke travelled to New York in April 1953 with the novel and several of his other works . Literary agent Bernard <unk> @-@ Cliff convinced Ballantine Books to buy everything Clarke had , including Childhood 's End , " Encounter in the Dawn " ( 1953 ) , ( which Ballantine retitled Expedition to Earth ) , and Prelude to Space ( 1951 ) . However , Clarke had composed two different endings for the novel , and the last chapter of Childhood 's End was still not finished . Clarke proceeded to Tampa Bay , Florida , to go scuba diving with George <unk> , and on his way there visited his friend Frederick C. Durant - President of the International Astronautical Federation from 1953 to 1956 - and his family in the Washington Metropolitan Area , whilst he continued working on the last chapter . He then travelled to Atlanta , Georgia , where he visited Ian Macauley , a friend who was active in the anti @-@ segregation movement . Clarke finished the final chapter in Atlanta while Clarke and Macauley discussed racial issues ; these conversations may have influenced the development of the last chapter , particularly Clarke 's choice to make the character of Jan Rodricks – the last surviving member of the human species – a black man . 
 Clarke arrived in Florida at the end of April . The short story , " The Man Who <unk> the Sea " , included in the Tales from the White Hart ( 1957 ) collection , was influenced by his time in Florida . While in Key Largo in late May , Clarke met Marilyn Mayfield , and after a romance lasting less than three weeks , they travelled to Manhattan and married at New York City Hall . The couple spent their honeymoon in the Pocono Mountains in Pennsylvania , where Clarke proofread Childhood 's End . In July , Clarke returned to England with Mayfield , but it quickly became clear that the marriage would not last as Clarke spent most of his time reading and writing , and talking about his work . Further , Clarke wanted to be a father , and Marilyn , who had a son from a previous marriage , informed Clarke after their marriage that she could no longer have children . When Childhood 's End was published the following month , it appeared with a dedication : " To Marilyn , For letting me read the proofs on our honeymoon . " The couple separated after a few months together , but remained married for the next decade . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Ballantine wanted to publish Childhood 's End before Expedition to Earth and Prelude to Space , but Clarke wanted to wait . He felt that it was a difficult book to release . He had written two different endings for the novel and was unsure of which to use . According to biographer Neil McAleer , Clarke 's uncertainty may have been because of its thematic focus on the paranormal and transcendence with the alien Overmind . While the theme was used effectively by Clarke in the novel , McAleer wrote that " it was not science fiction based on science , which he came to advocate and represent " . When he wrote Childhood 's End , Clarke was interested in the paranormal , and did not become a sceptic until much later in his life . Ballantine convinced Clarke to let them publish Childhood 's End first , and it was published on August 24 , 1953 , with a cover designed by American science fiction illustrator Richard M. Powers . Childhood 's End first appeared in paperback and hardcover editions , with the paperback as the primary edition , an unusual approach for the 1950s . For the first time in his career , Clarke became known as a novelist . 
 Decades later , Clarke was preparing a new edition of Childhood 's End after the story had become dated . After the book was first published , the Apollo missions landed humans on the Moon in 1969 , and in 1989 US President George H. W. Bush announced the Space Exploration Initiative ( SEI ) , calling for astronauts to eventually explore Mars . In 1990 , Clarke added a new foreword and revised the first chapter , changing the venue for the space race from the Moon to Mars . Editions since have appeared with the original opening or have included both versions . " Guardian Angel " has also appeared in two short story collections : The Sentinel ( 1983 ) , and The Collected Stories of Arthur C. Clarke ( 2001 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The novel was well received by most readers and critics . Two months after publication , all 210 @,@ 000 copies of the first printing had been sold . The New York Times published two positive reviews of the book : Basil Davenport compared Clarke to Olaf Stapledon , C. S. Lewis , and H. G. Wells , a " very small group of writers who have used science fiction as the vehicle of philosophic ideas . " William DuBois called the book " a first rate tour de force that is well worth the attention of every thoughtful citizen in this age of anxiety . " Don Guzman of the Los Angeles Times admired the novel for its suspense , wisdom , and beauty . He compared Clarke 's role as a writer to that of an artist , " a master of sonorous language , a painter of pictures in futuristic colors , a Chesley Bonestell with words " . Galaxy reviewer Groff Conklin called the novel " a formidably impressive job ... a continuous kaleidoscope of the unexpected . " 
 Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas were more sceptical , and faulted the novel 's " curious imbalance between its large @-@ scale history and a number of episodic small @-@ scale stories . " While praising Clarke 's work as " <unk> [ for ] its historic concepts and also for the quality of its prose and thinking , " they concluded that Childhood 's End was " an awkward and imperfect book . " P. Schuyler Miller said the novel was " all imagination and poetry , " but concluded it was " not up to some of Clarke 's other writing " due to weakness in its " episodic structure . " 
 Brian W. Aldiss and David Wingrove wrote that Childhood 's End rested on " a rather banal philosophical idea , " but that Clarke " expressed [ it ] in simple but aspiring language that vaguely recalls the Psalms [ and ] combined [ it ] with a dramatized sense of loss [ for ] undeniable effect . " 
 In 2004 Childhood 's End was nominated for a retroactive Hugo Award for Best Novel for 1954 . 
 = = Adaptations , and media inspired by the novel = = 
 In the 1960s , director Stanley Kubrick was interested in making a film adaptation of the novel , but blacklisted director Abraham Polonsky had already optioned it . Instead , Kubrick collaborated with Clarke on adapting the short story " The Sentinel " into what eventually became 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( 1968 ) . Months before his performance at Woodstock in 1969 , folk singer and guitarist Richie Havens told Ebony magazine about his appreciation of Clarke 's story and expressed his interest in working on a future film adaptation of Childhood 's End . Screenplays by Polonsky and Howard Koch were never made into films . 
 Two British progressive rock bands coincidentally released songs based on the book in 1972 . The first was Pink Floyd , with their song " Childhood 's End " on the album Obscured by Clouds . Later in that same year , Genesis adapted part of the story into lyrics for their single " Watcher of the Skies " . A third progressive rock band , Van der Graaf Generator , included the song " <unk> Faith in Childhood 's End " on their 1976 album Still Life . 
 David Elgood first proposed a radio adaptation of the novel in 1974 , but nothing came of it in that decade . 
 Philip <unk> , whose credits include the TV series Alias Smith and Jones , developed a script in the late 1970s for Universal , who planned to film it initially as a six @-@ hour mini @-@ series for CBS Television , and later as a two- or three @-@ hour telemovie for ABC . However , Universal discovered that its contracts with Arthur C. Clarke - some of which dated back to 1957 - were out of date . These contractual difficulties were resolved in 1979 and <unk> worked with legendary comic book artist Neal Adams on preproduction drawings and other material . The project had Clarke 's approval . However Universal decided that the budget required would be nearly $ 40 million and they were only prepared to spend $ 10 million , so the movie was not made . 
 Director Brian Lighthill revisited the radio adaptation proposal and obtained the rights in 1995 . After Lighthill received a go @-@ ahead from BBC Radio in 1996 , he commissioned a script from Tony Mulholland , resulting in a new , two @-@ part adaptation . The BBC produced the two @-@ hour radio dramatization of the novel , and broadcast it on BBC Radio 4 in November 1997 . The recording was released on cassette by BBC Audiobooks in 1998 and on CD in 2007 . 
 As of 2002 , film rights to the novel were held by Universal Pictures , with director Kimberly Peirce attached to a project . 
 On October 28 , 2008 , Audible.com released a 7 @-@ hour 47 minute unabridged audiobook version of Childhood 's End , narrated by Eric Michael Summerer , under its Audible Frontiers imprint . An AudioFile review commended Summerer 's narration as " smoothly presented and fully credible " . An audio introduction and commentary is provided by Canadian science fiction author Robert J. Sawyer . The Japanese anime film , <unk> Senshi Gundam 00 : A <unk> of the Trailblazer , is loosely inspired by Childhood 's End 
 On April 10 , 2013 , the Syfy Channel announced its plans to develop a Childhood 's End TV miniseries . The three @-@ episode , four @-@ hour production premiered December 14 , 2015 . Charles Dance portrays the Supervisor Karellen . 
 = The Sword = 
 The Sword is an American heavy metal band from Austin , Texas . Formed in 2003 , the band is composed of vocalist and guitarist John D. Cronise , guitarist Kyle Shutt , bassist Bryan Richie and drummer Santiago " Jimmy " Vela III . Originally signed to Kemado Records , the group released its debut album Age of Winters in 2006 , which had been largely written by Cronise prior to the band 's formation . Gods of the Earth was released two years later and gave the group its first entry on the US Billboard 200 chart . 
 In 2010 the band released Warp Riders , a concept album centered on an original science fiction narrative , which marked the first time the band had enlisted an external producer in Matt Bayles . Wingo left the group later in the year and was replaced briefly by Kevin Fender , before Vela joined in 2011 . After signing with Razor & Tie in 2012 , the group released its fourth album Apocryphon which was promoted worldwide on the Apocryphon Tour . The band 's fifth album , High Country , was released in 2015 . 
 The Sword is commonly categorized as a stoner rock or doom metal band , and is influenced by groups such as Black Sabbath and Sleep . The band has toured with a wide range of fellow metal artists , including ... And You Will Know Us by the Trail of Dead , Year Long Disaster and Metallica on multiple occasions . The Sword 's first album Age of Winters failed to chart , but subsequent releases have all gained increasing commercial success , with Apocryphon charting in the top 20 of the Billboard 200 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 2003 – 2007 : Formation , early years and Age of Winters = = = 
 After writing and recording music on his own for " a few years " , vocalist and guitarist John D. Cronise formed The Sword in 2003 with guitarist Kyle Shutt and drummer <unk> Wingo . Speaking about choosing the band 's name , Cronise claims that he researched the moniker first and found it " unbelievable " that it hadn 't already been used ; two bands did already have the name Sword though , including a Canadian heavy metal band , and the frontman states he " narrowly escaped litigation hell " before The Sword was finalised . The trio played their first show together on June 19 at <unk> in Austin , and released their first demo , entitled Age of Winters , before the end of the year . Bassist Bryan Richie joined to complete the four @-@ piece lineup of the band in early 2004 . Prior to the formation of The Sword , Cronise and Wingo had performed together in the group Ultimate Dragons , based in Richmond , Virginia , while Shutt and Richie had worked with multiple bands in Texas " united by a love of Led Zeppelin " . Cronise had also performed with a local band called Those <unk> , but left as he felt he " needed to do something heavier " . After their first live performance together as a four @-@ piece at Austin 's Sound on Sound Records on March 17 , 2004 , the band released their second demo , The Sword , which was followed the next year by an extended play ( EP ) entitled Freya . 
 After performing at the 2005 South by Southwest festival , The Sword was signed by New York @-@ based record label Kemado Records , following a recommendation by Lamb of God guitarist Mark Morton . The band released its debut album Age of Winters in February 2006 , for which much of the material had been written by Cronise before the band 's formation and featured on the band 's early demos . In support of the album the band toured throughout 2006 and 2007 , with support acts including Lacuna Coil and Trivium in the United States , Nebula and Clutch in Europe , and Lamb of God in Japan . In November 2006 a cover version of the song " Freya " was featured as a playable track on the video game Guitar Hero II , and the original track was later released as the band 's first single in September 2007 . Age of Winters did not chart , but received widely positive reviews from critics including AllMusic 's Eduardo Rivadavia , who described the album as " remarkably well @-@ balanced and almost suspiciously immediate " . 
 = = = 2007 – 2009 : Gods of the Earth and first chart success = = = 
 In June 2007 the band contributed a new song , " Under the <unk> " ( which was later included on their second album ) , to the Kemado compilation Invaders . The group also released a split EP with Swedish doom metal band Witchcraft that month , contributing new track " Sea of Spears " and a cover of Led Zeppelin 's " Immigrant Song " to the record . Gods of the Earth was the band 's second album , released on April 1 , 2008 . The album , which is much more of a collaborative writing effort than its predecessor , provided the band with its first Billboard 200 chart entry , reaching number 102 . In support of the album , the band completed the Gods of the Earth Tour supported by artists such as Machine Head , Lamb of God , and Clutch ; the quartet also supported heavy metal veterans Metallica on their 2008 European Vacation Tour in July , and returned as the opening act for a number of legs on their World Magnetic Tour which continued through the opening months of 2009 until May . 
 A two @-@ disc box set containing the band 's first two albums Age of Winters and Gods of the Earth was released on November 25 , 2008 , and the song " The Black River " from Gods of the Earth was later included on the video game Guitar Hero : Metallica , released in March 2009 . The band 's music was also featured in the 2009 films Jennifer 's Body ( " Celestial Crown " ) and Horsemen ( " Maiden , Mother & Crone " ) , and in March 2009 The Sword won two local music awards : the High Times Doobie Award and the Austin Music Award for Best Metal Artist . 
 = = = 2009 – 2010 : Change in style and direction on Warp Riders = = = 
 The Sword spent the rest of 2009 writing material for their third album , which took the form of " a concept album centered around an original science fiction narrative " , and had more of a hard rock sound than the band 's previous releases . Some of the new songs were debuted at the 2009 Fun Fun Fun Fest in November , and were also played on " a short regional tour showcasing the new songs " in January . Recording for the follow @-@ up to Gods of the Earth began in Austin at Wire Recording in February 2010 ; Matt Bayles was hired to produce and engineer the album – a first for the band , as Cronise and Richie had respectively produced and engineered both Age of Winters and Gods of the Earth . Recording of the album , titled Warp Riders , was completed by April . 
 In May , the band contributed to a split release for the second time , covering Thin Lizzy 's " Cold Sweat " for a <unk> Entertainment Vinyl Club release with Year Long Disaster , who covered The Sword 's own track " Maiden , Mother & Crone " . In July , Warp Riders lead single " Tres <unk> " was released as a digital download , and a live EP entitled iTunes Festival : London 2010 ( recorded at the iTunes Festival in London on July 3 ) was also released as an iTunes @-@ exclusive download . A week after the album 's August 24 release , Warp Riders surpassed the commercial performance of Gods of the Earth when it debuted at number 47 on the Billboard 200 albums chart , selling almost 9 @,@ 000 copies in the first week of its release . The band supported Metallica again on a series of September tour dates in Australia , New Zealand and Japan as warm @-@ up for their own Warp Riders Tour , which began the following month . 
 = = = 2010 – 2012 : Drummer changes and Warp Riders Tour = = = 
 Five shows into the opening North American leg of the Warp Riders Tour , The Sword was forced to postpone all dates due to the departure of drummer <unk> Wingo . Explaining his decision to leave , Wingo commented that he felt " physically and emotionally unable to continue on as part of [ the band ] " , and later revealed that he had predicted he would eventually leave the band for " probably a couple of years " , justifying his decision by explaining that " my level of anxiety pertaining to being on tour got to the point where medication was not the answer . " Upon Wingo 's departure from The Sword , the remaining members of the band released the following statement : 
 For the later rescheduled tour dates , Austin @-@ based drummer Kevin Fender was enlisted to perform with Cronise , Shutt , and Richie as a temporary touring member of The Sword . The second single from Warp Riders , " ( The Night the Sky Cried ) Tears of Fire " , was released as a limited edition picture disc at the beginning of November backed with previously unreleased B @-@ side " <unk> " , and later in the month the video for " Lawless Lands " – part two of the Warp Riders trilogy – was released online . A number of European dates were rescheduled for May 2011 , and the third and final Warp Riders music video " Night City " was released in March . The Sword returned to North America in the summer , extending the Warp Riders Tour and performing with Kyuss Lives ! and <unk> until October . 
 In October 2011 , Fender was replaced with Santiago " Jimmy " Vela III , and the band saw out the rest of 2011 touring in the United States . Guitarist Kyle Shutt later spoke about the drummer changes in an interview in 2012 , claiming that Wingo " took a shit all over [ the band ] " when he left , and that Fender was chosen as he already knew how to play the group 's songs . 
 = = = 2012 – 2014 : Record label change and return with Apocryphon = = = 
 In March 2012 it was announced that The Sword had signed a multi @-@ album worldwide deal with New York @-@ based label Razor & Tie , with plans for a fourth album starting with recording in June and a projected late @-@ 2012 release . In May the band released the single " Hammer of Heaven " , a song originally recorded in 2003 for the Age of Winters demo and later submitted for inclusion on the soundtrack to the film The Avengers . In the run @-@ up to the recording of their next album , the group only played a few shows in 2012 , most notably the Metallica @-@ organised festival Orion Music + More in June . 
 Working with producer J. Robbins , the group recorded the follow @-@ up to Warp Riders at Magpie Cage Studios in Baltimore , Maryland between June and July 2012 . The resulting album , Apocryphon , was released in October 2012 ; it debuted at number 17 on the Billboard 200 albums chart , selling over 16 @,@ 000 copies in its first week and providing a new chart record for the band . The album was released throughout Europe by Germany @-@ based label Napalm Records . The promotional tour for the album , the Apocryphon Tour , commenced the following week in the US , and continued across the world throughout the rest of 2012 and 2013 . 
 2012 and 2013 also saw The Sword expanding into business ventures outside of music , beginning in September 2012 with the release of the band 's own brand of hot sauce called Tears of Fire . The hot sauce , which is made with the ' ghost pepper ' <unk> <unk> , was first announced and revealed on the Travel Channel series Anthony Bourdain : No Reservations on September 3 , before going on sale to the public the following day . This was followed in October by the release of the band 's first line of beer , Winter 's Wolves Beer , produced by Baltimore , Maryland @-@ based brewery Oliver Ales , and in July 2013 by a second line of beer , Iron Swan , produced by Texas @-@ based Real Ale Brewing . 
 In 2014 the band released lyric videos for Apocryphon tracks " The Hidden Masters " and " Arcane Montane " . Both were also released together as a set of 7 " vinyl singles , featuring remixes of each by Dylan C. Later that year , the band also worked with BMX company Subrosa on its own branded model , featuring artwork by Apocryphon artist J. H. Williams III and named after Apocryphon track " Eyes of the <unk> " . 
 = = = 2014 – present : International recognition with High Country = = = 
 Writing for The Sword 's fifth album began in late 2014 , which was recorded between March and April 2015 with former Grupo Fantasma guitarist Adrian Quesada as producer . Prior to starting recording , the group also embarked on a short tour between March 11 and 14 , visiting four cities in Louisiana , Tennessee and Oklahoma . High Country was released on August 21 , 2015 and the High Country Tour began in Europe on the same day . The album was the band 's first to chart outside of the US and UK , reaching number 74 on the Australian Albums Chart and number 91 on the German Albums Chart ; it reached number 30 on the US Billboard 200 . In 2016 , the band released a recording of " John the Revelator " for Record Store Day . 
 = = Style , songwriting and influence = = 
 While commonly labelled as a doom metal band , The Sword has also been identified as an example of the ' classic metal ' movement of stoner rock artists influenced by early metal bands such as Black Sabbath , Led Zeppelin and Blue Cheer . In addition to Sabbath , to whom the band is commonly compared , artists such as Sleep , Melvins and Slayer have been cited as influences by members of the band . With the release of Warp Riders , members of the band acknowledged that fans with a more " narrow @-@ minded " view of heavy metal may feel alienated by stylistic changes . Eduardo Rivadavia of allmusic describes the band as being " at the forefront of … the ' heritage ' or ' retro metal ' movement , " comparing their style to that of heavy metal veterans Black Sabbath and vocalist Cronise to Ozzy Osbourne . Rolling Stone also likens the band to Sabbath , as does AbsolutePunk.net in its review of Gods of the Earth , claiming that " It 's impossible not to compare [ the album ] to the works of Black Sabbath . " 
 While every member of the band contributes to the musical compositions , Cronise is the primary writer of the band 's lyrics . He often uses Norse mythology as a topic in his lyrics , notably in the song " Freya " , but cites literature as his main influence , identifying such authors as George R. R. Martin , Robert E. Howard , H. P. Lovecraft and Arthur C. Clarke as inspirations . On Warp Riders , Cronise was again credited for writing all the lyrics , and only guitarist Kyle Shutt was added to the credits for the musical compositions . 
 The band has cited Black Sabbath as a major influence , in addition to doom trio Sleep , sludge band the Melvins , thrash veterans Slayer , and heavy metal icons Iron Maiden and Deep Purple , among others . The band 's guitarists , in discussions of their musical influences , have identified ' classic ' metal guitar players such as James Hetfield of Metallica , Pantera 's Dimebag Darrell and Tony Iommi of Black Sabbath , and Cronise has also described Billy Gibbons ( of ZZ Top ) as a " huge influence . " In an interview with entertainment newspaper The A.V. Club , Cronise also revealed that local metal band HRM , rock musician Bob Seger and R & B singer Michael Jackson have been influences on The Sword 's sound . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Age of Winters ( 2006 ) 
 Gods of the Earth ( 2008 ) 
 Warp Riders ( 2010 ) 
 Apocryphon ( 2012 ) 
 High Country ( 2015 ) 
 = George W. Romney = 
 George <unk> Romney ( July 8 , 1907 – July 26 , 1995 ) was an American businessman and Republican Party politician . He was chairman and president of American Motors Corporation from 1954 to 1962 , the 43rd Governor of Michigan from 1963 to 1969 , and the United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development from 1969 to 1973 . He was the father of former Governor of Massachusetts and 2012 Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney and the husband of former Michigan U.S. Senate candidate Lenore Romney . 
 Romney was born to American parents living in the Mormon colonies in Mexico ; events during the Mexican Revolution forced his family to flee back to the United States when he was a child . The family lived in several states and ended up in Salt Lake City , Utah , where they struggled during the Great Depression . Romney worked in a number of jobs , served as a Mormon missionary in the United Kingdom , and attended several colleges in the U.S. but did not graduate from any . In 1939 he moved to Detroit and joined the American Automobile Manufacturers Association , where he served as the chief spokesman for the automobile industry during World War II and headed a cooperative arrangement in which companies could share production improvements . He joined Nash @-@ Kelvinator in 1948 , and became the chief executive of its successor , American Motors Corporation , in 1954 . There he turned around the struggling firm by focusing all efforts on the compact Rambler car . Romney mocked the products of the " Big Three " automakers as " gas @-@ guzzling dinosaurs " and became one of the first high @-@ profile , media @-@ savvy business executives . <unk> religious , he presided over the Detroit Stake of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints . 
 Having entered politics by participating in a state constitutional convention to rewrite the Michigan Constitution during 1961 – 1962 , Romney was elected Governor of Michigan in 1962 . Re @-@ elected by increasingly large margins in 1964 and 1966 , he worked to overhaul the state 's financial and revenue structure , greatly expanding the size of state government and introducing Michigan 's first state income tax . Romney was a strong supporter of the American Civil Rights Movement . He briefly represented moderate Republicans against conservative Republican Barry Goldwater during the 1964 U.S. presidential election . He requested the intervention of federal troops during the 1967 Detroit riot . 
 Initially a front runner for the Republican nomination for President of the United States in the 1968 election , he proved an ineffective campaigner and fell behind Richard Nixon in polls . After a mid @-@ 1967 remark that his earlier support for the Vietnam War had been due to a " brainwashing " by U.S. military and diplomatic officials in Vietnam , his campaign faltered even more and he withdrew from the contest in early 1968 . Elected president , Nixon appointed Romney as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development . Romney 's ambitious plans for housing production increases for the poor , and for open housing to desegregate suburbs , were modestly successful but often thwarted by Nixon . Romney left the administration at the start of Nixon 's second term in 1973 . Returning to private life , he advocated volunteerism and public service , and headed the National Center for Voluntary Action and its successor organizations from 1973 through 1991 . He also served as a regional representative of the Twelve within his church . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Romney 's grandparents were polygamous Mormons who fled the United States with their children owing to the federal government 's prosecution of polygamy . His maternal grandfather was Helaman Pratt ( 1846 – 1909 ) , who presided over the Mormon mission in Mexico City before moving to the Mexican state of Chihuahua and who was the son of original Mormon apostle Parley P. Pratt ( 1807 – 1857 ) . In the 1920s , Romney 's uncle Rey L. Pratt ( 1878 – 1931 ) played a major role in the preservation and expansion of the Mormon presence in Mexico and in its introduction to South America . A more distant kinsman was George Romney ( 1734 – 1802 ) , a noted portrait painter in Britain during the last quarter of the 18th century . 
 Romney 's parents , Gaskell Romney ( 1871 – 1955 ) and Anna Amelia Pratt ( 1876 – 1926 ) , were United States citizens and natives of the Territory of Utah . They married in 1895 in Mexico and lived in Colonia <unk> in Galeana in the state of Chihuahua ( one of the Mormon colonies in Mexico ) , where George was born on July 8 , 1907 . They practiced monogamy ( polygamy having been abolished by the 1890 Manifesto , although it persisted in places , especially Mexico ) . George had three older brothers , two younger brothers , and a younger sister . Gaskell Romney was a successful carpenter , house builder , and farmer who headed the most prosperous family in the colony , which was situated in an agricultural valley below the Sierra Madre Occidental . The family chose U.S. citizenship for their children , including George . 
 The Mexican Revolution broke out in 1910 and the Mormon colonies were endangered in 1911 – 1912 by raids from marauders , including " Red <unk> " Pascual Orozco and José Inés Salazar . Young George heard the sound of distant gunfire and saw rebels walking through the village streets . The Romney family fled and returned to the United States in July 1912 , leaving their home and almost all of their property behind . Romney later said , " We were the first displaced persons of the 20th century . " 
 In the United States , Romney grew up in humble circumstances . The family subsisted with other Mormon refugees on government relief in El Paso , Texas , benefiting from a $ 100 @,@ 000 fund for refugees that the U.S. Congress had set up . After a few months they moved to Los Angeles , California , where Gaskell Romney worked as a carpenter . In kindergarten , other children mocked Romney 's national origin by calling him " Mex " . 
 In 1913 , the family moved to Oakley , Idaho , and bought a farm , where they grew and subsisted largely on Idaho potatoes . The farm was not on good land and failed when potato prices fell . The family moved to Salt Lake City , Utah , in 1916 , where Gaskell Romney resumed construction work , but the family remained generally poor . In 1917 , they moved to Rexburg , Idaho , where Gaskell became a successful home and commercial builder in an area growing owing to high World War I commodities prices . 
 George started working in wheat and sugar beet fields at the age of eleven and was the valedictorian at his grammar school graduation in 1921 ( by the sixth grade he had attended six different schools ) . The Depression of 1920 – 21 brought a collapse in prices and local building was abandoned . His family returned to Salt Lake City in 1921 , and while his father resumed construction , George became skilled at lath @-@ and @-@ plaster work . The family was again prospering when the Great Depression hit in 1929 and ruined them . George watched his parents fail financially in Idaho and Utah and having to take a dozen years to pay off their debts . Seeing their struggles influenced his life and business career . 
 In Salt Lake City , Romney worked while attending Roosevelt Junior High School and , beginning in 1922 , Latter @-@ day Saints High School . There he played halfback in football , guard in basketball , and right field in baseball , all with more persistence than talent , but in an effort to uphold the family tradition of athleticism , he earned varsity letters in all three sports . In his senior year , he and junior Lenore LaFount became high school sweethearts ; she was from a more well @-@ assimilated Mormon family . Academically , Romney was steady but undistinguished . He graduated from high school in 1925 ; his yearbook picture caption was " Serious , high minded , of noble nature — a real fellow . " 
 Partly to stay near Lenore , Romney spent the next year as a junior college student at the co @-@ located Latter @-@ day Saints University , where he was elected student body president . He was also president of the booster club and played on the basketball team that won the Utah – Idaho Junior College Tournament . 
 = = Missionary work = = 
 After becoming an elder , Romney earned enough money working to fund himself as a Mormon missionary . In October 1926 , he sailed to Great Britain and was first assigned to preach in a Glasgow , Scotland , slum . The abject poverty and hopelessness he saw there affected him greatly , but he was ineffective in gaining converts and temporarily suffered a crisis of faith . 
 In February 1927 , he was shifted to Edinburgh and in February 1928 to London , where he kept track of mission finances . He worked under renowned Quorum of the Twelve Apostles intellectuals James E. Talmage and John A. <unk> ; the latter 's admonitions to " Live mightily today , the greatest day of all time is today " made a lasting impression on him . Romney experienced British sights and culture and was introduced to members of the peerage and the Oxford Group . 
 In August 1928 , Romney became president of the Scottish missionary district . Operating in a whisky @-@ centric region was difficult , and he developed a new " task force " approach of sending more missionaries to a single location at a time ; this successfully drew local press attention and several hundred new recruits . Romney 's frequent public proselytizing – from Edinburgh 's Mound and in London from soap boxes at Speakers ' Corner in Hyde Park and from a platform at Trafalgar Square – developed his gifts for debate and sales , which he would use the rest of his career . Three decades later , Romney said that his missionary time had meant more to him in developing his career than any other experience . 
 = = Early career , marriage and children = = 
 Romney returned to the U.S. in late 1928 and studied briefly at the University of Utah and LDS Business College . He followed LaFount to Washington , D.C. , in fall 1929 , after her father , Harold A. Lafount , had accepted an appointment by President Calvin Coolidge to serve on the Federal Radio Commission . He worked for Massachusetts Democratic U.S. Senator David I. Walsh during 1929 and 1930 , first as a stenographer using <unk> , then , when his abilities at that proved limited , as a staff aide working on tariffs and other legislative matters . Romney researched aspects of the proposed Smoot @-@ Hawley tariff legislation and sat in on committee meetings ; the job was a turning point in his career and gave him lifelong confidence in dealing with Congress . 
 With one of his brothers , Romney opened a dairy bar in nearby Rosslyn , Virginia , during this time . The business soon failed , in the midst of the Great Depression . He also attended George Washington University at night . Based upon a connection he made working for Walsh , Romney was hired as an apprentice for Alcoa in Pittsburgh in June 1930 . 
 When LaFount , an aspiring actress , began earning bit roles in Hollywood movies , Romney arranged to be transferred to Alcoa 's Los Angeles office for training as a salesman . There he took night classes at the University of Southern California . ( Romney did not attend for long , or graduate from , any of the colleges in which he was enrolled , accumulating only 2 ½ years of credits ; instead he has been described as an autodidact . ) LaFount had the opportunity to sign a $ 50 @,@ 000 , three @-@ year contract with Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer studios , but Romney convinced her to return to Washington with him as he was assigned a position there with Alcoa as a lobbyist . She later said she had never had a choice of both marriage and an acting career , because the latter would have upstaged him , but expressed no regrets about having chosen the former . Romney would later consider wooing her his greatest sales achievement . 
 The couple married on July 2 , 1931 , at Salt Lake City Temple . They would have four children : Margo Lynn ( born 1935 ) , Jane LaFount ( born 1938 ) , George Scott ( born 1941 ) , and Willard Mitt ( born 1947 ) . The couple 's marriage reflected aspects of their personalities and courtship . George was devoted to Lenore , and tried to bring her a flower every day , often a single rose with a love note . George was also a strong , blunt personality used to winning arguments by force of will , but the more self @-@ controlled Lenore was unintimidated and willing to push back against him . The couple quarreled so much as a result that their grandchildren would later nickname them " the <unk> " , but in the end , their closeness would allow them to settle arguments amicably . 
 As a lobbyist , Romney frequently competed on behalf of the aluminum industry against the copper industry , and defended Alcoa against charges of being a monopoly . He also represented the Aluminum Wares Association . In the early 1930s , he helped get aluminum windows installed in the U.S. Department of Commerce Building , at the time the largest office building in the world . 
 Romney joined the National Press Club and the Burning Tree and Congressional Country Clubs ; one reporter watching Romney hurriedly play golf at the last said , " There is a young man who knows where he is going . " Lenore 's cultural refinement and hosting skills , along with her father 's social and political connections , helped George in business , and the couple met the <unk> , the Roosevelts , and other prominent Washington figures . He was chosen by Pyke Johnson , a Denver newspaperman and automotive industry trade representative he met at the Press Club , to join the newly formed Trade Association Advisory Committee to the National Recovery Administration . The committee 's work continued even after the agency was declared unconstitutional in 1935 . During 1937 and 1938 , Romney was also president of the Washington Trade Association Executives . 
 = = Automotive industry representative = = 
 After nine years with Alcoa , Romney 's career had stagnated ; there were many layers of executives to climb through and a key promotion he had wanted was given to someone with more seniority . Pyke Johnson was vice president of the Automobile Manufacturers Association , which needed a manager for its new Detroit office . Romney got the job and moved there with his wife and two daughters in 1939 . An association study found Americans using their cars more for short trips and convinced Romney that the trend was towards more functional , basic transportation . In 1942 , he was promoted to general manager of the association , a position he held until 1948 . Romney also served as president of the Detroit Trade Association in 1941 . 
 In 1940 , as World War II raged overseas , Romney helped start the Automotive Committee for Air Defense , which coordinated planning between the automobile and aircraft industries . Immediately following the December 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor that drew the U.S. into the war , Romney helped turn that committee into , and became managing director of , the Automotive Council for War Production . This organization established a cooperative arrangement in which companies could share machine tools and production improvements , thus maximizing the industry 's contribution to the war production effort . It embodied Romney 's notion of " competitive cooperative capitalism " . 
 With labor leader Victor Reuther , Romney led the Detroit Victory Council , which sought to improve conditions for Detroit workers under wartime stress and deal with the causes of the 1943 Detroit race riots . Romney successfully appealed to the Federal Housing Administration to make housing available to black workers near the Ford Willow Run plant . He also served on the labor @-@ management committee of the Detroit section of the War Manpower Commission . 
 Romney became the chief spokesman of the automobile industry , often testifying before Congressional hearings about production , labor , and management issues ; he was mentioned or quoted in over 80 stories in The New York Times during this time . By war 's end , 654 manufacturing companies had joined the Automotive Council for War Production , and produced nearly $ 29 billion in output for the Allied military forces . This included over 3 million motorized vehicles , 80 percent of all tanks and tank parts , 75 percent of all aircraft engines , half of all diesel engines , and a third of all machine guns . Between a fifth and a quarter of all U.S. wartime production was accounted for by the automotive industry . 
 As peacetime production began , Romney persuaded government officials to forgo complex contract @-@ termination procedures , thus freeing auto plants to quickly produce cars for domestic consumption and avoid large layoffs . Romney was director of the American Trade Association Executives in 1944 and 1947 , and managing director of the National Automobile Golden Jubilee Committee in 1946 . From 1946 to 1949 , he represented U.S. employers as a delegate to the Metal Trades Industry conference of the International Labor Office . By 1950 , Romney was a member of the Citizens Housing and Planning Council , and criticized racial segregation in Detroit 's housing program when speaking before the Detroit City Council . Romney 's personality was blunt and intense , giving the impression of a " man in a hurry " , and he was considered a rising star in the industry . 
 = = American Motors Corporation chief executive = = 
 As managing director of the Automobile Manufacturers Association , Romney became good friends with then @-@ president George W. Mason . When Mason became chairman of the manufacturing firm Nash @-@ Kelvinator in 1948 , he invited Romney along " to learn the business from the ground up " as his roving assistant , and the new executive spent a year working in different parts of the company . At an inefficient Detroit refrigerator plant of the Kelvinator appliance division , Romney battled the Mechanics Educational Society of America union to institute a new industrial – labor relations program that forestalled the whole facility being shut down . He appealed to the workers by saying , " I am no college man . I 've laid floors , I 've done <unk> . I 've thinned beets and shocked wheat . " As Mason 's protégé , Romney assumed executive assignment for the development of the Rambler . 
 Mason had long sought a merger of Nash @-@ Kelvinator with one or more other companies , and on May 1 , 1954 , it merged with Hudson Motor Car to become the American Motors Corporation ( AMC ) . It was the largest merger in the history of the industry , and Romney became an executive vice president of the new firm . In October 1954 , Mason suddenly died of acute pancreatitis and pneumonia . Romney was named AMC 's president and chairman of the board the same month . 
 When Romney took over , he reorganized upper management , brought in younger executives , and pruned and rebuilt AMC 's dealer network . Romney believed that the only way to compete with the " Big Three " ( General Motors , Ford , and Chrysler ) was to stake the future of AMC on a new smaller @-@ sized car line . Together with chief engineer Meade Moore , by the end of 1957 Romney had completely phased out the Nash and Hudson brands , whose sales had been lagging . The Rambler brand was selected for development and promotion , as AMC pursued an innovative strategy : manufacturing only compact cars . The company struggled badly at first , losing money in 1956 , more in 1957 , and experiencing defections from its dealer network . Romney instituted company @-@ wide savings and efficiency measures , and he and other executives reduced their salaries by up to 35 percent . 
 Though AMC was on the verge of being taken over by corporate raider Louis Wolfson in 1957 , Romney was able to fend him off . Then sales of the Rambler finally took off , leading to unexpected financial success for AMC . It posted its first quarterly profit in three years in 1958 , was the only car company to show increased sales during the recession of 1958 , and moved from thirteenth to seventh place among worldwide auto manufacturers . In contrast with the Hudson 's NASCAR racing success in the early 1950s , the Ramblers were frequent winners in the coast @-@ to @-@ coast Mobil Economy Run , an annual event on U.S. highways . Sales remained strong during 1960 and 1961 ; the Rambler was America 's third most popular car both years . 
 A believer in " competitive cooperative consumerism " , Romney was effective in his frequent appearances before Congress . He discussed what he saw as the twin evils of " big labor " and " big business " , and called on Congress to break up the Big Three . As the Big Three automakers introduced ever @-@ larger models , AMC undertook a " gas @-@ guzzling dinosaur fighter " strategy , and Romney became the company spokesperson in print advertisements , public appearances , and commercials on the Disneyland television program . Known for his fast @-@ paced , shirt @-@ sleeved management style that ignored organization charts and levels of responsibility , he often wrote the ad copy himself . 
 Romney became what automotive writer Joe Sherman termed " a folk hero of the American auto industry " and one of the first high @-@ profile media @-@ savvy business executives . His focus on small cars as a challenge to AMC 's domestic competitors , as well as the foreign @-@ car invasion , was documented in the April 6 , 1959 , cover story of Time magazine , which concluded that " Romney has brought off singlehanded one of the most remarkable selling jobs in U.S. industry . " A full biography of him was published in 1960 ; the company 's resurgence made Romney a household name . The Associated Press named Romney its Man of the Year in Industry for four consecutive years , 1958 through 1961 . 
 The company 's stock rose from $ 7 per share to $ 90 per share , making Romney a millionaire from stock options . However , whenever he felt his salary and bonus was excessively high for a year , he gave the excess back to the company . After initial wariness , he developed a good relationship with United Automobile Workers leader Walter Reuther , and AMC workers also benefited from a then @-@ novel profit @-@ sharing plan . Romney was one of only a few Michigan corporate chiefs to support passage and implementation of the state Fair Employment Practices Act . 
 = = Local church and civic leadership = = 
 Religion was a paramount force in Romney 's life . In a 1959 essay for the Detroit Free Press he said , " My religion is my most precious possession . ... Except for my religion , I easily could have become excessively occupied with industry , social and recreational activities . Sharing personal responsibility for church work with my fellow members has been a vital counterbalance in my life . " Following LDS Church practices , he did not drink alcohol or caffeinated beverages , smoke , or swear . Romney and his wife tithed , and from 1955 to 1965 , gave 19 percent of their income to the church and another 4 percent to charity . 
 Romney was a high priest in the Melchizedek priesthood of the LDS , and beginning in 1944 he headed the Detroit church branch ( which initially was small enough to meet in a member 's house ) . By the time he was AMC chief , he presided over the Detroit Stake , which included not only all of Metro Detroit , Ann Arbor , and the Toledo area of Ohio but also the western edge of Ontario along the Michigan border . In this role , Romney oversaw the religious work of some 2 @,@ 700 church members , occasionally preached sermons , and supervised the construction of the first stake tabernacle east of the Mississippi River in 100 years . Because the stake covered part of Canada , he often interacted with Canadian Mission President Thomas S. Monson . Romney 's rise to a leadership role in the church reflected the church 's journey from a fringe pioneer religion to one that was closely associated with mainstream American business and values . Due in part to his prominence , the larger Romney family tree would become viewed as " LDS royalty " . 
 Romney and his family lived in affluent Bloomfield Hills , having moved there from Detroit around 1953 . He became deeply active in Michigan civic affairs . He was on the board of directors of the Children 's Hospital of Michigan and the United Foundation of Detroit , and was chairman of the executive committee of the Detroit Round Table of Catholics , Jews , and Protestants . In 1959 , he received the Anti @-@ Defamation League of B 'nai B 'rith 's Americanism award . 
 Starting in 1956 , Romney headed a citizen @-@ based committee for improved educational programs in Detroit 's public schools . The 1958 final report of the Citizens Advisory Committee on School Needs was largely Romney 's work and received considerable public attention ; it made nearly 200 recommendations for economy and efficiency , better teacher pay , and new infrastructure funding . Romney helped a $ 90 @-@ million education @-@ related bond issue and tax increase win an upset victory in an April 1959 statewide referendum . He organized Citizens for Michigan in 1959 , a nonpartisan group that sought to study Detroit 's problems and build an informed electorate . Citizens for Michigan built on Romney 's belief that assorted interest groups held too much influence in government , and that only the cooperation of informed citizens acting for the benefit of all could counter them . 
 Based on his fame and accomplishments in a state where automobile making was a central topic of conversation , Romney was seen as a natural to enter politics . He first became directly involved in politics in 1959 , when he was a key force in the petition drive calling for a constitutional convention to rewrite the Michigan Constitution . Romney 's sales skills made Citizens for Michigan one of the most effective organizations among those calling for the convention . Previously unaffiliated politically , Romney declared himself a member of the Republican Party and gained election to the convention . By early 1960 , many in Michigan 's somewhat moribund Republican Party were touting Romney as a possible candidate for governor , U.S. senator , or even U.S. vice president . 
 Also in early 1960 , Romney served on the Fair Campaign Practices Committee , a group also having Jewish , Catholic , mainline and evangelical Protestant , and Orthodox Christian members . It issued a report whose guiding principles were that no candidate for elected office should be supported or opposed due to their religion and that no campaign for office should be seen as an opportunity to vote for one religion against another . This statement helped pave the way for John F. Kennedy 's famous speech on religion and public office later that year . Romney briefly considered a run in the 1960 Senate election , but instead became a vice president of the constitutional convention that revised the Michigan constitution during 1961 and 1962 . 
 = = Governor of Michigan = = 
 After a period of pained indecision and a 24 @-@ hour prayer fast , Romney stepped down from AMC in February 1962 to enter electoral politics ( given an indefinite leave of absence , he was succeeded as president of AMC by Roy Abernethy ) . Romney 's position as the leader of the moderate Republicans at the constitutional convention helped gain him the Republican nomination for Governor of Michigan . He ran against incumbent Democratic Governor John B. Swainson in the general election . Romney campaigned on revising the state 's tax structure , increasing its appeal to businesses and the general public , and getting it " rolling again " . Romney decried both the large influence of labor unions within the Democratic Party and the similarly large influence of big business within the Republican Party . His campaign was among the first to exploit the capabilities of electronic data processing . 
 Romney won by some 80 @,@ 000 votes and ended a fourteen @-@ year stretch of Democratic rule in the state executive spot . His win was attributed to his appeal to independent voters and to those from the increasingly influential suburbs of Detroit , who by 1962 were more likely to vote Republican than the heavily Democratic residents of the city itself . Additionally , Romney had appeal to labor union members that was unusual for a Republican . Democrats won all the other statewide executive offices in the election , including Democratic incumbent T. John Lesinski in the separate election for Lieutenant Governor of Michigan . Romney 's success caused immediate mention of him as a presidential possibility for 1964 , and President John F. Kennedy said privately in 1963 that , " The one fellow I don 't want to run against is Romney . " 
 Romney was sworn in as governor on January 1 , 1963 . His initial concern was the implementation of the overhaul of the state 's financial and revenue structure that had been authorized by the constitutional convention . In 1963 , he proposed a comprehensive tax revision package that included a flat @-@ rate state income tax , but general economic prosperity alleviated pressure on the state budget and the Michigan Legislature rejected the measure . Romney 's early difficulties with the legislature helped undermine an attempted push that year of Romney as a national political figure by former Richard Nixon associates . One Michigan Democrat said of Romney , " He has not yet learned that things in government are not necessarily done the moment the man at the top gives an order . He is eager and sometimes impatient . " But over his first two years in office , Romney was able to work with Democrats – who often had at least partial control of the legislature – and an informal bipartisan coalition formed which allowed Romney to accomplish many of his goals and initiatives . 
 Romney held a series of Governor 's Conferences , which sought to find new ideas from public services professionals and community activists who attended . He opened his office in the Michigan State Capitol to visitors , spending five minutes with every citizen who wanted to speak with him on Thursday mornings , and was always sure to shake the hands of schoolchildren visiting the capitol . He almost always eschewed political activities on Sunday , the Mormon Sabbath . His blunt and unequivocal manner sometimes caused friction , and family members and associates used the idiom " bull in a china shop " to describe him . He took a theatrical approach to governance , staging sudden appearances in settings where he might be politically unwelcome . One former aide later said that willful was too weak a word to describe him , and chose messianic instead . Romney saw a moral dimension in every issue and his political views were held with as much fervor as religious ones ; writer Theodore H. White said " the first quality that surfaced , as one met and talked with George Romney over a number of years , was a sincerity so profound that , in conversation , one was almost embarrassed . " 
 Romney supported the American Civil Rights Movement while governor . Although he belonged to a church that did not allow black people in its lay clergy , Romney 's hardscrabble background and subsequent life experiences led him to support the movement . He reflected , " It was only after I got to Detroit that I got to know Negroes and began to be able to evaluate them and I began to recognize that some Negroes are better and more capable than lots of whites . " During his first State of the State address in January 1963 , Romney declared that " Michigan 's most urgent human rights problem is racial discrimination — in housing , public accommodations , education , administration of justice , and employment . " Romney helped create the state 's first civil rights commission . 
 When Martin Luther King , Jr. came to Detroit in June 1963 and led the 120 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Great March on Detroit , Romney designated the occasion Freedom March Day in Michigan , and sent state senator Stanley Thayer to march with King as his emissary , but did not attend himself because it was on Sunday . Romney did participate in a much smaller march protesting housing discrimination the following Saturday in Grosse Pointe , after King had left . Romney 's advocacy of civil rights brought him criticism from some in his own church ; in January 1964 , Quorum of the Twelve Apostles member Delbert L. Stapley wrote him that a proposed civil rights bill was " vicious legislation " and telling him that " the Lord had placed the curse upon the Negro " and men should not seek its removal . Romney refused to change his position and increased his efforts towards civil rights . Regarding the church policy itself , Romney was among those liberal Mormons who hoped the church leadership would revise the theological interpretation that underlay it , but Romney did not believe in publicly criticizing the church , subsequently saying that fellow Mormon Stewart Udall 's 1967 published denunciation of the policy " cannot serve any useful religious purpose " . 
 In the 1964 U.S. presidential election , Senator Barry Goldwater quickly became the likely Republican Party nominee . Goldwater represented a new wave of American conservatism , of which the moderate Romney was not a part . Romney also felt that Goldwater would be a drag on Republicans running in all the other races that year , including Romney 's own ( at the time , Michigan had two @-@ year terms for its governor ) . Finally , Romney disagreed strongly with Goldwater 's views on civil rights ; he would later say , " Whites and Negroes , in my opinion , have got to learn to know each other . Barry Goldwater didn 't have any background to understand this , to fathom them , and I couldn 't get through to him . " 
 During the June 1964 National Governors ' Conference , 13 of 16 Republican governors present were opposed to Goldwater ; their leaders were Jim Rhodes of Ohio , Nelson Rockefeller of New York ( whose own campaign had just stalled out with a loss to Goldwater in the California primary ) , William Scranton of Pennsylvania , and Romney . In an unusual Sunday press conference , Romney declared , " If [ Goldwater 's ] views deviate as indicated from the heritage of our party , I will do everything within my power to keep him from becoming the party 's presidential nominee . " Romney had , however , previously vowed to Michigan voters that he would not run for president in 1964 . Detroit newspapers indicated they would not support him in any such bid , and Romney quickly decided to honor his pledge to stay out of the contest . Scranton entered instead , but Goldwater prevailed decisively at the 1964 Republican National Convention . Romney 's name was entered into nomination as a favorite son by U.S. Representative Gerald Ford of Michigan ( who had not wanted to choose between candidates during the primary campaign ) and he received the votes of 41 delegates in the roll call ( 40 of Michigan 's 48 and one from Kansas ) . 
 At the convention , Romney fought for a strengthened civil rights plank in the party platform that would pledge action to eliminate discrimination at the state , local , and private levels , but it was defeated on a voice vote . He also failed to win support for a statement that condemned both left- and right @-@ wing extremism without naming any organizations , which lost a standing vote by a two @-@ to @-@ one margin . Both of Romney 's positions were endorsed by former President Dwight Eisenhower , who had an approach to civic responsibilities similar to Romney 's . As the convention concluded , Romney neither endorsed nor repudiated Goldwater and vice presidential nominee William E. Miller , saying he had reservations about Goldwater 's lack of support for civil rights and the political extremism that Goldwater embodied . 
 For the fall 1964 elections , Romney cut himself off from the national ticket , refusing to even appear on the same stage with them and continuing to feud with Goldwater privately . He campaigned for governor in mostly Democratic areas , and when pressed at campaign appearances about whether he supported Goldwater , he replied , " You know darn well I 'm not ! " Romney was re @-@ elected in 1964 by a margin of over 380 @,@ 000 votes over Democratic Congressman Neil <unk> , despite Goldwater 's landslide defeat to President Lyndon B. Johnson that swept away many other Republican candidates . Romney won 15 percent of Michigan 's black vote , compared to Goldwater 's two percent . 
 In 1965 , Romney visited South Vietnam for 31 days and said that he was continuing his strong support for U.S. military involvement there . During 1966 , while son Mitt was away in France on missionary work , George Romney guided Mitt 's fiancée Ann Davies in her conversion to Mormonism . Governor Romney continued his support of civil rights ; after violence broke out during the Selma to Montgomery marches in 1965 , he marched at the front of a Detroit parade in solidarity with the marchers . In 1966 , Romney had his biggest electoral success , winning re @-@ election again by some 527 @,@ 000 votes over Democratic lawyer <unk> <unk> ( this time to a four @-@ year term , after a change in Michigan law ) . His share of the black vote rose to over 30 percent , a virtually unprecedented accomplishment for a Republican . 
 By 1967 , a looming deficit prompted the legislature to overhaul Michigan 's tax structure . Personal and corporate state income taxes were created while business receipts and corporation franchise taxes were eliminated . Passage of an income levy had eluded past Michigan governors , no matter which party controlled of the legislature . Romney 's success convincing Democratic and Republican factions to compromise on the details of the measure was considered a key test of his political ability . 
 The massive 12th Street riot in Detroit began during the predawn hours of July 23 , 1967 , precipitated by a police raid of a speakeasy in a predominantly black neighborhood . As the day wore on and looting and fires got worse , Romney called in the Michigan State Police and the Michigan National Guard . At 3 a.m. on July 24 , Romney and Detroit Mayor Jerome Cavanagh called U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark and requested that federal troops be sent . Clark indicated that to do so , Romney would have to declare a state of civil insurrection , which the governor was loath to do from fear that insurance companies would seize upon it as a reason to not cover losses owing to the riot . Elements of the 82nd and 101st U.S. Army Airborne Divisions were mobilized outside of the city . As the situation in Detroit worsened , Romney told Deputy Secretary of Defense Cyrus Vance , " We gotta move , man , we gotta move . " Near midnight on July 24 , President Johnson authorized thousands of paratroopers to enter Detroit . Johnson went on national television to announce his actions and made seven references to Romney 's inability to control the riot using state and local forces . Thousands of arrests took place and the rioting continued until July 27 . The final toll was the largest of any American civil disturbance in fifty years : 43 dead , over a thousand injured , 2 @,@ 500 stores looted , hundreds of homes burned , and some $ 50 million overall in property damage . 
 There were strong political implications in the handling of the riot , as Romney was seen as a leading Republican contender to challenge Johnson 's presidential re @-@ election the following year ; Romney believed the White House had intentionally slowed its response and he charged Johnson with having " played politics " in his actions . The riot notwithstanding , by the end of Romney 's governorship the state had made strong gains in civil rights related to public employment , government contracting , and access to public accommodations . Lesser improvements were made in combating discrimination in private employment , housing , education , and law enforcement . Considerable state and federal efforts were made during this time to improve the lot of Michigan 's migrant farm workers and Native Americans , without much progress for either . 
 Romney greatly expanded the size of state government while governor . His first state budget , for fiscal year 1963 , was $ 550 million , a $ 20 million increase over that of his predecessor Swainson . Romney had also inherited an $ 85 million budget deficit , but left office with a surplus . In the following fiscal years , the state budget increased to $ 684 million for 1964 , $ 820 million for 1965 , $ 1 billion for 1966 , $ 1 @.@ 1 billion for 1967 , and was proposed as $ 1 @.@ 3 billion for 1968 . Romney led the way for a large increase in state spending on education , and Michigan began to develop one of the nation 's most comprehensive systems of higher education . There was a significant increase in funding support for local governments and there were generous benefits for the poor and unemployed . Romney 's spending was enabled by the post – World War II economic expansion that generated continued government surpluses and by a consensus of both parties in Michigan to maintain extensive state bureaucracies and expand public sector services . 
 The bipartisan coalitions that Romney worked with in the state legislature enabled him to reach most of his legislative goals . His record as governor continued his reputation for having , as writer Theodore H. White said , " a knack for getting things done . " Noted University of Michigan historian Sidney Fine assessed him as " a highly successful governor " . 
 = = 1968 presidential campaign = = 
 Romney 's wide margin of re @-@ election as governor in November 1966 thrust him to the forefront of national Republicans . In addition to his political record , the tall , square @-@ jawed , handsome , graying Romney matched what the public thought a president should look like . Republican governors were determined not to let a Goldwater @-@ sized loss recur , and neither Rockefeller nor Scranton wanted to run again ; the governors quickly settled on Romney as their favorite for the Republican presidential nomination in the 1968 U.S. presidential election . 
 Former Congressman and Republican National Committee chair Leonard W. Hall became Romney 's informal campaign manager . A Gallup Poll after the November elections showed Romney as favored among Republicans over former Vice President Richard Nixon for the Republican nomination , 39 percent to 31 percent ; a Harris Poll showed Romney besting President Johnson among all voters by 54 percent to 46 percent . Nixon considered Romney his chief opponent . Romney announced an exploratory phase for a possible campaign in February 1967 , beginning with a visit to Alaska and the Rocky Mountain states . 
 Romney 's greatest weakness was a lack of foreign policy expertise and a need for a clear position on the Vietnam War . The press coverage of the trip focused on Vietnam and reporters were frustrated by Romney 's initial reluctance to speak about it . The qualities that helped Romney as an industry executive worked against him as a presidential candidate ; he had difficulty being articulate , often speaking at length and too forthrightly on a topic and then later correcting himself while maintaining he was not . Reporter Jack <unk> joked that he was going to add a single key on his typewriter that would print , " Romney later explained .... " Life magazine wrote that Romney " manages to turn self @-@ expression into a positive ordeal " and that he was no different in private : " nobody can sound more like the public George Romney than the real George Romney let loose to ramble , inevitably away from the point and toward some distant moral precept . " 
 The perception grew that Romney was gaffe @-@ prone . The campaign , beset by internal rivalries , soon went through the first of several reorganizations . By then , Nixon had already overtaken Romney in Gallup 's Republican preference poll , a lead he would hold throughout the rest of the campaign . The techniques that had brought Romney victories in Michigan , such as operating outside established partisan formulas and keeping a distance from Republican Party organizational elements , proved ineffective in a party nominating contest . 
 Romney 's national poll ratings continued to erode , and by May he had lost his edge over Johnson . The Detroit riots of July 1967 did not change his standing among Republicans , but did give him a bounce in national polls against the increasingly unpopular president . 
 Questions were occasionally asked about Romney 's eligibility to run for President owing to his birth in Mexico , given the ambiguity in the United States Constitution over the phrase " natural @-@ born citizen " . Romney would depart the race before the matter could be more definitively resolved , although the preponderance of opinion then and since has been that he was eligible . 
 Romney was also the first Mormon to stage a credible run for the presidency . By this time , he was well known as a Mormon and perhaps the most nationally visible one since Brigham Young . But his membership in the LDS Church was scarcely mentioned at all during the campaign . What indirect discussion there was helped bring to national attention the church 's policy regarding blacks , but the contrast of Romney 's pro @-@ civil rights stance deflected any criticism of him and indirectly benefited the image of the church . Some historians and Mormons suspected then and later that had Romney 's campaign lasted longer and been more successful , his religion might have become a more prominent issue . Romney 's campaign did often focus on his core beliefs ; a Romney billboard in New Hampshire read " The Way To Stop Crime Is To Stop Moral Decay " . Dartmouth College students gave a bemused reaction to his morals message , displaying signs such as " God Is Alive and Thinks He 's George Romney " . A spate of books were published about Romney , more than for any other candidate , and included a friendly campaign biography , an attack from a former staffer , and a collection of Romney 's speeches . 
 On August 31 , 1967 , in a taped interview with locally influential ( and nationally syndicated ) talk show host Lou Gordon of <unk> @-@ TV in Detroit , Romney stated : " When I came back from Viet Nam [ in November 1965 ] , I 'd just had the greatest brainwashing that anybody can get . " He then shifted to opposing the war : " I no longer believe that it was necessary for us to get involved in South Vietnam to stop Communist aggression in Southeast Asia . " <unk> the " tragic " conflict , he urged " a sound peace in South Vietnam at an early time . " Thus Romney disavowed the war and reversed himself from his earlier stated belief that the war was " morally right and necessary " . 
 The " brainwashing " reference had been an offhand , unplanned remark that came at the end of a long , behind @-@ schedule day of campaigning . By September 7 , it found its way into prominence at The New York Times . Eight other governors who had been on the same 1965 trip as Romney said no such activity had taken place , and one of them , Philip H. Hoff of Vermont , said Romney 's remarks were " outrageous , kind of stinking ... Either he 's a most naïve man or he lacks judgment . " The connotations of brainwashing , following the experiences of American prisoners of war ( highlighted by the 1962 film The Manchurian Candidate ) , made Romney 's comment devastating , especially as it reinforced the negative image of Romney 's abilities that had already developed . The topic of brainwashing quickly became newspaper editorial and television talk show fodder , and Romney bore the brunt of the topical humor . Senator Eugene McCarthy , running against Johnson for the Democratic nomination , said that in Romney 's case , " a light rinse would have been sufficient . " Republican Congressman Robert T. Stafford of Vermont sounded a common concern : " If you 're running for the presidency , you are supposed to have too much on the ball to be brainwashed . " After the remark was aired , Romney 's poll ratings <unk> , going from 11 percent behind Nixon to 26 percent behind . 
 He nonetheless persevered , staging a three @-@ week , 17 @-@ city tour of the nation 's ghettos and disadvantaged areas that none of his advisors thought politically worthwhile . He sought to engage militants in dialogue , found himself exposed to the harsh realities and language of ghetto areas , and had an unusual encounter with hippies and The Diggers in San Francisco 's Haight @-@ Ashbury . 
 Romney formally announced on November 18 , 1967 , at Detroit 's Veterans Memorial Building , that he had " decided to fight for and win the Republican nomination and election to the Presidency of the United States . " His subsequent release of his federal tax returns – twelve years ' worth going back to his time as AMC head – was groundbreaking and established a precedent that many future presidential candidates would have to contend with . He spent the following months campaigning tirelessly , focusing on the New Hampshire primary , the first of the season , and doing all the on @-@ the @-@ ground activities known to that state : greeting workers at factory gates before dawn , having neighborhood meetings in private homes , and stopping at bowling alleys . He returned to Vietnam in December 1967 and made speeches and proposals on the subject , one of which presaged Nixon 's eventual policy of Vietnamization . For a while , he got an improved response from voters . 
 Two weeks before the March 12 primary , an internal poll showed Romney losing to Nixon by a six @-@ to @-@ one margin in New Hampshire . Rockefeller , seeing the poll result as well , publicly maintained his support for Romney but said he would be available for a draft ; the statement made national headlines and embittered Romney ( who would later claim it was Rockefeller 's entry , and not the " brainwashing " remark , that doomed him ) . Seeing his cause was hopeless , Romney announced his withdrawal as a presidential candidate on February 28 , 1968 . Romney wrote his son Mitt , still away on missionary work : " Your mother and I are not personally distressed . As a matter of fact , we are relieved . ... I aspired , and though I achieved not , I am satisfied . " 
 Nixon went on to gain the nomination . At the 1968 Republican National Convention in Miami Beach , Romney refused to release his delegates to Nixon , something Nixon did not forget . Romney finished a weak fifth , with only 50 votes on the roll call ( 44 of Michigan 's 48 , plus six from Utah ) . When party liberals and moderates and others expressed dismay at Nixon 's choice of Spiro Agnew as his running mate , Romney 's name was placed into nomination for vice president by Mayor of New York John Lindsay and pushed by several delegations . Romney said he did not initiate the move , but he made no effort to oppose it . Nixon saw the rebellion as a threat to his leadership and actively fought against it ; Romney lost to Agnew 1 @,@ 119 – 186 . Romney , however , worked for Nixon 's eventually successful campaign in the fall , which did earn him Nixon 's gratitude . 
 Presidential historian Theodore H. White wrote that during his campaign Romney gave " the impression of an honest and decent man simply not cut out to be President of the United States . " Governor Jim Rhodes of Ohio more memorably said , " Watching George Romney run for the presidency was like watching a duck try to make love to a football . " 
 = = Secretary of Housing and Urban Development = = 
 After the election , Nixon named Romney to be Secretary of Housing and Urban Development ( HUD ) . The president @-@ elect made the announcement as part of a nationally televised presentation of his new cabinet on December 11 , 1968 . Nixon praised Romney for his " missionary zeal " and said that he would also be tasked with mobilizing volunteer organizations to fight poverty and disease within the United States . In actuality , Nixon distrusted Romney politically , and appointed him to a liberally oriented , low @-@ profile federal agency partly to appease Republican moderates and partly to reduce Romney 's potential to challenge for the 1972 Republican presidential nomination . 
 Romney was confirmed by the Senate without opposition on January 20 , 1969 , the day of Nixon 's inauguration , and was sworn into office on January 22 , with Nixon at his side . Romney resigned as Governor of Michigan that same day , and was succeeded by Lieutenant Governor William G. Milliken . Milliken continued Romney 's model of downplaying party label and ideology , and Republicans held onto the governorship for three more terms until 1983 , though Michigan was one of the nation 's most blue @-@ collar states . 
 As secretary , Romney conducted the first reorganization of the department since its 1966 creation . His November 1969 plan brought programs with similar functions together under unified , policy @-@ based administration at the Washington level , and created two new assistant secretary positions . At the same time , he increased the number of regional and area offices and decentralized program operations and locality @-@ based decisions to them . 
 The Fair Housing Act of 1968 mandated a federal commitment towards housing desegregation , and required HUD to orient its programs in this direction . Romney , filled with moral passion , wanted to address the widening economic and geographic gulf between whites and blacks by moving blacks out of inner @-@ city ghettos into suburbs . Romney proposed an open housing scheme to facilitate desegregation , dubbed " Open Communities " ; HUD planned it for many months without keeping Nixon informed . 
 When the open housing proposal became public , local reaction was often hostile . This included Warren , Michigan , a blue @-@ collar suburb of Detroit where many blacks worked but could not live owing to the zoning practices , refusals , and intimidatory actions of white property owners , many of whom had come there from the city as part of white flight . HUD made Warren a prime target for Open Communities enforcement and threatened to halt all federal assistance to the town unless it took a series of actions to end racial discrimination there ; town officials said progress was being made and that their citizens resented forced integration . Romney rejected this response , partly because when he was governor , Warren residents had thrown rocks and garbage and yelled obscenities for days at a biracial couple who moved into town . Now the secretary said , " The youth of this nation , the minorities of this nation , the discriminated of this nation are not going to wait for ' nature to take its course . ' What is really at issue here is responsibility – moral responsibility . " 
 Romney visited Warren in July 1970 , and emphasized that affirmative action rather than forced integration was all that HUD was demanding , but the local populace was not satisfied and Romney was jeered as a police escort took him away from the meeting place . Nixon saw what happened in Warren and had no interest in the Open Communities policy in general , remarking to domestic adviser John Ehrlichman that , " This country is not ready at this time for either forcibly integrated housing or forcibly integrated education . " Open Communities also conflicted with Nixon 's use of the Southern strategy and his own views on race . Romney was forced to back down on Warren and release federal monies to them unconditionally . 
 When Black Jack , Missouri , subsequently resisted a HUD @-@ sponsored plan for desegregated <unk> and middle @-@ income housing , Romney appealed to U.S. Attorney General John Mitchell for Justice Department intervention . In September 1970 , Mitchell refused and Romney 's plan collapsed . Under Romney , HUD did put into place stricter racial guidelines in relation to new public housing projects , but overall administration implementation of the Fair Housing Act was lacking . Some of the responsibility lay with Romney 's inattentiveness to gaining political backing for the policy , including the failure to rally natural allies such as the NAACP . Salisbury University historian Dean J. <unk> writes that , " No civil rights initiative developed on Nixon 's watch was as sincerely devised or poorly executed as open communities . " 
 Another of Romney 's initiatives was " Operation Breakthrough " , which was intended to increase the amount of housing available to the poor and which did have Nixon 's initial support . Based on his automotive industry experience , Romney thought that the cost of housing could be significantly reduced if in @-@ factory modular construction techniques were used . However , HUD officials saw it too as a means to spearhead desegregation ; Romney said , " We 've got to put an end to the idea of moving to suburban areas and living only among people of the same economic and social class " . This aspect of the program brought about strong opposition at the local suburban level and lost support in the White House as well . Over half of HUD 's research funds during this time were spent on Operation Breakthrough , and it was modestly successful in its building goals . It did not revolutionize home construction , and was phased out once Romney left HUD , but side effects of the program did lead to more modern and consistent building codes and to introduction of technological advances such as the smoke alarm . In any case , using conventional methods , HUD set records for the amount of construction of assisted housing for low- and moderate @-@ income families . Toward the end of his term , Romney oversaw demolition of the infamous Pruitt – Igoe housing project in St. Louis . 
 Romney was largely outside the president 's inner circle and had minimal influence within the Nixon administration . His intense , sometimes bombastic style of making bold advances and awkward <unk> lacked adequate guile to succeed in Washington . Desegregation efforts in employment and education had more success than in housing during the Nixon administration , but HUD 's many missions and unwieldy structure , which sometimes worked at cross @-@ purposes , made it institutionally vulnerable to political attack . Romney also failed to understand or circumvent Nixon 's use of Ehrlichman and White House Chief of Staff H. R. Haldeman as policy gatekeepers and the consequent de facto downgrading of cabinet officers . Romney was used to being listened to and making his own decisions , and annoyed Nixon by casually interrupting him at meetings ; at one point , Nixon told Haldeman , " Just keep [ Romney ] away from me . " A statement by Romney that he would voluntarily reduce his salary to aid the federal budget was viewed by Nixon as an " ineffective grandstand play " . 
 By early 1970 , Nixon had decided he wanted Romney removed from his position . Nixon , who hated to fire people and was , as Ehrlichman later described , " notoriously <unk> " at it , instead hatched a plot to get Romney to run in the 1970 U.S. Senate race in Michigan . Instead , George came up with the idea of his wife Lenore running , and she received the backing of some state Republicans . But there was resistance to the move and initial suspicion that her candidacy was just a stalking horse for keeping his options open . She barely survived a primary against a conservative opponent , then lost badly in the general election to incumbent Democrat Philip A. Hart . He then blamed others for her having entered the race , when he had been the major force behind it . 
 In late 1970 , after opposition to Open Communities reached a peak , Nixon again decided that Romney should go . Still reluctant to dismiss him , Nixon tried to get Romney to resign by forcing him to capitulate on a series of policy issues . Romney surprised both Nixon and Haldeman by agreeing to back off his positions , and Nixon kept him as HUD secretary . Nixon remarked privately afterwards , " [ Romney ] talks big but folds under pressure . " Puzzled by Nixon 's lack of apparent ideological consistency across different areas of the government , Romney told a friend , " I don 't know what the president believes in . Maybe he doesn 't believe in anything , " an assessment shared by others both inside and outside the administration . 
 In spring 1972 , a major scandal struck the Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) , which since passage of the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 and the creation of the Government National Mortgage Association ( Ginnie Mae ) had been responsible for helping the poor buy homes in inner @-@ city areas via government @-@ backed mortgages . This was financed by mortgage @-@ backed securities , the first issues of which Romney had announced in 1970 . A number of FHA employees , along with a number of real estate firms and lawyers , were indicted for a scheme in which the value of cheap inner city homes was inflated and sold using those government @-@ backed mortgages to black buyers who could not really afford them , and the government was stuck for the bad loans when owners defaulted . FHA was under Romney 's purview , and he conceded that HUD had been unprepared to deal with speculators and had not been alert to earlier signs of illegal activity . The FHA scandal gave Nixon the ability to shut down HUD 's remaining desegregation efforts with little political risk ; by January 1973 , all federal housing funds had been frozen . 
 In August 1972 , Nixon announced Romney would inspect Hurricane Agnes flood damage in Wilkes @-@ Barre , Pennsylvania , but neglected to tell Romney first . Much of the area lacked shelter six weeks after the storm , residents were angry , and Romney got into a three @-@ way shouting match with Governor Milton J. Shapp and a local citizens ' representative . Romney denounced Shapp 's proposal that the federal government pay off the mortgages of victims as " unrealistic and demagogic " , and the representative angrily responded to Romney , " You don 't give a damn whether we live or die . " The confrontation received wide media attention , damaging Romney 's public reputation . Frustrated , Romney wanted to resign immediately , but Nixon , worried about the fallout to his 1972 re @-@ election campaign , insisted that Romney stay on . Romney agreed , although he indicated to the press that he would leave eventually . 
 Romney finally did hand in his resignation on November 9 , 1972 , following Nixon 's re @-@ election . His departure was announced on November 27 , 1972 , as part of the initial wave of departures from Nixon 's first @-@ term cabinet . Romney said he was unhappy with presidential candidates who declined to address " the real issues " facing the nation for fear they would lose votes , and said he would form a new national citizens ' organization that would attempt to enlighten the public on the most vital topics . He added that he would stay on as secretary until his successor could be appointed and confirmed , and did stay until Nixon 's second inauguration on January 20 , 1973 . Upon his departure , Romney said he looked forward " with great enthusiasm " to his return to private life . 
 The Boston Globe later termed Romney 's conflicts with Nixon a matter that " played out with Shakespearean drama " . Despite all the setbacks and frustrations , University at Buffalo political scientist Charles M. Lamb concluded that Romney pressed harder to achieve suburban integration than any prominent federal official from the 1970s through the 1990s . In 2008 , Lehman College sociology professor Christopher <unk> assessed the Romney @-@ era HUD as having come " surprisingly close to implementing unpopular <unk> policies " but in the end was unable to bring about meaningful alterations in American segregation patterns , with no equivalent effort having happened since then or likely to in the foreseeable future . 
 = = Public service , volunteerism , and final years = = 
 Romney was known as an advocate of public service , and volunteerism was a passion of his . He initiated several volunteer programs while Governor of Michigan , and at the beginning of the Nixon administration chaired the Cabinet Committee on Voluntary Action . Out of this the National Center for Voluntary Action was created : an independent , private , non @-@ profit organization intended to encourage volunteerism on the part of American citizens and organizations , to assist in program development for voluntary efforts , and to make voluntary action an important force in American society . Romney 's long interest in volunteerism stemmed from the Mormon belief in the power of institutions to transform the individual , but also had a secular basis . At the National Center 's first meeting on February 20 , 1970 , he said : 
 Americans have four basic ways of solving problems that are too big for individuals to handle by themselves . One is through the federal government . A second is through state governments and the local governments that the states create . The third is through the private sector – the economic sector that includes business , agriculture , and labor . The fourth method is the independent sector – the voluntary , cooperative action of free individuals and independent association . Voluntary action is the most powerful of these , because it is uniquely capable of stirring the people themselves and involving their enthusiastic energies , because it is their own – voluntary action is the people 's action . ... As Woodrow Wilson said , " The most powerful force on earth is the spontaneous cooperation of a free people . " Individualism makes cooperation worthwhile – but cooperation makes freedom possible . 
 In 1973 , after he left the cabinet , Romney became chair and CEO of the National Center for Voluntary Action . In 1979 , this organization merged with the Colorado @-@ based National Information Center on Volunteerism and became known as VOLUNTEER : The National Center for Citizen Involvement ; Romney headed the new organization . The organization simplified its name to VOLUNTEER : The National Center in 1984 and to the National Volunteer Center in 1990 . Romney remained as chair of these organizations throughout this time . 
 Within the LDS Church , Romney remained active and prominent , serving as patriarch of the Bloomfield Hills Stake and holding the office of regional representative of the Twelve , covering Michigan and northern Ohio . As part of a longtime habit of playing golf daily , he had long ago concocted a " compact 18 " format in which he played three balls on each of six holes , or similar formulations depending upon the amount of daylight . During the early part of the Reagan administration , Romney served on the President 's Task Force for Private Sector Initiatives along with LDS leader Monson . In 1987 , he held a four @-@ generation extended family reunion in Washington , where he showed the places and recounted the events of his life which had occurred there . Looking back on his and some other failed presidential bids , he once concluded , " You can 't be right too soon and win elections . " 
 President George H. W. Bush 's Points of Light Foundation was created in 1990 , also to encourage volunteerism . Romney received the Points of Light Foundation 's inaugural Lifetime Achievement Award from President Bush in April 1991 . The Bush administration wanted to tap Romney to chair the new foundation , but he reportedly refused to head two organizations doing the same thing and suggested they merge . They did so in September 1991 , and Romney became one of the founding directors of the Points of Light Foundation & Volunteer Center National Network . In the early 1990s , Romney was also involved in helping to set up the Commission on National and Community Service , one of the predecessors to the later Corporation for National and Community Service . He gave speeches emphasizing the vital role of people helping people , and in 1993 inspired the first national meeting of volunteer centers . 
 For much of his final two decades , Romney had been out of the political eye , but he re @-@ emerged to the general public when he campaigned for his son , Mitt Romney , during the younger Romney 's bid to unseat Senator Edward M. Kennedy in the 1994 U.S. Senate election in Massachusetts . Romney had urged Mitt to enter the race and moved into his son 's house for its duration , serving as an unofficial advisor . Romney was a vigorous surrogate for his son in public appearances and at fundraising events . When Kennedy 's campaign sought to bring up the LDS Church 's past policy on blacks , Romney interrupted Mitt 's press conference and said loudly , " I think it is absolutely wrong to keep hammering on the religious issues . And what Ted is trying to do is bring it into the picture . " The father counseled the son to be relaxed in appearance and to pay less attention to his political consultants and more to his own instincts , a change that the younger Romney made late in the ultimately unsuccessful campaign . 
 That same year , Ronna Romney , Romney 's ex @-@ daughter @-@ in @-@ law ( formerly married to G. Scott Romney ) , decided to seek the Republican nomination for the U.S. Senate from Michigan . While Mitt and G. Scott endorsed Ronna Romney , George Romney had endorsed her opponent and the eventual winner , Spencer Abraham , during the previous year when Ronna was considering a run but had not yet announced . A family spokesperson said that George Romney had endorsed Abraham before knowing Ronna Romney would run and could not go back on his word , although he did refrain from personally campaigning on Abraham 's behalf . 
 By January 1995 , amid press criticism of the Points of Light Foundation engaging in ineffective , wasteful spending , Romney expressed concern that the organization had too high a budget . Active to the end , in July 1995 , four days before his death , Romney proposed a presidential summit to encourage greater volunteerism and community service , and the night before his death he drove to a meeting of another volunteer organization . 
 On July 26 , 1995 , Romney died of a heart attack at the age of 88 while he was doing his morning exercising on a treadmill at his home in Bloomfield Hills , Michigan ; he was discovered by his wife Lenore but it was too late to save him . He was buried at the Fairview Cemetery in Brighton , Michigan . In addition to his wife and children , Romney was survived by 23 grandchildren and 33 great @-@ grandchildren . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Presidents ' Summit For America 's Future took place in Philadelphia in 1997 , manifesting Romney 's last volunteerism proposal , with the organization America 's Promise coming out of it . For many years , the Points of Light Foundation ( and its predecessor organization ) has given out an annual Lenore and George W. Romney Citizen Volunteer Award ( later retitled the George and Lenore Romney Citizen Volunteer Award ) ; the inaugural such award in 1987 went to George Romney himself . The Points of Light Foundation and the Corporation for National and Community Service also give out a George W. Romney Volunteer Center Excellence Award ( later the George W. Romney Excellence Award ) at the annual National Conference on Community Volunteering and National Service ( later the National Conference on Volunteering and Service ) . The George W. Romney Volunteer Center itself is sponsored by the United Way for Southeastern Michigan , and began during Romney 's lifetime . 
 Founded in 1998 with a grant from Romney 's immediate family , the George W. Romney Institute of Public Management in the Marriott School of Management at Brigham Young University honors the legacy left by Romney . Its mission is to develop people of high character who are committed to service , management , and leadership in the public sector and in non @-@ profit organizations throughout the world . 
 The building housing the main offices of the Governor of Michigan in Lansing is known as the George W. Romney Building following a 1997 renaming . The Governor George Romney Lifetime Achievement Award is given annually by the State of Michigan , to recognize citizens who have demonstrated a commitment to community involvement and volunteer service throughout their lifetimes . In 2010 , Adrian College in Michigan announced the opening of its George Romney Institute for Law and Public Policy . Its purpose is to explore the interdisciplinary nature of law and public policy and encourage practitioners , academics , and students to work together on issues in this realm . 
 = = Authored books = = 
 The Concerns of a Citizen . New York : G. P. Putnam 's Sons . 1968 . OCLC <unk> . 
 The Mission and the Dream . New York : G. P. Putnam 's Sons . 1968 . ( Galley proofs produced , but <unk> process ceased before actual publication ) 
 = Berlin ( NCIS ) = 
 " Berlin " is the 21st episode of the tenth season of the American police procedural drama NCIS , and the 231st episode overall . It originally aired on CBS in the United States on April 23 , 2013 . The episode is written by Scott Williams and Gina <unk> Monreal and directed by Terrence O 'Hara , and was seen live by 17 @.@ 33 million viewers . 
 The episode advances a storyline focusing on the murder of significant secondary characters in the series and the romance between main characters Tony and Ziva . It carries the storyline surrounding the deaths of Ziva 's father , Mossad Director Eli David , and Vance 's wife , Jackie , who were both killed off in the January episode " Shabbat Shalom " . Ziva continues to pursue revenge against Eli 's killer , Ilan Bodnar , and Vance continues to endorse her actions despite orders from Homeland Security to rein them in . 
 " Berlin " introduced the new Mossad director , Orli Elbaz , portrayed by Marina Sirtis . Several actors reprised their roles from previous episodes , including Gabi <unk> as young Ziva , Ben Morrison as young Eli , and Oded Fehr as Ilan Bodnar . 
 The installment was generally well @-@ received , with the ratings being up from the previous week and critics giving it favorable reviews . The network and producers advertised the reported development of Ziva 's relationship with Tony within the episode . Particularly , a scene in which the characters dance together while in Berlin was heavily promoted and received favorable commentary from reviewers . 
 = = Background = = 
 NCIS follows a team of government agents who work for the Naval Criminal Investigative Service . The main cast includes Mark Harmon as team leader Leroy Jethro Gibbs , Michael Weatherly as Senior Agent Anthony " Tony " <unk> , Cote de Pablo as Mossad Liaison Officer turned NCIS Agent Ziva David , Pauley <unk> as Forensic Specialist Abby Sciuto , Sean Murray as Special Agent Timothy McGee , David McCallum as Autopsy Technician Donald " Ducky " Mallard , Rocky Carroll as NCIS Director Leon Vance , and Brian <unk> as Medical Assistant Jimmy Palmer . 
 Executive producer Gary Glasberg began discussing the possibility of killing off Ziva 's father and Vance 's wife in the spring of 2012 . He approached Rocky Carroll and Cote de Pablo about the potential storyline , as well as Paula Newsome and Michael Nouri , who portray Jackie Vance and Eli David respectively . De Pablo was interested in the idea , seeing the ramifications of it as something that had not been explored with her character before , and Carroll agreed that the death of Vance 's wife would dynamically change his role in the series . Glasberg reported that Newsome and Nouri were understandably unhappy about their characters ' deaths , but agreed to " give it everything they could " . The plot twist , initially advertised as a " huge Ziva story " that would " rock Vance 's world " , culminated in Eli and Jackie being shot to death in a house attack in the 11th episode of the season , " Shabbat Shalom " . 
 The killings set the course for the rest of the season , and , in the following episode , " Shiva " , it is revealed that Eli 's protégé , Ilan Bodnar , had orchestrated the attack . Ziva begins to seek revenge with Vance 's support , covertly attempting to track Bodnar 's location after he escapes arrest and goes into hiding . In the episode directly prior to " Berlin " , Tony confronts her about her behavior , prompting her to approach Gibbs about going to Rome to apprehend Bodnar , where he is believed to be located . Gibbs agrees and instructs her to take Tony with her . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As the episode opens , Mossad Officer Amir Mantel ( Dove Meir ) is shot dead at point blank range in an American parking garage . At NCIS headquarters , Ziva cancels plans to pursue Eli David 's killer , Ilan Bodnar ( Oded Fehr ) , in Rome , having come to the conclusion that he will relocate to Berlin shortly . Before she and Tony depart , the new Mossad director , Orli Elbaz ( Marina Sirtis ) , arrives in hopes of collaborating with the agency in the search for Bodnar . Ziva <unk> congratulates her for her promotion and declines an offer to put her in contact with Mossad operatives in Rome . 
 Elbaz informs Gibbs and Director Vance that five Mossad officers went rogue following Eli 's assassination in support of Bodnar 's attempted coup d 'état . She explains that Mantel had been investigating the situation when he was killed , and Vance hesitantly grants her request for cooperation among the agencies . 
 Beginning on the airplane to Berlin , flashbacks are interlaced throughout the episode , illustrating the tensions caused by Eli 's frequent absence during Ziva 's adolescence and the disintegration of Rivka ( <unk> <unk> ) and Eli David 's marriage . Also while on the plane , Ziva explains her rationale for changing their destination : her father had told her to convert all funds to diamonds with a dealer in Berlin should she ever need to go into hiding . She assumes that he would have given Bodnar , who he viewed as a son , the same advice . 
 She and Tony meet up with her Israeli friend , Adam Eshel ( Damon <unk> ) , who gives them information on Bodnar 's whereabouts and intentions . Bodnar contacts Ziva on the computer , urging her to walk away . They are able to track his location but are unable to apprehend him as he disappears into a crowd . Later , they learn that he is planning to pick up the diamonds from an ally ( Willem Van Der <unk> ) at a night club . While waiting to intercept him , Tony dances with Ziva both to help her get a better view of the area and to calm her agitated state of mind . Bodnar seems to appear , but when Ziva approaches him , she is stunned to see that it is Ilan 's brother , <unk> ( <unk> Goldberg ) . 
 Meanwhile , Gibbs and Vance order McGee to hack into the Mossad database , discovering that all five operatives Elbaz had claimed were rogue are still listed as active members and that Mantel was the only traitor . When confronted , Elbaz at first deflects , but when informed that " Bodnar " has been arrested in Berlin , admits that she had believed that he never left the United States . Realizing shortly after that it is <unk> who is in custody , she explains that she had hoped that the other agencies ' search in Rome would cause Ilan to let his guard down . Vance and Homeland Senior Division Chief Tom Morrow ( Alan Dale ) , while angry about her deception , decide to look the other way . 
 As Ziva and Tony drive home from the airport , she divulges the reason for her resentment of the new director : Orli Elbaz was the reason for her parents ' divorce . She discloses that she had always believed that it was a political strategy on Elbaz 's part in attempt to advance her rank in Mossad , though she now thinks that it is possible that Elbaz had loved Eli . When she adds that she believes that she would be a different person were it not for Elbaz , Tony expresses thankfulness that things occurred the way they did . 
 The episode ends with a cliffhanger when an unknown vehicle crashes into their car , leaving their fates unclear . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Berlin " was written by Scott Williams and Gina <unk> Monreal . The episode marked the return of Ilan Bodnar , the " disgraced Mossad Deputy Director " last seen when he fled from both NCIS and Mossad after the deaths of Eli David and Jackie Vance . Following the two @-@ part episode arc in January surrounding the killings and the immediate aftermath , show runner Gary Glasberg decided to pull away from the storyline for a few months to focus on the typical police procedural work that the NCIS team is normally shown doing . The writers returned to the plot in " Chasing Ghosts " , the episode before " Berlin " by revealing that Ziva had been searching for Bodnar on her despite being told not to , intending to kill him as revenge . 
 Glasberg previewed Ziva 's state of mind and divulged , " People are going to see a Ziva David that they haven 't seen in a long time . There is a strength and a resolute determination . " A few days after the episode aired , Williams and Monreal stated : 
 Since we last saw Ilan Bodnar ... , we 've striven to whet your appetite with a few choice ingredients . 1 . Ziva 's determination for revenge . 2 . Tony 's watchful eye over his favorite Israeli , and ... 3 . The sparks that fly when 1 and 2 combine . Yep , the path of vengeance brings Tony and Ziva together in ways we can only hint at in other episodes . So when our fearless leader , Gary Glasberg , teamed us up with orders to add another chapter to this Tiva [ Tony and Ziva ] saga , we jumped at the challenge . And that was BEFORE we realized we 'd get to write flashbacks , and a dance , and a hotel room , and diamonds , and the new Mossad director , and Berlin , and a car crash . Truth is , start to finish , this episode was a blast . And it all started with Tiva … 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 " Berlin " marked the first appearance of Eli David 's killer , Ilan Bodnar , played by Oded Fehr , since the January episode " Shiva " . Gabi <unk> reprised her role as young Ziva for flashbacks threaded throughout the episode , and Ben Morrison acted alongside her as young Eli . 
 On March 25 , 2013 , the casting of Marina Sirtis as Orli Elbaz , the new director of Mossad , was announced . Sirtis , who formerly portrayed the main character Deanna Troi in the Star Trek enterprise , indicated that she enjoyed working with Mark Harmon and said that he welcomed her to the set by bringing her breakfast on the first day of filming . 
 " There is a lot of history between Ziva and Orli , " Glasberg hinted before the episode aired . He added that the characters ' relationship would be tense and complex ; their background and the reasoning behind Ziva 's animosity towards the new Mossad director would be explained in the final scenes . Sirtis described her character 's relationship with Ziva as electric , explaining that she saw Orli as a <unk> to Ziva 's intensity and drive for vengeance . Their history , she believed , is " kind of mind @-@ blowing " ; it provides an explanation for subplots introduced earlier in the episode . She clarified that Director Elbaz would not be a " shrinking flower " : " She 's kickass . She 's strong . She 's manipulative . She uses every weapon in her female arsenal . These parts for middle @-@ aged women in Hollywood do not come along very often . I 'm thrilled that the producers of the show were brave enough to cast a woman in this role . They 're prepared to take risks . It 's a big gamble . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Before the episode aired , a photograph depicting Tony and Ziva dancing while in Germany was released and promoted , and Glasberg commented , " This is a very personal moment of vulnerability where her guard goes down and she lets herself melt into his arms . I think it 's a moment that our Tiva fans will truly enjoy . " 
 Cote de Pablo relayed that there had been a dispute between the director , Terrence O 'Hara , and the actors during filming about how the scene should be choreographed . Both sides thought that it needed to be very intimate , but the director thought that the moment should be drawn out more while de Pablo and Michael Weatherly wanted to keep it brief . Furthermore , the latter two believed that simply looking at each other would be sufficient to convey the message to the audience . Eventually , de Pablo approached O 'Hara and said , " Listen , if there was any more time of staring into each other 's eyes , it would be like , cut to a hotel room . " In an interview , she explained that she and Weatherly played the characters as being at a more vulnerable level than is typical for the show . She likened Tony to a " man Teddy Bear " in the episode ; in the Tony @-@ Ziva dynamic , he is normally portrayed as being the more juvenile of the two while Ziva is more mature and worldly . In " Berlin " , their roles are largely reversed as more of " the little girl in Ziva " is shown and as Tony takes charge of the situation while they are dancing . De Pablo said that she found this reversal in their interactions to be an interesting change . 
 Producers Avery Drewe and Richie Owens coordinated the visual effects during the final scene of the episode and were only able to do one take during filming . Stunt driver Steve Kelso drove the SUV when it crashed into Tony 's car , reportedly driving at 50 miles per hour , though bloggers indicated that they thought that the car looked more like it was going 80 miles per hour . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Berlin " was seen by 17 @.@ 33 million live viewers at its April 23 , 2013 broadcast , with a 2 @.@ 8 / 8 share among adults aged 18 to 49 . A rating point represents one percent of the total number of television sets in American households , and a share means the percentage of television sets in use tuned to the program . In total viewers , " Berlin " was the highest rated show on the night it aired . The spin @-@ off NCIS : Los Angeles drew second and was seen by 14 @.@ 22 million viewers . Berlin had higher ratings and attracted more adults aged 18 – 49 than the previous episode , " Chasing Ghosts " . 
 = = = Critical reviews = = = 
 BuddyTV marked " Berlin " as number 9 on its list of " The 10 Best ' Tiva ' Episodes " , and Entertainment Weekly contributor Sandra Gonzalez remarked that the episode had " some of the best ' Tiva ' moments of all time " . TVline reviewers Matt Webb Mitovich and Michael Ausiello commented that the episode gave Tiva fans " the best of times ... [ and ] the worst of times " , and that there were both light and dark moments for the couple , " including ' diamond shopping , ' dancing ( punctuated by a meaningful Eli flashback ) and , yes , hand @-@ holding . " 
 Douglas Wolfe from TV Fanatic gave the episode 4 @.@ 8 / 5 and said that he did not think the episode could have been executed better . Wolfe emphasized Ziva 's back story with her father and speculated that many of her choices were based upon events that her family experienced , including her father 's repeated absences and the breakup of her parents ' marriage due to Eli 's indiscretions with a young Orli Elbaz , which also explained Ziva 's resentment of Elbaz . Wolfe was touched by Ziva 's dance with Tony , and her flashback to dancing with her father as a child while he tells her , " My Ziva . One day you will dance with a man who deserves your love " . In a TV Fanatic round table , Steve Marsi added , " What an emotionally loaded quote from the Eli flashback , followed by the much @-@ anticipated present @-@ day dance . " He went on to say that Sirtis did well as the new Mossad director and that " Counselor Deanna Troi was nothing but a faint memory " . Michelle <unk> from TV Equals praised the storyline and agreed that Marina Sirtis performed well in the role , saying that she found Orli to be a more likeable character than Eli David . 
 " Berlin " ended with Tony and Ziva being in what appeared to be a severe car crash , so viewers speculated about the extent of the damage done and focused on the fact that Ziva 's portrayer had not yet renewed her contract for the show at the time . TV Guide called the car crash in the closing moments of the episode as its " best cliffhanger " of the week . 
 = SMS Friedrich der Grosse ( 1911 ) = 
 SMS Friedrich der Grosse was the second vessel of the Kaiser class of battleships of the German Imperial Navy . Friedrich der Grosse 's keel was laid on 26 January 1910 at the AG Vulcan dockyard in Hamburg , her hull was launched on 10 June 1911 , and she was commissioned into the fleet on 15 October 1912 . The ship was equipped with ten 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns in five twin turrets , and had a top speed of 23 @.@ 4 knots ( 43 @.@ 3 km / h ; 26 @.@ 9 mph ) . Friedrich der Grosse was assigned to the III Squadron of the High Seas Fleet for the majority of World War I , and served as fleet flagship from her commissioning until 1917 . 
 Along with her four sister ships , Kaiser , Kaiserin , König Albert , and Prinzregent Luitpold , Friedrich der Grosse participated in all the major fleet operations of World War I , including the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . Toward the center of the German line , Friedrich der Grosse was not as heavily engaged as the leading German ships , such as the battleships König and Grosser Kurfürst and the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group — Friedrich der Grosse emerged from the battle completely unscathed . In 1917 , the new battleship Baden replaced Friedrich der Grosse as the fleet flagship . 
 After Germany 's defeat in the war and the signing of the Armistice in November 1918 , Friedrich der Grosse and most of the capital ships of the High Seas Fleet were interned by the British Royal Navy in Scapa Flow . The ships were disarmed and reduced to skeleton crews while the Allied powers negotiated the final version of the Treaty of Versailles . On 21 June 1919 , days before the treaty was signed , the commander of the interned fleet , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , ordered the fleet to be scuttled to ensure that the British would not be able to seize the ships . Friedrich der Grosse was raised in 1936 and broken up for scrap metal . Her bell was returned to Germany in 1965 and is now located at the Fleet Headquarters in Glücksburg . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Ordered under the contract name Ersatz Heimdall as a replacement for the obsolete coastal defense ship Heimdall , Friedrich der Grosse was laid down at the AG Vulcan dockyard in Hamburg on 26 January 1910 . She was launched on 10 June 1911 , after which AG Vulcan conducted builder 's trials . At her launching ceremony , Princess Alexandra Victoria performed the christening and Field Marshal Colmar Freiherr von der Goltz gave a speech . She was then transferred to Wilhelmshaven and commissioned into the fleet on 15 October 1912 . Exercises in the Baltic Sea followed ; Friedrich der Grosse then went to Kiel for final fitting @-@ out work . On 22 January 1913 , the ship was finally ready for active service . She cost the German government 45 @,@ 802 @,@ 000 marks . 
 Friedrich der Grosse was 172 @.@ 40 m ( 565 ft 7 in ) long overall and displaced a maximum of 27 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 26 @,@ 570 long tons ) . The ship had a beam of 29 m ( 95 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 10 m ( 29 ft 10 in ) forward and 8 @.@ 80 m ( 28 ft 10 in ) aft . She was powered by three sets of AEG Curtis turbines , supplied with steam by 16 coal @-@ fired boilers . On trials , the powerplant produced a top speed of 22 @.@ 4 knots ( 41 @.@ 5 km / h ; 25 @.@ 8 mph ) . She carried 3 @,@ 600 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 500 long tons ) of coal , which enabled a maximum range of 7 @,@ 900 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 600 km ; 9 @,@ 100 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Friedrich der Grosse was protected by heavy Krupp cemented armor ; the main armored belt was 350 mm ( 14 in ) thick amidships and the conning tower had 400 mm ( 16 in ) thick sides . The gun turrets had 300 mm ( 12 in ) sides . As with the other four ships in her class , Friedrich der Grosse carried anti @-@ torpedo nets until after the Battle of Jutland in 1916 . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of ten 30 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 50 guns in five twin turrets . She disposed with the inefficient hexagonal turret arrangement of previous German battleships ; instead , three of the five turrets were mounted on the centerline , with two of them arranged in a superfiring pair aft . The other two turrets were placed en echelon amidships , such that both could fire on the broadside . The ship was also armed with fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 guns in casemates amidships , eight 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 guns in casemates ; these were removed during the war and replaced with four 8 @.@ 8 cm L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns . Her armament was rounded out by five 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedo tubes , all mounted in the ship 's hull . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning in January 1913 , Friedrich der Grosse conducted sea trials before becoming the fleet flagship on 2 March , replacing Deutschland . The ship participated in her first round of fleet maneuvers in February 1913 , which were conducted in the Kattegat and the North Sea . The next month saw another round of exercises , from 12 to 14 March . The ship went into dock for periodic maintenance in April , and was ready for artillery training by the end of the month . Extensive fleet maneuvers were conducted in the North Sea from 5 to 27 May . Friedrich der Grosse , as the Navy 's newest battleship , was sent to Kiel for Kiel Week in June . While there , she was visited by the Italian king Victor Emmanuel III and his wife Elena . In mid @-@ July , the fleet conducted its annual summer cruise to Norway , which lasted until mid @-@ August . During the cruise , Friedrich der Grosse visited <unk> , Norway . The autumn maneuvers followed after the fleet returned ; they lasted from 31 August to 9 September . Unit drills and individual ship training were conducted in October and November . 
 In early 1914 , Friedrich der Grosse participated in additional ship and unit training . The annual spring maneuvers were conducted in the North Sea at the end of March . Further fleet exercises followed in April and May in the Baltic and North Seas . The ship again went to Kiel Week that year . Despite the rising international tensions following the assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand on 28 June , the High Seas Fleet began its summer cruise to Norway on 13 July . During the last peacetime cruise of the Imperial Navy , the fleet conducted drills off Skagen before proceeding to the Norwegian fjords on 25 July . The following day the fleet began to steam back to Germany , as a result of Austria @-@ Hungary 's ultimatum to Serbia . On the 27th , the entire fleet assembled off Cape Skudenes before returning to port , where they remained at a heightened state of readiness . War between Austria @-@ Hungary and Serbia broke out the following day , and in the span of a week all of the major European powers had joined the conflict . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The High Seas Fleet , including Friedrich der Grosse , conducted a number of sweeps and advances into the North Sea . The first occurred on 2 – 3 November 1914 , though no British forces were encountered . Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet , adopted a strategy in which the battlecruisers of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group raided British coastal towns to lure out portions of the Grand Fleet where they could be destroyed by the High Seas Fleet . The raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 was the first such operation . On the evening of 15 December , the German battle fleet of some twelve dreadnoughts — including Friedrich der Grosse and her four sisters — and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . Skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced von Ingenohl that he was faced with the entire Grand Fleet . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II to avoid risking the fleet unnecessarily , von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battle fleet back toward Germany . 
 Following the loss of SMS Blücher at the Battle of Dogger Bank in January 1915 , the Kaiser removed Admiral von Ingenohl from his post on 2 February . Admiral Hugo von Pohl replaced him as commander of the fleet . Admiral von Pohl conducted a series of fleet advances in 1915 in which Friedrich der Grosse took part ; in the first one on 29 – 30 March , the fleet steamed out to the north of Terschelling and return without incident . Another followed on 17 – 18 April , where Friedrich der Grosse and the rest of the fleet covered a mining operation by the II Scouting Group . Three days later , on 21 – 22 April , the High Seas Fleet advanced toward Dogger Bank , though again failed to meet any British forces . 
 The II Scouting Group performed another minelaying operation on 17 – 18 May , and Friedrich der Grosse and the rest of the fleet steamed out in support . Less than two weeks later on 29 – 30 May , the fleet attempted to conduct a sweep in the North Sea , but inclement weather forced Pohl to cancel the operation some 50 nmi ( 93 km ; 58 mi ) off Schiermonnikoog . The fleet remained in port until 10 August , when it sortied to Helgoland to cover the return of the auxiliary cruiser Möwe . A month later , on 11 – 12 September , the fleet covered another mine @-@ laying operation off the Swarte Bank . The last operation of the year , conducted on 23 – 24 October , was an advance without result in the direction of Horns Reef . 
 On 11 January 1916 , Admiral Reinhard Scheer replaced von Pohl , who was suffering from liver cancer . A week later on the 18th , Scheer hoisted his flag aboard Friedrich der Grosse . Scheer proposed a more aggressive policy designed to force a confrontation with the British Grand Fleet ; he received approval from the Kaiser in February . The first of Scheer 's operations was conducted the following month , on 5 – 7 March , with an uneventful sweep of the Hoofden . On 25 – 26 March , Scheer attempted to attack British forces that had raided Tondern , but failed to locate them . Another advance to Horns Reef followed on 21 – 22 April . 
 On 24 April , the battlecruisers of Von Hipper 's I Scouting Group conducted a raid on the English coast . Friedrich der Grosse and the rest of the fleet sailed in distant support . The battlecruiser Seydlitz struck a mine while en route to the target , and had to withdraw . The other battlecruisers bombarded the town of Lowestoft unopposed but , during the approach to Yarmouth , they encountered the British cruisers of the Harwich Force . A short artillery duel ensued before the Harwich Force withdrew . Reports of British submarines in the area prompted the retreat of the I Scouting Group . At this point , Scheer , who had been warned of the sortie of the Grand Fleet from its base in Scapa Flow , also withdrew to safer German waters . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 Soon after the Lowestoft raid , Scheer began planning another foray into the North Sea . He had initially intended to launch the operation in mid @-@ May , by which time the mine damage to Seydlitz was scheduled to be repaired — Scheer was unwilling to embark on a major raid without his battlecruiser forces at full strength . On 9 May , several battleships developed problems with their engines , which delayed the operation further , to 23 May . By 22 May , Seydlitz was still not fully repaired and the operation was again postponed , to 29 May . At noon on 29 May , the repairs to Seydlitz were finally completed , and the ship returned to the I Scouting Group . The plan called for Hipper 's battlecruisers to steam north to the Skagerrak , with the intention of luring out a portion of the British fleet so it could be destroyed by Scheer 's waiting battleships . 
 Friedrich der Grosse was the eighth ship in the German line ; the four König @-@ class ships of the V Division , III Battle Squadron , led the line , followed by four Kaiser @-@ class ships in the VI Division , III Battle Squadron . Friedrich der Grosse was the last ship in her division , directly astern of Prinzregent Luitpold and ahead of Ostfriesland , the flagship of Vice Admiral Schmidt 's I Division , I Battle Squadron . The eight Helgoland- and Nassau @-@ class battleships constituted the I Squadron , which was followed by the six elderly pre @-@ dreadnoughts of Rear Admiral Franz Mauve 's II Squadron . Hipper 's five battlecruisers , the scouting force for the fleet , left the Jade estuary at 02 : 00 on 31 May ; Scheer and the High Seas Fleet followed an hour and a half later . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 the battlecruisers of I Scouting Group encountered the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron under the command of Vice Admiral Sir David Beatty . The opposing ships began an artillery duel that saw the destruction of Indefatigable , shortly after 17 : 00 , and Queen Mary , less than half an hour later . By this time , the German battlecruisers were steaming south to draw the British ships toward the main body of the High Seas Fleet . At 17 : 30 , König 's crew spotted both the I Scouting Group and the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron approaching . The German battlecruisers were steaming to starboard , while the British ships steamed to port . At 17 : 45 , Scheer ordered a two @-@ point turn to port to bring his ships closer to the British battlecruisers and the accompanying fast battleships of the 5th Battle Squadron ; a minute later , he gave the order to open fire . 
 Friedrich der Grosse was still out of range of both the British battlecruisers and the 5th Battle Squadron , and so held her fire initially . Between 17 : 48 and 17 : 52 , Friedrich der Grosse and ten other battleships engaged the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron , though only Nassau managed to score a hit during this period . Shortly after , the German battle line came across the disabled destroyers Nestor and Nomad . Friedrich der Grosse and her three sisters targeted Nomad and quickly sank her . Nestor was similarly dispatched by the I Squadron ships . Shortly after 19 : 00 , a melee between the German line and British cruisers took place . The center of the action was the damaged German cruiser Wiesbaden , which had been disabled by a shell from the British battlecruiser Invincible . Rear Admiral Behncke in König attempted to maneuver the III Squadron to cover the stricken cruiser . Simultaneously , the British 3rd and 4th Light Cruiser Squadrons began a torpedo attack on the German line ; while advancing to torpedo range , they smothered Wiesbaden with fire from their main guns . The eight III Squadron battleships fired on the British cruisers , but even the sustained fire from the battleships ' main guns failed to drive off the British cruisers . The armored cruisers Defence , Warrior , and Black Prince joined in the attack on the crippled Wiesbaden . While most of the III Squadron battleships rained heavy fire upon the attacking armored cruisers , Friedrich der Grosse and the I Squadron ships engaged the battleship Warspite at ranges from 9 @,@ 600 to 12 @,@ 500 yd ( 8 @,@ 800 to 11 @,@ 400 m ) , until Warspite disappeared in the haze . In this period , Warspite was hit by 13 heavy shells , though the ships that fired them are unknown . 
 After successfully withdrawing from the British , Scheer ordered the fleet to assume night cruising formation , though communication errors between Scheer aboard Friedrich der Grosse and Westfalen , the lead ship , caused delays . The series of reversals in course and confused maneuvers disorganized the fleet and inverted the sequence of ships , but by 23 : 30 the fleet had reached its cruising formation . Friedrich der Grosse was now the ninth ship in a line of twenty @-@ four , headed by the eight I Squadron ships . Shortly after 01 : 00 , the British cruiser Black Prince stumbled into the German line . Searchlights aboard Thüringen illuminated the target ; Friedrich der Grosse , Thüringen , Nassau , and Ostfriesland hammered the cruiser at point @-@ blank range with main and secondary guns . In the span of a few minutes Black Prince exploded and sank , taking her entire crew of 857 with her . 
 After a series of night engagements between the I Squadron battleships and British destroyers , the High Seas Fleet punched through the British light forces and reached Horns Reef by 04 : 00 on 1 June . The German fleet reached Wilhelmshaven a few hours later ; five of the I Squadron battleships took up defensive positions in the outer roadstead , and Kaiser , Kaiserin , Prinzregent Luitpold , and Kronprinz stood ready just outside the entrance to Wilhelmshaven . The rest of the fleet entered Wilhelmshaven , where Friedrich der Grosse and the other ships still in fighting condition replenished their stocks of coal and ammunition . In the course of the battle , Friedrich der Grosse had fired 72 main battery shells and 151 rounds from her secondary guns . She emerged from the battle completely undamaged . 
 = = = = Subsequent North Sea operations = = = = 
 On 18 August 1916 , Friedrich der Grosse took part in an operation to bombard Sunderland . Admiral Scheer attempted a repeat of the original 31 May plan : the two serviceable German battlecruisers , Moltke and Von der Tann , augmented by three faster dreadnoughts , were to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . Scheer , in Friedrich der Grosse , would trail behind with the rest of the fleet and provide support . Scheer turned north after receiving a false report from a zeppelin about a British unit in the area . As a result , the bombardment was not carried out , and by 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and so turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 Another fleet operation took place on 18 – 19 October , though it ended without encountering any British units . The fleet was reorganized on 1 December ; the four König @-@ class battleships remained in III Squadron , along with the newly commissioned Bayern , while the five Kaiser @-@ class ships , including Friedrich der Grosse , were transferred to IV Squadron . In March 1917 the new battleship Baden , built to serve as fleet flagship , entered service ; on the 17th , Scheer hauled down his flag from Friedrich der Grosse and transferred it to Baden . On 4 – 5 July , crewmen aboard Friedrich der Grosse staged a hunger strike in protest over the poor quality and insufficient quantity of the food they were given . The ship 's officers relented , fed the crew a meal of <unk> soup and agreed to form a <unk> , a council that gave the enlisted men a voice in their ration selection and preparation . Further insubordination on several vessels followed on 11 July , and the ringleaders were arrested and put on trial . Max <unk> , a stoker from Friedrich der Grosse was sentenced to death and executed by firing squad on 5 September in Cologne . 
 = = = = Operation Albion = = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to eliminate the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . The Admiralstab ( Navy High Command ) planned an operation to seize the Baltic island of Ösel , and specifically the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula . The Admiralstab issued orders on 18 September for a joint operation with the army to capture Ösel and Moon Islands ; the primary naval component was to comprise the flagship , Moltke , and the III and IV Battle Squadrons of the High Seas Fleet . Along with nine light cruisers , three torpedo boat flotillas , and dozens of mine warfare ships , the entire force numbered some 300 ships , supported by over 100 aircraft and six zeppelins . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Opposing the Germans were the old Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts Slava and Tsesarevich , the armored cruisers Bayan , Admiral Makarov , and Diana , 26 destroyers , and several torpedo boats and gunboats . The garrison on Ösel numbered some 14 @,@ 000 men . 
 The operation began on the morning of 12 October , when Moltke and the III Squadron ships engaged Russian positions in Tagga Bay while Friedrich der Grosse and the rest of IV Squadron shelled Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula on Ösel . The coastal artillery in both locations were quickly silenced by the battleships ' heavy guns . On the morning of the 14th , Friedrich der Grosse , Kaiserin , and König Albert were detached to support German troops advancing toward <unk> . The three ships fired on the battery at Zerel for an hour , which prompted most of the Russian gun crews to flee their posts . 
 By 20 October , the fighting on the islands was winding down ; Moon , Ösel , and Dagö were in German possession . The previous day , the Admiralstab had ordered the cessation of naval actions and the return of the dreadnoughts to the High Seas Fleet as soon as possible . On 27 October , Friedrich der Grosse was detached from the Baltic and returned to the North Sea . Upon her return , she resumed guard duties . The ship participated in the fruitless advance to Norway on 23 – 25 April 1918 . Afterward , she went into drydock for extensive maintenance , which lasted from 26 July to 28 September . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Friedrich der Grosse and her four sisters were to have taken part in a final fleet action at the end of October 1918 , days before the Armistice was to take effect . The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Grossadmiral ( Grand Admiral ) of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , to ensure a better bargaining position for Germany , despite the expected casualties . However , many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . On the 30th , crewmen aboard Friedrich der Grosse engaged in forms of passive resistance , including a " go @-@ slow " while replenishing the ship 's coal stock . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . Informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated " I no longer have a navy . " 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Prior to the departure of the German fleet , Admiral Adolf von Trotha made clear to Von Reuter that he could not allow the Allies to seize the ships , under any conditions . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , which led the ships to the Allied fleet that was to escort the Germans to Scapa Flow . The massive flotilla consisted of some 370 British , American , and French warships . Once the ships were interned , their guns were disabled through the removal of their breech blocks , and their crews were reduced to 200 officers and enlisted men . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Treaty of Versailles . Von Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to sign the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Friedrich der Grosse capsized and sank at 12 : 16 . In 1936 , the ship was raised and broken up for scrap ; the work was completed by 29 April 1937 . On 30 August 1965 , Britain returned the ship 's bell to Germany via the frigate Scheer ; it now resides at the Fleet Headquarters of the German Navy in Glücksburg . 
 = Elmer S. Dailey = 
 Elmer S. Dailey , originally known as the Claire B. Follette , is a wooden barge built by William H. Follette in 1915 at Tonawanda , New York , and rebuilt and renamed in 1928 by Brown Drydock on Staten Island , New York . It was used to transport materials from New York , New Jersey and Connecticut . It is the only known surviving Erie Canal boat and is one of a few remaining wooden @-@ hulled canal boats . It sank in 1974 along with the Priscilla Dailey and the Berkshire No. 7 , and has deteriorated to the point that a salvage operation could result in it breaking apart . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 21 , 1978 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The barge is an Erie Canal boat that has two Fairbanks @-@ Morse in @-@ line six @-@ cylinder diesel engines . It measures 105 @.@ 2 feet ( 32 @.@ 1 m ) long with a 17 @.@ 9 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) beam . The depth of the hold is listed at 9 @.@ 9 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) and it had a listed capacity of 101 tons . 
 Clouette describes the Elmer S. Dailey as having an " almost rectangular hull in section and plan , with bluntly rounded bow and stern ... the bulwarks , perforated by scuppers , rise up to the stem which is slightly raked back . There are prominent strakes in the bow and topside along the sides of the vessel . A coaming about 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) high frames the single large cargo opening which occupies about two @-@ thirds of the boat 's length " . The cargo opening is covered by convex hatch covers . Towards the stern is a rectangular pilothouse and a low cabin with a companionway which has a protruding stack . 
 = = History = = 
 The Elmer S. Dailey was originally known as the Claire B. Follette when it was built by William H. Follette in 1915 at Tonawanda , New York . In 1928 , the ship was rebuilt by Brown Drydock on Staten Island and acquired the name Elmer S. Dailey . Brown Drydock installed two Fairbanks @-@ Morse in @-@ line six @-@ cylinder diesel engines and added the pilothouse and stack . At an unspecified later date , one engine was removed and a direct @-@ drive engine , rated at 180 or 210 horsepower , operated on compressed air . In its final configuration , the vessel was manned by a three @-@ man crew . 
 The ship was owned by Stewart J. Dailey , a former mule driver on the Erie Canal who later became a partner in a Tonawanda shipbuilding company and afterwards opened his own business , S. J. Dailey Company . 
 The barge was used to transport materials between New York , New Jersey , and Connecticut , and after the diesel engines were added , it was able to push another barge . It was in service between 1941 and 1972 , and afterwards was moored in Bridgeport Harbor together with the Berkshire No. 7 and Priscilla Dailey . 
 In the spring of 1974 , one of the barges began to take on water , dragging down the other two . No part of the barge is visible above water . Elmer S. Dailey is listed in the U.S. Registry as # <unk> . 
 = = Importance = = 
 The Elmer S. Dailey is historically significant because it is the only known surviving Erie Canal boat and is one of a few remaining wooden @-@ hulled canal boats . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 21 , 1978 . It and the other two barges that sank with it are the only shipwrecks in Connecticut listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 In 1998 , the historic status of the barges was a concern for the Port Authority of Bridgeport Harbor , as the sunken ships interfered with a billion @-@ dollar redevelopment project . Over the years , the barges had deteriorated so that an operation to salvage them would likely result in it breaking apart . No action had been taken by 2003 , but a report noted that prior to any activity of the Elmer S. Dailey the Federal Transit Administration and / or the City of Bridgeport should document the barge with photos and a technical description . Specifics regarding the documentation based on the activity would be archived at the State Historic Preservation Office and the Mystic Seaport Museum . 
 = Joe Biden = 
 Joseph Robinette " Joe " Biden Jr . ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; born November 20 , 1942 ) is the 47th and current Vice President of the United States , having been jointly elected twice with President Barack Obama . A member of the Democratic Party , Biden represented Delaware as a United States Senator from 1973 until becoming Vice President in 2009 . 
 Biden was born in Scranton , Pennsylvania , in 1942 , and lived there for ten years before moving to Delaware . He became an attorney in 1969 , and was elected to the New Castle County council in 1970 . Biden was first elected to the Senate in 1972 , and became the sixth @-@ youngest senator in U.S. history . He was re @-@ elected to the Senate six times , and was the fourth most senior senator at the time of his resignation to assume the Vice Presidency in 2009 . Biden was a long @-@ time member and former chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee . He opposed the Gulf War in 1991 , but advocated U.S. and NATO intervention in the Bosnian War in 1994 and 1995 . Biden voted in favor of the resolution authorizing the Iraq War in 2002 , but opposed the surge of U.S. troops in 2007 . He has also served as chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee , dealing with issues related to drug policy , crime prevention , and civil liberties , and led the legislative efforts for creation of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act , and the Violence Against Women Act . He chaired the Judiciary Committee during the contentious U.S. Supreme Court nominations of Robert Bork and Clarence Thomas . 
 Biden unsuccessfully sought the Democratic presidential nomination in 1988 and in 2008 , both times dropping out early in the race . In the 2008 U.S. presidential election , Barack Obama chose Biden to be his running mate in the race , which they won . Biden became the first Roman Catholic , and the first <unk> , to be Vice President of the United States . 
 As Vice President in the Obama administration , Biden oversaw the infrastructure spending aimed at counteracting the Great Recession , and U.S. policy toward Iraq up until the withdrawal of U.S. troops in 2011 . His ability to negotiate with congressional Republicans helped bring about legislation such as the Tax Relief , Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization , and Job Creation Act of 2010 that resolved a taxation deadlock , the Budget Control Act of 2011 that resolved that year 's debt ceiling crisis , and the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 that addressed the impending " fiscal cliff " . In 2011 , Biden opposed going ahead with the military mission that resulted in the death of Osama bin Laden . Obama and Biden were re @-@ elected in 2012 . In October 2015 , after months of speculation , Biden chose not to run for President of the United States in 2016 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Biden was born on November 20 , 1942 , at St. Mary 's Hospital in Scranton , Pennsylvania , to Catherine Eugenia " Jean " Biden ( née Finnegan ; 1917 – 2010 ) and Joseph Robinette " Joe " Biden Sr. ( 1915 – 2002 ) . He was the first of four siblings in a Catholic family , with a sister , Valerie , and two brothers , James and Frank , following . His mother was of either Irish or Northern Irish descent , with roots variously attributed to County Louth or County Londonderry . His paternal grandparents , Mary Elizabeth ( Robinette ) and Joseph H. Biden , an oil businessman from Baltimore , Maryland , were of English , French , and Irish ancestry . His paternal great @-@ great @-@ great grandfather , William Biden , was born in Sussex , England , and immigrated to the United States . His maternal great @-@ grandfather , Edward Francis Blewitt , was a member of the Pennsylvania State Senate . 
 Biden 's father had been very well @-@ off earlier in his life , but suffered several business reversals by the time Biden was born . For several years , the family had to live with Biden 's maternal grandparents , the Finnegans . When the Scranton area went into economic decline during the 1950s , Biden 's father could not find enough work . In 1953 , the Biden family moved to an apartment in Claymont , Delaware , where they lived for a few years before moving to a house in Wilmington , Delaware . Joe Biden Sr. then did better as a used car salesman , and the family 's circumstances were middle class . 
 Biden attended the Archmere Academy in Claymont , Delaware , where he was a standout halfback / wide receiver on the high school football team ; he helped lead a perennially losing team to an undefeated season in his senior year . He played on the baseball team as well . During these years , he participated in an anti @-@ segregation sit @-@ in at a Wilmington theatre . Academically , Biden was an above @-@ average student , was considered a natural leader among the students , and was elected class president during his junior and senior years . He graduated in 1961 . 
 Biden earned his BA in 1965 from the University of Delaware , with a double major in history and political science , graduating with a class rank of 506 out of 688 . His classmates were impressed by his cramming abilities , and he played halfback with the Blue Hens freshman football team . In 1964 , while on spring break in the Bahamas , he met and began dating Neilia Hunter , who was from an affluent background in Skaneateles , New York and attended Syracuse University . He told her that he aimed to become a Senator by the age of 30 and then President . He dropped a junior year plan to play for the varsity football team as a defensive back , enabling him to spend more time visiting out of state with her . 
 He then entered Syracuse University College of Law , receiving a half scholarship based on financial need with some additional assistance based on academics . By his own description , he found law school to be " the biggest bore in the world " and pulled many all @-@ nighters to get by . During his first year there , he was accused of having plagiarized 5 of 15 pages of a law review article . Biden said it was inadvertent due to his not knowing the proper rules of citation , and he was permitted to retake the course after receiving an " F " grade , which was subsequently dropped from his record ( this incident would later attract attention when further plagiarism accusations emerged in 1987 ) . He received his Juris Doctor in 1968 , graduating 76th of 85 in his class . Biden was admitted to the Delaware bar in 1969 . 
 Biden received student draft deferments during this period , at the peak of the Vietnam War , and in 1968 , he was reclassified by the Selective Service System as not available for service due to having had asthma as a teenager . He never took part in anti @-@ war demonstrations , later saying that at the time he was preoccupied with marriage and law school , and " wore sports coats ... not tie @-@ dyed " . 
 Negative impressions of drinking alcohol in the Biden and Finnegan families and in the neighborhood led to Joe Biden becoming a teetotaler . Biden suffered from stuttering through much of his childhood and into his twenties , and overcame it by spending many hours reciting poetry in front of a mirror . 
 = = Early political career and family life = = 
 On August 27 , 1966 , Biden , while still a law student , married Neilia Hunter . They overcame her parents ' initial reluctance for her to wed a Roman Catholic , and the ceremony was held in a Catholic church in Skaneateles . They had three children , Joseph R. " Beau " Biden III ( 1969 – 2015 ) , Robert Hunter ( born 1970 ) , and Naomi Christina ( 1971 – 1972 ) . 
 During 1968 , Biden clerked for six months at a Wilmington law firm headed by prominent local Republican William <unk> and , as he later said , " thought of myself as a Republican " . He disliked the conservative racial politics of incumbent Democratic Governor of Delaware Charles L. Terry and supported a more liberal Republican , Russell W. Peterson , who defeated Terry in 1968 . The local Republicans tried to recruit Biden , but he resisted due to his distaste for Republican presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon , and registered as an Independent instead . 
 In 1969 , Biden resumed practicing law in Wilmington , first as a public defender and then at a firm headed by Sid <unk> , a locally active Democrat . <unk> named Biden to the Democratic Forum , a group trying to reform and revitalize the state party , and Biden switched his registration to Democratic . Biden also started his own firm , Biden and Walsh . Corporate law , however , did not appeal to him and criminal law did not pay well . He supplemented his income by managing properties . 
 Later in 1969 , Biden ran as a Democrat for the New Castle County Council on a liberal platform that included support for public housing in the suburban area . He won by a solid , two @-@ thousand vote margin in the usually Republican district and in a bad year for Democrats in the state . Even before taking his seat , he was already talking about running for the U.S. Senate in a couple of years . Biden served on the County Council from 1970 to 1972 while continuing his private law practice . Among issues he addressed on the council was his opposition to large highway projects that might disrupt Wilmington neighborhoods , including those related to Interstate 95 . 
 = = United States Senator = = 
 = = = Election and tragedy ; recovery and new family = = = 
 Biden 's entry into the 1972 U.S. Senate election in Delaware presented a unique circumstance . Longtime Delaware political figure and Republican incumbent Senator J. Caleb Boggs was considering retirement , which would likely have left U.S. Representative Pete du Pont and Wilmington Mayor Harry G. Haskell Jr. in a divisive primary fight . To avoid that , U.S. President Richard M. Nixon helped convince Boggs to run again with full party support . No other Democrat wanted to run against Boggs . Biden 's campaign had virtually no money and was given no chance of winning . It was managed by his sister Valerie Biden Owens ( who would go on to manage his future campaigns as well ) and staffed by other members of his family , and relied upon handed @-@ out newsprint position papers and meeting voters face @-@ to @-@ face ; the small size of the state and lack of a major media market made the approach feasible . Biden did receive some assistance from the AFL @-@ CIO and Democratic pollster Patrick Caddell . Biden 's campaign issues focused on withdrawal from Vietnam , the environment , civil rights , mass transit , more equitable taxation , health care , the public 's dissatisfaction with politics @-@ as @-@ usual , and " change " . During the summer , Biden trailed by almost 30 percentage points , but his energy level , his attractive young family , and his ability to connect with voters ' emotions gave the surging Biden an advantage over the ready @-@ to @-@ retire Boggs . Biden won the November 7 , 1972 , election in an upset by a margin of 3 @,@ 162 votes . 
 On December 18 , 1972 , a few weeks after the election , Biden 's wife and one @-@ year @-@ old daughter Naomi were killed in an automobile accident while Christmas shopping in Hockessin , Delaware . Neilia Biden 's station wagon was hit by a tractor @-@ trailer as she pulled out from an intersection ; the truck driver was cleared of any wrongdoing . Biden 's sons Beau and Hunter survived the accident and were taken to the hospital in fair condition , Beau with a broken leg and other wounds , and Hunter with a minor skull fracture and other head injuries . Doctors soon said both would make full recoveries . Biden considered resigning to care for them , but was persuaded not to by Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield . 
 Biden was sworn into office on January 5 , 1973 , by Francis R. <unk> , the Secretary of the Senate in a small chapel at the Delaware Division of the Wilmington Medical Center . Beau was wheeled in with his leg still in traction ; Hunter , who had already been released , was also there , as were other members of the extended family . Witnesses and television cameras were also present and the event received national attention . 
 At age 30 ( the minimum age required to hold the office ) , Biden became the sixth @-@ youngest senator in U.S. history , and one of only 18 senators who took office before reaching the age of 31 . But the accident left him filled with both anger and religious doubt : " I liked to [ walk around seedy neighborhoods ] at night when I thought there was a better chance of finding a fight ... I had not known I was capable of such rage ... I felt God had played a horrible trick on me . " To be at home every day for his young sons , Biden began the practice of commuting every day by Amtrak train for 1 ½ hours each way from his home in the Wilmington suburbs to Washington , D.C. , which he continued to do throughout his Senate career . In the aftermath of the accident , he had trouble focusing on work , and appeared to just go through the motions of being a senator . In his memoirs , Biden notes that staffers were taking bets on how long he would last . A single father for five years , Biden left standing orders that he be interrupted in the Senate at any time if his sons called . In remembrance of his wife and daughter , Biden does not work on December 18 , the anniversary of the accident . 
 Biden 's elder son , Beau , became Delaware Attorney General and an Army Judge Advocate who served in Iraq ; his younger son , Hunter , became a Washington attorney and lobbyist . On May 30 , 2015 , Beau died at the age of 46 after a two @-@ year battle with brain cancer . At the time of his death , Beau had been widely seen as the frontrunner to be the Democratic nominee for Governor of Delaware in 2016 . 
 In 1975 , Biden met Jill Tracy Jacobs , who grew up in Willow Grove , Pennsylvania , and would become a teacher in Delaware . They had met on a blind date arranged by Biden 's brother , although it turned out that Biden had already noticed a photograph of her earlier in an advertisement for a local park in Wilmington , Delaware . Biden would credit her with renewing his interest in both politics and life . On June 17 , 1977 , Biden and Jacobs were married by a Catholic priest at the Chapel at the United Nations in New York . Jill Biden has a bachelor 's degree from the University of Delaware ; two master 's degrees , one from West Chester University , and one Villanova University ; and a doctorate in education from the University of Delaware . They have one daughter together , Ashley Blazer ( born 1981 ) , who became a social worker and staffer at the Delaware Department of Services for Children , Youth , and Their Families . Biden and his wife are Roman Catholics and regularly attend Mass at St. Joseph 's on the Brandywine in Greenville , Delaware . 
 = = = Early Senate activities = = = 
 During his first years in the Senate , Biden focused on legislation regarding consumer @-@ protection and environmental issues and called for greater accountability on the part of government . In mid @-@ 1974 , freshman Senator Biden was named one of the 200 Faces for the Future by Time magazine , in a profile that mentioned what had happened to his family and characterized Biden as " self @-@ confident " and " compulsively ambitious " . 
 Biden became ranking minority member of the U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary in 1981 . In 1984 , he was Democratic floor manager for the successful passage of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act ; civil libertarians praised him for modifying some of the Act 's provisions , and it was his most important legislative accomplishment at that point in time . Biden first considered running for president in that year , after he gained notice for giving speeches to party audiences that simultaneously scolded and encouraged Democrats . 
 Regarding foreign policy , during his first decade in the Senate , Biden focused on arms control issues . In response to the refusal of the U.S. Congress to ratify the SALT II Treaty signed in 1979 by Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev and President Jimmy Carter , Biden took the initiative to meet the Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko , educated him about American concerns and interests , and secured several changes to address objections of the Foreign Relations Committee . When the Reagan administration wanted to interpret the 1972 SALT I Treaty loosely in order to allow the Strategic Defense Initiative to proceed , Biden argued for strict adherence to the treaty 's terms . Biden clashed again with the Reagan administration in 1986 over economic sanctions against South Africa ; he received considerable attention when he excoriated Secretary of State George P. Shultz at a Senate hearing because of the administration 's support of that country , which continued to practice the apartheid system . 
 = = = 1988 presidential campaign = = = 
 Biden ran for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination , formally declaring his candidacy at the Wilmington train station on June 9 , 1987 . He was attempting to become the youngest president since John F. Kennedy . When the campaign began , Biden was considered a potentially strong candidate because of his moderate image , his speaking ability on the stump , his appeal to Baby Boomers , his high profile position as chair of the Senate Judiciary Committee at the upcoming Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination hearings , and his fundraising appeal . He raised $ 1 @.@ 7 million in the first quarter of 1987 , more than any other candidate . 
 By August 1987 , Biden 's campaign , whose messaging was confused due to staff rivalries , had begun to lag behind those of Michael Dukakis and Dick Gephardt , although he had still raised more funds than all candidates but Dukakis , and was seeing an upturn in Iowa polls . In September 1987 , the campaign ran into trouble when he was accused of plagiarizing a speech that had been made earlier that year by Neil Kinnock , leader of the British Labour Party . Kinnock 's speech included the lines : 
 " Why am I the first Kinnock in a thousand generations to be able to get to university ? [ Then pointing to his wife in the audience ] Why is Glenys the first woman in her family in a thousand generations to be able to get to university ? Was it because all our predecessors were thick ? " 
 While Biden 's speech included the lines : 
 " I started thinking as I was coming over here , why is it that Joe Biden is the first in his family ever to go to a university ? [ Then pointing to his wife in the audience ] Why is it that my wife who is sitting out there in the audience is the first in her family to ever go to college ? Is it because our fathers and mothers were not bright ? Is it because I 'm the first Biden in a thousand generations to get a college and a graduate degree that I was smarter than the rest ? " 
 Biden had in fact cited Kinnock as the source for the formulation on previous occasions . But he made no reference to the original source at the August 23 Democratic debate at the Iowa State Fair being reported on , nor in an August 26 interview for the National Education Association . Moreover , while political speeches often appropriate ideas and language from each other , Biden 's use came under more scrutiny because he fabricated aspects of his own family 's background in order to match Kinnock 's . Biden was soon found to have earlier that year lifted passages from a 1967 speech by Robert F. Kennedy ( for which Biden aides took the blame ) and a short phrase from the 1961 inaugural address of John F. Kennedy , and in two prior years to have done the same with a 1976 passage from Hubert H. Humphrey . 
 A few days later , Biden 's plagiarism incident in law school came to public light . Video was also released showing that when earlier questioned by a New Hampshire resident about his grades in law school , Biden had stated that he had graduated in the " top half " of his class , that he had attended law school on a full scholarship , and that he had received three degrees in college , each of which was untrue or exaggerations of his actual record . 
 The Kinnock and school revelations were magnified by the limited amount of other news about the nomination race at the time , when most of the public were not yet paying attention to any of the campaigns ; Biden thus fell into what The Washington Post writer Paul Taylor described as that year 's trend , a " trial by media ordeal " . Biden lacked a strong demographic or political group of support to help him survive the crisis . He withdrew from the nomination race on September 23 , 1987 , saying his candidacy had been overrun by " the exaggerated shadow " of his past mistakes . 
 After Biden withdrew from the race , it was revealed that the Dukakis campaign had secretly made a video highlighting the Biden – Kinnock comparison and distributed it to news outlets . Later in 1987 , the Delaware Supreme Court 's Board of Professional Responsibility cleared Biden of the law school plagiarism charges regarding his standing as a lawyer , saying Biden had " not violated any rules " . 
 In February 1988 , after suffering from several episodes of increasingly severe neck pain , Biden was taken by long @-@ distance ambulance to Walter Reed Army Medical Center and given lifesaving surgery to correct an intracranial berry aneurysm that had begun leaking ; the situation was serious enough that a priest had administered last rites at the hospital . While recuperating , he suffered a pulmonary embolism , which represented a major complication . Another operation to repair a second aneurysm , which had caused no symptoms but was also at risk from bursting , was performed in May 1988 . The hospitalization and recovery kept Biden from his duties in the U.S. Senate for seven months . Biden has had no recurrences or effects from the aneurysms since then . In retrospect , Biden 's family came to believe that the early end to his presidential campaign had been a blessing in disguise , for had he still been campaigning in the midst of the primaries in early 1988 , he might well have not have stopped to seek medical attention and the condition might have become <unk> . 
 = = = Judiciary Committee = = = 
 Biden was a long @-@ time member of the U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary . He chaired it from 1987 until 1995 and he served as ranking minority member on it from 1981 until 1987 and again from 1995 until 1997 . 
 While chairman , Biden presided over the two most contentious U.S. Supreme Court confirmation hearings in history , those for Robert Bork in 1987 and Clarence Thomas in 1991 . In the Bork hearings , Biden stated his opposition to Bork soon after the nomination , reversing an approval in an interview of a hypothetical Bork nomination he had made the previous year and angering conservatives who thought he could not conduct the hearings dispassionately . At the close , Biden won praise for conducting the proceedings fairly and with good humor and courage , as his 1988 presidential campaign collapsed in the middle of the hearings . Rejecting some of the less intellectually honest arguments that other Bork opponents were making , Biden framed his discussion around the belief that the U.S. Constitution provides rights to liberty and privacy that extend beyond those explicitly enumerated in the text , and that Bork 's strong originalism was ideologically incompatible with that view . Bork 's nomination was rejected in the committee by a 9 – 5 vote , and then rejected in the full Senate by a 58 – 42 margin . 
 In the Thomas hearings , Biden 's questions on constitutional issues were often long and convoluted , sometimes such that Thomas forgot the question being asked . Viewers of the high @-@ profile hearings were often annoyed by Biden 's style . Thomas later wrote that despite earlier private assurances from the senator , Biden 's questions had been akin to a <unk> . The nomination came out of the committee without a recommendation , with Biden opposed . In part due to his own bad experiences in 1987 with his presidential campaign , Biden was reluctant to let personal matters enter into the hearings . Biden initially shared with committee , but not the public , Anita Hill 's sexual harassment charges , on the grounds she was not yet willing to testify . After she did , Biden did not permit other witnesses to testify further on her behalf , such as Angela Wright ( who made a similar charge ) and experts on harassment . Biden said he was striving to preserve Thomas 's right to privacy and the decency of the hearings . The nomination was approved by a 52 – 48 vote in the full Senate , with Biden again opposed . During and afterwards , Biden was strongly criticized by liberal legal groups and women 's groups for having mishandled the hearings and having not done enough to support Hill . Biden subsequently sought out women to serve on the Judiciary Committee and emphasized women 's issues in the committee 's legislative agenda . 
 Biden was involved in crafting many federal crime laws . He spearheaded the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 , also known as the Biden Crime Law , which included the Federal Assault Weapons Ban , which expired in 2004 after its ten @-@ year sunset period and was not renewed . It also included the landmark Violence Against Women Act ( VAWA ) , which contains a broad array of measures to combat domestic violence . In 2000 , the Supreme Court ruled in United States v. Morrison that the section of VAWA allowing a federal civil remedy for victims of gender @-@ motivated violence exceeded Congress 's authority and therefore was unconstitutional . Congress reauthorized VAWA in 2000 and 2005 . Biden has said , " I consider the Violence Against Women Act the single most significant legislation that I 've crafted during my 35 @-@ year tenure in the Senate . " In 2004 and 2005 , Biden enlisted major American technology companies in diagnosing the problems of the Austin , Texas @-@ based National Domestic Violence Hotline , and to donate equipment and expertise to it in a successful effort to improve its services . 
 Biden was critical of the actions of Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr during the 1990s Whitewater controversy and Lewinsky scandal investigations , and said " it 's going to be a cold day in hell " before another Independent Counsel is granted the same powers . Biden voted to acquit on both charges during the impeachment of President Clinton . 
 As chairman of the International Narcotics Control Caucus , Biden wrote the laws that created the U.S. " Drug Czar " , who oversees and coordinates national drug control policy . In April 2003 , he introduced the controversial Reducing Americans ' Vulnerability to Ecstasy Act , also known as the <unk> Act . He continued to work to stop the spread of " date rape drugs " such as flunitrazepam , and drugs such as Ecstasy and Ketamine . In 2004 , he worked to pass a bill outlawing steroids like androstenedione , the drug used by many baseball players . 
 Biden 's " Kids 2000 " legislation established a public / private partnership to provide computer centers , teachers , Internet access , and technical training to young people , particularly to low @-@ income and at @-@ risk youth . 
 = = = Foreign Relations Committee = = = 
 Biden was also a long @-@ time member of the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations . In 1997 , he became the ranking minority member and chaired the committee in January 2001 and from June 2001 through 2003 . When Democrats re @-@ took control of the Senate following the 2006 elections , Biden again assumed the top spot on the committee in 2007 . Biden was generally a liberal internationalist in foreign policy . He collaborated effectively with important Republican Senate figures such as Richard Lugar and Jesse Helms and sometimes went against elements of his own party . Biden was also co @-@ chair of the NATO Observer Group in the Senate . A partial list covering this time showed Biden meeting with some 150 leaders from nearly 60 countries and international organizations . Biden held frequent hearings as chair of the committee , as well as holding many subcommittee hearings during the three times he chaired the Subcommittee on European Affairs . 
 Biden became interested in the Yugoslav Wars after hearing about Serbian abuses during the Croatian War of Independence in 1991 . Once the Bosnian War broke out , Biden was among the first to call for the " lift and strike " policy of lifting the arms embargo , training Bosnian Muslims and supporting them with NATO air strikes , and investigating war crimes . Both the George H. W. Bush administration and Clinton administration were reluctant to implement the policy , fearing Balkan entanglement . In April 1993 , Biden spent a week in the Balkans and held a tense three @-@ hour meeting with Serbian leader Slobodan Milošević . Biden related that he told Milošević , " I think you 're a damn war criminal and you should be tried as one . " Biden wrote an amendment in 1992 to compel the Bush administration to arm the Bosnians , but deferred in 1994 to a somewhat softer stance preferred by the Clinton administration , before signing on the following year to a stronger measure sponsored by Bob Dole and Joe Lieberman . The engagement led to a successful NATO peacekeeping effort . Biden has called his role in affecting Balkans policy in the mid @-@ 1990s his " proudest moment in public life " that related to foreign policy . In 1999 , during the Kosovo War , Biden supported the NATO bombing campaign against Serbia and Montenegro , and co @-@ sponsored with his friend John McCain the McCain @-@ Biden Kosovo Resolution , which called on President Clinton to use all necessary force , including ground troops , to confront Milosevic over Serbian actions in Kosovo . In 1998 , Congressional Quarterly named Biden one of " Twelve Who Made a Difference " for playing a lead role in several foreign policy matters , including NATO enlargement and the successful passage of bills to streamline foreign affairs agencies and punish religious persecution overseas . 
 Biden had voted against authorization for the Gulf War in 1991 , siding with 45 of the 55 Democratic senators ; he said the U.S. was bearing almost all the burden in the anti @-@ Iraq coalition . Biden was a strong supporter of the 2001 war in Afghanistan , saying " Whatever it takes , we should do it . " Regarding Iraq , Biden stated in 2002 that Saddam Hussein was a threat to national security , and that there was no option but to eliminate that threat . In October 2002 , Biden voted in favor of the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq , justifying the Iraq War . While he soon became a critic of the war and viewed his vote as a " mistake " , he did not push to require a U.S. withdrawal . He supported the appropriations to pay for the occupation , but argued repeatedly that the war should be internationalized , that more soldiers were needed , and that the Bush administration should " level with the American people " about the cost and length of the conflict . 
 By late 2006 , Biden 's stance had shifted , and he opposed the troop surge of 2007 , saying General David Petraeus was " dead , flat wrong " in believing the surge could work . Biden was instead a leading advocate for dividing Iraq into a loose federation of three ethnic states . In November 2006 , Biden and Leslie H. Gelb , President Emeritus of the Council on Foreign Relations , released a comprehensive strategy to end sectarian violence in Iraq . Rather than continuing the present approach or withdrawing , the plan called for " a third way " : federalizing Iraq and giving Kurds , Shiites , and Sunnis " breathing room " in their own regions . In September 2007 , a non @-@ binding resolution passed the Senate endorsing such a scheme . However , the idea was unfamiliar , had no political constituency , and failed to gain traction . Iraq 's political leadership united in denouncing the resolution as a de facto partitioning of the country , and the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad issued a statement distancing itself . 
 In March 2004 , Biden secured the brief release of Libyan democracy activist and political prisoner Fathi <unk> , after meeting with leader Muammar Gaddafi in Tripoli . In May 2008 , Biden sharply criticized President George W. Bush for his speech to Israel 's Knesset in which he suggested that some Democrats were acting in the same way some Western leaders did when they appeased Hitler in the runup to World War II . Biden stated : " This is bullshit . This is <unk> . This is outrageous . Outrageous for the president of the United States to go to a foreign country , sit in the Knesset ... and make this kind of ridiculous statement . " Biden later apologized for using the expletive . Biden further stated , " Since when does this administration think that if you sit down , you have to eliminate the word ' no ' from your vocabulary ? " 
 = = = Delaware matters = = = 
 Biden was a familiar figure to his Delaware constituency , by virtue of his daily train commuting from there , and generally sought to attend to state needs . Biden was a strong supporter of increased Amtrak funding and rail security ; he hosted barbecues and an annual Christmas dinner for the Amtrak crews , and they would sometimes hold the last train of the night a few minutes so he could catch it . He earned the nickname " Amtrak Joe " as a result ( and in 2011 , Amtrak 's Wilmington Station was named the Joseph R. Biden Jr . Railroad Station , in honor of the over 7 @,@ 000 trips he made from there ) . He was an advocate for Delaware military installations , including Dover Air Force Base and New Castle Air National Guard Base . 
 In 1975 , Biden broke from liberal orthodoxy when he took legislative action to limit desegregation busing . In doing so , he said busing was a " bankrupt idea [ that violated ] the cardinal rule of common sense , " and that his opposition would make it easier for other liberals to follow suit . Three years later , Wilmington 's federally mandated cross @-@ district busing plan generated much turmoil , and in trying to legislate a compromise solution , Biden found himself alienating both black and white voters for a while . 
 Beginning in 1991 , Biden served as an adjunct professor at the Widener University School of Law , Delaware 's only law school , teaching a seminar on constitutional law . The seminar was one of Widener 's most popular , often with a waiting list for enrollment . Biden typically co @-@ taught the course with another professor , taking on at least half the course minutes and sometimes flying back from overseas to make one of the classes . 
 Biden was a sponsor of bankruptcy legislation during the 2000s , which was sought by MBNA , one of Delaware 's largest companies , and other credit card issuers . Biden allowed an amendment to the bill to increase the homestead exemption for homeowners declaring bankruptcy and fought for an amendment to forbid anti @-@ abortion felons from using bankruptcy to discharge fines ; the overall bill was vetoed by Bill Clinton in 2000 but then finally passed as the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act in 2005 , with Biden supporting it . The downstate Sussex County region is the nation 's top chicken @-@ producing area , and Biden held up trade agreements with Russia when that country stopped importing U.S. chickens . 
 In 2007 , Biden requested and gained $ 67 million worth of projects for his constituents through congressional earmarks . 
 Biden sits on the board of advisors of the Close Up Foundation , which brings high school students to Washington for interaction with legislators on Capitol Hill . 
 = = = Characteristics as senator = = = 
 Following his initial election in 1972 , Biden was re @-@ elected to six additional terms , in the elections of 1978 , 1984 , 1990 , 1996 , 2002 , and 2008 , usually getting about 60 percent of the vote . He did not face strong opposition ; Pete du Pont , then governor , chose not to run against him in 1984 . Biden spent 28 years as a junior senator due to the two @-@ year seniority of his Republican colleague William V. Roth Jr . After Roth was defeated for re @-@ election by Tom Carper in 2000 , Biden became Delaware 's senior senator . He then became the longest @-@ serving senator in Delaware history . In May 1999 , Biden set the mark for youngest senator to cast 10 @,@ 000 votes . 
 With a net worth between $ 59 @,@ 000 and $ 366 @,@ 000 , and almost no outside income or investment income , Biden was consistently ranked as one of the least wealthy members of the Senate . Biden stated that he was listed as the second poorest member in Congress , a distinction that he was not proud of , but attributed to being elected early in his career . Biden realized early in his senatorial career how vulnerable poorer public officials are to offers of financial contributions in exchange for policy support , and he pushed campaign finance reform measures during his first term . 
 During his years as a senator , Biden amassed a reputation for loquaciousness , with his questions and remarks during Senate hearings being especially known for being long @-@ winded . He has been a strong speaker and debater and a frequent and effective guest on the Sunday morning talk shows . In public appearances , he is known to deviate from prepared remarks at will . According to political analyst Mark Halperin , he has shown " a persistent tendency to say silly , offensive , and off @-@ putting things " ; The New York Times writes that Biden 's " weak filters make him capable of blurting out pretty much anything " . Nor is Biden known for modesty ; journalist James Traub has written that " Biden 's vanity and his regard for his own gifts seem considerable even by the rarefied standards of the U.S. Senate . " 
 Political writer Howard Fineman has said that , " Biden is not an academic , he 's not a theoretical thinker , he 's a great street pol . He comes from a long line of working people in Scranton — auto salesmen , car dealers , people who know how to make a sale . He has that great Irish gift . " Political columnist David S. Broder has viewed Biden as having grown since he came to Washington and since his failed 1988 presidential bid : " He responds to real people — that 's been consistent throughout . And his ability to understand himself and deal with other politicians has gotten much much better . " Traub concludes that " Biden is the kind of fundamentally happy person who can be as generous toward others as he is to himself . " 
 = = 2008 presidential election = = 
 Biden ran for the Democratic nomination for president in 2008 , and on the national ticket as eventual nominee Barack Obama 's running @-@ mate . 
 = = = Biden presidential campaign = = = 
 Biden had thought about running for president again ever since his failed 1988 bid . 
 Biden declared his candidacy for president on January 31 , 2007 , after having discussed running for months prior , and first made a formal announcement to Tim Russert on Meet the Press on January 7 , stating he would " be the best Biden I can be . " In January 2006 , Delaware newspaper columnist Harry F. Themal wrote that Biden " occupies the sensible center of the Democratic Party . " Themal concludes that this is the position Biden desires , and that in a campaign " he plans to stress the dangers to the security of the average American , not just from the terrorist threat , but from the lack of health assistance , crime , and energy dependence on unstable parts of the world . " 
 During his campaign , Biden focused on the war in Iraq and his support for the implementation of the Biden @-@ Gelb plan to achieve political success . He touted his record in the Senate as the head of major congressional committees and his experience on foreign policy . Despite speculation to the contrary , Biden rejected the notion of accepting the position of Secretary of State , focusing only on the presidency . At a 2007 campaign event , Biden said , " I know a lot of my opponents out there say I 'd be a great Secretary of State . Seriously , every one of them . Do you watch any of the debates ? ' Joe 's right , Joe 's right , Joe 's right . ' " Other candidates ' comments that " Joe is right " in the Democratic debates were converted into a Biden campaign theme and ad . In mid @-@ 2007 , Biden stressed his foreign policy expertise compared to Obama 's , saying of the latter , " I think he can be ready , but right now I don 't believe he is . The presidency is not something that lends itself to on @-@ the @-@ job training . " Biden also said that Obama was copying some of his foreign policy ideas . Biden was noted for his one @-@ liners on the campaign trail , saying of Republican then @-@ frontrunner Rudy Giuliani at the debate on October 30 , 2007 , in Philadelphia , " There 's only three things he mentions in a sentence : a noun , and a verb and 9 / 11 . " Overall , Biden 's debate performances were an effective mixture of humor and sharp and surprisingly disciplined comments . 
 Biden made remarks during the campaign that attracted controversy . On the day of his January 2007 announcement , he spoke of fellow Democratic candidate and Senator Barack Obama : " I mean , you got the first mainstream African @-@ American who is articulate and bright and clean and a nice @-@ looking guy , I mean , that 's a storybook , man . " This comment undermined his campaign as soon as it began and significantly damaged his fund @-@ raising capabilities ; it later took second place on Time magazine 's list of Top 10 Campaign <unk> for 2007 . Biden had earlier been criticized in July 2006 for a remark he made about his support among Indian Americans : " I 've had a great relationship . In Delaware , the largest growth in population is Indian @-@ Americans moving from India . You cannot go to a 7 @-@ Eleven or a Dunkin ' Donuts unless you have a slight Indian accent . I 'm not joking . " Biden later said the remark was not intended to be derogatory . 
 Overall , Biden had difficulty raising funds , struggled to draw people to his rallies , and failed to gain traction against the high @-@ profile candidacies of Obama and Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton ; he never rose above single digits in the national polls of the Democratic candidates . In the initial contest on January 3 , 2008 , Biden placed fifth in the Iowa caucuses , garnering slightly less than one percent of the state delegates . Biden withdrew from the race that evening , saying " There is nothing sad about tonight .... I feel no regret . " 
 Despite the lack of success , Biden 's stature in the political world rose as the result of his campaign . In particular , it changed the relationship between Biden and Obama . Although the two had served together on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , they had not been close , with Biden having resented Obama 's quick rise to political stardom , and Obama having viewed Biden as garrulous and patronizing . Now , having gotten to know each other during 2007 , Obama appreciated Biden 's campaigning style and appeal to working class voters , and Biden was convinced that Obama was " the real deal " . 
 = = = Democratic nominee for vice president = = = 
 Since shortly following Biden 's withdrawal from the presidential race , Obama had been privately telling Biden that he was interested in finding an important place for him in a possible Obama administration . Biden declined Obama 's first request to vet him for the vice presidential slot , fearing the vice presidency would represent a loss in status and voice from his Senate position , but subsequently changed his mind . In a June 22 , 2008 , interview on NBC 's Meet the Press , Biden confirmed that , although he was not actively seeking a spot on the ticket , he would accept the vice presidential nomination if offered . In early August , Obama and Biden met in secret to discuss a possible vice @-@ presidential relationship , and the two hit it off well personally . On August 22 , 2008 , Barack Obama announced that Biden would be his running mate . The New York Times reported that the strategy behind the choice reflected a desire to fill out the ticket with someone who has foreign policy and national security experience — and not to help the ticket win a swing state or to emphasize Obama 's " change " message . Other observers pointed out Biden 's appeal to middle class and blue @-@ collar voters , as well as his willingness to aggressively challenge Republican nominee John McCain in a way that Obama seemed uncomfortable doing at times . In accepting Obama 's offer , Biden ruled out to him the possibility of running for president again in 2016 ( although comments by Biden in subsequent years seemed to back off that stance , with Biden not wanting to diminish his political power by appearing uninterested in advancement ) . Biden was officially nominated for vice president on August 27 by voice vote at the 2008 Democratic National Convention in Denver , Colorado . 
 After his selection as a vice presidential candidate , Biden was criticized by his own Roman Catholic Diocese of Wilmington Bishop Michael <unk> over his stance on abortion , which goes against the church 's pro @-@ life beliefs and teachings . The diocese confirmed that even if elected vice president , Biden would not be allowed to speak at Catholic schools . Biden was soon barred from receiving Holy Communion by the bishop of his original hometown of Scranton , Pennsylvania , because of his support for abortion rights ; however , Biden did continue to receive Communion at his local Delaware parish . Scranton became a flash point in the competition for swing state Catholic voters between the Democratic campaign and liberal Catholic groups , who stressed that other social issues should be considered as much or more than abortion , and many bishops and conservative Catholics , who maintained abortion was paramount . Biden said he believed that life began at conception but that he would not impose his personal religious views on others . Bishop <unk> had previously stated regarding stances similar to Biden 's : " No one today would accept this statement from any public servant : ' I am personally opposed to human slavery and racism but will not impose my personal conviction in the legislative arena . ' Likewise , none of us should accept this statement from any public servant : ' I am personally opposed to abortion but will not impose my personal conviction in the legislative arena . ' " 
 Biden 's vice presidential campaigning gained little media visibility , as far greater press attention was focused on the Republican running mate , Alaskan Governor Sarah Palin . During one week in September 2008 , for instance , the Pew Research Center 's Project for Excellence in Journalism found that Biden was only included in five percent of the news coverage of the race , far less than for the other three candidates on the tickets . Biden nevertheless focused on campaigning in economically challenged areas of swing states and trying to win over blue @-@ collar Democrats , especially those who had supported Hillary Rodham Clinton . Biden attacked McCain heavily , despite a long @-@ standing personal friendship ; he would say , " That guy I used to know , he 's gone . It literally saddens me . " As the financial crisis of 2007 – 2010 reached a peak with the liquidity crisis of September 2008 and the proposed bailout of United States financial system became a major factor in the campaign , Biden voted in favor of the $ 700 billion Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 , which passed the Senate 74 – 25 . 
 On October 2 , 2008 , Biden participated in the campaign 's one vice presidential debate with Palin . Post @-@ debate polls found that while Palin exceeded many voters ' expectations , Biden had won the debate overall . On October 5 , Biden suspended campaign events for a few days after the death of his mother @-@ in @-@ law . During the final days of the campaign , Biden focused on less @-@ populated , older , less well @-@ off areas of battleground states , especially in Florida , Ohio , and Pennsylvania , where polling indicated he was popular and where Obama had not campaigned or performed well in the Democratic primaries . He also campaigned in some normally Republican states , as well as in areas with large Catholic populations . 
 Under instructions from the Obama campaign , Biden kept his speeches succinct and tried to avoid off @-@ hand remarks , such as one about Obama being tested by a foreign power soon after taking office , which had attracted negative attention . Privately , Obama was frustrated by Biden 's remarks , saying " How many times is Biden gonna say something stupid ? " Obama campaign staffers referred to Biden blunders as " Joe bombs " and kept Biden uninformed about strategy discussions , which in turn irked Biden . Relations between the two campaigns became strained for a month , until Biden apologized on a call to Obama and the two built a stronger partnership . Publicly , Obama strategist David Axelrod said that any unexpected comments had been outweighed by Biden 's high popularity ratings . Nationally , Biden had a 60 percent favorability rating in a Pew Research Center poll , compared to Palin 's 44 percent . 
 On November 4 , 2008 , Obama was elected President and Biden Vice President of the United States . The Obama @-@ Biden ticket won 365 Electoral College votes to McCain @-@ Palin 's 173 , and had a 53 – 46 percent edge in the nationwide popular vote . 
 Biden had continued to run for his Senate seat as well as for Vice President , as permitted by Delaware law . On November 4 , Biden was also re @-@ elected as senator , defeating Republican Christine O 'Donnell . Having won both races , Biden made a point of holding off his resignation from the Senate so that he could be sworn in for his seventh term on January 6 , 2009 . He became the youngest senator ever to start a seventh full term , and said , " In all my life , the greatest honor bestowed upon me has been serving the people of Delaware as their United States senator . " Biden cast his last Senate vote on January 15 , supporting the release of the second $ 350 billion for the Troubled Asset Relief Program . Biden resigned from the Senate later that day ; in emotional farewell remarks on the Senate floor , where he had spent most of his adult life , Biden said , " Every good thing I have seen happen here , every bold step taken in the 36 @-@ plus years I have been here , came not from the application of pressure by interest groups , but through the maturation of personal relationships . " 
 = = Vice Presidency = = 
 = = = Post @-@ election transition and first term = = = 
 As the presidential transition of Barack Obama began , Biden said he was in daily meetings with Obama and that McCain was still his friend . The U.S. Secret Service codename given to Biden is " Celtic " , referencing his Irish roots . 
 Biden chose veteran Democratic lawyer and aide Ron <unk> to be his chief of staff , and Time Washington bureau chief Jay Carney to be his director of communications . Biden intended to eliminate some of the explicit roles assumed by the vice presidency of his predecessor , Dick Cheney , who had established himself as an autonomous power center . Otherwise , Biden said he would not model his vice presidency on any of the ones before him , but instead would seek to provide advice and counsel on every critical decision Obama would make . Biden said he had been closely involved in all the cabinet appointments that were made during the transition . Biden was also named to head the new White House Task Force on Working Families , an initiative aimed at improving the economic well being of the middle class . As his last act as Chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee , Biden went on a trip to Iraq , Afghanistan and Pakistan during the second week of January 2009 , meeting with the leadership of those countries . 
 Biden became the 47th Vice President of the United States on January 20 , 2009 , when he was inaugurated alongside President Barack Obama . Biden is the first United States Vice President from Delaware and the first Roman Catholic to attain that office . Supreme Court Justice John Paul Stevens administered the oath of office to Biden . 
 In the early months of the Obama administration , Biden assumed the role of an important behind @-@ the @-@ scenes counselor . One role was to adjudicate disputes between Obama 's " team of rivals " . The president compared Biden 's efforts to a basketball player " who does a bunch of things that don 't show up in the stat sheet . " Biden played a key role in gaining Senate support for several major pieces of Obama legislation , and was a main factor in convincing Senator Arlen Specter to switch from the Republican to the Democratic party . Biden lost an internal debate to Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton regarding his opposition to sending 21 @,@ 000 new troops to the war in Afghanistan . His skeptical voice was still considered valuable within the administration , however , and later in 2009 Biden 's views achieved more prominence within the White House as Obama reconsidered his Afghanistan strategy . 
 Biden made visits to Iraq about once every two months , including trips to Baghdad in August and September 2009 to listen to Prime Minister Nouri al @-@ Maliki and reiterate U.S. stances on Iraq 's future ; by this time he had become the administration 's point man in delivering messages to Iraqi leadership about expected progress in the country . More generally , overseeing Iraq policy became Biden ’ s responsibility , when the president said in 2009 : " Joe , you do Iraq " . Biden said Iraq " could be one of the great achievements of this administration . " Biden 's January 2010 visit to Iraq in the midst of turmoil over banned candidates from the upcoming Iraqi parliamentary election resulted in 59 of the several hundred candidates being reinstated by the Iraqi government two days later . By 2012 , Biden had made eight trips there , but his oversight of U.S. policy in Iraq receded with the exit in 2011 of U.S. troops . 
 Biden was also in charge of the oversight role for infrastructure spending from the Obama stimulus package intended to help counteract the ongoing recession , and stressed that only worthy projects should get funding . He talked with hundreds of governors , mayors , and other local officials in this role . During this period , Biden was satisfied that no major instances of waste or corruption had occurred , and when he completed that role in February 2011 , he said that the number of fraud incidents with stimulus monies had been less than one percent . 
 It took some time for the cautious Obama and the blunt , rambling Biden to work out ways of dealing with each other . In late April 2009 , Biden 's off @-@ message response to a question during the beginning of the swine flu outbreak , that he would advise family members against travelling on airplanes or subways , led to a swift retraction from the White House . The remark revived Biden 's reputation for gaffes , and led to a spate of late @-@ night television jokes themed on him being a loose @-@ talking buffoon . In the face of persistently rising unemployment through July 2009 , Biden acknowledged that the administration had " misread how bad the economy was " but maintained confidence that the stimulus package would create many more jobs once the pace of expenditures picked up . The same month , Secretary of State Clinton quickly disavowed Biden 's remarks disparaging Russia as a power , but despite any missteps , Biden still retained Obama 's confidence and was increasingly influential within the administration . On March 23 , 2010 , a microphone picked up Biden telling the president that his signing of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was " a big fucking deal " during live national news telecasts . White House press secretary Robert Gibbs replied via Twitter " And yes Mr. Vice President , you 're right ... " Senior Obama advisor Valerie Jarrett said that Biden 's loose talk " [ is ] part of what makes the vice president so endearing ... We wouldn 't change him one bit . " Former Senate colleague Lindsey Graham said , " If there were no gaffes , there 'd be no Joe . He 's someone you can 't help but like . " Biden gained a long @-@ running alter ego persona , " The President of Vice " , on the satirical news site The Onion , which parodied his job title . Despite their different personalities , Obama and Biden formed a friendship , partly based around Obama 's daughter Sasha and Biden 's granddaughter Maisy , who attended Sidwell Friends School together . 
 Biden 's most important role within the administration has been to question assumptions , playing a contrarian role . Obama said that , " The best thing about Joe is that when we get everybody together , he really forces people to think and defend their positions , to look at things from every angle , and that is very valuable for me . " Another senior Obama advisor said Biden " is always prepared to be the skunk at the family picnic to make sure we are as intellectually honest as possible . " On June 11 , 2010 , Biden represented the United States at the opening ceremony of the World Cup , attended the England v. U.S. game which was tied 1 – 1 , and visited Egypt , Kenya , and South Africa . Throughout , Joe and Jill Biden maintained a relaxed atmosphere at their official residence in Washington , often entertaining some of their grandchildren , and regularly returned to their home in Delaware . 
 Biden campaigned heavily for Democrats in the 2010 midterm elections , maintaining an attitude of optimism in the face of general predictions of large @-@ scale losses for the party . Following large @-@ scale Republican gains in the elections and the departure of White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel , Biden 's past relationships with Republicans in Congress became more important . He led the successful administration effort to gain Senate approval for the New START treaty . In December 2010 , Biden 's advocacy within the White House for a middle ground , followed by his direct negotiations with Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell , were instrumental in producing the administration 's compromise tax package that revolved around a temporary extension of the Bush tax cuts . Biden then took the lead in trying to sell the agreement to a reluctant Democratic caucus in Congress , which was passed as the Tax Relief , Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization , and Job Creation Act of 2010 . 
 In March 2011 , Obama detailed Biden to lead negotiations between both houses of Congress and the White House in resolving federal spending levels for the rest of the year and avoid a government shutdown . By May 2011 , a " Biden panel " with six congressional members was trying to reach a bipartisan deal on raising the U.S. debt ceiling as part of an overall deficit reduction plan . The U.S. debt ceiling crisis developed over the next couple of months , but it was again Biden 's relationship with McConnell that proved to be a key factor in breaking a deadlock and finally bringing about a bipartisan deal to resolve it , in the form of the Budget Control Act of 2011 , signed on August 2 , 2011 , the same day that an unprecedented U.S. default had loomed . Biden had spent the most time bargaining with Congress on the debt question of anyone in the administration , and one Republican staffer said , " Biden 's the only guy with real negotiating authority , and [ McConnell ] knows that his word is good . He was a key to the deal . " 
 = = = 2012 re @-@ election campaign = = = 
 In October 2010 , Biden stated that Obama had asked him to remain as his running mate for the 2012 presidential election . With Obama 's popularity on the decline , however , in late 2011 White House Chief of Staff William M. Daley conducted some secret polling and focus group research into the idea of Secretary of State Clinton replacing Biden on the ticket . The notion was dropped when the results showed no appreciable improvement for Obama , and White House officials later said that Obama had never entertained the idea . 
 Biden 's May 2012 statement that he was " absolutely comfortable " with same @-@ sex marriage gained considerable public attention in comparison to President Obama 's position , which had been described as " evolving " . Biden made his statement without administration consent , and Obama and his aides were quite irked , since Obama had planned to shift position several months later , in the build @-@ up to the party convention , and since Biden had previously counseled the president to avoid the issue lest key Catholic voters be offended . Gay rights advocates seized upon the Biden stance , and within days , Obama announced that he too supported same @-@ sex marriage , an action in part forced by Biden 's unexpected remarks . Biden apologized to Obama in private for having spoken out , while Obama acknowledged publicly it had been done from the heart . The incident showed that Biden still struggled at times with message discipline ; as Time wrote , " everyone knows [ that ] Biden 's greatest strength is also his greatest weakness . " Relations were also strained between the campaigns when Biden appeared to use his to bolster fundraising contacts for a possible run on his own in the 2016 presidential election , and the vice president ended up being excluded from Obama campaign strategy meetings . 
 The Obama campaign nevertheless still valued Biden as a retail @-@ level politician who could connect with disaffected , blue collar workers and rural residents , and he had a heavy schedule of appearances in swing states as the Obama re @-@ election campaign began in earnest in spring 2012 . An August 2012 remark before a mixed @-@ race audience that proposed Republican relaxation of Wall Street regulations would " put y 'all back in chains " led to a similar analysis of Biden 's face @-@ to @-@ face campaigning abilities versus tendency to go off track . The Los Angeles Times wrote , " Most candidates give the same stump speech over and over , putting reporters if not the audience to sleep . But during any Biden speech , there might be a dozen moments to make press handlers cringe , and prompt reporters to turn to each other with amusement and confusion . " Time magazine wrote that Biden often goes too far and that " Along with the familiar Washington mix of neediness and overconfidence , Biden 's brain is wired for more than the usual amount of goofiness . " 
 Biden was officially nominated for a second term as vice president on September 6 by voice vote at the 2012 Democratic National Convention in Charlotte , North Carolina . He faced his Republican counterpart , Representative Paul Ryan , in the lone 2012 vice presidential debate on October 11 in Danville , Kentucky . There he made a feisty , emotional defense of the Obama administration 's record and energetically attacked the Republican ticket , in an effort to regain campaign momentum lost by Obama 's unfocused debate performance against Republican nominee Mitt Romney the week before . 
 On November 6 , 2012 , the president and vice president were elected to second terms . The Obama @-@ Biden ticket won 332 Electoral College votes to Romney @-@ Ryan 's 206 and had a 51 – 47 percent edge in the nationwide popular vote . 
 = = = Post @-@ election and second term = = = 
 In December 2012 , Biden was named by Obama to head the Gun Violence Task Force , created to address the causes of gun violence in the United States in the aftermath of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting . Later that month , during the final days before the country fell off the " fiscal cliff " , Biden 's relationship with McConnell once more proved important as the two negotiated a deal that led to the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 being passed at the start of 2013 . It made permanent much of the Bush tax cuts but raised rates on upper income levels . 
 Biden was inaugurated to a second term in the early morning of January 20 , 2013 , at a small ceremony in his official residence with Justice Sonia Sotomayor presiding ( a public ceremony took place on January 21 ) . He continued to be in the forefront as , in the wake of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting , the Obama administration put forth executive orders and proposed legislation towards new gun control measures ( the legislation failed to pass ) . 
 During the discussions that led to the October 2013 passage of the Continuing Appropriations Act , 2014 , which resolved the U.S. federal government shutdown of 2013 and the U.S. debt @-@ ceiling crisis of 2013 , Biden played little role . This was due to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and other Democratic leaders cutting the vice president out of any direct talks with Congress , feeling that Biden had given too much away during previous negotiations . 
 Biden 's Violence Against Women Act was reauthorized again in 2013 . The act led to further related developments in the creation of the White House Council on Women and Girls , begun in the first term , as well as the White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault , begun in January 2014 with Biden as co @-@ chair along with Jarrett . 
 As Iraq fell apart during 2014 , renewed attention was paid to the Biden @-@ Gelb Iraqi federalization plan of 2006 , with some observers suggesting that Biden had been right all along . Biden himself said that the U.S. would follow ISIL " to the gates of hell . " 
 By 2015 , a series of <unk> @-@ in and other events where Biden placed his hands on women and girls and talked closely to them had attracted the attention of both the press and social media . In one case , a senator issued a statement afterward saying about his daughter , " No , she doesn 't think the vice president is creepy . " On January 17 , 2015 , secret service agents heard shots were fired as a vehicle drove near Biden 's Delaware residence at 8 : 28 p.m. outside the security perimeter , but the vice president and his wife , Jill were not home . A vehicle was observed by an agent leaving the scene at a high rate of speed . 
 On February 29 , 2016 , Biden gave a speech at the 88th Academy Awards to do with awareness for sexual assault ; he also introduced Lady Gaga . 
 = = = Death of Beau = = = 
 Almost 43 years after two family members died in an automobile accident , Biden and his family were struck by a second family tragedy on May 30 , 2015 : his son Beau died of brain cancer at age 46 , after battling it for several years . The nature and seriousness of the illness had not been previously disclosed to the public , and Biden had quietly reduced his public schedule in order to spend more time with his son , who at the time of his death had been widely seen as the frontrunner to be the Democratic nominee for Governor of Delaware in 2016 . The Vice President issued a statement saying , " The entire Biden family is saddened beyond words . " 
 = = 2016 presidential race = = 
 During much of his second term , Biden was said to be preparing for a possible bid for the 2016 Democratic presidential nomination . He will be 74 on January 20 , 2017 , the date on which the successful candidate will be sworn in , which would have made him the oldest president on inauguration in history . With his family , many friends , and donors encouraging him in mid @-@ 2015 to enter the race , and with Hillary Clinton 's favorability ratings in decline at that time , Biden was reported to again be seriously considering the prospect and a " Draft Biden 2016 " PAC was established . 
 As of September 11 , 2015 , Biden was still uncertain whether or not to run . Biden cited the recent death of his son being a large drain on his emotional energy , and that " nobody has a right ... to seek that office unless they 're willing to give it 110 % of who they are . " 
 On October 21 , speaking from a podium in the Rose Garden with his wife and President Obama by his side , Biden announced his decision not to enter the race for the Democratic presidential nomination in the 2016 election . In January 2016 , Biden affirmed not running was the right decision , but he admitted to regretting not running for President " every day . " 
 As of the end of January 2016 , neither Biden nor President Barack Obama had endorsed any candidate for the 2016 presidential election . Biden did miss his annual Thanksgiving tradition of going to Nantucket , opting instead to travel abroad and meet with several European leaders , and took time to meet with Martin O 'Malley , having previously met with Bernie Sanders . Neither of these meetings were considered endorsements , as Biden has said that he will meet with any candidate who asks . 
 Following Obama 's endorsement of Hillary Clinton on June 9 , 2016 , Biden also endorsed her later the same day . Though Biden and Clinton were supposed to campaign together in Scranton on July 8 , the appearance was canceled by Clinton in light of the shooting of Dallas police officers the previous day . 
 = = Political positions = = 
 Biden has supported deficit spending on fiscal stimulus in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 ; the increased infrastructure spending proposed by the Obama administration ; mass transit , including Amtrak , bus , and subway subsidies ; same @-@ sex marriage ; and the reduced military spending proposed in the Obama Administration 's fiscal year 2014 budget . 
 A method that political scientists use for gauging ideology is to compare the annual ratings by the Americans for Democratic Action ( ADA ) with the ratings by the American Conservative Union ( ACU ) . Biden has a lifetime liberal 72 percent score from the ADA through 2004 , while the ACU awarded Biden a lifetime conservative rating of 13 percent through 2008 . Using another metric , Biden has a lifetime average liberal score of 77 @.@ 5 percent , according to a National Journal analysis that places him ideologically among the center of Senate Democrats as of 2008 . The Almanac of American Politics rates congressional votes as liberal or conservative on the political spectrum , in three policy areas : economic , social , and foreign . For 2005 – 2006 , Biden 's average ratings were as follows : the economic rating was 80 percent liberal and 13 percent conservative , the social rating was 78 percent liberal and 18 percent conservative , and the foreign rating was 71 percent liberal and 25 percent conservative . This has not changed much over time ; his liberal ratings in the mid @-@ 1980s were also in the 70 – 80 percent range . 
 Various advocacy groups have given Biden scores or grades as to how well his votes align with the positions of each group . The American Civil Liberties Union gives him an 80 percent lifetime score , with a 91 percent score for the 110th Congress . Biden opposes drilling for oil in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and supports governmental funding to find new energy sources . Biden believes action must be taken on global warming . He co @-@ sponsored the Sense of the Senate resolution calling on the United States to be a part of the United Nations climate negotiations and the Boxer @-@ Sanders Global Warming Pollution Reduction Act , the most stringent climate bill in the United States Senate . Biden was given an 85 percent lifetime approval rating from AFL @-@ CIO , and he voted for the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) . 
 December 8 , 2015 Joe Biden spoke in Ukraine 's parliament in Kiev . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Biden has received honorary degrees from the University of Scranton ( 1976 ) , Saint Joseph 's University ( 1981 ) , Widener University School of Law ( 2000 ) , Emerson College ( 2003 ) , his alma mater the University of Delaware ( 2004 ) , Suffolk University Law School ( 2005 ) , and his other alma mater Syracuse University ( 2009 ) . 
 Biden also received the Chancellor Medal from his alma mater , Syracuse University , in 1980 , and in 2005 , he received the George <unk> Pioneer Medal — Syracuse 's highest alumni award — " for excellence in public affairs . " 
 In 2008 , Biden received the Best of Congress Award , for " improving the American quality of life through family @-@ friendly work policies , " from Working Mother magazine . Also in 2008 , Biden shared with fellow Senator Richard Lugar the Hilal @-@ i @-@ Pakistan award from the Government of Pakistan , " in recognition of their consistent support for Pakistan . " In 2009 , Biden received The Golden Medal of Freedom award from Kosovo , that region 's highest award , for his vocal support for their independence in the late 1990s . 
 Biden is an inductee of the Delaware Volunteer Firemen 's Association Hall of Fame . He was named to the Little League Hall of Excellence in 2009 . 
 = = Almanac = = 
 U.S. Senators are popularly elected and take office January 3 for a six @-@ year term ( except when appointed to fill existing vacancies ) . 
 = = Writings by Biden = = 
 = Émile Durkheim = 
 David Émile Durkheim ( French : [ emil <unk> ] or [ <unk> ] ; April 15 , 1858 – November 15 , 1917 ) was a French sociologist , social psychologist and philosopher . He formally established the academic discipline and — with Karl Marx and Max Weber — is commonly cited as the principal architect of modern social science and father of sociology . 
 Much of Durkheim 's work was concerned with how societies could maintain their integrity and coherence in modernity ; an era in which traditional social and religious ties are no longer assumed , and in which new social institutions have come into being . His first major sociological work was The Division of Labour in Society ( 1893 ) . In 1895 , he published The Rules of Sociological Method and set up the first European department of sociology , becoming France 's first professor of sociology . In 1898 , he established the journal L 'Année Sociologique . Durkheim 's seminal monograph , Suicide ( 1897 ) , a study of suicide rates in Catholic and Protestant populations , pioneered modern social research and served to distinguish social science from psychology and political philosophy . The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life ( 1912 ) presented a theory of religion , comparing the social and cultural lives of aboriginal and modern societies . 
 Durkheim was also deeply preoccupied with the acceptance of sociology as a legitimate science . He refined the positivism originally set forth by Auguste Comte , promoting what could be considered as a form of epistemological realism , as well as the use of the <unk> @-@ deductive model in social science . For him , sociology was the science of institutions , if this term is understood in its broader meaning as " beliefs and modes of behaviour instituted by the collectivity " and its aim being to discover structural social facts . Durkheim was a major proponent of structural functionalism , a foundational perspective in both sociology and anthropology . In his view , social science should be purely holistic ; that is , sociology should study phenomena attributed to society at large , rather than being limited to the specific actions of individuals . 
 He remained a dominant force in French intellectual life until his death in 1917 , presenting numerous lectures and published works on a variety of topics , including the sociology of knowledge , morality , social stratification , religion , law , education , and deviance . <unk> terms such as " collective consciousness " have since entered the popular lexicon . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Childhood and education = = = 
 Emile Durkheim was born in <unk> in Lorraine , the son of Mélanie ( Isidor ) and <unk> Durkheim . He came from a long line of devout French Jews ; his father , grandfather , and great @-@ grandfather had been rabbis . He began his education in a rabbinical school , but at an early age , he decided not to follow in his family 's footsteps and switched schools . Durkheim led a completely secular life . Much of his work was dedicated to demonstrating that religious phenomena stemmed from social rather than divine factors . While Durkheim chose not to follow in the family tradition , he did not sever ties with his family or with the Jewish community . Many of his most prominent collaborators and students were Jewish , and some were blood relations . Marcel Mauss , a notable social anthropologist of the pre @-@ war era , was his nephew . One of his nieces was Claudette ( née Raphael ) Bloch , a marine biologist and mother of Maurice Bloch , who became a noted anthropologist . 
 A precocious student , Durkheim entered the École Normale Supérieure ( <unk> ) in 1879 , at his third attempt . The entering class that year was one of the most brilliant of the nineteenth century and many of his classmates , such as Jean Jaurès and Henri Bergson , would go on to become major figures in France 's intellectual history . At the <unk> , Durkheim studied under the direction of Numa Denis <unk> de <unk> , a classicist with a social scientific outlook , and wrote his Latin dissertation on Montesquieu . At the same time , he read Auguste Comte and Herbert Spencer . Thus Durkheim became interested in a scientific approach to society very early on in his career . This meant the first of many conflicts with the French academic system , which had no social science curriculum at the time . Durkheim found humanistic studies uninteresting , turning his attention from psychology and philosophy to ethics and eventually , sociology . He obtained his <unk> in philosophy in 1882 , though finishing next to last in his graduating class owing to serious illness the year before . 
 There was no way that a man of Durkheim 's views could receive a major academic appointment in Paris . From 1882 to 1887 he taught philosophy at several provincial schools . In 1885 he decided to leave for Germany , where for two years he studied sociology at the universities of Marburg , Berlin and Leipzig . As Durkheim indicated in several essays , it was in Leipzig that he learned to appreciate the value of empiricism and its language of concrete , complex things , in sharp contrast to the more abstract , clear and simple ideas of the Cartesian method . By 1886 , as part of his doctoral dissertation , he had completed the draft of his The Division of Labour in Society , and was working towards establishing the new science of sociology . 
 = = = Academic career = = = 
 Durkheim 's period in Germany resulted in the publication of numerous articles on German social science and philosophy ; Durkheim was particularly impressed by the work of Wilhelm Wundt . Durkheim 's articles gained recognition in France , and he received a teaching appointment in the University of Bordeaux in 1887 , where he was to teach the university 's first social science course . His official title was Chargé d 'un Cours de Science Sociale et de <unk> and thus he taught both pedagogy and sociology ( the latter had never been taught in France before ) . The appointment of the social scientist to the mostly humanistic faculty was an important sign of the change of times , and also the growing importance and recognition of the social sciences . From this position Durkheim helped reform the French school system and introduced the study of social science in its curriculum . However , his controversial beliefs that religion and morality could be explained in terms purely of social interaction earned him many critics . 
 Also in 1887 , Durkheim married Louise Dreyfus . They would have two children , Marie and André . 
 The 1890s were a period of remarkable creative output for Durkheim . In 1893 , he published The Division of Labour in Society , his doctoral dissertation and fundamental statement of the nature of human society and its development . Durkheim 's interest in social phenomena was spurred on by politics . France 's defeat in the Franco @-@ Prussian War led to the fall of the regime of Napoleon III , which was then replaced by the Third Republic . This in turn resulted in a backlash against the new secular and republican rule , as many people considered a vigorously nationalistic approach necessary to rejuvenate France 's fading power . Durkheim , a Jew and a staunch supporter of the Third Republic with a sympathy towards socialism , was thus in the political minority , a situation that galvanized him politically . The Dreyfus affair of 1894 only strengthened his activist stance . 
 In 1895 , he published The Rules of Sociological Method , a manifesto stating what sociology is and how it ought to be done , and founded the first European department of sociology at the University of Bordeaux . In 1898 , he founded L 'Année Sociologique , the first French social science journal . Its aim was to publish and publicize the work of what was , by then , a growing number of students and collaborators ( this is also the name used to refer to the group of students who developed his sociological program ) . In 1897 , he published Suicide , a case study that provided an example of what the sociological monograph might look like . Durkheim was one of the pioneers of the use of quantitative methods in criminology during his suicide case study . 
 By 1902 , Durkheim had finally achieved his goal of attaining a prominent position in Paris when he became the chair of education at the Sorbonne . Durkheim aimed for the Parisian position earlier , but the Parisian faculty took longer to accept what some called " sociological imperialism " and admit social science to their curriculum . He became a full professor ( Professor of the Science of Education ) there in 1906 , and in 1913 he was named Chair in " Education and Sociology " . Because French universities are technically institutions for training secondary school teachers , this position gave Durkheim considerable influence — his lectures were the only ones that were mandatory for the entire student body . Durkheim had much influence over the new generation of teachers ; around that time he also served as an advisor to the Ministry of Education . In 1912 , he published his last major work , The Elementary Forms of The Religious Life . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 The outbreak of World War I was to have a tragic effect on Durkheim 's life . His leftism was always patriotic rather than internationalist — he sought a secular , rational form of French life . But the coming of the war and the inevitable nationalist propaganda that followed made it difficult to sustain this already nuanced position . While Durkheim actively worked to support his country in the war , his reluctance to give in to simplistic nationalist fervor ( combined with his Jewish background ) made him a natural target of the now @-@ ascendant French Right . Even more seriously , the generations of students that Durkheim had trained were now being drafted to serve in the army , and many of them perished in the trenches . Finally , Durkheim 's own son , André , died on the war front in December 1915 — a loss from which Durkheim never recovered . Emotionally devastated , Durkheim collapsed of a stroke in Paris on November 15 , 1917 . He was buried at the Montparnasse Cemetery in Paris . 
 = = Durkheim 's thought = = 
 Throughout his career , Durkheim was concerned primarily with three goals . First , to establish sociology as a new academic discipline . Second , to analyze how societies could maintain their integrity and coherence in the modern era , when things such as shared religious and ethnic background could no longer be assumed ; to that end he wrote much about the effect of laws , religion , education and similar forces on society and social integration . Lastly , Durkheim was concerned with the practical implications of scientific knowledge . The importance of social integration is expressed throughout Durkheim 's work : 
 For if society lacks the unity that derives from the fact that the relationships between its parts are exactly regulated , that unity resulting from the harmonious articulation of its various functions assured by effective discipline and if , in addition , society lacks the unity based upon the commitment of men 's wills to a common objective , then it is no more than a pile of sand that the least jolt or the slightest puff will suffice to scatter . 
 = = = Inspirations = = = 
 During his university studies at the École , Durkheim was influenced by two neo @-@ Kantian scholars , Charles Bernard <unk> and Émile <unk> . The principles Durkheim absorbed from them included rationalism , scientific study of morality , anti @-@ utilitarianism and secular education . His methodology was influenced by Numa Denis <unk> de <unk> , a supporter of the scientific method . 
 A fundamental influence on Durkheim 's thought was the sociological positivism of Auguste Comte , who effectively sought to extend and apply the scientific method found in the natural sciences to the social sciences . According to Comte , a true social science should stress for empirical facts , as well as induce general scientific laws from the relationship among these facts . There were many points on which Durkheim agreed with the positivist thesis . First , he accepted that the study of society was to be founded on an examination of facts . Second , like Comte , he acknowledged that the only valid guide to objective knowledge was the scientific method . Third , he agreed with Comte that the social sciences could become scientific only when they were stripped of their metaphysical abstractions and philosophical speculation . At the same time , Durkheim believed that Comte was still too philosophical in his outlook . 
 A second influence on Durkheim 's view of society beyond Comte 's positivism was the epistemological outlook called social realism . Although he never explicitly exposed it , Durkheim adopted a realist perspective in order to demonstrate the existence of social realities outside the individual and to show that these realities existed in the form of the objective relations of society . As an epistemology of science , realism can be defined as a perspective that takes as its central point of departure the view that external social realities exist in the outer world and that these realities are independent of the individual 's perception of them . This view opposes other predominant philosophical perspectives such as empiricism and positivism . <unk> such as David Hume had argued that all realities in the outside world are products of human sense perception . According to empiricists , all realities are thus merely perceived : they do not exist independently of our perceptions , and have no causal power in themselves . Comte 's positivism went a step further by claiming that scientific laws could be deduced from empirical observations . Going beyond this , Durkheim claimed that sociology would not only discover " apparent " laws , but would be able to discover the inherent nature of society . 
 Scholars also debate the exact influence of Jewish thought on Durkheim 's work . The answer remains uncertain ; some scholars have argued that Durkheim 's thought is a form of secularized Jewish thought , while others argue that proving the existence of a direct influence of Jewish thought on Durkheim 's achievements is difficult or impossible . 
 = = = Establishing sociology = = = 
 Durkheim authored some of the most programmatic statements on what sociology is and how it should be practiced . His concern was to establish sociology as a science . Arguing for a place for sociology among other sciences he wrote : 
 Sociology is , then , not an auxiliary of any other science ; it is itself a distinct and autonomous science . 
 To give sociology a place in the academic world and to ensure that it is a legitimate science , it must have an object that is clear and distinct from philosophy or psychology , and its own methodology . He argued , " There is in every society a certain group of phenomena which may be differentiated from .... those studied by the other natural sciences . " 
 A fundamental aim of sociology is to discover structural " social facts " . 
 Establishment of sociology as an independent , recognized academic discipline is amongst Durkheim 's largest and most lasting legacies . Within sociology , his work has significantly influenced structuralism or structural functionalism . Scholars inspired by Durkheim include Marcel Mauss , Maurice <unk> , Célestin <unk> , Alfred Radcliffe @-@ Brown , Talcott Parsons , Robert K. Merton , Jean Piaget , Claude Lévi @-@ Strauss , Ferdinand de Saussure , Michel Foucault , Clifford <unk> , Peter Berger , Robert <unk> , social reformer Patrick <unk> and others . 
 = = = Methodology = = = 
 In The Rules of Sociological Method ( 1895 ) , Durkheim expressed his will to establish a method that would guarantee sociology 's truly scientific character . One of the questions raised by the author concerns the objectivity of the sociologist : how may one study an object that , from the very beginning , conditions and relates to the observer ? According to Durkheim , observation must be as impartial and impersonal as possible , even though a " perfectly objective observation " in this sense may never be attained . A social fact must always be studied according to its relation with other social facts , never according to the individual who studies it . Sociology should therefore privilege comparison rather than the study of singular independent facts . 
 Durkheim sought to create one of the first rigorous scientific approaches to social phenomena . Along with Herbert Spencer , he was one of the first people to explain the existence and quality of different parts of a society by reference to what function they served in maintaining the quotidian ( i.e. by how they make society " work " ) . He also agreed with his organic analogy , comparing society to a living organism . Thus his work is sometimes seen as a precursor to functionalism . Durkheim also insisted that society was more than the sum of its parts . 
 Unlike his contemporaries Ferdinand Tönnies and Max Weber , he focused not on what motivates the actions of individuals ( an approach associated with methodological individualism ) , but rather on the study of social facts . 
 = = = Social facts = = = 
 A social fact is every way of acting , fixed or not , capable of exercising on the individual an external constraint ; or again , every way of acting which is general throughout a given society , while at the same time existing in its own right independent of its individual manifestations . 
 Durkheim 's work revolved around the study of social facts , a term he coined to describe phenomena that have an existence in and of themselves , are not bound to the actions of individuals , but have a coercive influence upon them . Durkheim argued that social facts have , sui generis , an independent existence greater and more objective than the actions of the individuals that compose society . Only such social facts can explain the observed social phenomena . Being exterior to the individual person , social facts may thus also exercise coercive power on the various people composing society , as it can sometimes be observed in the case of formal laws and regulations , but also in situations implying the presence of informal rules , such as religious rituals or family norms . Unlike the facts studied in natural sciences , a " social " fact thus refers to a specific category of phenomena : 
 The determining cause of a social fact must be sought among the antecedent social facts and not among the states of the individual consciousness . 
 Such social facts are endowed with a power of coercion , by reason of which they may control individual behaviors . According to Durkheim , these phenomena cannot be reduced to biological or psychological grounds . Social facts can be material ( physical objects ) or immaterial ( meanings , sentiments , etc . ) . The latter cannot be seen or touched , but they are external and coercive , and as such , they become real , gain " <unk> " . Physical objects can represent both material and immaterial social facts ; for example a flag is a physical social fact that often has various immaterial social facts ( the meaning and importance of the flag ) attached to it . 
 Many social facts , however , have no material form . Even the most " individualistic " or " subjective " phenomena , such as love , freedom or suicide , would be regarded by Durkheim as objective social facts . Individuals composing society do not directly cause suicide : suicide , as a social fact , exists independently in society , and is caused by other social facts ( such as rules governing behavior and group attachment ) , whether an individual likes it or not . Whether a person " leaves " a society does not change anything to the fact that this society will still contain suicides . Suicide , like other immaterial social facts , exists independently of the will of an individual , cannot be eliminated , and is as influential – coercive – as physical laws such as gravity . Sociology 's task thus consists of discovering the qualities and characteristics of such social facts , which can be discovered through a quantitative or experimental approach ( Durkheim extensively relied on statistics ) . 
 = = = Society , collective consciousness and culture = = = 
 Regarding the society itself , like social institutions in general , Durkheim saw it as a set of social facts . Even more than " what society is " , Durkheim was interested in answering " how is a society created " and " what holds a society together " . In The Division of Labour in Society , Durkheim attempted to answer the question of what holds the society together . He assumes that humans are inherently egoistic , but norms , beliefs and values ( collective consciousness ) form the moral basis of the society , resulting in social integration . Collective consciousness is of key importance to the society , its requisite function without which the society cannot survive . Collective consciousness produces the society and holds it together , and at the same time individuals produce collective consciousness through their interactions . Through collective consciousness human beings become aware of one another as social beings , not just animals . 
 The totality of beliefs and sentiments common to the average members of a society forms a determinate system with a life of its own . It can be termed the collective or common consciousness . 
 In particular , the emotional part of the collective consciousness overrides our egoism : as we are emotionally bound to culture , we act socially because we recognize it is the responsible , moral way to act . A key to forming society is social interaction , and Durkheim believes that human beings , when in a group , will inevitably act in such a way that a society is formed . 
 The importance of another key social fact : the culture . Groups , when interacting , create their own culture and attach powerful emotions to it . He was one of the first scholars to consider the question of culture so intensely . Durkheim was interested in cultural diversity , and how the existence of diversity nonetheless fails to destroy a society . To that , Durkheim answered that any apparent cultural diversity is overridden by a larger , common , and more generalized cultural system , and the law . 
 In a socioevolutionary approach , Durkheim described the evolution of societies from mechanical solidarity to organic solidarity ( one rising from mutual need ) . As the societies become more complex , evolving from mechanical to organic solidarity , the division of labour is counteracting and replacing collective consciousness . In the simpler societies , people are connected to others due to personal ties and traditions ; in the larger , modern society they are connected due to increased reliance on others with regard to them performing their specialized tasks needed for the modern , highly complex society to survive . In mechanical solidarity , people are self @-@ sufficient , there is little integration and thus there is the need for use of force and repression to keep society together . Also , in such societies , people have much fewer options in life . In organic solidarity , people are much more integrated and interdependent and specialisation and cooperation is extensive . Progress from mechanical to organic solidarity is based first on population growth and increasing population density , second on increasing " morality density " ( development of more complex social interactions ) and thirdly , on the increasing specialisation in workplace . One of the ways mechanical and organic societies differ is the function of law : in mechanical society the law is focused on its punitive aspect , and aims to reinforce the cohesion of the community , often by making the punishment public and extreme ; whereas in the organic society the law focuses on repairing the damage done and is more focused on individuals than the community . 
 One of the main features of the modern , organic society is the importance , sacredness even , given to the concept – social fact – of the individual . The individual , rather than the collective , becomes the focus of rights and responsibilities , the center of public and private rituals holding the society together – a function once performed by the religion . To stress the importance of this concept , Durkheim talked of the " cult of the individual " : 
 Thus very far from there being the antagonism between the individual and society which is often claimed , moral individualism , the cult of the individual , is in fact the product of society itself . It is society that instituted it and made of man the god whose servant it is . 
 Durkheim saw the population density and growth as key factors in the evolution of the societies and advent of modernity . As the number of people in a given area increase , so does the number of interactions , and the society becomes more complex . Growing competition between the more numerous people also leads to further division of labour . In time , the importance of the state , the law and the individual increases , while that of the religion and moral solidarity decreases . 
 In another example of evolution of culture , Durkheim pointed to fashion , although in this case he noted a more cyclical phenomenon . According to Durkheim , fashion serves to differentiate between lower classes and upper classes , but because lower classes want to look like the upper classes , they will eventually adapt the upper class fashion , depreciating it , and forcing the upper class to adopt a new fashion . 
 = = = Social pathologies and crime = = = 
 As the society , Durkheim noted there are several possible pathologies that could lead to a breakdown of social integration and disintegration of the society : the two most important ones are anomie and forced division of labour ; lesser ones include the lack of coordination and suicide . By anomie Durkheim means a state when too rapid population growth reduces the amount of interaction between various groups , which in turn leads a breakdown of understanding ( norms , values , and so on ) . By forced division of labour Durkheim means a situation where power holders , driven by their desire for profit ( greed ) , results in people doing the work they are unsuited for . Such people are unhappy , and their desire to change the system can destabilize the society . 
 Durkheim 's views on crime were a departure from conventional notions . He believed that crime is " bound up with the fundamental conditions of all social life " and serves a social function . He stated that crime implies , " not only that the way remains open to necessary changes but that in certain cases it directly prepares these changes . " Examining the trial of Socrates , he argues that " his crime , namely , the independence of his thought , rendered a service not only to humanity but to his country " as " it served to prepare a new morality and faith that the Athenians needed " . As such , his crime " was a useful prelude to reforms " . In this sense , he saw crime as being able to release certain social tensions and so have a cleansing or purging effect in society . He further stated that " the authority which the moral conscience enjoys must not be excessive ; otherwise , no @-@ one would dare to criticize it , and it would too easily congeal into an immutable form . To make progress , individual originality must be able to express itself ... [ even ] the originality of the criminal ... shall also be possible " . 
 = = = = Suicide = = = = 
 In Suicide ( 1897 ) , Durkheim explores the differing suicide rates among Protestants and Catholics , arguing that stronger social control among Catholics results in lower suicide rates . According to Durkheim , Catholic society has normal levels of integration while Protestant society has low levels . Overall , Durkheim treated suicide as a social fact , explaining variations in its rate on a macro level , considering society @-@ scale phenomena such as lack of connections between people ( group attachment ) and lack of regulations of behavior , rather than individuals ' feelings and motivations . 
 This study has been extensively discussed by later scholars and several major criticisms have emerged . First , Durkheim took most of his data from earlier researchers , notably Adolph Wagner and Henry <unk> , who were much more careful in generalizing from their own data . Second , later researchers found that the Protestant – Catholic differences in suicide seemed to be limited to German @-@ speaking Europe and thus may have always been the spurious reflection of other factors . Durkheim 's study of suicide has been criticized as an example of the logical error termed the ecological fallacy . However , diverging views have contested whether Durkheim 's work really contained an ecological fallacy . More recent authors such as Berk ( 2006 ) have also questioned the micro – macro relations underlying Durkheim 's work . Some , such as <unk> ( 1959 ) , Johnson ( 1965 ) and Gibbs ( 1968 ) , have claimed that Durkheim 's only intent was to explain suicide sociologically within a holistic perspective , emphasizing that " he intended his theory to explain variation among social environments in the incidence of suicide , not the suicides of particular individuals . " 
 Despite its limitations , Durkheim 's work on suicide has influenced proponents of control theory , and is often mentioned as a classic sociological study . The book pioneered modern social research and served to distinguish social science from psychology and political philosophy . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 In The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life , Durkheim 's first purpose was to identify the social origin and function of religion as he felt that religion was a source of camaraderie and solidarity . His second purpose was to identify links between certain religions in different cultures , finding a common denominator . He wanted to understand the empirical , social aspect of religion that is common to all religions and goes beyond the concepts of spirituality and God . 
 Durkheim defined religion as 
 A religion is a unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things , i.e. , things set apart and <unk> and practices which unite in one single moral community called a Church , all those who adhere to them . 
 In this definition , Durkheim avoids references to supernatural or God . Durkheim argued that the concept of supernatural is relatively new , tied to the development of science and separation of supernatural — that which cannot be rationally explained — from natural , that which can . Thus , according to Durkheim , for early humans , everything was supernatural . Similarly , he points out that religions that give little importance to the concept of god exist , such as Buddhism , where the Four Noble Truths are much more important than any individual deity . With that , Durkheim argues , we are left with the following three concepts : the sacred ( the ideas that cannot be properly explained , inspire awe and are considered worthy of spiritual respect or devotion ) , the beliefs and practices ( which create highly emotional state — collective effervescence — and invest symbols with sacred importance ) , and the moral community ( a group of people sharing a common moral philosophy ) . Out of those three concepts , Durkheim focused on the sacred , noting that it is at the very core of a religion . He defined sacred things as : 
 ... simply collective ideals that have fixed themselves on material objects ... they are only collective forces <unk> , that is to say , moral forces ; they are made up of the ideas and sentiments awakened in us by the spectacle of society , and not of sensations coming from the physical world . 
 Durkheim saw religion as the most fundamental social institution of humankind , and one that gave rise to other social forms . It was the religion that gave humanity the strongest sense of collective consciousness . Durkheim saw the religion as a force that emerged in the early hunter and gatherer societies , as the emotions collective effervescence run high in the growing groups , forcing them to act in a new ways , and giving them a sense of some hidden force driving them . Over time , as emotions became symbolized and interactions ritualized , religion became more organized , giving a rise to the division between the sacred and the profane . However , Durkheim also believed that religion was becoming less important , as it was being gradually superseded by science and the cult of an individual . 
 Thus there is something eternal in religion that is destined to outlive the succession of particular symbols in which religious thought has clothed itself . 
 However , even if the religion was losing its importance for Durkheim , it still laid the foundation of modern society and the interactions that governed it . And despite the advent of alternative forces , Durkheim argued that no replacement for the force of religion had yet been created , . He expressed his doubt about modernity , seeing the modern times as " a period of transition and moral mediocrity " . 
 Durkheim also argued that our primary categories for understanding the world have their origins in religion . It is religion , Durkheim writes , that gave rise to most if not all other social constructs , including the larger society . Durkheim argued that categories are produced by the society , and thus are collective creations . Thus as people create societies , they also create categories , but at the same time , they do so unconsciously , and the categories are prior to any individual 's experience . In this way Durkheim attempted to bridge the divide between seeing categories as constructed out of human experience and as logically prior to that experience . Our understanding of the world is shaped by social facts ; for example the notion of time is defined by being measured through a calendar , which in turn was created to allow us to keep track of our social gatherings and rituals ; those in turn on their most basic level originated from religion . In the end , even the most logical and rational pursuit of science can trace its origins to religion . Durkheim states that , " Religion gave birth to all that is essential in the society . 
 In his work , Durkheim focused on totemism , the religion of the aboriginal Australians and Native Americans . Durkheim saw totemism as the most ancient religion , and focused on it as he believed its simplicity would ease the discussion of the essential elements of religion . 
 Durkheim 's work on religion was criticized on both empirical and theoretical grounds by specialists in the field . The most important critique came from Durkheim 's contemporary , Arnold van Gennep , an expert on religion and ritual , and also on Australian belief systems . Van Gennep argued that Durkheim 's views of primitive peoples and simple societies were " entirely erroneous " . Van Gennep further argued that Durkheim demonstrated a lack of critical stance towards his sources , collected by traders and priests , naively accepting their veracity , and that Durkheim interpreted freely from dubious data . At the conceptual level , van Gennep pointed out Durkheim 's tendency to press ethnography into a prefabricated theoretical scheme . 
 Despite such critiques , Durkheim 's work on religion has been widely praised for its theoretical insight and whose arguments and propositions , according to Robert Alun Jones , " have stimulated the interest and excitement of several generations of sociologists irrespective of theoretical ' school ' or field of specialization . " 
 = = = Sociology and philosophy = = = 
 = = = = Sociology of knowledge = = = = 
 While Durkheim 's work deals with a number of subjects , including suicide , the family , social structures , and social institutions , a large part of his work deals with the sociology of knowledge . 
 While publishing short articles on the subject earlier in his career ( for example the essay De quelques formes primitives de classification written in 1902 with Marcel Mauss ) , Durkheim 's definitive statement concerning the sociology of knowledge comes in his 1912 magnum opus The Elementary Forms of Religious Life . This book has as its goal not only the elucidation of the social origins and function of religion , but also the social origins and impact of society on language and logical thought . Durkheim worked largely out of a Kantian framework and sought to understand how the concepts and categories of logical thought could arise out of social life . He argued , for example , that the categories of space and time were not a priori . Rather , the category of space depends on a society 's social grouping and geographical use of space , and a group 's social rythme that determines our understanding of time . In this Durkheim sought to combine elements of rationalism and empiricism , arguing that certain aspects of logical thought common to all humans did exist , but that they were products of collective life ( thus contradicting the tabla rasa empiricist understanding whereby categories are acquired by individual experience alone ) , and that they were not universal a priori 's ( as Kant argued ) since the content of the categories differed from society to society . 
 Another key elements to Durkheim 's theory of knowledge is his concept of représentations collectives ( collective representations ) , which is outlined in The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life . <unk> collectives are the symbols and images that come to represent the ideas , beliefs , and values elaborated by a collectivity and are not reducible to individual constituents . They can include words , slogans , ideas , or any number of material items that can serve as a symbol , such as a cross , a rock , a temple , a feather etc . As Durkheim elaborates , représentations collectives are created through intense social interaction and are products of collective activity . As such these representations have the particular , and somewhat contradictory , aspect that they exist externally to the individual ( since they are created and controlled not by the individual but by society as a whole ) , and yet simultaneously within each individual of the society ( by virtue of that individual 's participation within society ) . 
 Arguably the most important " <unk> collective " is language , which according to Durkheim is a product of collective action . And because language is a collective action , language contains within it a history of accumulated knowledge and experience that no individual would be capable of creating on their own . As Durkheim says , ' représentations collectives ' , and language in particular : 
 add to that which we can learn by our own personal experience all that wisdom and science which the group has accumulated in the course of centuries . Thinking by concepts , is not merely seeing reality on its most general side , but it is projecting a light upon the sensation which illuminates it , penetrates it and transforms it . 
 As such , language , as a social product , literally structures and shapes our experience of reality . This discursive approach to language and society would be developed by later French philosophers , such as Michel Foucault . 
 = = = = Morality = = = = 
 Durkheim defines morality as " a system of rules for conduct . " His analysis of morality is strongly marked by Immanuel Kant and his notion of duty . While Durkheim was influenced by Kant , he was highly critical of aspects of the latter 's moral theory and developed his own positions . 
 Durkheim agrees with Kant that within morality , there is an element of obligation , " a moral authority which , by manifesting itself in certain precepts particularly important to it , confers upon [ moral rules ] an obligatory character . " Morality tells us how to act from a position of superiority . There exists a certain , pre @-@ established moral norm to which we must conform . It is through this view that Durkheim makes a first critique of Kant in saying that moral duties originate in society , and are not to be found in some universal moral concept such as the categorical imperative . Durkheim also argues that morality is characterized not just by this obligation , but is also something that is desired by the individual . The individual believes that by adhering to morality , they are serving the common Good , and for this reason , the individual submits voluntarily to the moral commandment . 
 However , in order to accomplish its aims , morality must be legitimate in the eyes of those to whom it speaks . As Durkheim argues , this moral authority is primarily to be located in religion , which is why in any religion one finds a code of morality . For Durkheim , it is only society that has the resources , the respect , and the power to cultivate within an individual both the obligatory and the desirous aspects of morality . 
 = = Influences and legacy = = 
 Durkheim had an important impact on the development of Anthropology and Sociology , influencing thinkers from his school of sociology , such as Marcel Mauss , but also later thinkers , such as Maurice <unk> , Talcott Parsons , Alfred Radcliffe @-@ Brown , and Claude Levi @-@ Strauss . More recently , Durkheim has influenced sociologists such as Steven Lukes , Robert <unk> , and Pierre Bourdieu . His description of collective consciousness also deeply influenced the Turkish nationalism of Ziya <unk> , the founding father of Turkish sociology . 
 Outside of sociology , he influenced philosophers Henri Bergson and Emmanuel Levinas , and his ideas can be found latently in the work of certain structuralist thinkers of the 60s , such as Alain <unk> , Louis Althusser , and Michel Foucault . Recently , Durkheim has influenced philosophers such as Charles Taylor and Hans <unk> . 
 = = = Durkheim contra Searle = = = 
 Much of Durkheim 's work , however , remains unacknowledged in philosophy , despite its direct relevance . As proof one can look to John Searle , who wrote a book The Construction of Social Reality , in which he elaborates a theory of social facts and collective representations that he believed to be a landmark work that would bridge the gap between analytic and continental philosophy . Neil Gross however , demonstrates how Searle 's views on society are more or less a reconstitution of Durkheim 's theories of social facts , social institutions , collective representations and the like . Searle 's ideas are thus open to the same criticisms as Durkheim 's . Searle responded by saying that Durkheim 's work was worse than he had originally believed , and , admitting that he had not read much of Durkheim 's work , said that , " Because Durkheim ’ s account seemed so impoverished I did not read any further in his work . " Stephen Lukes , however , responded to Searle 's response to Gross and refutes point by point the allegations that Searle makes against Durkheim , essentially upholding the argument of Gross , that Searle 's work bears great resemblance to that of Durkheim 's . Lukes attributes Searle 's <unk> of Durkheim 's work to the fact that Searle , quite simply , never read Durkheim . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Montesquieu 's contributions to the formation of social science ( 1892 ) 
