 The Division of Labour in Society ( 1893 ) 
 The Rules of Sociological Method ( 1895 ) 
 On the <unk> of Crime ( 1895 ) 
 Suicide ( 1897 ) 
 The Prohibition of Incest and its Origins ( 1897 ) , published in L 'Année Sociologique , vol . 1 , pp. 1 – 70 
 Sociology and its Scientific Domain ( 1900 ) , translation of an Italian text entitled " La <unk> e il suo <unk> <unk> " 
 Primitive Classification ( 1903 ) , in collaboration with Marcel Mauss 
 The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life ( 1912 ) 
 Who Wanted War ? ( 1914 ) , in collaboration with Ernest Denis 
 Germany Above All ( 1915 ) 
 Published posthumously : 
 Education and Sociology ( 1922 ) 
 Sociology and Philosophy ( 1924 ) 
 Moral Education ( 1925 ) 
 Socialism ( 1928 ) 
 Pragmatism and Sociology ( 1955 ) 
 = Calvatia sculpta = 
 Calvatia sculpta , commonly known as the sculpted puffball , the sculptured puffball , the pyramid puffball , and the Sierran puffball , is a species of puffball fungus in the Agaricaceae family . Attaining dimensions of up to 8 to 15 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 to 5 @.@ 9 in ) tall by 8 to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) wide , the <unk> or egg @-@ shaped puffball is readily recognizable because of the large pyramidal or polygonal warts covering its surface . It is edible when young , before the spores inside the fruit body disintegrate into a brownish powder . The spores are roughly spherical , and have wart @-@ like projections on their surfaces . 
 Originally described from the Sierra Nevada , C. sculpta is found in mountainous areas in western North America , and was found in a Brazilian dune in 2008 . It may be easily confused with Calbovista subsculpta , a similar puffball that — in addition to differences observable only with microscopy — is larger , and has slightly raised warts with a felt @-@ like texture . Other similar species include Calvatia arctica and immature specimens of Amanita magniverrucata . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The species was first described in 1885 by American mycologist Harvey Willson Harkness , under the name Lycoperdon <unk> . Harkness , who called it " a curious and strikingly beautiful species " , found fruit bodies growing at elevations between 1 @,@ 800 and 2 @,@ 400 meters ( 5 @,@ 900 and 7 @,@ 900 ft ) in the Sierra Nevada mountains . Although he noted that " in appearance it differs so much from any species known to us , as to be almost deemed worthy of generic rank " , he thought that placement in the puffball genus Lycoperdon was the most appropriate classification , despite its unusual cortex . Harkness 's type collections were destroyed in the fires following the 1906 San Francisco earthquake . In 1904 , Curtis Gates Lloyd considered the species better placed in Calvatia , because of the resemblance of its deeply colored capillitial threads ( coarse thick @-@ walled cells found in the gleba ) to those of Calvatia <unk> ; he called the species Calvatia <unk> . The mushroom is known by several common names , including the " sculpted puffball " , the " sculptured puffball " , the " pyramid puffball " , and the " Sierran puffball " . 
 In 1992 , German mycologist Hanns Kreisel , in his survey of the genus Calvatia , defined the section <unk> to contain C. sculpta and C. subcretacea . Two years later he merged the section <unk> into <unk> when it was shown that C. subcretacea was synonymous with the arctic @-@ alpine species C. arctica . 
 = = Description = = 
 The white <unk> or egg @-@ shaped fruit body of C. sculpta may be 8 to 15 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 to 5 @.@ 9 in ) tall by 8 to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) wide . The outer layer of tissue , known as the exoperidium , is covered on the outer surface with distinctive long , pointed , pyramid @-@ shaped warts , either erect or bent over and sometimes connected at the tip with other warts . The warts bear parallel horizontal lines towards the base . Mycologist David Arora opined that C. sculpta resembled " a cross between a geodesic dome and a giant glob of meringue . " In age , the peridium sloughs off and exposes a brownish spore mass . The interior of the puffball , the gleba , is firm and yellowish @-@ white when young , but gradually becomes powdery and deep olive @-@ brown as it matures . 
 The spores are roughly spherical , thick @-@ walled , 3 – 6 µm in diameter ( although some specimens collected in the USA range from 7 @.@ 2 to 9 @.@ 5 µm ) , and are covered with minute spines or warts . The use of scanning electron microscopy has revealed that these ornamentations on the spores are typically 0 @.@ 95 µm long . Spore ultrastructure is distinctive among Calvatia species , and has been used to help verify taxonomic groupings and confirm the status of species within the genus . The capillitia ( coarse , thick @-@ walled hyphae in the gleba ) are septate , with branches that are narrowed towards the tips ; they are 3 – 8 µm in diameter . When grown in pure culture in the laboratory , C. sculpta is , under certain conditions , able to grow structures called mycelial strands . These are linear aggregates of hyphae whereby older " leading " hyphae become enclosed by coiled layers of newer " tendril " hyphae . Mycelial strands provide a conduit for transporting water and nutrients across non @-@ nutrient material , allowing the fungus to reach new sources of food . They are also implicated in the formation of fruit bodies and sclerotia . The mycelia of C. sculpta can be induced to form mycelial strands when there is a permeable physical barrier between it and the agar substrate . The wide hyphae in the center of the mycelial strands contain protein @-@ dense structures on their cell walls that are shaped like a torus . Their function is unknown . 
 Calvatia sculpta produces the extracellular ( secreted outside the cell ) hydrolytic enzymes known as esterases and lipases . These classes of enzymes are of interest in biotechnology because of their use in industrial processes . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Calvatia sculpta is edible , and said to be " choice " by some authors . The taste is described as " mild " and the flesh has no distinguishable odor . Arora recommends eating the puffball only when it is firm and white inside , as older specimens may have a distasteful iodine @-@ like flavor . The puffball may be preserved by freezing fresh or partially cooked slices , but their flavor and texture will deteriorate unless cooked immediately after thawing . Recommended cooking techniques for puffball slices include sautéing and coating in batter before frying . C. sculpta was used as a traditional food of the Plains and Sierra Miwok Indians of North America , who called the fungus <unk> or <unk> . <unk> were prepared by drying them in the sun , grinding them with a mortar , and boiling them before eating with acorn soup . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The giant western puffball , Calvatia booniana , is much larger than C. sculpta — up to 60 cm ( 24 in ) in diameter and 30 cm ( 12 in ) tall — and has a smoother surface . Mature specimens of Calvatia arctica ( synonymous with Calvatia subcretacea , Gastropila subcretacea , and Handkea subcretacea ) can resemble immature specimens of C. sculpta . It is distinguished from C. sculpta by its tough , thicker peridial wall , and its scales are tipped with gray @-@ brown . Calbovista subsculpta is similar in appearance , but has more flattened and less prominent pyramidal warts . Microscopically , its capillitia are thin @-@ walled and frequently and irregularly branched , in contrast to the thick @-@ walled infrequently branched capillitia of C. sculpta . The " possibly toxic " Amanita magniverrucata , in its embryonic stage , has a superficial resemblance as it also has pyramidal cap warts . However , it grows at different elevations and different seasons than C. sculpta . Further , slicing the fruit body of A. magniverrucata in half will reveal internal structures of cap , gills and stem not present in puffballs . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The sculptured puffball grows solitarily or in small groups in forest duff . It is typically associated with coniferous forests at high elevations , greater than about 750 m ( 2 @,@ 500 ft ) , on western mountains like the Sierra Nevada and the Cascade Range . The United States distribution includes the states of California , Oregon , Washington , and Idaho . An uncommon species , it fruits throughout spring , summer , and fall during wet weather . 
 Most commonly known from western North America , the species was reported growing on sandy soil in Dunas Park , Rio Grande do Norte state , northeastern Brazil in 2008 . The fruit bodies were associated with the roots of the native tree species Eugenia brasiliensis . Several hypotheses have been proposed to account for this disjunct distribution : the species may have been present before the Americas separated ; it may have been introduced to Brazil by human activity , and subsequently adapted to the environment there ; or the North and South American populations may represent a cryptic species complex — appearing morphologically similar but genetically distinct . The Brazilian population has not been compared genetically with North American specimens . 
 = Harold M. McClelland = 
 Harold Mark McClelland ( November 4 , 1893 – November 19 , 1965 ) was a United States Air Force ( USAF ) major general who is considered the father of Air Force communications . He founded and led the 19th Bombardment Group in the early 1930s , commanded Rockwell Field for a year then was groomed for higher leadership , becoming the inspector for the General Headquarters Air Force ( GHQ ) in 1937 . 
 Between 1934 and 1938 , McClelland researched the technical and logistical aspects of long @-@ range air communications , an effort which resulted in the establishment of the Army Airways Communications System . Following this , he worked in the Operations and Training Division of the War Department General Staff , and served as chief of the Aviation division . 
 During World War II , McClelland organized the largest communications system the world had yet seen . McClelland , rated a command pilot , served as the chief of communications for the Central Intelligence Agency in the early 1950s . 
 In the USAF , an award is given annually in McClelland 's name , for excellence in large unit communications . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Harold Mark McClelland was born in Tiffin , Iowa , in 1893 . His siblings included two sisters and a younger brother , Herbert . McClelland graduated from Kansas State Agricultural College with a bachelor of science degree in 1916 . He was commissioned as a regular second lieutenant August 18 , 1917 and was promoted to first lieutenant at the same time . 
 McClelland was assigned successively to the Army service schools at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas . His electronics @-@ minded brother Herbert " Mac " McClelland was attending nearby Kansas State and the two young men built the first radio transmitter at the college in 1918 , stringing an antenna from the Physics building to a water tower . The station <unk> transmitted in Morse code , and may have broadcast the first regularly scheduled weather reports in the U.S. On November 19 , 1918 , McClelland joined the 48th Infantry at Norfolk , Virginia . 
 Detailed to the Aviation Section of the Signal Corps , McClelland earned his wings by attending ground school at the University of Texas , flying gunnery and advanced fighter courses at Rockwell Field in San Diego , California . Then followed an assignment at Roosevelt Field , New York , and in December 1918 , he became commandant of training , commanding officer of the cadet detachment and assistant engineering officer at Love Field , Dallas , Texas . 
 In July 1919 , McClelland was stationed at London , England as assistant aviation officer , Headquarters of the Provisional District of Great Britain , at the rank of captain . In September , with fellow Air Service pilot Lieutenant Colonel James E. Chaney , he was made an honorary member of the Royal Aero Club of the UK . He also saw service in England with the U.S. Army Liquidation Mission , and collected some advanced " voice radio " equipment from France to take back home for a demonstration in Manhattan . McClelland sailed from London aboard the RMS <unk> as an unmarried member of the ship 's crew , arriving in New York on December 1 , 1920 . 
 = = Communications = = 
 In January 1921 , McClelland attended the Air Service Communications School at Fort Sill , Oklahoma , and after graduation , remained there as an instructor . In February 1922 , he was assigned to the Signal Corps radio laboratory at Camp Alfred Vail , New Jersey , as Air Service representative and from August 1922 to February 1924 , was officer in charge of the laboratory . 
 Transferred to Mitchel Field , New York , in September 1924 , with the 9th Observation Group , McClelland was posted signal officer and instructor in communications at summer training camps . From September 1925 to May 1926 , he attended a special radio course at Columbia University . While stationed in New York , McClelland agreed to fly a publicity stunt intended to bring more attention to the United States Army Air Corps ( USAAC ) , and aid the Citizens Military Training Camp . Enthusiastic Air Corps booster Major Benjamin Foulois , commander of Mitchel Field , arranged for a USAAC pilot to fly over and drop baseballs for Babe Ruth to catch . Ruth came out to Mitchel Field on July 23 , 1926 dressed up in an Army uniform ( he was in the Reserves ) to keep his end of the bargain . In the sweltering heat and humidity of a Long Island summer , in front of a row of newspaper and film cameramen , as well as radio and print reporters , McClelland flew over Ruth at a speed of 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) and a height of about 250 to 300 feet ( 76 to 91 m ) . Foulois recalled that the first two baseballs that McClelland dropped near Ruth " knocked him flat " but that the third ball was caught with a shout of pain and then handed to the major . Foulois wrote in 1980 : " The last I saw of the Babe that day he was slowly flexing his burning hand and trying to smile about it as he left in a big limousine . " 
 On October 1 , 1927 , McClelland began a four @-@ year stint in the Training and Operations Division , Office of the Chief of the USAAC , at Washington , D.C. He then was given command of the 19th Bombardment Group , which he organized in 1931 and commanded until 1934 . 
 He drew two unusual assignments in 1934 . When the USAAC took over flying the air mail , McClelland acted as zone communications officer at Salt Lake City . Later in the year , he was communications and meteorological officer for General Henry H. Arnold 's Alaskan flight , which was to do much in shaping the trend of air communications . 
 In October 1934 , McClelland was given command of Rockwell Field and Rockwell Air Depot . In 1935 he began a series of courses , which saw him graduate from the Air Corps Tactical School , the Chemical Warfare School and the Command and General Staff School . In 1937 he became inspector for the General Headquarters Staff School . In 1937 he became inspector for the General Headquarters Air Force at Langley Field , Virginia . 
 At the request of General Arnold , from 1934 to 1938 , McClelland worked to devise a permanent airways communication system . In 1938 , McClelland 's efforts yielded the establishment of the Army Airways Communications System , a group that would develop into the Air Force Network Integration Center . 
 In August 1938 , McClelland was assigned to the Operations and Training Division of the War Department General Staff , Washington , D.C. at the rank of lieutenant colonel , and became chief of Aviation Branch of that division February 21 , 1941 . In May 1941 , McClelland , now colonel , was assigned as assistant chief of staff for operations and training of the Special Army Observer Group in London , England , and after the direct participation of the United States in World War II he retained the same role as assistant chief of staff , training and operations , but within the new European Theater of Operations , United States ( ETOUSA ) , and at the rank of brigadier general . 
 McClelland returned to the U.S. in July 1942 and was assigned to Headquarters Army Air Forces , Washington , D.C. , where he was director of technical services until March 1943 . He worked with Fred Terman to determine how best to conduct radio frequency searches and jamming of enemy communications . After serving the next several months as deputy assistant chief of Air Staff , operations , Headquarters Army Air Forces , he became the air communications officer in July 1943 . 
 = = Postwar = = 
 McClelland wrote an article for Bell Telephone Magazine in 1945 , entitled " In The Air , " describing military communications as used by Air Force units in the successful prosecution of the war . 
 In January 1946 , McClelland reported for newspaper and radio audiences that the recent radar contact with the Moon could well be an " opening step " in the search for life in space . 
 On April 8 , 1946 , McClelland became the first commanding general of the Airways and Air Communications Service , the group he had originally formed in 1938 as the Army Airways Communications System . On April 24 , 1946 , he was made commander of the Airways and Air Communications Service Alumni Association . 
 Upon creation of the Military Air Transport Service , June 6 , 1948 , McClelland was named deputy commander , services . These services included Airways and Air Communications Service , Air Weather Service , Air Rescue Service , Flight Service and National Interest Bases . In addition to his new duties , he continued as commanding general of Airways and Air Communications Service until September 10 , 1948 . 
 McClelland authored an essay about how radar affected the recent war — a work which was included in Volume 7 : Bombs Away — Your Air Force in Action of the Pictorial History of the Second World War , published in 1948 . On August 7 , McClelland read over the CBS Radio Network a 15 @-@ minute speech he had prepared for the radio series Adventures in Science . McClelland 's broadcast was entitled " Thunder and Lightning Flying . " McClelland stepped down as commander of AACS Alumni Association on September 9 , 1948 . 
 On August 30 , 1949 , McClelland was appointed director of communications @-@ electronics in the United States Department of Defense for the Joint Chiefs of Staff , with station at Washington , D.C. 
 In 1951 , a sharp increase in diplomatic tensions was seen by the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) as the precursor to war . A greater volume of communications required a stronger system , and CIA Director Walter Bedell Smith hired McClelland as chief of CIA communications , a position known as " Assistant Director , Communications " , on September 10 , 1951 . There , McClelland oversaw the technical development and implementation of a secure global communications system . He served the CIA for 14 years until his death in Washington , D.C. in 1965 . McClelland was survived by his wife Doris C. McClelland , and by their son Alan J. McClelland of Houston , Texas . McClelland 's brother Herbert " Mac " McClelland continued to thrive as the founder and president of McClelland Sound in Wichita , Kansas , with clients that included McConnell Air Force Base and area businesses Boeing and Learjet . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 McClelland was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal , the Legion of Merit and Commander of the Order of the British Empire . His DSM citation reads , " ... as air communications officer , Headquarters Army Air Forces from July 1942 to August 1945 , [ he ] supervised the Army Airways Communications System which furnished communications and navigational aids along the military air routes throughout the world . He pioneered in military electronics , analyzed the enemy 's scientific research in this field and instituted radio and radar countermeasures . " 
 In 1951 , the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers ( IEEE ) awarded McClelland the Pioneer Award . 
 In honor of his work in military communications , the " Air Force Communications and Information Major General Harold M. McClelland Award " is given annually to the large USAF unit ( 301 or more members ) which has demonstrated " sustained superior performance and professional excellence while managing core communications and information functions and for contributions that most improved communications and information support to Air Force and ( or ) DoD operations and missions . " 
 = Emanuel Lasker = 
 Emanuel Lasker ( December 24 , 1868 – January 11 , 1941 ) was a German chess player , mathematician , and philosopher who was World Chess Champion for 27 years ( from 1894 to 1921 ) . In his prime Lasker was one of the most dominant champions , and he is still generally regarded as one of the strongest players ever . 
 His contemporaries used to say that Lasker used a " psychological " approach to the game , and even that he sometimes deliberately played inferior moves to confuse opponents . Recent analysis , however , indicates that he was ahead of his time and used a more flexible approach than his contemporaries , which mystified many of them . Lasker knew contemporary analyses of openings well but disagreed with many of them . He published chess magazines and five chess books , but later players and commentators found it difficult to draw lessons from his methods . 
 Lasker made contributions to the development of other games . He was a first @-@ class contract bridge player and wrote about bridge and other games , including Go and his own invention , Lasca . His books about games presented a problem that is still considered notable in the mathematical analysis of card games . Lasker was also a research mathematician who was known for his contributions to commutative algebra , which included proving the primary decomposition of the ideals of polynomial rings . On the other hand , his philosophical works and a drama that he co @-@ authored received little attention . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early years 1868 – 94 = = = 
 Emanuel Lasker was born on December 24 , 1868 at <unk> in Neumark ( now <unk> in Poland ) , the son of a Jewish cantor . At the age of eleven he was sent to Berlin to study mathematics , where he lived with his brother Berthold , eight years his senior , who taught him how to play chess . According to the website Chessmetrics , Berthold was among the world 's top ten players in the early 1890s . To supplement their income Emanuel Lasker played chess and card games for small stakes , especially at the Café <unk> . 
 Lasker shot up through the chess rankings in 1889 , when he won the Café <unk> 's annual Winter tournament 1888 / 89 and the <unk> A ( " second division " tournament ) at the sixth DSB Congress ( German Chess Federation 's congress ) held in Breslau . Winning the <unk> earned Lasker the title of " master " . The candidates were divided into two groups of ten . The top four in each group competed in a final . Lasker won his section , with 2 ½ points more than his nearest rival . However , scores were reset to 0 for the final . With two rounds to go , Lasker trailed the leader , Viennese amateur von <unk> , by 1 ½ points . Lasker won both of his final games , while von <unk> lost in the penultimate round ( being mated in 121 moves after the position was reconstructed incorrectly following an adjournment ) and drew in the last round . The two players were now tied . Lasker won a playoff and garnered the master title . This enabled him to play in master @-@ level tournaments and thus launched his chess career . 
 Lasker finished second in an international tournament at Amsterdam , ahead of some well @-@ known masters , including Isidore Gunsberg ( assessed as the second strongest player in the world at that time by Chessmetrics ) . In 1890 he finished third in Graz , then shared first prize with his brother Berthold in a tournament in Berlin . In spring 1892 , he won two tournaments in London , the second and stronger of these without losing a game . At New York 1893 , he won all thirteen games , one of the few times in chess history that a player has achieved a perfect score in a significant tournament . 
 His record in matches was equally impressive : at Berlin in 1890 he drew a short play @-@ off match against his brother Berthold ; and won all his other matches from 1889 to 1893 , mostly against top @-@ class opponents : Curt von Bardeleben ( 1889 ; ranked 9th best player in the world by Chessmetrics at that time ) , Jacques Mieses ( 1889 ; ranked 11th ) , Henry Edward Bird ( 1890 ; then 60 years old ; ranked 29th ) , Berthold <unk> ( 1890 ; ranked 18th ) , Joseph Henry Blackburne ( 1892 , without losing a game ; Blackburne was aged 51 then , but still 9th in the world ) , Jackson Showalter ( 1892 – 93 ; 22nd ) and Celso Golmayo <unk> ( 1893 ; 29th ) . Chessmetrics calculates that Emanuel Lasker became the world 's strongest player in mid @-@ 1890 , and that he was in the top ten from the very beginning of his recorded career in 1889 . 
 In 1892 Lasker founded the first of his chess magazines , The London Chess Fortnightly , which was published from August 15 , 1892 to July 30 , 1893 . In the second quarter of 1893 there was a gap of ten weeks between issues , allegedly because of problems with the printer . Shortly after its last issue Lasker traveled to the USA , where he spent the next two years . 
 Lasker challenged Siegbert Tarrasch , who had won three consecutive strong international tournaments ( Breslau 1889 , Manchester 1890 , and Dresden 1892 ) , to a match . Tarrasch haughtily declined , stating that Lasker should first prove his mettle by attempting to win one or two major international events . 
 = = = Chess competition 1894 – 1918 = = = 
 = = = = Matches against Steinitz = = = = 
 Rebuffed by Tarrasch , Lasker challenged the reigning World Champion Wilhelm Steinitz to a match for the title . Initially Lasker wanted to play for US $ 5 @,@ 000 a side and a match was agreed at stakes of $ 3 @,@ 000 a side , but Steinitz agreed to a series of reductions when Lasker found it difficult to raise the money . The final figure was $ 2 @,@ 000 , which was less than for some of Steinitz ' earlier matches ( the final combined stake of $ 4 @,@ 000 would be worth over $ 495 @,@ 000 at 2006 values ) . Although this was publicly praised as an act of sportsmanship on Steinitz ' part , Steinitz may have desperately needed the money . The match was played in 1894 , at venues in New York , Philadelphia , and Montreal . Steinitz had previously declared he would win without doubt , so it came as a shock when Lasker won the first game . Steinitz responded by winning the second , and maintained the balance through the sixth . However , Lasker won all the games from the seventh to the eleventh , and Steinitz asked for a week 's rest . When the match resumed , Steinitz looked in better shape and won the 13th and 14th games . Lasker struck back in the 15th and 16th , and Steinitz did not compensate for his losses in the middle of the match . Hence Lasker won convincingly with ten wins , five losses and four draws . Lasker thus became the second formally recognized World Chess Champion , and confirmed his title by beating Steinitz even more convincingly in their re @-@ match in 1896 – 97 ( ten wins , two losses , and five draws ) . 
 = = = = Tournament successes = = = = 
 Influential players and journalists belittled the 1894 match both before and after it took place . Lasker 's difficulty in getting backing may have been caused by hostile pre @-@ match comments from Gunsberg and Leopold Hoffer , who had long been a bitter enemy of Steinitz . One of the complaints was that Lasker had never played the other two members of the top four , Siegbert Tarrasch and Mikhail Chigorin – although Tarrasch had rejected a challenge from Lasker in 1892 , publicly telling him to go and win an international tournament first . After the match some commentators , notably Tarrasch , said Lasker had won mainly because Steinitz was old ( 58 in 1894 ) . 
 Emanuel Lasker answered these criticisms by creating an even more impressive playing record . Before World War I broke out his most serious " setbacks " were third place at Hastings 1895 ( where he may have been suffering from the after @-@ effects of typhoid fever ) , a tie for second at Cambridge Springs 1904 , and a tie for first at the Chigorin Memorial in St Petersburg 1909 . He won first prizes at very strong tournaments in St Petersburg ( 1895 – 96 , Quadrangular ) , Nuremberg ( 1896 ) , London ( 1899 ) , Paris ( 1900 ) and St Petersburg ( 1914 ) , where he overcame a 1 ½ -point deficit to finish ahead of the rising stars , Capablanca and Alexander Alekhine , who later became the next two World Champions . For decades chess writers have reported that Tsar Nicholas II of Russia conferred the title of " Grandmaster of Chess " upon each of the five finalists at St Petersburg 1914 ( Lasker , Capablanca , Alekhine , Tarrasch and Marshall ) , but chess historian Edward Winter has questioned this , stating that the earliest known sources supporting this story were published in 1940 and 1942 . 
 = = = = Matches against Marshall and Tarrasch = = = = 
 Lasker 's match record was as impressive between his 1896 – 97 re @-@ match with Steinitz and 1914 : he won all but one of his normal matches , and three of those were convincing defenses of his title . He first faced Marshall in the World Chess Championship 1907 , when despite his aggressive style , Marshall could not win a single game , losing eight and drawing seven ( final score : 11 ½ − 3 ½ ) . 
 He then played Tarrasch in the World Chess Championship 1908 , first at Düsseldorf then at Munich . Tarrasch firmly believed the game of chess was governed by a precise set of principles . For him the strength of a chess move was in its logic , not in its efficiency . Because of his stubborn principles he considered Lasker as a coffeehouse player who won his games only thanks to dubious tricks , while Lasker mocked the arrogance of Tarrasch who , in his opinion , shone more in salons than at the chessboard . At the opening ceremony , Tarrasch refused to talk to Lasker , only saying : " Mr. Lasker , I have only three words to say to you : check and mate ! " 
 Lasker gave a brilliant answer on the chessboard , winning four of the first five games , and playing a type of chess Tarrasch could not understand . For example , in the second game after 19 moves arose a situation ( see diagram at left ) in which Lasker was a pawn down , with a bad bishop and doubled pawns . At this point it appeared Tarrasch was winning , but 20 moves later he was forced to resign . Lasker eventually won by 10 ½ − 5 ½ ( eight wins , five draws , and three losses ) . Tarrasch claimed the wet weather was the cause of his defeat . 
 = = = = Matches against Janowski = = = = 
 In 1909 Lasker drew a short match ( two wins , two losses ) against Dawid Janowski , an all @-@ out attacking Polish expatriate . Several months later they played a longer match in Paris , and chess historians still debate whether this was for the World Chess Championship . Understanding Janowski 's style , Lasker chose to defend solidly so that Janowski unleashed his attacks too soon and left himself vulnerable . Lasker easily won the match 8 – 2 ( seven wins , two draws , one loss ) . This victory was convincing for everyone but Janowski , who asked for a revenge match . Lasker accepted and they played a World Chess Championship match in Berlin in November – December 1910 . Lasker crushed his opponent , winning 9 ½ − 1 ½ ( eight wins , three draws , no losses ) . Janowski did not understand Lasker 's moves , and after his first three losses he declared to Edward Lasker , " Your homonym plays so stupidly that I cannot even look at the chessboard when he thinks . I am afraid I will not do anything good in this match . " 
 = = = = Match against Schlechter = = = = 
 Between his two matches against Janowski , Lasker arranged another World Chess Championship in January – February 1910 against Carl Schlechter . Schlechter was a modest gentleman , who was generally unlikely to win the major chess tournaments by his peaceful inclination , his lack of aggressiveness and his willingness to accept most draw offers from his opponents ( about 80 % of his games finished by a draw ) . The conditions of the match against Lasker are still debated among chess historians , but it seems Schlechter accepted to play under very unfavourable conditions , notably that he would need to finish two points ahead of Lasker to be declared the winner of the match , and he would need to win a revenge match to be declared World Champion . The match was originally meant to consist of 30 games , but when it became obvious that there were insufficient funds ( Lasker demanded a fee of 1 @,@ 000 marks per game played ) , the number of games was reduced to ten , making the margin of two points all the more difficult . 
 At the beginning , Lasker tried to attack but Schlechter had no difficulty defending , so that the first four games finished in draws . In the fifth game Lasker had a big advantage , but committed a blunder that cost him the game . Hence at the middle of the match Schlechter was one point ahead . The next four games were drawn , despite fierce play from both players . In the sixth Schlechter managed to draw a game being a pawn down . In the seventh Lasker nearly lost because of a beautiful exchange sacrifice from Schlechter . In the ninth only a blunder from Lasker allowed Schlechter to draw a lost ending . The score before the last game was thus 5 – 4 for Schlechter . In the tenth game Schlechter tried to win tactically and took a big advantage , but he missed a clear win at the 35th move , continued to take increasing risks and finished by losing . Hence the match was a draw and Lasker remained World Champion . 
 = = = = Abandoned challenges = = = = 
 In 1911 Lasker received a challenge for a world title match against the rising star José Raúl Capablanca . Lasker was unwilling to play the traditional " first to win ten games " type of match in the semi @-@ tropical conditions of Havana , especially as drawn games were becoming more frequent and the match might last for over six months . He therefore made a counter @-@ proposal : if neither player had a lead of at least two games by the end of the match , it should be considered a draw ; the match should be limited to the best of thirty games , counting draws ; except that if either player won six games and led by at least two games before thirty games were completed , he should be declared the winner ; the champion should decide the venue and stakes , and should have the exclusive right to publish the games ; the challenger should deposit a forfeit of US $ 2 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to over $ 194 @,@ 000 in 2006 values ) ; the time limit should be twelve moves per hour ; play should be limited to two sessions of 2 ½ hours each per day , five days a week . Capablanca objected to the time limit , the short playing times , the thirty @-@ game limit , and especially the requirement that he must win by two games to claim the title , which he regarded as unfair . Lasker took offence at the terms in which Capablanca criticized the two @-@ game lead condition and broke off negotiations , and until 1914 Lasker and Capablanca were not on speaking terms . However , at the 1914 St. Petersburg tournament , Capablanca proposed a set of rules for the conduct of World Championship matches , which were accepted by all the leading players , including Lasker . 
 Late in 1912 Lasker entered into negotiations for a world title match with Akiba Rubinstein , whose tournament record for the previous few years had been on a par with Lasker 's and a little ahead of Capablanca 's . The two players agreed to play a match if Rubinstein could raise the funds , but Rubinstein had few rich friends to back him and the match was never played . This situation demonstrated some of the flaws inherent in the championship system then being used . The start of World War I in summer 1914 put an end to hopes that Lasker would play either Rubinstein or Capablanca for the World Championship in the near future . Throughout World War I ( 1914 – 18 ) Lasker played in only two serious chess events . He convincingly won ( 5 ½ − ½ ) a non @-@ title match against Tarrasch in 1916 . In September – October 1918 , shortly before the armistice , he won a quadrangular ( four @-@ player ) tournament , half a point ahead of Rubinstein . 
 = = = Academic activities 1894 – 1918 = = = 
 Despite his superb playing results , chess was not Lasker 's only interest . His parents recognized his intellectual talents , especially for mathematics , and sent the adolescent Emanuel to study in Berlin ( where he found he also had a talent for chess ) . Lasker gained his abitur ( high school graduation certificate ) at Landsberg an der <unk> , now a Polish town named <unk> Wielkopolski but then part of Prussia . He then studied mathematics and philosophy at the universities in Berlin , Göttingen ( where David Hilbert was one of his doctoral advisors ) and Heidelberg . 
 In 1895 Lasker published two mathematical articles in Nature . On the advice of David Hilbert he registered for doctoral studies at Erlangen during 1900 – 02 . In 1901 he presented his doctoral thesis Über <unk> auf der <unk> ( " On Series at Convergence Boundaries " ) at Erlangen and in the same year it was published by the Royal Society . He was awarded a doctorate in mathematics in 1902 . His most significant mathematical article , in 1905 , published a theorem of which Emmy Noether developed a more generalized form , which is now regarded as of fundamental importance to modern algebra and algebraic geometry . 
 Lasker held short @-@ term positions as a mathematics lecturer at Tulane University in New Orleans ( 1893 ) and Victoria University in Manchester ( 1901 ; Victoria University was one of the " parents " of the current University of Manchester ) . However , he was unable to secure a longer @-@ term position , and pursued his scholarly interests independently . 
 In 1906 Lasker published a booklet titled Kampf ( Struggle ) , in which he attempted to create a general theory of all competitive activities , including chess , business and war . He produced two other books which are generally categorized as philosophy , Das <unk> der Welt ( Comprehending the World ; 1913 ) and Die Philosophie des <unk> ( sic ; The Philosophy of the <unk> ; 1918 ) . 
 = = = Other activities 1894 – 1918 = = = 
 In 1896 – 97 Lasker published his book Common Sense in Chess , based on lectures he had given in London in 1895 . 
 In 1903 , Lasker played in Ostend against Mikhail Chigorin , a six @-@ game match that was sponsored by the wealthy lawyer and industrialist Isaac Rice in order to test the Rice Gambit . Lasker narrowly lost the match . Three years later Lasker became secretary of the Rice Gambit Association , founded by Rice in order to promote the Rice Gambit , and in 1907 Lasker quoted with approval Rice 's views on the convergence of chess and military strategy . 
 In November 1904 , Lasker founded Lasker 's Chess Magazine , which ran until 1909 . 
 For a short time in 1906 Emanuel Lasker was interested in the strategy game Go , but soon returned to chess . He was introduced to the game by his namesake Edward Lasker , who wrote a successful book Go and Go @-@ Moku in 1934 . 
 At the age of 42 , in July 1911 , Lasker married Martha Cohn ( née Bamberger ) , a rich widow who was a year older than Lasker and already a grandmother . They lived in Berlin . 
 Martha Cohn wrote popular stories under the pseudonym " L. Marco " . 
 During World War I , Lasker invested all of his savings in German war bonds . Since Germany lost the war , Lasker lost all his money . During the war , he wrote a book which claimed that civilization would be in danger if Germany lost the war . 
 = = = Match against Capablanca = = = 
 In January 1920 Lasker and José Raúl Capablanca signed an agreement to play a World Championship match in 1921 , noting that Capablanca was not free to play in 1920 . Because of the delay , Lasker insisted on a final clause that allowed him to play anyone else for the championship in 1920 , that nullified the contract with Capablanca if Lasker lost a title match in 1920 , and that stipulated that if Lasker resigned the title Capablanca should become World Champion . Lasker had previously included in his agreement before World War I to play Akiba Rubinstein for the title a similar clause that if he resigned the title , it should become Rubinstein 's . 
 A report in the American Chess Bulletin ( July – August 1920 issue ) said that Lasker had resigned the world title in favor of Capablanca because the conditions of the match were unpopular in the chess world . The American Chess Bulletin speculated that the conditions were not sufficiently unpopular to warrant resignation of the title , and that Lasker 's real concern was that there was not enough financial backing to justify his devoting nine months to the match . When Lasker resigned the title in favor of Capablanca he was unaware that enthusiasts in Havana had just raised $ 20 @,@ 000 to fund the match provided it was played there . When Capablanca learned of Lasker 's resignation he went to the Netherlands , where Lasker was living at the time , to inform him that Havana would finance the match . In August 1920 Lasker agreed to play in Havana , but insisted that he was the challenger as Capablanca was now the champion . Capablanca signed an agreement that accepted this point , and soon afterwards published a letter confirming this . Lasker also stated that , if he beat Capablanca , he would resign the title so that younger masters could compete for it . 
 The match was played in March – April 1921 . After four draws , the fifth game saw Lasker blunder with Black in an equal ending . Capablanca 's solid style allowed him to easily draw the next four games , without taking any risks . In the tenth game , Lasker as White played a position with an isolated queen pawn but failed to create the necessary activity and Capablanca reached a superior ending , which he duly won . The eleventh and fourteenth games were also won by Capablanca , and Lasker resigned the match . 
 Reuben Fine and Harry Golombek attributed this to Lasker 's being in mysteriously poor form . On the other hand , Vladimir Kramnik thought that Lasker played quite well and the match was an " even and fascinating fight " until Lasker blundered in the last game , and explained that Capablanca was twenty years younger , a slightly stronger player , and had more recent competitive practice . 
 = = = 1921 to end of life = = = 
 By this time Lasker was nearly 53 years old , and he never played another serious match ; his only other match was a short exhibition against Frank James Marshall in 1940 , which Lasker lost . After winning the New York 1924 chess tournament ( 1 ½ points ahead of Capablanca ) and finishing second at Moscow in 1925 ( 1 ½ points behind Efim <unk> , ½ point ahead of Capablanca ) , he effectively retired from serious chess . 
 During the Moscow 1925 chess tournament , Emanuel Lasker received a telegram informing him that the drama written by himself and his brother Berthold , Vom Menschen die Geschichte ( " History of Mankind " ) , had been accepted for performance at the Lessing theatre in Berlin . Emanuel Lasker was so distracted by this news that he lost badly to Carlos Torre the same day . The play , however , was not a success . 
 In 1926 Lasker wrote Lehrbuch des Schachspiels , which he re @-@ wrote in English in 1927 as Lasker 's Manual of Chess . He also wrote books on other games of mental skill : Encyclopedia of Games ( 1929 ) and Das <unk> <unk> ( means " Sensible Card Play " ; 1929 ; English translation in the same year ) , both of which posed a problem in the mathematical analysis of card games ; <unk> der Völker ( " Board Games of the Nations " ; 1931 ) , which includes 30 pages about Go and a section about a game he had invented in 1911 , Lasca . 
 In 1930 , Lasker was a special correspondent for Dutch and German newspapers reporting on the Culbertson @-@ Buller bridge match during which he became a registered teacher of the Culbertson system . He became an expert bridge player , representing Germany at international events in the early 1930s , and wrote Das <unk> ( " The Game of Bridge " ) in 1931 . 
 In October 1928 Emanuel Lasker 's brother Berthold died . 
 In spring 1933 Adolf Hitler started a campaign of discrimination and intimidation against Jews , depriving them of their property and citizenship . Lasker and his wife Martha , who were both Jewish , were forced to leave Germany in the same year . After a short stay in England , in 1935 they were invited to live in the USSR by Nikolai Krylenko , the Commissar of Justice who was responsible for the Moscow show trials and , in his other capacity as Sports Minister , was an enthusiastic supporter of chess . In the USSR , Lasker renounced his German citizenship and received Soviet citizenship . He took permanent residence in Moscow , and was given a post at Moscow 's Institute for Mathematics and a post of trainer of the USSR national team . Lasker returned to competitive chess to make some money , finishing fifth in Zürich 1934 and third in Moscow 1935 ( undefeated , ½ point behind Mikhail Botvinnik and Salo Flohr ; ahead of Capablanca , Rudolf Spielmann and several Soviet masters ) , sixth in Moscow 1936 and seventh equal in Nottingham 1936 . His performance in Moscow 1935 at age 66 was hailed as " a biological miracle . " 
 Joseph Stalin 's Great Purge started at about the same time the <unk> arrived in the USSR . In August 1937 , Martha and Emanuel Lasker decided to leave the Soviet Union , and they moved , via the Netherlands , to the United States ( first Chicago , next New York ) in October 1937 . In the following year Emanuel Lasker 's patron , Krylenko , was purged . Lasker tried to support himself by giving chess and bridge lectures and exhibitions , as he was now too old for serious competition . In 1940 he published his last book , The Community of the Future , in which he proposed solutions for serious political problems , including anti @-@ Semitism and unemployment . He died of a kidney infection in New York on January 11 , 1941 , at the age of 72 , as a charity patient at the Mount Sinai Hospital . He was buried in the Beth <unk> Cemetery , Queens , New York . He was survived by his wife Martha and his sister , Mrs. Lotta Hirschberg . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 = = = Playing strength and style = = = 
 Lasker was considered to have a " psychological " method of play in which he considered the subjective qualities of his opponent , in addition to the objective requirements of his position on the board . Richard Réti published a lengthy analysis of Lasker 's play in which he concluded that Lasker deliberately played inferior moves that he knew would make his opponent uncomfortable . W. H. K. Pollock commented , " It is no easy matter to reply correctly to Lasker 's bad moves . " 
 Lasker himself denied the claim that he deliberately played bad moves , and most modern writers agree . According to Grandmaster Andrew Soltis and International Master John L. Watson , the features that made his play mysterious to contemporaries now appear regularly in modern play : the g2 @-@ g4 " Spike " attack against the Dragon Sicilian ; sacrifices to gain positional advantage ; playing the " practical " move rather than trying to find the best move ; counterattacking and complicating the game before a disadvantage became serious . Former World Champion Vladimir Kramnik said , " He realized that different types of advantage could be interchangeable : tactical edge could be converted into strategic advantage and vice versa " , which mystified contemporaries who were just becoming used to the theories of Steinitz as codified by Siegbert Tarrasch . 
 Max Euwe opined that the real reason behind Lasker 's success was his " exceptional defensive technique " and that " almost all there is to say about defensive chess can be demonstrated by examples from the games of Steinitz and Lasker " , with the former exemplifying passive defence and the latter an active defence . 
 The famous win against José Raúl Capablanca at St. Petersburg in 1914 , which Lasker needed in order to retain any chance of catching up with Capablanca , is sometimes offered as evidence of his " psychological " approach . Reuben Fine describes Lasker 's choice of opening , the Exchange Variation of the Ruy Lopez , as " innocuous but psychologically potent " . However , an analysis of Lasker 's use of this variation throughout his career concludes that he had excellent results with it as White against top @-@ class opponents , and sometimes used it in " must @-@ win " situations . Luděk Pachman writes that Lasker 's choice presented his opponent with a dilemma : with only a ½ point lead , Capablanca would have wanted to play safe ; but the Exchange Variation 's pawn structure gives White an endgame advantage , and Black must use his bishop pair aggressively in the middle game to nullify this . In Kramnik 's opinion , Lasker 's play in this game demonstrated deep positional understanding , rather than psychology . 
 Fine reckoned Lasker paid little attention to the openings , but Capablanca thought Lasker knew the openings very well but disagreed with a lot of contemporary opening analysis . In fact before the 1894 world title match Lasker studied the openings thoroughly , especially Steinitz ' favorite lines . In Capablanca 's opinion , no player surpassed Lasker in the ability to assess a position quickly and accurately , in terms of who had the better prospects of winning and what strategy each side should adopt . Capablanca also wrote that Lasker was so adaptable that he played in no definite style , and that he was both a tenacious defender and a very efficient finisher of his own attacks . 
 He did everything at a high level . However , he was the first great endgame player , and instead of using his epic tactical skills solely for mating schemes , he used them for attack and , most importantly , for defense . In a way , he was the first universal player , which made him very odd indeed for those times . Like all great players , Lasker could play any type of position ; however , the classic course of a Lasker game was to concede some small concession to an opponent , exchange off either one or two minor pieces and then play a game of manoeuvre where he did not necessarily stand better but in which he could keep the position balanced . When his opponent could not maintain the balance , either by over @-@ pressing or by playing too passively , Lasker would have them . Although famed for his defence , Lasker was equally brutal in his treatment of opponents who <unk> or played passively . 
 Lasker followed Steinitz principles , and both demonstrated a completely different chess paradigm than the “ romantic ” mentality before them . Thanks to Steinitz and Lasker , positional players gradually became common ( Tarrasch , Schlechter , and Rubinstein stand out . ) But , while Steinitz created a new school of chess thought , Lasker ’ s talents were far harder for the masses to grasp ; hence there was no Lasker school . 
 In addition to his enormous chess skill , Lasker was said to have an excellent competitive temperament : his rival Siegbert Tarrasch once said , " Lasker occasionally loses a game , but he never loses his head . " Lasker enjoyed the need to adapt to varying styles and to the shifting fortunes of tournaments . Although very strong in matches , he was even stronger in tournaments . For over twenty years , he always finished ahead of the younger Capablanca : at St. Petersburg 1914 , New York 1924 , Moscow 1925 , and Moscow 1935 . Only in 1936 ( 15 years after their match ) , when Lasker was 67 , did Capablanca finish ahead of him . 
 In 1964 , <unk> magazine published an article in which future World Champion Bobby Fischer listed the ten greatest players in history . Fischer did not include Lasker in the list , deriding him as a " coffee @-@ house player [ who ] knew nothing about openings and didn 't understand positional chess " . In a poll of the world 's leading players taken some time after Fischer 's list appeared , Tal , Korchnoi , and Robert Byrne all said that Lasker was the greatest player ever . Both Pal Benko and Byrne stated that Fischer later reconsidered and said that Lasker was a great player . 
 Statistical ranking systems place Lasker high among the greatest players of all time . The book Warriors of the Mind places him sixth , behind Garry Kasparov , Anatoly Karpov , Fischer , Mikhail Botvinnik and Capablanca . In his 1978 book The Rating of Chessplayers , Past and Present , Arpad Elo gave retrospective ratings to players based on their performance over the best five @-@ year span of their career . He concluded that Lasker was the joint second strongest player of those surveyed ( tied with Botvinnik and behind Capablanca ) . The most up @-@ to @-@ date system , Chessmetrics , is rather sensitive to the length of the periods being compared , and ranks Lasker between fifth and second strongest of all time for peak periods ranging in length from one to twenty years . Its author , the statistician Jeff Sonas , concluded that only Kasparov and Karpov surpassed Lasker 's long @-@ term dominance of the game . By Chessmetrics ' reckoning , Lasker was the number 1 player in 292 different months — a total of over 24 years . His first No. 1 rank was in June 1890 , and his last in December 1926 — a span of 36 ½ years . Chessmetrics also considers him the strongest 67 @-@ year @-@ old in history : in December 1935 , at age 67 years and 0 months , his rating was <unk> ( number 7 in the world ) , well above second @-@ place Viktor Korchnoi 's rating at that age ( 2660 , number 39 in the world , in March 1998 ) . 
 = = = Influence on chess = = = 
 Lasker founded no school of players who played in a similar style . Max Euwe , World Champion 1935 – 37 and a prolific writer of chess manuals , who had a lifetime 0 – 3 score against Lasker , said , " It is not possible to learn much from him . One can only stand and wonder . " However , Lasker 's pragmatic , combative approach had a great influence on Soviet players like Mikhail Tal and Viktor Korchnoi . 
 There are several " Lasker Variations " in the chess openings , including Lasker 's Defense to the Queen 's Gambit , Lasker 's Defense to the Evans Gambit ( which effectively ended the use of this gambit in tournament play until a revival in the 1990s ) , and the Lasker Variation in the McCutcheon Variation of the French Defense . 
 One of Lasker 's most famous games is Lasker – Bauer , Amsterdam 1889 , in which he sacrificed both bishops in a maneuver later repeated in a number of games . Similar sacrifices had already been played by Cecil Valentine De Vere and John Owen , but these were not in major events and Lasker probably had not seen them . 
 Lasker was shocked by the poverty in which Wilhelm Steinitz died and did not intend to die in similar circumstances . He became notorious for demanding high fees for playing matches and tournaments , and he argued that players should own the copyright in their games rather than let publishers get all the profits . These demands initially angered editors and other players , but helped to pave the way for the rise of full @-@ time chess professionals who earn most of their living from playing , writing and teaching . Copyright in chess games had been contentious at least as far back as the mid @-@ 1840s , and Steinitz and Lasker vigorously asserted that players should own the copyright and wrote copyright clauses into their match contracts . However , Lasker 's demands that challengers should raise large purses prevented or delayed some eagerly awaited World Championship matches — for example Frank James Marshall challenged him in 1904 to a match for the World Championship but could not raise the stakes demanded by Lasker until 1907 . This problem continued throughout the reign of his successor Capablanca . 
 Some of the controversial conditions that Lasker insisted on for championship matches led Capablanca to attempt twice ( 1914 and 1922 ) to publish rules for such matches , to which other top players readily agreed . 
 = = = Work in other fields = = = 
 Lasker was also a mathematician . In his 1905 article on commutative algebra , Lasker introduced the theory of primary decomposition of ideals , which has influence in the theory of Noetherian rings . Rings having the primary decomposition property are called " <unk> rings " in his honor . 
 His attempt to create a general theory of all competitive activities were followed by more consistent efforts from von Neumann on game theory , and his later writings about card games presented a significant issue in the mathematical analysis of card games . 
 However , his dramatic and philosophical works have never been highly regarded . 
 = = Friends and relatives = = 
 Lasker was a good friend of Albert Einstein , who wrote the introduction to the posthumous biography Emanuel Lasker , The Life of a Chess Master from Dr. Jacques <unk> ( 1952 ) . In this preface Einstein express his satisfaction at having met Lasker , writing : 
 Emanuel Lasker was undoubtedly one of the most interesting people I came to know in my later years . We must be thankful to those who have penned the story of his life for this and succeeding generations . For there are few men who have had a warm interest in all the great human problems and at the same time kept their personality so uniquely independent . 
 <unk> Else Lasker @-@ <unk> was his sister @-@ in @-@ law . Edward Lasker , born in Kempen ( <unk> ) , Greater Poland ( then Prussia ) , the German @-@ American chess master , engineer , and author , claimed that he was distantly related to Emanuel Lasker . They both played in the great New York 1924 chess tournament . 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = = Chess = = = 
 The London Chess Fortnightly , 1892 – 93 
 Common Sense in Chess , 1896 ( an abstract of 12 lectures delivered to a London audience in 1895 ) 
 Lasker 's How to Play Chess : An Elementary Text Book for Beginners , Which Teaches Chess By a New , Easy and Comprehensive Method , 1900 
 Lasker 's Chess Magazine , OCLC <unk> , 1904 – 07 . 
 The International Chess Congress , St. Petersburg , 1909 , 1910 
 Lasker 's Manual of Chess , 1925 , is as famous in chess circles for its philosophical tone as for its content . 
 Lehrbuch des Schachspiels , 1926 – English version Lasker 's Manual of Chess published in 1927 . 
 Lasker 's Chess Primer , 1934 
 = = = Other games = = = 
 Encyclopedia of Games , 1929 . 
 Das <unk> <unk> ( Sensible Card Play ) , 1929 – English translation published in the same year . 
 <unk> der Völker ( Board Games of the Nations ) , 1931 – includes sections about Go and Lasca . 
 Das <unk> ( " The Game of Bridge " ) , 1931 . 
 = = = Mathematics = = = 
 Lasker , Emanuel ( August 1895 ) . " Metrical Relations of Plane Spaces of n <unk> " . Nature 52 ( 1345 ) : 340 – 343 . Bibcode : <unk> .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1038 / <unk> . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 05 @-@ 31 . 
 Lasker , Emanuel ( October 1895 ) . " About a certain Class of Curved Lines in Space of n <unk> " . Nature 52 ( 1355 ) : 596 – 596 . Bibcode : <unk> .. 52 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1038 / <unk> . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 05 @-@ 31 . 
 Lasker , Emanuel ( 1901 ) . " Über <unk> auf der <unk> ( " On Series at Convergence Boundaries " ) " . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 196 ( 274 – 286 ) : 431 – 477 . Bibcode : <unk> .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1098 / <unk> – Lasker 's Ph.D. thesis . 
 Lasker , E. ( 1905 ) . " Zur Theorie der <unk> und Ideale " . Math . Ann . 60 ( 1 ) : 19 – 116 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> . 
 = = = Philosophy = = = 
 Kampf ( Struggle ) , 1906 . 
 Das <unk> der Welt ( Comprehending the World ) , 1913 . 
 Die Philosophie des <unk> ( sic ; The Philosophy of the <unk> ) , 1918 . 
 Vom Menschen die Geschichte ( " History of Mankind " ) , 1925 – a play , co @-@ written with his brother Berthold . 
 The Community of the Future , 1940 . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 In Michael Chabon 's alternate history mystery novel , The Yiddish Policemen 's Union , the murdered man , Mendel <unk> ( born during the 1960s ) , being a chess enthusiast , uses the name " Emanuel Lasker " as an alias . The reference is clearly understood by the protagonist , Detective Meyer Landsman , because he has also studied chess . 
 = = = Quotations = = = 
 = = = = By Lasker = = = = 
 " Lies and hypocrisy do not survive for long on the chessboard . The creative combination lays bare the presumption of a lie , while the merciless fact , culminating in a checkmate , contradicts the hypocrite . " 
 " Education in Chess has to be an education in independent thinking and judgement . Chess must not be memorized , simply because it is not important enough . ... Memory is too valuable to be stocked with trifles . " 
 " Pit two players against each other who both have perfect technique , who both avoid weaknesses , and what is left ? – a sorry caricature of chess . " 
 Although the adage " If you find a good move , look for a better one " is often attributed to Lasker , it actually dates earlier . 
 = = = = About Lasker = = = = 
 W. H. K. Pollock : " It is no easy matter to reply correctly to Lasker 's bad moves . " 
 Viktor Korchnoi : " My chess hero . " 
 Mikhail Tal : " The greatest of the champions was , of course , Emanuel Lasker . " 
 = = Notable games = = 
 " Emanuel Lasker vs Johann Hermann Bauer , Amsterdam 1889 " . ChessGames.com. 
 Although this was not the earliest known game with a successful two bishops sacrifice , this combination is now known as a " Lasker – Bauer combination " or " Lasker sacrifice " . 
 " Harry Nelson Pillsbury vs Emanuel Lasker , St Petersburg 1895 " . ChessGames.com. 
 A brilliant sacrifice in the seventeenth move leads to a victorious attack . 
 " Wilhelm Steinitz vs Emanuel Lasker , London 1899 " . ChessGames.com. 
 The old champion and the new one really go for it . 
 " Frank James Marshall vs Emanuel Lasker , World Championship Match 1907 , game 1 " . ChessGames.com. 
 Lasker 's attack is insufficient for a quick win , so he trades it in for an endgame in which he quickly ties Marshall in knots . 
 " Emanuel Lasker vs Carl Schlechter , match 1910 , game 10 " . ChessGames.com. 
 Not a great game , but the one that saved Emanuel Lasker from losing his world title in 1910 . 
 " Emanuel Lasker vs Jose Raul Capablanca , St Petersburg 1914 " . ChessGames.com. 
 Lasker , who needed a win here , surprisingly used a quiet opening , allowing Capablanca to simplify the game early . There has been much debate about whether Lasker 's approach represented subtle psychology or deep positional understanding . 
 " Max Euwe vs Emanuel Lasker , Zurich 1934 " . ChessGames.com. 
 66 @-@ year @-@ old Lasker beats a future World Champion , sacrificing his Queen to turn defense into attack . 
 = = Tournament results = = 
 The following table gives Lasker 's placings and scores in tournaments . The first " Score " column gives the number of points on the total possible . In the second " Score " column , " + " indicates the number of won games , " − " the number of losses , and " = " the number of draws . 
 = = Match results = = 
 Here are Lasker 's results in matches . The first " Score " column gives the number of points on the total possible . In the second " Score " column , " + " indicates the number of won games , " − " the number of losses , and " = " the number of draws . 
 = Wildfire ( Silver Dollar City ) = 
 Wildfire is a steel roller coaster located at Silver Dollar City in Branson , Missouri . The $ 14 million ride was built by Swiss firm Bolliger & Mabillard and opened in 2001 . Wildfire is themed as a flying machine developed by an 1880s Ozark inventor . 
 Standing 120 feet ( 37 m ) tall and featuring a top speed of 66 miles per hour ( 106 km / h ) , Wildfire is the tallest and second fastest ride at Silver Dollar City . Along its 3 @,@ 073 feet ( 937 m ) of track , Wildfire features five inversions including an Immelmann loop , a vertical loop , a cobra roll and a corkscrew . 
 = = History = = 
 In July 2000 , Silver Dollar City announced that they would be adding the Wildfire roller coaster to their park in 2001 . At a cost of $ 14 million , the ride would be the most expensive attraction in the park 's history . At the time of the announcement , construction was already underway on an undeveloped portion of land in the outskirts of the park . All of the ride 's footings were in place with some of the steel supports already erected . Construction was expected to be completed in early January the following year , leaving three months for testing , landscaping and theming . On April 4 , 2001 , Wildfire officially opened to the public . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The 3 @,@ 073 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 937 m ) Wildfire features five inversions including an Immelmann loop , a vertical loop , a cobra roll , and a corkscrew . The park 's existing terrain ( situated on the Ozark Mountains ) is utilised to allow a 120 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 37 m ) lift hill to be translated into a first drop stretching 155 feet ( 47 m ) . Riders reach a top speed of 66 miles per hour ( 106 km / h ) on the 2 @-@ minute , 16 @-@ second ride . The track was manufactured by Clermont Steel Fabricators located in Batavia , Ohio . Wildfire operates with two trains ( generally with one train loading / unloading while the other runs the course , each featuring eight cars . Each car seats riders four abreast with ratcheting over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraints . This configuration allows the ride to achieve a theoretical hourly capacity of 1 @,@ 300 riders per hour . 
 Wildfire is located in the " Hugo 's Hill Street " district of Silver Dollar City . It is themed around the story of an 1880s Ozark inventor named Dr. Horatio Harris . Harris has an aim to create a powered flying contraption for flight across the Ozark Mountains . Wildfire is the fuel he developed for his flying machine . The ride 's queue and station area are modelled as the laboratory and invention warehouse of Harris . Riders eventually board his Wildfire @-@ powered flying machine , the steel roller coaster . One year after the opening of the roller coaster Silver Dollar City began selling the Wildfire Burger , a hot and spicy hamburger , themed after the ride . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 The train leaves the station , takes a 180 degree right turn and climbs up the chain lift hill to 120 feet ( 37 m ) . At the top , the train turns 90 degrees to the left before negotiating the first drop of 155 feet ( 47 m ) . This is followed by an Immelmann loop , a vertical loop and a cobra roll , the latter of which inverts riders twice . Then the train heads up a banked curve into a corkscrew and a 230 degree turn into the final brake run . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Rick Baker , Silver Dollar City 's vice president of corporate development and design , expected the addition of the ride would increase season pass sales by 9 % to 250 @,@ 000 . In 2001 , the park was visited by a total of 2 @.@ 1 million people . 
 In Amusement Today 's annual Golden Ticket Awards , Wildfire ranked in the top 50 steel roller coasters three times . In 2003 it debuted at position 40 , before dropping to 46 in 2004 and 49 in 2005 . As of 2012 it has not returned to the listing . 
 In Mitch Hawker 's worldwide Best Roller Coaster Poll , Wildfire entered at position 47 in 2001 , before peaking at 45 in 2005 . It hovered in positions around 60 before dropping to 96 in 2012 . The ride 's ranking in the poll is shown in the table below . 
 = William Phips = 
 Sir William Phips ( or Phipps ; February 2 , 1651 – February 18 , 1695 ) was a shepherd boy born in the Massachusetts Bay Colony , a shipwright , ship 's captain , treasure hunter , a major general , and the first royally appointed governor of the Province of Massachusetts Bay . He is perhaps best remembered for establishing , and later over @-@ ruling and disbanding , the court associated with the infamous Salem Witch Trials . 
 Of humble origin , uneducated , and fatherless from a young age , he watched over his family 's flock of sheep before apprenticing to a shipbuilder near his home in present @-@ day Maine . He moved to Boston to start a business building ships and soon began to embark on treasure @-@ hunting expeditions to the West Indies . He became famous in London and Boston for recovering a large treasure from a sunken Spanish galleon , a feat that earned him instant wealth and a knighthood . 
 In 1690 , during King William 's War , Phips was commissioned as a major general the same day he was first allowed to vote . He led a successful military expedition against Port Royal , the capital of Acadia , followed by an unsuccessful attempt to capture Quebec . 
 Two years later Phips was appointed as governor . He had successfully straddled a middle political position , cultivating a strong connection to the powerful New England minster , Increase Mather , as well as his royalist opposition on the Board of Trade . Phips and Mather returned to the Massachusetts Bay Colony from England at the height of the witchcraft delusion , after numerous executions in Salem . Phips suspended the court proceedings , pardoned several people sentenced to death , and released more than 100 being held in jail before trial . He became enmeshed in related controversies that resulted in his recall to England to answer a variety of charges . Phips died in London at the age of 44 before the charges against him could be heard . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Phips was born the son of James and Mary Phips , in a frontier settlement at <unk> ( present @-@ day Woolwich , Maine ) , near the mouth of the Kennebec River . His father died when the boy was six years old , and his mother married a neighbor and business partner , John White . Although Cotton Mather in his biography of Phips claimed that he was one of 26 children , this number is likely an exaggeration or included many who did not survive infancy . His mother is known to have had six children by Phips , and eight by White . His father was poor but his ancestry was may have descended from country gentry in Nottinghamshire , at least technically . Constantine Phipps seems to have been a cousin of Phips , five years his junior . 
 According to Mather , Phips was a shepherd until the age of 18 , after which he began a four @-@ year apprenticeship as a ship 's carpenter . He received no formal schooling . Despite a keen intelligence , his literacy skills were likely rudimentary . Robert Calef wrote , " ... it will be generally acknowledged , that not withstanding the meanness of his parentage and education , he attained to be master of a Ship ... " Once Phips achieved wealth and fame , he relied on a personal secretary and scribes for assistance , as was common for many figures of the time . 
 After his apprenticeship ended in 1673 , Phips traveled to Boston , where he continued to employ his <unk> and carpentry skills . About a year later he married Mary Spencer Hull , widow to John Hull ( unrelated to Massachusetts <unk> John Hull ) . Mary 's father , Daniel Spencer , was a merchant and landowner with interests in Maine . Phips may have known Mary from an early age . By all accounts , the couple exhibited " genuine affection " for one another , and there is no evidence Phips was unfaithful during his long absences from home . 
 Phips established a shipyard on the Sheepscot River at <unk> Bay in Maine in 1675 at the outbreak of King Philips War . The shipyard was successful , turning out a number of small boats and building its first large merchant ship in 1676 . As he was preparing for its maiden voyage in August 1676 , planning to deliver a load of lumber to Boston , a band of Indians descended on the area during the Northeast Coast Campaign ( 1676 ) . Rather than take on his cargo , he took on board as many of the local settlers as he could . Although he was financially ruined ( the Indians destroyed the shipyard and his intended cargo of masts and lumber ) , Phips was considered a hero among the colonists in Boston . 
 In the early 1680s , Phips began to engage in a favorite colonial pastime of treasure hunting in the Bahamas . As captain of the Resolution , he was seeking treasure from sunken Spanish ships near New Providence . The expedition is not well documented but seems to have been profitable , returning shares worth £ 54 to certain low @-@ level participants . New England mint master John Hull was one of Phips ' investors . Phips earned a widespread reputation for ' continually finding sunken <unk> 
 = = The Strange Voyage of HMS Rose of <unk> = = 
 = = = Narborough 's Treasure Hunt = = = 
 On May 2 , 1683 , the Captain of the frigate HMS Falcon was sailing from England to the West Indies and beckoned the other officers to be present as he broke open his secret instructions . He learned that his mission was to aid in the hunt for a large treasure near Hispaniola . A sloop in convoy , HMS Bonetta ( sometimes Bonito ) , was designated to do most of the searching , but the Falcon would act as aid and protection . These instructions were from Sir John Narborough , a rear admiral and commissioner of the Royal Navy , who also had the ear of King Charles II . 
 Around this same time , the thirty @-@ two year @-@ old Phips had made his way to England , where he gained an audience with Narborough and Charles II . By any measure , this was a remarkable achievement for a poor New Englander like Phips , but it also seems clear that he must have been at the right place at the right time . His reputation for finding sunken ships may have preceded him , and he seems to have had demonstrable gains to show , as one letter writer mentions his ' late successful returns . ' Perhaps he delivered the King 's portion of these returns to Whitehall in person ? In any case , a reckless plan was concocted , probably by Narborough , whereby this New England native , despite having no background in the English navy , would be assigned as the commander of a 20 @-@ gun frigate , HMS Rose of Algiers for a treasure hunt , but given no other financial backing . He and his crew would be required to pay for all other expenses of the voyage , including food and diving equipment , and give a deposit of £ 100 . Of the treasure they found , 35 % would go to the King , and the rest would be divided among the otherwise unpaid crew . 
 The plan seemed ill @-@ conceived and suggests that Narborough was obsessed by the possibility of treasure . It is also possible that Phips was being used in a complex way , with the sly intention that HMS Rose would act as a noisy decoy for his more important treasure hunt . Unlike the Falcon and Bonetta , Phips was not sent directly to search near Hispaniola where Narborough ( correctly ) believed a great treasure lay buried . Phips ' instructions were not kept secret but were signed by the entire crew , thereby broadcasting their designs through the harbor and shipyards . On July 13 , 1683 , the articles of agreement ( see image ) were signed by Phips and seven other crew members , in the presence of Narborough and Haddock . 
 = = = Delivering Randolph , " Evil Genius of New England " = = = 
 Before Phips could set sail , he had another mission added to the manifest . Edward Randolph " indefatigable foe of Puritans " was serving Boston with a writ of quo warranto against the precious charter of Massachusetts , and searching for a frigate to be the muscle backing him : 
 " It is essential that a frigate should be on the New England coast at such a time to second the quo warranto and hasten submission ; ... a war vessel be present to awe them . " 
 Randolph hoped such a display would induce New England to submit to revisions of their charter from the Crown , rather than having it fully revoked . On August 3 , 1683 , Randolph wrote to Sir Leonine Jenkins , " I am now informed that the H.M.S. Rose is already fitted out for the Bahamas with orders to call at Boston for 2 or 3 weeks on the way . " Randolph indicates that time is of the essence and he is willing to travel with Phips or forego the frigate idea and embark on a merchantman . Randolph , along with his brother Bernard , were given passage and cabins on HMS Rose . 
 = = = As Told by John Knepp = = = 
 Just before the Rose set sail , things were complicated again when the Crown decided to place a minder on board named John Knepp " to look after the King 's interest " . Knepp seems to have been a purser . In the English Navy , the purser acted as a sort of Company Store , tempting sailors far from shore with whiskey , tobacco and other <unk> by offering them credit against their wages , ( collected through the captain ) . It was a lucrative post and required an investment to procure , hence it usually went to young Naval clerks and scions who could afford the capital outlay . It seems like a terrible idea to place a purser on a voyage like that of the Rose , on a shoestring budget , with the men receiving no wages and collectively buying and sharing food together . ( Knepp brought great quantities of fancy cheese and brandy , with predictable results ) . But either way , the purser was dependent on good relations with the captain , yet Knepp seems to have looked down on Phips and decided to be forward in introducing himself to the crew of HMS Rose while Phips was absent in London . The reception was rather less than friendly : 
 " ... then most of them began to curse the ship and wished she had been afire before they saw her and that they had better have hired a ship of merchants ... " 
 The crew were a salty bunch to say the least , a " rum lot " as Peter Earle calls them , and this final last @-@ minute bait @-@ and @-@ switch , after the previous addition of Randolph , seems to have nearly put them over the edge . Everything we know about the crew comes from a detailed journal of the trip to Boston was kept by Knepp and he has rightly been called a " hostile observer " but it is more important to note that he was often ignorant of the complex , dual nature of the voyage , as well as basic colonial politics , if not some important elements of human nature . Distant historians must grope for any available source to shed light on events of the past , and so history tends to be swayed heavily by the writers . Phips was never a writer and so much of his story comes from others , with Knepp 's Journal at the top of this pile . Like the rest of us , Knepp does not seem to have understood the role Phips was intended to play , either in support of Randolph , or as a possible decoy and cleanup for the Falcon & Bonetta . In Knepp 's first interaction , he says that he is seeking signatures between the crew and the King though the July 13 agreement ( see image ) would more accurately be portrayed as between Phips and the crew , as the first mate protests . Knepp 's job seemed to be to seek additional signatures from the crew , which is easily done when Phips returns to the ship , with Randolph acting as a witness . Next Knepp complained to Phips about the firing of the ships cannons to set the watch . By the time the ship set sail the next day , Phips and Knepp were distinctly at odds , as Knepp records when asked for a cabin or berth and was told he would have to make do sleeping on a trunk . This was an unfortunate turn of events for both of them , as well as the historian who would prefer to have Knepp at the Captain 's table recording the dinner conversation between Randolph , his brother , and Phips . Class friction surely played a strong role in the conflict between Knepp and Phips . Knepp consistently presents himself as a victim and there are many times he is bullied and badly mistreated , but it also seems that he must have set himself above , and thought of himself as being of a higher class than Phips . The articles of agreement testify to the trust that the king and Narborough placed in Phips , and the crew seemed willing to do as Phips commanded , but Knepp acts as if he is not beholden to Phips . Knepp 's journal is addressed to Narborough ( and Haddock ) and it reads like a sycophant 's strong gambit for a future promotion . He presents Phips as the trope of a tarpaulin captain — every sailor his comrade , questionable literacy level — and so it is probably safe to infer that Knepp was of the gentleman class and likely some years younger than Phips , perhaps in his mid @-@ twenties . Knepp is excellent at taking coordinates and seems trained in piloting , but does not exhibit the a breadth of experience or knowledge of the rigging . Though he records every perceived misstep by Phips , his careful plotting of the journey also shows the great ability Phips possessed as a sailor , crossing the Atlantic in half the time of another ship that they meet , and making first landfall at Cape Ann . 
 = = = Randolph Arrived at Boston = = = 
 On October 27 , Increase Mather recorded his one and only diary entry for all of 1683 : " Randolph arrived at Boston . " Phips quickly began to provide a show of force for Randolph by insisting other ship 's strike their colors and firing across their bows if they did not . Knepp claims that Narborough did not condone this , and many historians have followed his lead in treating Phips ' activities in Boston harbor as arrogant showboating , but it seems clear from the letters of Randolph and Blathwayt that Phips was not doing this merely for some explosive fun . Phips cites personal instructions from the King and indeed Charles II was known to have insisted on a salute to his flag . As Phips was creating chaos for the Massachusetts government , he continued to pursue his original intention of gathering diving equipment and divers to take to the Bahamas . Phips later followed the same procedures of requiring ships to strike in the West Indies and with a new crew in Bermuda . Phips lack of experience in the Royal Navy would suggest he likely made mistakes and did not always go about this procedure in the best way . It must have been a strange and uncomfortable chore for someone whose loyalties were with Boston ( in ' 76 the records show initiated the building of a house in Boston ) . Randolph was never one to withhold criticism , but he did not complain of Phips activities in Boston harbor that winter and Randolph even seems to have assisted Phips by searching a ship for him . But choosing a threatening posture showed Randolph 's inability to understand the New England character and it did not produce the effect Randolph intended . The magistrates voted to submit to the crown , but the deputies resisted . Phips and the Rose became a focal point for the resistance , as Knepp dutifully recorded without understanding the subtext : " Phips crew say that they would as soon fire against this town as against Algiers and called us rebels , " is one deposition Knepp records though Knepp seems to believe he is merely recording a barroom brawl . " ... one of the constables in particular told him that he thought Capt. Phips had been a town born child , Captain Phips answering him , ' Let him be what he would , he had been sworn at sixteen years of age to be true to the King and his government . " ( As if in an act of delayed vengeance , HMS Rose would be boarded and de @-@ masted , and its captain John George imprisoned , less than six years later during the Boston Revolution . ) 
 Randolph 's writ of quo warranto required a response from Massachusetts by the end of " Michaelmas term . " Empty @-@ handed , Randolph and his brother boarded a pink bound for England on December 14 . A few days later , Phips began making preparations but was detained by problems with the Boston government and the ongoing search for victuals . In a discussion with Phips , Knepp allows , as a purser , that many of the crew owe him money , and says that he would have them thrown into jail except that it would hinder His Majesties treasure hunt . Phips finally sailed clear of the Boston Harbor on January 19 , 1684 but unfortunately not before some of his rogue @-@ ish crew could cause a small riot in Boston and perpetrate a despicable assault in Hull , according to Knepp . Knepp was not on board , meaning he had effectively deserted according to the Articles , " though I should be almost undone by it " and so it became all the more important for Knepp to show Phips in a bad light . 
 Two days after Phips left the Boston area , Increase Mather gave a rousing speech to the deputies and freemen advising them not to submit to the crown and to resist the quo warranto . One historian calls this Increase Mather 's " first important entry into politics . " { Mather 's " Remarkable <unk> " was distributed this same month , with echoes to the New England government Increase Mather assembles in 1692 . } It had been Phips ' debut into colonial politics too , if clumsily and involuntarily . To what extent he was swayed by the arguments of Randolph as they crossed the Atlantic , it is hard to know , but Phips certainly played the role with bluster , and he seems to have spoken up as a royalist to the Boston government in the meetings he had with Bradstreet and Stoughton , at least as recorded by Knepp . By 1688 , Phips would cross over to Increase Mather 's side and begin to consistently oppose Randolph and the Dominion government he helped to bring about , and with a vehemence that would seem to suggest some degree of shame and dismay for the role he played as captain of HMS Rose in 1683 @-@ 4 . 
 After leaving Boston , Phips searched the picked over wrecks in the Bahamas with limited success . Too many other treasure hunters had already gone before . When some of his crew became mutinous , he had them put off in Jamaica . On November 18 , 1684 , Phips was in Port Royal , Jamaica the same time as Captain Stanley of the Bonetta . There is no record of their joining forces or sharing information . It seems likely they met up but we don 't know if it was preordained . If Phips was unwittingly being used as a decoy to distract the other treasure hunters away from Stanley , it might have dawned on him at this time . Soon after Phips visited the north coast of Hispaniola and slowly cruised north exploring the banks where Stanley had been diligently searching for over a year . The decisiveness with which Phips later returned and quickly located the treasure suggests that he was able to gather valuable knowledge and begin to formulate a clear plan , though he would have to wait two years to bring it to fruition . 
 After Phips returned to London in August of 1685 , Samuel Pepys ordered the Navy Board to assess the Rose . Pepys had been out of power when Narborough set the strange plan in motion . In March and May of 1686 , Phips was ordered to attend the Lord Treasurer where it was found that the King was only to receive £ 471 in treasure , though the wear and tear on the Rose was estimated at £ 700 . In this age of piracy and high mortality , Phips making it back to London alive and with the King 's ship still afloat was probably enough for him to pass the test . Already Narborough had a new plan in the works for Captain Phips , though this time it would be a private venture . Narborough 's long infatuation with the Hispaniola treasure had not been diminished by Captain Stanley 's discouragement on the Bonetta . And Knepp 's report on Phips did not disqualify him . Phips had shown that he was serviceable : willing to harass the harbor of his hometown and to compromise between his own interests , and the interests of the crown . This was surely noted at Whitehall , even by the more conservative elements . 
 = = Striking Silver & Gold = = 
 With Captain Stanley of the Bonetta expressing disinterest in continuing to search for the Hispaniola treasure , while Captain Phips probably expressed enthusiasm and new confidence , the next logical choice for commander was obvious . Narborough turned to the hard @-@ partying Duke of Albemarle who assembled a group of private investors to fund another expedition . Phips was tasked with finding suitable ships and these came to be the James and Mary , a 22 @-@ gun 200 @-@ ton frigate , and the 45 @-@ ton Henry of London , a sloop commanded by Francis Rogers , Phips ' second mate on the previous voyage ( he had left the Rose in Boston [ 1 ] ) . Phips utilized experience as a sailor and shipwright to select high quality anchors , chains , and cables to hold their ships securely in close proximity to the shoals for months as they tried to fish treasure from it . £ 500 worth of <unk> was taken along to barter for provisions , as well as to provide cover , or a ruse , that they were in Hispaniola merely as merchants , not treasure hunters . The London investors must have felt confident because they paid a total of £ 3 @,@ 210 outfitting the ships for the voyage . Unlike the voyage of the Rose , the crew were to be paid regular wages . 
 Phips sailed from the Downs on 12 September 1686 , and on 28 November arrived in Hispaniola , Samana Bay , where they spent two weeks restocking their water and <unk> . The weather was bad , and the search consequently did not get under way for a few more weeks . January 12 , Phips sent out Captain Rogers in the smaller Henry of London along with three Native American divers ( Jonas <unk> and John Pasqua , name of other diver not listed ) to search what was then called the Ambrosia Bank ( now the Silver Bank ) . There was a bit more delay from weather but Peter Earle writes , " There is no doubt that he knew exactly where he was going . " January 20 , they spotted cannons from a shipwreck lying on the white sands of the reef . The ship they had found was the <unk> of the Spanish silver fleet ( later determined to be Nuestra Señora de la Concepción ; the English did not know the name of the ship ) wrecked in 1641 . Over the next two days , the divers were able to bring up 3 @,@ 000 coins and 3 silver bars . They decided to travel back to Phips ' to let him know but this turned out to be a somewhat slow and treacherous trip among the reefs . 
 After Phips was discreetly informed of their amazing find , he spent the next nine days preparing the ships and gathering enough food to sustain the men over months of bringing up treasure . ( During the controversies that surrounded Phips at the end of his life , his critics like to portray him as hot @-@ headed , ill @-@ bred , and impatient , so it seems worth noting his careful conduct during this life @-@ changing and momentous time . ) 
 Through March and April the divers and ships ' crews worked to recover all manner of treasure : silver coins , silver bullion , doubloons , jewelry , a small amount of gold , and other artifacts . Concerned about the possibility of mutiny , Phips guaranteed to the crew , who had been hired for seaman 's wages , that they would receive shares in the find , even if he had to pay them from his own percentage . He carefully avoided putting in at any ports before anchoring at Gravesend , where he dispatched a courier to London with the news . 
 The treasure weighed in at over 34 tons , or £ 205 @,@ 536 . Almost a quarter went to Albemarle . Phips , after paying out £ 8 @,@ 000 in crew shares , received £ 11 @,@ 000 . Phips was treated as a hero in London , and the find was the talk of the town . Some economic historians argue that Phips ' find significantly effected history because it led to a major increase in the formation of joint @-@ stock companies , and even played a role in the eventual formation in the Bank of England . 
 Phips and the crew were rewarded by the investors with medals , and Phips was knighted by James in June . James also rewarded Phips with the post of provost marshal general ( chief sheriff ) of the Dominion of New England , serving under Sir Edmund Andros . In September 1687 Phips returned to the wreck , though he did not command the venture . Admiral Narborough elected to personally lead the expedition , but it was not nearly as successful . The wreck had been discovered by others , and the arrival of the English scattered more than 20 smaller ships . Treasure worth £ 10 @,@ 000 was recovered before Narborough 's death in May 1688 brought the expedition to an end . Phips had by then already left the wreck site in early May , sailing for Boston for what seems to have been his first time home in four and a half years , to take up his new post as provost marshal general . 
 = = Provost Marshal General = = 
 Phips arrived back in Boston in the summer of 1688 and was welcomed back as a hero . His wife seemed very happy to see him . He was celebrated in sermons and at the Harvard college commencement he was compared to Jason fetching the Golden Fleece . Andros and Randolph were not so happy to see him and it seems the feeling was mutual . Almost all of New England was unified in their opposition to Andros and Randolph . It is interesting to note here that Phips , despite having been captain of Randolph 's gunship in ' 83 @-@ 4 , does not seem to have carried an association with Randolph in the minds of the people of Massachusetts Bay . 
 Andros swore Phips into his new post in early July , but his council refused Phips ' demand that the previously named sheriffs be dismissed . If Phips had simply wanted a share in the spoils of the Dominion , he might have stuck around and kept his head down . Instead he stayed home in Boston only six weeks before shipping back to London to join with Increase Mather in opposing the Dominion and seeking to restore the original charter . This seems to be the first mention of Phips in Increase Mather 's diary or correspondence . Motivated by a shared dislike of Andros , Phips and Increase Mather worked together to bring about his downfall . After the Glorious Revolution in late 1688 replaced the Catholic James with the Protestant monarchs William and Mary , Phips and Mather petitioned the new monarchs for restoration of the Massachusetts charter , and successfully convinced the Lords of Trade to delay the transmission of formal instructions about the change of power to Andros . Phips returned to Boston in May 1689 , carrying proclamations from the king and queen , and found Andros and Randolph had already been arrested in a revolt in Boston . Phips served for a time as an overseer guarding Andros and Randolph in the prison at Castle Island . 
 = = Becoming Free : The Political Baptism of Phips = = 
 " If Paris were worth a mass to Henry IV , Boston was worth a conversion , in the Puritan sense , to William Phips . " 
 The turmoil in England and William 's accession to the throne had prompted New France 's Governor to take advantage of the political turmoil in New England , launching a series of Indian raids across the northern frontier in 1689 and early 1690 . When a frontier town in Maine was overrun in early March of 1690 , the French were perceived as instigators and the provisional government of Massachusetts , began casting about for a major general to lead an expedition against the French in Acadia . Phips had not demonstrated military interests as a young man . During King Philip 's War , when many took up arms , Phips built ships and cut lumber . John Knepp 's journal testifies to Phips constitutional disinterest in military discipline . Yet Phips control of the naval gunship , and his subsequent actions , seem to have suggested he was a good candidate to lead a large military expedition . Sewall writes : 
 Saturday , March 22 . Sir William Phips offers himself to go in person , the Governor [ Bradstreet ] sends for me , and tells me of it , I tell the [ General ] Court ; they send for Sir William who accepts to go , and is appointed to command the forces . Major Townsend relinquishes with thanks . Sir William had been sent to at first ; but some feared he would not go ; others thought his Lady would not consent . Court makes Sir William free and swear him Major General , and several others . <unk> to Boston , Wednesday , 14 night one o 'clock . 
 This is Sewall 's entire entry and he has no entry for the next day . It shows that Phips , though knighted , and one of the richest men in the colony , and highly active on the colony 's behalf , was not yet able to vote or serve under the provisional government , as they were following the old charter wherein only church members were free . The court , not the church , made Phips free on this Saturday , according to Sewall . Sewall was religiously devout and active in his church congregation and would not likely have misspoken or deliberately withheld information on this point . Sewall 's diary is generally considered trustworthy and is widely referenced by historians . 
 Some years later , after Phips death and following a good bit of political upheaval involving Phips and the Mathers , Cotton Mather anonymously wrote a biography of Phips and sent it away to London for publication despite having Boston printing presses at his beck and call . He implausibly cast this scenario as a spontaneous spiritual awakening , including heartfelt testimony , which Cotton Mather claims to faithfully transcribe " without adding so much as one word unto it . " ( Cotton Mather loved puns and inside jokes and this could be interpreted as his sly way of saying Phips wrote not a single word . ) 
 The two events are not mutually exclusive . Cotton Mather places the baptism the next day , March 23 . The general court , where Cotton Mather played an active role , could have made Phips free with the understanding that Cotton Mather would add him to the rolls of the North church . Records of the North church show Phips name added to admissions . ( Curiously , a " B " for " brother " is withheld as prefix to his name , unlike all others . See image . ) Another book , mostly recording infant baptisms , lists Phips as " Admitted and Baptized . " <unk> 's wife 's name doesn 't seem to appear in the records at all . The admission and baptism of an adult was generally a somewhat drawn @-@ out process over some weeks . There doesn 't seem to be any surviving record of Phips " coming to the table " to partake in the Lord 's supper , as only church members were invited to do . 
 The only other reference to a baptism of Phips is not first @-@ hand but a sardonic reference by Blathwayt ( Randolph 's boss in London ) mentioning Phips being made a general the same year he was " publicly christened at Boston . " Expanding the franchise of New England away from the control of the clergy was one of Blathwayt 's obsessions , and his comment probably goes to this point , as well as noting Phips loyalty with New England as opposed to the crown . In short , if something like Cotton Mather 's March 23 church scene happened at all , it should be understood as foremost a political event . 
 = = Major General = = 
 = = = Port Royal expedition = = = 
 In late April , leading a fleet of seven ships and over 700 , Phips sailed from Boston to the Acadian capital , Port Royal . On May 9 he summoned governor Louis @-@ Alexandre des <unk> de Meneval to surrender . Meneval , in command of about 70 men and a fort in disrepair , promptly negotiated terms of capitulation . When Phips came ashore the next day , it was discovered that Acadians had been removing valuables , including some that were government property ( and thus were supposed to come under the victor 's control ) . 
 Phips , whose motives continue to be debated by historians today , claimed this was a violation of the terms of capitulation , and consequently declared the agreement void . He allowed his troops to sack the town and destroy the church , acts that he had promised to prevent in the oral surrender agreement . He had the fortifications destroyed , removing all of their weaponry . Before he left , he convinced a number of Acadians to swear oaths of allegiance to the English crown , appointed a council of locals to administer the town , and then sailed back to Boston , carrying Meneval and his garrison as prisoners of war . Phips received a hero 's welcome and was lavished with praise , although he was criticized in some circles ( and has been vilified in French and Acadian histories ) for allowing the sacking of Port Royal . 
 = = = Quebec expedition = = = 
 In the wake of the success , the Massachusetts provisional government agreed to organize an expedition on a larger scale against Quebec , the capital of New France , and gave its command to Phips . Originally intending to coordinate with a simultaneous overland attack on Montreal launched from Albany , New York , the expedition 's departure was delayed in the vain hope that needed munitions would arrive from England . The expedition , counting 34 ships and more than 2 @,@ 000 soldiers , finally sailed on August 20 . It was short on ammunition , had no pilots familiar with the Saint Lawrence River , and carried what would turn out to be inadequate provisions . 
 Because of contrary winds and the difficulty in navigating the Saint Lawrence , the expedition took eight weeks to reach Quebec . The late arrival ( wintry conditions were already setting in on the river ) and the long voyage meant that it would be impossible to conduct a lengthy siege . Phips sent a message into the citadel demanding its surrender . Governor General Louis de Buade de Frontenac declared that his only response would be from " the mouths of my cannons " . Phips then held a war council , which decided to make a combined land assault and naval bombardment . Both failed . The landing force , 1 @,@ 200 men led by Major John Walley , were unable to cross the well @-@ defended Saint @-@ Charles River , and the naval bombardment failed because the New Englanders ' guns were unable to reach the high battlements of the city , and they furthermore soon ran out of ammunition . The fighting , according to Phips , cost the expedition 30 deaths and one field cannon , as well as numerous wounded ; disease and disaster took an additional toll . Smallpox ravaged the troops , and two transports were lost to accidents ; another 200 men were lost to these causes . 
 The expedition cost the colony £ 50 @,@ 000 to mount , for which it issued paper currency , a first in the English colonies . Many of the expedition 's participants and creditors were unhappy at being paid this way , and Phips generously purchased some of the depreciated paper with hard currency , incurring financial losses in the process . At this same time , Governor Meneval petitioned for the return of minor valuables ( silverware and other small items ) that Phips had taken . Phips was outraged when the General Council heard Meneval 's case . He returned to England in February 1691 to seek support for another expedition against Quebec . 
 = = Governor of Massachusetts = = 
 Soon after returning to England , Phips joined back up with Increase Mather and again supported him in dealing with Whitehall . Increase Mather 's diary says they are together on March 25 , 1691 , and again on March 26 . On March 31 , they are together as Increase Mather writes a response to the Board of Trade . Also at this meeting is Sir Henry Ashurst . These three — Mather the clergyman , flanked by two knights : Sir Phips & Sir Ashurst — would emerge later as the major proponents of the various compromises that brought about a new charter . Not counting Phips , there seem to have been a total of four agents acting on behalf of Massachusetts in seeking to restore the old charter . The two agents holding official commission papers from the Massachusetts council — Cooke and Oakes — were also the least compromising and the least politically deft . The Board of Trade seems to have sought a policy of pushing through a new charter by cleaving the two knights away from these two agents . July 24 , Increase Mather records in his diary that he would " part with my life sooner than [ compromise on charter ] " . Not long after this Increase Mather left London on vacation . August 11 , 1691 , a letter was written from Whitehall to the King William 's secretary : " I must now desire your Lordship to acquaint the King that they are willing to accept their Charter ... and no longer <unk> upon the Alterations mentioned ... " This could not have been Cooke and Oakes , as they never wavered in their stance opposing a new charter . Mather 's diary entry one week later ( August 19 ) indicates that he is still either unaware or has not yet accepted this move . On August 20 , the Earl of Nottingham told a committee that he had been with Sir William Phips who informed him that the New England agents " did acquiesce therein [ with the new charter ] . " By August 27 , Increase Mather had decided to participate in the process of shaping this new charter , if reluctantly . 
 A number of Mather 's requests concerning the new charter were rejected , but William and Mary allowed Mather to nominate the colony 's Lt. Governor and council members . The monarchs appointed Phips as the first royal governor , with Increase Mather 's approval , under a newly issued colonial charter for the Province of Massachusetts Bay . The charter greatly expanded the colony 's bounds , including not just the territories of the Massachusetts Bay Colony , but also those of the Plymouth Colony , islands south of Cape Cod including Martha 's Vineyard and Nantucket , and the present @-@ day territories of Maine , New Brunswick , and Nova Scotia . It also expanded the franchise to be nearly universal ( for males ) . 
 Phips and Increase Mather were odd @-@ fellows , without much in common , but they had become politically conjoined to the new charter , and it would be their job to sell it to the people of Massachusetts who were expecting their agents to return with nothing less than the old charter restored . 
 = = The Salem Witch Trials = = 
 Phips and Increase Mather reached Boston in separate ships on May 14 , 1692 . This was a Saturday afternoon , meaning all activity was to cease at sundown according to the old Puritan laws regarding the sabbath . Unlike his arrival in HMS Rose in 1683 , when Phips showed little regard for the sabbath , on this occasion Phips was highly deferential toward the theocracy . Phips ' elaborate swearing @-@ in ceremony at the meeting house was halted at sundown and delayed until the following Monday . According to one letter writer , Phips presented himself as having no intentions to oppose the ancient laws and customs of Puritan Boston . He promised to rule as a weak governor , according to the tradition of his predecessors . The speech itself had likely been crafted with the care and attention of Increase Mather as they crossed the Atlantic . They seemed to have come to an agreement — you work your side of the street and I 'll work mine — whereby Phips would tend to the frontier while Increase Mather and his slate of cohorts would see to domestic affairs . 
 Unfortunately , their crossing also coincided with the great swelling of the infamous witchcraft delusion . More than 125 people had been arrested on charges of witchcraft , and were being held in Boston and Salem prisons . On May 27 , a special Court of Oyer and Terminer was created to hear the accumulated cases . Though Phips officially signed the commission , Increase Mather was likely the architect , as such courts were specifically mentioned in the new charter , and no one had spent more time working on the details of the charter than Increase Mather . Increase Mather 's pick for Lieutenant Governor , William Stoughton , a lifelong bachelor , was chosen as chief judge of this new court . There was little then to indicate that Stoughton would proceed with such ruthless conviction . Phips later claimed to have chosen nominations for the court from " persons of the best prudence and figure that could then be pitched upon " and indeed , as Thomas Brattle pointed out , most were well @-@ known and respected merchants from the Boston area . 
 On June 8 , Stoughton ordered a woman accused of witchcraft to be executed only two days later , though tradition had been to allow at least four days between order and execution . The following Monday the clergy were asked to officially weigh in on the issue . This was likely Phips asking for the opinion of Increase Mather , and his son Cotton , and to put it in writing . The response is called The Return of the Ministers , simultaneously urging caution and speedy prosecution . Most importantly it cautioned against , but did not disallow , or discredit , the admission of spectral evidence ( accusations of a crime committed by one 's " <unk> " , against which there is no alibi possible ) . The Mathers , father and son , and the other area ministers continued to debate this issue throughout the summer and into the fall , as documented by the minutes of the Cambridge Association . At the end of June , five more women were condemned to die . Phips granted a reprieve to one of these , but was impressed upon " by some Salem gentlemen " to take it back . At this point , Phips seemed to wash his hands of the proceedings , not relishing the idea of gaining the enmity of his own lieutenant governor and the clergymen allied with him , including the fully committed Cotton Mather , and the waffling Increase Mather . There is no record of Phips ever having travelled north to meet any of the " afflicted " , or attend a single Oyer and Terminer trial , or execution . Instead , Phips continued to work on recruiting troops and gathering supplies to build a fort in Maine and he left the province at the end of July , and was gone the entire month of August and much of September , officially handing over all executive powers to Stoughton in his absence beginning August 1 . 
 French and Indian raids had resumed in the years following Phips ' 1690 expeditions , so he sought to improve the province 's defenses . Pursuant to his instructions from London , in 1692 he oversaw the construction of a stone fort , which was dubbed Fort William Henry , at Pemaquid ( present @-@ day Bristol , Maine ) , where a wooden fort had been destroyed in 1689 . He recruited Major Benjamin Church to lead a 450 @-@ man expedition eventually leading to a tenuous peace agreement with the Abenaki people . 
 By the time Phips returned from Maine on September 29 , 1692 , twenty persons had been executed and the accusations and arrests continued , including charges against many high @-@ profile individuals , allegedly including Phips ' own wife . At this point Phips finally let it be known that the court of Oyer and Terminer " must fall " . A new court was formed with instructions to entirely disregard spectral evidence . But Stoughton was once again selected by his peers to be chief justice . In late January 1693 , Stoughton ordered eight graves dug in advance of his next round of his execution orders , not realizing that Phips would no longer appeasing him . 
 All eight were cleared by Phips ' proclamations , leading Stoughton to storm from the court . His replacement on the court was more inclined to mercy for the accused . Beginning in February of 1693 , no more of the accused were condemned to die , and almost all had been released from prison by May . 
 = = Recall to London = = 
 Phips ' leadership was dependent on the support of the powerful Mathers , father and son , as well as their pick to be his lieutenant governor . This strange and disparate coalition had been badly fractured by the witchcraft proceedings , and Phips ' resolute and final , if slow , move to shut it down . In a letter written October 20 , 1692 , Cotton Mather expressed anguish over the ending of the " proceedings " and stated his displeasure with his father 's recent call for presumed innocence ( " Cases of Conscience " ) . When Phips stood up to Stoughton , he gained a terrible foe . Furthermore , Joseph Dudley , a Massachusetts native ( and former dominion official alongside Randolph ) was in London , scheming to replace Phips and in early 1693 Stoughton joined forces with him . 
 The strain of this seems to have gotten to Phips in a way that so many previous seemingly insurmountable challenges had not . In January 1693 , Phips was involved in an embarrassing and unseemly physical altercation with his subordinate captain in the royal navy , Richard Short . Their accusations against each other in letters to Whitehall follow the standard lines of the <unk> vs. Gentleman . Short is called a drunk , corrupt , unwilling to withstand hardships or obey direct orders . His lieutenant captain is accused of cowardice . Phips , as usual , is accused of having only a carpenter 's education , poor manners , disregarding standard procedure ( reminiscent of the journal of Knepp ) . Phips pick for a replacement captain , Dobbins , is accused of the same . Phips is also accused of corruption , which was a standard charge , and a standard problem for colonial leadership at this time , but Phips having traded silver for paper after the fiasco of Quebec , and building his own ship to chase pirates in Maine , seems to take the teeth out of this accusation . 
 Following the dominion government , in which Andros oversaw all of the colonies , there was a good bit of jealousy , border disputes , and jockeying for position between the new governors of the various colonies , and Phips seems to have done as much to inflame these jealousies as to work past them . Phips expressed outrage at the execution of Leisler and harbored enemies of Fletcher and the New York government that replaced Leisler . Phips ' ongoing struggles with Usher in New Hampshire continued as before . ( In 1695 , following Phips ' death , Bellomont was placed over Fletcher , Usher , and Stoughton , suggesting Whitehall was unimpressed by the bickering of the three provinces , and <unk> by the particular merits of any of their arguments . Bellomont ordered a posthumous pardon of Leisler . ) 
 Keeping up the longstanding tradition of Massachusetts Bay , Phips fought against the office of custom inspectors , arguing that the port of Massachusetts did not see enough enumerated goods to warrant their presence . Instead Phips attempted to re @-@ establish a naval office , with himself acting as head of the admiralty , thereby doling out favors to gain the support of the powerful merchant class . This was part of an old turf battle between the Admiralty and Customs but it lead to an altercation with Randolph 's custom inspector , Jahleel Brenton , which seemed to follow the similar embarrassing and unseemly pattern as his altercation with Captain Short . The two altercations weighed together against Phips . Phips was accused of violating the Navigation Acts , as his predecessor had been . Blathwayt was slowly and steadily working to standardize the flow of tributes from the colonies to the Crown , and if Phips was clogging these pipes he would need to answer for it . 
 By the spring elections of 1693 , Phips needed new connections to balance against the dangerous enmity of Stoughton . Elisha Cooke was elected and Phips <unk> his seat . For a royally appointed governor to exercise such veto power , granted only by the controversial new charter , was a highly unpopular move and could establish a dangerous precedent . Increase Mather had fought unsuccessfully to keep this veto power out of the new charter , but ironically , he seems to have been the architect of this move . A few weeks later , Phips invited both men to dinner , but was unable to broker a truce . Phips was still trying to maintain a bond of loyalty to Increase Mather . By many counts this move against Cooke was considered poor political calculus . The Mathers , father and son , were a house divided , trying to heal itself . The Mathers had lost much credibility and public trust . Phips seemed slow to realize that Increase Mather should no longer be his trusted adviser . A year later , when Elisha Cooke was again elected , Phips allowed it to stand . But by this time , it was probably too little , too late . 
 On July 31 , 1693 , Phips hosted at his house a meeting of the General Council , including Stoughton and four other O & T judges , and read a letter that had arrived the day before from the queen . The letter supported Phips in his ending of the trials , and stated that ' the greatest moderation and all due circumspection be used .. [ toward those accused of witchcraft ] . " No doubt , Phips wanted the letter read into the official minutes , but by hosting the meeting at his house , one wonders if he was not trying to provoke , especially if his own wife had been among the accused . 
 On November 30 , 1693 , little over a year after Phips had shut down the Court of Oyer and Terminer , Whitehall heard complaints against Phips regarding Short and Brenton , shepherded to London by Stoughton and Dudley . A recall with the internal date of February 15 , 1694 , summoned Phips back to London to answer the charges . It took months for the letter to reach Boston . On July 4 , 1694 , Phips received the summons to appear before the Lords of Trade . Stoughton , of all people , was ordered to oversee the gathering of evidence for the hearing , a galling reversal of fortunes for Phips . Phips spent much of the summer in Maine , at Pemaquid securing a peace treaty , and overseeing the frontier defenses near his birthplace . 
 Phips finally sailed for England on November 17 . Increase Mather was asked to go along in support but decided against it , citing the difficulty of the journey , though his diary from the time is full of yearning to return to England . They were still friendly , but it seems their coalition and partnership was in tatters . 
 As a final stroke , before Phips left he pardoned all those who had been accused of witchcraft . Most had already been reprieved but a pardon ensured they would not be brought to trial in his absence . He sailed from the harbor after sunset on the sabbath , and firing guns from his ship . Samuel Sewall notes the similarity to his " uncomfortable " time of arrival , but the differences are more telling : Phips was no longer sensitive to the customs of the Puritan clergy , he was loudly defying them . 
 Phips arrived in London in early January , 1695 . Upon his arrival in London , he was arrested on exaggerated charges , levied by Dudley , that he had conspired to withhold customs monies . Phips was bailed out by Sir Henry Ashurst but fell ill with a fever and died on February 18 , 1695 , aged 44 , before his charges were heard . He was buried in London at the Church of St. Mary Woolnoth . 
 = = Family and legacy = = 
 William and Mary Phips had no children . They adopted Spencer Bennett , the son of Mary 's sister Rebecca , who formally took the Phips name in 1716 . He went on to serve as lieutenant governor of Massachusetts , including two periods as acting governor . 
 <unk> , Maine is named in his honor . 
 = Geert Wilders = 
 Geert Wilders ( Dutch pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] , born 6 September 1963 ) is a Dutch politician and the founder and leader of the Dutch Party for Freedom ( <unk> voor de Vrijheid – PVV ) . Wilders is the Parliamentary group leader of his party in the Dutch House of Representatives . In the formation in 2010 of the <unk> cabinet , a minority cabinet of VVD and CDA , he actively participated in the negotiations , resulting in a " support agreement " ( <unk> ) between the PVV and these parties , but withdrew his support in April 2012 , citing disagreements with the cabinet on proposed budget cuts . Wilders is best known for his criticism of Islam ; his views have made him a controversial figure in the Netherlands and abroad , and since 2004 he receives permanent personal protection by armed bodyguards . 
 Raised a Roman Catholic , Wilders left the church at his coming of age . His travels to Israel as a young adult , as well as to neighbouring Arab countries , helped form his political views . Wilders worked as a speechwriter for the conservative @-@ liberal People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( <unk> voor Vrijheid en <unk> – VVD ) , and later served as parliamentary assistant to party leader Frits Bolkestein from 1990 to 1998 . He was elected to the Utrecht city council in 1996 , and later to the House of Representatives . Citing irreconcilable differences over the party 's position on the accession of Turkey to the European Union , he left the VVD in 2004 to form his own party , the Party for Freedom . 
 Wilders has campaigned to stop what he views as the " Islamisation of the Netherlands " . He has compared the Quran to Mein Kampf and has campaigned to have the book banned in the Netherlands . He advocates ending immigration from Muslim countries , and supports banning the construction of new mosques . Wilders was a speaker at the Facing Jihad Conference held in Jerusalem in 2008 , which discussed the dangers of jihad , and has called for a hard line against what he called the " street terror " exerted by minorities in Dutch cities . His controversial 2008 film about his views on Islam , Fitna , received international attention . He has been described in the media as populist and labeled far @-@ right , although this is disputed by other observers . Wilders , who long refused to align himself with European far @-@ right leaders such as Jean @-@ Marie Le Pen and Jörg Haider and expressed concern of being " linked with the wrong rightist fascist groups " , views himself as a right @-@ wing liberal . More recently , however , Wilders worked together with the French National Front 's Marine Le Pen in a failed attempt to form a parliamentary group in the European Parliament which would also have included Austria 's Freedom Party , Italy 's Northern League , and Belgium 's Flemish Interest . On 18 March 2016 , his trial began on the accusation of inciting " discrimination and hatred " against Moroccans living in the Netherlands . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Wilders was born in the city of Venlo , in the southeast Netherlands . He is the youngest of four children , and was raised Catholic . He was born to a Dutch father and a mother born in colonial Indonesia , whose ancestors were Dutch Indonesian . His father worked as a manager for the printing and copying manufacturing company <unk> , and had remained hidden from the Germans during the Second World War ; an experience so traumatizing that he refused to physically enter Germany even forty years later . 
 Wilders received his secondary education at the <unk> and <unk> middle school and high school in Venlo . Reflecting passions that came to the fore later in his career , Wilders took a course in health insurance at the Stichting <unk> Sociale <unk> in Amsterdam and earned several law certificates at the Dutch Open University . 
 Wilders ' goal after he graduated from secondary school was to see the world . Because he did not have enough money to travel to Australia , his preferred destination , he went to Israel instead . For several years he volunteered in a moshav and worked for several firms , becoming in his own words " a true friend of Israel " . With the money he saved , he travelled to the neighbouring Arab countries , and was moved by the lack of democracy in the region . When he returned to the Netherlands , he retained Israeli ideas about counter @-@ terrorism and a " special feeling of solidarity " for the country . 
 Living in Utrecht , Wilders initially worked in the health insurance industry . His interest in the subject led him into politics as a speech @-@ writer for the Netherlands ' People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy . He started his formal political career as a parliamentary assistant to the party leader Frits Bolkestein , specialising in foreign policy . He held this job from 1990 to 1998 . During this time Geert Wilders travelled extensively , visiting countries all across the Middle East , including Iran , Syria , Jordan , Egypt and Israel . Bolkestein was the first Dutch politician to address the consequences of mass immigration for Dutch society , including a sharp criticism of Muslim immigrants . He set an example for Wilders not only in his ideas but also in his confrontational speaking style . Political analyst Anno <unk> later described Wilders as a " sorcerer 's apprentice " to Bolkestein . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 On 10 November 2004 , two suspected attackers were captured after an hour @-@ long siege of a building in The Hague . They were in possession of three grenades and were accused of planning to murder Wilders as well as a fellow MP , Ayaan Hirsi Ali . The suspects were presumed to be members of what the Dutch intelligence agency , the General Intelligence and Security Service , has termed the <unk> . Since this incident Wilders has been under constant security protection because of frequent threats to his life . In September 2007 , a Dutch woman was sentenced to a one @-@ year prison term for sending more than 100 threatening emails to Wilders . In 2009 , a rapper from Rotterdam was sentenced to 80 hours community service and a two @-@ month suspended jail term for threatening Wilders in a rap song . Wilders was listed as the most threatened politician in the Netherlands in 2008 . 
 Wilders is said to have been " deprived ... of a personal life for his ... hatred of Islam " . He is constantly accompanied by a permanent security detail of about six plainclothes police officers , and does not receive visitors unless they are cleared in advance , thoroughly searched , and escorted at all times . He lives in a state @-@ provided safe house which is outfitted to be bulletproof , is heavily guarded by police , and has a panic room . He is driven from his home to his offices in parliament in an armored police vehicle , and wears a bulletproof vest . His office is located in the most isolated corner of the Dutch Parliament building , and was chosen because potential terrorists can get to it through only one corridor , making it easier for his bodyguards to repel an attack . He is married to <unk> Wilders ( née <unk> ) , a former diplomat of Hungarian origin , with whom he can only meet about once every week due to security concerns . The restrictions on his life because of this , he said , are " a situation that I wouldn 't wish on my worst enemy " . 
 In January 2010 , Karen <unk> , a Dutch journalist from the magazine HP @-@ De Tijd , revealed a painful breach of security . She spent four months working undercover , posing as an intern , for the PVV party . She claimed that she had had unchecked access to Wilders . " I could have killed him " , were the first words of the article that she published about this operation . According to her , she had " dozens " of opportunities to take his life . In July 2010 , after Wilders complained that his security was inadequate , the Special Security Assignments Brigade , a special unit of Dutch military police , made four attempts to smuggle a firearm into the heavily @-@ guarded offices of Wilders ' Freedom Party , two of which were successful . Following these breaches , security at the offices was increased . 
 Wilders has acquired nicknames such as " Mozart " and " Captain Peroxide " because of his flamboyant platinum blond hairstyle . Radio Netherlands calls him " the most famous bleach @-@ blond since Marilyn Monroe " . 
 Wilders is an agnostic , but he has stated that he thinks Dutch Christians " are my allies " and that they fundamentally should want the same thing . 
 In June 2011 , disclosure of Wilder 's personal finances indicated that Wilders had founded a self @-@ administered company one year earlier without reporting this via the public records of the House of Representatives , which he , as a parliamentarian , should have done . 
 = = Political career = = 
 In 1997 , Wilders was elected for the People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) to the municipal council of Utrecht , the fourth largest city of the Netherlands . He lived in <unk> , a suburb with cheap social housing and high apartment blocks , which has a relatively high number of immigrants . While a city councilor , Wilders was mugged in his own neighbourhood ; some have speculated that this may have catalysed his political transformation . He was not rewarded for his time on the municipal council of Utrecht , for in the following elections he would score well below the national average in the University city . 
 A year later , he was elected to the Netherlands ' national parliament , but his first four years in parliament drew little attention . However , his appointment in 2002 as a public spokesman for the VVD led Wilders to become more well known for his outspoken criticism of Islamic extremism . Tensions immediately developed within the party , as Wilders found himself to be to the right of most members , and challenged the party line in his public statements . He was expelled from the VVD parliamentary party , and in September 2004 , Wilders left the VVD , having been a member since 1989 , to form his own political party , <unk> Wilders , later renamed the Party for Freedom . The crunch issue with the VVD party line was about his refusal to endorse the party 's position that European Union accession negotiations must be started with Turkey . 
 The Party for Freedom 's political platform often overlaps those of the assassinated Rotterdam politician Pim Fortuyn and his Pim Fortuyn List . After his death , Fortuyn 's impact remained , as more and more politicians sought to gain political mileage by directly confronting topics such as a ban on immigration that were , from a politically correct point of view , considered unmentionable in the Netherlands until Fortuyn came on the scene and upended the Dutch tradition of consensus politics with an anti @-@ immigration stance . Wilders would position himself to inherit Fortuyn 's constituency . The Party for Freedom called for a € 16 billion tax reduction , a far stricter policy toward recreational drug use , investing more in roads and other infrastructure , building nuclear power plants and including animal rights in the Dutch constitution . In the 2006 Dutch parliamentary election , their first parliamentary election , the Party for Freedom won 9 out of the 150 open seats . 
 In March 2009 , in a party meeting in Venlo , Wilders said " I want to be prime minister " , believing the PVV will eventually become the Netherlands ' biggest party . " At some point it 's going to happen and then it will be a big honour to fulfil the post of prime minister " . 
 Polling conducted throughout March 2009 by Maurice de <unk> indicated the Party for Freedom was the most popular parliamentary party . The polls predicted that the party would take 21 % of the national vote , winning 32 out of 150 seats in the Dutch parliament . If the polling results were replicated in an election , Wilders would be a major power broker . Under such circumstances , there would also be some likelihood of him becoming Prime Minister of the Netherlands . This has been partially attributed to timely prosecution attempts against him for hate speech and the travel ban imposed on him by the United Kingdom , as well as dissatisfaction with the Dutch government 's response to the global financial crisis of 2008 – 2009 . 
 On 3 March 2010 , elections for the local councils were held in the municipalities of The Netherlands . The PVV only contested these local elections in the Dutch towns The Hague and Almere , because of a shortage of good candidates . The big gains that were scored indicated that the party and Wilders might dominate the political scene in the run @-@ up to the parliamentary elections scheduled on 9 June 2010 . The PVV won in Almere and came second to the Dutch Labour party in The Hague . In Almere , the PVV won 21 percent of the vote to Labour 's 18 percent , preliminary results showed . In The Hague , the PVV had 8 seats — second to Labour with 10 seats . 
 On 8 March 2010 , Wilders announced that he would take a seat on the Hague city council , after it became clear he won 13 @,@ 000 preference votes . Earlier he had said he would not take up a seat if he won . In the parliamentary elections on 9 June 2010 , the PVV increased its number of seats from 9 to 24 ( out of 150 ) , getting 15 @.@ 5 % of the vote . This made the PVV the third party in size . With a fragmented parliament , at least three parties were required for an absolute majority . A coalition of VVD and Christian Democratic Appeal ( CDA ) was negotiated with parliamentary support by the PVV . The PVV did not become part of the government formed by VVD and CDA but actively participated in the negotiations and thus policy decisions and – as part of the outcome agreed that they would not support any motion to dismiss ministers concerning topics listed in a so @-@ called " support agreement " – much like the Danish model where the Danish People 's Party plays a similar role . The very fact of the participation of Wilder 's party in these negotiations caused fierce discussions in political circles . 
 On 21 April 2012 , Wilders withdrew his support from the <unk> cabinet because of new austerity measures that were about to be taken . Commenting on his withdrawal Wilders blamed the " European dictates " pointing to the 3 % rule on budget deficit for European countries although his party had supported these rules earlier on . The cabinet blamed Wilders for what they call his " lack of political will " and " political cowardice " in regards to addressing the economic woes of the Netherlands . Wilders ' withdrawal from the negotiations led to new elections in September . Wilders and the PVV ran on a campaign to have the Netherlands withdraw from the European Union and for a return to the guilder . The PVV won 10 @.@ 1 % of the vote and 15 seats in parliament , a loss of 9 seats . 
 In the March 2014 local elections , Wilders ' Party for Freedom only took part in two municipalities , The Hague and Almere , and suffered minor losses in both . Nevertheless , international news coverage of the elections was dominated by Wilders after he led his supporters in a provocative chant ( calling for " fewer , fewer ... Moroccans " ) at an election night party rally . 
 In the May 2014 elections for the European Parliament , the Party for Freedom received 17 @.@ 0 % of the vote and four seats , a slight gain compared to the 13 @.@ 3 % of the vote the party had received in the previous parliamentary elections . In the run @-@ up to and aftermath of those European elections , Wilders worked with the French Front National 's Marine Le Pen to try to form a new parliamentary group in the European Parliament . They first announced their collaboration during a joint press conference in November 2013 , where Wilders vowed that " today is the beginning of the liberation from the European elite , the monster in Brussels " . Wilders visited the Sweden Democrats party and spoke with the Austrian Freedom party 's leader Heinz @-@ Christian Strache to help bring about the alliance , even while rejecting Hungary 's <unk> and Germany 's NPD because he wanted to exclude " right @-@ wing extremist and racist " parties . Three days after the elections finished , Le Pen and Wilders presented another press conference , this time with Matteo Salvini of Italy 's Northern League , Harald <unk> of Austria 's Freedom party and <unk> Annemans of Belgium 's Flemish Interest party , to promise that the parliamentary group would be formed . Eventually , however , the effort failed because it could only unite parties from six EU member states , one fewer than is required by parliamentary rules . This was in part due to a refusal to include the Greek Golden Dawn or Poland 's Congress of the New Right , and in part because parties like the Danish People 's party and the True Finns refused to join . 
 In the March 2015 provincial elections , the Party for Freedom received 11 @.@ 7 % of the vote nationally , slipping slightly from the 12 @.@ 4 % of the vote it had gotten in the 2011 provincial elections . 
 = = Public reception = = 
 Wilders has become a controversial figure with polarized opinions on him from the world news media . Regarding his reputation in the Netherlands , Wilders stated in 2009 , " Half of Holland loves me and half of Holland hates me . There is no in @-@ between . " In 2005 , the Dutch public expressed mixed reactions to Wilders ' general agenda , with 53 % calling it " implausible " and 47 % more supportive . He has been described as populist , labelled as both " extreme right " and far @-@ right , and defended by others as a mainstream politician with legitimate concerns saying that such labels are shallow smear attempts . Wilders himself rejects the labels and has called such descriptions " scandalous " . He has been accused of building his popularity on fear and resentment and vociferously defended for having the courage to talk openly about the problems unfettered immigration brings with it and the incompatibility of fundamentalist Islam with western values . 
 On 15 December 2007 , Wilders was declared " Politician of the Year " by NOS @-@ radio , a mainstream Dutch radio station . The parliamentary press praised his ability to dominate political discussion and to attract the debate and to get into publicity with his well @-@ timed one @-@ liners . The editors eventually gave the title to Wilders because he was the only one who scored high amongst both the press and the general public . 
 In December 2009 , Wilders came in second in two polls in the Netherlands for Politician of the Year . A panel of Dutch television viewers praised him as " the second best " politician this year ( after his outspoken critic Alexander <unk> ) , while his colleagues in parliament named him " the second worst " ( after Rita <unk> ) . 
 Some Muslim critics of Wilders accuse him of using Quranic verses out of context . Because of Wilders ' positions on Islam and calls for discrimination against Dutch citizens of minority ethnic descent , the Dutch – Moroccan rapper Appa , when interviewed about Wilders for a newspaper , said " if someone were to put a bullet in his head , I wouldn 't mind " . Wilders ' views on Islam prompted the Mayor of Rotterdam , Ahmed <unk> , to reprimand him . 
 Editorials by AlterNet , The Montreal Gazette , The Wall Street Journal , The Guardian , and The New York Times have accused Wilders of hypocrisy given that , in their view , Wilders has called for the ban of the sale of the Quran while simultaneously arguing for his own personal freedom of speech . In a speech during a Dutch parliamentary debate , Wilders elaborated that he calls for the consistent application of Dutch laws restricting any act of expression that incites violence . Ideally , he would prefer to see nearly all such laws abolished . As such , he supports a European @-@ wide constitutional protection of freedom of speech like that which exists in the United States . 
 Wilders has also been compared to the assassinated fellow critic of Islam and filmmaker Theo van Gogh , but he does not see himself as taking on van Gogh 's mantle . Wilders has stated that he supports the free speech rights of his critics , saying that " An Imam who wants a politician dead is — however reprehensible — allowed to say so " . He has responded to critics ' comments of racism and Islamophobia by stating , " I don 't hate Muslims . I hate their book and their ideology " . 
 In February 2010 , the trailer of a newly published online satirical video on the website of the Dutch radio station <unk> , which targets a young urban audience , spoofed a murder attempt on Wilders . 
 In July 2010 , the magazine Inspire announced that Wilders , as well as Ayaan Hirsi Ali , Kurt Westergaard and Salman Rushdie , were mentioned on a " death list " of an international Islamist terrorist network . 
 Shortly before this publication it was revealed in The Hague that Dutch law enforcement officers succeeded twice in smuggling a firearm into the parliament buildings and into the guarded headquarters of Wilders ' party . This check was carried out by the Special Security Assignments Brigade BSB , a special unit of the Dutch Military Police . The test was carried out following a complaint from Wilders about his security being inadequate . 
 On 11 September 2010 , 2 @,@ 000 people gathered close by the site of a planned Muslim community center near the site of the World Trade Center attacks , on 11 September 2001 , where they were addressed by Wilders who flew from The Netherlands to urge the crowd : " This is where we have ( to ) draw the line . We must never give a free hand to those who want to subjugate us , " Wilders added . " Draw this line so that New York ... will never become New Mecca . " 
 Wilders was extensively discussed in American diplomatic cables , released by WikiLeaks in December 2010 . In a briefing to President Barack Obama , he was described as " no friend of the US : he opposes Dutch military involvement in Afghanistan ; he believes development assistance is money wasted ; he opposes NATO missions outside ' allied ' territory ; he is against most EU initiatives ; and , most troubling , he <unk> fear and hatred of immigrants . " 
 In July 2011 , Anders Behring Breivik , the man who carried out the 2011 Norway attacks , expressed admiration for Geert Wilders and the Party for Freedom . Wilders immediately distanced himself strongly from Breivik . 
 On 2 October 2011 Radio Netherlands Worldwide reported that a retired Dutch politician of the People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy ( VVD ) Frits Bolkestein , who is sometime called the ' mentor ' of Geert Wilders , " does not share his views " . He reportedly said that " Wilders says things that are just not right and I think he totally exaggerates . " While giving his opinion on burqa ban Mr Bolkestein said that he " disagrees with the recent introduction of a burqa ban , an idea championed by Geert Wilders . " The Netherlands , he said , is the third European country to introduce such a ban after France and Belgium . " A ban makes martyrs of the few burqa wearers there are in the Netherlands " , he said . 
 In March 2014 and during a meeting for his party on the evening of local elections , he sparked widespread controversy when he asked his attending supporters " Do you want , in this city ( The Hague ) , and in the Netherlands , more or less Moroccans ? " , after which they chanted " Less ! Less ! " . Wilders ' response was " Then we 'll fix it ! " . This action led several PVV representatives to resign , among whom two of the party 's members of Parliament ( Roland van Vliet and Joram van <unk> ) , the party 's leader in the European Parliament ( Laurence Stassen ) , and a number of its provincial legislators and municipal councillors . Many politicians denounced what happened . In a response , young Moroccans launched a social media campaign called ' Born here ' , in which they posted pictures of themselves alongside their Dutch passports as a sign of challenge . 
 = = Political views = = 
 = = = Political principles = = = 
 Wilders generally considers himself to be a right @-@ wing liberal , with a specific mix of positions independent of the European political spectrum and particular to iconoclastic Dutch society . He has stated that " My allies are not Le Pen or Haider . ... We 'll never join up with the fascists and <unk> of Italy . I 'm very afraid of being linked with the wrong rightist fascist groups " , saying instead his drive is issues such as freedom of expression and Dutch iconoclasm . Wilders views British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher as his greatest political role model . People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy figure Frits Bolkestein also heavily influenced his beliefs . 
 Wilders strongly opposes the Dutch political system in general . He believes that there is a ruling elite of parliamentarians who only care about their own personal careers and disregard the will of the people . He also blames the Dutch system of multi @-@ party coalition governments for a lack of clear and effective policies . In his view , Dutch society advocates rule by consensus and cultural relativism , while he believes that this should change so as to " not tolerate the intolerant " . 
 On foreign relations , Wilders has largely supported Israel and has criticized countries he perceives as enemies of Israel . Furthermore , he has made some proposals in the Dutch Parliament inspired by Israeli policies . For example , he supports implementing Israel 's administrative detention in the Netherlands , a practice heavily criticized by human rights groups , which he calls " common sense " . 
 Wilders often mentions Henk and Ingrid in his speeches , fictitious common Dutch subjects who he claims to work for . Henk and Ingrid represent the Average Joe in Dutch political parlance , as the " heart and backbone of Dutch society " . They were compared to Joe the Plumber in Dutch media , although he is a real person . They live in a <unk> neighbourhood , have two school attending children , a median income and both work . They used to vote <unk> but now vote PVV . 
 Furthermore , Wilders has revived the ancient idea of reuniting Flanders and the Netherlands . 
 Wilders published the version of his political manifesto called Klare <unk> ( " Clear Wine " ) in March 2006 . The program proposed ten key points to be implemented : 
 Considerable reduction of taxes and state regulations . 
 Replacement of the present Article 1 of the Dutch constitution , guaranteeing equality under the law , by a clause stating the cultural dominance of the Christian , Jewish and humanist traditions . 
 Reduction of the influence of the European Union , which may no longer be expanded with new member states , especially Turkey ; the European Parliament will be abolished . Dutch financial contributions to the European Union should be reduced by billions of euros . 
 A five @-@ year moratorium on the immigration of non @-@ Western foreigners who intend to stay in the Netherlands . Foreign residents will no longer have the right to vote in municipal elections . 
 A five @-@ year moratorium on the founding of new mosques and Islamic schools ; a permanent ban on preaching in any language other than Dutch . Foreign imams will not be allowed to preach . Radical mosques will be closed and radical Muslims will be expelled . 
 Restoration of educational standards , with an emphasis on the educational value of the family . 
 Introduction of binding referenda and elected mayors , chiefs of police and prime ministers . 
 Introduction of minimum penalties , and higher maximum penalties ; introduction of administrative detention for terrorist suspects . Street terrorism will be punished by boot camps and <unk> and deportation of immigrant offenders . 
 Restoration of respect and better rewards for teachers , policemen , health care workers and military personnel . 
 Instead of complicated reorganisation , a more accessible and humane health care system , especially for elderly citizens . 
 = = = Views on Islam = = = 
 Wilders is best known for his criticism of Islam , summing up his views by saying , " I don 't hate Muslims , I hate Islam " . Although identifying Islamic extremists as 5 – 15 % of Muslims , he argues that " there is no such thing as ' moderate Islam ' " and that the " Koran also states that Muslims who believe in only part of the Koran are in fact apostates " . He suggests that Muslims should " tear out half of the Koran if they wished to stay in the Netherlands " because it contains " terrible things " and that Muhammad would " ... in these days be hunted down as a terrorist " . 
 On 8 August 2007 , Wilders opined in an open letter to the Dutch newspaper De Volkskrant that the Koran , which he called a " fascist book " , should be outlawed in the Netherlands , like Adolf Hitler 's Mein Kampf . He has stated that " The book incites hatred and killing and therefore has no place in our legal order " . He has also referred to Mohammed as " the devil " . In September 2009 Wilders proposed to put a tax on <unk> wearing by Muslim women . He suggested women could purchase a license at a cost of € 1000 and that the money raised could be used in projects beneficial to women 's emancipation . 
 He believes that all Muslim immigration to the Netherlands should be halted and all settled immigrants should be paid to leave . Referring to the increased population of Muslims in the Netherlands , he has said : 
 Take a walk down the street and see where this is going . You no longer feel like you are living in your own country . There is a battle going on and we have to defend ourselves . Before you know it there will be more mosques than churches ! 
 In a speech before the Dutch Parliament , he stated : 
 Islam is the Trojan Horse in Europe . If we do not stop <unk> now , <unk> and <unk> will just be a matter of time . One century ago , there were approximately 50 Muslims in the Netherlands . Today , there are about 1 million Muslims in this country . Where will it end ? We are heading for the end of European and Dutch civilisation as we know it . Where is our Prime Minister in all this ? 
 In reply to my questions in the House he said , without batting an eyelid , that there is no question of our country being <unk> . Now , this reply constituted a historical error as soon as it was uttered . Very many Dutch citizens , Madam Speaker , experience the presence of Islam around them . And I can report that they have had enough of <unk> , <unk> , the ritual slaughter of animals , so ‑ called honour revenge , blaring minarets , female circumcision , hymen restoration operations , abuse of homosexuals , Turkish and Arabic on the buses and trains as well as on town hall leaflets , halal meat at grocery shops and department stores , Sharia exams , the Finance Minister 's Sharia mortgages , and the enormous <unk> of Muslims in the area of crime , including Moroccan street terrorists . 
 Nonetheless , Wilders has traveled widely in the Arab world and Der Spiegel has stated that Wilders will " wax poetic " over those " magnificent countries " . Wilders has also said that " It 's a real shame that these places are so chaotic . " 
 Wilders argues that Islam is not a religion , but rather a totalitarian political ideology such as communism and fascism . 
 After the Dutch parliament turned down his request for an exhibition of cartoons depicting Prophet Muhammad be shown in parliament , Wilders vowed to show cartoons depicting him on television during time reserved for political parties . 
 On 28 July 2015 , Vienna 's prosecutors ' office launched the probe and lodged calls for criminal proceedings against Geert Wilders for allegedly comparing the Quran to Mein Kampf , after <unk> <unk> had accused them of hate speech and denigrating religious teachings . 
 After the November 2015 Paris attacks , Wilders in an article on The New York Times , argued for a national referendum in Netherlands to decide about the refugee crisis . 
 = = = Wilders and Israel = = = 
 Wilders lived in Israel for two years during his youth and has visited the country 40 times in the last 25 years . 
 Wilders stated about Israel : " I have visited many interesting countries in the Middle East – from Syria to Egypt , from Tunisia to Turkey , from Cyprus to Iran – but nowhere did I have the special feeling of solidarity that I always get when I land at Ben Gurion International Airport . " Dutch public TV channel Nederland 2 's daily news programme <unk> reported that numerous American supporters of Israel financially supported Wilders ' Party for Freedom ( PVV ) and openly approved of his message towards Islam and Islamic terrorism . Wilders told an audience during the report that " We [ in the West ] are all Israel " . He has also said " Israel is the West 's first line of defence " against what he perceives to be a threat posed by Islam . 
 Following the Dutch general election , 2010 , in which the PVV was the third biggest party , Wilders said Jordan should be renamed Palestine . The Jordanian government responded saying Wilders ' speech was reminiscent of the Israeli right wing . His speech said " Jordan is Palestine . Changing its name to Palestine will end the conflict in the Middle East and provide the Palestinians with an alternate homeland . " He also said Israel deserves a special status in the Dutch government because it was fighting for " Jerusalem " in its name . 
 " If Jerusalem falls into the hands of the Muslims , Athens and Rome will be next . Thus , Jerusalem is the main front protecting the West . It is not a conflict over territory but rather an ideological battle , between the mentality of the liberated West and the ideology of Islamic barbarism . There has been an independent Palestinian state since 1946 , and it is the kingdom of Jordan . " 
 He called on the Dutch government to refer to Jordan as Palestine and move its embassy to Jerusalem . 
 = = Fitna = = 
 Fitna is a 2008 short film written and commissioned by Wilders that explores Koranic @-@ inspired motivations for terrorism , Islamic universalism , and Islam in the Netherlands . Its title comes from the Arabic word <unk> , which describes " disagreement and division among people " or a " test of faith in times of trial " . 
 It is the subject of an international controversy and debate on free speech . Despite the legal troubles surrounding the film , Wilders insists that before he released it , he consulted numerous lawyers in the field , who found nothing worth prosecution . Jordan has summoned Wilders to court , with the film deemed to " incite hatred " . Militant Sunni Islamist group Al @-@ Qaeda issued a call to murder Wilders after its release . 
 In the spring of 2009 , Wilders launched the " Facing Jihad World Tour " , a series of screenings of Fitna to public officials and influential organizations around the globe , starting in Rome . In the United States , Wilders showed the film to the United States Congress on 26 February having been invited by Arizona Republican Senator Jon Kyl . Around 40 people attended the screening . American Muslims protested , but the groups said that they supported his right of free speech while still condemning his opinions . Wilders spoke at the Conservative Political Action Conference on 28 February . He appeared before the National Press Club and the Republican Jewish Coalition that week as well . Similar attempts in Britain led to a travel ban , and legislative blocks have prevented an appearance in Denmark . 
 = = Call for beheading by Feiz Mohammad = = 
 In September 2010 , in an internet chat room , Australian Islamic fundamentalist preacher Feiz Mohammad urged his followers to behead Wilders . His rationale was his accusation that Wilders had " <unk> [ ed ] " Islam , and that that anyone who " mocks , laughs or degrades Islam " as Wilders had must be killed " by chopping off his head . " The Dutch newspaper De Telegraaf released an excerpt of the talk , after Dutch intelligence officials received a tip about the threat . 
 After the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing , Wilders wrote : 
 I am threatened for the simple reason that I am an Islam critic . But , make no mistake , I am not the only one who is in danger . The Tsarnaev brothers drew inspiration from Feiz Mohammed 's internet rants and decided to kill innocent onlookers at a marathon . Everyone is in danger . 
 = = = Al @-@ Qaeda hit list = = = 
 In 2010 Anwar al @-@ Awlaki published a hit list in his Inspire magazine , including Wilders , Ayaan Hirsi Ali and Salman Rushdie along with cartoonists Lars Vilks and three Jyllands @-@ Posten staff members : Kurt Westergaard , Carsten Juste , and Flemming Rose . The list was later expanded to include Stéphane " Charb " Charbonnier , who was murdered in a terror attack on Charlie Hebdo in Paris , along with 11 other people . After the attack , Al @-@ Qaeda called for more killings . 
 = = = Death wish by Labour politician = = = 
 One local politician from the Labour Party in the Netherlands wished for the death of Wilders . 
 = = In the United Kingdom = = 
 = = = Ban on entering the United Kingdom = = = 
 Lord Pearson of Rannoch and Baroness Cox , members of the House of Lords ( the upper chamber of the British Parliament ) , invited Wilders to a show of 12 February 2009 viewing of Fitna in the Palace of Westminster . Two days before the showing , Home Secretary Jacqui Smith banned Wilders from entering the United Kingdom , labeling him an " undesirable person " . Entry was denied under EU law , and reportedly supported under regulation 19 of the Immigration ( European Economic Area ) Regulations 2006 , an EU law which allows a member state to refuse entry to individuals if they are regarded as constituting a threat to public policy , security or health . A Home Office spokesperson elaborated that " The Government opposes extremism in all its forms ... and that was the driving force behind tighter rules on exclusions for unacceptable behaviour that the Home Secretary announced in October last year " 
 Wilders defied the ban and took a British Midland Airways flight from Amsterdam to London Heathrow Airport on 12 February , accompanied by television crews . Upon arrival , he was quickly detained by UK Border Agency officials , and deported on one of the next flights to the Netherlands . He called Prime Minister Gordon Brown " the biggest coward in Europe " and remarked , " Of course I will come back " . Wilders had visited the United Kingdom in December 2008 without any problem . In response to the ban , both Pearson and Cox accused the government of " appeasing " militant Islam . 
 The International Herald Tribune stated that the ban was broadly condemned in the British news media . The Dutch Foreign Secretary , Maxime Verhagen , called the decision " highly regrettable " and complained to his British counterpart . Dutch Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende complained to Gordon Brown about the " disappointing " decision . The Quilliam Foundation , a British think tank , criticised the ban , as did National Secular Society president Terry Sanderson . The Muslim Labour peer Lord Ahmed expressed support for Smith 's ban on Wilders entering the country ; the Ramadhan Foundation and the Muslim Council of Britain also did so , the council labeling Wilders " an open and relentless preacher of hate " . 
 = = = Ban overturned = = = 
 After being declared persona non @-@ grata by Jacqui Smith , then the Home Secretary , in February 2009 , Wilders appealed the decision to Britain 's Asylum and Immigration Tribunal . In October 2009 , the tribunal overturned the ban . Wilders subsequently praised the ruling as " a triumph for freedom of speech " and stated that he plans to visit the United Kingdom in the near future . 
 The ruling was criticized by the British Home Office , which stated that an appeal of the tribunal 's ruling is being considered . A spokesman stated : 
 " The Government opposes extremism in all its forms . The decision to refuse Wilders admission was taken on the basis that his presence could have inflamed tensions between our communities and have led to inter @-@ faith violence . We still maintain this view . " 
 = = = Visits to the UK = = = 
 On 16 October 2009 , Wilders arrived in the United Kingdom and was quickly forced to move his press conference due to protests by about forty members of the organization Islam4UK , an organization that was later shut down under the UK 's Terrorism Act 2000 on 14 January 2010 . Though the Home Office had asserted that his entry into the country would not be blocked , a spokesman said his " statements and behaviour during a visit will inevitably impact on any future decisions to admit him . " His visit to the UK met with protest , but Wilders called it " a victory " in a press conference . On his outspoken views on Islam , he said : " I have a problem with the Islamic ideology , the Islamic culture , because I feel that the more Islam that we get in our societies the less freedom we get . " He opened the press conference with a quote from George Orwell 's preface to Animal Farm : " If liberty means anything at all , it means the right to tell people what they don 't want to hear " . Lord Pearson , who had invited him , said his arrival was 
 " a celebration of the victory of freedom of speech over those who would prevent it in this country , particularly the Islamists , the violent <unk> who are on the march across the world and in the UK . " 
 In January 2010 , Wilders was invited again to show his anti @-@ Quran movie Fitna in the British House of Lords by Lord Pearson UK Independence Party ( UKIP ) , and cross @-@ bencher Baroness Cox . Wilders accepted the invitation and was present for a showing of the movie in the House of Lords on 5 March . In his speech he quoted ominous words from Winston Churchill 's book The River War from 1899 : 
 " <unk> is a militant and proselytizing faith . No stronger retrograde force exists in the World . It has already spread throughout Central Africa , raising fearless warriors at every step ... the civilization of modern Europe might fall , as fell the civilization of ancient Rome . " 
 At the ensuing press conferences , he called the Islamic prophet , Muhammad a " barbarian , a mass murderer , and a pedophile " and referred to Islam as a " fascist ideology " which was " violent , dangerous , and retarded " . Wilders also reportedly called Turkish Prime Minister Erdoğan a " total freak " . Dutch Prime Minister Jan @-@ Peter Balkenende called these comments " irresponsible " , and Maxime Verhagen , Dutch caretaker Minister of Foreign Affairs , publicly condemned Wilders 's remarks and behaviour : 
 " He incites discord among people in a distasteful manner . And in the meantime he damages the interests of the Dutch population and the reputation of the Netherlands in the world . " 
 Bernard <unk> , the president of the Dutch employers ' organization Confederation of Netherlands Industry and Employers ( VNO @-@ NCW ) , also accused Wilders of " seriously " damaging Dutch interests abroad . He called it outrageous that Wilders had presented himself in London as " the next Dutch prime minister " and then derided Turkish Prime Minister Erdoğan . Emphasizing that three quarters of the Dutch GDP comes from revenue earned abroad , according to <unk> , Wilders poses " a serious threat to the Netherlands and the Dutch economy " . 
 = = In Australia = = 
 In 2012 Wilders was invited by the Q Society of Australia to visit Australia . In August 2012 he applied for a visa to give two speeches in October 2012 . His staff and police protection officers were granted visas within three days , but Wilders was not . On 2 October 2012 Immigration Minister Chris Bowen , while stating that Wilders ' views were offensive , stated that he would not block the visa application . Bowen stated : 
 " I have decided not to intervene to deny him a visa because I believe that our democracy is strong enough , our multiculturalism robust enough and our commitment to freedom of speech entrenched enough that our society can withstand the visit of a fringe commentator from the other side of the world " . 
 On the same day , the Q Society put out a press release criticizing the delays in issuing a visa , saying that Chris Bowen 's announcement was " too little , too late " and announcing that Wilders ' visit would be pushed back to February 2013 as there were still no visa documents available . 
 = = In Germany = = 
 In March 2010 , Wilders was told he is " not welcome " in the western German tourist resort of Monschau in the Eifel area , after he spent a weekend there , along with several armed bodyguards . Mayor Margareta Ritter ( CDU ) said she was concerned that his presence tainted her town with the suspicion that it was sympathetic to his views . As a result , Monschau was said to have been unfairly connected with " extremism " in the European press . 
 " Anyone who pollutes the integration debate in the Netherlands with poisonous right @-@ wing populism as Wilders has , and advocates prohibition of the Koran by a comparison with Hitler 's Mein Kampf , is not welcome in Monschau . I wanted to distinguish Monschau from that . " 
 Ritter didn 't say whether Wilders was enjoying a short vacation in her town or had been meeting with like @-@ minded people . A demonstration to support Wilders was announced to take place in Berlin on 17 April . 
 In October 2010 , Wilders supported the founding of the German Freedom Party . 
 In April 2015 , Wilders held a speech for <unk> in Dresden . 
 = = Other international initiatives = = 
 In July 2010 , Wilders announced the International Freedom Alliance , a network of groups and individuals who " are fighting for freedom against Islam " . 
 Wilders plans IFA branches in the United States , Canada , Britain , France and Germany by late 2010 . " The message , ' stop Islam , defend freedom ' , is a message that 's not only important for the Netherlands but for the whole free Western world " , Wilders stated in an address to reporters at the Dutch Parliament . 
 On 6 August 2010 , Wilders , who had become a regular guest with American conservatives and libertarians , announced that he would speak at a rally on 11 September in New York to protest the plans for <unk> , a Muslim community center with a prayer space to be built near the World Trade Center site . The rally , to be held on the ten @-@ year anniversary of the 11 September 2001 attacks , was organised by Stop Islamization of America , which was supported by former House speaker Newt Gingrich , who was originally announced as a speaker at the event , but never confirmed his appearance and cancelled a video appearance . According to <unk> 's website world leaders , prominent politicians and 9 / 11 family members would be speaking at the rally , but Wilders was not mentioned by name , though he did attend as he had announced . 
 In political circles in The Netherlands , the announcement caused widespread irritation about his plan . Christian Democrat senator Hans Hillen remarked that Wilders ' words could endanger Dutch interests . Former NATO General Secretary Jaap de Hoop Scheffer advised Wilders not to make a speech , arguing that the international public does not know who is in the Dutch cabinet and who is in parliament and thus Wilders ' speech could be mistaken as an official statement of the Dutch government . Also Christian Democrat party leader and acting Dutch Minister of Foreign Affairs Maxime Verhagen issued a warning . 
 Also , the Dutch Foreign Ministry allegedly would have issued guidelines to its embassies on how to react to questions about the role being played by the PVV and Wilders in the formation of a new government . On 10 August 2010 , the website of Dutch daily newspaper NRC Handelsblad published the ministry memo . The ministry itself however had declined " to confirm or deny " the authenticity of these guidelines . One question posed is how Wilders could be taking part in negotiations on forming a government coalition when he has been indicted for inciting hatred and discrimination , and for insulting a group of persons . Other questions covered possible bans on the building of new mosques , on the Quran and on Islamic schools in the Netherlands . The memo stressed that such bans would breach the Dutch constitution . 
 Wilders spoke on Thursday , 12 May 2011 , at Cornerstone Church in Madison , Tennessee , at the Tennessee Freedom Coalition inaugural Signature Series event . 
 In May 2015 , Geert Wilders was invited to an art exhibit presented by Stop Islamization of America in Garland , Texas that offered a $ 10 @,@ 000 prize for the best drawing of Muhammad . Towards the end of the event , two gunmen opened fire outside , injuring a police officer before being shot dead by other police officers guarding the center . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Several groups and persons in the Netherlands have called for legal action against Wilders , while others defended his right to free speech . On 15 August 2007 , a representative of the Prosecutors ' Office in Amsterdam declared that dozens of reports against Wilders had been filed , and that they were all being considered . Attempts to prosecute Wilders under Dutch anti @-@ hate speech laws in June 2008 failed , with the public prosecutor 's office stating that Wilders ' comments contributed to the debate on Islam in Dutch society and also had been made outside parliament . The office released a statement reading : " That comments are hurtful and offensive for a large number of Muslims does not mean that they are punishable . Freedom of expression fulfils an essential role in public debate in a democratic society . That means that offensive comments can be made in a political debate . " 
 On 21 January 2009 , a three @-@ judge court ordered prosecutors to try him . 
 The Middle East Forum established a Legal Defence Fund for Wilders 's defence . The New York Times ran an op @-@ ed criticizing his views and arguing that " for a man who calls for a ban on the Koran to act as the champion of free speech is a bit rich " , concluding , however that the lawsuit against Wilders might not be " a good thing for democracy " , because it made him " look more important than he should be . " 
 A survey by Angus Reid Global Monitor found that public opinion is deeply split on the prosecution , with 50 % supporting Wilders and 43 % opposed . However , as of 2009 , public support for the Party for Freedom had greatly increased since Wilders ' legal troubles began , with the Party for Freedom virtually tied with the People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy to be the third most popular party . According to Radio Netherlands , " Dutch politicians themselves seem to be keeping quiet on the issue ; they are probably worried that media attention will only serve to make the controversial politician more popular " . 
 In late October 2010 , the Dutch court approved a request from Geert Wilders to have new judges appointed forcing the court to retry the case . On 7 February 2011 , Wilders returned to the court room in order that his legal team could present evidence from Islamic experts which the court rejected in 2010 , including Mohammed <unk> , who murdered film @-@ maker Theo van Gogh , and Dutch academic Hans Jansen . 
 On 23 June 2011 , Wilders was acquitted of all charges . A Dutch court said that his speech was legitimate political debate , but on the edge . Because both the public prosecutor and the defence requested complete acquittal , the verdict will most likely not be appealed . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 Oriana Fallaci Free Speech Award in 2009 
 Nominated for Sakharov Prize in 2010 
 Netherlands Politician of the Year 2010 
 Netherlands Politician of the Year 2013 
 Netherlands Politician of the Year 2015 
 = 1st Armoured Regiment ( Australia ) = 
 1st Armoured Regiment is an armoured regiment of the Australian Army and is the senior regiment of the Royal Australian Armoured Corps . Formed as a tank unit in the new Australian Regular Army on 7 July 1949 , the regiment subsequently saw service during the Vietnam War operating Centurion tanks . Currently the unit is based in Darwin as part of the 1st Brigade . As part of the Plan Beersheba reorganisation , the unit will become one of three Armoured Cavalry Regiments ( ACRs ) assigned to the Army 's multirole combat brigades in Brisbane , Darwin and Townsville . Each ACR will be equipped with M1A1 tanks , ASLAV light armoured vehicles , and M113 armoured personnel carriers . As a consequence the tanks currently operated by the unit will be split across each of the three ACRs . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The 1st Armoured Regiment was raised as a regular unit on 7 July 1949 at Puckapunyal in Victoria when the 1st Armoured Car Squadron , which had returned from occupation duties in Japan a few months earlier , was converted to a tank unit . The formation occurred following the renaming of a reserve unit of the Citizens Military Forces ( CMF ) of the same name , which subsequently became the 1st Royal New South Wales Lancers and its battle honours and history perpetuated by this unit , in order to reallocate the name to the tank regiment that was to be established in the new Australian Regular Army . At first only one squadron strong , planning commenced to expand to full strength as soon as possible under the command of Major Cecil Ives . Formal affiliation with the Royal Tank Regiment ( RTR ) was recognised two years later and the regiment adopted their regimental colours of Brown , Red and Green , which date back to the Battle of Cambrai during the First World War in 1917 . These same colours had also been used by the Australian Tank Corps prior to the Second World War . 
 Initially the new regiment was equipped with Churchill tanks , although this was only a temporary measure until Centurion tanks could be acquired . However , due to the perceived unsuitability of the Churchill and the late arrival of the new platform , the regiment was not deployed as part of Australia 's commitment to the Korean War , although a number of officers served on exchange with British and US formations and the unit provided machine @-@ gunners and signalers to Australian infantry battalions as reinforcements . The first Centurions finally began arriving in June 1952 , with the regiment receiving 39 tanks . With the numbers of regular personnel steadily growing , it was possible to raise Regimental Headquarters , Headquarters Squadron and B Squadron , and the regiment was fully raised by 8 September 1952 under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Stuart Graham . 
 Meanwhile , in September 1952 another tank squadron was raised . This was known as Nucleus Squadron and , based in Holsworthy , New South Wales , with the purpose of forming the basis of a second tank unit which was to be named the 2nd Armoured Regiment . In 1954 the regiment received it first Ferret MK 1 Scout Car , enabling the raising of Reconnaissance Troop . The following year 1st Armoured Regiment received the Saracen Armoured Personnel Carrier , and it was at this time that the intention to form another tank unit was abandoned , and Nucleus Squadron subsequently returned to the regiment as its third squadron , designated C Squadron . 
 On 6 February 1956 , the then Governor General , Field Marshal Sir William Slim , presented the regiment with its Guidon at a Regimental Parade held in Puckapunyal . Also in 1956 the regiment was equipped with the Centurion armoured recovery vehicle , allowing the retirement of the Churchill recovery vehicle . Following the expansion of the Royal Australian Armoured Corps ( RAAC ) in 1960 , A Squadron was disbanded , reducing the regiment to two squadrons , and the majority of its personnel formed regular squadrons in the 4th / 19th Prince of Wales ' Light Horse and the 2nd / 14th Light Horse ( Queensland Mounted Infantry ) , which were predominantly CMF formations . These squadrons subsequently became part of the 1st Cavalry Regiment , which was later redesignated the 2nd Cavalry Regiment and in turn provided the nucleus for the newly raised 3rd Cavalry Regiment . 
 = = = Vietnam War = = = 
 During 1964 – 65 the regiment provided most of the men for 1 Troop , A Squadron , 4th / 19th Prince of Wales Light Horse , which was subsequently equipped with the new <unk> Armoured Personnel Carrier and was deployed on active service to South Vietnam in May 1965 . In October 1967 the Australian government announced it would increase the size of the 1st Australian Task Force ( 1 ATF ) at Nui Dat in Phuoc Tuy Province from two to three infantry battalions , while additional supporting arms , including a tank squadron would also be added to the force . As such in February 1968 , C Squadron was sent to Vietnam , with a total strength of 20 Centurion tanks which would work closely with the M113s of the 3rd Cavalry Regiment . However , two of the four tank troops were initially held back until the Centurions had proved themselves capable of operating in the conditions . The tank squadron reached full strength on 5 September 1968 . Meanwhile , in May the regiment had again reached full strength , with A Squadron re @-@ raised in order to meet the ongoing operational commitment . 
 Over the next four years all three of the regiment 's operational squadrons eventually served in Vietnam , providing invaluable close support to the infantry , particularly during the clearance of Viet Cong bunker systems . Although their value in Vietnam was originally questioned by some , they proved a powerful weapon in both offence and defence , and were responsible for limiting infantry casualties . The Centurions were able to move through the countryside more easily than expected and although they were vulnerable to anti @-@ tank weapons and mines , their firepower and shock action had a decisive effect on the battlefield . In late @-@ May 1968 the tanks played a significant role in the Battle of Coral – Balmoral . Occupying blocking positions in an attempt to thwart an impending communist offensive aimed at influencing the peace @-@ talks , 1ATF deployed two battalions away from its base in Phuoc Tuy , subsequently developing Fire Support Base Coral north @-@ east of Saigon , just east of Lai Khe on 12 May . 
 Following several regimental @-@ sized assaults on Coral which were successfully repelled by the Australians with heavy casualties on both sides , 1ATF moved to establish Fire Support Base Balmoral on 24 – 25 May , 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) north of Coral . The infantry were this time supported by Centurion tanks which had been called forward by road from Nui Dat and had arrived just hours before Balmoral was subjected to a two battalion attack . Following a very accurate rocket and mortar barrage at 03 : 45 hours on 26 May , the base was assaulted by North Vietnamese infantry . The attack was repelled with heavy casualties by the combined firepower of the tanks and infantry . The next day the Australians at Coral assaulted a number of bunkers located just outside the base , with a troop of Centurions supported by infantry destroying the bunkers and their occupants without loss . A second attack , again of regimental strength , was made against Balmoral at 02 : 30 hours on 28 May but was called off after only 30 minutes . The North Vietnamese were soundly defeated — again by the supporting fires of tanks , artillery and mortars — leaving 55 dead and resulted in six prisoners . Australian losses were one killed and six wounded . This performance demonstrated the advantage of using armour in Vietnam , and whereas before the battle some infantry had doubted the usefulness or necessity of the Centurions , after the battle the infantry did not like working without them . 
 In February 1969 , C Squadron was relieved by B Squadron . On 6 – 7 June , B Squadron was involved in a fierce action during the Battle of Binh Ba , a village 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) north of Nui Dat . The attack began on the morning of 6 June when Australian tanks and APCs advanced with infantry from D Company , 5th Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 5 RAR ) towards the village which was being occupied by the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese . As the battle continued , B Company , 5 RAR took up a blocking position to prevent them from escaping . During fierce urban fighting the infantry were forced to clear each house , while the Communist troops occupying the houses fired on them from the windows and doorways before retreating into tunnels as the Australians passed . Each time the infantry were fired on , the tanks would blast a hole in the wall of the building , through which small teams could then enter and clear the structure of any opposition . The fighting continued throughout the afternoon , and resumed the next day before the Australians successfully cleared the village , the bulk of which was destroyed . One Australian was killed and 10 wounded , while communist losses included at least 107 killed , six wounded and eight captured . 
 In December 1969 B Squadron was re @-@ designated A Squadron , while in December 1970 A Squadron was in turn re @-@ designated C Squadron . By late @-@ 1970 Australia was beginning to reduce its commitment to the war and the size of 1ATF was again reduced from three infantry battalions to two . The tanks , however , continued operations and were involved in heavy fighting at Long Khanh on 6 – 7 June 1971 , as well as numerous smaller actions . The last elements of the regiment were subsequently withdrawn from Vietnam in September 1971 . A total of 58 Centurions had served in Vietnam ; 42 had suffered battle damage , of which six were beyond repair , while two crewmen had been killed in action . 
 = = = Post @-@ Vietnam to the present = = = 
 The following years were traumatic for the regiment , and for the Australian Army , with the abolition of National Service after the end of Australian involvement in Vietnam depleting its strength to the point where training was severely restricted until it was reinforced during 1974 . B Squadron was re @-@ designated as the Medium Tank Trials Unit in 1972 and subsequently carried out extensive user and technical trials to evaluate the replacement for the ageing Centurions . In 1977 the Centurion was replaced in service by the Leopard 1 , which had been selected over the American built M60 Patton . On 21 April 1981 , the Colonel @-@ in @-@ Chief of the RAAC , HRH The Prince of Wales , presented the unit with its first Regimental Standard . In 1995 the 1st Armoured Regiment moved from Puckapunyal to Darwin . 
 On 13 July 2002 , the regiment was presented with its current Standard by the then Governor General , Dr. Peter Hollingworth . On 26 July 2007 , after 31 years of service the Leopard was replaced by 59 M1A1 Abrams AIM , with 41 being delivered to the regiment and the remaining vehicles issued to the School of Armour for use for training purposes . Seven M88A2 Hercules Armoured Recovery Vehicles were also acquired , two being delivered to the regiment . The Leopards never saw operational service , although during the 1999 East Timor crisis the regiment was placed on standby to deploy in the event the conflict escalated , while the regiment was not deployed during Australia 's involvement in the 2003 invasion of Iraq . Members of the unit later deployed to Iraq and Afghanistan as Bushmaster <unk> crews , while others have also served in East Timor and the Solomon Islands . During this period the regiment was the only main battle tank unit in the Australian Army and was based at Robertson Barracks , in Darwin . Until 2013 it provided the basis for one of three battlegroups within the mechanised 1st Brigade , which included two mechanised infantry battalions , one cavalry regiment , one tank regiment , and a medium artillery regiment . 
 However , as part of the Plan Beersheba reorganisation , the unit will become one of three Armoured Cavalry Regiments ( ACRs ) assigned to the Army 's multirole combat brigades in Brisbane , Darwin and Townsville . Each ACR will be equipped with M1A1 tanks , ASLAV light armoured vehicles , and M113 armoured personnel carriers . Under the reforms announced in 2011 and confirmed in the 2013 Defence White Paper , the three Regular Army brigades will be restructured between 2014 and 2017 into three Combat Brigades with a similar structure and capabilities , each consisting of : a Brigade Headquarters , an Armoured Cavalry Regiment , two Standard Infantry Battalions , an Artillery Regiment , a Combat Engineer Regiment , a Combat Service Support Battalion and a Combat Signals Regiment . As a consequence the tanks currently operated by the unit will be split across each of the three ACRs . In 2015 it was reported that the Darwin @-@ based elements of the 1st Armoured Regiment may be transferred to South Australia . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 As of 2012 , the regiment was organised as follows : 
 Headquarters Squadron ; 
 Two Sabre Squadrons ( A and B ) — each with three tank troops , total of 14 M1A1 Abrams ( two <unk> are attached to Squadron HQ and each troop operates four <unk> ) ; 
 Technical Support Squadron . 
 However , the unit is currently in the process of reorganising as an ACR . Each ACR is expected to adopt the following structure : a headquarters , one tank squadron , one cavalry squadron , one armoured personnel carrier squadron , and a combat service support squadron . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 Vietnam War : Coral – Balmoral , Hat Dich , Binh Ba , Vietnam 1965 – 72 . 
 = = Alliances = = 
 United Kingdom — Royal Tank Regiment 
 = 1905 Tour de France = 
 The 1905 Tour de France was the third Tour de France , held from 9 to 30 July 1905 , organized by the newspaper L 'Auto . Following the disqualifications after the 1904 Tour de France , there were changes in the rules , the most important one being the general classification not made by time but by points . The race saw the introduction of mountains in the Tour de France , and René Pottier excelled in the first mountain , although he could not finish the race . Due in part to some of the rule changes , the 1905 Tour de France had less cheating and sabotage than in previous years , though they were not completely eliminated . It was won by Louis Trousselier , who also won four of the eleven stages . 
 = = Changes from the 1904 Tour de France = = 
 After the 1904 Tour de France , some cyclists were disqualified , most notably the top four cyclists of the original overall classification , Maurice Garin , Lucien Pothier , César Garin and Hippolyte Aucouturier . Maurice Garin was originally banned for two years and Pothier for life , so they were ineligible to start the 1905 Tour de France . Of these four , only Aucouturier ( who had been " warned " and had a " reprimand inflicted " on him ) , started the 1905 Tour . They were disqualified by the Union Vélocipédique Française , based on accusations of cheating when there were no race officials around . In 1904 Tour , it was difficult to observe the cyclists continuously , as significant portions of the race were run overnight , and the long stages made it difficult to have officials everywhere . 
 Because these disqualifications had almost put an end to the Tour de France , the 1905 event had been changed in important ways , to make the race easier to supervise : 
 The stages were shortened so that no night riding occurred . 
 The number of stages increased to 11 stages , almost double from the previous year . 
 The winner was selected on points , not time . 
 The first cyclist to cross the finish line received 1 point . Other cyclists received one point more than the cyclist who passed the line directly before him , plus an additional point for every five minutes between them , with a maximum of ten points . In this way , a cyclist could not get more than 11 points more than the cyclist that crossed the finish line just before him . 
 As an example for this point system , the result for the first seven cyclists in the first stage is in this table : 
 The other important introduction were the mountains . One of Desgrange 's staffers , Alphonse <unk> , took Desgrange for a trip over the Col Bayard at 1 @,@ 246 metres ( 4 @,@ 088 ft ) and the Ballon d 'Alsace at 1 @,@ 178 metres ( 3 @,@ 865 ft ) , that had an average gradient of 5 @.@ 2 % with 10 % at some places , to convince Desgrange to use these climbs in the route . Desgrange accepted it , saying that <unk> would take the blame if the mountains would be too hard to climb . In the two previous editions , the highest point was the Col de la République at 1 @,@ 145 metres ( 3 @,@ 757 ft ) . In 1905 , Desgrange chose to overlook this , and focused instead on the introduction of the Ballon d 'Alsace , because he saw that he had missed the opportunity for publicity previously . 
 There were two categories of riders , the coureurs de vitesse and the coureurs sur machines poinçonnées . The riders in the first category were allowed to change bicycles , which could be an advantage in the mountains , where they could use a bicycle with lower gears . The riders in the machines poinçonnées category had to use the same bicycle in the entire race , and to verify this , their bicycles were marked . 
 = = Participants = = 
 Before the race started , 78 riders had signed up for the race . Eighteen of those did not start the race , so the Tour began with 60 riders , including former winner Henri Cornet and future winners René Pottier and Lucien Petit @-@ Breton . The riders were not grouped in teams , but most of them rode with an individual sponsor . Two of the cyclists — <unk> and <unk> — were Belgian , all other cyclists were French . Leading up to the start of the Tour , <unk> , Trousselier , Pottier and Augereau were all considered the most likely contenders to win the event . 
 = = Race details = = 
 Despite the rule changes , there were still protesters among the spectators ; in the first stage all riders except Jean @-@ Baptiste Dortignacq punctured due to 125 kg of nails spread along the road . The first stage was won by Louis Trousselier . Trousselier was serving the army , and had requested his commander leave for the Tour de France ; this was allowed for 24 hours . After he won the first stage and led the classification , his leave was extended until the end of the Tour . From 60 starting cyclists , only 15 cyclists reached the finish line within the time limit ; 15 more reached the finish after the limit and the rest took the train . The Tour organizer Desgrange wanted to stop the race , but was persuaded by the cyclists not to do so , and allowed all cyclists to continue with 75 points . 
 In the second stage , the first major climb , the Ballon d ’ Alsace , made its debut . Four riders were the fastest climbers : Trousselier , René Pottier , Cornet and Aucouturier . Of those four , Trousselier and Aucouturier were the first to be dropped , and Cornet had to drop in the final kilometers . The top was therefore reached first by René Pottier , without dismounting , at an average speed of 20 km / h . Cornet , who reached the top second , had to wait 20 minutes for his bicycle with higher gear , because his support car had broken down . Later Aucouturier caught Pottier , and dropped him , and won the stage . Pottier became second in the stage and led the classification . Seven cyclists did not reach the finish in time , but they were again allowed to start the next stage . 
 In the third stage , Pottier had to abandon due to tendinitis . The lead was back with Trousselier , who also won the stage . 
 In the fourth stage , the Côte de <unk> and the Col Bayard were climbed , the second and third mountains of the Tour de France . Julien <unk> reached both tops first , but Aucouturier won the stage . Trousselier finished in second place , still leading the overall classification , although with the same number of points as Aucouturier . 
 In the fifth stage , Trousselier won , and because Aucouturier finished in twelfth place , Trousselier had a big lead in the general classification . After the fifth stage , Aucouturier could no longer challenge Trousselier for the lead . 
 In the seventh stage to Bordeaux , Trousselier punctured after only a few kilometers . The rest of the cyclists quickly sped away from him , and Trousselier had to follow them alone for 200 km . A few kilometers before Bordeaux , Trousselier caught up with the rest , and even managed to win the sprint . Louis Trousselier kept his lead until the end of the race , winning five stages . Trousselier was accused of bad sportsmanship : he reportedly smashed the <unk> of a control post to prevent his opponents from signing . Unlike the 1904 Tour de France , no stage winners , nor anyone from the top ten of the general classification , were disqualified . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Stage results = = = 
 In the first and last stage , the cyclists were allowed to use pacers . All the 11 stages were won by only three cyclists : 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 The cyclists officially were not grouped in teams ; some cyclists had the same sponsor , even though they were not allowed to work together . 
 = = = Other classifications = = = 
 <unk> was the winner of the coureurs sur machines poinçonnées category , having used the same bicycle through the whole event . 
 The organising newspaper L 'Auto named René Pottier the meilleur grimpeur . This unofficial title is the precursor to the mountains classification . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The tour organizers liked the effect of the points system , and it remained active until the 1912 Tour de France , after which it was reverted to the time system . In 1953 , for the 50 @-@ years anniversary of the Tour de France , the points system was reintroduced as the points classification , and the winner was given a green jersey . This points classification has been active ever since . 
 The introduction of mountains in the Tour de France had also been successful . After the introduction of the Vosges in the 1905 Tour de France , in 1906 the Massif Central were climbed , followed by the Pyrenees in 1910 and the Alps in 1911 . 
 The winner Trousselier received <unk> Francs for his victory . The night after he won , he drank and gambled with friends , and lost all the money . In later years , Trousselier would not win a Tour de France again , but he still won eight more stages and finished on the podium in the next year . The unofficial mountain champion of the 1905 Tour de France , Pottier , would be more successful in the next year , when he won the overall classification and five stages . 
 For L 'Auto , the newspaper that organized the Tour de France , the race was a success ; the circulation had increased to 100 @,@ 000 . 
 = Géza , Grand Prince of the Hungarians = 
 Géza ( c . 940 – 997 ) , also Gejza , was Grand Prince of the Hungarians from the early 970s . He was the son of Grand Prince Taksony and his Oriental — Khazar , Pecheneg or Volga Bulgarian — wife . He married Sarolt , a daughter of an Orthodox Hungarian chieftain . After ascending the throne , Géza made peace with the Holy Roman Empire . Within Hungary , he consolidated his authority with extreme cruelty , according to the unanimous narration of nearly contemporaneous sources . He was the first Hungarian monarch to support Christian missionaries from Western Europe . Although he was baptised ( his baptismal name was Stephen ) , his Christian faith remained shallow and continued to perform acts of pagan worship . He was succeeded by his son , Stephen who was crowned the first King of Hungary in 1000 or 1001 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Géza was the elder son of Taksony , Grand Prince of the Hungarians . His mother was his father 's wife " from the land of the Cumans " , according to the anonymous author of the Gesta Hungarorum . This anachronistic reference to the Cumans suggests that she was of Khazar , Pecheneg or Volga Bulgarian origin . The Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus , who listed the descendants of Grand Prince Árpád around 950 , did not mention Géza . Even so , Gyula Kristó wrote that Géza was born around 940 and the emperor ignored him because of his youth . The genuine form of his name was either " <unk> " or " <unk> " , which is possibly a diminutive form of the Turkic title yabgu . Géza 's father arranged his marriage with Sarolt — a daughter of a Hungarian chieftain called Gyula , who ruled Transylvania independently of the grand prince and had converted to Christianity in Constantinople . Sarolt seems to have also adhered to Orthodox Christianity , according to Bruno of Querfurt 's remark on her " languid and muddled Christianity " . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Géza succeeded his father around 972 . He adopted a centralizing policy , which gave rise to his fame as a merciless ruler . The longer version of his son 's Life even states that Géza 's hands were " defiled with blood " . Pál Engel wrote that Géza carried out a " large @-@ scale purge " against his relatives , which explains the lack of references to other members of the Árpád dynasty from around 972 . Koppány , who continued to rule the southern parts of Transdanubia , is the only exception to this dearth of references . A marriage alliance between the German and Byzantine dynasties brought about a <unk> between the two powers neighboring Hungary in 972 . Géza decided to make peace with the Holy Roman Empire . First , a monk named Bruno sent by Otto I , Holy Roman Emperor arrived in Hungary around 972 . Hungarian " legates " were present at a conference held by the emperor in Quedlinburg in 973 . 
 <unk> , who was strict and cruel , acting in a domineering way , as it were , with his own people , but compassionate and generous with strangers , especially with Christians , although [ he was ] still entangled in the rite of paganism . At the approach of the light of spiritual grace , he began to discuss peace attentively with all the neighboring provinces ... Moreover , he laid down a rule that the favor of hospitality and security be shown to all Christians wishing to enter to his domains . He gave clerics and monks leave to enter his presence ; he offered them a willing hearing , and delighted them in the germination of the seed of true faith sown in the garden of his heart . 
 A record on one Bishop <unk> in the Abbey of Saint Gall mentions his success in baptising many Hungarians , including their " king " . The nearly contemporaneous Thietmar of Merseburg confirms that the conversion to Christianity of the pagan Hungarians started under Géza , who became the first Christian ruler of Hungary . His baptismal name was Stephen . However , Géza continued to observe pagan cults , which proves that his conversion to Christianity was never complete . Kristó and other historians have said that the first Roman Catholic diocese in Hungary , with its seat in Veszprém , was set up in Géza 's reign , but their view has not been unanimously accepted . A charter issued during his son 's reign states that Géza was the founder of the Benedictine Pannonhalma Archabbey . 
 [ Géza ] was very cruel and killed many people because of his quick temper . When he became a Christian , however , he turned his rage against his reluctant subjects , in order to strengthen this faith . Thus , glowing with zeal for God , he washed away his old crimes . He sacrificed both to the omnipotent God and to various false gods . When reproached by his priest for doing so , however , he maintained that the practice had brought him both wealth and great power . 
 Taking advantage of internal conflicts which emerged in the Holy Roman Empire after Emperor Otto I 's death , Géza invaded Bavaria and took the fortress of Melk in 983 . In 991 , the Bavarians launched a counter @-@ attack which forced Géza to withdraw Hungarian forces from the territories east of the Vienna Woods . Furthermore , he renounced the lands east of the river Leitha in his peace treaty of 996 with Henry IV of Bavaria . Géza also arranged the marriage of his son and heir Stephen to Henry IV 's sister Giselle . Even before this marriage alliance , Géza convoked the Hungarian leaders to an assembly and forced them to take an oath confirming his son 's right to succeed him . 
 = = Family = = 
 Sarolt gave birth to at least three of Géza 's children ; Stephen , who succeeded his father on the throne , and two unnamed daughters . Sarolt survived Géza , which suggests that she was also the mother of Géza 's daughters . Based on the Polish @-@ Hungarian Chronicle , Szabolcs de <unk> wrote that the daughters ' mother was Géza 's alleged second wife Adelaide ( <unk> ) of Poland , but this has not been widely accepted . The following family tree presents Géza 's ancestry and his offspring . 
 * Whether Menumorut is an actual or an invented person is debated by modern scholars . * * A Khazar , Pecheneg or Volga Bulgarian lady . * * * Samuel Aba might have been Géza 's grandson instead of his son @-@ in @-@ law . * * * * The Aba family descending from them still flourished in the 14th century . 
 = Mycena purpureofusca = 
 Mycena purpureofusca , commonly known as the purple edge bonnet , is a species of agaric fungus in the family Mycenaceae . First described by Charles Horton Peck in 1885 , the species is found in Europe and North America , where it grows on the decaying wood and debris of conifers , including cones . Fruit bodies have conical to bell @-@ shaped purple caps up to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 in ) set atop slender stipes up to 10 cm ( 4 in ) long . The mushroom is named for the characteristic dark greyish @-@ purple color of its gill edges . In the field , M. purpureofusca mushrooms can usually be distinguished from similar species by characteristics such as the dark purple gill edges , the deep purple cap center , and its <unk> consistency . The fungus contains a laccase enzyme that has been investigated scientifically for its potential to detoxify recalcitrant industrial dyes used in textile dyeing and printing processes . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described as Agaricus <unk> by American mycologist Charles Horton Peck in 1885 . The type collection was made in Caroga , New York , from a moss @-@ covered trunk of spruce . Pier Andrea Saccardo transferred it to Mycena in 1887 , giving it the name by which it is currently known . William Alphonso Murrill moved it to Prunulus in 1916 , but this genus has since been subsumed in Mycena . In 1879 , Petter Karsten described a collection made in Scandinavia as Mycena <unk> var. <unk> , but Rudolph Arnold Maas Geesteranus later placed this in synonymy with M. purpureofusca . Another synonym , according to Maas Geesteranus , is Mycena sulcata , described by Josef Velenovský in 1920 from Czechoslovakia . 
 Alexander H. Smith classified the species in section Calodontes , subsection <unk> of Mycena in his 1947 monograph on North American Mycena . Rolf Singer put it in the section <unk> in his 1986 The Agaricales in Modern Taxonomy , a group characterized by having distinct red marginate gills . The specific epithet <unk> combines the Latin words <unk> ( purple ) and <unk> ( dark or dusky ) . It is commonly known as the " purple edge bonnet " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is conical to bell @-@ shaped , flattening in age , and reaches a diameter of 0 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) . The cap margin is usually bent inwards initially . The cap surface is initially covered with tiny white hairs , but later becomes smooth . It is slightly hygrophanous , and when moist , is slightly translucent , so that the outline of the gills underneath are apparent . Its color is dark purple in the center , fading to pale lilac at the margins ; older specimens are purplish @-@ gray . The flesh is thin and pliant , with a texture similar to cartilage . It is initially purplish @-@ gray , becoming pale lilac to white in age . The odor and taste of the flesh are not distinctive . The narrow gills have an ascending attachment to the stipe and are narrowly adnate . They are somewhat closely spaced , with pallid to grayish face color and dark grayish purple edges that are sometimes fringed . The tubular stipe measures 3 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) long by 1 – 2 mm thick . It is tough and cartilaginous , and its base it covered with white hairs . Overall , its color is that of the cap or paler , and often paler near the top . The edibility of the mushroom is unknown . 
 Spores are broadly ellipsoid in shape , amyloid , and have dimensions of either 8 – 10 by 6 – 7 µm or 10 – 14 by 6 @.@ 7 – 8 @.@ 5 µm depending on whether they originated from four @-@ or two @-@ spored basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) , respectively . There are abundant cheilocystidia on the gill edges . They measure 30 – 50 by 7 – 12 µm , and are fusoid @-@ ventricose , with tips that are broadly rounded . They are filled with a purplish sap and have granular contents . The cap tissue comprises a well @-@ differentiated cuticle , a distinct hypoderm , and a filamentous tramal body . Clamp connections in the hyphae are rare or absent . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Field characteristics that help to distinguish Mycena purpureofusca from similar species include the dark purple gill edges , the deep purple cap center , and its <unk> consistency . M. californiensis ( formerly M. elegantula ) is similar , but has gill edges colored rosy to vinaceous @-@ brown , and its cap is browner than that of M. purpureofusca . It has an orange to orange @-@ brown cap , a stipe the exudes red juice when injured , and grows in lead litter under oaks . Mitchel and Smith noted that there was considerable intergradation between the two species . The bioluminescent fungus M. lux @-@ coeli is another allied species , but it has smaller spores ( 8 @.@ 5 – 12 by 6 @.@ 5 – 9 µm ) and its cystidia are more lobed . Another similar " bleeding " Mycena is M. haematopus , which usually grows in clusters on rotting wood . In his original <unk> , Peck mentioned that he considered the species closely related to M. rubromarginata , but could be distinguished by its darker color and " non @-@ hygrophanous striate pileus . " Microscopically , M. rubromarginata differs from M. purpureofusca in having abundant clamp connections and narrow necks on the cheilocystidia . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of Mycena purpureofusca grow singly or in clusters on the decaying wood of conifers , particularly spruce , pine , and Douglas @-@ fir . It is commonly found on decaying pine cones . In a European study , the fungus was found growing on logs in a state of decay where the wood was mostly hard , with most of the bark left , to wood that had decayed to the point that it was mostly soft throughout . 
 In North America , the fungus has been recorded in North Carolina , Tennessee , New York , Michigan , Montana , Idaho , Washington , Oregon , California , Virginia , and South Dakota . In Canada , it has been found in Ontario . Smith noted that collections from Michigan are likely to be found on old hemlock knots lying in the soil , where it usually fruits singly ; it tends to grow in clusters on logs and stumps . In Europe , it has been recorded from Britain , Scotland , the Czech Republic , Poland , Germany , and Turkey . In the UK , the fungus is commonly found in Caledonian pine woods , and it is considered an indicator species for that habitat type . 
 = = Research = = 
 Mycena purpureofusca has been investigated for its potential to <unk> industrial dyes . These dyes , used in textile dyeing and printing processes , are difficult to degrade due to their highly structured organic compounds and pose a major environmental threat . The fungus mycelium produces high levels of laccase , an oxidoreductase enzyme . <unk> are widely used in biotechnology and industry due to their ability to break down various recalcitrant compounds . M. purpureofusca laccase efficiently breaks down <unk> Brilliant Blue R , an industrially important dye that is frequently used as a starting material in the production of polymeric dyes . A Chinese group purified the enzyme and described its biochemical characteristics in a 2013 publication . 
 <unk> A has been isolated from the fruit bodies . <unk> have fungicidal activities and well known for their broad fungicidal spectrum , low toxicity against mammalian cells , and environmentally benign characteristics . 
 = 1995 North Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1995 North Indian Ocean cyclone season was below @-@ average and was primarily confined to the autumn months , with the exception of three short @-@ lived deep depressions in May . There were eight depressions in the basin , which is Indian Ocean north of the equator . The basin is subdivided between the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea on the east and west coasts of India , respectively . Storms were tracked by the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) , which is the basin 's Regional Specialized Meteorological Center , as well as the American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) on an unofficial basis . 
 Tropical activity was largely affected by the monsoon trough , which spawned the three deep depressions in May , as well as the two strongest cyclones in November . The first storm of the season formed on May 5 in the Bay of Bengal , the same location as two additional depressions later in the month . Collectively , the three systems killed 146 people , mostly related to the third system which produced a deadly storm surge in Bangladesh . After two weak depressions in September , the season 's lone Arabian Sea storm developed on October 12 , and remained largely away from land . The final two storms of the season were the most notable . On November 10 , a cyclone struck southeastern India , killing 173 people in India and Bangladesh . Its remnants produced a rare snowstorm in eastern Nepal that caused landslides and avalanches , killing 63 . The last storm of the season was also the most powerful , causing 172 deaths when it struck southeastern Bangladesh . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) in New Delhi – the official Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the northern Indian Ocean as recognized by the World Meteorological Organization – issued warnings for tropical cyclones developing in the region , using satellite imagery and surface data to assess and predict storms . The agency also utilized a tropical cyclone forecast model that used climatology and a storm 's persistence to forecast future movement . Warnings and advisories were broadcast throughout India by telegraph and news media . The basin 's activity is sub @-@ divided between the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal on opposite coasts of India , and is generally split before and after the monsoon season . Storms were also tracked on an unofficial basis by the American @-@ based Joint Typhoon Warning Center . 
 The JTWC only tracked the longer @-@ lived and stronger cyclonic storms , which all formed after September ; by their assessment , this was the fifth such occurrence since 1975 where all storms developed in the autumn . Throughout the year , tropical systems generally lasted longer than in 1994 . The systems that affected land generally struck Andhra Pradesh and eastward through Bangladesh . The three cyclonic storms was less than the average of 5 @.@ 4 , and the two severe cyclonic storms was slightly below the average of 2 @.@ 5 . In addition to the storms tracked by the IMD , a monsoon depression struck northern Oman in late July , producing heavy rainfall that totaled 300 mm ( 12 in ) on Jebel Shams mountain . The system later affected the remainder of the Arabian Peninsula . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = May deep depressions = = = 
 During two weeks in the middle of May , a series of three deep depressions developed in unusual succession in the western Bay of Bengal . 
 Originating from the monsoon trough , a low pressure area formed just north of Sri Lanka on May 5 . By 21 : 00 UTC that night , the system organized into a depression while moving west @-@ northwestward toward India . It developed a central dense overcast of deep convection , prompting the IMD to upgrade it to a 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) deep depression . Still associated with the monsoon , the system had several small circulations and gale force winds . At 11 : 00 UTC on May 6 , the system moved ashore Tamil Nadu near Cuddalore , and by the next day degenerated into a remnant low . The second deep depression formed on May 8 about 120 km ( 75 mi ) southeast of the Andhra Pradesh coastline , north of the previous system . It moved to the northeast , intensifying into a 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) deep depression on May 9 . At 17 : 00 UTC that day , the system struck Andhra Pradesh near <unk> as it progressed northward , degenerating into a remnant low on May 10 . The third deep depression was also the longest lasting . It formed on May 14 off the coast of Odisha , northeast of the previous system . Moving parallel to the coast , it also intensified into a 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) deep depression on May 15 . Early the next day , the system made landfall on Sagar Island in West Bengal state , and weakened while progressing northeastward into Bangladesh . On May 18 , the depression was downgraded to a remnant low over Assam state . 
 The series of storms helped end a drought in eastern India by bringing heavy monsoonal rainfall . The first system brought heavy rainfall to Tamil Nadu and neighboring Andhra Pradesh , while the second storm mainly dropped rainfall in the latter state . The third system brought precipitation to Odisha , West Bengal , and Bangladesh ; Bhubaneswar in Odisha reported 567 mm ( 22 @.@ 3 in ) of rainfall over six days . The rains resulted in flooding and damages to crops , while wrecking dozens of homes . Collectively , the storms killed 86 people in India . 
 In Bangladesh , the third storm produced a 3 m ( 10 ft ) storm surge and heavy rainfall , reaching 147 mm ( 5 @.@ 8 in ) over 24 hours in Chittagong . About 100 @,@ 000 people evacuated their houses to storm shelters due to the floods , while another 100 @,@ 000 were stranded in their homes due to floods . Many embankment dams were damaged , furthering flooding . On Hatia Island , the storm wrecked over 5 @,@ 000 homes and 10 @,@ 000 ha ( 25 @,@ 000 acres ) of crops , with salt and shrimp farms in the region also destroyed . A 1 @.@ 8 m ( 6 ft ) storm tide flooded dozens of villages around Cox 's Bazar , destroying about 1 @,@ 000 houses . Two bridges were destroyed , severing traffic between Cox 's Bazar and Chittagong . In the latter city , 20 @,@ 125 houses were damaged or destroyed . Over 60 @,@ 000 people were left homeless in the country , and there were 60 deaths related to the storm . However , the rains also helped end a damaging five @-@ month drought in the country . The government provided wheat and cash to affected residents to help cope with the disaster . After the storm moved through the area , most freshwater ponds were intruded by saltwater , furthering damage to crops and causing a shortage of drinking water . About 50 @,@ 000 people became ill after drinking contaminated water , killing around 400 people due to a diarrhea outbreak . 
 = = = Depression BOB 04 ( 01B ) = = = 
 On September 9 , a tropical depression formed in the South China Sea in the west Pacific basin . Two days later , the system struck Vietnam and progressed westward through Indochina . The remnants entered the Bay of Bengal around September 13 , accompanied by increasing convection . Moving to the west @-@ northwest , the system resembled a monsoon depression at times , although the thunderstorms gradually became more concentrated . On September 16 , the system developed into a depression , and on the same day the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 01B . As the system approached the Indian coastline , it developed good outflow , and was intensifying quickly . The JTWC estimated peak 1 minute winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) at 18 : 00 UTC on September 16 . However , the IMD never assessed winds beyond 45 km / h ( 30 mph ) . Around 01 : 00 UTC on September 17 , the depression moved ashore India near Balasore , Odisha . That night , the system degenerated into a remnant low over Bihar , although the remnants persisted until September 20 , when they dissipated near Delhi . The depression brought heavy rainfall over Odisha and Bihar . 
 = = = Depression BOB 05 = = = 
 Later in September , another depression formed on September 26 in the northwestern Bay of Bengal . Moving northwestward , it quickly moved ashore near Balasore , Odisha , failing to intensify beyond winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . A ridge turned the system to the northeast , and the depression dissipated on September 28 over West Bengal . The depression brought heavy rainfall to Odisha , Bihar , and West Bengal , peaking at 570 mm ( 22 in ) in Malda district in West Bengal . 
 = = = Cyclonic Storm ARB 01 ( 02A ) = = = 
 A low pressure area accompanied by a well @-@ defined circulation persisted over central India on October 11 . By the following day , the system emerged into the Arabian Sea , whereupon its convection organized west of a sheared circulation . On October 12 , the system organized into a depression , classified Tropical Cyclone 02A by the JTWC . Steered by a ridge , it moved to the west @-@ northwest and gradually intensified . The IMD upgraded it to a cyclonic storm on October 14 , estimating peak 3 minute winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . The JTWC assessed slightly higher 1 minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . Increased wind shear stripped away the convection , causing the storm to weaken . By October 17 , the system deteriorated into a depression and began drifting to the southwest , having moved between two ridges . Later that day , the system degenerated into a remnant low , which the JTWC tracked for an additional day until dissipation east of the Somalia coastline . 
 = = = Very Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 06 ( 03B ) = = = 
 The storm originated from the monsoon trough on November 7 in the Bay of Bengal , east of India . Moving northwestward , the system gradually intensified while moving toward land , eventually developing an eye in the middle of the convection . Reaching peak 3 minute winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , the IMD classified the system as a very severe cyclonic storm , in line with the 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) wind estimate from the JTWC . On November 9 , the cyclone made landfall near the border of Andhra Pradesh and Orissa . Atypical for most November storms , the system continued to the north and dissipated over Nepal on November 11 . 
 In India , the cyclone 's strong winds were accompanied by heavy rainfall and a storm surge of 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) that inundated the coastline several hundred feet inland . Power lines , crops , and houses were damaged , and many boats were damaged , causing several nautical fatalities . The cyclone killed 128 people and caused US $ 46 @.@ 3 million in damage . In neighboring Bangladesh , high waves killed 45 people after sinking or sweeping away four ships . The cyclone later spawned a rare November snowstorm across eastern Nepal , with depths reaching 2 @,@ 000 mm ( 79 in ) . The snowfall occurred without warning amid the busy mountain trekking season , and there were several avalanches and landslides across the country . One such incident killed 24 people at a lodge near Gokyo , and there were 63 deaths related to the cyclone in the country . The Nepal government launched the largest search and rescue mission in the country 's history , rescuing 450 people , some of whom trapped for days in the snow . 
 = = = Extremely Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 07 ( 04B ) = = = 
 An area of convection blossomed near northern Sumatra on November 18 , associated with the monsoon . Aided by the same westerly wind burst that assisted Cyclone Daryl in the southern hemisphere , the disturbance gradually organized and persisted while moving west @-@ northwestward through the Bay of Bengal . Late on November 21 , the system developed into a depression , which the JTWC classified as Tropical Cyclone 04B . Steady intensification ensued ; by November 23 , the JTWC upgraded the cyclone to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , and the IMD steadily upgraded the storm to increasing categories . The storm turned to the north and northeast around a ridge , accelerating toward land . At 06 : 00 UTC on November 24 , the JTWC estimated peak 1 minute winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) . Shortly thereafter , the IMD estimated peak 3 minute winds of 190 km / h ( 115 mph ) , making the system an extremely severe cyclonic storm . By that time , the system had a well @-@ defined eye in the center of deep convection . Due to increasing wind shear , the storm weakened and made landfall over southeastern Bangladesh with winds of around 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , south of Cox 's Bazaar around 09 : 00 UTC on November 25 . A few hours later , the system degenerated into a remnant low over northern Myanmar . 
 Along the coast of Bangladesh , Cox 's Bazaar reported winds of 93 km / h ( 58 mph ) . The storm brought heavy rainfall and produced high waves that flooded offshore islands with a 0 @.@ 91 to 1 @.@ 22 m ( 3 to 4 ft ) storm surge . Most residents of the offshore islands were evacuated ahead of the storm , totaling 300 @,@ 000 evacuees . About 10 @,@ 000 huts were destroyed , mostly made of mud and straw , while crops in the region were damaged . The storm 's winds cut power lines and communication links in the hardest hit areas . Initially , about 500 fishermen were missing after the storm 's passage ; most were rescued or swam ashore , but over 100 people were killed when 10 boats were lost . The International Disaster Database listed 172 fatalities associated with the storm . In neighboring Myanmar , the cyclone destroyed most of the rice crop in Rakhine State just before the harvest , forcing many Rohingya farmers to borrow money to compensate for lost income . 
 = El Mundo Gira = 
 " El Mundo Gira " is the eleventh episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on January 12 , 1997 . It was written by John Shiban and directed by Tucker Gates . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " El Mundo Gira " received a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 3 and was viewed by 22 @.@ 37 million people in its initial broadcast , and received mixed to negative reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , and the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , strange and deadly rain in a migrant workers camp sends Mulder and Scully on the trail of a mythical beast — El Chupacabra . What they discover is a bizarre fungal growth affecting illegal immigrants . 
 Shiban was inspired to write " El Mundo Gira " after noticing the long lines of migrant workers he would often see at his job when working as a computer programmer in the Los Angeles area . He combined it with an idea he had about a contagious fungus . Series creator Chris Carter was attracted to the soap opera @-@ like aspects of the episode , and the title of the episode means " The World Turns " in Spanish . The migrant camp used in the episode was built from scratch in a waste ground near Boundary Bay Airport in Vancouver . This site was later used again in the episode " Tempus Fugit " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) investigate the death of Maria <unk> , an illegal immigrant from Mexico living in the San Joaquin Valley near Fresno , California who was found dead , with her face partially eaten away , after yellow rain fell from the sky . Maria was the object of the love of two brothers , Eladio ( Raymond Cruz ) and Soledad <unk> ; Soledad blames his brother for her death . The migrants believe that the so @-@ called " Chupacabra " was responsible for her death , despite the fact that none of the circumstances of the death resemble anything close to reports of the Chupacabra . Mulder , assisted on the case by Mexican @-@ American INS agent Conrad Lozano , is able to track down and interrogate Eladio , who frightens the other migrants . Meanwhile , Scully discovers that Maria was killed by a fungal growth known as Aspergillus . 
 Eladio escapes as he is being deported , killing a truck driver in the process . A clinical exam on the driver shows his death was caused by a rapid growth of <unk> — the Athlete 's foot fungus . Scully brings samples of the fatal fungi to a mycologist who discovers that their abnormally rapid growth was caused by an unidentifiable enzyme . This revelation leads Scully to suspect Eladio of being an unwitting carrier of the enzyme , necessitating his immediate capture . Eladio , seeking to return to Mexico , meets with his cousin Gabrielle to ask for money . He works with a construction foreman for the day to make the money . Soledad comes after him , seeking to kill him , but finds the foreman dead . Eladio escapes in the foreman 's truck and heads to the grocery store where Gabrielle works , spreading the fungal growth . The agents later confront Soledad at the supermarket , discovering another dead victim of the fungus . 
 Eladio returns to see Gabrielle , but by now has grown deformed from the fungus . Gabrielle , afraid of him , gives him her money and lies to the agents about his location when they come to see her . In actuality , Eladio has returned to the camp where Maria died , where Lozano tries to spur Soledad on in killing his brother . Soledad finds he can 't do it , and Lozano struggles with him , being accidentally killed when the gun goes off . Soledad becomes a carrier of the fungal growth himself and flees with Eladio towards Mexico . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer John Shiban was inspired to write the episode after noticing the long lines of migrant workers he would often see at his job when working as a computer programmer in the Los Angeles area . He combined it with an idea he had about a contagious fungus . Shiban originally intended to have the fungal infection spread by a <unk> , but later changed it to a trucker in the second draft . In the finalized script , it was changed to Eladio once the storylines were combined . Executive producer and series creator Chris Carter was attracted to the soap opera @-@ like aspects of the episode , and the title of the episode means " The World Turns " in Spanish , a reference to the popular American television soap opera As the World Turns . The Chupacabra is a Latin American folk myth that Shiban originally heard about in an article in the The Los Angeles Times about a year prior . To research the episode , Shiban spent time observing the processing of illegal aliens at an INS facility in San Pedro , California . The usage of fake names by the detained immigrants in the episode was inspired by his experiences at the facility . Lozano was portrayed by popular Panamanian salsa singer and actor Ruben Blades . Chris Carter had been looking to use him in an episode for a while . The actors who portrayed Eladio and Gabrielle were a couple at the time . 
 The migrant camp used in the episode was built from scratch in a waste ground near Boundary Bay Airport in Vancouver . This site was later used again in the episode " Tempus Fugit " . It snowed the night before filming occurred , requiring the production crew to use hot water and blow dryers to melt it . Originally , composer Mark Snow created a score that was deemed too " serious " by Carter ; thus , Snow was forced to replace his entire score with a new one . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " El Mundo Gira " was originally broadcast in the United States on the Fox network on January 12 , 1997 ( 1997 @-@ 01 @-@ 12 ) , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on November 19 , 1997 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 3 , with a 19 share , meaning that roughly 13 @.@ 3 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 19 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 22 @.@ 37 million viewers . 
 The episode received mixed to negative reviews from critics . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club reviewed the episode positively , rating it a B. He considered the episode " entertaining to watch " with " nifty direction from Tucker Gates " , despite being formulaic and with the same problems he found in the previous episode penned by John Shiban , season three 's " Teso Dos Bichos " . Handlen had much praise for the second half , which he noted was filled with dark humor , and featured a " bizarre ending " . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a largely negative review and awarded it a 2 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this episode is a disastrous combination of political commentary and stereotypical “ Mexican soap opera ” caricatures . Mulder and Scully have nothing to do with the resolution of the episode , and in fact , the writers fail to provide that resolution . There are some good character moments , but they are too far and few between . " Author Keith Topping criticized the episode in his book X @-@ Treme Possibilities , calling it an " awful episode with a heavy @-@ handed , clod @-@ hopping attempt at social comment that hardly sits well with the themes on display in the rest of the episode . " He called it the worst episode of the fourth season . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five and wrote that it was " trying very hard to be clever " . Despite this the two explained that " if cleverness were only about intent , then we could all be geniuses " . Shearman and Pearson derided the episode 's use of social criticism , referring to it as " rubbish [ because it ] only works if it isn 't underlined each time it 's made . " Furthermore , the two criticized the story 's " Mexican soap opera " style , noting that it drowned out the themes in " unengaging melodrama " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a largely negative review and awarded it one star out of four . She wrote that " ' El Mundo Gira ' is so overloaded with ideas that it falls over and can 't get up " . 
 = Hatt @-@ i <unk> = 
 Hatt @-@ i <unk> ( Ottoman Turkish : <unk> <unk> , Turkish : hatt @-@ ı hümayun or hatt @-@ ı hümâyûn ) , also known as hatt @-@ i sharif ( hatt @-@ ı <unk> ) , is the <unk> term for a document or handwritten note of an official nature composed by an Ottoman sultan . The terms come from hatt ( Arabic : handwriting , command ) , hümayun ( imperial ) and <unk> ( lofty , noble ) . These notes were commonly written by the Sultan personally , although they could also be transcribed by a palace scribe . They were written usually in response to , and directly on , a document submitted to the sultan by the grand vizier or another officer of the Ottoman government . Thus , they could be approvals or denials of a letter of petition , acknowledgements of a report , grants of permission for a request , an annotation to a decree , or other government documents . Hatt @-@ ı hümayuns could be composed from scratch , rather than as a response to an existing document . After the Tanzimat reform ( 1856 ) , aimed to modernize the Ottoman Empire , hatt @-@ ı hümayuns of the routine kind were supplanted by the practice of irâde @-@ i <unk> , in which the Sultan 's spoken response was recorded on the document by his scribe . 
 There are nearly 100 @,@ 000 hatt @-@ ı hümayuns in the Ottoman archives in Istanbul . Among the more famous are the Edict ( hatt @-@ ı <unk> ) of Gülhane of 1839 and the Imperial Reform Edict ( hatt @-@ ı hümayun ) of 1856 . For this last one , the Turkish term Tanzimat <unk> is more accurate . This decree , which started the so @-@ called Tanzimat reforms , is so called because it carries a handwritten order by the sultan to the grand vizier to execute his command . 
 The term " hatt @-@ ı hümayun " can sometimes also be used in a literal sense , meaning a document handwritten by an Ottoman Sultan . 
 = = Types of hatt @-@ ı hümayun = = 
 The hatt @-@ ı hümayun would usually be written to the grand vizier ( <unk> ) , or in his absence , to his replacement ( the ka 'immakâm ) , or to another senior official such as the grand admiral ( <unk> @-@ i <unk> ) or the governor @-@ general ( <unk> ) of Rumeli . There were three types of hatt @-@ ı hümayuns : 
 those addressed to a government post 
 those " on the white " 
 those on a document 
 = = = Hatt @-@ ı hümayun to a government post = = = 
 Routine decrees ( ferman ) or titles of privilege ( <unk> ) were written by a scribe , but those written to certain officials and those that were particularly important were preceded by the Sultan 's handwritten note beside his seal ( tughra ) . The tughra and the notation might be surrounded by a decorated frame . The note would emphasize a particular part of his edict , urging or ordering it to be followed without fault . These were called Hatt @-@ ı <unk> <unk> Ferman ( ferman decorated with a hatt @-@ ı hümayun ) or <unk> Hatt @-@ ı Hümayun ( hatt @-@ ı hümayun to the title ) . The note might use a clichéd phrase like " to be done as required " ( mûcebince amel oluna ) or " my command is to carried out as required and no one is to interfere with its execution " ( <unk> mûcebince amel oluna , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . Some edicts to the title would start with a note from the Sultan praising the person ( s ) to whom the edict was addressed , in order to encourage or honor him . Rarely , there might be a threat such as " if you want to keep your head , carry out this order as required " ( <unk> <unk> ise <unk> amel oluna ) . 
 = = = Hatt @-@ ı hümayun on the white = = = 
 " Hatt @-@ ı hümayun on the white " ( <unk> <unk> hatt @-@ ı <unk> ) were documents originating with the sultan ( ex officio ) rather than a notation on an existing document . They were so called because the edict was written on a blank ( i.e. white ) page . They could be documents such as a command , an edict , an appointment letter or a letter to a foreign ruler . 
 There also exist hatt @-@ ı hümayuns expressing the sultan 's opinions or even his feelings on certain matters . For example , after the successful defense of Mosul against the forces of Nadir Shah , in 1743 , Sultan Mahmud I sent a hatt @-@ ı hümayun to the governor Haj Husayn Pasha , which praised in verse the heroic exploits of the governor and the warriors of Mosul . 
 = = = Hatt @-@ ı hümayun on a document = = = 
 In normal bureaucratic procedure , a document would be submitted by the grand vizier , or his deputy the <unk> ( <unk> 'immakâm Paşa ) , who would summarize a situation for the Sultan , and request the Sultan 's will on the matter . Such documents were called telhis ( summary ) until the 19th century and <unk> ( suggestion ) later on . The Sultan 's handwritten response ( his command or decision ) were called hatt @-@ ı hümâyûn on telhis or hatt @-@ ı hümâyûn on <unk> . Other types of documents submitted to the Sultan were petitions ( <unk> ) , sworn transcriptions of oral petitions ( <unk> ) , reports from a higher to a lower office ( <unk> ) , religious reports by <unk> to higher offices ( <unk> ) and record books ( <unk> ) . These would be called hatt @-@ ı hümâyûn on <unk> , hatt @-@ ı hümâyûn on <unk> , etc. depending on the type of the document . The Sultan responded not only to documents submitted to him by his viziers but also to petitions ( <unk> ) submitted to him by his subjects following the Friday prayer . Thus , hatt @-@ ı hümayuns on documents were analogous to Papal rescripts and rescripts used in other imperial regimes . 
 When the sultan contacted the public for Friday prayer or other occasions , people would hand in petitions addressed to him . These were later discussed and decided upon by the council of viziers . They would prepare a summary of all petitions and the action decided upon for each one . The sultan would write on the same sheet " I have been informed " ( <unk> olmuştur ) multiple times , followed by the item number to which he is referring . When palace bureaucracy was reorganized after the Tanzimat reforms , the Sultan 's decision came to be written directly by the Chief Scribe at the bottom of the summary document , and this one writing applied to all decisions . 
 = = Practices = = 
 When a petition or memo requiring the Sultan 's decision was to be submitted to him , the grand vizier usually prepared an executive summary ( telhis ) as an attachment . In some cases , rather than prepare a separate summary document , the grand vizier or his deputy would write his summary and views diagonally , on the top or bottom margins of documents coming from lower functionaries ( see an example in the first figure above ) . Such annotations on a written document were called <unk> . Sometimes the grand vizier would append a separate cover page on top of a proposal coming from a lower @-@ level functionary like the Treasurer ( <unk> ) or the Minister of Defence ( <unk> ) , introducing it as , for example , " this is the proposal of the <unk> " . In such cases , the Sultan would write his hatt @-@ ı hümayun on the cover page . In other cases , the grand vizier would summarize the matter directly in the margin of the document submitted by the lower functionary and the Sultan would write on the same page as well . Sometimes the Sultan would write his decision on a fresh piece of paper attached to the submitted document . 
 In most cases hatt @-@ ı <unk> were written by the Sultan himself although there exist some that were penned by the chief scribe or another functionary . Important hatt @-@ ı <unk> on the white were sometimes drafted by the head of diplomatic correspondence ( Reis @-@ <unk> <unk> ) or the Secretary of Navy ( <unk> Paşa ) . In some cases , there were notations as to who prepared the draft of the document that was then re @-@ written by the Sultan . 
 Hatt @-@ ı hümayuns usually were not dated , although some , concerning withdrawal of money from the treasury , did carry dates . Most late @-@ period hatt @-@ ı hümayuns and <unk> had dates . Abdulhamid I was especially inclined to date his hatt @-@ ı hümayuns . His grand vizier <unk> Yusuf Pasha , later suggested this practice of dating hatt @-@ ı hümayuns to Abdulhamid 's successor Selim III so that he could follow up whether his orders were carried out . However , this suggestion was not adopted . Abdulhamid II used signatures toward the latter parts of his reign . 
 = = Language = = 
 The language of hatt @-@ ı hümayuns on documents generally was a form of Turkish understandable ( orally ) even today and has changed little over the centuries . Many documents or annotations were short comments such as " I gave " ( verdim ) , " be it given " ( <unk> ) , " will not happen " ( <unk> ) , " be it written " ( <unk> ) , " is clear / is clear to me " ( <unk> oldu / <unk> olmuştur ) , " provide it " ( <unk> <unk> ) , " it has come to my sight " ( <unk> oldu / <unk> olmuştur ) , " be it answered " ( <unk> <unk> ) , " record it " ( <unk> <unk> ) , " be it supplied " ( <unk> <unk> ) , " be they without need " ( " <unk> <unk> " ) . 
 Some Sultans would write longer comments , starting with " It has become my knowledge " ( <unk> oldu ) , and continue with an introduction on the topic , then give their opinion such as " this report 's / petition 's / record 's / etc. appearance and meaning has become my imperial knowledge " ( " ... <unk> <unk> / <unk> / <unk> / <unk> <unk> ve me <unk> ma <unk> @-@ ı <unk> <unk> " ) . Some common phrases in hatt @-@ ı hümayuns are " according to this report ... " ( <unk> <unk> mûcebince ) , " the matter is clear " ( <unk> <unk> ) , " I permit " ( <unk> verdim ) , " I give , according to the provided facts " ( <unk> @-@ i <unk> <unk> verdim ) . 
 Hatt @-@ ı hümayuns to the position often had clichéd expressions such as " To be done as required " ( <unk> amel oluna ) or " To be done as required , not to be contravened " ( <unk> amel ve <unk> <unk> oluna ) . 
 Hatt @-@ ı hümayuns on the white were more elaborate and some may have been drafted by a scribe before being penned by the Sultan . They often started by addressing the recipient . The Sultan would refer to his grand vizier as " My Vizier " , or if his grand vizier was away at war , would refer to his deputy as " Ka 'immakâm Paşa " . Those written to other officials would often start with an expression like " You who are my Vizier of Rumeli , Mehmed Pasha " ( " Sen ki <unk> <unk> Mehmed Paşa <unk> " ) . The head of religious affairs ( <unk> ) or the Sultan 's personal tutor would be addressed simply and respectfully . In cases where the hatt @-@ ı hümayun was to be delivered ceremoniously , with an imperial sword and a cloak , as in an appointment to a high rank , there would be a flowery salutation such as " after I have honored you with my glorious greeting you should know that ... " ( seni <unk> @-@ ı <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ola ki ... ) . Correspondence to a military commander could have a lengthy and ornate salutation or just address him by his title . A note without an address was meant for the grand vizier or his deputy . 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest known hatt @-@ ı hümayun is the one sent by Sultan Murad I to Evrenos Bey in 1386 , commending the commander for his conquests and giving him advice on how to administer people . Until the reign of Murad III , <unk> used to present matters orally to the Sultans , who would then give their consent or denial , also orally . While hatt @-@ ı hümayuns were very rare prior to this , they proliferated afterward , especially during the reigns of Sultans such as <unk> I , Selim III and Mahmud II , who wanted to increase their control and be informed of everything . 
 The content of hatt @-@ ı hümayuns tends to reflect the power struggle that existed between the Sultan and his council of viziers ( the Divan ) . The process of using the hatt @-@ ı hümayun to authorize the actions of the grand vizier came into existence in the reign of Murad III . This led to a loss of authority and independence in the grand vizier while other palace people such as the Master of the Harem ( Harem <unk> ) or concubines ( <unk> ) who had greater access to the Sultan gained in influence . By giving detailed instructions or advice , the Sultans reduced the role of the grand viziers to be just a supervisor to the execution of his commands . This situation appears to have created some backlash , as during most of the 17th century there were attempts to return to grand viziers ' prestige and the power of " supreme proxy " ( <unk> @-@ i <unk> ) and over time hatt @-@ ı hümayuns returned to their former simplicity . However , in the eighteenth century , Selim III became concerned by the over @-@ centralization of the bureaucracy and its general inefficacy . He created consulting bodies ( <unk> @-@ i <unk> ) to share some of the authority with him and the grand vizier . He would give detailed answers on hatt @-@ ı hümayuns to questions asked of him and would make inquiries as to whether his decisions were followed . The hatt @-@ ı hümayun became Selim III 's tool to ensure rapid and precise execution of his decisions . 
 During the reign of Mahmud II , in the early 1830s , the practice of writing on the memoranda of the grand vizier was replaced by the Chief Scribe of the Imperial Office ( <unk> @-@ i <unk> <unk> ) recording the Sultan 's decision . After the Tanzimat , the government bureaucracy was streamlined . For most routine communications , the imperial scribe ( <unk> @-@ i <unk> ) began to record the spoken will ( irâde ) of the Sultan and thus the irâde ( also called irâde @-@ i <unk> , i.e. , " supreme will " , or irâde @-@ i <unk> , i.e. , " glorious will " ) replaced the hatt @-@ ı hümayun . The use of hatt @-@ ı hümayuns on the white between the Sultan and the grand vizier continued on for matters of great importance such as high level appointments or promotions . Infrequently , the grand vizier and the Sultan wrote to each other directly as well . 
 The large number of documents that required the Sultan 's decision through either a hatt @-@ ı hümayun or an <unk> @-@ i <unk> is considered to be an indication of how centralized the Ottoman government was . <unk> I has written himself in one of his hatt @-@ ı hümayuns " I have no time that my pen leaves my hand , with God 's resolve it does not . " 
 The early hatt @-@ ı hümayuns were written in the calligraphic styles of tâlik , tâlik <unk> ( a variant of tâlik ) , <unk> and riq ’ a . After Mahmud II , they were only written in riq ’ a . Ahmed III and Mahmud II were skilled <unk> and their hatt @-@ ı hümayuns are notable for their long and elaborate annotations on official documents . In contrast , Sultans who accessed the throne at an early age , such as Murad V and Mehmed IV display poor spelling and calligraphy . 
 = = Archival = = 
 Hatt @-@ ı hümayuns sent to the grand vizier were handled and recorded at the Âmedi Kalemi , the secretariat of the grand vizier . The Âmedi Kalemi organized and recorded all correspondence between the grand vizier and the Sultan , as well as any correspondence with foreign rulers and with Ottoman ambassadors . Other hatt @-@ ı hümayuns , not addressed to the grand vizier , were stored in other document stores ( called fon in the terminology of current Turkish archivists ) . 
 = = = Cut @-@ out hatt @-@ ı hümayuns = = = 
 During the creation of the State Archives in the nineteenth century , documents were organized according to their importance . Hatt @-@ ı hümayuns on the white were considered the most important , along with those on international relations , border transactions and internal regulations . Documents of secondary importance were routinely placed in trunks and stored in cellars in need of repair . Presumably as a sign of respect toward the Sultan , hatt @-@ ı hümayuns on documents ( petitions , reports , etc . ) were cut out and stored together with the hatt @-@ ı hümayuns on the white , while the rest of the documents were stored elsewhere . These cut @-@ out hatt @-@ ı hümayuns were not cross @-@ referenced with the documents to which they referred and were only annotated by the palace office using general terms and an approximate date . Because Sultans were not in the habit of dating their hatt @-@ ı hümayuns until the late period of the empire , in most cases the documents associated with them are not known . Conversely , the decisions on many a memorandum , petition , or request submitted to the Sultan are unknown . The separation of hatt @-@ ı hümayuns from their documents is considered a great loss of information for researchers . The Ottoman Archives in Istanbul has a special section of " cut @-@ out hatt @-@ ı hümayuns " . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Today all known hatt @-@ ı hümayuns have been recorded in a computerized database in the Ottoman Archives of the Turkish Prime Minister ( <unk> <unk> <unk> , or BOA in short ) in Istanbul , and they number 95 @,@ 134 . Most hatt @-@ ı hümayuns are stored at the BOA and in the Topkapı Museum Archive . The BOA contains 58 @,@ 000 hatt @-@ ı hümayuns . 
 Because the hatt @-@ ı hümayuns were originally not organized systematically , historians in the nineteenth and early twentieth century created several catalogs of hatt @-@ ı hümayuns based on different organizing principles . These historic catalogs are still in use by historians at the BOA : 
 Hatt @-@ ı <unk> Tasnifi is the catalog of the hatt @-@ ı hümayuns belonging to the Âmedi Kalemi . It consists of 31 volumes listing 62 @,@ 312 documents , with their short summaries . This catalog lists documents from 1730 to 1839 but covers primarily those from the reigns of Selim III and Mahmud II within this period . 
 Ali Emiri Tasnifi is a chronological catalog of 181 @,@ 239 documents organized according to the periods of sovereignty of Sultans , from the foundation of the Ottoman state to the Abdülmecid period . Along with hatt @-@ ı hümayuns , this catalog includes documents on foreign relations . 
 <unk> Tasnifi is a catalog created by a committee led by historian <unk> Mahmud Kemal . It covers the period of 1290 @-@ 1873 . Along with 329 hatt @-@ ı hümayuns , it lists documents of various other types relating to palace correspondence , private correspondence , appointments , land grants ( timar and <unk> ) , and charitable endowments ( <unk> ) . 
 <unk> <unk> Tasnifi catalogs 216 @,@ 572 documents in 34 volumes , organized by topics that include local governments , provincial administration , <unk> and internal security . 
 = = The Hatt @-@ ı <unk> of 1856 = = 
 Although there exist thousands of hatt @-@ ı hümayuns , the Imperial Reform Edict ( or <unk> <unk> ) of 1856 is well enough known that most history texts refer to it simply as " Hatt @-@ i Hümayun " . This decree from Sultan Abdülmecid I promised equality in education , government appointments , and administration of justice to all , regardless of creed . In <unk> , the Ottoman code of laws , the text of this ferman is introduced as " a copy of the supreme ferman written to the grand vizier , perfected by decoration above with a hatt @-@ ı hümayun . " So , technically this edict was a hatt @-@ ı hümayun to the rank . 
 The Reform Decree of 1856 is sometimes referred to by another name , " The Rescript of Reform " . Here , the word ' rescript ' is used to sense of " edict , decree " , not " reply to a query or other document . " 
 The Hatt @-@ ı Hümayun of 1856 was an extension of another important edict of reform , the Hatt @-@ i Sharif of Gülhane of 1839 , and part of the Tanzimat reforms . That document is also generally referred to as " The Hatt @-@ i Sharif " , although there are many other hatt @-@ i sharifs , a term that is synonymous with hatt @-@ ı hümayun . 
 = = The Sultan 's script = = 
 The term hatt @-@ ı hümayun is occasionally used in the literal sense of the handwriting of the Sultan . For example , the imperial poet Nef 'i has written a <unk> of 22 couplets describing the calligraphy of Sultan Murad IV , called Der @-@ <unk> @-@ ı Hatt @-@ ı Humayun @-@ ı Sultan Murad Han . The whole poem is a compliment to the writings of the Sultan . 
 = The Time of Our Lives ( EP ) = 
 The Time of Our Lives is the first extended play ( EP ) by American recording artist Miley Cyrus . The EP was released on August 28 , 2009 by Hollywood Records , initially as a United States ' Walmart exclusive . With alterations in artwork and track listing , an international edition was issued October 16 , 2009 . The Time of Our Lives was conceived as a release to accompany Cyrus ' newly launched apparel line with Max Azria . The tracks on the EP were primarily composed by John Shanks and Dr. Luke , who also produced their respective cuts . Cyrus co @-@ wrote one out of seven songs on The Time of Our Lives ; one is a cover and another is a live rendition . Musically , the uptempo tracks on the record are in the pop rock and dance @-@ pop genres while ballads are largely soft rock . Lyrically , it explores the themes of romantic relationships , among other subjects . 
 The Time of Our Lives received generally positive reactions from critics , with some reviews suggesting that the EP was an effective step into adulthood for Cyrus . Some reviews were critical of the ballads which appear on the record , however . The EP was a commercial success , charting within the top ten in nine countries . In the United States , The Time of Our Lives peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . Moreover , the EP had success internationally , peaking at number three in Greece , number five in Austria , and number six in Spain . 
 Two singles were released from The Time of Our Lives . The lead single , " Party in the U.S.A. " , became Cyrus ' best @-@ selling effort up to that point , peaking at number two in the Billboard Hot 100 . It also became one of the best @-@ selling singles in the United States and Hollywood Records ' <unk> and fastest @-@ selling single . The second and final single released from the EP was " When I Look at You " . It was used to promote the 2010 film The Last Song , which Cyrus starred in . Unable to match " Party in the U.S.A. " ' s success , the single appeared in the top twenty of charts in Australia and the United States . Cyrus performed songs from The Time of Our Lives live numerous times . Her performance at the 2009 Teen Choice Awards caused a media uproar because of its sexuality . She embarked on her first world tour , the Wonder World Tour , to promote the EP in late 2009 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In order to support Cyrus ' then newly launched , joint apparel line with Max Azria , sold exclusively by Walmart stores , an EP was chosen for release . " I feel it goes perfect for that kind of look " , she commented . For Cyrus , The Time of Our Lives was a transitional EP and a method of re @-@ introducing herself to new audiences . Speaking about the EP 's sound , she said , " I kind of kept it in the lines of what I usually do , which is kind of a pop rock sound — I don ’ t even like using the word ' rock , ' because I feel like it ’ s an honor to be put in that title . This is kind of my transition . The next record , I definitely want to be able to step it up a bit . " Cyrus originally planned for her succeeding album to be edgier and more predominant in rock music . She said that , after completing promotion for The Time of Our Lives , she wanted to " step out and maybe take a break " for some time in order to compose music that inspires her . Cyrus ' next album , Can 't Be Tamed was released approximately ten months later , on June 18 , 2010 . 
 At first , The Time of Our Lives was exclusively released through the American retail company Walmart , available in American stores and at <unk> The album was originally planned for release on August 31 , 2009 , but because of a confusion at various stores , the album was released three days prior than intended . Several months afterwards , an international edition was released in numerous countries , beginning with the United Kingdom on October 16 , 2009 . With the addition of " The Climb " from Hannah Montana : The Movie , released earlier in 2009 , the edition also featured new cover artwork , with photography by Annie Leibovitz . On January 5 , 2010 , the EP became available for purchasing on other digital retailers in the United States . 
 = = Development = = 
 Cyrus recorded a cover version of " Kicking and Screaming " , written by John Shanks and Kara DioGuardi , and originally recorded by Ashlee Simpson for her 2005 album I Am Me . " Party in the U.S.A. " was written by Dr. Luke , Claude Kelly , and Jessica Cornish . The song was not originally meant for Cyrus to perform , but , once it reached Cyrus , the writing team reworked the lyrics , intending to write an accompanying theme for the clothing line . In order to please audiences , Dr. Luke , Kelly , and Cornish fixated on composing a fun , upbeat song that narrated reflections of Cyrus ' personality . To write his contributions to the song , Kelly said he tried to mimic Cyrus ' songwriting : " It ’ s the same song from a different point of view , you just have to find that unique perspective . " Cyrus was pleased with the song and selected it partially due to the need for tracks to appear on The Time of Our Lives . " When I Look at You " , written by Shanks and Hillary Lindsey , was initially to be included on Cyrus ' succeeding album ; it was eventually chosen to promote the 2010 film The Last Song after Cyrus recognized that it fit the film 's concept well . According to Cyrus , when she sings " When I Look at You " , she thinks of family and love . " It 's kind of what this movie is all about " , she said . The title track , " The Time of Our Lives " , was composed by Dr. Luke , Kelly , Kesha Sebert ( known as Ke $ ha ) , and Pebe Sebert . Kesha co @-@ wrote her contributions to " The Time of Our Lives " with the ideal of constructing a party anthem for young audiences , based on her first impression of Cyrus ' personality ; comedic and likable . 
 " Obsessed " was written by Roger <unk> . Because the EP 's production personnel did not understand it , the song was at first denied of inclusion . However , once " Obsessed " reached Cyrus , she continually insisted the track be included on the EP because she felt related to it . Cyrus described the song as depicting the emotions one feels when one cannot stop thinking of a person and believed it related to numerous fans having their first love . " It 's a really romantic song " , she concluded . " Before the Storm " , originally released on the Jonas Brothers ' fourth studio album Lines , Vines and Trying Times ( 2009 ) , is included on The Time of Our Lives as a live rendition . The song was written by Nick Jonas , Joe Jonas , Kevin Jonas , and Cyrus . At first , the song was solely written by the Jonas Brothers for their third studio album A Little Bit Longer ( 2008 ) , but did not make the final cut . Nick and Cyrus later reworked the song 's lyrics to fit their past romance using a grand piano . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Kicking and Screaming " is the most prominent representation of rock music on The Time of Our Lives . The track features instrumentation that relies on glam electric guitar riffing and ragged , gutsy vocals , which , at several points , feature a gravelly element . It results in an uptempo electronic rock number . Lyrically , " Kicking and Screaming " is a merciless message to an ex @-@ boyfriend . " Party in the U.S.A. " mixes R & B and pop music elements while having instrumentation that includes a " clash between feathery jazz guitar chords and a booming synth bassline serving as a hook " . Cyrus ' vocals display an undertone of alternative country twang and features belter refrains . The lyrics for " Party in the U.S.A. " discuss Cyrus ' relocation from Nashville , Tennessee to Hollywood , California . The refrains mainly speak of how her favorite songs make her feel more confident . " When I Look at You " is a power ballad that transitions in instrumentation , from piano to electric guitar . Throughout the song , Cyrus keeps a hushed tone , but starts to belt soon before the arrival of the second verse . Lyrically , it speaks of a dream lover . " The Time of Our Lives " is a bouncy , dance @-@ pop song characterized by 1980s synths and a fizzy sound caused by a bubblegum pop background . Cyrus ' processed vocals display a prominent use of auto @-@ tune ; influences derive from new wave music . The song 's lyrics talk about not worrying so much about the future and simply focusing on the present and having a good time together . " Talk Is Cheap " is a pop @-@ punk , garage rock song with disco influences and a number of hooks . " Talk Is Cheap " features lyrics that speak of being extremely irritated after encountering predicaments at a club and others smoking cigarettes . " Obsessed " is a power ballad with soft rock characteristics and husky vocals . " Obsessed " ' s lyrics deal with teenage lust . " Before the Storm " is a country pop ballad about a melancholic romantic breakup . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Party in the U.S.A. " was released on August 11 , 2009 as the lead single from The Time of Our Lives through digital distribution . It received praise from critics for its musical composition , reflecting aspects of R & B and catchy effect . " Party in the U.S.A. " was also a commercial success for Cyrus ; it charted within the top ten of eight countries . In the United States , the song peaked at number two , becoming Cyrus ' best @-@ charting single up to that point and the sixth best selling digital single of 2009 . It was also deemed Hollywood Records ' fastest and best @-@ selling single to date . The single was certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and quadruple platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) . A music video for " Party in the U.S.A. " , directed by Chris Applebaum , was set mainly at a drive @-@ in theater and pays tribute to the film Grease ( 1978 ) and Cyrus 's parents ' courting days . 
 " When I Look at You " was released to promote the film The Last Song , which Cyrus ' starred in and became the EP 's second and last single . " When I Look at You " received average to mixed critical reception , ranging from " inevitable hit single " to " inferior ballad " , and was unable to duplicate the commercial success of " Party in the U.S.A. " Its highest international peak was achieved in the United States , where it reached number sixteen , followed by Australia , where it peaked at number eighteen . The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Adam Shankman . It features Cyrus playing a grand piano in several settings , including a beach and forest . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Cyrus ' first live performance of " Party in the U.S.A. " was at the Teen Choice Awards held on August 10 , 2009 . Clothed in a tank top that revealed a portion of her bra , black hot pants , and leather boots , Cyrus and her backup dancers appeared from a trailer . Midway through the performance , Cyrus danced atop an ice cream cart with a pole ( which was suggested to be a dance pole by numerous critics ) for approximately forty seconds . The performance was met with a media uproar , with some critics suggesting that her dancing was too suggestive and sexual for a teen @-@ oriented event , which caused The Walt Disney Company to issue a statement distancing themselves from the performance . Other critics came to Cyrus ' defense , stating that viewers should have fixated on her accomplishments that night , winning six awards , rather than the sexuality of the performance . In continuation , Cyrus promoted the EP on The Today Show and VH1 Divas in the United States . In December , Cyrus undertook promotion in the United Kingdom at 95 @.@ 8 Capital FM 's Jingle Bell Ball , the Royal Variety Performance — the annual gala for the British Royal Family — and various other venues . 
 " The Time of Our Lives " was released for airplay , exclusively on Radio Disney , in order to promote the EP . " The Time of Our Lives " peaked at number twenty @-@ three on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles Chart ( Billboard Hot 100 – 123 ) and at number fifty @-@ one on the Canadian Hot 100 . Cyrus embarked on her second concert tour , the Wonder World Tour , to promote The Time of Our Lives and her second studio album <unk> ( 2008 ) . The tour was Cyrus 's first to not have her costumed as Hannah Montana , and was announced in June 2009 , with dates revealed for American venues . Dates for venues in the United Kingdom were later announced . In to order to avoid the extensive scalping that occurred during her previous tour , all tickets were sold exclusively through paperless ticket delivery , which required audiences to bring identification to gain entry into the concert . The tour expanded from September to December 2009 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Time of Our Lives received generally positive reviews , earning a collective score of 63 out of 100 on Metacritic . Bill Lamb of About.com said , " Cyrus is developing one of the more distinctive vocal instruments in current pop music , and her songs are turning slowly to reflective adult concerns . Consistent growth and improvement is the key here , and looks likely to turn Miley Cyrus into a long @-@ term pop star . " Lamb did , however , state that the ballads on The Time of Our Lives were throwaways . Heather Phares of Allmusic thought otherwise , saying that the EP 's highlights came when Cyrus " lets her inner rock chick and ballad @-@ singing diva come to the fore . " Phares stated that " If Breakout began to establish Miley Cyrus as a singing star in her own right , free of Hannah Montana baggage , then this Walmart Exclusive EP is another confident step in that direction . " Phares concluded that the EP was a good representation of Cyrus 's vocal growth and presumed that her vocal abilities would enhance further as she grew into an adult . Mikeal Wood of Entertainment Weekly graded The Time of Lives a B + because of its execution of various musical styles and genres . 
 Nick Levin of Digital Spy reviewed The Time of Our Lives , saying that , although not offering much original material , it did provide evidence that Cyrus could successfully dump her Disney Channel @-@ affiliated image . He said that each of " the six genuinely new songs " are worth listening to , resulting in a worthwhile EP release . Michael Hann of The Guardian felt that Cyrus managed to project a very wholesome image of herself but argued that she did not succeed in convincing adult audiences there was anything else to her : " She has her name on plenty of inventive , imaginative and precisely calibrated examples of modern chart pop , songs that would have been noticed beyond her audience of young girls had they come from a more credible source " . Jessica Holland of British newspaper The Observer wrote a favorable review of the EP , noting : " Still not yet 17 , Miley doesn 't need to worry about slipping yet . " Jaime Gill of Yahoo ! Music described the uptempo numbers on the EP as " brilliantly feisty skate pop " but described the record 's ballads as tedious . Gill concluded that , if Cyrus were to take her music more seriously , instead of releasing albums in between various other projects , she might make a great pop album and stated that " As it is , The Time Of Our Lives is a great pop EP drowning in a sea of bilge . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On the week ending September 12 , 2009 , The Time of Our Lives entered the Billboard 200 at number three , selling a total of 62 @,@ 000 copies and becoming Cyrus 's eighth release to chart within the top ten . The EP peaked at number two in the following week due to a 154 percent increase in sales ( 153 @,@ 000 copies sold ) . Spending another consecutive week at its peak , The Time of Our Lives continued to sell strongly throughout the remainder of 2009 . On the week ending December 12 , 2009 , the EP experienced a sudden increase sales , rising from number twenty @-@ nine to number seven with sales of 150 @,@ 000 copies . The Time of Our Lives was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of over one million copies . It debuted and peaked at number nine on the Canadian Albums Chart on the week ending January 30 , 2010 . 
 On the week ending November 11 , 2009 , the EP debuted and peaked at number eleven on the Australian Albums Chart . It later dropped to number thirteen and ascended and descended until its last week on the chart on May 18 , 2010 . The Time of Our Lives was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments exceeding 35 @,@ 000 copies . The Time of Our Lives entered the New Zealand Singles Chart at its peak of number nine . In the following week the EP dropped to number eleven , where it stayed for two consecutive weeks . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipments exceeding 7 @,@ 500 copies . On the fourth week ending of January 2010 , The Time of Our Lives debuted at number ten on the Japanese Albums Chart , selling an estimated 15 @,@ 000 copies . In its second week on the chart , the EP descended to number nineteen . 
 On the week ending November 26 , 2009 , the EP debuted and peaked at number seventeen on the UK Albums Chart . The Time of Our Lives was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies . In Ireland , it peaked at number nine and was certified platinum by the Irish Recorded Music Association ( IRMA ) for shipments exceeding 15 @,@ 000 copies . In mainland Europe , The Time of Our Lives peaked at number thirty @-@ three on the European Top 100 Albums Chart , number five on the Austrian Albums Chart , number nine on the German Albums Chart , and number three on the Greek Albums Chart . On the week ending November 1 , 2009 , it debuted and peaked at number six in Spain , where it was also certified platinum by the Productores de Música de España ( PROMUSICAE ) for shipments of more than 60 @,@ 000 copies . Elsewhere in Europe , the EP reached the top twenty of charts in the Czech Republic and Portugal . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies a vocal producer 
 ^ b signifies a live producer 
 ^ c signifies an additional producer 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 As listed in the liner notes . 
 = Black Eye ( album ) = 
 Black Eye is the only full @-@ length studio album by the English punk rock band Fluffy , released on September 17 , 1996 by The Enclave . It was recorded at Metropolis Studios in London and produced by punk rock veteran Bill Price , who had recorded albums by Sex Pistols and The Clash . The album was recorded live in the studio and the music was not arranged by the producer in order to achieve a rough , live sound . The record contains loud punk songs that explore social issues such as sex and abuse . 
 To promote the album , the band embarked on a major tour in Europe and both coasts of the United States , including a performance at CBGB in New York City . The songs " Husband " and " Nothing " reached number 58 and number 52 respectively on the UK Singles Chart . Upon release , Black Eye received mixed to positive reviews from music critics . Most journalists praised the album 's unrelenting mood , but some criticised the vagueness of the lyrics . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Black Eye is the only full @-@ length album by the English punk rock band Fluffy . The band formed in London in late 1994 by singer and guitarist Amanda Rootes , guitarist Bridget Jones , bassist Helen Storer , and drummer Angie Adams . Unsatisfied with the Britpop invasion at the time , the band sought to recapture the punk rock phenomenon . According to Rootes , " We want to infiltrate and conquer the masses . It 's like , Americans think English music 's shit – ' cause it is . We want [ England ] to gain a little respect that we haven 't had for a while . " The band also felt more comfortable in North America than in the UK because the British press " can 't handle the concept of a sexually frank all @-@ girl band " ; the name of the band comes from a lesbian novel titled Fluffy Butch , which Rootes thought was funny . 
 After turning down a number of record labels , the band signed to The Enclave , a record label run by A & R executive Tom Zutaut , who had previously signed Guns N ' Roses to Geffen . Rootes felt that Zutaut was " great . Very American , very cool , very into his artists . " Black Eye was recorded at Metropolis Studios in London and produced by punk rock veteran Bill Price , who had recorded albums by Sex Pistols and The Clash . The album was recorded live in the studio and the music was not arranged by the producer in order to achieve a rough , live sound . According to Rootes , Price " just recorded us live while we were playing . We did things like putting different guitar tracks on top and stuff like that . I did vocals at different times . But we really wanted to get a live sound . " The drums were recorded in a stone room using a basic kit that was modeled after a Ringo Starr reissue model , which resulted in a slightly distorted sound . The album was mastered by George Marino at Sterling Sound in New York City . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Musically , Black Eye was described by Carrie <unk> of Billboard as " pure hardcore punk delivered with a raunchy , abrasive vocal assault from [ Rootes ] . " Aaron <unk> , music director at modern rock <unk> , opined that the band is " a real indie , edgy version of Elastica , but not Britpop . They fit into that Hole , L7 , <unk> , Veruca Salt , edgy thing . " The band , however , felt " insulted " when journalists compared them to Elastica because they think the sound of Elastica is too " clean " . As Rootes recalls , " I admit every time me and Bridged cleaned our house we put Elastica on " . Despite this , she considers Elastica , along with the Sex Pistols and the Buzzcocks , as the only UK bands among her favorites . The band cited the Sex Pistols , the New York Dolls , and The Stooges as their musical influences . They also preferred the Sex Pistols over the Clash . According to Rootes , " The Sex Pistols are political in a great teenage fuck @-@ you way . The Clash are political in a mature way , like they 've done politics in A @-@ levels . " 
 The lyrics of Black Eye deal with sexual and abuse topics : " Nothing you will likely hear on the radio " , Rootes explained . The song " Hypersonic " , named after the best @-@ selling vibrator in England , celebrates the joys of vibrator use . The title track , " Black Eye " , is about domestic violence . Rootes remarked : " When I was <unk> up , my dad was really violent . I knew it was something I had to write a song about – to get it out of my system . " The song inspired the album cover , which depicts a cat holding a mouse in its jaw . Rootes explained that the mouse 's black eye represents a moment of serenity before it dies . Similarly , the song " Scream " deals with rape issues , while " Dirty Old Bird " is about spousal abuse . The track " Technicolour <unk> " is about the unpleasant effect of a hangover , " <unk> " is about drug usage , and " Cheap " deals with one 's loss of virginity and the subsequent feel of becoming " sort of cheap and common . " 
 Not all the songs from the album explore social issues . The songs " I Wanna Be Your Lush " and " Too Famous " use satire to criticise the superior attitudes of male musicians , while " Husband " disapproves " gruff and pushy " boyfriends . The band also clarified that they have nothing against men . As Rootes notes , " Men are great ! We love them ! We 're talking about dickhead men , not all men . " The band considered themselves more of a pro @-@ girl band than a feminist band . Rootes told Select : " So many girls are afraid to be girls . Apart from Courtney Love , who 's really feminine and uses her sexuality and is a strong woman . I don 't think women should dress like boys . That 's what 's great about PJ Harvey . She was boyish and now she 's gone really glam . She looks amazing and she 's become an icon : a real woman . " 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Black Eye is the first full @-@ length released by The Enclave . To promote the launch of the album , the record label , who had been working with the band since December 1995 , released several singles for " Husband " , " <unk> " , " Cheap " , and " Hypersonic " prior to the album release . The Enclave also released an EP consisting of five live songs recorded at New York 's CBGB on May 15 , 1996 and released on July 9 , 1996 to further awareness of the band . Prominent music critic Robert Christgau described the sound of the EP as " as pure punk as the ' 90s get . " Zutaut also admitted that the band 's punk attitude " may scare radio and MTV a little bit " , but he believed that their melodic music and lyrical statements " would pave the way for its success . " 
 The band embarked on a major tour in both coasts of the United States in April , May , and September 1996 . In Europe , the band also toured in Ireland with Foo Fighters , appeared at major summer festivals , and played with the Sex Pistols , Iggy Pop , and the Buzzcocks at Finsbury Park in London in June 23 , 1996 . The album was released on September 17 , 1996 in the US and September 30 , 1996 in the UK . The songs " Husband " and " Nothing " reached number 58 and number 52 respectively on the UK Singles Chart . A music video was made for " Black Eye " under the direction of Floria Sigismondi . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon release , Black Eye received mixed to positive reviews from music critics . Tom Sinclair , writing for Entertainment Weekly , stated that the album " barrels forward with such high @-@ spirited <unk> that it 's possible to forgive the shameless pandering of lyrics like ' I wanna be your kitten / Caress my fur . ' " In a very positive review , prominent music critic Robert Christgau felt that most of the songs " live up to the underlining " and considered the album to be the best punk debut since the ones by the Ramones , Sex Pistols , The Clash , and Wire . AllMusic reviewer Tom <unk> praised the loud guitar playing of both Rootes and Jones and opined that " the lack of dynamic diversity makes Black Eye somewhat of a one @-@ trick pony , but it 's a trick that makes the album 's strongest tracks a joy . " 
 Nick Duerden of Q magazine remarked that Black Eye " sounds like a cross between The Stooges and Courtney Love . And despite boasting the musical dexterity of Status Quo , it 's a short , sharp shock that dispatches its venom with a tireless guile . " Similarly , critic Roy Wilkinson of Select compared some songs favourably to The Stooges and early @-@ Siouxsie and the Banshees . However , he noted that the band " [ seems ] intent on falling short of PJ [ Harvey ] ' s black @-@ bordered presence . When was the last time you heard the Yeovil delta blues sound enlivened by such Carry On <unk> @-@ isms as ' I 've rocketed to Uranus ' ( ' Nothing ' ) and ' When the kids scream , there is a racket / You 've got a magnificent packet ' ( ' Too Famous ' ) ? " 
 In a negative review , Darren <unk> of Drop @-@ D magazine criticised the lyrics for their vague observations about obvious truths , stating : " The only shocking thing about Black Eye lies in a band trying to pass themselves off as Riot <unk> when in fact they pack as much ' <unk> ' as a slightly vexed Yorkshire Terrier . " In contrast , Colin Weston of Drowned in Sound commented : " The thing about Fluffy , is they aren 't the most lyrically challenging of bands , but their music more then [ sic ] makes up for it , and what they DO say , you understand immediately ... not messing about with ' Deep and meaningful ' lyrics , these girls have got something to say , and say it the only way they know how ... in your face ! ! ! " Although Black Eye was not ranked in the Top 40 of The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop critics ' poll for 1996 , Christgau placed it at number 3 in his own " Dean 's List " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
