 All songs written and composed by Fluffy . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 Fluffy 
 Amanda Rootes – vocals , guitar 
 Bridget Jones – guitar 
 Helen Storer – bass 
 Angie Adams – drums 
 Technical personnel 
 Bill Price – engineer , mixing , producer 
 George Marino – mastering 
 John Coding – design 
 Phil Hope – management 
 Elaine Constantine – photography 
 Jake Walters – photography 
 = 2011 LSU vs. Alabama football game = 
 The 2011 LSU vs. Alabama football game was a regular @-@ season college football game between the unbeaten LSU Tigers ( ranked No. 1 in the nation ) , and the unbeaten Alabama Crimson Tide ( ranked No. 2 in the nation ) on November 5 , 2011 , at Bryant – Denny Stadium in Tuscaloosa , Alabama . Coined a " Game of the Century , " this was the first time two Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) football teams came into a regular season matchup undefeated and ranked No. 1 and No. 2 in the nation . In a game dominated by defense and special teams , LSU won in overtime 9 – 6 . LSU kicker Drew Alleman made all 3 of his field goals , while Alabama kickers Jeremy Shelley and Cade Foster made only 2 out of their 6 attempts , proving to be decisive in the game . 
 LSU and Alabama first met on the field in 1895 , and have met annually since 1964 . When former LSU head coach Nick Saban was hired in the same capacity at Alabama , their annual contest became , arguably , an even more heated rivalry than before . At the start of the 2011 season , Alabama was ranked No. 2 and LSU was ranked No. 4 in all of the major college polls , and prior to their annual meeting , each team defeated all eight of their opponents , and LSU moved into the No. 1 spot after a victory over West Virginia . Statistically , the game matched two of the top defenses in both the SEC and all of college football . 
 Alabama received the ball to begin the game . After a scoreless first quarter in which Alabama missed two field goals , both teams scored field goals in the second ; Alabama also had another attempt blocked early in the second quarter , that left the score tied 3 – 3 at halftime . Alabama took a 6 – 3 lead in the third , but LSU tied the game at 6 – 6 in the fourth quarter to send the game into overtime . In the overtime period , Alabama missed a 52 @-@ yard field goal . LSU then connected on a 25 @-@ yard field goal to win the game 9 – 6 . 
 In the weeks after the game , both teams defeated their remaining opponents , and LSU captured the SEC Championship , after they defeated Georgia 42 – 10 . On December 4 , 2011 , the final Bowl Championship Series standings were released with LSU ranked No. 1 and Alabama ranked No. 2 to set up a rematch in the 2012 BCS National Championship Game . In the rematch , Alabama defeated LSU 21 – 0 and captured the 2011 national championship . 
 = = Pre @-@ game buildup = = 
 LSU and Alabama first met on the field in 1895 and continuously since 1964 . Prior to their 2011 game , Alabama held an overall lead in the all @-@ time series with 45 wins to only 24 for LSU and five ties . Historically , LSU 's main rival was Tulane and Alabama 's were both Auburn and Tennessee . However , when former LSU head coach Nick Saban was hired in the same capacity at Alabama in 2007 season , the Alabama – LSU game became a major rivalry game for each school . 
 At the beginning of the 2011 season , both teams were ranked in the top five . After Alabama 's victory over Arkansas and LSU 's over West Virginia on September 24 , their November 5 game was viewed by many in the national media as a playoff with the winner advancing to the 2012 BCS National Championship Game . After the week ten polls were released , the game officially became the first college football , regular season No. 1 vs. No. 2 matchup since the 2006 Michigan vs. Ohio State football game , and the first all @-@ time regular season No. 1 vs. No. 2 matchup between SEC conference foes . Due to the No. 1 vs. No. 2 rankings against conference rivals and the hype that led up to the matchup , the game was referred to as the " Game of the Century . " 
 = = = LSU = = = 
 In the preseason polls , LSU opened the 2011 season as the No. 4 team in both the AP and Coaches ' Polls . In week one , the Tigers met the No. 3 Oregon Ducks in the Cowboys Classic . Against the highly regarded Oregon running attack , the LSU defense held the Ducks to less than 100 yards rushing and won the game 40 – 27 . With their win , they moved up to No. 2 and No. 3 in the AP and Coaches ' Polls . After they held the Northwestern State Demons of the Football Championship Subdivision to minus 4 yards rushing at Baton Rouge , LSU faced ranked opponents on the road in consecutive weeks against the Mississippi State Bulldogs and the West Virginia Mountaineers . Against the No. 25 Bulldogs , the Tigers only managed to score a single touchdown , but behind a third strong defensive performance won 19 – 6 . 
 In their third game of the season against a ranked opponent , LSU played their first @-@ ever game against the No. 16 Mountaineers at Morgantown . Although West Virginia was able to outgain the Tigers in total offense 533 to 366 yards , four Mountaineer turnovers resulted in a 47 – 21 LSU victory . As a result of this win , combined with the other two over ranked opponents , LSU was selected the No. 1 team by the AP following week 5 . The Tigers returned home to defeat the Kentucky Wildcats 35 – 7 in Jordan Jefferson 's return from suspension , and then defeated the No. 17 Florida Gators 41 – 11 , also in Death Valley . After their 38 – 7 victory over the Tennessee Volunteers at Neyland Stadium , the Tigers were selected as the No. 1 team in both the AP and Coaches ' Polls for the first time of the season after the Oklahoma Sooners were upset by Texas Tech Red Raiders . The next week , LSU defeated the No. 19 Auburn Tigers 45 – 10 at home and entered their bye week undefeated and ranked No. 1 for their game against No. 2 Alabama in Tuscaloosa . 
 Prior to the game against Alabama , LSU 's defense was ranked near the top of all major defensive categories nationally . They ranked fourth in total defense ( 251 @.@ 38 yards per game ) , third in scoring ( 11 @.@ 5 points per game ) and rushing defense ( 76 @.@ 63 yards per game ) and tenth in passing defense ( 174 @.@ 75 yards per game ) . In the SEC , the Tigers ranked second in total , scoring and rushing defense and fourth in passing defense . Nationally on offense , LSU ranked twelfth in scoring offense ( 39 @.@ 25 points per game ) , 31st in rushing offense ( 189 yards per game ) , 81st in total offense ( 372 @.@ 13 yards per game ) and 99th in passing offense ( 183 @.@ 13 yards per game ) . In the SEC , they ranked second in scoring offense , fourth in rushing offense , sixth in total offense and eighth in passing offense . 
 = = = Alabama = = = 
 In the preseason polls , Alabama opened the 2011 season as the No. 2 ranked team in both the AP and Coaches ' Polls . After they defeated the Kent State Golden Flashes 48 – 7 in the season opener , Alabama dropped to No. 3 in the AP Poll as a result of LSU 's victory over Oregon . In Week 2 , the Crimson Tide traveled to Beaver Stadium for the first time since 1989 to play the Penn State Nittany Lions . They defeated the No. 23 Nittany Lions 27 – 11 , and returned to Tuscaloosa for a pair of home games against the North Texas Mean Green and the Arkansas Razorbacks . Against North Texas , the Alabama defense was dominant and secured the first shutout for the Crimson Tide defense since the 2009 season with their 41 – 0 victory . The following week , Alabama opened conference play with a 38 – 14 victory over No. 14 Arkansas and then defeated the No. 12 Florida Gators 38 – 10 to extend their record to 5 – 0 . After their victory over Florida , the Crimson Tide regained their No. 2 ranking in the AP Poll . 
 Alabama then returned home for their homecoming game against the Vanderbilt Commodores . For the second time of the season , the Alabama defense had a shutout in the 34 – 0 Crimson Tide victory . After a 52 – 7 win over the Ole Miss Rebels at Vaught – Hemingway Stadium , Alabama returned for their annual Third Saturday in October contest against the Tennessee Volunteers . The Crimson Tide defeated Tennessee for the fifth consecutive season with their 37 – 6 victory and entered their bye week undefeated and ranked No. 2 for their game against No. 1 LSU in Tuscaloosa . 
 Prior to the game against LSU , Alabama 's defense was ranked at or near the top of all major defensive categories nationally . Both nationally and in the SEC , they ranked first in total ( 180 @.@ 5 yards per game ) , scoring ( 6 @.@ 88 points per game ) and rushing defense ( 44 @.@ 88 yards per game ) . The Crimson Tide also nationally ranked second , and first in the SEC , in pass defense ( 135 @.@ 63 yards per game ) . Nationally on offense , Alabama ranked eleventh in scoring offense ( 39 @.@ 38 points per game ) , fourteenth in rushing offense ( 229 @.@ 25 yards per game ) , 23rd in total offense ( 457 @.@ 63 yards per game ) and 63rd in passing offense ( 228 @.@ 38 yards per game ) . In the SEC , they ranked first in total , scoring and rushing offense and fourth in passing offense . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 Originally to air on CBS with a start time of 2 : 30 p.m. CST , CBS reassigned the game for primetime television at 7 : 00 p.m. CST as part of a trade announced October 23 . The deal with CBS involved swapping games to other networks and gave future scheduling considerations for the 2012 season to ESPN . This was the case as CBS used their allotted SEC primetime slot for the Alabama – Florida game earlier in the season . 
 The 2011 edition of the Alabama – LSU football rivalry kicked off at 7 : 14 p.m. CST on November 5 , 2011 , before a crowd of 101 @,@ 821 people at Bryant – Denny Stadium , in Tuscaloosa , Alabama . The game was broadcast nationally in prime time on CBS and Verne Lundquist provided the play @-@ by @-@ play commentary , Gary Danielson provided the color commentary and Tracy Wolfson served as the sideline reporter . An estimated 20 million people watched the game 's television broadcast on CBS , and the broadcast earned a television rating of 11 @.@ 5 , the highest rating for a non @-@ bowl , college football telecast on CBS since 1989 . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 After winning the coin toss , Alabama elected to receive the ball to open the first half . Marquis Maze fielded the James Hairston kickoff and returned it to the Alabama 30 @-@ yard line where the offense began its first series . Alabama opened with a pair of gains by Trent Richardson on an 18 @-@ yard run and on a 22 @-@ yard pass reception from A. J. McCarron to reach the LSU 30 @-@ yard line . However , the drive stalled on the next three plays , and on fourth down Cade Foster missed a 44 @-@ yard field goal wide right and the game remained tied at zero . The Tigers began their first offensive series with Jarrett Lee at quarterback from their own 27 @-@ yard line . After LSU gained a pair of first downs on runs by Spencer Ware and short passes from Lee , the drive faltered , and Brad Wing punted the ball out @-@ of @-@ bounds at the Alabama five . 
 Alabama started their second drive with a short gain and an incompletion , and then McCarron then threw a 19 @-@ yard pass to Maze for a first down . The Crimson Tide gained another pair of first downs with a Maze reception and three runs each from Richardson and Eddie Lacy before the drive stalled at the LSU 33 . Again Foster missed a field goal , this time from 50 @-@ yards , and the game remained tied at zero . On the next LSU possession , Ware had a short gain and Lee completed a short pass to Russell Shepard before he threw an interception to Robert Lester at the Alabama 47 @-@ yard line . The Crimson Tide then began their third offensive series with a 19 @-@ yard completion from McCarron to Darius Hanks before the end of the first quarter . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 After a ten @-@ yard gain by Richardson to start the quarter , Alabama lost a total of seven yards on consecutive plays and a McCarron incompletion on third down set up a third long field goal attempt . This time the 49 @-@ yard attempt from Jeremy Shelley was blocked by Bennie Logan and recovered by Eric Reid who returned it to the Alabama 48 . On this LSU possession , Jordan Jefferson took over as the Tigers ' quarterback , and LSU gained a first down on a six @-@ yard Michael Ford run and a pair of short runs by Ware . However , the drive stalled again and Wing was forced to punt for LSU . 
 Alabama started from their own four , and Lacy had a short gain before Richardson had four consecutive runs to move the ball to the 39 @-@ yard line . The next play was Alabama 's longest play from scrimmage in the game when McCarron threw a 39 @-@ yard pass to Richardson and brought the ball to the LSU 19 @-@ yard line . However , for the fourth time in four offensive possessions , the LSU defense held Alabama to a field goal attempt . This time , the 34 @-@ yard Jeremy Shelley kick was good and the Crimson Tide took a 3 – 0 lead . Once the received the kickoff , LSU began their fourth offensive possession from their own 24 . The Tigers opened their drive with runs of 14 and nine yards from Ford , followed by short runs from Ware , Jefferson and Ford again to bring the ball to the Alabama 36 . After a five yard substitution penalty , Jefferson completed a 34 @-@ yard pass to Russell Shepard to give the Tigers a first and goal from the Alabama eight . After a four @-@ yard rush by Ford and a Jefferson incompletion , Dre Kirkpatrick was called for holding that resulted in a first and goal from the Alabama two @-@ yard line . Jefferson then threw another incompletion followed with a run for no gain by Ford . LSU then called a time @-@ out with two seconds left in the half to set up a field goal attempt , and Alabama followed with a second time @-@ out in an attempt to ice the kicker . Drew Alleman then kicked a 19 @-@ yard field goal as time expired to tie the game at 3 – 3 at halftime . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 LSU received the ball to start the second half and started their fifth offensive drive from their own 18 . After they gained a first down on a short pass on a pair of runs , the Alabama defense stopped the Tigers on their next series to force a punt . Alabama then started from their own 48 , but were only able to muster a three and out . This resulted in their first punt of the night from Cody Mandell . With Lee back at quarterback for LSU , he threw his second interception , this time to Mark Barron , to give Alabama possession at the LSU 35 . Again the LSU defense held the Alabama offense in check to set up another long field goal attempt . This time Foster connected on a 46 @-@ yard field goal to give the Crimson Tide a 6 – 3 lead . On the next drive , LSU was able to gain a pair of first downs primarily with only runs by Jefferson and Ford , but again were forced to punt . Alabama started this drive from their own 11 , and was able to gain a pair of first downs on McCarron passes before he threw an interception to Morris Claiborne that was returned to the Alabama 15 . The quarter ended two plays later after a pair of LSU runs resulted in no gain . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 After a two @-@ yard Jefferson run to open the fourth quarter , Alleman kicked a 30 @-@ yard field goal to tie the game at 6 – 6 . Alabama began the next series with a two @-@ yard Richardson reception followed by a two @-@ yard run before McCarron connected with Maze for a first down on an 18 @-@ yard reception . Richardson then had a three @-@ yard run and a 24 @-@ yard run to give the Crimson Tide a first down at the LSU 28 . On the next play , Maze threw an interception on a trick play to Reid at the LSU one @-@ yard line to give the Tigers possession . After Alabama held LSU to a three @-@ and @-@ out , Wing had a 73 @-@ yard punt to give Alabama possession at their own 18 . Alabama and LSU then traded punts on the next three offensive possessions to send the game into overtime tied 6 – 6 . 
 = = = Overtime = = = 
 In the overtime period , Alabama was on offense first . McCarron opened their drive with a pair of incompletions to Richardson . After a five @-@ yard substitution penalty and a five @-@ yard quarterback sack by Sam Montgomery , Foster missed a 52 @-@ yard field goal . On LSU 's possession , Ware had a three @-@ yard rush and then Ford had a 15 @-@ yard run to give the Tigers a first down from the Alabama seven . After a pair of runs that netted a loss of one yard , on third down Alleman kicked a 25 @-@ yard field goal to give LSU the 9 – 6 victory . 
 = = = Scoring summary = = = 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 In a game noted for dominant defense performances for both teams , offensively , both Alabama and LSU had similar statistics . The Crimson Tide compiled 295 yards of total offense as compared to LSU 's 239 yards . Alabama quarterback AJ McCarron completed 16 of 28 passes for 199 passing yards . His top receiver in the game was Trent Richardson who had 80 yards on 5 receptions , followed by Marquis Maze with 61 yards on 6 receptions . 
 Jarrett Lee entered the game as the Tigers ' starting quarterback . However after he threw a pair of interceptions , Lee was replaced by Jordan Jefferson for the remainder of the game . In the game , Lee completed 3 of 7 passes for 24 yards and Jefferson completed 6 of 10 passes for 67 yards . The Tigers top receiver in the game was Russell Shepard who had 39 yards on 2 receptions . 
 In terms of rushing offense , LSU outgained Alabama 148 to 96 yards , led by Michael Ford who ran for 72 rushing yards . The Crimson Tide was led on the ground by Richardson , who carried the ball 23 times for 89 yards . LSU , was led by Ford 's 72 rushing yards , and also saw Jefferson rush for 43 yards on 11 carries and Spencer Ware pick up 29 yards on 16 carries . 
 Defensively , Nico Johnson led Alabama with eleven total tackles in the game , followed by DeQuan Menzie with eight . Mark Barron and Robert Lester each had one interception and Courtney Upshaw accounted for the Crimson Tide 's only quarterback sack of the game . For LSU , Ryan Baker led the Tigers with eight total tackles in the game , followed by both Eric Reid and Sam Montgomery who each had six . Reid and Morris Claiborne each had one interception and Montgomery accounted for both of LSU 's quarterback sacks . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = LSU = = = 
 With the victory , LSU remained atop all three polls at No. 1 . They also took a one game lead in the SEC Western Division standings over Alabama , and ultimately secured a place in the 2011 SEC Championship Game . The Tigers went on to finish the regular season 12 – 0 with victories over Western Kentucky , Ole Miss and Arkansas . In the SEC Championship , LSU rallied from an early double @-@ digit deficit to defeat Georgia and won the conference championship , retained their unanimous No. 1 ranking and secured a place in the BCS National Championship Game . 
 Statistically , LSU 's defense was still ranked near the top of all major defensive categories nationally after the game against Alabama . They moved up to second in both scoring ( 10 @.@ 89 points per game ) and rushing defense ( 78 @.@ 78 yards per game ) , third in total defense ( 256 @.@ 22 yards per game ) and ninth in passing defense ( 177 @.@ 44 yards per game ) . The Tigers remained ranked second in total , scoring and rushing defense and fourth in passing defense within the conference . On offense the Tigers dropped to 20th in scoring offense ( 35 @.@ 89 points per game ) , 38th in rushing offense ( 184 @.@ 44 yards per game ) , 87th in total offense ( 357 @.@ 33 yards per game ) and 102nd in passing offense ( 172 @.@ 89 yards per game ) . In conference , they remained second in scoring offense , sixth in total offense , eighth in passing offense , but dropped to fifth in rushing offense . 
 = = = Alabama = = = 
 With the loss , Alabama dropped to No. 4 in both the AP and Coaches ' Polls and to No. 3 in the BCS standings . The Crimson Tide went on to finish the regular season 11 – 1 with victories over Mississippi State , Georgia Southern and Auburn . During these final weeks , a series of upsets occurred that allowed Alabama to remain in contention for the final No. 2 ranking , and thus to qualify for the BCS National Championship Game . Alabama secured a place in the BCS National Championship Game after they completed the regular season ranked No. 2 with a BCS score of <unk> , slightly ahead of Oklahoma State with a BCS score of <unk> . The <unk> difference between the teams was the closest final BCS ranking between No. 2 and No. 3 ranked teams since the current BCS formula was instituted in 2004 . 
 Statistically , Alabama 's defense was ranked at the top of all major defensive categories nationally after the game against LSU . They still ranked first in total ( 187 @.@ 00 yards per game ) , scoring ( 7 @.@ 11 points per game ) and rushing defense ( 56 @.@ 33 yards per game ) , and moved up to first in pass defense ( 130 @.@ 67 yards per game ) . Alabama remained the conference leader in all four major categories as well . On offense the Crimson Tide dropped to 23rd in scoring offense ( 35 @.@ 67 points per game ) , 21st in rushing offense ( 214 @.@ 44 yards per game ) , 30th in total offense ( 439 @.@ 56 yards per game ) and 68th in passing offense ( 225 @.@ 11 yards per game ) . In conference , Alabama remained first in rushing and fourth in passing offense , but dropped to second in total and third in scoring offense . 
 = = = Rematch = = = 
 On December 4 , 2011 , the final Bowl Championship Series standings were unveiled with LSU ranked first , followed by Alabama , to set up a rematch between the two teams in the 2012 BCS National Championship Game . In the weeks that led up to the game , the notion of a split national championship became a major storyline . This was the case as the AP Poll is not tied to the Bowl Championship Series and some AP voters expressed they might vote LSU national champions even if they lost as they defeated Alabama in their regular season game . However , after Alabama shut out LSU 21 – 0 in the BCS National Championship Game , the AP voted them national champions to give the Crimson Tide the consensus national championship and thus avoid a split title with LSU . 
 = = = Players drafted in the NFL = = = 
 Within the next four years , 45 players that participated in this game were taken into the NFL Draft . This represents the highest number of players taken in a regular season game and represents the second highest number of players taken into the NFL Draft from both of the teams that participated , second only to the 2003 Fiesta Bowl which produced 52 future draft picks . The final pick came with the 253rd selection on the 2015 NFL Draft , which saw the New England Patriots take Xzavier Dickson , three selections before the final " Mr. Irrelevant " pick . The following table lists all of the participants from the 2011 LSU vs. Alabama game that were later drafted by an NFL team : 
 = Raid at Cabanatuan = 
 The Raid at Cabanatuan , also known as The Great Raid , was a rescue of Allied prisoners of war ( POWs ) and civilians from a Japanese camp near Cabanatuan City , in the Philippines . On January 30 , 1945 , during World War II , United States Army Rangers , Alamo Scouts , and Filipino guerrillas liberated more than 500 from the POW camp . 
 After the surrender of tens of thousands of American troops during the Battle of Bataan , many were sent to the Cabanatuan prison camp following the Bataan Death March . The Japanese transferred most of the prisoners to other areas , leaving just over 500 American and other Allied POWs and civilians in the prison . Facing brutal conditions including disease , torture , and malnourishment , the prisoners feared they would all be executed by their captors before the arrival of General Douglas MacArthur and his American forces returning to Luzon . In late January 1945 , a plan was developed by Sixth Army leaders and Filipino guerrillas to send a small force to rescue the prisoners . A group of over a hundred Rangers and Scouts and several hundred guerrillas traveled 30 miles ( 48 km ) behind Japanese lines to reach the camp . 
 In a nighttime raid , under the cover of darkness and a distraction by a P @-@ 61 Black Widow , the group surprised the Japanese forces in and around the camp . Hundreds of Japanese troops were killed in the 30 @-@ minute coordinated attack ; the Americans suffered minimal casualties . The Rangers , Scouts , and guerrillas escorted the POWs back to American lines . The rescue allowed the prisoners to tell of the death march and prison camp atrocities , which sparked a new rush of resolve for the war against Japan . The rescuers were awarded commendations by MacArthur , and were also recognized by President Franklin D. Roosevelt . A memorial now sits on the site of the former camp , and the events of the raid have been depicted in several films . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the United States was attacked at Pearl Harbor on December 7 , 1941 by Japanese forces , it entered World War II to join the Allied forces in their fight against the Axis powers . American forces led by General Douglas MacArthur , already stationed in the Philippines as a deterrent against a Japanese invasion of the islands , were attacked by the Japanese hours after Pearl Harbor . On March 12 , 1942 , General MacArthur and a few select officers , on the orders of President Franklin D. Roosevelt , left the American forces , promising to return with reinforcements . The 72 @,@ 000 soldiers of the United States Army Forces in the Far East ( USAFFE ) , fighting with outdated weapons , lacking supplies , and stricken with disease and malnourishment , eventually surrendered to the Japanese on April 9 , 1942 . 
 The Japanese had initially planned for only 10 @,@ 000 – 25 @,@ 000 American and Filipino prisoners of war ( POWs ) . Although they had organized two hospitals , ample food , and guards for this estimate , they were overwhelmed with over 72 @,@ 000 prisoners . By the end of the 60 @-@ mile ( 97 @-@ km ) march , only 52 @,@ 000 prisoners ( approximately 9 @,@ 200 American and 42 @,@ 800 Filipino ) reached Camp O 'Donnell , with an estimated 20 @,@ 000 having died from illness , hunger , torture , or murder . Later with the closure of Camp O 'Donnell most of the imprisoned soldiers were transferred to the Cabanatuan prison camp to join the POWs from the Battle of Corregidor . 
 In 1944 , when the United States landed on the Philippines to recapture it , orders had been sent out by the Japanese high command to kill the POWs in order to avoid them being rescued by liberating forces . One method of the execution was to round the prisoners up in one location , pour gasoline over them , and then burn them alive . After hearing the accounts of the survivors from the massacre at the Puerto Princesa Prison Camp , the liberating forces feared that the safety of the POWs being held in the country was in jeopardy , and decided to launch a series of rescue operations to save the surviving POWs on the islands . 
 = = POW camp = = 
 The Cabanatuan prison camp was named after the nearby city of 50 @,@ 000 people ( locals also called it Camp <unk> , after a small nearby village ) . The camp had first been used as an American Department of Agriculture station and then a training camp for the Filipino army . When the Japanese invaded the Philippines , they used the camp to house American POWs . It was one of three camps in the Cabanatuan area and was designated for holding sick detainees . Occupying more than 25 acres ( 0 @.@ 10 km2 ) , the rectangular @-@ shaped camp was 800 yards ( 730 m ) deep by 600 yards ( 550 m ) across , divided by a road that ran through its center . One side of the camp housed Japanese guards , while the other included bamboo barracks for the prisoners as well as a section for a hospital . Nicknamed the " Zero Ward " , the hospital housed the <unk> prisoners as they waited to die from diseases such as dysentery and malaria . Eight @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 @-@ m ) high barbed wire fences surrounded the camp , in addition to multiple pillbox bunkers and four @-@ story guard towers . 
 At its peak , the camp held 8 @,@ 000 American soldiers ( along with a small number of soldiers and civilians from other nations including the United Kingdom , Norway , and the Netherlands ) , making it the largest POW camp in the Philippines . This number dropped significantly as able @-@ bodied soldiers were shipped to other areas in the Philippines , Japan , Japanese @-@ occupied Taiwan , and Manchukuo to work in slave labor camps . As Japan had not yet ratified the Geneva Convention , the POWs were transported out of the camp and forced to work in factories to build Japanese weaponry , unload ships , and repair airfields . 
 The imprisoned soldiers received two meals a day of steamed rice , occasionally accompanied by fruit , soup , or meat . To supplement their diet , prisoners were able to smuggle food and supplies hidden in their underwear into the camp during Japanese @-@ approved trips to Cabanatuan . To prevent extra food , jewelry , diaries , and other valuables from being confiscated , items were hidden in clothing , latrines , or were buried before scheduled inspections . Prisoners collected food using a variety of methods including stealing , bribing guards , planting gardens , and killing animals which entered the camp such as mice , snakes , ducks , and stray dogs . The Filipino underground collected thousands of quinine tablets to smuggle into the camp to treat malaria , saving hundreds of lives . When the Japanese had an American radio technician fix their radios , he would steal parts , allowing the prisoners to have several radios to listen to newscasts of the war efforts outside the camp . One group of Corregidor prisoners , before first entering the camp , had each hidden a piece of a radio under their clothing , to later be reassembled into a working device . The radios were able to pick up a San Francisco @-@ based radio station , allowing the POWs to hear about the status of war outside the gates of the prison . A smuggled camera was used to document the camp 's living conditions . Prisoners also constructed weapons and smuggled ammunition into the camp for the possibility of securing a handgun . 
 Multiple escape attempts were made throughout the history of the prison camp , but the majority ended in failure . In one attempt , four soldiers were recaptured by the Japanese . The guards forced all prisoners to watch as the four soldiers were beaten , forced to dig their own graves and then executed . Shortly thereafter , the guards put up signs declaring that if other escape attempts were made , ten prisoners would be executed for every escapee . Prisoners ' living quarters were then divided into groups of ten , which motivated the POWs to keep a close eye on others to prevent them from making escape attempts . 
 The Japanese permitted the POWs to build septic systems and irrigation ditches throughout the prisoner side of the camp . An onsite commissary was available to sell items such as bananas , eggs , coffee , notebooks , and cigarettes . Recreational activities allowed for baseball , horseshoes , and ping pong matches . In addition , a 3 @,@ 000 @-@ book library was allowed ( much of which was provided by the Red Cross ) , and films were shown occasionally . A bulldog was kept by the prisoners , and served as a mascot for the camp . Each year around Christmas , the Japanese guards gave permission for the Red Cross to donate a small box to each of the prisoners , containing items such as corned beef , instant coffee , and tobacco . Prisoners were also able to send postcards to relatives , although they were censored by the guards . 
 As American forces continued to approach Luzon , the Japanese Imperial High Command ordered that all able @-@ bodied POWs be transported to Japan . From the Cabanatuan camp , over 1 @,@ 600 soldiers were removed in October 1944 , leaving over 500 sick , weak , or disabled POWs . On January 6 , 1945 , all of the guards withdrew from the Cabanatuan camp , leaving the POWs alone . The guards had previously told prisoner leaders that they should not attempt to escape , or else they would be killed . When the guards left , the prisoners heeded the threat , fearing that the Japanese were waiting near the camp and would use the attempted escape as an excuse to execute them all . Instead , the prisoners went to the guards ' side of the camp and ransacked the Japanese buildings for supplies and large amounts of food . Prisoners were alone for several weeks , except when retreating Japanese forces would periodically stay in the camp . The soldiers mainly ignored the POWs , except to ask for food . Although aware of the consequences , the prisoners sent a small group outside the prison 's gates to bring in two <unk> to slaughter . The meat from the animals , along with the food secured from the Japanese side of the camp , helped many of the POWs to regain their strength , weight , and stamina . In mid @-@ January , a large group of Japanese troops entered the camp and returned the prisoners to their side of the camp . The prisoners , fueled by rumors , speculated that they would soon be executed by the Japanese . 
 = = Planning and preparation = = 
 On October 20 , 1944 , General Douglas MacArthur 's forces landed on Leyte , paving the way for the liberation of the Philippines . Several months later , as the Americans consolidated their forces to prepare for the main invasion of Luzon , nearly 150 Americans were executed by their Japanese captors on December 14 , 1944 at the Puerto Princesa Prison Camp on the island of Palawan . These Americans were herded into air @-@ raid shelters , sealed in , doused with gasoline , and burned alive . One of the survivors , PFC Eugene Nielsen , recounted his tale to U.S. Army Intelligence on January 7 , 1945 . Two days later , MacArthur 's forces landed on Luzon and began a rapid advance towards the capital , Manila . 
 Major Bob Lapham , the American USAFFE senior guerrilla chief , and another guerrilla leader , Juan Pajota , had considered freeing the prisoners within the camp , but feared logistical issues with hiding and caring for the prisoners . An earlier plan had been proposed by Lieutenant Colonel Bernard Anderson , leader of the guerrillas near the camp . He suggested that the guerrillas would secure the prisoners , escort them 50 miles ( 80 km ) to Debut Bay , and transport them using 30 submarines . The plan was denied approval as MacArthur feared the Japanese would catch up with the fleeing prisoners and kill them all . In addition , the Navy did not have the required submarines , especially with MacArthur 's upcoming invasion of Luzon . 
 On January 26 , 1945 , Lapham traveled from his location near the prison camp to Sixth Army headquarters , 30 miles ( 48 km ) away . He proposed to Lieutenant General Walter Krueger 's intelligence chief Colonel Horton White that a rescue attempt be made to liberate the estimated 500 POWs at the Cabanatuan prison camp before the Japanese possibly killed them all . Lapham estimated Japanese forces to include 100 – 300 soldiers within the camp , 1 @,@ 000 across the Cabu River northeast of the camp , and possibly around 5 @,@ 000 within Cabanatuan City . Pictures of the camp were also available , as planes had taken surveillance images as recently as January 19 . White estimated that the I Corps would not reach Cabanatuan City until January 31 or February 1 , and that if any rescue attempt were to be made , it would have to be on January 29 . White reported the details to Krueger , who gave the order for the rescue attempt . 
 White gathered Lt. Col. Henry Mucci , leader of the 6th Ranger Battalion , and three lieutenants from the Alamo Scouts — the special reconnaissance unit attached to his Sixth Army — for a briefing on the mission to raid Cabanatuan and rescue the POWs . The group developed a plan to rescue the prisoners . Fourteen Scouts , made up of two teams , would leave 24 hours ahead of the main force , to survey the camp . The main force would consist of 90 Rangers from C Company and 30 from F Company who would march 30 miles behind Japanese lines , surround the camp , kill the guards , and rescue and escort the prisoners back to American lines . The Americans would join up with 80 Filipino guerrillas , who would serve as guides and help in the rescue attempt . The initial plan was to attack the camp at 17 : 30 PST ( UTC + 8 ) on January 29 . 
 On the evening of January 27 , the Rangers studied air reconnaissance photos and listened to guerrilla intelligence on the prison camp . The two five @-@ man teams of Alamo Scouts , led by 1st <unk> . William Nellist and Thomas Rounsaville , left Guimba at 19 : 00 and infiltrated behind enemy lines for the long trek to attempt a reconnaissance of the prison camp . Each Scout was armed with a .45 pistol , three hand grenades , a rifle or M1 carbine , a knife , and extra ammunition . The next morning , the Scouts linked up with several Filipino guerrilla units at the village of Platero , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of the camp . 
 The Rangers were armed with assorted Thompson submachine guns , BARs , M1 Garand rifles , pistols , grenades , knives , extra ammunition , as well as a few bazookas . Four combat photographers from a unit of the <unk> Signal Service Battalion volunteered to accompany the Scouts and Rangers to record the rescue after Mucci suggested the idea of documenting the raid . Each photographer was armed with a pistol . Despite Geneva Convention restrictions on armed medical personnel , surgeon Captain Jimmy Fisher and his medics each carried pistols and carbines . To maintain a link between the raiding group and Army Command , a radio outpost was established outside of Guimba . The force had two radios , but their use was only approved in asking for aircraft support if they ran into large Japanese forces or if there were last @-@ minute changes to the raid ( as well as calling off friendly fire by American aircraft ) . 
 = = Behind enemy lines = = 
 Shortly after 05 : 00 on January 28 , Mucci and a reinforced company of 121 Rangers under Capt. Robert Prince drove 60 miles ( 97 km ) to Guimba , before slipping through Japanese lines at just after 14 : 00 . Guided by Filipino guerrillas , the Rangers hiked through open grasslands to avoid enemy patrols . In villages along the Rangers ' route , other guerrillas assisted in muzzling dogs and putting chickens in cages to prevent the Japanese from hearing the traveling group . At one point , the Rangers narrowly avoided a Japanese tank on the national highway by following a ravine that ran under the road . 
 The group reached Balincarin , a barrio 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north of the camp , the following morning . Mucci linked up with Scouts Nellist and Rounsaville to go over the camp reconnaissance from the previous night . The Scouts revealed that the terrain around the camp was flat , which would leave the force exposed before the raid . Mucci also met with USAFFE guerrilla Captain Juan Pajota and his 200 men , whose intimate knowledge of enemy activity , the locals , and the terrain proved crucial . Upon learning that Mucci wanted to push through with the attack that evening , Pajota resisted , insisting that it would be suicide . He revealed that the guerrillas had been watching an estimated 1 @,@ 000 Japanese soldiers camped out across the Cabu River just a few hundred yards from the prison . Pajota also confirmed reports that as many as 7 @,@ 000 enemy troops were deployed around Cabanatuan City located several miles away . With the invading American forces from the southwest , a Japanese division was withdrawing to the north on a road close to the camp . He recommended waiting for the division to pass so that the force would face minimal opposition . After consolidating information from Pajota and the Alamo Scouts about heavy enemy activity in the camp area , Mucci agreed to postpone the raid for 24 hours , and alerted the Sixth Army Headquarters to the development by radio . He directed the Scouts to return to the camp and gain additional intelligence , especially on the strength of the guards and the exact location of the captive soldiers . The Rangers withdrew to Platero , a barrio ( suburb ) 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) south of Balincarin . 
 = = Strategy = = 
 At 11 : 30 on January 30 , Alamo Scouts Lt. Bill Nellist and Pvt. Rufo <unk> , disguised as locals , managed to gain access to an abandoned shack 300 yards ( 270 m ) from the camp . Avoiding detection by the Japanese guards , they observed the camp from the shack and prepared a detailed report on the camp 's major features , including the main gate , Japanese troop strength , the location of telephone wires , and the best attack routes . Shortly thereafter they were joined by three other Scouts , whom Nellist tasked to deliver the report to Mucci . Nellist and <unk> remained in the shack until the start of the raid . 
 Mucci had already given Nellist 's January 29 afternoon report and forwarded it to Prince , whom he entrusted to determine how to get the Rangers in and out of the compound quickly , and with as few casualties as possible . Prince developed a plan , which was then modified in light of the new report from the abandoned shack reconnaissance received at 14 : 30 . He proposed that the Rangers would be split into two groups : about 90 Rangers of C Company , led by Prince , would attack the main camp and escort the prisoners out , while 30 Rangers of a platoon from F Company , commanded by Lt. John Murphy , would signal the start of the attack by firing into various Japanese positions at the rear of the camp at 19 : 30 . Prince predicted that the raid would be accomplished in 30 minutes or less . Once Prince had ensured that all of the POWs were safely out of the camp , he would fire a red flare , indicating that all troops should fall back to a meetup at Pampanga River 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north of the camp where 150 guerrillas would be ready with carabao @-@ pulled carts to transport the POWs . This group would help to load the POWs and escort them back to American lines . 
 One of Prince 's primary concerns was the flatness of the countryside . The Japanese had kept the terrain clear of vegetation to ensure that approaching guerrilla attacks could be seen as well as to spot prisoner escapes . Prince knew his Rangers would have to crawl through a long , open field on their bellies , right under the eyes of the Japanese guards . There would only be just over an hour of full darkness , as the sun set below the horizon and the moon rose . This would still present the possibility of the Japanese guards noticing their movement , especially with a nearly full moon . If the Rangers were discovered , the only planned response was for everyone to immediately stand up and rush the camp . The Rangers were unaware that the Japanese did not have any searchlights that could be used to illuminate the perimeter . Pajota suggested that to distract the guards , a United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) airplane should buzz the camp to divert the guards ' eyes to the sky . Mucci agreed with the idea and a radio request was sent to command to ask for a plane to fly over the camp while the men made their way across the field . In preparation for possible injuries or wounds received during the encounter with the Japanese , the battalion surgeon , Cpt . Jimmy Fisher , developed a makeshift hospital in the Platero schoolhouse . 
 By dawn on January 30 , the road in front of the camp was clear of traveling Japanese troops . Mucci made plans to protect the POWs once they were freed from the camp . Two groups of guerrillas of the Luzon Guerrilla Armed Forces , one under Pajota and another under Capt. Eduardo Joson , would be sent in opposite directions to hold the main road near the camp . Pajota and 200 guerrillas were to set up a roadblock next to the wooden bridge over the Cabu River . This setup , northeast of the prisoner camp , would be the first line of defense against the Japanese forces camped across the river , which would be within earshot of the assault on the camp . Joson and his 75 guerrillas , along with a Ranger bazooka team , would set up a roadblock 800 yards ( 730 m ) southwest of the prisoner camp to stop any Japanese forces that would arrive from Cabanatuan . Both groups would each place 25 land mines in front of their positions , and one guerrilla from each group was given a bazooka to destroy any armored vehicles . After the POWs and the remainder of the attacking force had reached the Pampanga River meeting point , Prince would fire a second flare to indicate to the ambush sites to pull back ( gradually , if they faced opposition ) and head to Plateros . 
 As the POWs had no knowledge of the upcoming assault , they went through their normal routine that night . The previous day , two Filipino boys had thrown rocks into the prisoner side of the camp with notes attached , " Be ready to go out . " Assuming that the boys were pulling a prank , the POWs disregarded the notes . The POWs were becoming more wary of the Japanese guards , believing that anytime in the next few days they could be massacred for any reason . They figured that the Japanese would not want them to be rescued by advancing American forces , regain their strength , and return to fight the Japanese again . In addition , the Japanese could kill the prisoners to prevent them from telling of the atrocities of the Bataan Death March or the conditions in the camp . With the limited Japanese guard , a small group of prisoners had already decided that they would make an escape attempt at about 20 : 00 . 
 = = Prisoner rescue = = 
 At 17 : 00 , a few hours after Mucci approved Prince 's plan , the Rangers departed from Platero . White cloths were tied around their left arms to prevent " friendly fire " casualties . They crossed the Pampanga River and then , at 17 : 45 , Prince and Murphy 's men parted ways to surround the camp . Pajota , Joson , and their guerrilla forces each headed to their ambush sites . The Rangers under Prince made their way to the main gate and stopped about 700 yards ( 640 m ) from the camp to wait for nightfall and the aircraft distraction . 
 Meanwhile , a P @-@ 61 Black Widow from the <unk> Night Fighter Squadron had taken off at 18 : 00 , piloted by Capt. Kenneth Schrieber and 1st Lt. Bonnie Rucks . About 45 minutes before the attack , Schrieber cut the power to the left engine at 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) over the camp . He restarted it , creating a loud backfire , and repeated the procedure twice more , losing altitude to 200 feet ( 61 m ) . Pretending that his plane was crippled , Schrieber headed toward low hills , clearing them by a mere 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) . To the Japanese observers , it seemed the plane had crashed and they watched , waiting for a fiery explosion . Schrieber repeated this several times while also performing various aerobatic maneuvers . The ruse continued for twenty minutes , creating a diversion for the Rangers inching their way toward the camp on their bellies . Prince later commended the pilots ' actions : " The idea of an aerial decoy was a little unusual and honestly , I didn 't think it would work , not in a million years . But the pilot 's maneuvers were so skillful and deceptive that the diversion was complete . I don 't know where we would have been without it . " As the plane buzzed the camp , Lt. Carlos <unk> and his guerrillas along with a small number of Rangers cut the camp 's telephone lines to prevent communication with the large force stationed in Cabanatuan . 
 At 19 : 40 , the whole prison compound erupted into small arms fire after Murphy and his men fired on the guard towers and barracks . Within the first fifteen seconds , all of the camp 's guard towers and pillboxes were targeted and destroyed . Sgt. Ted Richardson rushed to shoot a padlock off of the main gate using his .45 pistol . The Rangers at the main gate maneuvered to bring the guard barracks and officer quarters under fire , while the ones at the rear eliminated the enemy near the prisoners ' huts and then proceeded with the evacuation . A bazooka team from F Company ran up the main road to a tin shack which the Scouts had told Mucci held tanks . Although Japanese soldiers attempted to escape with two trucks , the team was able to destroy the trucks and then the shack . 
 At the beginning of the gunfire , many of the prisoners thought that it was the Japanese beginning to massacre them . One prisoner stated that the attack sounded like " whistling slugs , Roman candles , and flaming meteors sailing over our heads . " Prisoners immediately hid in their shacks , latrines , and irrigation ditches . When the Rangers yelled to the POWs to come out and be rescued , many of the POWs feared that it was the Japanese attempting to trick them into being killed . Also , a substantial number resisted because the Rangers ' weapons and uniforms looked nothing like those of a few years earlier ; for example , the Rangers wore caps , earlier soldiers had M1917 Helmets and incidentally , the Japanese also wore caps . The Rangers were challenged by the POWs and asked who they were and where they were from . Rangers sometimes had to resort to physical force to remove the detainees , throwing or kicking them out . Some of the POWs weighed so little due to illness and malnourishment that several Rangers carried two men on their backs . Once out of the barracks , they were told by the Rangers to proceed to the main , or front gate . Prisoners were disoriented because the " main gate " meant the entrance to the American side of the camp . POWs collided with each other in the confusion but were eventually led out by the Rangers . 
 A lone Japanese soldier was able to fire off three mortar rounds toward the main gate . Although members of F Company quickly located the soldier and killed him , several Rangers , Scouts , and POWs were wounded in the attack . Battalion surgeon Capt. James Fisher was mortally injured in the stomach and was carried to the nearby village of <unk> . Scout Alfred Alfonso had a shrapnel wound to his abdomen . Scout Lt. Tom Rounsaville and Ranger Pvt. 1st Class Jack Peters were also wounded by the barrage . 
 A few seconds after Pajota and his men heard Murphy fire the first shot , they fired on the alerted Japanese contingent situated across the Cabu River . Pajota had earlier sent a demolitions expert to set charges on the unguarded bridge to go off at 19 : 45 . The bomb detonated at the designated time , and although it did not destroy the bridge , it formed a large hole over which tanks and other vehicles could not pass . Waves of Japanese troops rushed the bridge , but the V @-@ shaped choke point created by the Filipino guerrillas repulsed each attack . One guerrilla , who had been trained to use the bazooka only a few hours earlier by the Rangers , destroyed or disabled four tanks that were hiding behind a clump of trees . A group of Japanese soldiers made an effort to flank the ambush position by crossing the river away from the bridge , but the guerrillas spotted and eliminated them . 
 At 20 : 15 , the camp was secured from the Japanese and Prince fired his flare to signal the end of the assault . No gunfire had occurred for the last fifteen minutes . However , as the Rangers headed towards the meetup , Cpl. Roy Sweezy was shot twice by friendly fire , and later died . The Rangers and the weary , frail , and disease @-@ ridden POWs made their way to the appointed Pampanga River rendezvous , where a caravan of 26 carabao carts waited to transport them to Plateros , driven by local villagers organized by Pajota . At 20 : 40 , once Prince determined that everyone had crossed the Pampanga River , he fired his second flare to indicate to Pajota and Joson 's men to withdraw . The Scouts stayed behind at the meetup to survey the area for enemy retaliatory movements . Meanwhile , Pajota 's men continued to resist the attacking enemy until they could finally withdraw at 22 : 00 , when the Japanese forces stopped charging the bridge . Joson and his men met no opposition , and they returned to help escort the POWs . 
 Although the combat photographers were able to shoot images of the trek to and from the camp , they were unable to use their cameras during the night @-@ time raid , as the flashes would indicate their positions to the Japanese . One of the photographers reflected on the nighttime hindrance : " We felt like an eager soldier who had carried his rifle for long distances into one of the war 's most crucial battles , then never got a chance to fire it . " The Signal Corps photographers instead assisted with escorting the POWs out of the camp . 
 = = Trek to American lines = = 
 By 22 : 00 , the Rangers and ex @-@ POWs arrived at Plateros , where they rested for half an hour . A radio message was sent and received by Sixth Army at 23 : 00 that the mission had been a success , and that they were returning with the rescued prisoners to American lines . After a headcount , it was discovered that POW Edwin Rose , a deaf British soldier , was missing . Mucci dictated that none of the Rangers could be spared to search for him , so he sent several guerrillas to do so in the morning . It was later learned that Rose had fallen asleep in the latrine before the attack . Rose woke early the next morning , and realized the other prisoners were gone and that he was left behind . Nevertheless , he took the time to shave and put on his best clothes that he had been saving for the day he would be rescued . He walked out of the prison camp , thinking that he would soon be found and led to freedom . Sure enough , Rose was found by passing guerrillas . Arrangements were made for a tank destroyer unit to pick him up and transport him to a hospital . 
 In a makeshift hospital at Plateros , Scout Alfonso and Ranger Fisher were quickly put into surgery . The shrapnel was removed from Alfonso 's abdomen , and he was expected to recover if returned to American lines . Fisher 's shrapnel was also removed , but with limited supplies and widespread damage to both his stomach and intestines , it was decided more extensive surgery would need to be completed in an American hospital . Mucci ordered that an airstrip be built in a field next to Plateros so that a plane could airlift him to American lines . Some Scouts and freed prisoners stayed behind to construct the airstrip . 
 As the group left Plateros at 22 : 30 to trek back towards American lines , Pajota and his guerrillas continually sought out local villagers to provide additional carabao carts to transport the weakened prisoners . The majority of the prisoners had little or no clothing and shoes , and it became increasingly difficult for them to walk . When the group reached Balincarin , they had accumulated nearly 50 carts . Despite the convenience of using the carts , the carabao traveled at a sluggish pace , only 2 miles per hour ( 3 @.@ 2 km / h ) , which greatly reduced the speed of the return trip . By the time the group reached American lines , 106 carts were being used . 
 In addition to the tired former prisoners and civilians , the majority of the Rangers had only slept for five to six hours over the past three days . The soldiers frequently had hallucinations or fell asleep as they marched . Benzedrine was distributed by the medics to keep the Rangers active during the long march . One Ranger commented on the effect of the drug : " It felt like your eyes were popped open . You couldn 't have closed them if you wanted to . One pill was all I ever took — it was all I ever needed . " 
 P @-@ 61 Black Widows again helped the group by patrolling the path they took on its way back to American lines . At 21 : 00 , one of the aircraft destroyed five Japanese trucks and a tank located on a road 14 miles ( 23 km ) from Plateros that the group would later travel on . The group was also met by circling P @-@ 51 Mustangs that guarded them as they neared American lines . The freed prisoner George Steiner stated that they were " jubilant over the appearance of our airplanes , and the sound of their strafing was music to our ears " . 
 During one leg of the return trip , the men were stopped by the Hukbalahap , Filipino Communist guerrillas who hated both the Americans and the Japanese . They were also rivals to Pajota 's men . One of Pajota 's lieutenants conferred with the Hukbalahap and returned to tell Mucci that they were not allowed to pass through the village . Angered by the message , Mucci sent the lieutenant back to insist that pursuing Japanese forces would be coming . The lieutenant came back and told Mucci that only Americans could pass , and Pajota 's men had to stay . Both the Rangers and guerrillas were finally allowed through after an agitated Mucci told the lieutenant that he would call in an artillery barrage and level the whole village . In fact , Mucci 's radio was not working at that point . 
 At 08 : 00 on January 31 , Mucci 's radioman was able to finally contact Sixth Army headquarters . Mucci was directed to go to Talavera , a town captured by the Sixth Army 11 miles ( 18 km ) from Mucci 's current position . At Talavera , the freed soldiers and civilians boarded trucks and ambulances for the last leg of their journey home . The POWs were <unk> , and given hot showers and new clothes . At the POW hospital , one of the Rangers was reunited with his rescued father , who had been assumed killed in combat three years earlier . The Scouts and the remaining POWs who had stayed behind to get James Fisher onto a plane also encountered resistance by the Hukbalahap . After threatening the communist band , the Scouts and POWs were granted safe passage and reached Talavera on February 1 . 
 A few days after the raid , Sixth Army troops inspected the camp . They collected a large number of death certificates and cemetery layouts , as well as diaries , poems , and sketchbooks . The American soldiers also paid 5 pesos to each of the carabao cart drivers who had helped to evacuate the POWs . 
 = = Outcome and historical significance = = 
 The raid was considered successful — 489 POWs were liberated , along with 33 civilians . The total included 492 Americans , 23 British ( including Edwin Rose ) , three Dutch , two Norwegians , one Canadian , and one Filipino . The rescue , along with the liberation of Camp O 'Donnell the same day , allowed the prisoners to tell of the Bataan and Corregidor atrocities , which sparked a new wave of resolve for the war against Japan . Prince gave a great deal of credit for the success of the raid to others : " Any success we had was due not only to our efforts but to the Alamo Scouts and Air Force . The pilots ( Capt. Kenneth R. Schrieber and Lt. Bonnie B. Rucks ) of the plane that flew so low over the camp were incredibly brave men . " Some of the Rangers and Scouts went on bond drive tours around the United States and also met with President Franklin D. Roosevelt . In 1948 , the United States Congress created legislation which provided $ 1 ( $ 9 @.@ 85 today ) for each day the POWs had been held in a prisoner camp , including Cabanatuan . Two years later , Congress again approved an additional $ 1 @.@ 50 per day ( a combined total of $ 24 @.@ 59 today ) . 
 Estimates of the Japanese soldiers killed during the assault ranged from 530 to 1 @,@ 000 . The estimates include the 73 guards and approximately 150 traveling Japanese who stayed in the camp that night , as well as those killed by Pajota 's men attempting to cross the Cabu River . Several Americans died during and after the raid . A prisoner weakened by illness died of a heart attack as a Ranger carried him from the barracks to the main gate . The Ranger later recalled , " The excitement had been too much for him , I guess . It was really sad . He was only a hundred feet from the freedom he had not known for nearly three years . " Another prisoner died of illness just as the group had reached Talavera . Although Mucci had ordered that an airstrip be built in a field next to Plateros so that a plane could evacuate Fisher to get medical attention , it was never dispatched , and he died the next day . His last words were " Good luck on the way out . " The other Ranger killed during the raid was Sweezy , who was struck in the back by two rounds from friendly fire . Both Fisher and Sweezy are buried at Manila National Cemetery . Twenty of Pajota 's guerrillas were injured , as were two Scouts and two Rangers . 
 The American prisoners were quickly returned to the United States , most by plane . Those who were still sick or weakened remained at American hospitals to continue to recuperate . On February 11 , 1945 , 280 POWs left Leyte aboard the transport USS General A.E. Anderson bound for San Francisco via Hollandia , New Guinea . In an effort to counter the improved American morale , Japanese propaganda radio announcers broadcast to American soldiers that submarines , ships , and planes were hunting the General Anderson . The threats proved to be a bluff , and the ship safely arrived in San Francisco Bay on March 8 , 1945 . 
 News of the rescue was released to the public on February 2 . The feat was celebrated by MacArthur 's soldiers , Allied correspondents , and the American public , as the raid had touched an emotional chord among Americans concerned about the fate of the defenders of Bataan and Corregidor . Family members of the POWs were contacted by telegram to inform them of the rescue . News of the raid was broadcast on numerous radio outlets and newspaper front pages . The Rangers and POWs were interviewed to describe the conditions of the camp , as well as the events of the raid . The enthusiasm over the raid was later overshadowed by other Pacific events , including the Battle for Iwo Jima and the dropping of the atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki . The raid was soon followed by additional successful raids , such as the raid of Santo Tomas Civilian Internment Camp on February 3 , raid of <unk> Prison on February 4 , and the raid at Los Baños on February 23 . 
 A Sixth Army report indicated that the raid demonstrated " ... what patrols can accomplish in enemy territory by following the basic principles of scouting and patrolling , ' sneaking and peeping , ' [ the ] use of concealment , reconnaissance of routes from photographs and maps prior to the actual operation , ... and the coordination of all arms in the accomplishment of a mission . " MacArthur spoke about his reaction to the raid : " No incident of the campaign in the Pacific has given me such satisfaction as the release of the POWs at Cabanatuan . The mission was brilliantly successful . " He presented awards to the soldiers who participated in the raid on March 3 , 1945 . Although Mucci was nominated for the Medal of Honor , he and Prince both received Distinguished Service Crosses . Mucci was promoted to colonel and was given command of the 1st Regiment of the 6th Infantry Division . All other American officers and selected enlisted received Silver Stars . The remaining American enlisted men and the Filipino guerrilla officers were awarded Bronze Stars . Nellist , Rounsaville , and the other twelve Scouts received Presidential Unit Citations . 
 In late 1945 , the bodies of the American troops who died at the camp were exhumed , and the men moved to other cemeteries . Land was donated in the late 1990s by the Filipino government to create a memorial . The site of the Cabanatuan camp is now a park that includes a memorial wall listing the 2 @,@ 656 American prisoners who died there . The memorial was financed by former American POWs and veterans , and is maintained by the American Battle Monuments Commission . A joint resolution by Congress and President Ronald Reagan designated April 12 , 1982 as " American Salute to Cabanatuan Prisoner of War Memorial Day " . In Cabanatuan City , a hospital is named for guerrilla leader Eduardo Joson . 
 = = Depictions in film = = 
 Several films have focused on the raid , while also including archival footage of the POWs . Edward Dmytryk 's 1945 film Back to Bataan , starring John Wayne , opens by retelling the story of the raid on the Cabanatuan POW camp @-@ with real life film of the POW survivors . Based on the books The Great Raid on Cabanatuan and Ghost Soldiers , the 2005 John Dahl film The Great Raid focused on the raid intertwined with a love story . Prince served as a consultant on the film , and believed it depicted the raid accurately . Marty Katz conveyed his interest in producing the film : " This [ rescue ] was a massive operation that had very little chance of success . It 's like a Hollywood movie — it couldn 't really happen , but it did . That was why we were attracted to the material . " 
 = = Cabanatuan memorial images = = 
 = Cherry Valley massacre = 
 The Cherry Valley massacre was an attack by British and Iroquois forces on a fort and the village of Cherry Valley in eastern New York on November 11 , 1778 , during the American Revolutionary War . It has been described as one of the most horrific frontier massacres of the war . A mixed force of Loyalists , British soldiers , Seneca and Mohawks descended on Cherry Valley , whose defenders , despite warnings , were unprepared for the attack . During the raid , the Seneca in particular targeted non @-@ combatants , and reports state that 30 such individuals were slain , in addition to a number of armed defenders . 
 The raiders were under the overall command of Walter Butler , who exercised little authority over the Indians on the expedition . Historian Barbara Graymont describes Butler 's command of the expedition as " criminally incompetent " . The Seneca were angered by accusations that they had committed atrocities at the Battle of Wyoming , and the colonists ' recent destruction of their forward bases of operation at Unadilla , Onaquaga , and Tioga . Butler 's authority with the Indians was undermined by his poor treatment of Joseph Brant , the leader of the Mohawks . Butler repeatedly maintained , against accusations that he permitted the atrocities to take place , that he was powerless to restrain the Seneca . 
 During the campaigns of 1778 , Brant achieved an undeserved reputation for brutality . He was not present at Wyoming , although many thought he was , and actively sought to minimize the atrocities that took place at Cherry Valley . The massacre contributed to calls for reprisals , leading to the 1779 Sullivan Expedition which drove the Iroquois out of western New York . 
 = = Background = = 
 With the failure of British General John Burgoyne 's campaign to the Hudson after the Battles of Saratoga in October 1777 , the American Revolutionary War in upstate New York became a frontier war . The Mohawk Valley was especially targeted for its fertile soil and large supply of crops farmers were supplying Patriot troops . British leaders in the Province of Quebec supported Loyalist and Native American partisan fighters with supplies and armaments . During the winter of 1777 – 78 , Joseph Brant and other British @-@ allied Indians developed plans to attack frontier settlements in New York and Pennsylvania . In February 1778 Brant established a base of operations at Onaquaga ( present @-@ day Windsor , New York ) . He recruited a mix of Iroquois and Loyalists estimated to number between two and three hundred by the time he began his campaign in May . One of his objectives was to acquire provisions for his forces and those of John Butler , who was planning operations in the Susquehanna River valley . 
 Brant began his campaign in late May with a raid on Cobleskill , and raided other frontier communities throughout the summer . The local militia and Continental Army units defending the area were ineffective against the raiders , who typically escaped from the scene of a raid before defenders arrived in force . After Brant and some of Butler 's Rangers attacked German Flatts in September , the Americans organized a punitive expedition that destroyed the villages of Unadilla and Onaquaga in early October . 
 While Brant was active in the Mohawk valley , Butler descended with a large mixed force and raided the Wyoming Valley of northern Pennsylvania in early July . This action complicated affairs , for the Senecas in Butler 's force were accused of massacring noncombatants , and a number of Patriot militia violated their parole not long afterward , participating in a reprisal expedition against Tioga . The lurid propaganda associated with the accusations against the Seneca in particular angered them , as did the destruction of Unadilla , Onaquaga , and Tioga . The Wyoming Valley attack , even though Brant was not present , fueled among his opponents the view of him as a particularly brutal opponent . 
 Brant then joined forces with Captain Walter Butler ( the son of John Butler ) , leading two companies of Butler 's Rangers commanded by Captains John McDonell and William Caldwell for an attack on the major Schoharie Creek settlement of Cherry Valley . Butler 's forces also included 300 Senecas , probably led by either Cornplanter or Sayenqueraghta , and 50 British Army soldiers from the 8th Regiment of Foot . As the force moved toward Cherry Valley , Butler and Brant quarreled over Brant 's recruitment of Loyalists . Butler was unhappy at Brant 's successes in this sphere , and threatened to withhold provisions from Brant 's Loyalist volunteers . Ninety of them ended up leaving the expedition , and Brant himself was on the verge of doing so when his Indian supporters convinced him to stay . The dispute did not sit well with the Indian forces , and may have undermined Butler 's tenuous authority over them . 
 = = Massacre = = 
 Cherry Valley had a palisaded fort ( constructed after Brant 's raid on Cobleskill ) that surrounded the village meeting house . It was garrisoned by 300 soldiers of the 7th Massachusetts Regiment of the Continental Army commanded by Colonel Ichabod Alden . Alden and his command staff were alerted by November 8 through Oneida spies that the Butler – Brant force was moving against Cherry Valley . However , he failed to take elementary precautions , continuing to occupy a headquarters ( the house of a settler named Wells ) some 400 yards ( 370 m ) from the fort . 
 Butler 's force arrived near Cherry Valley late on November 10 , and established a cold camp to avoid detection . Reconnaissance of the town identified the weaknesses of Alden 's arrangements , and the raiders decided to send one force against Alden 's headquarters and another against the fort . Butler extracted promises from the Indians in the party that they would not harm noncombatants in a council held that night . 
 The attack began early on the morning of November 11 . Some overeager Indians spoiled the surprise by firing on settlers cutting wood nearby . One of them escaped , raising the alarm . Little Beard led some of the Senecas to surround the Wells house , while the main body surrounded the fort . The attackers killed at least sixteen officers and troops of the quarters guards , including Alden , who was cut down while he was running from the Wells house to the fort . Most accounts say Alden was within reach of the gates , only to stop and try to shoot his pursuer , who may have been Joseph Brant . His wet pistol repeatedly misfired and he was killed by a thrown tomahawk hitting him in the forehead . Lt. Col. William Stacy , second in command , also quartered at the Wells house , was taken prisoner . Stacy 's son Benjamin and cousin Rufus Stacy ran through a hail of bullets to reach the fort from the house ; Stacy 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Gideon Day was killed . Those attacking the Wells house eventually gained entry , leading to hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat inside . After killing most of the soldiers stationed there , the Senecas slaughtered the entire Wells household , twelve in all . 
 The raiders ' attack on the fort was unsuccessful — lacking heavy weapons , they were unable to make any significant impressions on its stockade walls . The fort was then guarded by the Loyalists while the Indians rampaged through the rest of the settlement . Not a single house was left standing , and the Senecas , seeking revenge , were reported to have slaughtered anyone they encountered . Butler and Brant attempted to restrain their actions but were unsuccessful . Brant in particular was dismayed to learn that a number of families who were well known to him and whom he had counted as friends had borne the brunt of the Seneca rampage , including the Wells , Campbell , Dunlop , and Clyde families . 
 Lt. William McKendry , a quartermaster in Colonel Alden 's regiment , described the attack in his journal : 
 Immediately came on 442 Indians from the Five Nations , 200 Tories under the command of one Col. Butler and Capt. Brant ; attacked headquarters ; killed Col. Alden ; took Col. Stacy prisoner ; attacked Fort Alden ; after three hours retreated without success of taking the fort . 
 McKendry identified the fatalities of the massacre as Colonel Alden , thirteen other soldiers , and thirty civilian inhabitants . Most of the slain soldiers had been at the Wells house . 
 Accounts surrounding the capture of Lt. Col. Stacy report that he was about to be killed , but Brant intervened . " [ Brant ] saved the life of Lieut . Col Stacy , who [ ... ] was made prisoner when Col. Alden was killed . It is said Stacy was a freemason , and as such made an appeal to Brant , and was spared . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The next morning Butler sent Brant and some rangers back into the village to complete its destruction . The raiders took 70 captives , many of them women and children . About 40 of these Butler managed to have released , but the rest were distributed among their captors ' villages until they were exchanged . Lt. Col. Stacy was taken to Fort Niagara as a prisoner of the British . 
 A Mohawk chief , in justifying the action at Cherry Valley , wrote to an American officer that " you Burned our Houses , which makes us and our Brothers , the Seneca Indians <unk> , so that we destroyed , men , women and Children at <unk> . " The Seneca " declared they would no more be falsely accused , or fight the Enemy twice " ( the latter being an indication that they would refuse quarter in the future ) . Butler reported that " notwithstanding my utmost <unk> and <unk> to save the Women and Children , I could not prevent some of them falling unhappy Victims to the Fury of the Savages , " but also that he spent most of his time guarding the fort during the raid . Quebec 's Governor Frederick Haldimand was so upset at Butler 's inability to control his forces that he refused to see him , writing " such indiscriminate vengeance taken even upon the treacherous and cruel enemy they are engaged against is useless and disreputable to themselves , as it is contrary to the dispositions and maxims of the King whose cause they are fighting . " Butler continued to insist in later writings that he was not at fault for the events of the day . 
 The violent frontier war of 1778 brought calls for the Continental Army to take action . Cherry Valley , along with the accusations of murder of non @-@ combatants at Wyoming , helped pave the way for the launch of the 1779 Sullivan Expedition , commissioned by commander @-@ in @-@ chief Major General George Washington and led by Major General John Sullivan . The expedition destroyed over 40 Iroquois villages in their homelands of central and western New York and drove the women and children into refugee camps at Fort Niagara . It failed , however , to stop the frontier war , which continued with renewed severity in 1780 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A monument was dedicated at Cherry Valley on August 15 , 1878 , at the centennial anniversary of the massacre . Former New York Governor Horatio Seymour delivered a dedication address at the monument to an audience of about 10 @,@ 000 persons , saying : 
 I am here today not only to show reverence for those dead patriots , but to offer my respects and heartfelt gratitude to the living descendants of those illustrious persons of the early settlements , who have erected this memorial stone . It is to be hoped that their example will be copied ; that the report of these commemorative exercises will move others to like acts of pious duty . Let every son of this soil uncover reverently as this monument is unveiled , and do reverence to their sturdy patriotism , made strong by their grand faith , their trials , and their sufferings , and show that the blood of innocent children , of wives , of sisters , of mothers , and of brave men , was not shed in vain . Let us show the world that 100 years have added to the value of that noble sacrifice . Thus we shall leave this sacred spot better men and women , with a higher and nobler purpose of life than that which animated us when we entered this domain of the dead . 
 Years after the massacre , Benjamin Stacy 's home village of New Salem , Massachusetts celebrated the annual Old Home Day holiday with a Benjamin Stacy footrace , honoring his escape at Cherry Valley . 
 = Ohio State Route 716 = 
 State Route 716 ( SR 716 ) is a state highway in the western part of the U.S. state of Ohio . Its southern terminus is at SR 705 in the village of Osgood in northeastern Darke County . The northern terminus of SR 716 is at SR 274 in the village of Chickasaw in southeastern Mercer County . For its entire length , SR 716 runs parallel to , and approximately four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the east of , U.S. Route 127 . 
 The highway was assigned in 1937 on a routing from SR 705 in Osgood to an unnumbered highway in Franklin Township . The route was truncated to its current northern terminus in 1973 . SR 716 has remained intact ever since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 716 begins at an intersection with SR 705 in the Darke County village of Osgood . The highway heads northward through downtown Osgood and then into the rural regions , which includes spontaneous residential homes and fields . Not far after Osgood , SR 716 intersects with Township Road 7 ( Darke @-@ Mercer County Line Road ) , which runs along the county line . The highway crosses the line into Mercer County and continues northward through rural areas . There is an intersection with a local road , Indian Trail Road , soon after . 
 The highway remains mainly unchanged for a little while until it nears the Marion Township village of Maria Stein . It then passes Marion Local High School . In Maria Stein , it intersects SR 119 . Through Maria Stein , the highway is more urbanized , with more homes and commercial buildings surrounding the highway . However , this is only for a short time , as SR 716 leaves Maria Stein after the intersection with SR 119 . The route continues northward for a short distance into Chickasaw , where it terminates at SR 274 . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 716 was established in 1937 . Its original path consisted of its entire current routing , SR 274 between Chickasaw and one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of Chickasaw in Marion Township , Mercer County , and a currently unnumbered road from Marion Township to one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) east of Montezuma in Franklin Township . 
 In 1973 , SR 716 was scaled back on the north end to its current northern terminus at SR 274 in Chickasaw . The road went westward at the intersection with SR 274 , and went on a short concurrency before turning off for the north . It continued to its then northern terminus . The former stretch of SR 716 from Chickasaw to Marion Township was re @-@ numbered as SR 274 , and the stretch from Marion Township to Franklin Township was deleted from the state highway system . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Battle of Bosworth Field = 
 The Battle of Bosworth Field ( or Battle of Bosworth ) was the last significant battle of the Wars of the Roses , the civil war between the Houses of Lancaster and York that raged across England in the latter half of the 15th century . Fought on 22 August 1485 , the battle was won by the Lancastrians . Their leader Henry Tudor , Earl of Richmond , by his victory became the first English monarch of the Tudor dynasty . His opponent , Richard III , the last king of the House of York , was killed in the battle . Historians consider Bosworth Field to mark the end of the Plantagenet dynasty , making it a defining moment of English and Welsh history . 
 Richard 's reign began in 1483 . At the request of his brother Edward IV , Richard was acting as Lord Protector for his son Edward V. Richard had Parliament declare Edward V illegitimate and ineligible for the throne , and Richard took it for himself . Richard lost popularity when the boy and his younger brother disappeared after Richard incarcerated them in the Tower of London , and Richard 's support was further eroded by the popular belief that he was implicated in the death of his wife . Across the English Channel in Brittany , Henry Tudor , a descendant of the greatly diminished House of Lancaster , seized on Richard 's difficulties so that he could challenge Richard 's claim to the throne . Henry 's first attempt to invade England was frustrated by a storm in 1483 , but at his second attempt he arrived unopposed on 7 August 1485 on the southwest coast of Wales . Marching inland , Henry gathered support as he made for London . Richard mustered his troops and intercepted Henry 's army south of Market Bosworth in Leicestershire . Thomas , Lord Stanley , and Sir William Stanley brought a force to the battlefield , but held back while they decided which side it would be more advantageous to support . 
 Richard divided his army , which outnumbered Henry 's , into three groups ( or " battles " ) . One was assigned to the Duke of Norfolk and another to the Earl of Northumberland . Henry kept most of his force together and placed it under the command of the experienced Earl of Oxford . Richard 's vanguard , commanded by Norfolk , attacked but struggled against Oxford 's men , and some of Norfolk 's troops fled the field . Northumberland took no action when signalled to assist his king , so Richard gambled everything on a charge across the battlefield to kill Henry and end the fight . Seeing the king 's knights separated from his army , the Stanleys intervened ; Sir William led his men to Henry 's aid , surrounding and killing Richard . After the battle , Henry was crowned king below an oak tree in nearby Stoke Golding , now a residential garden . 
 Henry hired chroniclers to portray his reign favourably ; the Battle of Bosworth was popularised to represent the Tudor dynasty as the start of a new age . From the 15th to 18th centuries the battle was glamorised as a victory of good over evil . The climax of William Shakespeare 's play Richard III provides a focal point for critics in later film adaptations . The exact site of the battle is disputed because of the lack of conclusive data , and memorials have been erected at different locations . In 1974 , the Bosworth Battlefield Heritage Centre was built on a site that has since been challenged by several scholars and historians . In October 2009 , a team of researchers , who had performed geological surveys and archaeological digs in the area from 2003 , suggested a location two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) southwest of Ambion Hill . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the 15th century , civil war raged across England as the Houses of York and Lancaster fought each other for the English throne . In 1471 , the Yorkists defeated their rivals in the battles of Barnet and Tewkesbury . The Lancastrian King Henry VI and his only son , Edward of Lancaster , died in the aftermath of the Battle of Tewkesbury . Their deaths left the House of Lancaster with no direct claimants to the throne . The Yorkist king , Edward IV , was in complete control of England . He attainted those who refused to submit to his rule , such as Jasper Tudor and his nephew Henry , naming them traitors and confiscating their lands . The Tudors tried to flee to France but strong winds forced them to land in Brittany , then a semi @-@ independent duchy , where they were taken into the custody of Duke Francis II . Henry 's mother , Lady Margaret Beaufort , was a great @-@ granddaughter of John of Gaunt , uncle of King Richard II and father of King Henry IV . The Beauforts were originally bastards , but Henry IV legitimised them on the condition that their descendants were not eligible to inherit the throne . Henry Tudor , the only remaining Lancastrian noble with a trace of the royal bloodline , had a weak claim to the throne , and Edward regarded him as " a nobody " . The Duke of Brittany , however , viewed Henry as a valuable tool to bargain for England 's aid in conflicts with France and kept the Tudors under his protection . 
 Edward IV died twelve years after Tewkesbury on 9 April 1483 . His twelve @-@ year @-@ old elder son succeeded him as King Edward V ; the younger son , nine @-@ year @-@ old Richard of Shrewsbury , was next in line to the throne . Edward V was too young to rule and a Royal Council was established to rule the country until the king 's coming of age . The royal court was worried when they learned that the Woodvilles , relatives of Edward IV 's widow Elizabeth , were plotting to seize control of the council . Having offended many in their quest for wealth and power , the Woodville family was not popular . To frustrate the Woodvilles ' ambitions , Lord Hastings and other members of the council turned to the new king 's uncle — Richard , Duke of Gloucester , brother of Edward IV . The courtiers urged Gloucester to assume the role of Protector quickly , as had been previously requested by his now dead brother . On 29 April , Gloucester , accompanied by a contingent of guards and Henry Stafford , 2nd Duke of Buckingham , took Edward V into custody and arrested several prominent members of the Woodville family . After bringing the young king to London , Gloucester had two of the Woodvilles ( Anthony Woodville , 2nd Earl Rivers and Richard Grey ) executed , without trial , on charges of treason . 
 On 13 June , Gloucester accused Hastings of plotting with the Woodvilles and had him beheaded . Nine days later , Gloucester convinced Parliament to declare the marriage between Edward IV and Elizabeth illegal , rendering their children illegitimate and disqualifying them from the throne . With his brother 's children out of the way , he was next in the line of succession and was proclaimed King Richard III on 26 June . The timing and extrajudicial nature of the deeds done to obtain the throne for Richard won him no popularity , and rumours that spoke ill of the new king spread throughout England . After they were declared bastards , the two princes were confined in the Tower of London and never seen in public again . 
 Discontent with Richard 's actions manifested itself in the summer after he took control of the country , as a conspiracy emerged to displace him from the throne . The rebels were mostly loyalists to Edward IV , who saw Richard as a usurper . Their plans were co @-@ ordinated by a Lancastrian , Henry 's mother Lady Margaret , who was promoting her son as a candidate for the throne . The highest @-@ ranking conspirator was Buckingham . No chronicles tell of the duke 's motive in joining the plot , although historian Charles Ross proposes that Buckingham was trying to distance himself from a king who was becoming increasingly unpopular with the people . Michael Jones and Malcolm Underwood suggest that Margaret deceived Buckingham into thinking the rebels supported him to be king . 
 The plan was to stage uprisings within a short time in southern and western England , overwhelming Richard 's forces . Buckingham would support the rebels by invading from Wales , while Henry came in by sea . Bad timing and weather wrecked the plot . An uprising in Kent started 10 days prematurely , alerting Richard to muster the royal army and take steps to put down the insurrections . Richard 's spies informed him of Buckingham 's activities , and the king 's men captured and destroyed the bridges across the River Severn . When Buckingham and his army reached the river , they found it swollen and impossible to cross because of a violent storm that broke on 15 October . Buckingham was trapped and had no safe place to retreat ; his Welsh enemies seized his home castle after he had set forth with his army . The duke abandoned his plans and fled to Wem , where he was betrayed by his servant and arrested by Richard 's men . On 2 November 1483 , he was executed . Henry had attempted a landing on 10 October ( or 19 October ) , but his fleet was scattered by a storm . He reached the coast of England ( at either Plymouth or Poole ) , and a group of soldiers hailed him to come ashore . They were , in truth , Richard 's men , prepared to capture Henry once he set foot on English soil . Henry was not deceived and returned to Brittany , abandoning the invasion . Without Buckingham or Henry , the rebellion was easily crushed by Richard . 
 The survivors of the failed uprisings fled to Brittany , where they openly supported Henry 's claim to the throne . At Christmas , Henry Tudor swore an oath to marry Edward IV 's daughter , Elizabeth of York , to unite the warring houses of York and Lancaster . Henry 's rising prominence made him a great threat to Richard , and the Yorkist king made several overtures to the Duke of Brittany to surrender the young Lancastrian . Francis refused , holding out for the possibility of better terms from Richard . In mid @-@ 1484 , Francis was incapacitated by illness and while recuperating , his treasurer , Pierre <unk> , took over the reins of government . <unk> reached an agreement with Richard to send back Henry and his uncle in exchange for military and financial aid . John Morton , a bishop of Flanders , learned of the scheme and warned the Tudors , who fled to France . The French court allowed them to stay ; the Tudors were useful pawns to ensure that Richard 's England did not interfere with French plans to annexe Brittany . On 16 March 1485 , Richard 's queen , Anne Neville , died , and rumours spread across the country that she was murdered to pave the way for Richard to marry his niece , Elizabeth . The gossip alienated Richard from some of his northern supporters , and upset Henry across the English Channel . The loss of Elizabeth 's hand in marriage could unravel the alliance between Henry 's supporters who were Lancastrians and those who were loyalists to Edward IV . Anxious to secure his bride , Henry assembled approximately 2 @,@ 000 men and set sail from France on 1 August . 
 = = Factions = = 
 By the 15th century , English chivalric ideas of selfless service to the king had been corrupted . Armed forces were mostly raised through musters in individual estates ; every able @-@ bodied man had to respond to his lord 's call to arms , and each noble had exclusive authority over his militia . Although a king could raise personal militia from his lands , he could only muster a significantly large army through the support of his nobles . Richard , like his predecessors , had to win over these men by granting gifts and maintaining cordial relationships . Powerful nobles could demand greater incentives to remain on the liege 's side or else they might turn against him . Three groups , each with its own agenda , stood on Bosworth Field : Richard III and his Yorkist army ; his challenger , Henry Tudor , who championed the Lancastrian cause ; and the fence @-@ sitting Stanleys . 
 = = = Yorkist = = = 
 Small and slender , Richard III did not have the robust physique associated with many of his Plantagenet predecessors . However , he enjoyed very rough sports and activities that were considered manly . His performances on the battlefield impressed his brother greatly , and he became Edward 's right @-@ hand man . During the 1480s , Richard defended the northern borders of England . In 1482 , Edward charged him to lead an army into Scotland with the aim of replacing King James III with the Duke of Albany . Richard 's army broke through the Scottish defences and occupied the capital , Edinburgh , but Albany decided to give up his claim to the throne in return for the post of Lieutenant General of Scotland . As well as obtaining a guarantee that the Scottish government would concede territories and diplomatic benefits to the English crown , Richard 's campaign retook the town of Berwick @-@ upon @-@ Tweed , which the Scots had conquered in 1460 . Edward was not satisfied by these gains , which , according to Ross , could have been greater if Richard had been resolute enough to capitalise on the situation while in control of Edinburgh . In her analysis of Richard 's character , Christine Carpenter sees him as a soldier who was more used to taking orders than giving them . However , he was not averse to displaying his militaristic streak ; on ascending the throne he made known his desire to lead a crusade against " not only the Turks , but all [ his ] foes " . 
 Richard 's most loyal subject was John Howard , 1st Duke of Norfolk . The duke had served Richard 's brother for many years and had been one of Edward IV 's closer confidants . He was a military veteran , having fought in the Battle of Towton in 1461 and served as Hastings ' deputy at Calais in 1471 . Ross speculates that he may have borne a grudge against Edward for depriving him of a fortune . Norfolk was due to inherit a share of the wealthy Mowbray estate on the death of eight @-@ year @-@ old Anne de Mowbray , the last of her family . However , Edward convinced Parliament to circumvent the law of inheritance and transfer the estate to his younger son , who was married to Anne . Consequently , Howard supported Richard III in deposing Edward 's sons , for which he received the dukedom of Norfolk and his original share of the Mowbray estate . 
 Henry Percy , 4th Earl of Northumberland , also supported Richard 's seizure of the throne of England . The Percys were loyal Lancastrians , but Edward IV eventually won the earl 's allegiance . Northumberland had been captured and imprisoned by the Yorkists in 1461 , losing his titles and estates ; however , Edward released him eight years later and restored his earldom . From that time , Northumberland served the Yorkist crown , helping to defend northern England and maintain its peace . Initially the earl had issues with Richard III as Edward groomed his brother to be the leading power of the north . Northumberland was mollified when he was promised he would be the Warden of the East March , a position that was formerly hereditary for the Percys . He served under Richard during the 1482 invasion of Scotland , and the allure of being in a position to dominate the north of England if Richard went south to assume the crown was his likely motivation for supporting Richard 's bid for kingship . However , after becoming king , Richard began moulding his nephew , John de la Pole , 1st Earl of Lincoln , to manage the north , passing over Northumberland for the position . According to Carpenter , although the earl was amply compensated , he despaired of any possibility of advancement under Richard . 
 = = = Lancastrian = = = 
 Henry Tudor was unfamiliar with the arts of war and a stranger to the land he was trying to conquer . He spent the first fourteen years of his life in Wales and the next fourteen in Brittany and France . Slender but strong and decisive , Henry lacked a penchant for battle and was not much of a warrior ; chroniclers such as Polydore Vergil and ambassadors like Pedro de Ayala found him more interested in commerce and finance . Having not fought in any battles , Henry recruited several experienced veterans on whom he could rely for military advice and the command of his armies . John de Vere , 13th Earl of Oxford , was Henry 's principal military commander . He was adept in the arts of war . At the Battle of Barnet , he commanded the Lancastrian right wing and routed the division opposing him . However , as a result of confusion over identities , Oxford 's group came under friendly fire from the Lancastrian main force and retreated from the field . The earl fled abroad and continued his fight against the Yorkists , raiding shipping and eventually capturing the island fort of St Michael 's Mount in 1473 . He surrendered after receiving no aid or reinforcement , but in 1484 escaped from prison and joined Henry 's court in France , bringing along his erstwhile gaoler Sir James Blount . Oxford 's presence raised morale in Henry 's camp and troubled Richard III . 
 = = = Stanleys = = = 
 In the early stages of the Wars of the Roses , the Stanleys of Cheshire had been predominantly Lancastrians . Sir William Stanley , however , was a staunch Yorkist supporter , fighting in the Battle of Blore Heath in 1459 and helping Hastings to put down uprisings against Edward IV in 1471 . When Richard took the crown , Sir William showed no inclination to turn against the new king , refraining from joining Buckingham 's rebellion , for which he was amply rewarded . Sir William 's elder brother , Thomas Stanley , 2nd Baron Stanley , was not as steadfast . By 1485 , he had served three kings , namely Henry VI , Edward IV , and Richard III . Lord Stanley 's skilled political manoeuvrings — vacillating between opposing sides until it was clear who would be the winner — gained him high positions ; he was Henry 's chamberlain and Edward 's steward . His non @-@ committal stance , until the crucial point of a battle , earned him the loyalty of his men , who felt he would not needlessly send them to their deaths . 
 Even though Lord Stanley had served as Edward IV 's steward , his relations with the king 's brother , the eventual Richard III , were not cordial . The two had conflicts that erupted into violence around March 1470 . Furthermore , having taken Lady Margaret as his second wife in June 1472 , Stanley was Henry Tudor 's stepfather , a relationship which did nothing to win him Richard 's favour . Despite these differences , Stanley did not join Buckingham 's revolt in 1483 . When Richard executed those conspirators who had been unable to flee England , he spared Lady Margaret . However , he declared her titles forfeit and transferred her estates to Stanley 's name , to be held in trust for the Yorkist crown . Richard 's act of mercy was calculated to reconcile him with Stanley , but it may have been to no avail — Carpenter has identified a further cause of friction in Richard 's intention to reopen an old land dispute that involved Thomas Stanley and the Harrington family . Edward IV had ruled the case in favour of Stanley in 1473 , but Richard planned to overturn his brother 's ruling and give the wealthy estate to the <unk> . Immediately before the Battle of Bosworth , being wary of Stanley , Richard took his son , Lord Strange , as hostage to discourage him from joining Henry . 
 = = Crossing the Channel and through Wales = = 
 The attacking force consisted of around 500 exiled Welsh and Englishmen . The history of one " John Major " ( published in 1521 ) said Charles VIII of France had granted Henry 5 @,@ 000 men of whom 1 @,@ 000 were Scots , headed by Sir Alexander Bruce . No mention of Scottish soldiers was made by subsequent English historians . After the battle , Bruce was given an annuity of £ 20 by Henry for his " faithful services " . How many Frenchmen actually sailed is unknown , but the historian Chris Skidmore estimates over half of Henry 's armed fleet . The Crowland Chronicler also recorded that Henry 's troops were " as much French as English " . Many of these French mercenaries were from the garrison of Phillipe de <unk> , Lord of <unk> . <unk> recorded that these included " some 3 @,@ 000 of the most unruly men in Normandy " . This is partly the reason why they were taken up the coast of Wales , under Henry 's stern command , keeping them well apart from the Welsh soldiers under Rhys ' command . 
 Henry 's crossing of the English Channel in 1485 was without incident . Thirty ships sailed from <unk> on 1 August and , with fair winds behind them , landed in his native Wales , at Mill Bay ( near Dale ) on the north side of Milford Haven on 7 August , easily capturing nearby Dale Castle . His long awaited arrival had been hailed by contemporary Welsh bards such as Dafydd Ddu and Gruffydd ap Dafydd as the true prince and " the youth of Brittany defeating the Saxons " in order to bring their country back to glory . Mill Bay had been chosen as it was completely hidden from view and there was no resistance by the cohort of Richard 's men stationed at Dale where Henry and his men spent the first night . 
 In the morning they marched to Haverfordwest , the county town of Pembrokeshire , 12 miles away and were received " with the utmost goodwill of all " . Here , the Welshman Arnold Butler ( who had met Henry in Brittany ) announced that " the whole of Pembrokeshire was prepared to serve him " . Butler 's closest friend was Rhys ap Thomas . That afternoon , Henry and his troops headed north towards Cardigan and pitched camp " at the fifth milestone towards Cardigan " where they were joined by Gruffydd Rede with a band of soldiers and John Morgan of Tredegar . The following day , 9 August , they passed through Bwlch @-@ y @-@ <unk> and over the Preseli mountains and to <unk> Llwyd south of Cilgwyn . 
 Richard 's lieutenant in South Wales , Sir Walter Herbert , failed to move against Henry , and two of his officers , Richard Griffith and Evan Morgan , deserted to Henry with their men . 
 However , the most important defector to Henry in this early stage of the campaign was probably Rhys ap Thomas , who was the leading figure in West Wales . Richard had appointed Rhys Lieutenant in West Wales for his refusal to join Buckingham 's rebellion , asking that he surrender his son Gruffydd ap Rhys ap Thomas as surety , although by some accounts Rhys had managed to evade this condition . However , Henry successfully courted Rhys , offering the lieutenancy of all Wales in exchange for his fealty . Henry marched via Aberystwyth while Rhys followed a more southerly route , recruiting 2 @,@ 000 Welshmen en route to swell Henry 's army when they reunited at Cefn <unk> , Welshpool , thus ensuring that the majority of Henry 's army in the ensuing battle would be Welsh . By 15 or 16 August , Henry and his men had crossed the English border , making for the town of Shrewsbury . 
 = = Shrewsbury : the gateway to England = = 
 Since 22 June 1485 Richard had been aware of Henry 's impending invasion , and had ordered his lords to maintain a high level of readiness . News of Henry 's landing reached Richard on 11 August , but it took three to four days for his messengers to notify his lords of their king 's mobilisation . On 16 August , the Yorkist army started to gather ; Norfolk set off for Leicester , the assembly point , that night . The city of York , a traditional stronghold of Richard 's family , asked the king for instructions , and receiving a reply three days later sent 80 men to join the king . Simultaneously Northumberland , whose northern territory was the most distant from the capital , had gathered his men and ridden to Leicester . 
 Although London was his goal , Henry did not move directly towards the city . After resting in Shrewsbury , his forces went eastwards and picked up Sir Gilbert Talbot and other English allies , including deserters from Richard 's forces . Although its size had increased substantially since the landing , Henry 's army was not yet large enough to contend with the numbers Richard could muster . Henry 's pace through Staffordshire was slow , delaying the confrontation with Richard so that he could gather more recruits to his cause . Henry had been communicating on friendly terms with the Stanleys for some time before setting foot in England , and the Stanleys had mobilised their forces on hearing of Henry 's landing . They ranged themselves ahead of Henry 's march through the English countryside , meeting twice in secret with Henry as he moved through Staffordshire . At the second of these , at Atherstone in Warwickshire , they conferred " in what sort to arraign battle with King Richard , whom they heard to be not far off " . On 21 August , the Stanleys were making camp on the slopes of a hill north of Dadlington , while Henry encamped his army at White Moors to the northwest of their camp . 
 On 20 August , Richard reached Leicester , joining Norfolk . Northumberland arrived the following day . The royal army proceeded westwards to intercept Henry 's march on London . Passing Sutton Cheney , Richard moved his army towards Ambion Hill — which he thought would be of tactical value — and made camp on it . Richard 's sleep was not peaceful and , according to the Croyland Chronicle , in the morning his face was " more livid and ghastly than usual " . 
 = = Engagement = = 
 The Yorkist army , numbering about 10 @,@ 000 men , deployed on the hilltop along the ridgeline from west to east . Norfolk 's group ( or " battle " in the parlance of the time ) of spearmen stood on the right flank , protecting the cannon and about 1 @,@ 200 archers . Richard 's group , comprising 3 @,@ 000 infantry , formed the centre . Northumberland 's men guarded the left flank ; he had approximately 4 @,@ 000 men , many of them mounted . Standing on the hilltop , Richard had a wide , unobstructed view of the area . He could see the Stanleys and their 6 @,@ 000 men holding positions on and around Dadlington Hill , while to the southwest was Henry 's army . 
 Henry had very few Englishmen — fewer than a thousand — in his army . Between three and five hundred of them were exiles who had fled from Richard 's rule , and the remainder were Talbot 's men and recent deserters from Richard 's army . Historian John Mackie believes that 1 @,@ 800 French mercenaries , led by Philibert de <unk> , formed the core of Henry 's army . John Mair , writing thirty @-@ five years after the battle , claimed that this force contained a significant Scottish component , and this claim is accepted by some modern writers , but Mackie reasons that the French would not have released their elite Scottish knights and archers , and concludes that there were probably few Scottish troops in the army , although he accepts the presence of captains like Bernard Stewart , Lord of <unk> . In total , Henry 's army was around 5 @,@ 000 strong , a substantial portion of which was made up by the recruits picked up in Wales . Rhys ap Thomas 's Welsh force was described as being large enough to have " annihilated " the rest of Henry 's force . 
 In their interpretations of the vague mentions of the battle in the old text , historians placed areas near the foot of Ambion Hill as likely regions where the two armies clashed , and thought up possible scenarios of the engagement . In their recreations of the battle , Henry started by moving his army towards Ambion Hill where Richard and his men stood . As Henry 's army advanced past the marsh at the southwestern foot of the hill , Richard sent a message to Stanley , threatening to execute his son , Lord Strange , if Stanley did not join the attack on Henry immediately . Stanley replied that he had other sons . Incensed , Richard gave the order to behead Strange but his officers temporised , saying that battle was imminent , and it would be more convenient to carry out the execution afterwards . Henry had also sent messengers to Stanley asking him to declare his allegiance . The reply was evasive — the Stanleys would " naturally " come , after Henry had given orders to his army and arranged them for battle . Henry had no choice but to confront Richard 's forces alone . 
 Well aware of his own military inexperience , Henry handed command of his army to Oxford and retired to the rear with his bodyguards . Oxford , seeing the vast line of Richard 's army strung along the ridgeline , decided to keep his men together instead of splitting them into the traditional three battles : vanguard , centre , and rearguard . He ordered the troops to stray no further than 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) from their banners , fearing that they would become enveloped . Individual groups clumped together , forming a single large mass flanked by horsemen on the wings . 
 The Lancastrians were harassed by Richard 's cannon as they manoeuvred around the marsh , seeking firmer ground . Once Oxford and his men were clear of the marsh , Norfolk 's battle and several contingents of Richard 's group , under the command of Sir Robert Brackenbury , started to advance . <unk> of arrows showered both sides as they closed . Oxford 's men proved the steadier in the ensuing hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat ; they held their ground and several of Norfolk 's men fled the field . Recognising that his force was at a disadvantage , Richard signalled for Northumberland to assist but Northumberland 's group showed no signs of movement . Historians , such as Horrox and Pugh , believe Northumberland chose not to aid his king for personal reasons . Ross doubts the aspersions cast on Northumberland 's loyalty , suggesting instead that Ambion Hill 's narrow ridge hindered him from joining the battle . The earl would have had to either go through his allies or execute a wide flanking move — near impossible to perform given the standard of drill at the time — to engage Oxford 's men . 
 At this juncture Richard saw Henry at some distance behind his main force . Seeing this , Richard decided to end the fight quickly by killing the enemy commander . He led a charge of mounted men around the melee and tore into Henry 's group ; several accounts state that Richard 's force numbered 800 – 1000 knights , but Ross says it was more likely that Richard was accompanied only by his household men and closest friends . Richard killed Henry 's standard @-@ bearer Sir William Brandon in the initial charge and unhorsed burly John Cheyne , Edward IV 's former standard @-@ bearer , with a blow to the head from his broken lance . French mercenaries in Henry 's retinue related how the attack had caught them off guard and that Henry sought protection by dismounting and concealing himself among them to present less of a target . Henry made no attempt to engage in combat himself . 
 Oxford had left a small reserve of Pike @-@ equipped men with Henry . They slowed the pace of Richard 's mounted charge and bought Tudor some critical time . The remainder of Henry 's bodyguards surrounded their master and succeeded in keeping him away from the Yorkist king . On seeing Richard embroiled with Henry 's men and separated from his main force , William Stanley made his move . He led his men into the fight at Henry 's side . Outnumbered , Richard 's group was surrounded and gradually pressed back . Richard 's force was driven several hundred yards away from Tudor , near to the edge of a marsh . The king 's horse lost its footing and toppled into it . Richard gathered himself and rallied his dwindling followers , supposedly refusing to retreat : " God forbid that I retreat one step . I will either win the battle as a king , or die as one . " In the fighting Richard 's banner man — Sir Percival Thirlwall — lost his legs but held the Yorkist banner aloft until he was killed . 
 Polydore Vergil , Henry Tudor 's official historian , recorded that " King Richard , alone , was killed fighting manfully in the thickest press of his enemies " . Richard had come within a sword 's length of Henry Tudor before being surrounded by Sir William Stanley 's men and killed . The Burgundian chronicler Jean Molinet says that a Welshman struck the death @-@ blow with a halberd while Richard 's horse was stuck in the marshy ground . It was said that the blows were so violent that the king 's helmet was driven into his skull . The contemporary Welsh poet Guto 'r Glyn implies the leading Welsh Lancastrian Rhys ap Thomas , or one of his men , killed the king , writing that he " killed the boar , shaved his head " . The identification in 2013 of King Richard 's body shows that the skeleton had 10 wounds , eight of them to the head , clearly inflicted in battle and suggesting he had lost his helmet . The skull showed that a blade had hacked away part of the rear of the skull . 
 Richard 's forces disintegrated as news of his death spread . Northumberland and his men fled north on seeing the king 's fate , and Norfolk was killed . 
 = = Post @-@ battle = = 
 After the battle , Richard 's circlet was found and brought to Henry , who was crowned king at the top of Crown Hill , near the village of Stoke Golding . According to Vergil , Henry 's official historian , Lord Stanley found the circlet . Historian Stanley Chrimes and Professor Sydney Anglo dismiss the legend of the crown 's finding in a hawthorn bush ; none of the contemporary sources reported such an event . Ross , however , does not ignore the legend . He argues that the hawthorn bush would not be part of Henry 's coat of arms if it did not have a strong relationship to his ascendance . In Vergil 's chronicle , 100 of Henry 's men , compared to 1 @,@ 000 of Richard 's , died in this battle — a ratio Chrimes believes to be an exaggeration . The bodies of the fallen were brought to St James Church at Dadlington for burial . However , Henry denied any immediate rest for Richard ; instead the last Yorkist king 's corpse was stripped naked and strapped across a horse . His body was brought to Leicester and openly exhibited to prove that he was dead . Early accounts suggest that this was in the major Lancastrian collegiate foundation , the Church of the Annunciation of Our Lady of the Newarke . After two days , the corpse was interred in a plain unmarked tomb , within the church of the Greyfriars . The location of Richard 's tomb was long uncertain , as the church was demolished following its dissolution in 1538 . 
 On 12 September 2012 archaeologists announced the discovery of a battle @-@ damaged skeleton suspected to be Richard 's in the remains of his burial church in Leicester . On 4 February 2013 , it was announced that DNA testing had conclusively identified ( " beyond reasonable doubt " ) the remains as those of Richard . On Thursday 26 March 2015 , these remains were ceremonially buried in Leicester Cathedral . On the following day the new royal tomb of Richard III was unveiled . 
 Henry dismissed the mercenaries in his force , retaining only a small core of local soldiers to form the " Yeomen of his Garde " , and proceeded to establish his rule of England . Parliament reversed his attainder and recorded Richard 's kingship as illegal , although the Yorkist king 's reign remained officially in the annals of England history . The proclamation of Edward IV 's children as illegitimate was also reversed , restoring Elizabeth 's status to a royal princess . The marriage of Elizabeth , the heiress to the House of York , to Henry , the master of the House of Lancaster , marked the end of the feud between the two houses and the start of the Tudor dynasty . The royal matrimony , however , was delayed until Henry was crowned king and had established his claim on the throne firmly enough to preclude that of Elizabeth and her kin . Henry further convinced Parliament to <unk> his reign to the day before the battle , retrospectively enabling those who fought against him at Bosworth Field to be declared traitors . Northumberland , who had remained inactive during the battle , was imprisoned but later released and reinstated to pacify the north in Henry 's name . The purge of those who fought for Richard occupied Henry 's first two years of rule , although later he proved prepared to accept those who submitted to him regardless of their former allegiances . 
 Of his supporters , Henry rewarded the Stanleys the most generously . Aside from making William his chamberlain , he bestowed the earldom of Derby upon Lord Stanley along with grants and offices in other estates . Henry rewarded Oxford by restoring to him the lands and titles confiscated by the Yorkists and appointing him as Constable of the Tower and admiral of England , Ireland , and Aquitaine . For his kin , Henry created Jasper Tudor the Duke of Bedford . He returned to his mother the lands and grants stripped from her by Richard , and proved to be a filial son , granting her a place of honour in the palace and faithfully attending to her throughout his reign . Parliament 's declaration of Margaret as femme sole effectively empowered her ; she no longer needed to manage her estates through Stanley . Elton points out that despite his initial largesse , Henry 's supporters at Bosworth would only enjoy his special favour for the short term ; in later years , he would instead promote those who best served his interests . 
 Like the kings before him , Henry faced dissenters . The first open revolt occurred two years after Bosworth Field ; Lambert Simnel claimed to be Edward Plantagenet , 17th Earl of Warwick , who was Edward IV 's nephew . The Earl of Lincoln backed him for the throne and led rebel forces in the name of the House of York . The rebel army fended off several attacks by Northumberland 's forces , before engaging Henry 's army at the Battle of Stoke Field on 16 June 1487 . Oxford and Bedford led Henry 's men , including several former supporters of Richard III . Henry won this battle easily , but other malcontents and conspiracies would follow . A rebellion in 1489 started with Northumberland 's murder ; military historian Michael C. C. Adams says that the author of a note , which was left next to Northumberland 's body , blamed the earl for Richard 's death . 
 = = Legacy and historical significance = = 
 Contemporary accounts of the Battle of Bosworth can be found in four main sources , one of which is the English Croyland Chronicle , written by a senior Yorkist chronicler who relied on second @-@ hand information from nobles and soldiers . The other accounts were written by foreigners — Vergil , Jean Molinet , and Diego de Valera . Whereas Molinet was sympathetic to Richard , Vergil was in Henry 's service and drew information from the king and his subjects to portray them in a good light . Diego de Valera , whose information Ross regards as unreliable , compiled his work from letters of Spanish merchants . However , other historians have used Valera 's work to deduce possibly valuable insights not readily evident in other sources . Ross finds the poem , The Ballad of Bosworth Field , a useful source to ascertain certain details of the battle . The multitude of different accounts , mostly based on second- or third @-@ hand information , has proved an obstacle to historians as they try to reconstruct the battle . Their common complaint is that , except for its outcome , very few details of the battle are found in the chronicles . According to historian Michael Hicks , the Battle of Bosworth is one of the worst @-@ recorded clashes of the Wars of the Roses . 
 = = = Historical depictions and interpretations = = = 
 Henry tried to present his victory as a new beginning for the country ; he hired chroniclers to portray his reign as a " modern age " with its dawn in 1485 . Hicks states that the works of Vergil and the blind historian Bernard André , promoted by subsequent Tudor administrations , became the authoritative sources for writers for the next four hundred years . As such , Tudor literature paints a flattering picture of Henry 's reign , depicting the Battle of Bosworth as the final clash of the civil war and downplaying the subsequent uprisings . For England the Middle Ages ended in 1485 , and English Heritage claims that other than William the Conqueror 's successful invasion of 1066 , no other year holds more significance in English history . By portraying Richard as a hunchbacked tyrant who usurped the throne by killing his nephews , the Tudor historians attached a sense of myth to the battle : it became an epic clash between good and evil with a satisfying moral outcome . According to Reader Colin Burrow , André was so overwhelmed by the historic significance of the battle that he represented it with a blank page in his Henry VII ( 1502 ) . For Professor Peter <unk> , the battle was indeed a unique clash in the annals of English history , because " the victory was determined , not by those who fought , but by those who delayed fighting until they were sure of being on the winning side . " 
 Historians such as Adams and Horrox believe that Richard lost the battle not for any mythic reasons , but because of morale and loyalty problems in his army . Most of the common soldiers found it difficult to fight for a liege whom they distrusted , and some lords believed that their situation might improve if Richard was dethroned . According to Adams , against such <unk> Richard 's desperate charge was the only knightly behaviour on the field . As fellow historian Michael Bennet puts it , the attack was " the swan @-@ song of [ mediaeval ] English chivalry " . Adams believes this view was shared at the time by the printer William Caxton , who enjoyed sponsorship from Edward IV and Richard III . Nine days after the battle , Caxton published Thomas Malory 's story about chivalry and death by betrayal — Le Morte d 'Arthur — seemingly as a response to the circumstances of Richard 's death . 
 Elton does not believe Bosworth Field has any true significance , pointing out that the 20th @-@ century English public largely ignored the battle until its <unk> celebration . In his view , the dearth of specific information about the battle — no @-@ one even knows exactly where it took place — demonstrates its insignificance to English society . Elton considers the battle as just one part of Henry 's struggles to establish his reign , underscoring his point by noting that the young king had to spend ten more years pacifying factions and rebellions to secure his throne . 
 Mackie asserts that , in hindsight , Bosworth Field is notable as the decisive battle that established a dynasty which would rule unchallenged over England for more than a hundred years . Mackie notes that contemporary historians of that time , wary of the three royal successions during the long Wars of the Roses , considered Bosworth Field just another in a lengthy series of such battles . It was through the works and efforts of Francis Bacon and his successors that the public started to believe the battle had decided their futures by bringing about " the fall of a tyrant " . 
 = = = Shakespearian dramatisation = = = 
 William Shakespeare gives prominence to the Battle of Bosworth in his play , Richard III . It is the " one big battle " ; no other fighting scene distracts the audience from this action , represented by a one @-@ on @-@ one sword fight between Henry Tudor and Richard III . Shakespeare uses their duel to bring a climactic end to the play and the Wars of the Roses ; he also uses it to champion morality , portraying the " unequivocal triumph of good over evil " . Richard , the villainous lead character , has been built up in the battles of Shakespeare 's earlier play , Henry VI , Part 3 , as a " formidable swordsman and a courageous military leader " — in contrast to the dastardly means by which he becomes king in Richard III . Although the Battle of Bosworth has only five sentences to direct it , three scenes and more than four hundred lines precede the action , developing the background and motivations for the characters in anticipation of the battle . 
 Shakespeare 's account of the battle was mostly based on chroniclers Edward Hall 's and Raphael Holinshed 's dramatic versions of history , which were sourced from Vergil 's chronicle . However , Shakespeare 's attitude towards Richard was shaped by scholar Thomas More , whose writings displayed extreme bias against the Yorkist king . The result of these influences is a script that vilifies the king , and Shakespeare had few qualms about departing from history to incite drama . Margaret of Anjou died in 1482 , but Shakespeare had her speak to Richard 's mother before the battle to foreshadow Richard 's fate and fulfill the prophecy she had given in Henry VI . Shakespeare exaggerated the cause of Richard 's restless night before the battle , imagining it as a haunting by the ghosts of those whom the king had murdered , including Buckingham . Richard is portrayed as suffering a pang of conscience , but as he speaks he regains his confidence and asserts that he will be evil , if such needed to retain his crown . 
 The fight between the two armies is simulated by rowdy noises made off @-@ stage ( <unk> or alarms ) while actors walk on @-@ stage , deliver their lines , and exit . To build anticipation for the duel , Shakespeare requests more <unk> after Richard 's councillor , William Catesby , announces that the king is " [ enacting ] more wonders than a man " . Richard punctuates his entrance with the classic line , " A horse , a horse ! My kingdom for a horse ! " He refuses to withdraw , continuing to seek to slay Henry 's doubles until he has killed his nemesis . There is no documentary evidence that Henry had five decoys at Bosworth Field ; the idea was Shakespeare 's invention . He drew inspiration from Henry IV 's use of them at the Battle of Shrewsbury ( 1403 ) to amplify the perception of Richard 's courage on the battlefield . Similarly , the single combat between Henry and Richard is Shakespeare 's creation . The True Tragedy of Richard III , a play earlier than Shakespeare 's , has no signs of staging such an encounter : its stage directions give not a hint of visible combat . 
 Despite the dramatic licences taken , Shakespeare 's version of the Battle of Bosworth was the model of the event for English textbooks for many years during the 18th and 19th centuries . This glamorised version of history , promulgated in books and paintings and played out on stages across the country , perturbed humorist Gilbert Abbott à Beckett . He voiced his criticism in the form of a poem , equating the romantic view of the battle to watching a " fifth @-@ rate production of Richard III " : shabbily costumed actors fight the Battle of Bosworth on @-@ stage while those with lesser roles lounge at the back , showing no interest in the proceedings . 
 In Laurence Olivier 's 1955 film adaptation of Richard III , the Battle of Bosworth is represented not by a single duel but a general melee that became the film 's most recognised scene and a regular screening at Bosworth Battlefield Heritage Centre . The film depicts the clash between the Yorkist and Lancastrian armies on an open field , focusing on individual characters amidst the savagery of hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting , and received accolades for the realism portrayed . One reviewer for The Manchester Guardian newspaper , however , was not impressed , finding the number of combatants too sparse for the wide plains and a lack of subtlety in Richard 's death scene . The means by which Richard is shown to prepare his army for the battle also earned acclaim . As Richard speaks to his men and draws his plans in the sand using his sword , his units appear on @-@ screen , <unk> themselves according to the lines that Richard had drawn . Intimately woven together , the combination of pictorial and narrative elements effectively turns Richard into a storyteller , who acts out the plot he has constructed . Shakespearian critic Herbert Coursen extends that imagery : Richard sets himself up as a creator of men , but dies amongst the savagery of his creations . Coursen finds the depiction a contrast to that of Henry V and his " band of brothers " . 
 The adaptation of the setting for Richard III to a 1930s fascist England in Ian McKellen 's 1995 film , however , did not sit well with historians . Adams posits that the original Shakespearian setting for Richard 's fate at Bosworth teaches the moral of facing one 's fate , no matter how unjust it is , " nobly and with dignity " . By overshadowing the dramatic teaching with special effects , McKellen 's film reduces its version of the battle to a pyrotechnic spectacle about the death of a one @-@ dimensional villain . Coursen agrees that , in this version , the battle and Richard 's end are trite and underwhelming . 
 = = Battlefield location = = 
 Officially the site of the battle is deemed by Leicestershire County Council to be in the vicinity of the town of Market Bosworth . The council engaged historian Daniel Williams to research the battle , and in 1974 his findings were used to build the Bosworth Battlefield Heritage Centre and the presentation it houses . Williams 's interpretation , however , has since been questioned . Sparked by the battle 's quincentenary celebration in 1985 , a dispute among historians has led many to suspect the accuracy of Williams 's theory . In particular , geological surveys conducted from 2003 to 2009 by the Battlefields Trust , a charitable organisation that protects and studies old English battlefields , show that the southern and eastern flanks of Ambion Hill were solid ground in the 15th century , contrary to Williams 's claim that it was a large area of marshland . Landscape archaeologist Glenn Foard , leader of the survey , said the collected soil samples and finds of medieval military equipment suggest that the battle took place two miles ( 3 km ) southwest of Ambion Hill ( 52 ° 34 ′ 41 ″ N 1 ° 26 ′ 02 ″ W ) , contrary to the popular belief that it was fought near the foot of the hill . 
 = = = Historians ' theories = = = 
 The Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England ( popularly referred to as " English Heritage " ) argues that the battle was named after Market Bosworth because the town was the nearest significant settlement to the battlefield in the 15th century . As explored by Professor Philip Morgan , a battle might initially not be named specifically at all . As time passes , writers of administrative and historical records find it necessary to identify a notable battle , ascribing it a name that is usually <unk> in nature and sourced from combatants or observers . This official name becomes accepted by society and future generations without question . Early records associated the Battle of Bosworth with " <unk> " , " bellum <unk> " , " <unk> " and " <unk> field " . The earliest record , a municipal memorandum of 23 August 1485 from York , locates the battle " on the field of Redemore " . This is corroborated by a 1485 – 86 letter that mentions " <unk> " as its site . According to historian Peter Foss , records did not associate the battle with " Bosworth " until 1510 . 
 Foss is named by English Heritage as the principal advocate for " Redemore " as the battle site . He suggests the name is derived from " <unk> Mor " , an Anglo @-@ Saxon phrase that means " reedy marshland " . Basing his opinion on 13th- and 16th @-@ century church records , he believes " Redemore " was an area of wetland that lay between Ambion Hill and the village of Dadlington , and was close to the Fenn Lanes , a Roman road running east to west across the region . Foard believes this road to be the most probable route that both armies took to reach the battlefield . Williams dismisses the notion of " <unk> " as a specific location , saying that the term refers to a large area of reddish soil ; Foss argues that Williams 's sources are local stories and flawed interpretations of records . Moreover , he proposes that Williams was influenced by William Hutton 's 1788 The Battle of Bosworth @-@ Field , which Foss blames for introducing the notion that the battle was fought west of Ambion Hill on the north side of the River <unk> . Hutton , as Foss suggests , misinterpreted a passage from his source , Raphael Holinshed 's 1577 Chronicle . Holinshed wrote , " King Richard pitched his field on a hill called Anne Beame , refreshed his soldiers and took his rest . " Foss believes that Hutton mistook " field " to mean " field of battle " , thus creating the idea that the fight took place on Anne Beame ( Ambion ) Hill . To " [ pitch ] his field " , as Foss clarifies , was a period expression for setting up a camp . 
 Foss brings further evidence for his " Redemore " theory by quoting Edward Hall 's 1550 Chronicle . Hall stated that Richard 's army stepped onto a plain after breaking camp the next day . Furthermore , historian William Burton , author of Description of Leicestershire ( 1622 ) , wrote that the battle was " fought in a large , flat , plaine , and spacious ground , three miles [ 5 km ] distant from [ Bosworth ] , between the Towne of Shenton , Sutton [ Cheney ] , Dadlington and Stoke [ Golding ] " . In Foss 's opinion both sources are describing an area of flat ground north of Dadlington . 
 = = = Physical site = = = 
 English Heritage , responsible for managing England 's historic sites , used both theories to designate the site for Bosworth Field . Without preference for either theory , they constructed a single continuous battlefield boundary that encompasses the locations proposed by both Williams and Foss . The region has experienced extensive changes over the years , starting after the battle . Holinshed stated in his chronicle that he found firm ground where he expected the marsh to be , and Burton confirmed that by the end of the 16th century , areas of the battlefield were enclosed and had been improved to make them agriculturally productive . Trees were planted on the south side of Ambion Hill , forming Ambion Wood . In the 18th and 19th centuries , the Ashby Canal carved through the land west and south @-@ west of Ambion Hill . Winding alongside the canal at a distance , the Ashby and Nuneaton Joint Railway crossed the area on an embankment . The changes to the landscape were so extensive that when Hutton revisited the region in 1807 after an earlier 1788 visit , he could not readily find his way around . 
 Bosworth Battlefield Heritage Centre was built on Ambion Hill , near Richard 's Well . According to legend , Richard III drank from one of the several springs in the region on the day of the battle . In 1788 , a local pointed out one of the springs to Hutton as the one mentioned in the legend . A stone structure was later built over the location . The inscription on the well reads : 
 " Near this spot , on August 22nd 1485 , at the age of 32 , King Richard III fell fighting gallantly in defence of his realm & his crown against the usurper Henry Tudor . 
 The Cairn was erected by Dr. Samuel Parr in 1813 to mark the well from which the king is said to have drunk during the battle . 
 It is maintained by the Fellowship of the White Boar . " 
 Northwest of Ambion Hill , just across the northern tributary of the <unk> , a flag and memorial stone mark Richard 's Field . Erected in 1973 , the site was selected on the basis of Williams 's theory . St James 's Church at Dadlington is the only structure in the area that is reliably associated with the Battle of Bosworth ; the bodies of those killed in the battle were buried there . 
 In 2010 , a small silver badge depicting a boar was found in the area at a site one mile to the southwest . Experts believed this could indicate the actual site of the battle , since this badge depicts Richard III 's personal emblem . Discussions were held about providing access to this site as well . 
 = Marguerite Louise d 'Orléans = 
 Marguerite Louise d 'Orléans ( 28 July 1645 – 17 September 1721 ) was Grand Duchess of Tuscany , as the wife of Grand Duke Cosimo III de ' Medici . Deprived of her lover , Charles V of Lorraine , and yearning for France , Marguerite Louise despised her husband and his family , whom she often quarrelled with and falsely suspected of attempting to poison her . Marguerite Louise reconciled with the Medici on more than one occasion , however , only to promptly resume hostilities . 
 Having become Grand Duke of Tuscany upon his father 's death , in 1670 , Cosimo III , under the sway of his mother , Vittoria della Rovere , refused to grant Marguerite Louise entry to the Consulta ( Privy Council ) . Thus without political influence , Marguerite Louise oversaw the education of her eldest son , Grand Prince Ferdinando . Two more children followed : Anna Maria Luisa , Electress Palatine , and Gian Gastone , the last Medici Grand Duke of Tuscany . 
 In June 1675 , having signed a contract with Cosimo III the previous December stipulating an 80 @,@ 000 livres pension , Marguerite Louise was allowed to return to France , on the condition she reside in the Abbaye Saint Pierre de Montmartre , near Paris . A daughter of Gaston de France , Duke of Orléans , Marguerite Louise was obliged to surrender her rights as Princess of France in Cosimo 's contract . Although the contract , too , banned her from leaving the convent , Marguerite Louise often went to her cousin Louis XIV 's court at Versailles , where she gambled for high stakes . She was at the centre of many scandals at the convent , including an attempt to burn it down , which greatly irritated her husband , who , despite the separation , took great interest in Marguerite Louise 's life . While still technically married , Marguerite Louise had several affairs . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life : 1645 @-@ 1661 = = = 
 Marguerite Louise , the eldest child of Gaston of France , Duke of Orléans , and of his second wife , Marguerite of Lorraine , was born on 18 July 1645 . Born at the Château de Blois , she was the oldest of five children born to Gaston by his second wife . Her other sisters included Élisabeth Marguerite , future Duchess of Guise and the Duchess of Savoy . 
 Marguerite Louise received a rudimentary education at her father 's court at Blois , where he retreated to after his failed insurrection against his nephew Louis XIV of France , the Fronde . Marguerite Louise enjoyed a close relationship with her half @-@ sister , Anne Marie Louise , Duchess of Montpensier , La Grande Mademoiselle , who took her and her friends to the theatre and royal balls ; Marguerite Louise reciprocated her sister 's affection , attending daily Anne Marie Louise 's salon and seeking her guidance in court matters . Madame de <unk> , Marguerite Louise believed , poorly advised her mother in matters of court and ruined her marriage negotiations with Charles Emmanuel II , Duke of Savoy . Therefore , when another proposal came , this time from Cosimo de ' Medici , Grand Prince of Tuscany , in 1658 , Marguerite Louise asked her half @-@ sister to ensure its fulfilment . Her own younger sister Françoise Madeleine d 'Orléans married Charles Emmanuel II in 1663 . 
 Initially overjoyed at the prospect of marrying , Marguerite Louise 's ebullience faded to dismay when she discovered her half @-@ sister no longer favoured the Tuscan match , as she did before . After this rebut , Marguerite Louise 's behaviour became erratic : she shocked the court by going out unaccompanied , a grievous offence in contemporary French society , with her cousin Prince Charles of Lorraine , who soon became her lover . Her marriage by proxy , on 19 April 1661 , did nothing to change her attitude , much to Louis XIV 's ministers ' discontentment ; on the day she was supposed to meet diplomats offering their congratulations on the wedding , she attempted to abscond and go hunting , only to be stopped by the Duchess of Montpensier . 
 = = Life in Tuscany : 1661 @-@ 1670 = = 
 = = = Grand Princess of Tuscany = = = 
 Mattias de ' Medici , the incumbent Grand Duke 's brother , brought Marguerite Louise to Tuscany in a fleet comprising nine galleys , three Tuscan , three on loan from the Republic of Genoa and another three from the Papal States . She arrived in Tuscany on 12 June , disembarking at Livorno , and , to much pageantry , made her formal entry to Florence on 20 June . Their wedding , the most lavish spectacle Florence had hitherto seen , was composed of a retinue of over three @-@ hundred carriages . As a wedding gift , Grand Duke Ferdinando , the bridegroom 's father , presented her with a pearl the " size of a small pigeon 's egg " . 
 Marguerite Louise and Cosimo greeted each other with indifference , and , according to Sophia , Electress of Hanover , they only slept together once a week . Marguerite Louise , two days after their marriage , demanded possession of the Tuscan crown jewels from Cosimo , who replied that he did not have the authority to give them . The jewels that she did manage to get from Cosimo she tried to smuggle out of Tuscany , only to be stopped by the Grand Duke . Marguerite Louise 's indifference , after this incident , turned to hatred , compounded by her love for Charles of Lorraine , from whom she was forced to part at Marseilles . On one occasion , she threatened to break a bottle over Cosimo 's head if he did not leave her chamber . Her hatred of Cosimo , however , did not get in the way of children : Grand Prince Ferdinando in 1663 , Anna Maria Luisa in 1667 and Gian Gastone in 1671 . Cosimo 's family , too , were the victims of Marguerite Louise 's caprices : she argued with the Grand Duchess Vittoria over precedence , Grand Duke Ferdinando over her profligacy . Marguerite Louise 's spending habits not only made her unpopular with the Grand Duke , but with the Florentines , who were tired of her lax etiquette , two grooms frequented her chamber at all hours . 
 = = = <unk> to Louis XIV = = = 
 Following Charles of Lorraine 's brief visit to Florence , during which he was entertained by the Grand Ducal family in Palazzo Pitti , the Grand Ducal palace , the tone of Marguerite Louise 's letters to Charles compelled the Grand Duke and Cosimo to spy on her . In response , she begged Louis XIV to intervene , but he stealthily declined . Both Marguerite Louise and the Grand Duke sent entreaties to Louis XIV following the dismissal of Marguerite Louise 's French staff , the former complaining of her maltreatment , the latter asking for Marguerite Louise 's behaviour to be curbed . 
 To placate both the Grand Duke and Marguerite Louise , he sent the comte de Saint Mesme . Marguerite Louise wanted to return to France , and Mesme sympathised with this , as did much of the French court , so he left without finding a solution to the heir 's domestic disharmony , incensing both Ferdinando and Louis XIV . Now , she humiliated Cosimo at every chance she got : she insisted on employing French cooks only as she feared the Medici were out to poison her and branded Cosimo " a poor groom " in front of the Papal nuncio . 
 After several more attempts at French conciliation failed , in September 1664 Marguerite Louise left her apartment in Palazzo Pitti , refusing to return ; therefore , Cosimo moved her into Villa di <unk> where she was watched by forty soldiers , and six courtiers , appointed by Cosimo , had to follow her everywhere because it was feared she would abscond . The next year , she changed tack , and reconciled with the Grand Ducal family . The delicate rapprochement that existed between Marguerite Louise and the rest of the family collapsed after Anna Maria Luisa 's birth , in 1667 , when she caught smallpox . 
 = = Grand Duchess of Tuscany : 1670 @-@ 1721 = = 
 In May 1670 , with the death of Grand Duke Ferdinando II , Marguerite Louise became Grand Duchess of Tuscany . The old tradition of admitting the Grand Duke 's mother to the Consulta , or Privy Council , was reinstituted at Cosimo III 's accession . Loathing Marguerite Louise for her treatment of Cosimo and herself , Vittoria della Rovere , Cosimo III 's mother , ensured that Marguerite Louise was excluded from politics , leaving her with nothing else to do but supervise her son the Grand Prince Ferdinando 's education . The Grand Duchess , furious at her exclusion , fought with Vittoria over precedence and demanded entry to the Consulta . Cosimo III sided with his mother . By early 1671 , fighting between Marguerite Louise and Vittoria became so heated that a contemporary remarked that " the Pitti Palace has become the devil 's own abode , and from morn till midnight only the noise of wrangling and abuse could be heard " . 
 = = = Return to France = = = 
 At the start of 1672 , Marguerite Louise wrote to Louis XIV , begging him for medical assistance as she believed she had breast cancer . Louis XIV sent Alliot le Vieux , Anne of Austria 's personal physician , to tend to her . Alliot , unlike Mesme , did not completely comply with Marguerite Louise 's plot to be sent to France , under the guise of illness , pronouncing that the tumour was " <unk> malignant " , though he did recommend thermal waters . Frustrated with the failure of her plan , Marguerite Louise began flirting with a cook in her household , tickling him and having pillow fights , to upset Cosimo . 
 To restore domestic harmony , Cosimo III sent for Madame du <unk> , Marguerite Louise 's childhood governess who had tried , but failed , to help the Grand Duke before . However , because of a string of deaths in the Orléans family , she arrived late , in December 1672 . By then , Marguerite Louise was in the depths of despair , and asked to be allowed visit Villa Poggio a Caiano , a Medici villa , ostensibly for worship at a nearby shrine . Once there , she refused to return , which resulted in a two @-@ year stand off between herself and the Grand Duke , for he would not consent to her return to France , a return she begged for in her parting letter to him . Madame du <unk> 's mission having failed , Louis XIV made one final attempt to reconcile the Grand Ducal couple , to no avail . Therefore , all attempts at conciliation having failed , Cosimo capitulated to Marguerite Louise , in a contract signed on 26 December 1674 : Marguerite Louise , provided for with a pension of 80 @,@ 000 livres , was allowed to leave for France , but she had to confine herself to the Saint Pierre Abbey of Montmartre and surrender her rights as a Royal Princess of France . Overjoyed , the Grand Duchess departed for France laden down with the fixtures and furniture of Villa Poggio a Caiano , for , in her own words , she had no intention " of setting forth without her proper wages " . 
 = = = Montmartre = = = 
 News of Marguerite Louise 's departure from Livorno on the 12 July 1675 was greeted with " a great displeasure " by the Florentines . The nobility , too , sympathised with her , falsely believing Cosimo was to blame for driving Marguerite Louise from Tuscany . Marguerite Louise , initially , patronised charitable works at Montmartre and bore herself with " an air of piety " , but soon reverted to her profligate ways , wearing heavy rouge and bright yellow <unk> , and embarking on an affair with the Count of <unk> , and later with two members of the Luxembourg regiment . Louis XIV , ignoring the 1674 contract 's article banning Marguerite Louise from stepping foot outside the convent , allowed the Grand Duchess to court , where she gambled for high stakes . 
 Because of her " shabby " retinue and short visits , Marguerite Louise garnered the reputation of a Bohemian among the courtiers of Versailles , and , therefore , was compelled to allow " those of insignificant birth " into her circle . The Tuscan envoy , Gondi , issued frequent protests to the French court of Marguerite Louise 's behaviour , to no avail . Eventually , the Abbess of Montmartre , Françoise Renée de Lorraine , ( 1621 – 1682 ) , when quizzed by the King about Marguerite Louise 's latest affair with a groom , interceded , saying , " A conspiracy of silence is the sole antidote to the depravity and excesses of [ Marguerite Louise ] " ; this explains Marguerite Louise 's absence from memoirs of the time . 
 Back in Florence , Cosimo III had the Tuscan envoy report on Marguerite Louise 's every movement , which he closely scrutinised . If he deemed a particular action of hers to be offensive , he wrote to Louis XIV , demanding an explanation . Initially sympathetic with Cosimo , Louis XIV , tiring of his endless stream of protests , said , " Since Cosimo had consented to the retirement of his wife to France , he had virtually relinquished all right to interfere in her conduct " . That Cosimo III ceased meddling in the affairs of his wife was the result of Louis XIV 's rebut . Marguerite Louise was informed of Cosimo III 's ensuing illness by her eldest son , Grand Prince Ferdinando , who espoused his mother 's cause and corresponded with her . Marguerite Louise , confident of her husband 's imminent death , told the French court that " at the first notice of her detested husband 's demise , she would fly to Florence to banish all hypocrites and hypocrisy and establish a new government " . This , however , was not to be , and Cosimo III actually outlived her two years . 
 In 1688 , saturated in debt , Marguerite Louise wrote to Cosimo , begging for 20 @,@ 000 crowns . When Cosimo was not initially forthcoming , she switched her focus to her son the Grand Prince , in the hope he would help her , but he feigned he could not , for fear of upsetting his father . Eventually , Cosimo paid off her debts , and her financial security was assured when she inherited a large sum of money from a relative in 1696 . 
 While Marguerite Louise 's behaviour — at its worst when she threatened to burn down the convent — was tolerated by the previous Abbess of Montmartre , the new Abbess , Madame d <unk> , frequently complained of her to the Grand Duke and the King . In retaliation , Marguerite Louise threatened to kill her with a hatchet and a pistol , and formed a clique against her . Therefore , in line with her wishes , Cosimo III consented to Marguerite Louise 's departure for a new convent , Saint @-@ Mandé , on the condition she only leave with the King Louis XIV 's explicit permission and be attended to by a chamberlain of his choice . Since she would not assent to these prerequisites , the payment of her pension was suspended , only to be resumed when Louis XIV compelled her to yield . 
 = = = Saint @-@ Mandé = = = 
 At Saint @-@ Mandé , Marguerite Louise underwent a transformation : she no longer cared for " excesses " , and busied herself with reforming the convent , which she called a " spiritual brothel " ; the absentee mother superior , who wore men 's clothing , was sent away , non @-@ conformist nuns were removed and it is because of these deeds her behaviour no longer proved a bone of contention with Florence . Marguerite Louise 's health began to decline in 1712 , with an attack of apoplexy , which left her with a paralysed left arm and foaming mouth . She soon recovered , only to suffer another attack the next year ; the death of the only one of her three children she cared for , Grand Prince Ferdinando , contributed to the second attack of apoplexy , which briefly paralysed her eyes and made speech difficult . The Regent of France , Philippe d 'Orléans , allowed Marguerite Louise to buy a house in Paris , 15 Place des Vosges , where she spent her final years . She corresponded with the Regent 's mother , Elizabeth Charlotte of the Palatinate , and gave assiduously to charity . Marguerite Louise d 'Orléans , Princess of France and Grand Duchess of Tuscany , died in September 1721 , and was buried in Picpus Cemetery , in Paris . 
 = = Issue = = 
 Cosimo III and Marguerite Louise had three children : 
 Ferdinando de ' Medici , Grand Prince of Tuscany ( <unk> <unk> ) married Violante Beatrice of Bavaria , no issue ; 
 Anna Maria Luisa de ' Medici , Electress Palatine ( <unk> <unk> ) married Johann Wilhelm , Elector Palatine , no issue ; 
 Gian Gastone de ' Medici , Grand Duke of Tuscany ( <unk> <unk> ) married Anna Maria Franziska of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg , no issue . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 28 July 1645 – 12 June 1661 Her Royal Highness Mademoiselle d 'Orléans 
 12 June 1661 – 23 May 1670 Her Royal Highness The Grand Princess of Tuscany 
 23 May 1670 – 17 September 1721 Her Royal Highness The Grand Duchess of Tuscany 
 = Charles Redheffer = 
 Charles Redheffer was an American inventor who claimed to have invented a perpetual motion machine . First appearing in Philadelphia , Redheffer exhibited his machine to the public , charging high prices for viewing . When he applied to the government for more money , a group of inspectors were sent to examine the machine . It was discovered the machine was actually powered by a device Redheffer claimed was powered by the machine . 
 Redheffer moved to New York City and set up a similar scam after rebuilding his machine . However , an engineer detected that it was a fake when he visited an exhibition by listening to its unsteady motions . He discovered that the machine was operated by a man using a crank in a room on the floor above . Redheffer returned to Philadelphia . He later claimed to have created another machine , but refused to demonstrate it to anyone . He managed to get a patent for his machine in 1820 , but after this his fate is unknown . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Little has been recorded about Redheffer 's life , other than his connection to the hoax . According to one source , he was from Germantown in Philadelphia , but most sources simply state that he appeared in Philadelphia with his machine . Redheffer disappeared from public view after the discovery of the fraud , and his fate is unknown . 
 = = Appearance in Philadelphia = = 
 Charles Redheffer and his machine became well known in Philadelphia in 1812 . Redheffer claimed he had invented a perpetual motion machine and exhibited it in a house near the Schuylkill River in the outskirts of the city . He charged an admission fee of $ 5 ( some sources claim $ 1 ) for men to view it ; depending on the source , women were admitted free or at a charge of $ 1 . The machine caused a sensation , and Redheffer lobbied for funds to build a larger version . 
 On January 21 , 1813 , eight city commissioners visited Redheffer to inspect the machine . They had to do so through a barred window , as Redheffer was concerned anyone going near the machine might damage it . One of the inspectors , Nathan Sellers , was accompanied by his son Coleman , who noticed something odd about the gears . The machine itself was said to be powering a separate device through a series of gears and weights . Coleman noticed that the cogs were worn on the wrong side and suggested that the device was in fact powering the machine . 
 The elder Sellers was convinced the machine was a hoax . To validate his suspicions , he hired local engineer Isaiah Lukens to build a similar machine , using a hidden clockwork motor as a power source . They then arranged a demonstration of the machine to Redheffer , who was immediately convinced and offered to buy it . Meanwhile , Redheffer 's machine appeared in the Philadelphia Gazette . Civil engineer Charles <unk> offered to bet sums of money ranging from $ 6 @,@ 000 to $ 10 @,@ 000 that the machine was genuine , and that Redheffer had discovered perpetual motion . 
 = = Move to New York City = = 
 His ruse revealed , Redheffer immediately departed for New York City where he was still unknown . He changed his machine somewhat so that it could not be detected as easily , and he exhibited it as he had done in Philadelphia . 
 When mechanical engineer Robert Fulton went to see the machine , he noticed that the machine was unsteady as if someone would have powered it manually and irregularly with a crank . Fulton also detected that the sound was uneven , uncharacteristic of a machine 's motions . He announced the machine was a fraud , and challenged Redheffer exclaiming he would expose the secret power source , otherwise he would pay for all the damage he would cause . Redheffer agreed , so Fulton removed some boards from the wall alongside the machine and exposed a catgut cord that led to the upper floor . Upstairs he found an old man who was turning a hand @-@ crank with one hand and eating bread with the other . Spectators realized they had been duped and destroyed the machine ; Redheffer fled the city . 
 = = Later appearances = = 
 Redheffer appears to have constructed another machine in 1816 , which he stated his intention to demonstrate to a group of men including the mayor and chief justice of Philadelphia . However , despite several meetings , Redheffer refused to demonstrate the machine to them . 
 On July 11 , 1820 , the U.S. Patent Office granted a patent to Charles Redheffer ( or Charles <unk> ) for a device listed as " machinery for the purpose of gaining power " . ( Unfortunately , all patents up to 1836 were lost in the 1836 U.S. Patent Office fire . If recovered , it would be X @-@ Patent <unk> . ) 
 = Question Time British National Party controversy = 
 The Question Time British National Party controversy occurred in the autumn of 2009 , due to an invitation by the British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) to Nick Griffin , leader of the far @-@ right British National Party ( BNP ) , to be a panelist on Question Time , one of its flagship television programmes on current affairs . 
 The decision to have the BNP represented on the programme for the first time sparked public and political debate in the United Kingdom . At the heart of the matter was the BBC 's public broadcasting mandate , requiring it to give equal prominence to political parties above a given level of electoral representation . Mark Thompson , Director @-@ General of the BBC , defended the BBC 's decision to invite Griffin , stating , " the BNP has demonstrated a level of support that would normally lead to an occasional invitation to join the panel on Question Time . It is for that reason – not for some misguided desire to be controversial , but for that reason alone – that the invitation has been extended . " 
 A late appeal was made to the BBC Trust , the BBC 's governing body , by the Secretary of State for Wales Peter Hain , to have the appearance blocked , which ultimately failed . Griffin appeared on the edition which aired on 22 October 2009 . As the programme was due to go on air , public protests took place at BBC Television Centre in London . The pre @-@ recorded programme featured Griffin alongside the Secretary of State for Justice Jack Straw , the Conservative peer and Shadow Minister for Community Cohesion Sayeeda Warsi , Baroness Warsi , the Liberal Democrats ' Home Affairs spokesperson Chris Huhne , and the writer / playwright Bonnie Greer . The edition was watched by over 8 million people – over half the total audience share – and more than double the previous record high for Question Time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Question Time is the flagship BBC Television political panel show , which began in 1979 . The weekly show , hosted by David Dimbleby since 1994 , takes place at locations around the country . Questions from a local audience are directed to a panel of invited guests , usually consisting of British politicians , alongside other public figures . The topics for debate during the programme are loosely defined by " set @-@ piece " questions from pre @-@ selected audience members . For each topic , the question is answered by each panel member in turn , followed by supplementary questions on the topic , time permitting . The show is pre @-@ recorded a few hours before being broadcast , and it is stressed by Dimbleby as the programme starts , that the panellists have no previous knowledge of the content of the questions . 
 The British National Party ( BNP ) is a far right minority party in Britain founded by John Tyndall in 1982 . The leader of the party at the time was Nick Griffin , elected as one of the eight MEPs in the North West England constituency , although he has since resigned . At the time of the programme , the BNP won 943 @,@ 598 votes and two seats in the UK 's 2009 European Parliament elections in June , when a total of 72 seats were contested . The BNP polled 6 @.@ 26 % of the national vote of 15 @,@ 625 @,@ 823 ( from an electorate of 45 @,@ 315 @,@ 669 ) , making it the sixth ranked party , behind the Conservatives ( 27 @.@ 7 % ) , United Kingdom Independence Party ( 16 @.@ 5 % ) , Labour ( 15 @.@ 7 % ) , Liberal Democrats ( 13 @.@ 7 % ) and the Green Party ( 8 @.@ 6 % ) . The result represented a 1 @.@ 3 percentage point increase on its previous performance . Since then , support for the party has declined significantly , allegedly due " to internal splits and the rise of <unk> " . 
 At the time of the programme the BNP held one seat on the London Assembly and council seats in four London boroughs ; it was the second party in the London Borough of Barking and Dagenham . 
 = = BBC policy = = 
 = = = Coverage of the BNP = = = 
 Griffin had already appeared on other BBC shows , including The Andrew Marr Show on BBC One and The World at One on BBC Radio 4 . No BNP representative had ever appeared on Question Time before , but following the European election performance , this stance was reviewed . The possibility of an appearance on Question Time by Nick Griffin was publicly announced by the BBC in early September . That month , James Macintyre of the New Statesman who was a former Question Time producer , said that Mentorn , the independent production company responsible for Question Time , had been proposing an appearance by Griffin over the previous two years . The Independent gave credit to the BBC for resisting " the naïve showbiz instincts " of executives at Mentorn , who may have wanted " what Peter Hain calls a ' <unk> ' for reasons well removed from the BBC 's charter obligations . " 
 On 21 October , the day before the broadcast , the BBC Director @-@ General , Mark Thompson , wrote an article for The Guardian entitled ' Keeping Nick Griffin off air is a job for parliament , not the BBC ' . He said that those arguing for the BNP to be excluded from the programme were making the case for censorship , which was a matter for the government and not the BBC . He explained the BBC 's decision : 
 Question Time is an opportunity for the British public to put questions to politicians of every ideological hue . Politicians from the UK 's biggest parties appear most frequently , but from time to time representatives of parties with many fewer supporters – from the Scottish Socialists and Respect to the Green party – also take their seats on the stage . Question Time is the most prominent programme of its kind on British television , and we carefully study the support gained in elections by each of the parties , large and small , before deciding who to invite and how frequently they should appear . It is a straightforward matter of fact that , with some 6 % of the vote and the election of two MEPs in this spring 's European elections – and with some success in local elections as well – the BNP has demonstrated a level of support that would normally lead to an occasional invitation to join the panel on Question Time . It is for that reason – not for some misguided desire to be controversial , but for that reason alone – that the invitation has been extended . 
 The BBC Deputy Director General , Mark Byford , also defended the decision on the day of the programme , saying : " [ The BNP ] should have the right to be heard , be challenged , and for the public who take part in Question Time and the viewers to make up their own minds about the views of the BNP . It 's not for the BBC to censor and say they can 't be on " . The BBC 's chief political adviser , Ric Bailey , stated after the failed appeal that the BBC " would have been breaking its charter if it had not treated the BNP with impartiality ... We absolutely stand by that judgement , even though there 's obviously been a lot of controversy about it " . A senior BBC presenter , John Humphrys , said the decision was " absolutely right " . He said : " Why should we be afraid of what they have to say ? Free speech is the issue here , and the BBC 's obligations . " However , broadcasting unions said some of its members would protest at the invitation . 
 = = = Appeal to the BBC Trust = = = 
 A late attempt to stop the programme came from the Labour Secretary of State for Wales , Peter Hain , who accused the BBC of being " apologists " for the BNP and making " one of the biggest mistakes in its proud history " . After failing to persuade the BBC Director General Mark Thompson to stop the appearance , Hain appealed to the BBC Trust . The BNP 's constitution restricting membership of the party to " indigenous Caucasian " people , namely " indigenous British ethnic groups " including the " Anglo @-@ Saxon folk community " and the " Celtic Scottish folk community " was declared illegal on 15 October 2009 under the Race Relations Act , after a challenge by the Equality and Human Rights Commission , and Hain argued that the appearance might be illegal in light of the ruling . 
 On the night of Tuesday 20 October , the Trust announced it was forming an emergency committee , comprising three trustees chaired by Richard Tait , to examine the appeals . Late on 21 October , the day before the programme was due to be made , the Trust cleared Griffin to appear on the show . It also ruled that , given the pre @-@ recorded nature of the show , many of the concerns were hypothetical and premature . The Trust declined further comment , in case of an appeal of the decision after the show : 
 We have concluded that the decision as to whether it is appropriate in all the circumstances for the BBC to allow the BNP to participate on Question Time is a question of editorial judgement , which the charter and framework agreement reserve for the Director @-@ General . 
 We have written to the Director @-@ General asking him to engage personally to ensure that the broadcast programme complies with the general law , the BBC 's editorial guidelines and all other regulatory requirements . 
 The committee is aware of the debate and public controversy on this issue and that this is a matter of considerable importance to many licence fee payers . 
 = = Opinions prior to broadcast = = 
 = = = Nick Griffin = = = 
 In an e @-@ mail to BNP supporters , Griffin said " Never before have we had the chance to present our patriotic , common sense solutions to Britain ’ s nightmare situation to the public at large in such prominent fashion ... I am relishing this opportunity , and I know that ... the ordinary members , supporters and voters of the BNP will be in the studio with me as I take on the corrupt , treacherous swine destroying our beautiful island nation . ” He also stated in a letter on the BNP website : " I will , no doubt , be interrupted , shouted down , slandered , put on the spot , and subjected to a scrutiny that would be a thousand times more intense than anything directed at other panellists . It will , in other words , be political blood sport . But I am relishing this opportunity . " 
 Griffin told The Times : " I thank the political class and their allies for being so stupid . " He went on to say that his invitation on the programme " clearly gives us a whole new level of public recognition . " Griffin said of his fellow Question Time panellists before the show that Bonnie Greer was " the joker in the pack ... [ who ] ... knows how to look after herself and may be more of a handful than the others " , that Menzies Campbell " would have been more daunting " than Chris Huhne , that Jack Straw is " a very effective advocate " . He said that the appearance of Baroness Warsi for the Conservatives was a typical " <unk> " stunt . In the run @-@ up to the programme , the BNP website displayed a prominent countdown to Question Time . 
 = = = UK parliamentary parties = = = 
 The policy of the Labour Party never to share a platform with the BNP was changed following the BBC 's invitation to Griffin . Labour said that future appearances were to be on a " case by case " basis . On 27 September 2009 , the Secretary of State for Justice , Jack Straw , announced he would appear on the programme , following the announcement that the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats would take part in any edition of Question Time that included the BNP . Straw said he would be delighted to make the argument for people against the BNP : 
 Wherever we have had BNP problems in my area and when we have fought them hard , we 've pulled back and won the seats back . 
 Speaking on the Question Time episode the week before the expected appearance by Griffin , the Home Secretary Alan Johnson condemned the decision of the BBC : 
 There isn 't a constitutional obligation to appear on Question Time . That gives [ the BNP ] a legitimacy they do not deserve . These people believe in the things that the fascists believed in the Second World War , they believe in what the National Front believe in . They believe in the purity of the Aryan race . It is a foul and despicable party . 
 The Prime Minister and Labour leader , Gordon Brown , said he would not interfere with the BBC 's decision . He said : " asked about their racist and bigoted views that are damaging to good community relations , it will be a good opportunity to expose what they are about . " When pressed on the reversal of Labour 's ' No Platform ' policy , Brown said " The issue is : should we have someone there ? Jack Straw is a very experienced person who has had to deal with the BNP and their awful politics over a period of time . " 
 The Conservative leader , David Cameron , was uncomfortable with the BBC decision , which reminded him of an invitation to Gerry Adams to speak at the Oxford Union during the 1980s when he was at Oxford . He said : " It makes me uneasy . I don 't think the BBC should have done it . " 
 The Conservative panel member , Baroness Warsi , a British Muslim from Dewsbury , West Yorkshire – a town which Janice Turner of The Times reported as having the biggest BNP vote in Britain – stated " I want to ask Nick Griffin what about me isn 't British " . The Liberal Democrat panel member Chris Huhne decided in consultation with his party leader Nick Clegg that , given the BBC 's decision to invite Griffin , he had no choice but to attend . He said that " Thursday night 's excitement would not have been called off just because the Liberal Democrats decided not to participate . " 
 On the day of the programme , the former Labour Mayor of London , Ken Livingstone , said that the BBC would " bear moral responsibility " for any rise in racist attacks in Britain . The Labour MP Diane Abbott , the first black woman to be elected to Parliament , believed that the appearance of Griffin would signal the BNP was part of the political mainstream in the same way that her appearance on Question Time in 1987 had signalled black people 's acceptance as part of the mainstream . She said : " It 's not a programme that 's going to scrutinise his views , it 's not that sort of programme , it 's politics as entertainment " . Andy Slaughter , a Labour MP whose constituency includes the BBC Television Centre , arrived to support the protests , scathingly attacking the BBC 's " smugness " , saying that local people on the estates were " utterly affronted " . 
 Ten MPs signed an early day motion tabled by the Labour MP Mike <unk> which called the BBC decision " profoundly wrong " and noted that " no previous BBC Director General made such a judgement and that neither Martin Webster , who polled 16 percent of the vote in the West Bromwich by @-@ election in 1973 , John Tyndall , Colin Jordan or Oswald Mosley were treated in the same way " . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 The decision by the BBC to invite Griffin on to Question Time caused widespread controversy . In an editorial on 15 October 2009 , The Guardian said : " The BNP is no normal party – yet by inviting it on to Question Time , the BBC runs the risk of normalising it " . It also stated that it would give the BNP " its best @-@ ever platform for its poisonous politics " . 
 Jim Shields , associate professor in French Studies at Warwick University , stated that the appearance would be " a real milestone " in Griffin 's acceptability . He said that the far @-@ right leader Jean @-@ Marie Le Pen 's appearance on a similar programme in France saw support for his Front national party " double overnight " . Professor Ted <unk> , commissioned by the Government to investigate the 2001 Oldham riots , urged a " more sophisticated approach " using reasoned arguments , to defeat the far right . 
 The anti @-@ fascist magazine Searchlight said that entry level for inclusion on BBC programmes should be " election to the national parliament " . Muhammad Abdul Bari , the Secretary General of the Muslim Council of Britain , said " We regret the BBC 's decision . There is a general fear that allowing the BNP to air its toxic views will increase Islamophobia and give the BNP the aura of respectability needed to spread its message of hate " . 
 On 21 October , Iain Martin wrote in a The Wall Street Journal blog that the appearance on Question Time signalled that the mainstream political parties in Britain had " badly let down their fellow Britons ... by setting narrow terms for the national debate which exclude the concerns of millions of voters and force them out on to the fringes " . Similarly , the issue of Griffin 's upcoming appearance was the headline story on BBC Two 's Newsnight the previous evening . It was dealt with in a segment on social decline in Britain and the perceived failings of the major parties . 
 On the morning of the programme , the leading article in The Times said that the BBC were right to invite Griffin , but that the issue of his appearance should not be allowed to dominate the programme , and that the panel and its chairman should be " well briefed on Mr Griffin ’ s many unsavoury comments on topics such as immigration " . Richard Preston , blogging for The Daily Telegraph , compared the importance of Griffin 's appearance with past infrequent Question Time panellists such as comedians Eddie Izzard , Norman Pace and Jim Davidson , while also expressing confidence that the hour @-@ long show and David Dimbleby would provide enough scrutiny to expose Griffin if he was a ' lightweight ' or a ' <unk> ' ; he suggested that " Britain truly does have problems " if a trio of mainstream politicians did not manage to take him apart . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 = = = Panel = = = 
 The panel for the 22 October edition of Question Time consisted of : 
 Bonnie Greer , writer , historian and playwright 
 Nick Griffin , British National Party MEP for North West England and BNP Leader 
 Chris Huhne , then Liberal Democrat MP for Eastleigh and the Home Affairs spokesperson 
 Jack Straw , Labour MP for Blackburn and the then United Kingdom Justice Secretary 
 Baroness Warsi , Conservative Life Peer and the then Shadow Minister for Community Cohesion and Social Action 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 Question Time was held in BBC Television Centre in London , for the first time in four years , to enable the police to keep order for Griffin 's appearance . The audience was expected by The Times to number 200 people and to comprise a broad spectrum of political views , including BNP supporters and left @-@ wing groups . The recording of the edition of 22 October was brought forward two hours from the usual 8 @.@ 30 pm start time to allow for any disruption , before being broadcast later the same night . 
 Filming started shortly before 7 @.@ 00 pm , and ended at around 8 @.@ 30 pm ; Griffin left the building 10 minutes later . Audience members inside the studios used their mobile phones to relay live information about the recording 's progress . James Lyons , political correspondent for the Daily Mirror , wrote that the mood in the studio turned from anger to mockery of Griffin . 
 A full audience attended the making of the programme and there were no protests in the studio . One audience member suggested that a " half dozen " BNP members in the studio shouted encouragement to Griffin . The show was broadcast on BBC One at 10 @.@ 35 pm ( BST ) and at 11 @.@ 05 pm on BBC One Wales . 
 = = = Protests = = = 
 Demonstrations were planned to take place during the show . A protest rally by Unite Against Fascism ( UAF ) had been held in London on the night of Tuesday 20 October , and sixteen <unk> of UAF protesters were expected on the day . Amid concern over the safety of residents , Hammersmith and Fulham council asked for clarification of the BBC 's security arrangements , and pushed for an alternative location . Although the protest organisers UAF rejected suggestions that the protests would be violent , security was stepped up at BBC Television Centre . Simon Darby of the BNP stated there would be no counter @-@ demonstration . Griffin expressed fears over his safety for his arrival and departure . Extra officers of the Metropolitan Police were drafted in to maintain order outside the studios , while the BBC recruited an extra 60 security guards for inside the studio . 
 By mid @-@ afternoon of the day of the programme , protesters had begun gathering outside Television Centre and there were also protesters outside regional BBC offices . By 4 @.@ 30 pm ( BST ) police estimated there were 500 chanting protesters ; around 25 people who reached the main entrance of Television Centre after breaking through a cordon were expelled . They were part of a group of about 40 people that had made a dash for an iron gate that had been left open . After this breach , stand @-@ by officers reinforced the police cordon and protesters moved to block Wood Lane , hoping to prevent Griffin entering the studios . Griffin arrived at 5 @.@ 17 pm unnoticed and entered on foot through a rear entrance on <unk> Road . It was reported that around 600 people had turned up to protest against Griffin . 
 Due to the various protests , Television Centre and other BBC buildings around the country were ' locked down ' until the protesters had dispersed . People arriving for recordings of other shows at Television Centre , such as Friday Night with Jonathan Ross , were turned away . Six people were arrested during the protests , reportedly for " offences including violent disorder , causing actual bodily harm , assault of a police officer and a person wanted on warrant " ; three police officers were slightly injured . Martin Smith , a UAF national officer and , at the time , the Socialist Workers Party National Secretary , was later found guilty of assaulting the police officer at South Western Magistrates ' Court , London , on 7 September 2010 . He was sentenced to a 12 @-@ month community order , with 80 hours ' unpaid work , and was fined £ 450 pending an appeal . 
 = = = Questions = = = 
 Five debate topics were initiated from audience questions during the programme : the BNP 's campaign symbols , Islam , immigration policy , Jan Moir and finally , the show itself . 
 The first three topic starting questions were as follows ( with notes detailing the approximate time into the broadcast the question occurred , the first panellist directed to respond to it by the moderator , and any background information to the question ) : 
 Given that the Second World War was fuelled by the need to disarm oppressive and racist regimes , is it fair that the BNP has hijacked Churchill as its own ? ( 1 minute in , Jack Straw ) This question references the BNP 's use of images of Winston Churchill , the British Prime Minister during World War II , in its recent European election campaign . 
 Why is Islam a " wicked and vicious " faith ? ( 21 , Nick Griffin ) Directed to Nick Griffin , the question was in reference to a quotation attributed to him . 
 Can the recent success of the BNP be explained by the misguided immigration policy of the government ? ( 27 , Jack Straw ) Jack Straw refused to answer this question . 
 Should the Daily Mail have published the Jan Moir article on Stephen Gately ? ( 50 , Bonnie Greer ) Referencing a recent newspaper article written by Daily Mail columnist Jan Moir about the recent death of the former Boyzone bandmember Stephen Gately , which sparked record complaints to the Press Complaints Commission . 
 Might this programme be viewed as an early Christmas present for the BNP ? ( 58 , Chris Huhne ) In reference to the prior comments of Peter Hain after the ruling of the BBC Trust that the programme could go ahead would represent " an early Christmas present " for the BNP . 
 = = = Viewing figures = = = 
 The previous record audience for Question Time was set during its 14 May 2009 edition in the wake of the MPs ' expenses scandal , when 3 @.@ 8 million <unk> and The Guardian had estimated the broadcast might attract ' 3 million or so ' viewers . The programme was watched by over 8 million people , the highest in the 30 @-@ year history of Question Time , and nearly triple the programme 's normal audience of two to three million . 
 In terms of share of audience , the broadcast represented over 50 % of the total audience share on the night , surpassing the previous record of 30 % achieved on the same 14 May 2009 show . The Griffin edition squeezed the audience of Newsnight ( BBC Two ) to 300 @,@ 000 viewers compared to its normal 700 @,@ 000 to 1 million , while a repeat showing of Piers Morgan 's Life Stories on ITV1 attracted 700 @,@ 000 viewers , a 5 % share . The Times noted that audience figures for the show led the BBC 's weekly total , ahead of Strictly Come Dancing on Saturday night . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Public comments = = = 
 While both the BBC and its independent regulator Ofcom had expected a ' barrage ' of complaints over the programme , Ofcom reported having received a " small number of complaints " about the programme by the following day , understood to be fewer than 100 . By noon on Friday 23 October , the BBC had received 416 calls , 243 complaining of bias against Griffin , 114 complaining about Griffin being allowed to appear , and 59 in support of the BBC . The main complaints were reported to be that the programme had overly focused on the BNP , becoming the ' Nick Griffin show ' . Ofcom was considering whether a formal investigation was warranted under the broadcast code section on harm and offence . After one week , Ofcom had received 290 complaints . 
 = = = Panel view = = = 
 Straw described Nick Griffin as a " fantasising conspiracy theorist with some very unpleasant views and no moral compass . But now that he has been exposed for what he is it is time to move on . " Warsi said Griffin was " ... very much exposed for the man that he is . When he was questioned on his views his face of extremism was exposed . He was given an opportunity to explain some of his policies and he couldn 't " . Huhne said , " This is a person who comes from a fascist background ; anyone who watches the programme will see exactly what he stands for . " Greer said Griffin had been " totally trounced " on the show , and that sitting next to Griffin had been " probably the weirdest and most creepy experience of my life " . Nevertheless , Griffin perceived that he had " struck up a rapport " with Greer , who treated him differently from the other panellists . ( Greer avoided looking in Griffin 's direction throughout , and indeed turned her back on him pointedly , and for the remainder of the programme , after he said that the Ku Klux Klan chapter leaders with whom he had been seen had been ' non @-@ violent ' - a remark greeted with laughter from the audience ) Speaking to the Associated Press , Griffin stated that his appearance had secured the BNP 's place on the national stage , and while not revolutionary , was like gaining a kind of " boy scout 's badge " . He was relatively pleased with having " been able to land a few punches of my own " . Later , Griffin declared : " Millions of people are angry about the way I was treated . " Describing the experience as a " lynch mob " , he complained how the choice of London had made it hostile territory for him , and had prevented him from speaking on current events such as the postal strikes . 
 = = = BNP view = = = 
 On 23 October , the day after the broadcast , Griffin announced he would be lodging a formal complaint over the programme , over its focus on BNP issues rather than topical subjects . Griffin stated , " There is not much support for me there [ in London ] , because the place is dominated by ethnic minorities . There is an ethnic minority that supports me : the English . But there 's not many of them left . " A spokesman for the BNP said that London was too " multicultural " to be fair to it and that a location like the northwest of England would have been more favourable . The BNP were also going to file a Freedom of Information Request to the BBC to determine the decision @-@ making process behind hosting the programme in London , and in allowing the debate to focus on the BNP , arguing that criticism of the BNP had dominated the whole programme . 
 Griffin dismissed criticism of his performance , saying " people who have always been against the BNP will say that I couldn 't answer some things . " He was of the opinion that he had been shown " extraordinary hostility " by the main political parties , but that he was happy having done his best . Griffin said : " I can see that millions of people who don 't usually watch Question Time will remember what I 've said and think that 's how they feel and I 'm perfectly happy with that . " He also said he expected the BNP would appear on Question Time again . The BNP legal officer , Lee Barnes , described Griffin 's performance as " failing to press the attack " , and the Evening Standard reported a possible challenge to Griffin 's leadership from a faction within the BNP , linked to Chris Jackson , which was dissatisfied with his performance , but rated this chance of success as low . 
 The BNP also claimed that it had received thousands of pounds in donations , and that 3 @,@ 000 people had expressed an interest on their website in joining the party once their recruitment freeze was lifted . This would represent nearly a 30 % increase in membership according to the party website . 
 While campaigning on 28 October for the forthcoming Glasgow North East by @-@ election on 22 November , Griffin was asked why he had laughed on Question Time . He replied : " I had thought that David Dimbleby would have the professional self @-@ respect to at least make a show of being fair . I was laughing at the fact that I was wrong " , adding , " All that was exposed was the pure , vicious bigotry of the British ruling elite . " 
 = = = Other reactions and analyses = = = 
 The programme was headline news in several of the early Friday paper editions of the British press , from the tabloids to the broadsheets . Tabloid headlines included " Bigot at Bay " ( Daily Mail ) and " When Auntie Met Nazi " ( The Sun : " Auntie " being a nickname for the BBC ) , while broadsheets featured examples such as " Hostile reception for Griffin " ( The Times ) and " Griffin 's baptism of fire at the BBC " ( The Independent ) . 
 Immediately after the show , The Independent said Griffin had " choked " on the oxygen of publicity given him by the BBC . The Times described Griffin as having been " caught in TV 's glare " , subjected to a " hostile hour @-@ long grilling " . The Guardian , however , was of the opinion that , while Griffin was jeered and attacked and " often looked just plain shifty " , he made no major gaffes and would thus think of it as a success . After rating the panel 's performance as " flawed " , and after some questions on the night went unanswered or were avoided by Griffin , it concluded that it " was the audience that came out best from the evening " . The fact that four out of the five question topics on the night were BNP @-@ related was criticised by some who believed it would allow Griffin to claim ' victimisation ' . However , according to The Times , the BBC was ' delighted ' with the strategy , which was to ensure it could not be accused of giving Griffin an " easy ride " . 
 The Welsh Secretary , Peter Hain , who had appealed to the BBC Trust to have Griffin 's appearance prevented , continued to denounce the decision . David Lammy , one of Britain 's first black ministers , feared that people would face violence as a result of the programme . The former Home Secretary , David Blunkett , attacked the way in which BBC News at Six engaged in " deliberate promotion of their own publicity @-@ seeking decision " , opining that " the only people who have benefited from this row are the BNP and the BBC 's Question Time ratings " . The Conservative Mayor of London , Boris Johnson , responded to Griffin 's complaints about the location by defending London 's diversity , urging residents to " reject their narrow , extremist and offensive views at every opportunity " . <unk> Pfeffer , commenting for the Israeli newspaper Haaretz , noted the relative silence of UK Jewish groups over the BNP appearance , and praised the BBC 's decision to give the BNP a voice , stating : " The BBC is right to have Griffin and other racists on its most respectable shows ; it is wrong to apologise . By doing so it is simply fulfilling its democratic and journalistic duties . " Pfeffer compared and contrasted this with Israeli freedom @-@ of @-@ speech laws , and questioned whether Hitler could have risen to power in modern times given the media 's scrutiny of democratic politicians . 
 The Guardian selected a spontaneous joke about the South Pole made by an audience member , <unk> Klare , as the " undoubted highlight " , having raised the loudest cheer from the audience . Klare , the son of Indian parents who migrated to Britain in the 1960s , had suggested collecting money for Griffin to be deported to the South Pole , as " it 's a colourless landscape that will suit you fine " . Klare said that while he did not think so at first , in retrospect he thought that Question Time was the right platform for Griffin . 
 Analysing the broadcast footage , The Times determined that the cameras spent " nearly 25 minutes " of the hour @-@ long programme of the screen time either on Griffin or a " two @-@ shot " with him and another panellist , equating to 38 % . The Daily Mail alleged that the BBC " stage @-@ managed " the programme , highlighting a crib @-@ sheet handed out to the audience members ; The Guardian 's ' Media Monkey ' blog observed that such a sheet is routinely given to the audience , and also accused The Mail of using a ' doctored ' crib @-@ sheet . 
 The first opinion poll taken after Nick Griffin 's appearance , conducted hours after the programme by YouGov for The Daily Telegraph , indicated that voter support for the BNP had increased by 1 % , from 2 % to 3 % , in the previous month , and that 22 % of voters were now " seriously considering " voting BNP in a future local , general or European election — broken down into " definitely " , 4 % ; " probably " , 3 % ; and " possible " , 15 % . The bookmaker , William Hill , changed its odds on the BNP winning a Westminster seat in the 2010 General Election from 10 @-@ 1 to 7 @-@ 2 after the programme . The BNP received 1 @.@ 9 % of the vote in the election and did not win a seat . 
 In an interview in the News of the World , the former Archbishop of Canterbury , George Carey , spoke out against Griffin 's claims that he was representing " Christian Britain " and called on Christians to " stand shoulder to shoulder " in rejecting the British National Party . The Prime Minister , Gordon Brown , did not watch the programme : his office explained that he " very rarely watches Question Time " through lack of time . 
 The programme received attention around the world , including from North America , Asia , the Middle East , Australia , Turkey , Russia , and South America . 
 The media later reported that the cost of policing the appearance had been £ 143 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = BBC view = = = 
 The BBC was subjected to criticism from some of its own staff , as Radio 4 broadcaster Sue MacGregor said that the show " gave the impression of attack dogs against Nick Griffin " , and another presenter called it a " bear pit " . In defence of criticism of the format and focus of the programme , the Deputy Director General Mark Byford stated that " the agenda of the programme was set by the audience 's own questions " . Byford also said of the comments that " clearly Mr Griffin and the BNP were the subject of intense questioning , but all the panellists were given the opportunity to respond and to have their voices heard " . Sir Christopher Bland , the former chairman of the BBC 's board of governors , said , however , that had the BBC not changed the format , the corporation would probably have been accused of leniency . 
 On 23 October , the BBC said it was " too early " to confirm how much more airtime would be given to the BNP in the future ; The Times reported on 24 October that the BBC had " no plans " to have Griffin on Question Time before the next general election . 
 On 28 October , Mark Thompson stated before the House of Lords communications committee that future BNP appearances on Question Time would " probably be no more than once a year and could be less " , based on the party continuing the same levels of support . Thompson denied suggestions that the invitation was made to boost viewing figures . 
 No BNP representative has appeared on the show since the 22 October 2009 broadcast . 
 = Chitty Chitty Death Bang = 
 " Chitty Chitty Death Bang " is the third episode of the first season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . The episode follows Peter after he tries to make amends for his son , Stewie 's , first birthday party when he loses their reservation at a popular kids ' restaurant known as Cheesie Charlie 's . Meanwhile , Meg becomes friends with an excitable girl named Jennifer , who leads her to join a death cult , in an attempt to fit in . 
 The episode was written by Danny Smith and directed by Dominic Polcino , both firsts in the Family Guy series . It was rated TV @-@ 14 . The episode featured guest performances by Butch Hartman , Waylon Jennings , Rachael MacFarlane and John O 'Hurley , along with several recurring voice actors for the series . Much of the episode features a cutaway style of humor that is typically used in Family Guy , many of which feature cultural references including the Incredible Hulk , The Dukes of Hazzard , Three Little Pigs , and <unk> . The title " Chitty Chitty Death Bang " was derived from 1930s and 1940s radio programs , particularly the radio thriller anthology Suspense , which featured several elements pertaining to death and murder . 
 The episode has received praise from television critic Ahsan Haque for its storyline and use of cultural references . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lois has booked Cheesie Charlie 's for Stewie 's upcoming first birthday party and sends Peter , along with Chris , to drop off the deposit check at the restaurant . However , once they arrive , they seek the opportunity to play with all the machines , causing Peter to lose his watch in a claw machine . A little boy wins his watch , which causes Peter to become angry and tries to force the watch off the child . Cheesie Charlie himself sees this and asks Peter to leave . But once Peter shows the deposit check , Cheesie Charlie immediately apologizes and exclaims how they are very excited to host Stewie 's birthday party . Peter , angered by how he was treated , states that they won 't be celebrating Stewie 's party there , which causes a crowd of people to circle around Cheesie Charlie shouting for the reservation . Peter , realizing what he has just done , immediately returns home with a poorly crafted lie in an attempt to evade Lois ' aggravation which involves him saying that they are Nazis who torture , kill and kidnap people . He pretends that he 's already planned an extravagant party at home so that Lois doesn 't have do any work . 
 Meanwhile , Stewie misinterprets the meaning of his birthday and assumes that the same mysterious " Man in White " who delivered him as an infant will be returning to force Stewie back into Lois ' womb from which he escaped just one year ago . Meg cries all the way home to Peter from cheerleading practice , and has been having trouble fitting in at school . Later , she discovers a new friend named Jennifer . Meanwhile , Stewie makes it all the way to the airport looking for tickets but then is stopped by a member of staff . The man then gives Stewie some advice saying that running from your problems never solves anything . Stewie then reflects on this , deciding to finally face " The Man in White " . But before he leaves , he wishes the man luck before freezing him in carbonite . Peter tries desperately , but ultimately unsuccessfully , to put together a party in time for Stewie 's birthday . He finally reroutes a circus into the Griffins ' backyard , saving the day - that is , until he reveals to Lois that he gave Meg permission to go to a party at her friend 's house . Lois , who wanted the whole family together for Stewie 's party , is upset with Peter for letting Meg go . What Peter and Lois don 't realize is that Meg 's " party " is actually a cult meeting where all the members are about to commit group suicide . 
 Peter goes to retrieve Meg from her " party " , oblivious to the fact that he is sparing her life in the process . The Cult Leader chases after them while wearing his ceremonial white robe and is mistaken by Stewie as " The Man in White " . Stewie does away with him and , feeling victorious , joins the others to enjoy his party . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Chitty Chitty Death Bang " was written by Danny Smith and directed by Dominic Polcino , both their first episodes in the Family Guy series . Staff writers included voice actor Mike Henry and Andrew Gormley , while Ricky Blitt , Chris Sheridan as executive story editors , and Neil Goldman and Garrett Donovan acted as the story editors . To help Polcino direct the episode were supervising directors Peter Shin and Roy Allen Smith . 
 In addition to the regular cast , guest stars included actor and comedian Patrick Bristow , animator , executive producer , animation director , storyboard artist and producer Butch Hartman ( who played Mr. Weed , Peter 's boss , and various other characters ) , writer Gary Janetti who played the Demon and Riff ) , actor John O 'Hurley ( who played the Cult Leader ) , and Waylon Jennings ( who played himself ) . Recurring cast members included Mike Henry who played Cleveland Brown and Lori Alan who played Dianne Simons . This is the first episode Seth MacFarlane 's sister , Rachael MacFarlane guest starred in the episode as the voice of Jennifer . In future episodes she would become a recurring voice actor for the series . Rachel has noted that she was asked by Seth to lend her voice for the show , but she did have to audition for the role . 
 As with the remaining first four episodes of the season , the title of the episode , " Chitty Chitty Death Bang " , was derived from 1930s and 1940s radio programs , particularly the radio thriller anthology " Suspense " , which featured several elements pertaining to death and murder . This convention was later dropped following the fourth episode of the season , " A Hero Sits Next Door " . due to individual episodes becoming difficult to identify and distinguish . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Peter explains to Lois why he canceled the party at Cheesie Charlie 's , he said he had been kidnapped by them and that they are Nazis . He explains to Lois that he escaped by turning into the Incredible Hulk . 
 The place where Lois had planned Stewie 's birthday party is called Cheesie Charlie 's , which is a reference to the food chain Chuck E. Cheese 's . 
 When Stewie recalls how he was conceived he tells the story of which he was in a sperm ships and gets in to a fight with other sperm ships is a reference to fights in the Star Wars trilogy . 
 Peter loses his Dukes of Hazzard watch . 
 When Peter is looking for pigs for a petting zoo he takes down a house of straw and a house made of sticks , this is a reference to the fairy tale Three Little Pigs . 
 Peter is also struck in the head by a <unk> on a string , a reference to the film Home Alone . 
 Items added to the suicide cult punch mix by Jennifer include cyanide , arsenic , rat poison , and the book <unk> by Paul Reiser . 
 The episode title is a reference to the 1968 musical film , Chitty Chitty Bang Bang . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A 2008 review of the episode written by Ahsan Haque of IGN was generally positive ; Haque stated that while it he did not believe " Chitty Chitty Death Bang " was an " instant classic , " it has " plenty of memorable moments " and " a nicely crafted storyline . " Haque went on to praise Peter 's attempt to " convince [ Lois ] that the people are Cheesie Charlie 's are Nazi devils who kidnapped him and that he only manages to escape because he was able to turn into the Incredible Hulk , " as well as Stewie 's role in the episode , calling it " extremely clever . " Haque concluded his review by rating the episode an 8 @.@ 4 / 10 . David Williams from the DVD Movie Guide , " said that " this episode saying that the episodes of the first season did a marvelous job of introducing the characters of the series to the viewers . 
 In his review of " Chitty Chitty Death Bang " the TV Critic called the writing in the episode wittier than in previous ones . He found the Stewie storyline very enjoyable , and also commented positively on the moral of the story . He criticized the Meg storyline as he did not find mass suicide funny ; he also commented that Peter felt a lot like Homer from The Simpsons . In his final comments he said it had some odd moments but it was a fun story . 
 = Beurre Maître d 'Hôtel = 
 Beurre Maître d 'Hôtel , also referred to as Maître d 'Hôtel butter , is a type of compound butter ( French : " Beurre composé " ) of French origin , prepared with butter , parsley , lemon juice , salt and pepper . It is a savory butter that is used on meats such as steak ( including the <unk> sauce for <unk> steak ) , fish , vegetables and other foods . It may be used in place of a sauce , and can significantly enhance a dish 's flavor . Some variations with a sweet flavor exist . It is usually served cold as sliced disks on foods , and is sometimes served as a side condiment . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name of Beurre Maître d 'Hôtel is derived from the manner in which it was commonly prepared from scratch by a restaurant 's maître d 'hôtel at diners ' tables . It is also referred to as Maître d 'Hôtel butter . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 Beurre Maître d 'Hôtel is a savory butter prepared by mixing softened butter with very finely minced parsley , lemon juice , salt and pepper . A ratio of around 1 @.@ 5 tablespoons of parsley to two ounces of butter may be used . Additional ingredients may include shallot and Worcestershire sauce . Vinegar is sometimes used , although its inclusion is rare . Cayenne pepper has also been used . After mixing , it is typically rolled in parchment paper or plastic wrap and chilled to harden . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Beurre Maître d 'Hôtel is usually served cold as sliced disks atop various foods , and sometimes as a side condiment . It is used on grilled meats such as steak and fish , and also on eggs , vegetables , potatoes and breads . Some variations exist , including a few sweet versions that include sugar , which may be used on dishes such as pancakes . When used as a topping , it is typically added just before the dish is served . It has also been served melted atop dishes , whereby it is placed atop foods during the last few minutes of cooking . It may be used in the place of a sauce , and a small amount can significantly add to a dish 's overall flavor . 
 = = = In Chateaubriand sauce = = = 
 Beurre Maître d 'Hôtel is used as an ingredient in Chateaubriand sauce , which is sometimes used in the preparation of Chateaubriand steak . The butter is used in the last stage of the sauce 's preparation , whereby after the sauce is strained , it is finished with Beurre Maître d 'Hôtel . Chopped tarragon may also be added to the sauce during this last preparation stage . 
 = Marceline the Vampire Queen = 
 Marceline the Vampire Queen is a character in the American animated television series Adventure Time created by Pendleton Ward . She is voiced by Olivia Olson in most appearances , by Ava Acres as a child and by Cloris Leachman as an old woman . Marceline is a fun @-@ loving 1 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old trickster vampire queen . The name " Marceline " is based on the middle name of a childhood friend of Ward 's , Marie . The artistic design for Marceline was created by Ward , with small changes and additions added by Phil Rynda , former lead @-@ character designer and prop designer for Adventure Time . Unlike a traditional vampire , Marceline does not need to drink blood to survive ; rather , she eats the color red . Marceline is a musician who plays an electric bass that she made from her family 's heirloom battle @-@ axe . 
 The character makes her debut in the first season episode " Evicted ! " and functions as an antagonist , forcing Finn and Jake from their home . However , as the series progresses , Marceline becomes a close friend to Finn and Jake . Information regarding her early life remains sparse as of 2015 ; however , her demon @-@ father Hunson Abadeer ( voiced by Olivia 's real @-@ life father , Martin Olson ) has appeared in several episodes . In addition , Marceline was the focus of a miniseries entitled Stakes , which aired during the show 's seventh season . 
 Marceline has been critically acclaimed and is popular with fans of Adventure Time . Ward himself has stated that Marceline is his favorite character in the series because he does not know everything about her history and backstory , which he noted adds a mysterious element to her character . Despite the positivity , the episodes " What Was Missing " and " Sky Witch " became somewhat controversial because of an implied past relationship between Princess Bubblegum and Marceline . 
 = = Creation and design = = 
 Marceline is one of the major characters in Adventure Time . Although she did not appear in the series ' pilot , the groundwork for her design and character were present in the series pitch book , penned by series creator Pendleton Ward . Marceline 's name is based on the name of a childhood friend of Ward 's , Marie , whose middle name is Marceline . Ward described Marie as someone who likes the horror movie Psycho and wears dark clothing . Ward purposely set out to make Marceline 's character complex , as he explained that " with the female characters it ’ s easy to either write them as clichés or write them as the extreme opposite of those clichés [ … ] I just try to make them have faults and strengths just like Finn and Jake have . " 
 Marceline is voiced by Olivia Olson . Olivia 's father Martin Olson was an acquaintance of Ward , and Olivia was encouraged to audition for Adventure Time after Ward told her father that he wanted " her as a voice " on his show . She had originally auditioned for the role of Princess Bubblegum . After her initial audition , she was asked to read for the role of Marceline , and was " definitely impressed by the character " after seeing design drawings . Martin Olson later noted that Olivia 's audition was a " sham " to please the network executives because Ward had already wanted her to be a voice on the show . In order to get into character , Olson often dresses in a manner similar to Marceline when she records her lines ; she explained , " I always find ... that on the days that I go in to record Marceline , I ’ ll dress like her , in a weird way ... I ’ ll throw on some rock n ’ roll boots , maybe some red lipstick , and just go in there . " Olson also is the character 's singing voice . According to storyboard artist Cole Sanchez , composers Casey James Basichis and Tim Kiefer produce the bass music that the character performs in the series . Many of the songs written for Marceline were uploaded onto the internet by the writers as well as the production company . For instance , Rob Sugar — the father of former storyboard artist Rebecca Sugar — often uploaded demos of songs written for Marceline by Rebecca . Furthermore , Frederator also posted demos , as well as a full version of the popular " Fry Song " , sung by Marceline in the episode " It Came from the Nightosphere " , on its official blog . In flashback sequences , younger Marceline is voiced by Ava Acres . In the fifth season episodes " Finn the Human " and " Jake the Dog " , an older , alternate universe version of the character is voiced by Cloris Leachman . Martin Olson also provides the voice for Marceline 's demonic father Hunson Abadeer . Olivia Olson later noted that the opportunity to voice act with her father was " pretty cool ” . 
 The design for Marceline was created by Ward , with small changes and additions added by Phil Rynda , former lead character and prop designer for Adventure Time . Visually , Marceline has long , dark hair . She rarely walks on the ground , generally preferring to float when she travels , moves , and sleeps . Marceline , unlike many of the other characters , wears varying outfits in most of her appearances . According to Ward , her clothing changes from episode to episode because " girls own more than one outfit " . Olson was impressed by her character 's fashion design stating , " she has really cool style [ … ] I love what they come up with [ in ] every episode . " Olson explained that when she goes in to record the voices for each episode , she is " totally surprised " by the costuming for Marceline . While she says her lines , she is able to view the animatics for the episode and sometimes has to stop to admire the unique designs . Marceline 's physical size and shape slightly changes depending on who is drawing her . Rynda later called this " one of the coolest parts " about the character 's animation due to the fact that " every artist leaves a little bit of their own taste and sensibilities in what they draw . " 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Roughly a thousand years prior to the events of the series , Marceline was born to a demon lord named Hunson Abadeer ( voiced by Martin Olson ) and a human woman ( voiced by Rebecca Sugar ) . Abadeer is the ruler of the Nightosphere — a Hell @-@ like demon dimension — and subsists on the souls of sentient beings . For some reason , Marceline was left abandoned on Earth in events immediately following the Mushroom War , a mysterious war that ravaged the earth one thousand years prior to events of the series . During this time , Simon Petrikov — the name of the Ice King before he was overcome by the evil power of his crown — found Marceline in the ruins of a city and gave her a stuffed animal named Hambo to cheer her up . The two developed a caring relationship , although the crown took a toll on Simon 's mental health , forcing him to leave Marceline alone . During this period in her life , she was reunited with her father , only to be disgusted by his cold and heartless ways . Although she attempted to tolerate his evil and selfish antics , she eventually severed all ties with Abadeer after she discovered him eating fries that she had made for herself . In the following years , Marceline roamed the land of Ooo and eventually befriended a tribe of humans . She became their guardian and ally , and she helped them kill vampires , who had taken over much of the land . Marceline soon discovered that , upon killing a vampire , she was able to acquire their unique abilities . However , when she tried to fight the Vampire King himself , she was bitten . Although she eventually managed to slay him , she was turned in the process . At some point , she began a romantic relationship with a magician named Ash . The two would move into the Tree Fort , but their relationship would come to an end . Presumably , around this time , Marceline befriended Princess Bubblegum ; the two would often avoid official royal meetings and explore the Candy Kingdom 's elaborate rock candy mining complex . Eventually , however , Bubblegum pushed Marceline away , leaving an animosity between the two that lasted for a while . 
 In the series ' present , Marceline eventually comes into contact with Finn and Jake in the episode " Evicted ! " , when she forces them from their home . In the episode " Henchman " , Marceline tricks Finn into becoming her accomplice , but Finn soon discovers that she is not evil , but rather fond of mischief and pranks , and the two develop a friendship . In the second season premiere " It Came From the Nightosphere " , Abadeer is accidentally summoned to Ooo by Finn . While Abadeer ravages the land , Finn discovers that there is animosity between Marceline and her father . Finn manages to distract Abadeer by playing a recording of Marceline 's " Fry Song " , which leads to a brief moment of reconciliation between the two before Finn sends him back to the Nightosphere . In the third season episode " Memory of a Memory " , Ash attempts to rekindle his former relationship with Marceline via trickery . Disguised as Marceline 's " spirit animal " , he tricks Finn and Jake into believing that Marceline has fallen asleep due to a sleep spell that has been self @-@ inflicted . Following Ash 's advice , the two enter into Marceline 's mind to retrieve the " memory core " in an attempt to wake her up . Along the way , they encounter various memories of her as a child in the aftermath of the Mushroom War . However , the duo soon learn that it was an elaborate trick by Ash ; Finn and Jake actually removed Marceline 's memory of their break @-@ up . In the end , Finn is able to convince Marceline , and she promptly attacks her chauvinistic ex @-@ boyfriend . In " What Was Missing " , past animosity between Marceline and Princess Bubblegum is explored when Finn , Jake , Princess Bubblegum , BMO , and Marceline form a band in order to defeat the Door Lord and recover what was stolen from them . 
 In " Daddy 's Little Monster " , Marceline 's dad returns and gives her an amulet that causes her to become the demonic and evil overlord of the Nightosphere . After an ordeal , Finn saves Marceline from the amulet . Marceline admits that all she wants is for her father to understand her . When Finn wishes for an alternate reality in which the Lich never existed during the events of the fifth season premiere " Finn the Human " , a universe is created in which the Mushroom War was prevented by Simon Petrikov and Marceline never became a vampire . She appears in the episode as an extremely frail and aged half @-@ demon , who was killed when a " mutagenic bomb " that was frozen in ice by Simon Petrikov detonates . Jake manages to undo this reality with his wish and sets everything back to the way it was . In " Sky Witch " , Marceline enlists the help of Princess Bubblegum , and the two are able to track down Maja , the titular Sky Witch . It is revealed that Ash sold Hambo to Maja . Only when Bubblegum trades her beloved rock shirt — which was given to her by Marceline — is Hambo able to be reunited with Marceline . After the events of " Sky Witch " , Bubblegum and Marceline are on much friendlier ground , and their friendship is completely reaffirmed in the seventh season episode " <unk> " . In " Betty " , Marceline sacrifices Hambo so that Ice King — who lost his powers and became Simon Petrikov again — can open a portal into time so that Simon can reconcile with his estranged fiancee Betty . 
 The miniseries Stakes , which aired during the show ’ s seventh season , documents the reemergence of five of Marceline ’ s most powerful vampiric foes : the Fool ( voiced by Ron Funches ) , the Empress Eyes ( voiced by Rebecca Romijn ) , the Hierophant ( voiced by Paul Williams ) , the Moon ( voiced by Beau Billingslea ) , and the Vampire King himself ( voiced by Billy Brown ) . The quintet <unk> after Bubblegum tries to extract Marceline ’ s vampiric essence , in an attempt to return Marceline to her normal half @-@ demon state . The reappearance of these vampires forces Marceline , Bubblegum , Finn , Jake , and Peppermint Butler ( voiced by Steve Little ) to stake them one @-@ by @-@ one , although the Vampire King is neutralized through a scientific process that removes the vampiric essence from his body . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 The gender @-@ swapped version of Marceline — named Marshall Lee — appeared in the third season episode " Fionna and Cake " . This version of the character only had a small cameo and no lines . It was later revealed that another Fionna and Cake episode was in the works for season five , and that the plot would largely revolve around Marshall Lee . The episode — titled " Bad Little Boy " — aired on February 18 , 2013 . In the episode , the princesses that are captured by the Ice King are tired of his poorly written Fionna and Cake fan fiction stories , so Marceline stops by the Ice Kingdom to show him how to properly do it ; she tells a tale involving her gender @-@ swapped character , Marshall Lee . The character was voiced by comedian and musician Donald Glover . 
 A six issue spin @-@ off comic miniseries titled Marceline and the Scream Queens , written by Meredith Gran of Octopus Pie , debuted in July 2012 . The series featured Marceline and Princess Bubblegum forming a band and touring around Ooo . The series is published by Boom ! Studios under its kid @-@ oriented imprint KaBoom , which also publishes the rest of the Adventure Time series . Other contributors to the series include Faith Erin Hicks , and Liz Prince . KaBoom has also published Seeing Red by Kate Leth , and Marceline Gone Adrift by Gran . 
 Marceline is also featured in the iOS game Adventure Time : Rock Bandits . In the context of the game , the Ice King kidnaps Marceline 's fans at a concert so that they will be his fans instead . Finn and Jake must then free the captured citizens . Marceline is set to appear as a playable character in the toys @-@ to @-@ life video game Lego Dimensions , distributed via a " fun pack " containing a Marceline Lego minifigure and a <unk> " Lunatic Amp " accessory . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Personality and traits = = = 
 In the context of the series , Marceline is a half @-@ demon and half @-@ human vampire , and the eponymous Vampire Queen , after having killed the previous Vampire King . Although she is at least 1 @,@ 000 years old , she was designed to appear in the form of an 18- to 21 @-@ year @-@ old . In her first role , Marceline functions as the antagonist of the story , forcing Finn and Jake from their home . However , as the series progressed , she became a close friend to the two . Ward has stated that she is not a villain . Marceline 's wandering of the Land of Ooo has made her into a fearless daredevil . Her fondness for mischief and fun has turned her into a trickster . Although appearing hostile at first , Finn soon realizes that she is " a radical dame who likes to play games " . 
 Marceline does not need to drink blood to survive . Rather , she only needs to eat the color red out of objects . She can eat various shades of red , including " low @-@ grade " shades such as pink . Since she is only satiated by the color , blood is only appealing to her because it is red . However , Ward has noted that she " drinks blood sometimes " . When Marceline is deprived of red , she enters into a " feral " state , and will instinctively try to kill others and drink their blood . Like traditional Western vampires , she is vulnerable to sunlight and is capable of turning into a bat of varying size . Marceline also possesses several powers , such as levitation , invisibility , and the ability to shape @-@ shift into various paranormal creatures , and self @-@ healing ; she gained these powers after absorbing the essence of five powerful vampires , as documented in Stakes . Marceline is also a survivor of the Mushroom War . Hints of her past are sprinkled through the series ; in " Memory of a Memory " a trip into Marceline 's mind shows her as a child wandering around the outskirts of a destroyed city , and " I Remember You " features her meeting Simon Petrikov in a ruined city . 
 She was very emotionally attached to her teddy bear Hambo , which was given to her by a still @-@ human Simon Petrikov , as revealed in the episode " I Remember You " . In " Memory of a Memory " , after Ash sold the teddy bear to a witch , Marceline was furious and broke up with him . In the episode " Sky Witch " , Marceline enlists Princess Bubblegum 's help , and they retrieve the bear , but in " Betty " , she sacrifices the bear in order to allow Simon the chance to communicate with his fiancée . Although she is very independent , her detachment often makes her feel alone , as seen in " Marceline 's Closet " ; while Jake and Finn are hiding in her closet , she expresses most of her feeling via the writings of her 500 @-@ year @-@ old diary . Throughout the series , Marceline is seen playing music ; in several official sources , she is described as " a wild rocker girl " . Several times throughout the series , she jams with Finn and Jake , and various others depending on the circumstances . She is usually shown playing her axe bass , which was formerly her family 's heirloom battle axe . According to Ward , she is ambidextrous , which explains her ability to play bass with both hands . She often finds it easier to express her feelings through music , as seen with songs like the " Fry Song " , about her father , and " I 'm Just Your Problem " , about her relationship with Princess Bubblegum . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Marceline has a close relationship with Finn and Jake . Marceline and Finn have many things in common with one another ; in the episodes " Evicted " and " Henchman " it is stated that the reason Marceline befriended Finn is because he simply enjoys being himself . Although she has kissed Finn platonically on the cheek twice , Ward has noted that there is no romantic subtext between the two . On the other hand , Marceline and Jake share a more complex relationship . In her initial appearances , she derived pleasure from scaring Jake , who was terrified " of her vampire bite " . Jake , in turn , felt that she was evil and had managed to take over Finn 's mind . Due to this , Jake attempted to kill her several times , to no avail . However , after the events of " Henchman " , Jake seems to have forgotten his fear of her ; in " Memory of a Memory " , he even refers to her as a " friend " in one of her memories . 
 Marceline shares a rocky relationship with Princess Bubblegum . Initially , in the series bible , the two were described as " friendly rivals " competing for Finn 's attention . However , as the show has gone on , their relationship has been fleshed out and changed . Marceline was the first person to address Bubblegum by her first name — <unk> — which occurred in the episode " Go With Me " . Their connections are explored further in the season three episode " What Was Missing " . In the episode , Marceline 's song " I 'm Just Your Problem " and the dialogue between her and Bubblegum implied that there may have had some sort of relationship in the past , although the exact details surrounding the nature of the relationship were not explained . This later caused an internet controversy over Marceline 's sexual orientation . However , after the events of " What Was Missing " , Marceline and Bubblegum 's relationship seems to have gotten better , as the two spend quality time together in " Sky Witch " and " Stakes " . 
 Marceline and her father , Hunson Abadeer , have trouble accepting one another . Initially , Marceline feels that her father does not care for her , and expresses her feelings through the before @-@ mentioned " Fry Song " . Although they admit to loving each other , Abadeer constantly pressures Marceline to follow in the family business and take over ruling the Nightosphere , a prospective job Marceline does not want . Marceline and the Ice King also have a complicated relationship . In the episode " I Remember You " , it is revealed that the Ice King — then , the human man named Simon Petrikov — discovered her crying in the ruins of a city destroyed by the Mushroom Wars . It was Simon who gave little Marceline Hambo and attempted to watch over her . This kind gesture made the Ice King a long @-@ time close friend to Marceline . However , as the crown 's power increased , Simon began to forget more and more about his relationship with Marceline , until he had all but forgotten their friendship . Former storyboard artist and current supervising director for the series Adam Muto explained that Marceline and the Ice King 's history was not part of the series ' initial plan , but something that " evolved from [ the show 's ] original course and it will likely continue to evolve in the future . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Marceline has attracted positive critical attention . Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club praised that the fact that she is one " of this show ’ s most tragic characters " . He later wrote that her addition " was a major turning point for the series , introducing a hip , adventure @-@ loving female to the cast who can hold her own against Finn and Jake and also has a strong connection to Ooo ’ s past . " Furthermore , he noted that " she ’ s been at the center of some of the show ’ s most emotional episodes " , and " beyond her dramatic value , Marceline tends to just make every episode better " because " her writers clearly enjoy writing scenes for her " . Susana Polo of The Mary Sue referred to the character as " one of the radder characters " in the series . Cam Shea of IGN named Marceline 's introduction in " Evicted ! " as the fourth best moment in the series ' first season . He wrote that " sure , in this episode she evicts Finn and Jake from their home ... but hey , this is the first time we meet her and she 's awesome . " He later wrote that " Marceline = best " . io9 writer Charlies Jane Anders wrote that Marceline 's — as well as the Ice King 's — appearance in " I Remember You " was " one of the most intense things I 've seen in ages . " She praised Marceline 's development from a " pretty one @-@ note villain " to a type of person that " we sort of knew " . <unk> named her " Character of the Week " on January 24 , 2012 . The Guardian called Marceline the best character in Adventure Time in a DVD review of the series , noting in particular that " she 's … responsible for some of the show 's best songs . " 
 The production crew of Adventure Time are also pleased with the character . Ward has stated several times that Marceline is his favorite character because he does not " know everything about her character yet " , which he finds " mysterious [ and ] cool " . Rynda claimed that Marceline was probably his favorite character in the series because " she 's just really fun to draw . " Marceline is also particularly popular with the Adventure Time fan base , and after the release of " Evicted ! " her popularity grew enormously . Ward later noted that he felt " good about that . It 's nice " . The character 's popularity has been recognized by the company that owns Adventure Time . In fact , the official press release for the Adventure Time : Marceline and the Scream Queens companion comic book referred to the character as a " fan @-@ favorite " . 
 Marceline 's popularity has transcended into other mediums of popular culture ; American singer Willow dedicated two tracks of her debut album <unk> to the character , which were eponymously named after her . 
 = = = Relationship controversy = = = 
 The episode " What Was Missing " became controversial because of an allegedly implied past relationship between Marceline and Princess Bubblegum . The controversy largely began after an accompanying " Mathematical " recap — a studio @-@ endorsed behind the scenes video series implied that there were lesbian relations between Princess Bubblegum and Marceline and that the writing staff actively seeks input from fans . This incident was addressed by the show 's producer , Fred Seibert , who said that " in trying to get the show ’ s audience involved we got wrapped up by both fan conjecture and spicy fanart and went a little too far . " Soon after , the video recap and the entire channel was pulled off of YouTube , although " What Was Missing " still airs during reruns . Seibert 's decision to remove the video also proved controversial ; Bitch magazine later wrote an article about how the episode " handled female desire — female queer desire at that — in a subtle but complex way " , but that the removal of the recap and the studio 's perceived treatment of the controversy was detrimental towards the acceptance of queer romance in children 's television . Ward later addressed the issue and gave a more neutral view ; he said that , because there were " so many extreme positions taken on it all over the Internet " , he did not " really want to comment on it [ because ] it was a big hullaballoo . " 
 In August 2014 , Olson told a crowd of fans gathered at a Barnes & Noble book signing from The Adventure Time Encyclopedia , that , according to Ward , Marceline and Princess Bubblegum had dated in the past , but that because the series airs in some areas where homosexual relationships are illegal , the show has not been able to officially make clear the relationship in the series itself . 
 = Red @-@ tailed black cockatoo = 
 The red @-@ tailed black cockatoo ( Calyptorhynchus banksii ) also known as <unk> or Banks ' black cockatoo , is a large black cockatoo native to Australia . Adult males have a characteristic pair of bright red panels on the tail that gives the species its name . It is more common in the drier parts of the continent . Five subspecies are recognised , differing most significantly in beak size . Although the more northerly subspecies are widespread , the two southern subspecies , the forest red @-@ tailed black cockatoo and the south @-@ eastern red @-@ tailed black cockatoo are under threat . 
 The species is usually found in eucalyptus woodlands , or along water courses . In the more northerly parts of the country , these cockatoos are commonly seen in large flocks . They are seed eaters and cavity nesters , and as such depend on trees with fairly large diameters , generally Eucalyptus . Populations in southeastern Australia are threatened by deforestation and other habitat alterations . Of the black cockatoos , the red @-@ tailed is the most adaptable to aviculture , although black cockatoos are much rarer and much more expensive in aviculture outside Australia . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The species complex was first described by the ornithologist John Latham in 1790 as Psittacus banksii , commemorating English botanist Sir Joseph Banks . The red @-@ tailed black cockatoo also has the distinction of being the first bird from Eastern Australia illustrated by a European , as a female , presumably collected at Endeavour River in north Queensland , was sketched by Banks ' draughtsman Sydney Parkinson in 1770 . Narrowly predating Latham , English naturalist George Shaw described Psittacus magnificus from a specimen collected somewhere in the Port Jackson ( now Sydney ) region . For many years , the species was referred to as Calyptorhynchus magnificus , proposed by Gregory Mathews in 1927 as Shaw 's name had predated Latham 's 1790 description . For several decades , Mathews ' proposal was accepted by many authorities , although it was unclear whether the original Port Jackson reference had actually referred to the red @-@ tailed black or , more likely , the glossy black cockatoo . In 1994 , an application to conserve Calyptorhynchus banksii as the scientific name was accepted by the ICZN . The red @-@ tailed black cockatoo is the type species of the genus Calyptorhynchus , the name of which is derived from the Greek <unk> / <unk> " hidden " and <unk> / <unk> " beak " . The change was first made by Anselme Gaëtan Desmarest in 1826 . 
 In 1827 , Jennings proposed the name Psittacus niger for the bird . The binomial combination had already been used by Carl Linnaeus for the lesser vasa parrot in 1758 , and by Johann Friedrich Gmelin for the palm cockatoo in 1788 ; it was thus invalid even though both other species were already known by different names at the time . Alternate common names include Banks ' black cockatoo , <unk> black cockatoo , or simply black cockatoo . Indigenous people of the central Cape York Peninsula have several names for the bird : ( minha ) <unk> in Pakanh ; ( <unk> - ) <unk> in Uw Oykangand ; and ( <unk> - ) <unk> in Uw Olkola . ( The bracketed prefix ( inh- or minha ) is a qualifier meaning ' meat ' or ' animal ' . ) <unk> or <unk> are terms used by the Gunwinggu of Arnhem Land . In Central Australia , southwest of Alice Springs , the Pitjantjatjara term for the subspecies C. b. samueli is <unk> . <unk> is a Noongar term derived from the call for the southwestern race C. b. naso . In the language of the <unk> of south @-@ eastern South Australia and western Victoria this bird was called <unk> . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 The red @-@ tailed black cockatoo 's closest relative is the glossy black cockatoo ; the two species form the subgenus Calyptorhynchus within the genus of the same name . They are distinguished from the other black cockatoos of the subgenus Zanda by their significant sexual dimorphism and calls of the juveniles ; one a squeaking begging call , the other a vocalization when swallowing food . 
 A 1999 mtDNA phylogenetic study of cockatoos utilizing among others , the red @-@ tailed black cockatoo supported the hypotheses that cockatoos originated in Australia before the Paleogene and Neogene periods ( 66 mya , marking the end of the Mesozoic , to 2 @.@ 6 mya ) and that the genus Cacatua diversified in two separate radiations to the islands of Indonesia , New Guinea , and the South Pacific . It concluded that the first extant cockatoo to diverge from the ancestral cockatoos was the palm cockatoo , followed by a subclade containing the black cockatoos . 
 A 2008 mitochondrial and nuclear DNA phylogenetic study of the parrots , cockatoos and related taxa by utilizing among others the yellow @-@ tailed black cockatoo , provides confirmatory evidence for a Gondwanaland origin of the ancestral parrots in the Cretaceous period , and an Australasia divergence of the ancestral cockatoos from the parrots in either late Cretaceous ( 66 mya ) or Paleogene ( 45 mya ) periods depending on baseline assumptions . 
 Five subspecies are recognised ; they differ mainly in the size and shape of the beak , the overall bird size and female colouration : 
 C. b. banksii is found in Queensland and , rarely , in far northern New South Wales ; it is the largest subspecies by overall body size and has a moderate @-@ sized bill . It merges with subspecies macrorhynchus around the Gulf of Carpentaria . It has disappeared from much of its former range in northern New South Wales and southeast Queensland . 
 C. b. graptogyne , ( Endangered ) known as the south @-@ eastern red @-@ tailed black cockatoo , is found in southwestern Victoria and southeastern South Australia in an area bordered by Mount Gambier to the west , Portland to the south , Horsham to the northeast and Bordertown to the north . The smallest of the five subspecies , it was only recognised as distinct in the 1980s . It is predominantly dependent on stands of Eucalyptus baxteri ( brown stringybark ) , Eucalyptus camaldulensis ( river <unk> ) and Allocasuarina <unk> ( buloke ) for feeding and nesting . These tree species have been all threatened by land clearing and most remaining are on private land ; possibly only 500 – 1000 individuals remain . The subspecies and its habitat are the subject of a national recovery plan . In 2007 local landowners are being reimbursed for assisting in regenerating suitable habitat . 
 C. b. macrorhynchus , given the name great @-@ billed cockatoo by Mathews , is found across northern Australia . Although thought to be widespread and abundant , this subspecies has been little studied . It is also large and has a large beak , as its subspecific name implies . Females lack red colouration in their tails . 
 C. b. naso ( Near Threatened ) is known as the forest red @-@ tailed black cockatoo and is found in the southwest corner of Western Australia between Perth and Albany . This form has a larger bill , and favours marri ( Corymbia ( formerly Eucalyptus ) calophylla ) , jarrah ( E. marginata ) and karri ( E. diversicolor ) . 
 C. b. samueli exists in four scattered populations : in central coastal Western Australia from the Pilbara south to the northern Wheatbelt in the vicinity of Northam , and inland river courses in Central Australia , southwestern Queensland and the upper Darling River system in Western New South Wales . Birds of this subspecies are generally smaller with smaller bills than the nominate banksii . 
 = = Description = = 
 Red @-@ tailed black cockatoos are around 60 centimetres ( 24 in ) in length and sexually dimorphic . The male 's plumage is all black with a prominent black crest made up of elongated feathers from the forehead and crown . The bill is dark grey . The tail is also black with two lateral bright red panels . Females are black with yellow @-@ orange stripes in the tail and chest , and yellow grading to red spots on the cheeks and wings . The bill is pale and horn @-@ coloured . The underparts are barred with fine yellow over a black base . Male birds weigh between 670 and 920 grams ( 1 @.@ 5 – 2 lb ) , while females weigh slightly less at 615 – 870 grams ( 1 @.@ 25 – 1 @.@ 75 lb ) . In common with other cockatoos and parrots , red @-@ tailed black cockatoos have zygodactyl feet , two toes facing forward and two backward , that allow them to grasp objects with one foot while standing on the other , for feeding and manipulation . Black cockatoos are almost exclusively left @-@ footed ( along with nearly all other cockatoos and most parrots ) . 
 Juvenile red @-@ tailed black cockatoos resemble females until puberty , which occurs around four years of age , but have paler yellow barred underparts . As the birds reach maturity , males gradually replace their yellow tail feathers with red ones ; the complete process takes around four years . 
 As with other cockatoos , the red @-@ tailed black cockatoo can be very long @-@ lived in captivity ; in 1938 , ornithologist Neville Cayley reported one over fifty years old at Taronga Zoo . Another bird residing at London and Rotterdam Zoos was 45 years and 5 months of age when it died in 1979 . 
 Several calls of red @-@ tailed black cockatoos have been recorded . The bird 's contact call is a rolling metallic <unk> @-@ rr or <unk> , which may carry long distances and is always given while flying ; its alarm call is sharp . Displaying males vocalize a sequence of soft growling followed by a repetitive kred @-@ kred @-@ kred @-@ kred . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The red @-@ tailed black cockatoo principally occurs across the drier parts of Australia . It is widespread and abundant in a broad band across the northern half of the country , where it has been considered an agricultural pest , with more isolated distribution in the south . It is found in a wide variety of habitats , from shrublands and grasslands through eucalypt , sheoak and Acacia woodlands , to dense tropical rainforests . The bird is dependent on large , old eucalypts for nesting hollows , although the specific gums used vary in different parts of the country . 
 Cockatoos are not wholly migratory , but they do exhibit regular seasonal movements in different parts of Australia . In the northern parts of the Northern Territory , they largely leave areas of high humidity in the summer wet season . In other parts of the country cockatoo seasonal movements tend to follow food sources , a pattern recorded in Northern Queensland , and New South Wales . In southwest Western Australia , both extant subspecies appear to have a north @-@ south pattern ; northwards after breeding in the case of subspecies naso , while movements by subspecies samueli in the wheatbelt can be irregular and unrelated to the seasons . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Red @-@ tailed black cockatoos are diurnal , raucous and noisy , and are often seen flying high overhead in small flocks , sometimes mixed with other cockatoos . Flocks of up to 500 birds are generally only seen in the north or when the birds are concentrated at some food source . Otherwise , they are generally rather shy of humans . In northern and central Australia , birds may feed on the ground , while the two southern subspecies , graptogyne and naso , are almost exclusively arboreal . They tend to fly rather slowly with intermittent deep flapping wingbeats , markedly different from the shallow wingbeats of the similar glossy black cockatoo . They also often fly at considerable height . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Although red @-@ tailed black cockatoos feed on a wide variety of native and introduced grains , the mainstay of their diet is eucalyptus seeds . There is a specific relationship between the species and larger @-@ fruited species of gums . These vary across Australia but include the marri in Southwest Western Australia , Darwin <unk> E. miniata across the north of the country , E. baxteri in Victoria and the bloodwood species Corymbia <unk> and C. intermedia in Queensland . Cockatoos bite off branchlets with clusters of seed capsules , then hold them with their feet while chewing and harvesting seeds before littering the ground with debris . Among other seeds and nuts consumed are those of Acacia , Allocasuarina , Banksia , Grevillea and Hakea , as well as berries , fruits and various insects . Cockatoos have adapted to eating some introduced plants such as the <unk> ( <unk> australis ) . There is some evidence of consumption of wild radish ( Raphanus <unk> ) , wild turnip ( Brassica <unk> ) and melon ( Citrullus or <unk> ) . Red @-@ tailed black cockatoos have been implicated as agricultural pests of peanut and other crops at Lakeland Downs in Far North Queensland . Here the cockatoos , in flocks of up to several hundred birds , have learned to sever the peanut plants above ground level before pulling the peanuts out of the ground by their stems and shelling them . They also damage electrical cables on pivot irrigators . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The male red @-@ tailed black cockatoo courts by puffing up crest and cheek feathers , and hiding the beak ; it then sings and struts , ending in a jump and a flash of red tail feathers toward the female who will most often reply by defensively biting him . Breeding generally takes place from May to September except in the case of the South @-@ eastern subspecies , which nests during summer ( December to February ) . Pairs of the subspecies samueli in the Wheatbelt region of Western Australia may produce two broods , while those of South @-@ eastern subspecies only produce one . Nesting takes place in large vertical tree hollows of tall trees . Isolated trees are generally chosen , so birds can fly to and from them relatively unhindered . The same tree may be used for many years . Hollows can be 1 to 2 metres ( 3 – 7 ft ) deep and 0 @.@ 25 – 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 10 – 20 in ) wide , with a base of woodchips . A clutch consists of 1 to 2 white , lustreless eggs , although the second chick is in most cases neglected and perishes in infancy . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The red @-@ tailed black cockatoo is protected under the Australian Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Amendment ( Wildlife Protection ) Act 2001 . These birds are listed internationally under Appendix II of CITES , which allows international trade in live wild @-@ caught and captive @-@ bred specimens , if such exports are not detrimental to wild populations . However , the current Australian restrictions on commercial exports from Australia are not imposed by CITES . C. b. graptogyne is also specifically listed as endangered on the Australian Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 . 
 Status of the red @-@ tailed black cockatoo as a species , and as a subspecies , also varies from state to state within Australia . For example : 
 The south @-@ eastern red @-@ tailed black cockatoo subspecies C. b. graptogyne is listed as endangered on Schedule 7 of the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1972 of South <unk> and is the smallest of the species . Though a June , 2012 count of approximately 1500 individuals is a notable increase from the 2007 count of just 1000 , it remains in danger of extinction . 
 C. b. graptogyne is also listed as threatened on the Victorian Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act ( 1988 ) . Under this Act , an Action Statement for the recovery and future management of this species has been prepared . However , it should also be noted that the red @-@ tailed black cockatoo is listed under this Act under its previous Latin name , Calyptorhynchus magnificus . On the 2007 advisory list of threatened vertebrate fauna in Victoria , this subspecies is listed as endangered . 
 The red @-@ tailed black cockatoo is listed as vulnerable on the NSW Threatened Species Conservation Act ( 1995 ) 
 Like many Australian cockatoos and parrots , the red @-@ tailed black cockatoo is threatened by the thriving illegal trade in bird smuggling . High demand and high transit mortality mean that many more birds are taken from the wild than actually sold . 
 In 1997 , the Northern Territory Government 's Department of Natural Resources , Environment and The Arts ( now defunct ) proposed a plan for management of the trade in eggs and nestlings of C. b. macrorhynchus . To date the plan has not been implemented . The Australian Senate inquiry into the Commercial Utilisation of Australian Native Wildlife concluded in early 1998 that routine capture and commercial use of adult wild birds should be prohibited . 
 = = Aviculture = = 
 In the late 1990s , red @-@ tailed black cockatoos fetched prices of $ 1750 in Australia and $ <unk> ( ~ US $ 6000 ) overseas . Hand @-@ raised birds can be bought for anywhere between $ 15 @,@ 000 to $ 40 @,@ 000 in the United States , where they are seldom seen in aviculture . Hand @-@ reared birds are able to learn a few words and can be quite affectionate , although males may become imprinted and unlikely to breed . The red @-@ tailed black cockatoo is the most commonly seen of the black cockatoos in captivity , and can be hardy and long @-@ lived if given plenty of space . Until now , most birds in captivity have been of subspecies C. b. banksii and C. b. samueli . Birds were often previously bred without much attention to subspecies of origin . However , with an increase in interest in conservation , more <unk> are concerned about maintaining the integrity of the separate subspecies in cultivation , and so avoid crossbreeding . 
 The birds breed easily in captivity and can lay eggs every 3 weeks between February and November . Once the female has one egg in her nest , she will not lay another . An egg takes about 30 days to hatch . The eyes of the young open around 3 weeks and the yellow down will show black pin feathers at about 6 weeks . The best time for hand raising is at about 10 weeks when their black feathers are in place but the tail feathers are still short . Young birds fledge after about 4 months and both sexes have the colouring of their mother . Mature male birds will become aggressive to young male birds at puberty ( 4 years ) ; they must be separated if caged . 
 The large and powerful bills of these birds can quickly and easily open a Brazil nut ( normally requiring crushing in a vise or pounding with a hammer ) , shearing it as neatly as a <unk> can also demolish a whole coconut with husk in 3 days 
 Captive breeding guidelines may be found in Husbandry Guidelines for the Red @-@ tailed Black Cockatoo ( Bennett , 2008 ) . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 A red @-@ tailed black cockatoo , named Karak , was the official mascot of the 2006 Commonwealth Games held in Melbourne . Promotion coincided with an implementation of initiatives to ensure the survival of the South @-@ eastern subspecies graptogyne , as well as increased environmental awareness at the games . 
 A traditional story from western Arnhem Land tells of Black Cockatoo and her husband Crow , who are Bird @-@ people , sprouting black feathers after becoming afflicted with a sickness from across the sea to the north . In fear of being buried underground , they transform into birds and fly high in the sky . 
 In the folklore of the Tiwi people , the red @-@ tailed black cockatoo is said to accompany the dead to heaven . 
 = Daicon III and IV Opening Animations = 
 The Daicon III and IV Opening Animations are two short , anime , 8 mm films that were produced for the 1981 Daicon III and 1983 Daicon IV Nihon SF <unk> conventions . They were produced by a group of amateur animators known as Daicon Film , who would later go on to form the animation studio Gainax . The films are known for their unusually high production values for amateur works and for including numerous references to otaku culture , as well as its appropriation of the song " Twilight " ( 1981 ) by English rock band Electric Light Orchestra . 
 Daicon III was made by Hideaki Anno , Hiroyuki Yamaga and Takami Akai and Daicon IV credits twelve people , including Yamada as the director and Anno and Akai as animation supervisors . Despite the questionable legal status of the works , the production of Daicon III resulted in debts that were repaid by selling video tapes and 8mm reels of the production ; of which the profits went to the production of Daicon IV . In 2001 , the anime magazine Animage ranked the Daicon animations as the 35th of the " Top 100 " anime of all time . 
 = = Summary = = 
 = = = Daicon III Opening Animation = = = 
 The Jet VTOL ship from Ultraman 's Science Patrol descends out of the sky toward Earth , as a school girl , carrying her <unk> , observes from behind a tree . The Science Patrol offer the girl a cup of water and ask her to deliver it to " DAICON " . The girl salutes and races away , but she quickly experiences trouble as Punk Dragon blocks her path . He summons a mecha from Starship Troopers , and it and the girl begin battling . The girl tosses the mecha aside and <unk> rises from the earth . Using a booster concealed in her backpack , the girl flies up into the sky and evades <unk> 's blast , with the mecha flying after her . They continue their battle in mid @-@ air . A blow from the mecha sends the girl falling , imperiling her cup of water . At the last moment , she has a vision of the Science Patrol and regains consciousness . She snatches the cup before it crashes to the ground . Resuming her battle with the mecha , she catches one of its missiles and hurls it back at the mecha , causing a huge explosion . The destroyed mecha launches a rocket , summoning Godzilla with the <unk> symbol . With King <unk> and Gamera chasing her , the girl flies through the air with her jet @-@ propelled backpack . A Star Destroyer , a TIE fighter , and Martian fighting machines from the film The War of the Worlds ( 1953 ) cross the background . Reaching into her backpack , the girl pulls out a bamboo ruler , which magically becomes a lightsaber . After slicing an Alien <unk> in half , the girl launches a number of miniature missiles from her backpack . Hit by one of the missiles , a Maser Tank from the Godzilla series catches fire . The <unk> breaks in two as the Yamato , the USS Enterprise , an X @-@ wing fighter and <unk> explode in complete chaos . The girl pours her cup of water on a shriveled daikon buried in the ground . As the daikon absorbs the water , it turns into the spaceship Daicon . <unk> in light , and now wearing a naval uniform , the girl boards the ship , where the film 's producers , Toshio Okada and Yasuhiro Takeda , sit at the controls . As the landing gear retracts , Daicon departs for the far reaches of the universe . 
 = = = Daicon IV Opening Animation = = = 
 The Daicon IV Opening Animation begins with an abridged , 90 @-@ second retelling of the Daicon III Opening Animation set to music by Kitarō . After this , " Prologue " by Electric Light Orchestra is heard , while the lyrics appear against a starfield and an outline of the spaceship Daicon passes in the background . The film proper begins as " Prologue " segues into " Twilight " , the song which follows it on the album Time . 
 The girl from the previous animation is now an adult , wearing a bunny costume . She fights off a multitude of sci @-@ fi monsters and mobile suits then jumps into a throng of <unk> <unk> and tosses them aside . She is then in a lightsaber duel with Darth Vader , with Stormtroopers sitting in the background and the Death Star enshrined in one corner . From atop a cliff , a xenomorph with artificial legs , wielding the Discovery One , knocks the girl down with an energy burst and the <unk> robot attempts to crush her . The girl lifts the <unk> robot off her with superhuman strength and smashes it against a cliff . The Stormbringer suddenly appears in the sky , and the girl jumps on it , riding it like a surfboard . A few scenes unconnected to the main plot are shown , such as Yoda as Yū Ida given a Japanese comedy routine with various characters in the audience . The girl is still riding the Stormbringer when she runs into a formation of <unk> 1 's . Then the Yamato , the Arcadia attached to the transformed SDF @-@ 1 Macross appear , along with an exploding VF @-@ 1 Valkyrie variable fighter from Macross armed with a Gundam @-@ style beam saber . An air battle unfolds in an otaku coffee shop . The girl is then seen in a world filled with American comic superheroes . A host of machines and characters ( from The Lord of the Rings , Conan , Narnia , Pern , and others ) fly past her into space , including a Klingon battle cruiser , the moon ship from H. G. Wells ' First Men in the Moon , the Millennium Falcon , Lord <unk> and the Thunderbirds . Once back on land , the girl jumps off the Stormbringer and it splits into seven parts , which fly though the sky spewing smoke in seven colors . A sequence of famous spaceships crashing into each other is shown . Then , suddenly , " what could only be described as an atomic bomb " explodes over an unpopulated city , leaving behind a flurry of <unk> petals . Successive upheavals of the Earth give birth to new worlds . As a beam launched by the Daicon traverses the sky , lush greenery sprouts and grows . The camera then pans over a massive crowd of fictional characters , the sun rises , the camera zooms out to the solar system , and the film ends with an image of the Daicon logo . 
 = = Production = = 
 Originally , the productions were intended to be shot in 16 mm film , but both were shot in 8 mm film instead and were completed only the morning before their debut . In order to pay off the debts of the productions , video copies of the animation were sold . Eng declares this as the first example of original video animation ( OVA ) predating <unk> . <unk> Miyatake of Studio Nue originally designed the mecha that appears in the Daicon III clip chasing the little girl for a Japanese edition of the military science fiction novel Starship Troopers novel in the early eighties . 
 = = = Daicon III = = = 
 Only three people were involved in the production of Daicon III , Hideaki Anno , Hiroyuki Yamaga and Takami Akai . Takeda , who was a part of the group , explains in <unk> Memoirs that Anno knew how to make anime , but he never worked with animation cels . They were referred to <unk> Pero , an anime hobby store chain , but they found that the cost of the cels were too expensive , so a single cel was purchased and taken to a vinyl manufacturer in east Osaka , where they purchased a roll for 2000 yen . After cutting and preparing the vinyl cels , they discovered that the painted cels would stick together when stacked and dry paint would peel off the cels . To keep costs low , they made their own tap to punch holes in the B5 animation paper used in the production . 
 The work was carried out in an empty room of Okada 's house where their business was also operated . While other people were present , the work was shared and Anno , Akai and Yamaga worked full @-@ time on the production , the direction was not professional , but <unk> attributed Okada as the producer , with Yamaga directing , Akai doing character animation and Anno as the mecha animator . <unk> also said other individuals were involved and were used to trace cels or paint cels as needed , but still credits Yamaga , Akai and Anno with the production itself . Filming was done by a camera on a tripod and frames were called out by Anno because the production lacked timing sheets . 
 Osamu Tezuka did not see the opening film at Daicon III , but was shown the film by Akai and Yamaga later that night . After watching the film , Tezuka remarked " Well , there certainly were a lot of characters in the film . ... [ T ] here were also some that weren 't in the film " . Akai and Yamaga later realized the omission of Tezuka 's characters ; they were subsequently used in the Daicon IV animation . According to Toshio Okada , the theme of water in the opening represented " opportunity " and Lawrence Eng , an otaku researcher , describes the theme as , " ... making the best use of one 's opportunities while fighting against those who would seek to steal such opportunity away . " 
 = = = Daicon IV = = = 
 The production facility for Daicon IV was in a dedicated studio in a building called the Hosei Kaikan that was owned by a textile union . Takeda defined it as a literal anime sweatshop , the building was shutdown at 9 : 00 pm and a majority of the staff would be locked inside and working through the night without air conditioning . The Daicon IV film officially credits a production crew of twelve people . Hiroyuki Yamaga directed the production of Daicon IV with Hideaki Anno and Takami Akai as animation directors . Toru Saegusa did the artwork and the animations were done with Yoshiyuki Sadamoto , Mahiro Maeda , <unk> <unk> ; additional animation was provided by Ichiro Itano , Toshihiro Hirano , Narumi <unk> , <unk> Morikawa , <unk> Miyatake . Originally , Daicon IV was supposed to be fifteen minutes long , but the difficult production resulted in the cut time . 
 = = Reception and release = = 
 The Daicon III film was reported on in <unk> magazine which resulted in requests for the film to be released publicly . In order to pay off the debts from producing the film , the decision was made to sell 8mm reels of the film and videos . Additional original artwork and the storyboards were included in the release . The sale paid the debts and the profit would be used to produce Daicon IV . 
 Due to copyright problems an official release of the animations has proven impossible . For the American release of the film , the rights to use of the Playboy bunny costume was denied and the rights to Electric Light Orchestra 's music was consequently not sought . However , a laserdisc featuring Daicon III & IV Opening Animation was unofficially released in Japan as bonus material to a ¥ 16 @,@ 000 art book of the animations . This laserdisc is considered rare and highly valuable among collectors , easily fetching prices over a thousand dollars on online auctions . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since its release the animations have been referenced several times in Japanese media productions , especially those focused on otaku culture . Clips and characters from the animations appear in the 1991 Gainax OVA Otaku no Video . The opening sequence of the Train Man Japanese TV drama series from 2005 was inspired by and uses the Electric Light Orchestra theme and the lead character from the Daicon IV film . In episode 5 of Gainax 's FLCL , titled " Brittle Bullet " , Haruko , wearing a red bunny suit , flies in on a bass guitar and yells " Daicon V ! " before attacking a giant robot with a slingshot . 
 At <unk> , Yamaga said , " [ The openings are ] a source of pride and something you want to strangle . " Akai who wants to produce better films stated , " I don 't want to see them for a long time . Just thinking about them sends shivers down my spine . " Lawrence Eng stated that without the Daicon animations , Gainax might never have existed . In 2001 , the anime magazine Animage ranked the Daicon animations as the 35th of the " Top 100 " anime of all time . 
 = = = Daicon 33 = = = 
 Gainax revealed the details of a new campaign to celebrate Daicon Film 's 33rd anniversary . The new project is named " DAICON FILM 33 " and was announced on January 8 , 2014 . The basis of the project is a " revival of DAICON FILM " and includes the release of several goods inspired by the original films from the eighties . 
 The project 's official site has started accepting pre @-@ orders for the first lineup of memorial goods . A new illustration of the " Daicon Bunny Girl " has been drawn by Takami Akai , the original character designer of the opening animation films and one of the founders of Gainax . The art is now also displayed on the top page of Gainax 's official site . 
 = Andrew Sledd = 
 Andrew Warren Sledd ( November 7 , 1870 – March 16 , 1939 ) was an American theologian , university professor and university president . A native of Virginia , he was the son of a prominent Methodist minister , and was himself ordained as a minister after earning his bachelor 's degree and master 's degree . He later earned a second master 's degree and his doctorate . 
 After teaching for several years , Sledd was chosen to be the last president of the University of Florida at Lake City , from 1904 to 1905 , and the first president of the modern University of Florida ( first known as the " University of the State of Florida " ) , from 1905 to 1909 . He was also president of Southern University from 1910 to 1914 , and later became a professor and an influential biblical scholar at Emory University 's Candler School of Theology from 1914 to 1939 . 
 Sledd first gained national recognition after he wrote a 1902 magazine article advocating better legal and social treatment of African @-@ Americans . He is also prominently remembered for his role in founding the modern University of Florida , his scholarly analysis of biblical texts as literature , his call for an end to racial violence , and his influence on a generation of Methodist seminary students , scholars and ministers . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Sledd was born November 7 , 1870 , in Lynchburg , Virginia , the son of a Methodist Episcopal minister , Robert Newton Sledd , and his wife , Frances Carey Greene Sledd . The elder Sledd was an influential minister within the Virginia Methodist Conference , and at various times while Andrew was growing up , his father held prominent pastorates of large Methodist congregations in four different Virginia cities — Danville , Norfolk , Petersburg and Richmond . Andrew received his early education in the Petersburg school of W. Gordon McCabe , a former Confederate captain and veteran of the U.S. Civil War . 
 In 1888 , Sledd entered Methodist @-@ affiliated Randolph – Macon College in Ashland , Virginia . While at Randolph – Macon , he was a member of Phi Delta Theta Fraternity ( Virginia Gamma chapter ) ; he was also the college 's outstanding student @-@ athlete and was particularly known as the college baseball team 's first baseman and star hitter . Sledd left the college without finishing his undergraduate degree requirements , first accepting a position as a teacher in Durant , Mississippi , and then as the principal of a high school in Arkadelphia , Arkansas . After teaching in Arkansas for two years , he returned to Randolph – Macon and completed his Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts degrees in 1894 . Sledd graduated in mathematics , was recognized for completing the best work in the mathematics and Greek departments during his senior year , and was honored as a member of Phi Beta Kappa . 
 Sledd taught at the Randolph @-@ Macon Academy in Front Royal , Virginia , from 1894 to 1895 , before returning to graduate school . He earned a second master of arts degree in Greek from Harvard University in Cambridge , Massachusetts , in 1896 , and completed one year 's additional graduate work toward a doctoral degree . While he was at Harvard , he played for the Harvard Crimson baseball team , and he is remembered as one of Harvard 's greatest athletes of the era ; he was offered a professional baseball contract but turned it down . Several years later , during a break in his teaching career , Sledd completed his doctorate . 
 = = Scholar and educator = = 
 = = = Emory College and the " Sledd Affair " = = = 
 After completing his graduate studies at Harvard , Sledd briefly served as a Latin instructor at Vanderbilt University in Nashville , Tennessee . He was ordained as a Methodist minister and licensed to preach in 1898 . At the suggestion of his father , he contacted Methodist minister Warren Akin Candler , who was the president of Emory College in Oxford , Georgia , a prominent leader of the Georgia Methodist Conference , and a few months from being elevated as a Methodist bishop . Candler was impressed with the character and academic credentials of the young scholar , and assisted him in becoming a professor of Latin language and literature at Emory College , a position Sledd held from 1898 to 1902 . While living in the Candler family home , Sledd fell in love with the bishop 's only daughter , Annie Florence Candler , and he married her on March 22 , 1899 ; his father conducted the wedding ceremony . 
 Later in 1899 , while traveling by train between Atlanta and Covington , Georgia , Sledd witnessed the aftermath of the lynching of an African @-@ American man named Sam Hose . The idealistic young minister was outraged . In reaction , he wrote an essay entitled " The Negro : Another View , " which was published as an article in the July 1902 issue of The Atlantic Monthly . In the article , Sledd denounced the lynchings of black men in the South in graphic terms : " lynching is not ' justice , ' however rude ; it is a wild and diabolic carnival of blood . " While he flatly asserted that the " negro race " was not the equal of the " white race , " he nevertheless demanded equal justice for blacks and whites alike , writing " There is nothing in a white skin or a black to nullify the essential rights of man as man . " Even though Sledd 's essay condoned the continued racial segregation of white and black Southerners as a necessary social expedient , a public firestorm ensued in Georgia over Sledd 's criticism of the South 's treatment of its black citizens , with the controversy stoked by the vitriolic letters and editorial attacks of agrarian populist Rebecca Felton in the Atlanta Constitution newspaper . As the controversy grew , the Atlanta Journal and Atlanta News quickly joined the anti @-@ Sledd chorus . When a majority of the members of Emory 's board of trustees threatened to withdraw their support of the college because of the negative publicity , the newly installed college president , James E. Dickey , demanded Sledd 's resignation from the faculty , and Sledd resigned on August 9 , 1902 . The Sledd Affair subsequently attracted attention throughout the United States as a matter of academic freedom and freedom of speech . 
 After resigning from the Emory College faculty , Sledd entered the graduate school of Yale University in New Haven , Connecticut , where he began work in the advanced classics doctoral program , specializing in Latin . Sledd received $ 1 @,@ 000 in severance pay from Emory pursuant to an agreement with Dickey and unanimously approved by the Emory faculty , and his father @-@ in @-@ law contributed $ 900 to help cover his tuition and living expenses while he attended Yale . He received a scholarship from the university , and earned his doctor of philosophy degree in Latin from Yale in 1903 , after only nine months . Stanford University and Syracuse University offered him professorships in Latin ; Antioch College offered him its presidency . Sledd declined all offers from Northern and Western institutions , and was determined to return to his native South . 
 = = = University of Florida at Lake City = = = 
 After completing his doctorate , Sledd obtained an appointment as a professor of Greek at Methodist @-@ affiliated Southern University ( now known as Birmingham – Southern College ) in Greensboro , Alabama . Several months later , on July 6 , 1904 , he was unanimously selected to be the president of the University of Florida at Lake City by its board of trustees . At the time of his appointment , the University of Florida at Lake City was experiencing a controversy of its own : its administration and faculty were hopelessly fractured by personality conflicts and its unpopular president 's failed attempts at improving the small school 's instruction and academic standing . The university 's board of trustees had removed the ineffectual president , and dismissed seven members of its small faculty . The university , such as it was , had been known as " Florida Agricultural College " until 1903 . When Sledd arrived in Lake City , it was a school with a new name , a faculty fractured by contentious personalities , an unknown number of returning students and an uncertain future . Sledd required all previous faculty members to re @-@ apply if they desired to keep their jobs , hired replacement instructors , most of whom had earned doctoral degrees in their respective fields ( in contrast to the previous faculty ) , and set about devising rigorous academic standards for the school 's new students . Although the university was a designated land @-@ grant college under the federal government 's Morrill Act , it received insufficient annual financial assistance from the state government , and its finances remained tenuous . 
 = = = University of the State of Florida = = = 
 Sledd and members of the faculty were actively involved in urging Florida 's state government to combine the state 's several small institutions of higher education . The university consolidation movement gained the political backing of newly elected Florida Governor Napoleon B. Broward , and , in 1905 , the Florida Legislature passed the Buckman Act , which abolished the hodge @-@ podge of state @-@ supported colleges and consolidated their assets and programs into a new comprehensive university and land @-@ grant college for white men , and a liberal arts college and normal school for white women . The Act mandated the merger of four separate institutions , including the existing University of Florida at Lake City , into the consolidated men 's university — the new University of the State of Florida . By a vote of six to four , the new Board of Control charged with the governance of the consolidated institutions , selected Gainesville as the location for the new men 's state university . 
 Sledd had not anticipated that the Lake City campus would be abandoned , and had assumed that it would be selected as the location of the newly consolidated men 's university , placing him in a strong position to become the first president of the new institution . The selection of Gainesville for the campus of the new men 's university put Sledd 's future as its first president in question . The University of Florida in Lake City was just one of the four existing institutions that were to be merged to form the new university , and there were other possible candidates for the presidency . Albert A. Murphree , president of Florida State College in Tallahassee , was the favorite of several prominent members of the legislature . But Sledd had Governor Broward 's backing , and the Board of Control ultimately selected him to be the first president on June 7 , 1905 ; Sledd 's appointment was for a single year , but renewable on an annual basis , as was typical in the university 's early years when the Board of Control appointed or re @-@ appointed the presidents of the state 's public colleges for each academic year . Murphree remained the president of the newly consolidated women 's college in Tallahassee until 1909 . 
 Sledd nominated all of the original faculty members , a majority of whom he had previously selected to be professors at the University of Florida at Lake City . The new University of the State of Florida operated in Lake City during the first academic year of its existence ( 1905 – 06 ) , while the buildings of the new Gainesville campus were being erected . Sledd managed the move of the school 's assets from Lake City to Gainesville during the late summer of 1906 , and participated in the official dedication of the campus on September 27 , 1906 . When registration for classes was held in Gainesville on September 24 , 1906 , there were 102 students and fewer than a dozen faculty members . Sledd received a $ 2 @,@ 250 annual salary in his first year as the head of the new state university , and , together with his wife and their young children , moved into the still incomplete Buckman Hall dormitory on the Gainesville campus . 
 Sledd played a key role in the formation and ultimate success of the new university , but his time as its president was a relatively short four years . His political backing ended with the retirement of Governor Broward , and the inauguration of the new governor , Albert Gilchrist , in January 1909 . The Florida Board of Education , which then consisted of the governor and the state 's elected cabinet members , oversaw the Board of Control and made no secret of its desire to remove Sledd , in part because members of the Board of Education believed Sledd 's admissions standards were too high and that the university was not growing quickly enough . Nevertheless , the Board of Control continued to back Sledd , and its members threatened to resign in protest . Seeking to avoid an unwinnable political controversy , Sledd resigned , and the Board of Control replaced him with Albert Murphree , the political favorite of several legislative leaders and the Board of Education . 
 = = = Methodist ministry and Southern University = = = 
 Following Sledd 's resignation , he and his family returned to Atlanta and stayed in the home of his wife 's parents . Within a few weeks , he was appointed minister of the First Methodist Church in Jacksonville , Florida , a position he held for the remainder of 1909 and the first half of 1910 . Sledd was subsequently invited to return to Southern University as its president , serving from 1910 to 1914 . While president of Southern University , he implemented a new pre @-@ college preparatory school and a four @-@ year course of Bible study , and focused his personal efforts on restoring the school 's finances and improving the quality of its instruction . 
 = = = Candler School of Theology = = = 
 In the fall of 1914 , Sledd resigned the presidency of Southern University and returned to Emory College , by then renamed Emory University and relocated to its new main campus in northeast Atlanta , as the first Professor of Greek and New Testament Literature at the Candler School of Theology , the newly established seminary of the Methodist Episcopal Church , South . Sledd became well known as a professor of Greek , Latin and New Testament studies at Candler , and was the author of several scholarly books on New Testament subjects , including Saint Mark 's Life of Jesus ( 1927 ) , The Bibles of the Churches ( 1930 ) and His Witnesses : A Study of the Book of Acts ( 1935 ) . He was selected to be a member of the American Standard Bible Committee , which was preparing a new American Standard Version of the Bible . He continued to advocate internal Methodist reform and an end to racial violence , and his teaching inspired a generation of his Candler theology students to act as change agents within the Methodist Episcopal Church , South . Many of his former students became Methodist ministers who returned to their congregations and annual conferences to work for better treatment of African @-@ Americans , helping the Southern Methodist church to evolve from a mainstay of theological and racial intransigence to an agent for social change and doctrinal reform . 
 Sledd 's interest in education was not limited to the higher education of colleges and universities . While holding his Candler professorship , he served as a member of the Board of Public Instruction of DeKalb County , Georgia , and volunteered to serve as the board 's treasurer . 
 Sledd and his wife Annie also suffered a personal tragedy during his time as a Candler professor , when their first @-@ born son and his namesake , Andrew Sledd , Jr . , died after an extended illness in 1919 . Andrew , Jr . , was 16 years old , and had graduated from Decatur High School only weeks earlier . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Sledd became a recognized New Testament scholar and a significant voice of educational , social and ecclesiastical reform within the Methodist Episcopal Church , South . For nearly twenty @-@ five years , he remained a professor at Emory University 's Candler School of Theology , until his death from a heart attack on March 16 , 1939 . Following Sledd 's funeral , his body was buried in the Decatur Cemetery . 
 In his 1960 History of Methodism in Alabama and West Florida , Marion Elias Lazenby remembered Sledd as " one of the [ Methodist ] Church 's most scholarly and reverent teachers . " Immediately after his death , Sledd was widely eulogized in Methodist churches across the country , and numerous obituaries appeared in regional and national newspapers across the country . The Atlanta Constitution , whose editorials had vilified Sledd in 1902 , paid tribute to him in its obituary as a " nationally known Bible authority " ; no mention was made of the " Sledd Affair . " 
 Sledd 's advocacy of social change and an evolving understanding of biblical texts came at a high personal price . Given his chosen career of minister and professor , he never accumulated much personal wealth . Sledd died deep in debt , having lost the family home to foreclosure after the salaries of Candler professors were cut when financial support of the school fell during the 1930s . His creditors obtained a deficiency judgment for the unpaid portion of his debt after the foreclosure , and , following his death , forced the sale of some of his furniture and parts of his personal library in partial satisfaction of his remaining debts . 
 The faculty of the University of Florida awarded Sledd the university 's first honorary degree , a doctor of divinity , at the spring 1909 commencement ceremonies . In 1933 , John J. Tigert , the university 's third president , invited Professor Sledd to be the university 's baccalaureate speaker . After his death , the university honored him again , renaming one of its early residence halls , Sledd Hall , in 1939 . The small state university , which Sledd had been instrumental in creating and organizing , is now one of the ten largest single @-@ campus universities in the United States , with a total enrollment of nearly 50 @,@ 000 undergraduate , graduate and professional students . 
 Sledd and his wife Annie had nine children . Eight of their children graduated from Emory , seven with Phi Beta Kappa honors , a fact newsworthy enough to be picked up by the Associated Press wire service when youngest daughter Antoinette graduated from Emory the year following Sledd 's death . Two of their sons followed in their father 's footsteps , earned doctorates and became university professors : James H. Sledd became a Rhodes Scholar and noted professor of English literature at the University of Chicago and the University of Texas ; Marvin B. Sledd was a professor of mathematics at Georgia Tech . 
 In 2002 , after almost a century of ignoring its role in the " Sledd Affair , " Emory University sponsored a presentation entitled " Professing Justice : A Symposium on the Civil Rights Legacy of Professor Andrew Sledd . " In holding the inter @-@ disciplinary symposium , Emory University acted to " right a wrong committed a century ago by revisiting the ' Sledd affair ' and reflecting on its meaning for Emory today . " 
 = Darkwatch = 
 Darkwatch : Curse of the West is a 2005 first @-@ person shooter video game for the PlayStation 2 and Xbox . It was developed by High Moon Studios ( formerly Sammy Studios ) and published by Capcom in the United States and by Ubisoft in Europe and Australia . 
 The game mixes western , horror and steampunk genres , telling the story of Jericho Cross , an outlaw gunfighter in the late 19th @-@ century American Frontier who has been turned into a vampire and then forcibly recruited by the titular monster @-@ hunting secret organization to fight against supernatural forces . The gameplay system of Darkwatch is reminiscent of Halo : Combat Evolved . 
 Darkwatch was met with a generally positive critical reception , acclaimed in particular for its relatively unique Weird West setting and artistic merits . The game was accompanied by an extensive promotional campaign and was planned to be the first installment of a new media franchise , but its sequel got canceled in 2007 and the film adaptation remains in development hell . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Darkwatch features a reputation system that affects player 's abilities in addition to the player character Jericho 's starting , neutral vampiric powers of " Blood Shield " ( a regenerating force field similar to the energy shield from Halo ) , " Vampire Jump " ( a double jump that can be aborted at any moment ) and " Blood Vision " ( a system of heat vision highlighting enemies and objects that also acts as a zoom ) . Through the game , Jericho is met with multiple choices of a good or evil variety , allowing the player to select morality awarding Jericho new powers , called " Brands " , based on the choices he made . This system was compared to the one used in the role @-@ playing video game Star Wars : <unk> . The good path powers are " Silver Bullet " ( making the player 's weapons cause more damage ) , " Fear " ( confusing minor enemies ) , " Mystic Armor " ( an extra shield system ) and " Vindicator " ( bolts of lightning destroying all nearby enemies ) . The evil powers are " Blood Frenzy " ( granting an immunity to damage and extremely powerful melee attacks ) , " Turn " ( turning undead enemies into allies ) , " Black Shroud " ( stealing life force from nearby enemies ) and " Soul Stealer " ( destroying nearby enemies and stealing their souls ) . The powers can be activated for a limited time when the HUD 's blood bar , which is fueled through collecting souls of the slain enemies , is completely full . Jericho 's health is also restored through collecting the souls . 
 During the daylight hours , Jericho 's powers are gone , so he has to fight as a normal human , using a wide variety of weaponry , from a Darkwatch 's standard @-@ issue 24 @-@ shot Redeemer handgun to a crossbow firing explosive arrows and a rocket launcher , as well as melee combat . In some missions , Jericho can drive a Gatling gun @-@ equipped Coyote <unk> vehicle ; using it or a horse changes perspective to the third @-@ person view . During horse @-@ riding rail shooter sequences , Jericho is granted unlimited ammunition and high attack speed , at the cost of only being able to use the Redeemer . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 The Xbox version has competitive multiplayer for up to 16 players online , although system link is not possible . The PlayStation 2 version does not offer any online connectivity and competitive multiplayer is limited to two players ( or four players while using an optional multitap device ) via split screen gameplay . In multiplayer matches , the players can pick up the " Silver Bullet " , " Mystic Armor and " Blood Frenzy " powers as floating power @-@ ups that activate immediately . The game 's story mode is also available for split screen cooperative gameplay on the PlayStation 2 , a feature absent from the Xbox version . In the co @-@ op mode , both players play as a rank @-@ and @-@ file Darkwatch Regulators but cutscenes designed for the single @-@ player mode and featuring Jericho as the main character are left unchanged , causing a number of glaring continuity errors . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game 's story ( narrated by Peter Jason ) follows the exploits of a wanted outlaw named Jericho Cross and his employment in an ancient vampire @-@ hunting order known as the Darkwatch ( hence the game 's title ) . After unwittingly releasing the Darkwatch 's greatest enemy , a vampire lord named Lazarus Malkoth , Jericho is conscripted into the Darkwatch as an elite operative . Jericho , however , is slowly turning into a vampire himself , as a result of being bitten by Lazarus . The game outlines either Jericho 's struggle for humanity or his descent into darkness , depending on the player 's actions . 
 The game begins in the Arizona Territory in 1876 with Jericho attempting to rob a Darkwatch train that is transporting the captured Lazarus Malkoth to the Darkwatch Citadel , a frequently mentioned and often visited location in the game . His actions inadvertently release Lazarus into the West . In a seeming bit of mercy , Lazarus bites Jericho and gives him the curse of the vampire , causing him to slowly turn into one . The game continues with the introduction of Darkwatch agent Cassidy Sharp as well as the appearance of Shadow , Jericho 's undead horse whom he fed on and turned in a frenzy after being bitten by Lazarus . 
 As the game progresses , Jericho finally makes his way to the Darkwatch Citadel , where he meets General Clay Cartwright , the current leader of the order . Cartwright puts him through Torture Maze , the Darkwatch initiation exercise which was designed as a test for Darkwatch Regulators , but Jericho gets a special version specially designed by Cartwright to kill him . When Jericho passes the test anyway , he begins to do missions for the Darkwatch . Missions include tasks ranging from fixing some of the damage he has caused to acquiring Darkwatch equipment , such as the <unk> Prism , a stone that allows vampires within its vicinity to both use their powers and walk in sunlight . On some of his missions Jericho is accompanied by other Darkwatch forces including his new partner , a sultry and vicious temptress named Tala . Eventually , during their night of passion , Tala lures him to bite her and inherits some portion of his power , transforming herself into a half @-@ vampire creature similar to him . She then betrays the Darkwatch from within , allowing hordes of the undead to invade its headquarters . 
 A final showdown ensues with Lazarus , in which Jericho arises victorious , and a choice is given for him to side with either Cassidy or Tala . Either Jericho rids the West of the Curse of Lazarus , or he becomes the Curse ; the player 's choice determines how the game ends . If the character were to choose the good option , then the final fight will be against the vampiric Tala ; if the player chooses to take Lazarus ' curse for himself , then he must fight the ghost of Cassidy . The bad ending shows the now @-@ monstrous Jericho killing Tala and riding into the night , while the good ending shows Cassidy 's soul being released . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Jericho Cross ( voiced by Christopher Corey Smith ) : The protagonist of the game , a jaded American Civil War deserter and drifter who became a gunslinger and train robber . During his " one last job " , he releases Lazarus Malkoth from his prison in a failed attempt to steal the contents . While dueling with Lazarus , Jericho gets bitten and infected by the vampire curse . His already deadly skills are enhanced by his vampire powers that afford him superhuman strength , increased endurance , enhanced agility , and heightened senses , in the form of the bioluminescent red orb that regenerated from his empty eye socket . Shadow is Jericho 's demonic horse that appears at his beckon . According to the developers , they created " deep psychological profiles of every character in the game " with " hope that Jericho 's character arc — as this desperate lone wolf that 's robbing trains with a subconscious death wish — makes a believable transition into this half @-@ vampire hybrid gunslinger and will ultimately envelop the player in his destiny : which is a guy that can be either a hero or a terror . Basically , we just want people to care about this character and what happens to him — and I can 't think of a first @-@ person shooter that 's really made us do that yet . " 
 Cassidy Sharp ( voiced by Jennifer Hale ) : The game 's first female protagonist . Cassidy is the agent who attempts to stop Jericho on the train in the game 's opening sequence . After the explosion of Lazarus ' prison , she joins Jericho but is soon murdered by Lazarus . Cassidy returns as a good ghost and befriends Jericho , aiding him in his mission to stop Lazarus ( a role similar to this of Cortana in the Halo series ) . As a little girl , Cassidy was orphaned in a vampire attack and then raised as a ward of the Darkwatch . Eventually , she became the most serious and dangerous agent in the organisation , yet really she is also deeply insecure about herself . If fought as the final boss , she turns into an angel . 
 Tala ( meaning " Stalking Wolf " ) ( voiced by Rose McGowan ) : The game 's second female protagonist . Tala is a Native American shaman and a power @-@ hungry Darkwatch agent . When she was young , Tala lost her seer mother and became an outcast from her own tribe , fearful of her mediumship abilities . Her father was then killed by a band of fur traders and she herself was kidnapped and abused by them , until her captors were killed by vampires . Tala was then herself rescued by the Darkwatch troops , who turned her into one of their own . However , her experiences made her extremely bitter , and she began pursuing ever more power at any cost , secretly desiring to get revenge upon the world for the death of her parents . Despite her ruthlessness , Tala quickly rose through the Darkwatch ranks due to her fearless battle efficiency . The developers described her as not evil but " just ambitious " . Tala is the only character who uses kicks in the game , due to the artists deciding that " some of the combat moves the actress performed fit the character so well that we changed the combat system she 's using . " If fought as the final boss , she turns into a demon . According to GameSpy , Tala is " without question , the more difficult boss to battle . " 
 Lazarus Malkoth ( voiced by Keith Szarabajka ) : A Roman who first founded the Darkwatch society in 66 AD in order to battle the dark forces responsible for the decline of the Roman Empire . He eventually got possessed by a demon and himself became a powerful vampire and turned on the organization he founded , raising an undead army to aid him in his task . The Darkwatch then pursued Lazarus across Europe and later America . During the game 's development , the villain 's name was Scourge . 
 Clay Cartwright ( voiced by Michael Bell ) : The brutal and scheming field commander of the Darkwatch . An American Civil War veteran in the rank of brigadier general , <unk> snipes Jericho and enslaves him , forcing him to participate in a series of trials before inducting him into the organization . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 The development of the game began in the summer of 2002 , when Sammy Studios ' first internal development team , informally called " Team 1 " , decided to " bring a refreshing theme to a genre riddled with the stereotypical sci @-@ fi , fantasy , and military themes , " an idea soon approved by the Sammy Corporation president Hajime Satomi . The original game concept was not very dark and the vampires " felt more like a cartoon property " . In the early derivatives of the project , the game " looked more like something from Pixar " and its protagonist was supposed to be Chaz Bartlett , a " vaguely bumbling sort of comic relief character " , described as an " Eastern dude who was a card cheat " similar to Bret Maverick . 
 The game 's lead designer and writer Paul O 'Connor said that the original ' high concept ' for Darkwatch was " Blade meets Men in Black in the Old West , " but " in the two years that the property has been in development , it has grown in other directions and taken on a life of its own . The game is quite a bit darker than Blade , and we ’ ve completely lost the tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek feeling of Men in Black . " He added it " leans toward the Army of Darkness side of things , though without the slapstick , " and " with the accessibility of Raiders of the Lost Ark . " The turning point for setting a much darker and mature tone was the final iteration of Jericho 's character design . Tala was originally intended to also be a player character , but the studio 's marketing department " didn ’ t think that would fly . " 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The game was developed for the PlayStation 2 and Xbox side @-@ by @-@ side , with a PC version initially described as " possible " . Creative director Emmanuel Valdez said that " for the longest time we were debating whether or not to bring it out for GameCube , " before deciding " there 's just not a lot there in the GameCube market right now . " There were also plans to port the game for the PlayStation Portable . The game engine for Darkwatch features middleware engines RenderWare , Havok and <unk> , while Autodesk <unk> was used to create character animation and motion capture . 
 The game was " intentionally designed as a cross between Halo and Silverado . " O 'Connor said Halo was " of course " an inspiration , comparing Darkwatch to the horror aspects of Halo , and senior designer Brent <unk> said he expected it to " stand on par with games like Halo 2 . " Other video game inspirations recounted by O 'Connor and Valdez included Half @-@ Life , Medal of Honor , Metroid Prime and TimeSplitters . Lead level designer Matt Tieger said that a creation of one of the game 's bosses was " inspired by all the fun " that he had while playing the Metal Slug 2D shooter series with its " crazy bosses " . O 'Connor said the game 's reputation system was inspired by the contrast between the Old West figures such as Billy the Kid and the likes of Wyatt Earp , who " both were feared gunslingers , but one was a psychopathic killer and the other was a good guy / lawman . " 
 The developers licensed Ennio Morricone 's main theme from the film The Good , The Bad , and The Ugly which was remixed to fit the horror feel of the game . The remaining music on the soundtrack is completely original , co @-@ composed by Mike Reagan , a veteran film and game music composer , and <unk> Sierra , frontman for the Latin Grammy @-@ winning indie band <unk> , who said : " Our goal is to help connect the audience with a conflicted character , one who alternates between moments of providence and misguidance , and accomplish that with a musical score of cinematic proportions . " The game 's title sequence animation was created by Kyle Cooper using a collage of computer graphics images and live @-@ action footage . 
 Darkwatch was officially unveiled on January 12 , 2004 , its announcement accompanied by a showing of its playable multiplayer deathmatch mode , and was originally slated for a Q4 2004 release . At one point , the game remained in limbo for several months until May 2005 , when High Moon Studios , by then a fully independent development company , found a publisher in Capcom . 
 = = Release = = 
 Darkwatch , described as High Moon 's " flagship property " , was released by Capcom in North America on August 16 , 2005 , and by Ubisoft in Europe on October 7 , 2005 . Ubisoft distributed the game in Australia as well . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 In 2004 , Sammy launched <unk> , an official fan community website allowing fans to win points for prizes through completing various challenges while promoting the game . An interactive game demo of Darkwatch was shown at E3 2005 inside a custom @-@ build Gothic architecture @-@ inspired theatre dubbed " desecrated church " . A trailer for the game , created by Brain Zoo Studios , was nominated for the Golden Trailer Awards and won two Aurora Awards in the categories " Best of Show : Use of Animation " and " Best of Show : Entertainment " . 
 In August 2005 , Capcom launched a major marketing campaign to support the upcoming release . This included an extensive marketing program in the U.S. television networks , print advertisements in several leading video game and men 's magazines , radio promotions broadcasts on alternative rock stations in major markets , and pre @-@ order and point of sale purchase campaigns . A Darkwatch music video to Good Charlotte 's song " Predictable " was also featured in MTV2 's Video Mods . 
 A major part of the game 's promotional campaign was based on using the sex appeal of its female characters . In October 2004 , a picture of Tala " wearing only a feather in her hair " was featured in a spread of the first special edition of Playboy that spotlighted provocative video game characters , also accompanying the article " Gaming Grows Up " . Several more naked pictures of her and Cassidy appeared in Playboy 's " Girls of Gaming " series in October 2005 and again in December 2007 . A few censored topless sketches of Tala were posted alongside a fake interview in an exclusive online gallery by IGN and a pinup picture was featured in IGN 's Hotlist magazine in June 2006 . She was also featured in exclusive pictures on the cover and the pinup poster of play issue # 44 in 2005 and in the 2007 calendar The Art of Heavy Metal . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Soundtrack and book = = = 
 The Art of Darkwatch , a 176 @-@ page art book for the game , was published in August 2005 by Design Studio Press . Darkwatch Original Game Music Score , a 30 @-@ track original soundtrack , was released in November 2006 by Sierra Entertainment . 
 = = = Comic = = = 
 A comic titled " Innocence " , published in the July 2005 issue of Heavy Metal , serves as an immediate prequel and expanded introduction to the game . Set in the Nebraska Territory , the story follows them as former partners reuniting for a mission to capture the tomb of Lazarus , an ancient vampire lord and Darkwatch 's original founder . Along the way , they release Jericho when they raid a jail . " Cass " does not hide her current dislike of Tala , but Tala kills Cassidy 's father @-@ turned @-@ vampire , saving her life . The comic was written by the game 's designers Ulm and O 'Connor and illustrated by Philip Tan and Brian <unk> . The issue 's award @-@ winning cover art was created by Aaron <unk> and Sergio Paez . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , Darkwatch received generally favorable reviews from most gaming media . According to review aggregation site <unk> , the PlayStation 2 version scored an averaged rating of 82 % from the gaming press with the Xbox version scoring 85 % . It also won several art direction and visual design awards , including five Davey Awards and a Telly Award . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The game received the score of 7 @.@ 9 ( " Good " ) from both Bob Colayco of GameSpot ( " If you 're looking for an intense shooter experience , Darkwatch will not disappoint " ) and Jeremy Dunham of IGN ( " Cowboys , vampires , and sexy dead girls are fun in parties , but not so much alone " ) . According to the review by Cheat Code Central , " just about every aspect of Darkwatch is cool . The environments are cool , the weapons are cool , the characters are cool and while the gameplay is not unique it 's definitely one of the best first @-@ person shooters on the Xbox and PS2 . The controls alone are worth the price of admission . " John Scalzo of Gaming Target wrote that " for anyone looking for something a little different out of their FPS experience , Darkwatch is that game . " The reviewer in GamePro wrote that Darkwatch " mixes its Western Roots with gothic horror and steampunk aesthetics , and the results are uniquely engaging , " adding that if some the game 's " cooler " concepts " had been explored further , lengthening the game in the process , Darkwatch could 've rivaled the best of the genre . " Official Xbox Magazine called it " a solid and robust blaster that 's tons of fun . Helped no end by the excellent Blood Powers and top multiplayer . " 
 Several reviews praised the game 's setting . GameSpy 's David Chapman called it " a truly remarkable experience . And , while the game itself may not have broken any new ground , the world it introduces more than makes up for that . It will leave gamers hungry for more . " According to Game Informer , " in terms of gameplay quality , this may be another middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road shooter , but the unique premise sets it aside from everything else out there . " Greg Bemis of G4TV wrote that the biggest draw in Darkwatch is the " different enough " setting that " does fall back on tired video game clichés from time to time like big @-@ breasted , leather @-@ clad babes who speak in aggressive sexually suggestive double entendres , but it ’ s nice to see <unk> ’ s a little off the beaten path . " GameShark 's Will Jayson Hill wrote that " about the sharpest criticism that can be leveled at Darkwatch is that it really adds nothing original in the gameplay department . Aside from its extremely well executed western / horror environment , Darkwatch is a pretty generic FPS game with a weaker multiplayer mode . " On the other hand , some reviews thought that the gameplay was actually the strongest part of the game . Official UK PlayStation 2 Magazine stated Darkwatch " has a few neat ideas but wins us over by doing solid shooting well . Fast @-@ paced with cool guns , what 's not to like ? " GameZone 's Mike David wrote that only a " weak plot pacing and that feeling that something is missing " kept it from being given a score of 9 / 10 . 
 However , some of the reviews were more negative . PALGN 's Jeremy Jastrzab opined that " Darkwatch gives vampires , undead , cowboys and plenty of bullets to fire . But that 's about it . Otherwise , Darkwatch is a fairly standard affair that 's worth a rental . " According to Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine , " Darkwatch doesn 't amount to much more than your run @-@ of @-@ the mill first @-@ person shooter . " Eurogamer 's Martin <unk> called it " a generic and quickly tiresome shooter , with a contrived premise which , unfortunately , does nothing to elevate it . " 
 = = = Other reception = = = 
 The game 's characters , especially Tala , <unk> some of the most notable reception . The voice @-@ acting of Rose McGowan in particular was critically acclaimed by numerous gaming outlets . Featured her in the GameDaily gallery Outrageous Boobs , Tala was a runner @-@ up in ActionTrip 's 2007 lists of Top 10 Video Game Chicks , both by staff and by readers ' choice . She was ranked as the 14th " hottest woman " in video games by Complex in 2012 and as the fourth by in <unk> 2013 . GamesRadar included her in the 2008 list of top seven Native American stereotypes , chosen to represent " the sex object " stereotype , but nevertheless stated that the portrayal of " an empowered female who ’ s not afraid to be sexy and go after what she wants " is " a vast improvement over the appalling depiction of Indian women in Custer 's Revenge . " Michael <unk> , author of Native Americans in Comic Books , listed " the continued objectification of the Indigenous female character , Tala , in Darkwatch " among " cultural ‘ <unk> ’ in video games " . She was also discussed in the book Sex in Video Games by Brenda Brathwaite and in Fantasy Women by Amanda Greenslade . Jericho Cross was included among the top five vampires in games by Laurie @-@ Anne Vazquez of 2D @-@ X in 2012 , and on the 2013 list of ten most notable vampire characters in video games by Kotaku 's Gergo Vas , who wrote that " the weird western @-@ steampunk hybrid style , mixed with classic vampire lore made this character ( and the game ! ) really exciting . " 
 According to a retrospective article by GamesRadar in 2009 , " while it didn ’ t innovate much in the gameplay department , Darkwatch was a solid shooter with proficient controls . Its real strength was its unique horror / western setting and bizarre selection of gothy undead characters and enemies . " In 2010 , GamesRadar 's Mikel <unk> ranked Darkwatch as sixth on the list of the top seven weirdest westerns , commenting that " the gothy trappings overlay a pretty awesome , Halo @-@ inspired shooter . " In a 2012 article about the history of steampunk video games , Mike <unk> of Game Informer wrote that " although not a widely known shooter , Darkwatch garnered a cult following with its unique story and unusual setting . " That same year , Robert Workman of Comic Book Resources called Darkwatch " in particular [ ... ] a fantastic effort , a first @-@ person shooter with beautiful , spooky atmosphere and excellent gameplay . " In 2013 , Metro included it among the " games that didn ’ t get the love they deserved . " Mark L. Bussler of Classic Game Room said in a retro video review that among many shooters on the PlayStation 2 , " few are as fun as this " , adding that Darkwatch should be " in your collection " alongside Red Faction and TimeSplitters . <unk> included it among their five favorite vampire games in 2014 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Cancelled sequel = = = 
 Darkwatch was supposed to be first of a series of games that would be set in different time periods , including Ancient Rome , the Crusades era and World War II . O 'Connor said they wanted " to tell not only the story of Jericho Cross but of the Darkwatch as an organization , from its origins in Roman times to its ultimate fate in Earth ’ s future . " Darkwatch 2 was in development by High Moon Studios for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 between 2005 and 2007 , and its technical demo gameplay footage ( based on the original game ) was shown at the Game Developers Conference 2006 . After the game was canceled , the studio abandoned further attempts to create their own IP and instead concentrated on developing licensed games , such as Transformers and Deadpool . 
 In 2009 , GamesRadar ranked Darkwatch as the 22nd top " game with untapped franchise potential " , adding that a sequel could have improved the original game 's supernatural powers and its " anemic " multiplayer mode and " make it shine " . Classic Game Room 's Mark Bussler expressed regret that so many bad games did receive sequels , while Darkwatch did not . 
 = = = Film project = = = 
 In 2006 , it was reported that Roger Avary , who wrote the script for the film adaptation of the Silent Hill video game series , " recently was asked to work on the Darkwatch movie script based on the Capcom vampire Western game of which he is a fan , but his schedule interfered . " In 2011 , it was reported that Glen Morgan and James Wong , the writers / directors / producers behind The X @-@ Files and the Final Destination film series , " have developed a pitch based on the game 's plot and action sequences , and are currently writing a screenplay . " Morgan and Wong 's involvement with the project has been first reported already in 2004 . 
 = Mount Tehama = 
 Mount Tehama ( also called Brokeoff Volcano or Brokeoff Mountain ) is an eroded andesitic stratovolcano in the Cascade Volcanic Arc and the Cascade Range in Northern California . Part of the Lassen volcanic center , its highest remaining remnant , Brokeoff Mountain , is itself the second highest peak in Lassen Volcanic National Park and connects to the park 's highest point , Lassen Peak . Located on the border of Tehama County and Shasta County , Tehama 's peak is the highest point in the former . The hikers that summit this mountain each year are treated to " exceptional " views of Lassen Peak , the Central Valley of California , and many of the park 's other features . On clear days , Mount Shasta can also be seen in the distance . 
 Tehama started life some 600 @,@ 000 years ago . At its peak activity , it reached approximately 3 @,@ 350 meters ( 11 @,@ 000 ft ) high , with a basal diameter of approximately 12 kilometers . Volcanic activity then declined 400 @,@ 000 years ago , with other volcanic lava domes forming at the edges of Mount Tehama later on , the largest and best known of which is Lassen Peak . A combination of continued hydrothermal activity and erosion , particularly by glaciers during ice ages , removed the central cone of the volcano , leaving a large caldera , the northern edge of which can still be seen . 
 Other remnants of Mount Tehama include Mount Conard , Pilot Pinnacle , Mount Diller , and Diamond Peak . 
 = = History = = 
 The area near Lassen Peak became a haven for new settlers throughout the 1800s . Wagon trains followed winding trails on the Nobles Emigrant Trail which cut through the Lassen Peak vicinity near Sacramento Valley . One of the main landmarks along this trail was a volcano . Called Lassen Peak after Peter Lassen , a prominent blacksmith and guide who escorted California settlers , the volcano and the area around it were given merit for their gripping volcanic phenomena , which included lava beds and extinct volcanic cones . In May 1907 , Lassen Peak was declared a National Monument by President Theodore Roosevelt to protect the area for " future generations to study and enjoy " . Roosevelt had been told that the area was actually extinct in terms of eruptive activity . Despite assurance from Native Americans in the area that the mountain was indeed active , settlers continued to think that Lassen Peak was extinct and " dead " and so continued to settle nearby . The natives continued to declare that " one day the mountain would blow itself to pieces " . In May 1914 , almost exactly seven years later , the volcano began a large explosive eruption sequence . More than a hundred eruptions of varying size took place over the next seven years , attracting national interest and the designation of national park in 1916 . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 The state of California is located on the Pacific Ring of Fire , an area of highly active tectonic activity that includes seismicity and volcanism . Tehama and the other volcanoes near Lassen Peak were produced by subduction of the oceanic Pacific Plate under the North American Plate . 
 Mount Tehama originated in the Lassen volcanic complex , an area of active volcanism for more than three million years . It formed during a period of eruptive activity approximately 600 @,@ 000 years ago on a series of faults ; the largest of these eruptions was about 50 times as powerful as the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens . During the Pleistocene , constantly renewed lava of andesite flowed from the caldera of the volcano , eventually becoming " interbedded " and heightening the mountain . By the time it reached its peak size , the volcano was immense , measuring at its base between 11 miles ( 18 km ) and 15 miles ( 24 km ) wide and more than 11 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 353 m ) tall . Activity at Tehama lasted for approximately 200 @,@ 000 years . Eruptions varied from ejection of pyroclastic material to andesitic lava flows built of olivine and other minerals . 
 Soon after the formation of Tehama , other , smaller volcanoes began to form . Shield volcanoes like Raker Peak , Red Mountain , Prospect Peak , and Mount Harkness appeared . At this point , the Pleistocene was coming to an end . One additional and final vent formed on the northeastern flank of the volcano , erupting glassy dacitic flows . Over time , the volcano became dilapidated from extensive erosion and " hydrothermal activity " , and collapsed . Prior leaking of dacite dried , forming smaller landforms like Mount Conard and Diamond Peak . The result of this huge collapse was a caldera 2 miles ( 3 km ) in diameter . Later activity built more than thirty other cones known as the Lassen Domes . Today the most active volcano in the area is Lassen Peak . Other smaller craters younger than 50 @,@ 000 years are also active . 
 Tehama 's remains sit under Mount Lassen in Shasta County , California . Sulphur Works , an area known for its sharp , putrid scent , is thought to be the center of the old caldera . It is located by Diamond Point , the conduit for magmas in Tehama . 
 After Tehama disappeared , local volcanism became more silicic , moving to Lassen Peak 's northern flank . The last 400 @,@ 000 years have seen at least three known flows , parts of which are still on Raker Peak and Mount Conard . A subsequent explosive eruption ejected 12 cubic miles ( 50 km3 ) of material and created a large crater , which was soon covered by lava . Twelve lava domes were built throughout the area and the next period of eruptive activity began . Spanning 50 @,@ 000 years it ejected 3 @.@ 5 cubic miles ( 15 km3 ) to 6 cubic miles ( 25 km3 ) of material and was followed by a third period . At least twelve periods of activity have taken place since Tehama formed , consisting of activity including pyroclastic flows , pasty lavas , and additional lava domes . Among the vents built by this activity include Lassen Peak . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Near the trailhead at lower elevations , alder thickets are present , as well as incense cedar , red firs , and western white pine . At higher elevations , groups of mountain hemlock and lupines prevail . Eagles and hawks can be frequently noted on high crags , and squirrels and pika live about the mountain . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Hiking is especially popular on the mountain during summer . The mountain trail lasts between four and six hours , spans 7 @.@ 4 miles ( 12 km ) , and offers " exceptional " views of Mount Diller , Lassen Peak , Chaos Crags , and Mount Conard . 
 Due to the characteristically intermittent eruptions of active volcanoes such as Lassen Peak , there is some threat from the volcanoes of the <unk> . <unk> explosive eruptions have taken place within the last 50 @,@ 000 years at Lassen Peak , Chaos Crags , and Sunflower Flat , and effusive eruptions of basalt have occurred at Tumble Buttes , Hat Mountain , and Prospect Peak . Pyroclastic flows and lahars could easily occur near glaciated areas and in river valleys like Hat Creek Valley . In addition to the volcanic hazards that could possibly occur , one volcano did erupt in the 20th century in <unk> : ( Lassen Peak ) . Lassen 's eruptions ( 1914 @-@ 21 , though most activity occurred between 1914 @-@ 17 ) were very small compared to the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens . 
 = Hel ( being ) = 
 In Norse mythology , Hel is a being who presides over a realm of the same name , where she receives a portion of the dead . Hel is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . In addition , she is mentioned in poems recorded in Heimskringla and Egils saga that date from the 9th and 10th centuries , respectively . An episode in the Latin work Gesta Danorum , written in the 12th century by Saxo Grammaticus , is generally considered to refer to Hel , and Hel may appear on various Migration Period bracteates . 
 In the Poetic Edda , Prose Edda , and Heimskringla , Hel is referred to as a daughter of Loki , and to " go to Hel " is to die . In the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , Hel is described as having been appointed by the god Odin as ruler of a realm of the same name , located in Niflheim . In the same source , her appearance is described as half blue and half flesh @-@ coloured and further as having a gloomy , downcast appearance . The Prose Edda details that Hel rules over vast mansions with many servants in her underworld realm and plays a key role in the attempted resurrection of the god Baldr . 
 Scholarly theories have been proposed about Hel 's potential connections to figures appearing in the 11th @-@ century Old English Gospel of Nicodemus and Old Norse Bartholomeus saga postola , that she may have been considered a goddess with potential Indo @-@ European parallels in Bhavani , Kali , and Mahakali or that Hel may have become a being only as a late personification of the location of the same name . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 The Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , features various poems that mention Hel . In the Poetic Edda poem Völuspá , Hel 's realm is referred to as the " Halls of Hel . " In stanza 31 of Grímnismál , Hel is listed as living beneath one of three roots growing from the world tree Yggdrasil . In Fáfnismál , the hero Sigurd stands before the mortally wounded body of the dragon Fáfnir , and states that Fáfnir lies in pieces , where " Hel can take " him . In <unk> , the phrases " Hel has half of us " and " sent off to Hel " are used in reference to death , though it could be a reference to the location and not the being , if not both . In stanza 4 of Baldrs draumar , Odin rides towards the " high hall of Hel . " 
 Hel may also be alluded to in <unk> . Death is <unk> as " joy of the troll @-@ woman " ( or " <unk> " ) and ostensibly it is Hel being referred to as the troll @-@ woman or the ogre ( <unk> ) , although it may otherwise be some unspecified dís . The Poetic Edda also mentions that travelers to Hel must pass by her guardian hound Garmr . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 Hel is referenced in the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . In chapter 34 of the book Gylfaginning , Hel is listed by High as one of the three children of Loki and Angrboða ; the wolf Fenrir , the serpent Jörmungandr , and Hel . High continues that , once the gods found that these three children are being brought up in the land of Jötunheimr , and when the gods " traced prophecies that from these siblings great mischief and disaster would arise for them " then the gods expected a lot of trouble from the three children , partially due to the nature of the mother of the children , yet worse so due to the nature of their father . 
