 = = = Hamiltonian variables = = = 
 The Hamiltonian variables , also called the energy variables , are those variables which when time differentiated are equal to the power conjugate variables . The Hamiltonian variables are so called because they are the variables which usually appear in Hamiltonian mechanics . The Hamiltonian variables in the electrical domain are charge ( q ) and flux linkage ( λ ) because , 
 <formula> ( Faraday 's law of induction ) and , <formula> 
 In the translational mechanical domain the Hamiltonian variables are distance displacement ( x ) and momentum ( p ) because , 
 <formula> ( Newton 's second law of motion ) and , <formula> 
 There is a corresponding relationship for other analogies and sets of variables . The Hamiltonian variables are also called the energy variables . The integrand of a power conjugate variable with respect to a Hamiltonian variable is a measure of energy . For instance , 
 <formula> and , <formula> 
 are both expressions of energy . They can also be called generalised momentum and generalised displacement after their analogs in the mechanical domain . Some authors discourage this terminology because it is not domain neutral . Likewise , the use of the terms I @-@ type and V @-@ type ( after current and voltage ) is also discouraged . 
 = = Classes of analogy = = 
 There are two principle classes of analogy in use . The impedance analogy ( also called the Maxwell analogy ) preserves the analogy between mechanical , acoustical and electrical impedance but does not preserve the topology of networks . The mechanical network is arranged differently to its analogous electrical network . The mobility analogy ( also called the Firestone analogy ) preserves network topologies at the expense of losing the analogy between impedances across energy domains . There is also the through and across analogy , also called the Trent analogy . The through and across analogy between the electrical and mechanical domain is the same as in the mobility analogy . However , the analogy between the electrical and acoustical domains is like the impedance analogy . Analogies between the mechanical and acoustical domain in the through and across analogy have a dual relationship with both the impedance analogy and mobility analogy . 
 Different fundamental variables are chosen for mechanical translation and rotational systems leading to two variants for each of the analogies . For instance , linear distance is the displacement variable in a translational system , but this is not so appropriate for rotating systems where angle is used instead . Acoustical analogies have also been included in the descriptions as a third variant . While acoustical energy is ultimately mechanical in nature , it is treated in the literature as an instance of a different energy domain , the fluid domain , and has different fundamental variables . Analogies between all three domains − electrical , mechanical and acoustical − are required to fully represent electromechanical audio systems . 
 = = = Impedance analogies = = = 
 Impedance analogies , also called the Maxwell analogy , classify the two variables making up the power conjugate pair as an effort variable and a flow variable . The effort variable in an energy domain is the variable analogous to force in the mechanical domain . The flow variable in an energy domain is the variable analogous to velocity in the mechanical domain . Power conjugate variables in the analog domain are chosen that bear some resemblance to force and velocity . 
 In the electrical domain , the effort variable is voltage and the flow variable is electrical current . The ratio of voltage to current is electrical resistance ( Ohm 's law ) . The ratio of the effort variable to the flow variable in other domains is also described as resistance . Oscillating voltages and currents give rise to the concept of electrical impedance when there is a phase difference between them . Impedance can be thought of as an extension to the concept of resistance . Resistance is associated with energy dissipation . Impedance encompasses energy storage as well as energy dissipation . The impedance analogy gives rise to the concept of impedance in other energy domains ( but measured in different units ) . 
 = = = = Translational mechanical impedance analogy = = = = 
 The translational impedance analogy describes mechanical systems moving in a single linear dimension and gives rise to the idea of mechanical impedance . The unit of mechanical impedance is the mechanical ohm ; in SI units this is N @-@ s / m , or <unk> / s . 
 = = = = Rotational mechanical impedance analogy = = = = 
 The rotational impedance analogy describes rotating mechanical systems and gives rise to the idea of rotational impedance . The unit of rotational impedance in the SI system is N @-@ m @-@ s / rad . 
 = = = = Acoustical impedance analogy = = = = 
 The acoustical impedance analogy gives rise to the idea of acoustic impedance . The unit of acoustic impedance is the acoustic ohm ; in SI units this is N @-@ s / <unk> . 
 = = = Mobility analogies = = = 
 Mobility analogies , also called the Firestone analogy , are the electrical duals of impedance analogies . That is , the effort variable in the mechanical domain is analogous to current ( the flow variable ) in the electrical domain , and the flow variable in the mechanical domain is analogous to voltage ( the effort variable ) in the electrical domain . The electrical network representing the mechanical system is the dual network of that in the impedance analogy . 
 The mobility analogy is characterised by admittance in the same way that the impedance analogy is characterised by impedance . Admittance is the algebraic inverse of impedance . In the mechanical domain , mechanical admittance is more usually called mobility . 
 = = = = Translation mechanical mobility analogy = = = = 
 = = = = Rotational mechanical mobility analogy = = = = 
 = = = = Acoustical mobility analogy = = = = 
 = = = Through and across analogies = = = 
 Through and across analogies , also called the Trent analogy , classify the two variables making up the power conjugate pair as an across variable and a through variable . The across variable is a variable that appears across the two terminals of an element . The across variable is measured relative to the element terminals . The through variable is a variable that passes through , or acts through an element , that is , it has the same value at both terminals of the element . The through variable is not a relative measure . Thus , in the electrical domain the across variable is voltage and the through variable is current . In the mechanical domain the analogous variables are velocity and force , as in the mobility analogy . 
 = = = = Translational mechanical through and across analogy = = = = 
 = = = = Rotational mechanical through and across analogy = = = = 
 = = = = Acoustical through and across analogy = = = = 
 Pressure is an across variable because pressure is measured relative to the two terminals of an element , not as an absolute pressure . It is thus not analogous to force which is a through variable , even though pressure is in units of force per area . Forces act through an element ; a rod with a force applied to the top will transmit the same force to an element connected to its bottom . Thus , in the through and across analogy the mechanical domain is analogous to the electrical domain like the mobility analogy , but the acoustical domain is analogous to the electrical domain like the impedance analogy . 
 = = = Other energy domains = = = 
 The electrical analogy can be extended to many other energy domains . In the field of sensors and actuators , and for control systems using them , it is a common method of analysis to develop an electrical analogy of the entire system . Since sensors can be sensing a variable in any energy domain , and likewise outputs from the system can be in any energy domain , analogies for all energy domains are required . The following table gives a summary of the most common power conjugate variables used to form analogies . 
 It is perhaps more common in the thermal domain to choose temperature and thermal power as the fundamental variables because , unlike entropy , they can be measured directly . The concept of thermal resistance is based on this analogy . However , these are not power conjugate variables and are not fully compatible with the other variables in the table . An integrated electrical analogy across multiple domains that includes this [ Which one ? The conjugate pair in the table or the non @-@ conjugate pair described in this paragraph ? ] thermal analogy will not correctly model energy flows . 
 Similarly , the commonly seen analogy using <unk> and magnetic flux as the fundamental variables , which gives rise to the concept of magnetic reluctance , does not correctly model energy flow . The variable pair <unk> and magnetic flux is not a power conjugate pair . The analogy shown in the table , which does use a power conjugate pair is sometimes called the gyrator @-@ capacitor model . 
 = = Transducers = = 
 A transducer is a device that takes energy from one domain as input and converts it to another energy domain as output . They are often reversible , but are rarely used in that way . Transducers have many uses and there are many kinds , in electromechanical systems they can be used as actuators and sensors . In audio electronics they provide the conversion between the electrical and acoustical domains . The transducer provides the link between the mechanical and electrical domains and thus a network representation is required for it in order to develop a unified electrical analogy . To do this the concept of port from the electrical domain is extended into other domains . 
 Transducers have ( at least ) two ports , one port in the mechanical domain and one in the electrical domain , and are analogous to electrical two @-@ port networks . This is to be compared to the elements discussed so far which are all one @-@ ports . Two @-@ port networks can be represented as a 2 × 2 matrix , or equivalently , as a <unk> of two dependent generators and two impedances or admittances . There are six canonical forms of these representations : impedance parameters , chain parameters , hybrid parameters and their inverses . Any of them can be used . However , the representation of a passive transducer converting between analogous variables ( for instance an effort variable to another effort variable in the impedance analogy ) can be simplified by replacing the dependent generators with a transformer . 
 On the other hand , a transducer converting non @-@ analogous power conjugate variables cannot be represented by a transformer . The two @-@ port element in the electrical domain that does this is called a gyrator . This device converts voltages to currents and currents to voltages . By analogy , a transducer that converts non @-@ analogous variables between energy domains is also called a gyrator . For instance , electromagnetic transducers convert current to force and velocity to voltage . In the impedance analogy such a transducer is a gyrator . Whether a transducer is a gyrator or a transformer is analogy related ; the same electromagnetic transducer in the mobility analogy is a transformer because it is converting between analogous variables . 
 = = History = = 
 James Clerk Maxwell developed very detailed mechanical analogies of electrical phenomena . He was the first to associate force with voltage ( 1873 ) and consequently is usually credited with founding the impedance analogy . This was the earliest mechanical @-@ electrical analogy . However , the term impedance was not coined until 1886 , long after Maxwell 's death , by Oliver Heaviside . The idea of complex impedance was introduced by Arthur E. Kennelly in 1893 , and the concept of impedance was not extended into the mechanical domain until 1920 by Kennelly and Arthur Gordon Webster . 
 Maxwell 's purpose in constructing this analogy was not to represent mechanical systems in terms of electrical networks . Rather , it was to explain electrical phenomena in more familiar mechanical terms . As electrical phenomena became better understood the reverse of this analogy , using electrical analogies to explain mechanical systems , started to become more common . Indeed , the lumped element abstract topology of electrical analysis has much to offer problems in the mechanical domain , and other energy domains for that matter . By 1900 the electrical analogy of the mechanical domain was becoming commonplace . From about 1920 the electrical analogy became a standard analysis tool . Vannevar Bush was a pioneer of this kind of modelling in his development of analogue computers , and a coherent presentation of this method was presented in a 1925 paper by Clifford A. <unk> . 
 In 1933 Floyd A. Firestone proposed a new analogy , the mobility analogy , in which force is analogous to current instead of voltage . Firestone introduced the concept of across and through variables in this paper and presented a structure for extending the analogy into other energy domains . A variation of the force @-@ current analogy was proposed by Horace M. Trent in 1955 and it is this version that is generally meant by the through and across analogy . Trent used a linear graph method of representing networks which has resulted in the force @-@ current analogy historically being associated with linear graphs . The force @-@ voltage analogy is historically used with bond graph representations , introduced in 1960 by Henry M. Paynter , however , it is possible to use either analogy with either representation if desired . 
 = Charlottesville and Albemarle Railway = 
 The Charlottesville and Albemarle Railway ( C & A ) was a short electric street railroad operating within the city of Charlottesville , Virginia , United States , during the early 20th century . The line was preceded by several streetcar lines operating both horse @-@ drawn and electric powered cars dating back to 1887 . After facing financial difficulties , the predecessor lines were reorganized into the C & A in 1903 . The C & A 's electric streetcars operated off of an overhead line system that was powered by the railroad 's own power plant . The C & A also offered electric power generated by its plant to the city of Charlottesville . During the mid @-@ 1910s , the line received numerous upgrades , including the construction of a new power plant on the Rivanna River , a new company headquarters building , expansion of track , and the purchase of new streetcars . 
 Increased expenses and decreasing ridership , coupled with the Great Depression , caused the railway to cease streetcar operations in 1935 . The railway was reorganized as the Charlottesville and Albemarle Bus Company in 1936 with a transition to bus service . Today , Charlottesville Area Transit provides bus service to the city of Charlottesville ; however , the city has recently investigated the feasibility of a streetcar line following much of the same route as the Charlottesville and Albemarle Railway . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Charlottesville gained its first railroad in 1850 , when the Virginia Central Railroad – formerly the Louisa Railroad – arrived as it progressed westward towards the Blue Ridge Mountains . The Orange and Alexandria Railroad , chartered in 1848 , entered into a contract in the early 1850s with the Virginia Central to use the Virginia Central 's track from Gordonsville to Charlottesville for its extension southward towards Lynchburg . This line began operations to Charlottesville in April 1854 . Thus , two major railroads – the Virginia Central in an east @-@ west direction and the Orange and Alexandria in a north @-@ south direction – converged at Charlottesville , ensuring the town 's prosperity . In 1868 , the Virginia Central was reorganized with the Covington and Ohio Railroad to form the Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad , which was renamed as the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway ( C & O ) in 1878 . After a series of mergers , the Orange and Alexandria Railroad was incorporated into the newly formed Southern Railway in 1894 . Charlottesville became a significant junction of the two railroads , with two railroad stations in operation . One was on the C & O line and the second , the Union Station , was just west of the C & O station at the junction between the C & O and Southern railroads . 
 The first local transit system within Charlottesville was established in 1883 as an omnibus line operating on a regular schedule . This service , which consisted of a large <unk> or horse @-@ drawn cart , operated between downtown Charlottesville and the University of Virginia . Fare for the one @-@ way trip cost 10 ¢ ( $ 2 @.@ 54 today ) . This service would soon be replaced by the development of Charlottesville 's streetcar system . 
 = = = Development of the streetcar system = = = 
 The C & A 's earliest predecessor line was chartered by the Virginia General Assembly on March 30 , 1887 as the Charlottesville and University Street Railway Company . This line constructed the first horse @-@ drawn streetcar line within Charlottesville and began operation on June 14 , 1887 . The Piedmont Construction and Improvement Company ( renamed as Piedmont Traction Company in January 1896 ) was incorporated by the General Assembly on March 4 , 1890 and began work on an electrified streetcar line . Meanwhile , the Charlottesville and University Street Railway Company – renamed as the Charlottesville City and Suburban Railway in 1895 – continued operation . For a time these two companies operated both horse @-@ drawn and electric streetcars on parallel tracks simultaneously , beginning with the first operation of the electric streetcars on January 12 , 1895 . 
 This continued until all of the Piedmont Traction Company 's holdings were transferred to the Charlottesville City and Suburban Railway on July 31 , 1896 , at which time the operation of horse @-@ drawn streetcars ceased . Several other companies , including the Charlottesville and University Electric Light and Gas Company , the Consolidated Ice and Electric Company , and the Jefferson Park Company , were acquired by the Charlottesville City and Suburban Railway around 1900 . Having defaulted on six months of payments towards bonds and mortgages , the Charlottesville City and Suburban Railway was sold at public auction on November 10 , 1903 , after which it was reorganized as the Charlottesville and Albemarle Railway . 
 = = = Expansion , development , and decline = = = 
 After the reorganization of the company as the Charlottesville and Albemarle Railway in 1903 , the new railway faced hardship in establishing a profitable business . Charlottesville , as of the 1900 Census , had only a population of 6 @,@ 449 people and few industries , making the development of an electric power provider and streetcar service difficult . Furthermore , the company 's electric power service , at that time using direct current , competed with the municipal gas provider . The C & A 's streetcar service was not expansive either , running for only 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) down Main Street from the C & O station west to the University of Virginia with multiple branches . Thus , the C & A 's profitability suffered and the railway went further into debt until it was purchased in 1912 by F.C. Todd , Norman James , and John L. Livers . Under the new ownership , the company was revitalized with many improvements including the construction of a new power plant producing alternating current electricity , the purchase of one @-@ man streetcars ( operated by one man ) , and a refocus of the company 's power service . 
 The C & A 's 3 @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) track was expanded by 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) during this time to reach the University of Virginia 's new stadium . The new one @-@ man streetcars required an alteration of the track at each end of the C & A 's line to accommodate the turning of the cars . After failing to receive permission from the C & O Railway to construct a loop at the C & O station , the C & A constructed a small turntable ; however , this was later replaced by a loop . The C & A also increased the number of Main Street sidings from three to five , thus reducing travel time to five minutes . 
 By 1922 , the C & A had grown to serve 28 @,@ 000 customers and employed 55 people . This prosperity , however , would soon reverse with the coming of the Great Depression at the end of the decade . Like many other transit companies , the C & A suffered financially during the depression . With a decrease in ridership and increased operational costs , the C & A ended streetcar operations in 1935 . On February 2 , 1936 , the company was renamed as the Charlottesville and Albemarle Bus Company and began providing bus service . Today , Charlottesville Area Transit provides bus transit in the Charlottesville area . 
 = = Operation and infrastructure = = 
 = = = Route Description = = = 
 As of 1920 , the C & A 's line was approximately 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) long . The line began at its easternmost point at the C & O Station and continued west down West Main Street . At the intersection of West Main Street and Ridge Street , a short branch line down Ridge Street was in service to reach the company 's car barn . The main street line continued past Ridge Street , the Charlottesville Union Station , and passed over the Southern Railway tracks before coming to the junction of West Main Street and Jefferson Park Avenue approximately 0 @.@ 3 miles ( 0 @.@ 48 km ) west of the Southern tracks . At this point the line split , with one line following Jefferson Park Avenue south for approximately 1 @.@ 6 miles ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) to Jefferson Park and Fry 's Spring . The other line , approximately 1 ⁄ 2 mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) long , continued west on West Main Street to the University of Virginia , passing the Rotunda , before turning north on Rugby Road where the line ended just before reaching the C & O mainline . 
 The C & A 's five passing sidings were located at the following locations : approximately halfway between the C & O station and Ridge Street on West Main Street , at the intersection of West Main Street and Ridge Street , near the union station , before the intersection of West Main Street and Jefferson Park Avenue , and approximately halfway down the Jefferson Park Avenue branch . 
 = = = Company headquarters = = = 
 In 1914 , the C & A began construction on a new company headquarters building at 300 West Main Street , which was completed in 1916 . Built in the Jeffersonian style of architecture , the new building featured red brick , white trim , and green shutters with bronze letters spelling the company name on the front . The building served as the company 's headquarters , a sales room , and an electrical substation . The substation was attached to the rear of the office building and featured two 200 @-@ kilowatt converters and three 65 @-@ kilowatt transformers for the purpose of reducing the 2200 @-@ volt AC power generated at the power plant to 600 @-@ volt DC power for use in the street railway system . The substation also contained devices to prepare the power for use in street lighting . The Southern Railway took advantage of the substation and installed transformers , raising the voltage to 4400 volts , for use along the Southern 's line between Calverton and Lynchburg . The building has since become an office building . 
 Located behind the company headquarters building was the railway 's car barn , the location where the streetcars were stored and maintained . Though constructed of only leftover rail and corrugated iron , the car barn suited the railway 's purpose , and most repair work was done in shop . The car barn has since become the entrance to a Greyhound Lines bus station . 
 = = = Power plant = = = 
 The C & A 's original power plant was located within the city of Charlottesville and produced direct current power for distribution to city residents . By the 1912 ownership change , this power plant had become worn and expensive to maintain , costing as much as 8 ¢ per kilowatt hour ( kWh ) to generate electricity ( equivalent today to $ 1 @.@ 89 ) . The plant also suffered from a flywheel explosion that caused $ 15 @,@ 000 dollars worth of damage on February 14 , 1913 . Because of the high expense , along with the difficulties of distributing DC power over an expanding system , the building of a new power plant to produce AC power was deemed necessary . 
 A location was selected east of Charlottesville where the C & O mainline followed the Rivanna River , providing both an easy water supply and rail access . The Red Land Power Corporation , chartered March 29 , 1913 , was charged to construct a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ horsepower plant for the C & A and was merged into the C & A on November 25 , 1913 . The old power plant was used temporarily , with new equipment , to produce AC power for the city as the new plant was being completed . Coal was provided to the new plant by way of rail , where a spur off of the C & O railway was provided to allow coal from hopper cars to be unloaded into a storage bin beneath . Two 400 hp boilers were installed along with multiple turbines and generators in order to generate the electricity . The completed plant produced 175 @,@ 000 kWh per month as of 1914 and consumed four hopper cars worth of coal per month ; this is contrasted with the old power plant 's generation of 125 @,@ 000 kWh per month consuming 14 – 15 cars worth , demonstrating the new plant 's efficiency . 
 = = = Jefferson Park = = = 
 Jefferson Park , which was located near the university in western Charlottesville , was owned by the C & A. The 13 @-@ acre park was improved in the mid @-@ 1910s with a renovated dance hall using materials harvested from a hotel that was torn down nearby . The park also featured motion picture shows , <unk> , roller @-@ skating , and swings . The C & A used the park 's attractions to garner further passengers on its streetcar line . 
 = = Streetcars = = 
 The C & A possessed multiple types of streetcars throughout its history . Both open and closed cars were used by the C & A , with these cars seating an average of 24 passengers and weighing between 24 @,@ 000 and 30 @,@ 000 pounds ( 11 @,@ 000 and 14 @,@ 000 kg ) . The closed cars were refurbished as part of the series of upgrades across the line to include new interior paint , tungsten lamps , and orange and blue exterior paint , a move to make the cars " more attractive to the students " of the University of Virginia , as these were the school 's colors . 
 Although the old cars received cosmetic upgrades , the energy inefficiency of the cars , due in part to their heavy weight , caused the railway to seek a new and improved car . Orders were placed with the J.G. Brill Company for five new near @-@ side one @-@ man streetcars sometime around 1913 . By June 1914 , two additional cars were ordered and placed in service making for a total of seven new streetcars servicing Charlottesville . These new cars offered multiple advantages to the company , as they were lighter , weighing around 18 @,@ 000 pounds ( 8 @,@ 200 kg ) , seated 36 people , and could be operated by one man . The near @-@ side cars were in length 31 feet 2 1 ⁄ 4 inches ( 9 @.@ 5 m ) and rode on a single truck . The benefits of the new cars allowed the company to scrap most of the older cars soon after the arrival of the new replacements . 
 = = Future plans = = 
 Though the Charlottesville and Albemarle Railway 's streetcars are long gone from Charlottesville , public transit is still of interest to the city . Since the rise of the personal automobile , Charlottesville has struggled to provide an effective public transportation system . Although bus service has been implemented under Charlottesville Area Transit , the city is challenged by expanding development and the lack of consumer willingness to use public transportation . In the early 2000s , the city began planning and analyzing various methods of public transportation for implementation within Charlottesville , one of which includes the development of a streetcar system . A 2005 study entitled Shaping Community with Transit laid out plans for the development of a streetcar system that would operate along West Main Street from the University of Virginia to downtown Charlottesville , following much of the same path as the Charlottesville and Albemarle Railway . A Streetcar Task Force was created in December 2006 by the City Council to examine the feasibility of a streetcar system , though no concrete plans have been developed or implemented as of 2012 . 
 = Ottawa Senators ( original ) = 
 The Ottawa Senators were an amateur , and later , professional , ice hockey team based in Ottawa , Canada which existed from 1883 to 1954 . The club was the first hockey club in Ontario , a founding member of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) and played in the NHL from 1917 until 1934 . The club , which was officially the Ottawa Hockey Club ( Ottawa HC ) , was known by several nicknames , including the Generals in the 1890s , the Silver Seven from 1903 to 1907 and the Senators dating from 1908 . 
 Generally acknowledged by hockey historians as one of the greatest teams of the early days of the sport , the club won numerous championships , starting with the 1891 to 1893 Ontario championships . Ottawa HC played in the first season during which the Stanley Cup was challenged in 1893 , and first won the Cup in 1903 , holding the championship until 1906 ( the Silver Seven years ) . The club repeated its success in the 1920s , winning the Stanley Cup in 1920 , 1921 , 1923 and 1927 ( the Super Six years ) . In total , the club won the Stanley Cup eleven times , including challenges during two years it did not win the Cup for the season . In 1950 , Canadian sports editors selected the Ottawa HC / Senators as Canada 's greatest team in the first half of the 20th century . 
 The club was one of the first organized clubs in the early days of the sport of ice hockey , playing in the Montreal Winter Carnival ice hockey tournaments in the early 1880s and founding the Amateur Hockey Association of Canada and the Ontario Hockey Association . Along with the rise of professionalism in ice hockey in the first decade of the 1900s , the club changed to a professional team and were founding members of the National Hockey Association ( NHA ) and its successor , the National Hockey League . The club competed in the NHL until the 1933 – 34 season , when it relocated the NHL franchise to St. Louis , Missouri , due to financial difficulties to become the St. Louis Eagles . The organization continued the Senators as an amateur , and later semi @-@ professional , team in Quebec senior men 's leagues until 1954 . 
 = = Team history = = 
 = = = Early amateur era ( 1883 – 1902 ) = = = 
 The Ottawa Hockey Club ( Ottawa HC ) was founded by a small group of like @-@ minded hockey enthusiasts . A month after witnessing games of hockey at the 1883 Montreal Winter Carnival , Halder Kirby , Jack Kerr and Frank Jenkins met and founded the club . Being the first organized ice hockey club in Ottawa , and also the first in Ontario , the club had no other clubs to play that season . The only activities that winter were practices at the " Royal Rink " starting on March 5 , 1883 . 
 The club first participated competitively at the 1884 Montreal Winter Carnival ice hockey tournament ( considered the Canadian championship at the time ) wearing red and black uniforms . Future Ottawa mayor Nelson Porter is recorded as the scorer of the club 's first @-@ ever goal , at the 1884 Carnival . Frank Jenkins was the first captain of the team ; he later became the president of the Hockey Club in 1891 and of the Amateur Hockey Association of Canada ( AHA or AHAC ) in 1892 . 
 For the 1885 season , the club adopted gold and blue as its colours and returned to the Montreal tournament . Ottawa earned its first @-@ ever victory at the tournament over the Montreal Victorias , but lost its final match to the Montreal Hockey Club ( Montreal HC ) to place second in the tournament . The 1886 Montreal tournament was cancelled due to an outbreak of smallpox and the club would not play an outside match again until 1887 . 
 = = = = Formation of the AHAC = = = = 
 On December 8 , 1886 , the first championship league , the Amateur Hockey Association of Canada was founded in Montreal . It was composed of several clubs from Montreal plus a Quebec City club and the Ottawa club . Ottawa 's Thomas D. Green was named the first president of the league . The league did not have a set schedule , and instead games were played in " challenge series " , whereby a team held the championship and entertained challengers until the end of the season , a format the league employed until 1893 . Under the format , Ottawa lost the one challenge it played in that first 1887 season to the Montreal Victorias . 
 After that season , Ottawa HC became inactive . The Royal Rink , which had been their primary facility , had been converted to a roller skating rink , and ice rink facilities were at a shortage . This changed with the opening of the Rideau Skating Rink in February 1889 . One of the principal organizers in the restarting of the team was Ottawa Journal publisher P. D. Ross , who also played on the team . Returning as captain was Frank Jenkins , and the other players were Halder Kirby , Jack Kerr , Nelson Porter , Ross , George Young , Weldy Young , Thomas D. Green , William O 'Dell , Tom Gallagher , Albert Low and Henry Ami . In 1889 , the club played only one match against an outside club , an exhibition at the Rideau rink against the Montreal HC ' second ' team . 
 In November 1889 , the Ottawa Amateur Athletic Club ( OAAC ) was opened at the corner of today 's Elgin and Laurier Streets on the site of today 's Lord Elgin Hotel . The Club building would also be the Hockey Club 's headquarters . The OAAC was affiliated with the Ottawa Amateur Athletic Association ( OAAA ) , and the Hockey Club through the affiliation also became OAAA members . When the club began outside competition again in 1889 – 90 , it was with new sweaters of white with black stripes and the OAAA red " triskelion " logo . It was during this period of affiliation with the OAAC , that the club would become known by the nickname " Generals " , attributed to the club 's insignia . The club is also referred to as the " Capitals " in literature , although there was a rival Ottawa Capitals club organized by the Capital Amateur Athletics Association active at the time . 
 In the 1889 – 90 season , Ottawa HC played two competitive games but this was to increase greatly the next season . The 1890 – 91 season saw the club play 14 games , playing in three leagues . Ottawa HC was a founding member of two new leagues , the Ottawa City Hockey League ( OCHL ) and the Ontario Hockey Association ( OHA ) and also rejoined the AHAC . Ottawa HC won the Ottawa and Ontario championships , and two games against AHAC opponents , but lost to the AHAC champion Montreal HC in its one challenge for the championship . 
 = = = = OHA championships = = = = 
 The team was the OHA champion for that league 's first three years . The first championship was played on March 7 , 1891 , at the Rideau rink and was won 5 – 0 by Ottawa over Toronto St. George 's . The 1891 championship was the only OHA final played in Ottawa , as Ottawa played the 1892 final in Toronto , defeating Osgoode Hall 4 – 2 , and in 1893 the Toronto <unk> defaulted by not appearing for the championship match scheduled for Ottawa . The club resigned from the OHA in February 1894 after the OHA refused the club 's demand to have the 1894 final in Ottawa and ordered Ottawa HC to play the final in Toronto . The dispute caused a permanent schism between Ottawa area teams competing in the Ottawa City Hockey League ( OCHL ) and the Ontario Hockey Association . As of 2010 , Ottawa and area teams remain unaffiliated with the OHA ; the official association under Hockey Canada is the Ottawa District Hockey Association , a descendant of the OCHL . 
 It was at a dinner to honour the 1892 OHA champions at the Russell Hotel that the Governor General , Lord Stanley , announced his new Dominion Challenge Trophy , now known as the Stanley Cup , for the Canadian champions . Former player and president of the club , P. D. Ross , was selected by Stanley to be a trustee of the Cup . 
 = = = = Re @-@ entry into the AHAC = = = = 
 Ottawa HC did not win a game in its return to AHAC challenge play in 1890 – 91 , but in the next season of AHAC play in 1891 – 92 the club won the league championship , and held it for most of the season , from January 10 until March 7 , 1892 . The club took the championship from Montreal HC , who were previously undefeated , and won five straight games before Montreal won the championship back by a 1 – 0 score in the last challenge of the season . Montreal 's win in the final challenge was their only win of the season and their only one in four games against Ottawa . 
 Lord Stanley , who often attended Ottawa HC games , felt the loss of the title after holding it all season was an unsuitable way to determine the championship . In the letter announcing the Stanley Cup , Stanley suggested that the AHAC start a ' round @-@ robin ' type regular season format , which the AHAC implemented in the following season of 1892 – 93 . The key match @-@ up in that season for Ottawa was a loss in the opening game of the season against the Montreal Victorias on January 7 , 1893 , as Ottawa split its season series with eventual winner Montreal HC , both teams otherwise winning all of their games . This loss provided the one game margin in the standings that led to Lord Stanley awarding the initial Cup to Montreal HC . 
 In 1893 – 1894 , Ottawa HC finished in a four @-@ way tie for first in the AHAC standings . A playoff was arranged in Montreal for the championship between Ottawa , Montreal HC and Montreal Victorias ( the other first place club , Quebec , having dropped out of the playoff ) . These games would be the first Stanley Cup playoff games ever played . As the ' away ' team , Ottawa was given a bye to the final game . On March 23 , 1894 , at the Victoria Rink , Ottawa and Montreal HC played for the championship . Ottawa scored the first goal , but Montreal would score the next three to win the game 3 – 1 . Ottawa captain Weldy Young fainted from exhaustion at the end of the game . 
 For the period of 1894 to 1900 , the club did not win the league championship , finishing as high as second several times , and fifth ( last ) once . For the 1896 – 97 season , the Ottawa club unveiled the first use of the ' barber @-@ pole ' style jerseys of horizontal bars of black , red and white . This basic style would be used by the club until 1954 except for the 1900 and 1901 seasons , when the team used a plain jersey with only the letter ' O ' on the front , identical in design to the jerseys of the Ottawa Football Club , also an OAAA affiliate . 
 In 1898 , the AHAC dissolved over the admission of the intermediate @-@ level team Ottawa Capitals of the rival Capital Amateur Association to the AHAC by a vote of the league executive . The Capitals had won the intermediate championship of the AHAC and were eligible to join the senior ranks . After they were outvoted by the intermediate @-@ level teams of AHAC which wanted to promote the Capitals to the senior @-@ level , the senior @-@ level Ottawa , Montreal HC , Montreal Victorias and Quebec clubs left the AHAC and formed the Canadian Amateur Hockey League ( CAHL ) , shutting out the Capitals . 
 In 1901 , the club won the CAHL league regular season title , its first league championship since winning the OHA in 1893 . It wished to challenge the Stanley Cup champion Winnipeg Victorias at first , but chose not to after deliberating for a week after the season . According to hockey historian Charles L. Coleman , it was due to the " lateness of the season " . 
 Notable players of this period included Albert Morel and Fred <unk> in goal , leaders of the league several times in goaltending , and future Hall of Famers Harvey Pulford , Alf Smith , Harry Westwick and brothers Bruce Stuart and Hod Stuart . It was during this period that the nickname Senators was first used ; however , from 1903 to 1906 , the team is better known as the Silver Seven . 
 = = = Silver Seven era ( 1903 – 1906 ) = = = 
 The first " dynasty " of the Ottawa HC was from 1903 until 1906 , when the team was known as the " Silver Seven " . The era started with the arrival of Frank McGee for the 1903 season and ended with his retirement after the 1906 season . Having lost an eye in local amateur hockey , he was persuaded , despite the threat of permanent blindness , to join the Senators . The youngest player on the team and standing 5 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 68 m ) tall , he went on to score 135 goals in 45 games . In a 1905 challenge against the Dawson City , he scored 14 goals in a 23 – 2 win . He retired in 1906 at the age of 23 . 
 In the 1903 CAHL season , Ottawa and the Montreal Victorias both finished in first place with 6 – 2 records . The top scorers were the Victorias ' Russell Bowie , who scored seven goals in one game and six in another , and McGee , whose top performance saw him score five goals in a game . The two clubs faced off in a two @-@ game total goals series to decide the league championship and Stanley Cup . The first game , played in Montreal on slushy ice that made it a desperate struggle to score , ended 1 – 1 . The return match in Ottawa , witnessed by three thousand fans , was on ice coated with an inch of water . The conditions did not hinder Ottawa , as they won 8 – 0 , with McGee scoring three goals and the other five shared among the three Gilmour brothers , Dave ( 3 ) , <unk> ( 1 ) and Bill ( 1 ) , to win their first Cup . This started a period in which the team held the Stanley Cup and defeated all challengers until March 1906 . 
 For that Stanley Cup win , each of the team 's players was given a silver nugget by team executive Bob <unk> , an Ottawa druggist and mining investor . He gave them nuggets instead of money since the players were still technically amateurs and to give them money would have meant disqualification from the league . In a 1957 interview , Harry Westwick recalled that at the presentation " One of the players said ' We ought to call ourselves the Silver Seven . ' and the name caught on right there . " ( At the time , hockey teams iced seven men — a goaltender , three forwards , two defencemen and a rover ) . 
 The Silver Seven moved between three leagues during this time , and for a time were independent of any league . In February 1904 , during the CAHL season , Ottawa resigned from the league in a dispute over the replaying of a game . The team had arrived late for a game in Montreal and the game had been called at midnight , with a tied score . The league demanded that the game be replayed . The club agreed to play only if the game mattered in the standings . The impasse led to Ottawa leaving the league . For the rest of that winter , the club played only in Cup challenge series . Quebec went on to win the championship of the league and demanded the Stanley Cup , but the Cup 's trustees ruled that Ottawa still retained it . The trustees offered to arrange a challenge between Ottawa and the CAHL champion , but the CAHL refused to consider it . The next season , Ottawa joined the Federal Amateur Hockey League ( FAHL ) , winning the league championship . The club was only in the FAHL for one season , and the Montreal Wanderers became their new rival . For the 1906 season Ottawa , along with the Wanderers and several of the CAHL teams , formed the Eastern Canada Amateur Hockey Association ( ECAHA ) , unifying the top teams into one league . 
 = = = = Style of play = = = = 
 The Silver Seven were well known for the number of injuries that they inflicted on other teams . In a Stanley Cup challenge game in 1904 , the Ottawas injured seven of the nine Winnipeg players , and the Winnipeg Free Press called it the " bloodiest game in Ottawa . " The next team to challenge the Ottawas , the Toronto Marlboroughs , were similar treated . According to the Toronto Globe : 
 The style of hockey seems to be the only one known and people consider it quite proper and legitimate for a team to endeavor to incapacitate their opponents rather than to excel them in skill and speed ... slashing , tripping , the severest kind of cross @-@ checking and a systematic method of hammering Marlboroughs on hand and wrists are the most effective points in Ottawa 's style . 
 According to one player , the " Marlboroughs got off very easily . When Winnipeg Rowing Club played here , most of their players were carried off on stretchers . " This style of hockey would continue for years to come . 
 = = = = Dawson City challenge = = = = 
 The Silver Seven participated in perhaps the most famous Stanley Cup challenge of all , that of Dawson City of Yukon Territory in 1905 . Organized by Joe Boyle , a Toronto @-@ born prospector , who had struck it rich in the Yukon gold rush of 1898 , Dawson City had Lorne Hanna , who had played for Brandon against Ottawa in a 1904 challenge and two former elite hockey players : Weldy Young , who had played for Ottawa in the 1890s , and D. R. McLennan , who had played for Queen 's College against the Montreal Victorias in an 1895 challenge . The remaining players were selected from other Dawson City clubs . Dawson City 's challenge was accepted in the summer of 1904 by the Stanley Cup trustees and scheduled to start on Friday , January 13 , 1905 . The date of the challenge meant that Young had to travel separately to Ottawa , as he had to work in a federal election that December and would meet the club in Ottawa . 
 To get to Ottawa , several thousand miles away , the club had to get to Whitehorse by overland sleigh , catch a train from there to Skagway , Alaska , then catch a steamer to Vancouver , B.C. and a train from there to Ottawa . On December 18 , 1904 , several players set out by dog sled and the rest left the next day by bicycle for a 330 @-@ mile trek to Whitehorse . At first the team made good progress , but the weather turned warm enough to thaw the roads , forcing the players to walk several hundred miles . The team spent the nights in police sheds along the road . At Whitehorse , the weather turned bad , causing the trains not to run for three days and the Nuggets to miss their steamer in Skagway . The next one could not dock for three days due to the ice buildup . The club found the sea journey treacherous , and it caused seasickness amongst the team . When the steamer reached Vancouver , the area was too fogged in to dock , and the steamer docked in Seattle . The team from there caught a train to Vancouver , from which it left on January 6 , 1905 , arriving in Ottawa on January 11 . 
 Despite the difficult journey , the Ottawas refused to change the date of the first game , only two days away . Ottawa arranged hospitable accommodations for the Dawson City team . The <unk> received a huge welcome at the train station , had a welcoming dinner , and used the Ottawa Amateur Athletic Club 's rooms for the duration of their stay . Young did not arrive in time to play for Dawson . 
 The first game was close at the halfway point , Ottawa leading Dawson three to one . In the second half , the play became violent . Norman Watt of Dawson tripped Ottawa 's Art Moore , who retaliated with a stick to the mouth of Watt . Watt promptly knocked Moore out , hitting him on the head with his stick . The game ended 9 – 2 for Ottawa . The game left a poor taste in the mouth for the <unk> , who complained that several goals were offside . 
 After the game , Watt was quoted as saying " [ Frank ] McGee doesn 't look like too much , " as he had only scored once in the first game . McGee scored four goals in the first half of the second match and 10 in the second half , leading Ottawa to a 23 – 2 score ; his 14 goals remains a record for a single game of major senior hockey . Eight of those 14 goals were scored consecutively in a span of less than nine minutes . Despite this high score , the newspapers claimed that Albert Forrest , the Dawson City goalie , had played a " really fine game " , otherwise the score " might have been doubled " . Ottawa celebrated by hosting Dawson at a banquet . After this , the players took the Cup and attempted to drop @-@ kick it over the Rideau Canal . The stunt was unsuccessful , as the Cup landed on the frozen ice and had to be retrieved the next day . 
 Considering the lopsided score of the series , historians such as Paul Kitchen question why Dawson City was even granted a chance at the Cup . Dawson City had won no championships and did not belong to any recognized senior league . While team official Weldy Young knew Stanley Cup trustee P. D. Ross personally through their joint connection with the club , it may have been the political connections that Joe Boyle had with the government Interior Minister of the time , Clifford Sifton , that got Dawson City the series . 
 = = = = Stanley Cup Challenge win streak = = = = 
 The Ottawas were the dominant team for three years : 
 The end of the streak came in March 1906 . Ottawa and the Montreal Wanderers tied for the ECAHA league lead in 1906 , forcing a playoff series for the league championship and the Cup . Montreal won the first game in Montreal by a score of 9 – 1 . In the return match , Ottawa replaced their goaltender Billy Hague and used goaltender Percy LeSueur , formerly of Smiths Falls . In the return match in Ottawa , Ottawa overcame the eight @-@ goal deficit , getting a 9 – 1 lead to tie the series by the midway point of the second half . Harry Smith then scored to put Ottawa ahead , only to have the goal ruled offside . It was then that Lester Patrick of the Wanderers took it upon himself , scoring two goals to win the series 12 – 10 . This was Frank McGee 's last game and he scored two goals . 
 The players 
 Besides McGee , future Hall of Fame players Billy Gilmour , Percy LeSueur , Harvey Pulford , Alf Smith , Bouse Hutton and Harry Westwick played for the Ottawas . Alf Smith was also the coach . Other players of the ' Seven ' included Arthur Allen , Dave <unk> , Arthur Fraser , Horace Gaul , Dave Gilmour , <unk> Gilmour , Jim McGee , Art Moore , Percy Sims , Hamby Shore , Charles Spittal , Frank White and Frank Wood . 
 The club was able to continue the streak despite the death of one of its members . Jim McGee , Frank McGee 's brother , died after the 1904 season in a horseback riding accident . He was also the Ottawa Football Club 's captain at the time . The funeral cortege was estimated at a half @-@ mile in length , and it included Canadian prime minister Wilfrid Laurier . 
 = = = Early professional era ( 1907 – 1917 ) = = = 
 = = = = Transition to professional ( 1907 – 1910 ) = = = = 
 Until the 1906 – 07 season , the players were not paid to play hockey , as the team was abiding by the principles of amateur sports . Ottawa HC had an advantage in attracting top players to its squad . The players could work for the government , and the work allowed the players to play for the team . Meanwhile , in the United States , the International Hockey League was paying players . In response to this , the ECAHA , while still having several purely amateur teams , started to allow professional players . The top teams could therefore compete for the top players and the gate attractions that they were . The only restriction was that the status of each and every player had to be publicized . 
 The period saw the rivalry between the Senators and the Wanderers continue , and at times it was brutally contested . On January 12 , 1907 , a full @-@ scale " <unk> " took place between the two teams at a game in Montreal . Charles Spittal of Ottawa was described as " attempting to split Blachford 's skull " , Alf Smith hit Hod Stuart " across the temple with his stick , laying him out like a corpse " and Harry Smith cracked his stick across Ernie Johnson 's face , breaking Johnson 's nose The Wanderers won the game 4 – 2 . Discipline was first attempted by the league at a meeting on January 18 , in which the Victorias proposed suspending Spittal and Alf Smith for the season , but this was voted down and the president of the league resigned . The police arrested Spittal , Alf and Harry Smith on their next visit to Montreal , leading to $ 20 fines for Spittal and Alf Smith and an acquittal for Harry Smith . The tactics did not work on the Wanderers ; they won the return match in Ottawa in March and went undefeated for the season , leaving Ottawa in second place . However , it may have affected the Wanderers in another way : they lost the Stanley Cup a week after the <unk> in a Stanley Cup challenge series to the Kenora Thistles . 
 The 1907 – 08 season was a season of change for Ottawa . Harry Smith and Hamby Shore left to join Winnipeg . Ottawa hired several free agents , including Marty Walsh , Tommy Phillips and Fred ' The Listowel Whirlwind ' Taylor . Taylor was hired away from the International Professional Hockey League ( IHL ) for the 1908 season for a $ 1000 salary and a guaranteed federal civil service job . He was an immediate sensation and earned a new nickname of ' Cyclone ' for his fast skating and end @-@ to @-@ end rushes , the nickname attributed to the Canadian governor @-@ general Earl Grey . Phillips was signed from Kenora to an even higher salary of $ 1 @,@ 500 for the season , partially paid for by Ottawa sportsmen . 
 Ottawa moved into their new arena , simply dubbed The Arena , with seating for 4 @,@ 500 and standing room for 2 @,@ 500 . With the free agent signings and the new arena , Ottawa started selling season @-@ tickets , the first of their kind , $ 3 @.@ 75 for five games , eventually selling 2 @,@ 400 . The capacity was topped with a crowd of 7 @,@ 100 in the home opener , attending a game against the Wanderers on January 11 , which Ottawa won 12 – 2 . However , Ottawa started the season with two losses out of three games and ended in second place behind the Wanderers again . Walsh tied for the scoring lead with 28 goals in 9 games ( including 7 in one match ) , while Phillips was close behind at 26 goals in 10 games . 
 In 1908 – 09 , the Eastern Canada Amateur Hockey Association became completely professional and changed its name to the Eastern Canada Hockey Association ( ECHA ) . This led to the retirement of several stars , including Ottawa 's Harvey Pulford and Montreal 's Russell Bowie , who insisted on keeping their amateur status . The Montreal Victorias and Montreal HC founded the Interprovincial Amateur Hockey Union , leaving only Ottawa , Quebec , Montreal Wanderers and Montreal Shamrocks in the ECHA . It was another season of player turn @-@ over for Ottawa . Besides Pulford , Ottawa lost Alf Smith , who formed a competing Ottawa Senators professional team in the Federal League , and Tommy Phillips , who joined Edmonton . The club picked up Bruce Stuart from the Wanderers , Fred Lake from Winnipeg and Dubby Kerr from Toronto . This lineup had a successful season , winning 10 out of 12 games . Walsh led all scorers with 38 goals in 12 games , while Stuart had 22 and Kerr had 20 . The season was clinched with a win against the Wanderers on March 3 in Ottawa , 8 – 3 , as Ottawa won the league and Stanley Cup . 
 Notable players of this time period include future Hall of Famers Percy LeSueur in goal , Dubby Kerr , Tommy Phillips , Harvey Pulford , Alf Smith , Bruce Stuart , Fred ' Cyclone ' Taylor and Marty Walsh . 
 = = = = National Hockey Association ( 1910 – 1917 ) = = = = 
 The 1909 – 10 hockey season saw major changes in the hockey world , as the ECHA organization split and created two organizations , the Canadian Hockey Association ( CHA ) and the National Hockey Association ( NHA ) . The CHA was formed to ' freeze out ' the Wanderers , whose ownership change led the team to move to a smaller arena . At the same time , millionaire businessman J. Ambrose O 'Brien , who wanted his Renfrew Creamery Kings to challenge for the Stanley Cup , saw his Renfrew application to join the CHA rejected . Together with the Wanderers , O 'Brien instead decided to form the NHA , and founded the Montreal Canadiens . The NHA became the fore @-@ runner of today 's National Hockey League . 
 Ottawa was one of the founders of the CHA and one of the teams that had rejected Renfrew . However , after a few poorly attended games showed that fans had no interest in the league , Ottawa and the Montreal Shamrocks abandoned the CHA to join the NHA . Ottawa , the defending Stanley Cup champion and Wanderers ' rival , was readily accepted by the NHA . This enabled Ottawa to continue the rivalry with the Wanderers and take in the gate revenues those games provided . The Wanderers won the championship in 1910 , and Ottawa won in 1911 and 1915 . 
 It is during the NHA period that the nickname " Ottawa Senators " came into common usage . Although there had been a competing Senators club in 1909 , and there had been mention of the Senators nickname as early as 1901 , the nickname was not adopted by the club . The official name of the Ottawa Hockey Club remained in place until ownership changes in the 1930s . 
 Star player Cyclone Taylor had defected to Renfrew , and despite a salary war with Renfrew , Ottawa managed to re @-@ sign their other top players , Dubby Kerr , Fred Lake and Marty Walsh for the 1909 – 10 season . On Taylor 's first return in February 1910 , he made a promise to score a goal while making a rush backwards against Ottawa . This led to incredible interest , with over 7 @,@ 000 in attendance . A bet of $ 100 was placed at the King Edward Hotel against him scoring at all . Ottawa won 8 – 5 ( scoring 3 goals in overtime ) and kept Taylor off the scoresheet . Later in the season at the return match in Renfrew , Taylor made good on his boast with a goal scored backwards , although it was simply a goal scored on a backhand shot . This was the final game of the season , and Ottawa had no chance at the league title and did not appear to have put in an effort in the 17 – 2 loss . 
 In 1910 – 11 , the NHA contracted and imposed a salary cap , leading many of the Ottawa players to threaten to form a competing league . However , team owners controlled the rinks and the players accepted the new conditions . For Ottawa players , conditions did not deteriorate much as the club provided bonuses after the season . Ottawa gained revenge for the previous loss to Renfrew by defeating Renfrew 19 – 5 . The team went 13 – 3 to win the NHA and inherit the Stanley Cup ; Marty Walsh and Dubby Kerr led the goal scoring with 37 and 32 goals in 16 games . After the season Ottawa played two challenges , against Galt , winning 7 – 4 , and against Port Arthur , winning 13 – 4 . In the Port Arthur game Marty Walsh came close to matching Frank McGee 's total , scoring ten goals . 1910 – 11 was the debut season of right winger Jack Darragh who scored 18 goals in 16 games . 
 The 1911 – 12 through 1913 – 14 seasons saw a decline for both Ottawa and the Wanderers . After the withdrawal of O 'Brien 's Renfrew team in 1911 , the two clubs fought over the rights to Cyclone Taylor , who wanted to return to Ottawa , where his fiance lived and he still had a government job . The NHA had given the Wanderers the rights to Taylor in a dispersal of the Renfrew players . Trade talks were unfruitful . Ottawa , insistent in their claim for Taylor , played him in one game for Ottawa against the Wanderers . The Senators won the game ; however , Taylor was ineffectual . The move backfired on the Senators , as the league ruled that the game could not stand and would have to be replayed . The Senators lost the replay and it was the difference in the league championship , as the defending champion Senators placed second by one game behind Quebec . Quebec 's Bulldogs won the only two Stanley Cup championships in the club 's history that season and the next , and the Toronto Blueshirts won in 1914 . Taylor did not play in the NHA again , as he joined Vancouver in the off @-@ season . The Senators finished fifth in 1912 – 13 and fourth in 1913 – 14 . 1912 – 13 saw the debut of right winger Punch Broadbent , who scored 20 goals in 18 games . 
 In 1914 – 15 , both Ottawa and the Wanderers bounced back to the top of league , tying each other for the NHA season title . This was also the season that future Hall of Famer Clint Benedict became the Senators ' top goaltender , taking over from Percy LeSueur . Former Wanderer Art Ross joined the Senators and helped Ottawa win in a two @-@ game playoff , 4 – 1 . The Senators then played in the first inter @-@ league Stanley Cup final playoff series with the Vancouver Millionaires of the Pacific Coast ( PCHA ) league . Cyclone Taylor , now of the Millionaires , haunted his old team , scoring six goals in three games as Ottawa lost three straight in Vancouver . Future Senator centreman Frank Nighbor played in this series for Vancouver and scored five goals . 
 In 1915 – 16 , the Senators placed second to the eventual Stanley Cup champion Montreal Canadiens . Punch Broadbent left the team to fight in World War I , while Frank Nighbor joined the Senators in his place and became the team 's leading scorer . Nighbor had been signed away from Vancouver for the salary of $ 1 @,@ 500 , making him the highest paid player on the club , ahead of Art Ross and Eddie Gerard . Benedict led the league as the top goaltender for the first time . With the wartime shortage of players , Rat Westwick and Billy Gilmour of ' Silver Seven ' days attempted comebacks with the club but both played only two games before retiring for good . 
 In the off @-@ season , Ottawa 's president Llewellyn Bate proposed to suspend the team 's operations until the end of the war . Gate receipts had declined 17 per cent . The other NHA owners refused to suspend the league . Rather than simply cease operations , Bate and the other directors of the team turned it over to Ted Dey , owner of the Arena . Dey cut player salaries and let players go , including Art Ross to the Wanderers . Dey also fired manager Alf Smith , saving on his $ 750 salary . 
 In 1916 – 17 , the last season of the NHA , Ottawa won the second @-@ half of the split schedule . An Army team , the Toronto 228th Battalion , composed of enlisted professional players , joined the league before leaving for war after the first half @-@ season . When the Battalion left , the other Toronto team , the Blueshirts was suspended by the league and its players dispersed including <unk> Denneny , brother of Cy Denneny , who joined the Senators . Future Hall of Famer Cy had been picked up in a trade with Toronto earlier that season and he would be a member of the Senators until 1928 . Benedict was the NHA 's top goaltender once again , and Nighbor tied for the scoring lead with 41 goals in 19 games . As second @-@ half winners , the Senators played off in a series with the Canadiens , the first @-@ half winners . The Senators ended their play in the NHA by losing a two @-@ game total goals playoff series to the Canadiens , who eventually lost to Seattle in the Stanley Cup final . This season saw the final decline of Ottawa 's old rivals , the Wanderers , who finished at the bottom of the standings . The next year , the Wanderers played only four games in the NHL , winning only one before folding the franchise after their home arena burned down . 
 While World War I affected all NHA teams , Ottawa was able to retain players and be competitive . The club finished no worse than second during the wartime seasons of 1914 – 15 to 1917 – 18 . 
 = = = = Stanley Cup champions in 1906 and 1910 : Historians ' debate = = = = 
 Due to the ' challenge ' format of Stanley Cup play before 1915 , there is often confusion about how many Stanley Cups the Senators should be given credit for : nine , ten or eleven . The Senators were Stanley Cup champions at the end of nine hockey seasons without dispute . In another two seasons , 1905 – 06 and 1909 – 10 , the Senators won Stanley Cup challenges but were not champions at the end of the season . The Hockey Hall of Fame and the National Hockey League agree that the Senators of 1906 were champions but disagree on whether the Senators were champions in 1910 . In both seasons , the Senators were the undisputed defending champions , and during that year 's hockey season , the Senators won Stanley Cup challenges . However , by the end of both hockey seasons , they were no longer holders of the Stanley Cup . 
 In 1906 , Ottawa defeated OHA champions Queen 's University and FAHL champions Smiths Falls in Stanley Cup challenges . However , Ottawa tied the Montreal Wanderers for the ECAHA regular season championship . To decide the ECAHA championship and the Stanley Cup , the Senators played a two @-@ game total goals series against the Wanderers in March 1906 and lost . The 1906 hockey season ended with the Wanderers as the Stanley Cup champions . The Hockey Hall of Fame recognizes both Ottawa and the Wanderers as champions for that year , as does the NHL . 
 In January 1910 , Ottawa defeated Galt , champions of the OPHL , during the CHA regular season , as well as Edmonton of the <unk> during the NHA regular season ( the Senators switched leagues in @-@ between ) . At the end of the season Ottawa gave up the Cup to the Montreal Wanderers , regular @-@ season champions of the new NHA league . Unlike the 1906 case , the Hockey Hall of Fame does not recognize the Senators as champions for January 1910 , although the NHL does . 
 In October 1992 , at the first game of the current Ottawa Senators NHL club , banners were raised to commemorate Stanley Cups in nine seasons , excluding 1906 and 1910 . In media guides published by the club , they listed the original Senators as nine @-@ time winners . This changed in March 2003 , when the team raised banners for the 1906 and 1910 years to join the other nine banners hanging at the Corel Centre . The club and the NHL now list the original Senators as eleven @-@ time winners . 
 = = = NHL years ( 1917 – 1934 ) = = = 
 After struggling through the war years , the Ottawa Hockey Association put the Club up for sale for $ 5 @,@ 000 in the fall of 1917 . Montreal Canadiens ' owner George Kennedy was leading an effort to get rid of Toronto Blueshirts ' owner Eddie Livingstone , and he needed the Senators in his corner . He loaned Ottawa Citizen sports editor Tommy Gorman ( who also doubled as a press representative for the Canadiens ) $ 2 @,@ 500 to help buy into the Senators . Gorman , along with Martin Rosenthal and Ted Dey ( owner of The Arena ) , bought the club . At a meeting held at Montreal 's Windsor Hotel , the Senators , Canadiens , Wanderers and Bulldogs formed a new league — the National Hockey League — effectively leaving Livingstone in the NHA by himself . Gorman represented the Senators at the meeting . " A great day for hockey , " he was quoted as saying , " Without [ Livingstone ] we can get down to the business of making money . " Within a year , Gorman and partner Ted Dey had made enough money to pay back Kennedy . Gorman also attended the following year 's meeting of the NHA owners in which the final vote to suspend the league was made . 
 The Senators first season in the NHL , 1917 – 18 , did not go well . Salary squabbles delayed the home opener as players protested that their contracts were for twenty games , while the season schedule was for twenty four . Enough players were appeased that the game started , 15 minutes late , while two players Hamby Shore and Jack Darragh , stayed in the dressing room while negotiations went on . The Senators lost their home opener 7 – 4 . The Senators lost their previous top rival , the Wanderers , after five games . The team struggled and finished in third place after the first half of the season . The club made player changes in the second half , getting Horace Merrill out of retirement and releasing Dave Ritchie . It was Shore 's last season as he would die of pneumonia in October 1918 . Shore 's last career game was in the third @-@ last game of the season and he was sat out for the last two games . In the end , the team placed second in the second half and missed the playoffs . Cy Denneny led the team , coming second overall in scoring in the league with 36 goals in 20 games . 
 Prior to the 1918 – 19 season , ownership of the Senators changed . While Ted Dey negotiated with Percy Quinn for a lease for The Arena , Dey was also negotiating with Rosenthal over the lease , causing Rosenthal to seriously consider moving the team from The Arena back to Aberdeen Pavilion . However , it turned out that Dey was engineering a takeover of the club and Rosenthal ended up selling his share of the club to Dey , making Dey the majority owner in both the Arena and the hockey club . Rosenthal , a prominent local jeweller , had been involved with the club since 1903 . Dey 's machinations also helped the NHL in its continuing fight against Blueshirts owner Livingstone . The Senators instigated an agreement with the other NHL clubs , binding them to the NHL for the next five years and locking out any rival league from their arenas . 
 In 1918 – 19 , the Senators won the second half of the split schedule . Clint Benedict had the top goalkeeper average , and Cy Denneny and Frank Nighbor placed third and fourth in scoring with 18 and 17 goals in 18 games , respectively . The schedule was abbreviated by the Toronto Arenas club suspending operations , so the Senators and Canadiens played off in the first best @-@ of @-@ seven series . Due to a family bereavement , Ottawa was without star centre Frank Nighbor for the first three games and lost all three . Ottawa asked to use <unk> Denneny of Toronto , but the Canadiens turned down the request . Nighbor returned for the fourth game in Ottawa , which Ottawa won 6 – 3 . The series ended in five games , as the Canadiens won the final match 4 – 2 to win the series . The Stanley Cup final between Montreal and Seattle was left undecided , as an influenza outbreak suspended the final . 
 = = = = The ' Super Six ' ( 1920 – 1927 ) = = = = 
 The " Super Six " Senators of the 1920s are considered by the NHL to be its first dynasty . The club won four Stanley Cups and placed first in the regular season seven times . The team 's success was based on the timely scoring of several forwards , including Frank Nighbor and Cy Denneny , and a defence @-@ first policy , which led to the NHL changing the rules in 1924 to force defencemen to leave the defensive zone once the puck had left the zone . The talent pool in Ottawa and the Ottawa valley was deep ; the Senators traded away two future Hall of Famers ( Clint Benedict and Harry Broadbent ) in 1924 to make way for two prospects ( Alex Connell and Hooley Smith ) , who would also become Hall of Famers . Benedict and Broadbent led the Montreal Maroons to a playoff defeat of the Senators on the way to a Stanley Cup win in 1926 . 
 In the 1919 – 20 season , the NHL reactivated the Quebec Bulldogs NHA franchise ; with this addition , the NHL played with four teams again . There were no playoffs , as Ottawa won both halves of the schedule , the undisputed NHL championship and the O 'Brien Cup . Clint Benedict again led league in goalkeeper goals @-@ against average and Frank Nighbor came third in the league scoring race with 25 goals in 23 games . 
 The Senators then played the Seattle Metropolitans of the PCHA for the Stanley Cup . Because Seattle 's red @-@ white @-@ green striped uniforms were nearly the same as Ottawa 's red @-@ white @-@ black jerseys , the Senators played in simple white sweaters adorned with a large red " O " for this series . The first three games were held in Ottawa ( the first Stanley Cup games played in Ottawa since 1911 ) and ended with scores of 3 – 2 and 3 – 0 for Ottawa and 3 – 1 for Seattle . The first three games had been played on ice covered with water and slush due to warm weather in Ottawa . At this point , NHL president Calder moved the series to the Arena Gardens in Toronto , which had an artificial ice rink , the only one in eastern Canada at that time . Seattle won 5 – 2 to tie the series , cheered on by the Toronto fans . In the fifth and deciding game , Ottawa won 6 – 1 on Jack Darragh 's three goal performance and won their first Stanley Cup as a member of the NHL . It was after this win that T. P. Gorman dubbed the team the ' Super Six . ' See the article 1920 Stanley Cup Finals . 
 In the 1920 – 21 season , the league transferred two Senators players to help its competitive balance . Punch Broadbent was transferred to Hamilton while Sprague Cleghorn was transferred to Toronto . Even without the two , the Senators won the first half of the season to qualify for the playoffs . By the end of the playoffs , both players were back with Ottawa . Benedict again led league in goalkeeper average and Cy Denneny came second in scoring with 34 goals in 24 games . The Senators shut out Toronto 7 – 0 in a two @-@ game total goals playoff and went west to play off against Vancouver for the Stanley Cup . Vancouver still had Cyclone Taylor , though it was near the end of his career and he scored no goals . The best @-@ of @-@ five series was heavily attended , with 11 @,@ 000 fans attending the first game , the largest crowd in history to see a hockey game up until that time and a total attendance for the five @-@ game series of over 51 @,@ 000 . Ottawa won the series with scores of 1 – 2 , 4 – 3 , 3 – 2 , 2 – 3 and 2 – 1 , with Jack Darragh scoring the winning goal . See the article 1921 Stanley Cup Finals . 
 The 1921 – 22 season saw Sprague Cleghorn leave and Jack Darragh retire , opening spaces for new defencemen Frank Boucher and Frank " King " Clancy . Clancy 's first goal came on his first shot , against Hamilton in overtime on February 7 , and was noted for having actually come in ( illegally ) through the side of the net . Broadbent and Cy Denneny , the " Gold Dust Twins " , finished one and two in league scoring , together producing 59 of Ottawa 's 106 goals . Broadbent scored in 16 consecutive games , an NHL record , that as of 2009 , still stands . The Senators won the regular season title but lost to eventual Stanley Cup winner Toronto St. Patricks 5 – 4 in a two @-@ game total goals series . The series had the Boucher brothers play for Ottawa , while Cy Denneny played for Ottawa and his brother Corbett played for Toronto . 
 In 1922 – 23 , the Senators were led by the league 's top goalie Clint Benedict , the goal scoring of Cy Denneny and the return from retirement of Jack Darragh . The season also saw the debut of defenceman Lionel <unk> . An unsurpassed iron man record was set when Frank Nighbor played in six consecutive games without substitution , averaging a goal a game during the stretch . The Senators won the regular season and took the playoff against the Canadiens 3 – 2 in a two @-@ game total @-@ goals playoff . 
 The Cup Final playoff format had changed . There were semi @-@ finals against the PCHA champion , followed by the final against the WCHL champion . In the Cup semi @-@ finals , Ottawa again faced Vancouver ( now known as the Maroons ) in Vancouver . New attendance records were set during this series , with 9 @,@ 000 for the first game and 10 @,@ 000 for the second . Ottawa won the series with scores of 1 – 0 , 1 – 4 , 3 – 2 , and 4 – 1 , with Benedict getting the shutout and Harry Broadbent scoring five goals . The Senators next had to play Edmonton in a best @-@ of @-@ three series and won it in two games with scores of 2 – 1 and 1 – 0 , with Broadbent scoring the winning goal . The second game of the finals is famous for being the game in which King Clancy ( then only a substitute for the team ) played all positions , including goal . See the article 1923 Stanley Cup Finals . 
 That year , club owners Dey and Gorman entered into a partnership with Frank Ahearn . Ahearn 's family was well @-@ off , owning the Ottawa Electric Company and the Ottawa Street Railway Company . Ted Dey then sold his share of the club and retired . The first work of the partnership was a new arena , the Ottawa Auditorium , which was a 7 @,@ 500 seat ( 10 @,@ 000 capacity with standing room ) arena with artificial ice . The new Ottawa Auditorium 's first regular season game came on December 26 , 1923 . A crowd of 8 @,@ 300 fans attended a game against the Canadiens , in which rookie Howie Morenz scored his first NHL goal . 
 The 1923 – 24 season saw the Senators win the season but lose the playoff to the Canadiens , 0 – 1 and 2 – 4 , with Georges Vezina getting the shutout and Morenz scoring 3 goals . Frank Nighbor was the first winner of the Hart Trophy as ' most valuable player ' for his play in the regular season . After the disappointing loss in the playoff series , goaltender Clint Benedict became embroiled in a controversy with the club over late nights and drinking . He was traded away , along with Harry Broadbent , to the new Montreal Maroons before the next season , for cash . Ottawa hockey fans got to see a Stanley Cup final game played in Ottawa as the Auditorium hosted the final match of the Stanley Cup finals between the Canadiens and the Calgary Tigers , moved because of poor natural ice at the Canadiens ' arena . 
 The 1924 – 25 season , the first year of NHL expansion to the United States , saw major changes in Ottawa 's lineup . Jack Darragh retired and had died from appendicitis months after his final game . Making his debut in goal for Ottawa was Alex Connell , replacing Benedict . Replacing Broadbent was Hooley Smith , who had played for Canada in the 1924 Olympics . Lionel <unk> was sold to the expansion Boston Bruins and replaced by Ed Gorman . It was also the debut season of Frank Finnigan . Off the ice , Gorman and Ahearn squabbled over ownership . In January 1925 , during the season , Gorman sold his share of the Senators to Ahearn and left the Senators organization , later joining the expansion New York Americans . 
 With all the changes , the Senators slipped to fourth place in the standings . Cy Denneny continued his scoring ways , placing fourth in league scoring with 28 goals in 28 games . Frank Nighbor became the first winner of the Lady Byng Trophy for gentlemanly play , donated by Marie Evelyn Moreton ( Lady Byng ) , wife of Julian Byng , 1st Viscount Byng of Vimy , who was Governor General of Canada from 1921 to 1926 . Nighbor received the trophy personally from Lady Byng during a presentation at Rideau Hall . Nighbor won the trophy in 1925 – 26 and 1926 – 27 as well . 
 The NHL expanded further into the United States in the 1925 – 26 season with the new New York Americans and Pittsburgh Pirates . Ottawa won the league title , led by Alex Connell in goal , who recorded 15 shutouts in 36 games , and Cy Denneny , who scored 24 goals . The team received a bye to the playoff finals . However , the Montreal Maroons won the two @-@ game total goals series with scores of 1 – 1 and 1 – 0 ; former Senator Clint Benedict got the shutout . The Maroons went on to win the Stanley Cup against Victoria . The season also marked the debut of future Hall of Famer Hec Kilrea . 
 The 1926 – 27 season saw the NHL divided for the first time into two divisions , and they made the playoffs , winning the Canadian Division title . They advanced to the semi @-@ finals and defeated the Canadiens , 4 – 0 , and 1 – 1 , en route to facing the Boston Bruins for the Cup . In the first series for the Stanley Cup with only NHL opponents , Ottawa defeated Boston with scores of 0 – 0 , 3 – 1 , 1 – 1 and 3 – 1 , with the final game taking place in Ottawa ; it would be the Senators ' final Stanley Cup championship . Alex Connell led the way in goal , allowing only three goals in the four games . Cy Denneny led the way in scoring with four goals , including the Cup winner . The Senators won three trophies as NHL champions , along with the Stanley Cup , the club also won two other trophies , the O 'Brien Cup and the Prince of Wales Trophy , the last time the trophies were given to winners of the NHL championship . They would be given out to divisional winners in the following season . After the series , the Senators players received a parade in Ottawa , a civic banquet and an 18 – carat gold ring with fourteen small diamonds in the shape of an ' O ' . See the article 1927 Stanley Cup Finals . 
 = = = = Decline ( 1927 – 34 ) = = = = 
 Ottawa had been by far the smallest market in the NHL even before American teams began playing in 1924 . The later 1931 census listed only 110 @,@ 000 people in the city of Ottawa — roughly one @-@ fifth the size of Toronto , which was the league 's second @-@ smallest market . The team sought financial relief from the league as early as 1927 . Despite winning the Stanley Cup , the Senators were already in financial trouble , having lost $ 50 @,@ 000 for the season . The league 's expansion to the United States did not benefit the Senators . Attendance was low for games against the expansion teams , which provided a poor gate at home . There were also higher travel costs for away games , although the American arenas were larger . This fact was the basis for attempts to increase revenues , as the team played " home " games in other cities . 
 In the 1927 @-@ 28 season , the Senators played two " home " games in Detroit , collecting the bulk of the gate receipts ( thus allowing them to actually turn a profit for that season ) , while Jack Adams retired to become the coach and general manager of the Detroit Cougars . The brightest note from the campaign was goaltender Alex Connell 's play , in which he set a NHL record ( unsurpassed as of 2015 ) of six consecutive shutouts , a shutout run of 460 minutes and 49 seconds . 
 Taking advantage of a spending spree by the Montreal Maroons at the onset of the 1928 @-@ 29 season , the Senators sold their star right wing Hooley Smith to the Maroons for $ 22 @,@ 500 and the return of former star Punch Broadbent . Also for cash , the team sent long @-@ time member Cy Denneny to the Bruins . The club further repeated the scheme of playing two " home " games in Detroit en route to an undistinguished campaign in which they missed the playoffs for only the third time in the NHL 's history . 
 In the 1929 – 30 season , with cash still hemorrhaging , the team transferred two scheduled home games to Atlantic City ( one each against the New York Rangers and New York Americans ) , two to Detroit , and one to Boston . The Senators rallied , however , to make the playoffs for a final time , finishing third in the Canadian Division . The Senators faced off against the New York Rangers in a two @-@ game total @-@ goals series . In the last NHL playoff game in Ottawa until 1996 , the Senators tied the Rangers 1 – 1 on March 28 , 1930 , but lost game two in New York 5 – 1 to lose the series 6 goals to 2 . The season also marked the debut of future star Syd Howe with the Senators while long @-@ time star Frank Nighbor was sold to Toronto . 
 By the 1930 – 31 season , the team was openly selling players to make ends meet . Star defenceman King Clancy was sold to Toronto for an unprecedented $ 35 @,@ 000 and two players on October 11 , 1930 . The team fell into last place for the first time since 1898 . In 1931 , a potential deal arose with the owners of Chicago Stadium , including grain magnate James E. Norris , who wanted to move the team to Chicago , but the deal was vetoed by Chicago Black Hawks owner Frederic McLaughlin who did not want another team in his territory . Norris bought the bankrupt Detroit Falcons instead and turned them into the Detroit Red Wings . 
 The Senators and the equally strapped Philadelphia Quakers asked the NHL for permission to suspend operations for the 1931 – 32 season in order to rebuild their fortunes . The league granted both requests on September 26 , 1931 . Ottawa received $ 25 @,@ 000 for the use of its players , and the NHL co @-@ signed a Bank of Montreal loan of $ 28 @,@ 000 to the club . The Senators seriously considered moving to Toronto , as Conn Smythe desired a second tenant for the new Maple Leaf Gardens . However , they balked when Smythe wanted a $ 100 @,@ 000 guarantee , with a 40 % / 60 % split of revenues . 
 Returning after a one @-@ year hiatus and despite the return of players such as Cooney Weiland , Finnigan , Howe and Kilrea , the Senators finished with the worst record in the league in the two seasons that followed . Attendance was poor , the club only drawing well when the league 's other three Canadian teams came to town . Frank Finnigan recalled that they frequently played home games before small crowds of 3 @,@ 500 to 4 @,@ 000 . 1932 – 33 saw the return of Cy Denneny to Ottawa as coach . He would last only the one season . In June 1933 , former captain Harvey Pulford was given an option to buy the team and move it to Baltimore , but the option was never exercised . In October 1933 , Kilrea was sold for $ 10 @,@ 000 to Toronto . 
 In December 1933 , rumours surfaced that the Senators would merge with the equally strapped New York Americans ; however , this was denied by Ottawa club president Frank Ahearn , who had sought financial help from the league . The team played the full 1933 – 34 season , transferring one home game to Detroit . Near the end of the season , reports surfaced that the club had entered into a deal with St. Louis " interests " to move the club . The team lost its last home game by a score of 3 – 2 to the Americans on March 15 , 1934 , before a crowd of 6 @,@ 500 . The Senators had lent Alex Connell to the Americans when the Americans ' goalie Worters was hurt , and he turned in a " sensational performance " for the visitors . The home crowd was in a " throwing mood " and " carrots , parsnips , lemons , oranges and several other unidentified objects were thrown onto the ice continuously for no reason whatsoever . " The final game of the season was a 2 – 2 tie with the Maroons at the Montreal Forum on March 18 , 1934 . 
 = = = = 1934 : End of the first NHL era in Ottawa = = = = 
 Despite finishing in last place for the second year in a row , the Senators actually improved their attendance over the previous season . Even with the increased gate , they barely survived the season . After the season ended , it was announced by Auditorium president F. D. Burpee that the franchise would not return to Ottawa for the 1934 – 35 season due to losses of $ 60 @,@ 000 over the previous two seasons . The losses were too great to be made up by the sale of players ' contracts , and the club needed to be moved to " some very large city which has a large rink , if we are to protect the Auditorium shareholders and pay off our debts . " The NHL franchise was moved to St. Louis , Missouri and operated as the St. Louis Eagles . The Eagles played only one season , finishing last again . They suspended operations after the season , never to return . Flash <unk> was the last member of the Senators to play in the NHL , retiring with the Detroit Red Wings in 1946 . 
 The city of Ottawa did not have an NHL franchise again until the new Ottawa Senators franchise was awarded for the 1992 – 93 season . The NHL presented the Senators with a " certificate of reinstatement " commemorating Ottawa 's return to the league , and the current Senators honour the original franchise 's 11 Stanley Cups . However , records for the two teams are kept separately . Frank Finnigan , the last surviving member of the original Senators ' last Stanley Cup winner , played a key role in the drive to win an expansion franchise for Ottawa . He was slated to drop the puck in a ceremonial face @-@ off for the new franchise 's first game , but died a year before that game took place . The new Senators honoured Finnigan by retiring his # 8 jersey . 
 After the NHL franchise relocated , the Senators were continued as a senior amateur club in the Montreal Group of the Quebec Amateur Hockey Association ( <unk> ) , beginning in the 1934 – 35 season . One player , Eddie Finnigan , played for both the Senators and the Eagles in the 1934 – 35 season . The ' Senior Senators ' renewed the rivalry with Montreal @-@ area senior amateur teams such as the Montreal Victorias that the old Senators had played in the years prior to turning openly professional . Later , Tommy Gorman bought the team and helped to found the Quebec Senior Hockey League . Winning the Allan Cup in 1949 , the senior Senators continued until December 1954 , finally ending the Senators ' storied 71 @-@ year history . 
 = = Team information = = 
 = = = Nicknames = = = 
 The club began in 1883 as the Ottawa Hockey Club and was known by that name officially , even after joining the Ottawa Amateur Athletic Association ( OAAA ) . Reports of the club in early play in the 1890s sometimes refer to the club as the Generals . The club is also referred to as the Capitals , although there was a competing Capital Athletic Association hockey team using that name . Other nicknames included the Silver Seven , a name the players gave themselves after receiving silver nuggets from manager Bob <unk> after the 1903 Stanley Cup win . The Super Six name was given in the 1920s . 
 The first reference to the nickname of Senators was in a game report ( " The Ottawas Made a Good Start " ) of the Ottawa Journal on January 7 , 1901 and used in other newspapers around that time . While the nickname was used occasionally , the club continued to be known as the Ottawa Hockey Club . In 1909 , a separate Ottawa Senators pro team existed in the Federal League . Ottawa newspapers referred to that club as the Senators , and the Ottawa HC as ' Ottawa ' , ' Ottawas ' or the ' Ottawa Pro Hockey Club ' . The Toronto Globe first refers to the Ottawa Hockey Club as the Senators in an article entitled ' Quebec defeated Ottawa ' on December 30 , 1912 . Eventually this became the official nickname , and was the only name used in descriptions of the club in NHL play . 
 = = = Logos and jerseys = = = 
 For the first two years of their existence , Ottawa used red and black horizontally @-@ striped jerseys . The club then changed to jerseys of gold and blue until it later affiliated with the Ottawa Amateur Athletic Association in 1889 . The team then adopted the colours of the OAAA organization : red , white and black . The logo of the team was a simplified version of the ' triskelion ' or ' winged legs ' logo of the OAAA , which can be described as a " running wheel " . The jerseys were solid white with the club logo in red . The players wore knee @-@ length white pants with black stockings , as shown in the 1891 team photo . 
 In 1896 , the club first adopted the " barber @-@ pole " design , with which the team became synonymous . The design was simple : strong horizontal stripes of red , black and white . Players wore white pants and red , white and black striped stockings . The basic design would be used for the rest of the organization 's existence , except for one season , 1909 – 10 , where the stripes were vertical and Montreal fans nicknamed the team derisively as ' les <unk> ' , a slang term for chipmunk . The " barber @-@ pole " uniform was later adopted by the Ottawa 67 's junior ice hockey team . 
 No logo was present on the jersey at first , and until 1930 logos were not used for more than a year at a time . During World War I , the club adopted a logo of flags to show allegiance to the war effort , as shown in the 1915 photo . After each Stanley Cup win , the club affixed a badge or logo stating " World Champions " . In the 1929 – 30 season , the club added the " O " logo to the chest of the jersey . 
 = = = Ownership = = = 
 From the start , the club was owned and operated by its members and known as the Ottawa Hockey Club , becoming an affiliate of the Ottawa Amateur Athletic Association in 1889 . In 1907 , according to hockey historian Charles L. Coleman , some of the ownership was transferred to five of the players : Smith , Pulford , Moore , Westwick and LeSueur . In 1911 , the club incorporated itself and the organization took on the name of the " Ottawa Hockey Association " . In 1917 , the club was separated from the Association and sold to Tommy Gorman , Ted Dey and Martin Rosenthal for $ 5 @,@ 000 in time to join the National Hockey League . 
 In 1918 , Rosenthal was forced out by Dey in a complex scheme . Dey was negotiating , as owner of The Arena , with both Rosenthal on behalf of the Senators and Percy Quinn ( who held an option to purchase the Quebec NHA club ) on behalf of a proposed new professional league over exclusive rights to the Arena for professional hockey . In a plan to derail the proposed new league , Dey maintained publicly that he had reserved the Arena for Quinn 's proposed league when , in fact , he had not cashed a cheque received from Quinn to reserve an option on the Arena . Rosenthal , believing the club could no longer play at the Arena , attempted to find alternate arrangements for the club , including refurbishing Aberdeen Pavilion , but was unsuccessful . Dey purchased Rosenthal 's share of the club on October 28 , 1918 , and Rosenthal resigned from the club . Quinn filed a lawsuit against Dey for his deception but it was dismissed . Quinn would get further action from the NHL , as the NHL suspended Quinn 's franchise and took over its players ' contracts . 
 In 1923 , Dey retired after selling his ownership interest to Gorman and new investor Frank Ahearn . Ahearn and Gorman had an uneasy partnership and at one point Gorman was going to buy out Ahearn . By January 1925 , the deal was nearly finalized when Gorman backed out of the deal . Instead , Ahearn bought Gorman 's interest in the club for $ 35 @,@ 000 and a share of the Connaught Park Racetrack and Gorman moved on to New York to manage the New York Americans . In 1929 , Ahearn sold the club to the Ottawa Auditorium corporation for $ 150 @,@ 000 , financed by a share issue . William Foran , the Stanley Cup trustee , became president of the Club . As the Auditorium did not meet its payments , Ahearn resumed a share of the club in 1931 . 
 In 1931 , a dispute arose between Foran , in his role as Stanley Cup trustee , and the NHL . The American Hockey League had asked for a Stanley Cup challenge against the champions of the NHL . Foran had agreed to the challenge and ordered the NHL to comply , but the NHL refused to play the challenge . Foran was fired from his position as Senators ' president and was replaced by Redmond Quain . 
 While the Ottawa Auditorium owned the hockey club , it was heavily indebted to Frank Ahearn and his father , and tried to clear its debt . In December 1930 , the club was put up for sale for $ 200 @,@ 000 under conditions it stay in Ottawa . The best local bid was $ 100 @,@ 000 , while a bid to move the club to Chicago was made for $ 300 @,@ 000 , ultimately denied by the Chicago Blackhawks ownership . Later , the Auditorium tried to relocate the team to Baltimore under the ownership of former player Harvey Pulford . A possible relocation to Toronto was also explored , but in the end , no sales occurred . 
 In 1934 , the club 's NHL franchise was transferred to St. Louis , although the Association continued its ownership of the franchise and player contracts as well as the senior club . On October 15 , 1935 , the NHL bought back the franchise and players ' contracts for $ 40 @,@ 000 and suspended its operations again . Under the agreement , the NHL paid for the players and took back possession of the franchise . If the franchise was resold , the proceeds would go to the Ottawa Hockey Association . 
 In July 1936 , the Auditorium bond @-@ holders foreclosed on the arena and it was put under the control of the Royal Securities Corporation . The senior club was sold in 1937 to James <unk> , the owner of the Ottawa Rough Riders football team . Former owner Tommy Gorman returned to Ottawa in 1944 , when he purchased the club and the Auditorium . He operated the senior team until December 1954 , when he shut down the team over the " rise of hockey on television . " 
 = = = Fans = = = 
 When the Ottawa Hockey Club began play , there was no division between the ice surface and the stands like today . The fans became quite wet in the times when the temperature was warm . In the 1903 Stanley Cup Final against the Montreal Victorias , the Governor @-@ General ( who had a private box seat at the ice 's edge ) is recorded as getting wet from the play . On another occasion , in the 1906 Stanley Cup Final against the Wanderers , the Governor @-@ General 's top hat was knocked off by the stick of Ernie Johnson . The top hat was taken by a fan and given to Johnson . 
 One custom of the Ottawa fans towards opposition teams was to throw lemons . Cyclone Taylor , on his first visit back to Ottawa after signing with Renfrew , was pelted with lemons as well as a bottle . 
 = = Team record = = 
 = = = List of Stanley Cup final appearances = = = 
 A. ^ Montreal refused to continue the series in Ottawa , thereby losing by default . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Hall of Famers = = = 
 Source : Ottawa Senators 
 = = = Team captains = = = 
 Sources : 
 1902 – 1934 : " Ottawa Senators " . <unk> Retrieved 2008 @-@ 10 @-@ 30 . 
 = = = Team scoring leaders ( NHL ) = = = 
 Note : Pos 
 = Position ; GP = 
 Games Played ; G 
 = Goals ; A = 
 Assists ; Pts = Points 
 Games : Frank Finnigan , 363 
 Penalty Minutes : George Boucher , 604 
 Goaltending Games : Alex Connell , 293 
 Goaltending Wins : Connell , 158 
 Shutouts : Connell , 70 
 Source : Diamond , Dan ( 1998 ) . Total hockey : the official encyclopedia of the National Hockey League . New York , New York : Total Sports . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 = Poitou donkey = 
 The Poitou donkey or Poitou ass ( French : Baudet du Poitou ) , also called the Poitevin donkey or simply the Poitou , is a breed of donkey originating in the Poitou region of France . It is one of the largest donkey breeds , and was selected for size so that it could be used for the production of large working mules , in conjunction with the Poitevin horse breed . It is known for its distinctive coat , called a <unk> , which hangs in long , ungroomed cords . Breeders originally prized the coats highly , but today , many Poitou donkeys are shorn for hygienic reasons . 
 Poitous developed in the French Poitou region , possibly from donkeys introduced to the area by the Romans . They may have been a status symbol during the Middle Ages , and by the early 18th century , their physical characteristics had been established . A studbook for the breed was established in France in 1884 , and the 19th and early 20th centuries saw them being used for the production of mules throughout Europe . During this same time , Poitou bloodlines were also used to develop other donkey breeds , including the American Mammoth Jack in the United States . Increasing mechanization in the mid @-@ 20th century saw a decline in the need for , and hence population of , the breed , and by 1977 , a survey found only 44 members worldwide . Conservation efforts were begun by a number of public and private breeders and organizations , and by 2005 there were 450 purebred Poitou donkeys . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Poitou donkey is " instantly recognizable " for a number of unusual characteristics that distinguish it from other donkeys . Its shaggy coat , called a <unk> , hangs in long cords when ungroomed because of the long , soft hair . Animals with great <unk> of matted and tangled hair were most highly valued . A purebred Poitou has a more massive bone structure and a larger foot than a part @-@ bred animal , but the shaggy coat is such a dominant trait that even a 1 / 8 Poitou donkey may resemble a pure @-@ bred . In modern times , the coat is still considered important but less so than size and measurements . Today , many Poitou donkeys are shorn for the purpose of hygiene , but some are allowed to grow their coats out so as to have " <unk> " , or coats of great length . The coat is always dark brown or black . While lacking the stripes and cross @-@ like markings on the coats of some other breeds of donkey , the Poitou should have a white underbelly , nose and rings around its eyes . 
 The Poitou donkey is a large breed ; among other European donkeys only the <unk> donkey reaches a similar size . In order to breed large mules , the original breeders of the Poitou chose animals with large features , such as ears , heads and leg joints . The ears developed to such an extent that their weight sometimes causes them to be carried horizontally . Minimum height is 1 @.@ 40 m ( 55 in ) for jacks and 1 @.@ 35 m ( 53 in ) for jennies . They have large , long heads , strong necks , long backs , short croups and round haunches . The limb joints and feet are large , and the legs strong . The temperament of the Poitou has been described as " friendly , affectionate and docile " . Historically , most Poitou donkeys were used to breed large mules , but in recent years , they have found an increasing number of uses . Breed enthusiasts use them for agricultural work , driving and riding . 
 = = History = = 
 The exact origins of the Poitou breed are unknown , but donkeys and their use in the breeding of mules may have been introduced to the Poitou region of France by the Roman Empire . The Baudet de Poitou ( donkey of Poitou ) , and the <unk> ( mule breeder ) horse breed ( also known as the Poitevin ) were developed together for the use of producing superior mules . In the Middle Ages , owning a Poitou donkey may have been a status symbol among the local French nobility . It is not known when the Poitou 's distinctive characteristics were gained but they seem to have been well @-@ developed by 1717 when an advisor to King Louis XV described : 
 There is found , in northern Poitou , donkeys which are as tall as large mules . They are almost completely covered in hair a half @-@ foot long with legs and joints as large as a those of a carriage horse . 
 In the mid @-@ 1800s , Poitou mules were " regarded as the finest and strongest in France " , and between 15 @,@ 000 and 18 @,@ 000 were sold annually . In 1884 , a studbook was established for the Poitou donkey in France . During the first half of the 20th century , the mules bred by the Poitou and the Poitevin continued to be desired throughout Europe , and were called the " finest working mule in the world " . Purchasers paid higher prices for Poitou mules than for other mules , and up to 30 @,@ 000 mules were bred annually in the Poitou region , with some estimates putting the number as high as 50 @,@ 000 . As mechanization increased around World War II , mules became outmoded , and population numbers for both mules and donkeys dropped dramatically . 
 Poitou donkey and mule breeders were extremely protective of their breeding practices , some of which were " highly unusual and misguided . " Jacks were kept in closed @-@ in stalls throughout the year once they had begun covering mares , in often unhygienic conditions . Once the mares had been covered , a folk belief held that if they were underfed , they would produce colts , which were more valuable , rather than fillies . This often led to mares being starved during their pregnancies . <unk> , vital for foal development , was considered unhealthy and withheld from newborns . A lack of breeding records resulted in fertility problems , and there was a significant amount of foal mortality , due to jacks being used to cover horse mares before jennies of their own kind , resulting in late @-@ born foals that were vulnerable to cold fall and winter temperatures . Despite these husbandry issues , one author , writing in 1883 , stated that " mule @-@ breeding is about the only branch of agricultural industry in which France has no rival abroad , owing its prosperity entirely to the zeal of those engaged in it . " 
 = = = Conservation efforts = = = 
 A 1977 inventory revealed only 44 Poitou donkeys worldwide , and there were still fewer than 80 animals as of 1980 . Conservation efforts were led by several public and private groups in France . In 1979 , the Haras Nationaux , ( the French national stud ) and the Parc Naturel Regional du Marais Poitevin , working with private breeders , launched an effort to improve the genetics of the Poitou , develop new breeding techniques and collect traditional knowledge on the breed . In 1981 , 18 large donkeys from Portugal were acquired for use in breeding Poitou donkeys . This preceded the creation of the <unk> Nationale <unk> , which opened in Charente @-@ Maritime in Dampierre @-@ sur @-@ <unk> in 1982 , as an experimental breeding farm for Poitous . The Parc also works to preserve the Poitevin horse breed . In 1988 , the Association pour la <unk> du Baudet du Poitou ( <unk> ) was formed as a breeder network that focuses on marketing and fundraising for the breed , and in 1989 became the financial support arm of the <unk> Nationale <unk> . The Association des Éleveurs des Races <unk> , <unk> et <unk> , Baudet du Poitou is the registering body for the Poitou donkey . The early conservation efforts were sometimes sidetracked as some breeders sold crossbred Poitous as purebreds , which are worth up to ten times as much . Forged pedigrees and registration papers were sometimes used to legitimize these sales . However , by the 1990s , DNA testing and microchip technology began to be used to identify and track purebred animals . 
 The conservation efforts in the latter decades of the 20th century and the early years of the 21st were successful , and a 2005 survey revealed 450 purebred registered animals . This number had dropped to just under 400 by 2011 . The French studbook for the breed is split into two sections . The first , Livre A , is for purebred animals with documented Poitou parentage on both sides of their pedigree . The second , Livre B , is for animals with one purebred Poitou parent . The American Livestock Breeds Conservancy lists the Poitou as " Critical " on its Conservation Priority List , a category for breeds with less than 2 @,@ 000 animals worldwide and less than 200 registrations annually in the US . 
 In 2001 , scientists in Australia successfully implanted a Poitou donkey embryo created by artificial insemination in the womb of a Standardbred mare . Worries that joint problems might prevent a healthy pregnancy in the foal 's biological mother led to the initiative . The resultant foal became one of three Poitou donkeys in Australia . The procedure was unusual because it is often difficult for members of one Equus species to accept implanted embryos from another species in the same genus . 
 = = = In the United States = = = 
 Historical records exist of several sets of exports of Poitous from France to the US during the 19th and early 20th centuries , including a 1910 import of 10 donkeys . Most of these were integrated into the generic pool of donkey bloodstock , rather than being bred pure . During this time , Poitous were used in the creation of the American Mammoth Jack breed . Due to high purchase and transportation costs , the breed played a smaller role in the development of the Mammoth Jack than some breeders would have preferred . Imports to the US continued until at least 1937 , when a successful breeding jack name Kaki , who stood 16 @.@ 2 hands ( 66 inches , 168 cm ) high , was brought to the country . The 1940s through the 1960s saw a dearth of Poitou imports , and only a few arrived between 1978 and the 1990s . By 1996 , there were estimated to only be around 30 Poitous in North America . 
 In 1996 , Debbie Hamilton , an American , founded the Hamilton Rare Breeds Foundation on a 440 @-@ acre ( 180 ha ) farm in Hartland , Vermont , to breed Poitou donkeys . As of 2004 , she owned 26 purebred and 14 partbred Poitous , making hers the largest Poitou breeding operation in the United States , and the second largest in the world , behind the French government @-@ sponsored experimental farm . Hamilton works with French officials toward the preservation of the breed , and has received praise from French veterinarians , who appreciate her technical and financial contributions to the breed . Techniques for using cryopreservation to develop a sperm bank for Poitou donkeys have been in development in France since at least 1997 , but Hamilton has pioneered the use of artificial insemination using frozen semen in the breed , in order to use genetic material from France to improve Poitou herds in the US . The North American Baudet de Poitou Society , organized by the American Donkey and Mule Society , is the American registry for the breed , coordinating with French officials for inspections and registrations of American @-@ bred Poitou stock . 
 = Long @-@ tailed ground roller = 
 The long @-@ tailed ground roller ( Uratelornis chimaera ) is a species of bird in the ground roller family <unk> , placed in the monotypic genus Uratelornis . Endemic to arid spiny forests near the coast in southwestern Madagascar , this ground roller occurs at extremely low population densities throughout its habitat . This species requires shade and a deep layer of leaves on the ground , and it is absent from parts of the spiny forest lacking these features . It has no recognized subspecies , and its closest relative is the scaly ground roller . The long @-@ tailed ground roller is the only ground roller to definitively display sexual dimorphism ( differences in plumage or size between sexes ) . It is a medium @-@ sized bird with a plump silhouette and a long tail . The upperparts are dark brown with black streaks while the underparts are light gray . The white throat is framed by black malar stripes and a black breastband , and a white stripe is present at the base of the bill . Sky @-@ blue feathers are visible at the edge of the wings and the tail . Calls are rarely made outside of the breeding season , though multiple courtship calls are made . 
 These ground rollers feed primarily on invertebrates , including ants , beetles , butterflies , and worms , which they find by searching through deep leaf litter or by remaining still and watching attentively . The ground roller primarily runs through its habitat on its strong legs , as its wings are relatively weak . The long @-@ tailed ground roller is a monogamous species , and it defends a territory during the breeding season of October to February . The species digs a tunnel in the sand , at the end of which is a wider chamber where it makes its nest out of leaves and earthy pellets . Two to four eggs are laid . After the chicks fledge , the birds continue living in family groups until at least February before dispersing more widely across the scrubland . 
 This bird is classified as vulnerable by the IUCN and is threatened by habitat destruction . The arid spiny forests in which it lives are not protected by the Malagasy government , and as such the bird is losing habitat to slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture , charcoal collection , and logging . This ground roller is also hunted by the native peoples of Madagascar . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 British banker and naturalist Walter Rothschild first described the long @-@ tailed ground roller in 1895 , giving it the scientific name Uratelornis chimaera ; Rothschild published his description in Novitates <unk> , the periodical of his private museum . The adaptations required for the ancestral long @-@ tailed ground roller to inhabit scrubland led Rothschild to create the monotypic genus Uratelornis for the species in his description . The genus name Uratelornis is derived from the Ancient Greek word oura " tail , " and <unk> in reference to another genus of ground roller . <unk> comes from the Ancient Greek words <unk> " indeterminate or incomplete , " and <unk> " bird . " The specific name , chimaera , is a reference to the Ancient Greek mythological creature known as the chimera . The long @-@ tailed ground roller is placed in the ground roller family , which gets its common name due to its similarity to the rollers and its largely terrestrial nature . Until recently the ground rollers , cuckoo roller , and rollers were all placed in a single family , <unk> , in which each of the three groups formed a subfamily . In 1971 , Joel Cracraft proposed a separate family for the ground rollers based on significant differences in behavior , plumage , and post @-@ cranial anatomy between the groups . This position is supported by DNA evidence . It has been suggested , but not widely accepted , that ground rollers are closely related to the <unk> and <unk> . It has been speculated that the ancestor of the long @-@ tailed ground roller was an arboreal roller that crossed over from Africa to Madagascar and developed a terrestrial lifestyle before moving from the rainforests into the long @-@ tailed ground roller 's arid scrubland . No fossils have been found for this genus , and genetic analysis suggests that this bird 's closest relative is the scaly ground roller . The long @-@ tailed ground roller has no subspecies . 
 = = Description = = 
 The long @-@ tailed ground roller 's silhouette is highly distinctive due to its long tail and plump silhouette . The bird is 34 to 47 centimeters ( 13 to 19 in ) long , although its tail can contribute up to 30 centimeters ( 12 in ) of the length , which makes it the longest tail of any of the ground rollers . This ground roller has short wings and long , pinkish @-@ brown legs . The male has a sandy buff crown and dark brown upperparts with black streaks . Its supercilium is a pale buff color , while the ear @-@ coverts are brown . The eyes are brown , while the short and stout beak is black . Its tongue is long with a brush @-@ like tip to help it collect insects . A white stripe is present at the base of the bill and is surrounded by brown and black malar stripes . These malar stripes and the black breastband frame a white throat . The tail has 15 to 20 dark brown bars marking it , while the outer rectrices are sky blue ; this sky blue is also present on the wing @-@ coverts . In flight , the bird 's two black and white bands on the primaries and secondaries are conspicuous . The underparts are a light gray , and the breast white . The toes are <unk> , with the first and fourth toes turned outwards and the middle two toes turned inwards . The female resembles the male , but is smaller and has a narrower <unk> and a shorter tail . Also , the female loses her tail while nesting . These differences make the long @-@ tailed ground roller the only ground roller to definitively display sexual dimorphism . Juveniles of both sexes resemble the adult female , but have duller plumage , particularly in the black bands on the chest , neck , and eyes . 
 Although it is generally a silent species , during the breeding season the vocalizations of the long @-@ tailed ground roller include a " hooting " sound , a " popping " tu @-@ tuc , and a soft boo sound . The low @-@ pitched " hooting " is given by males from a perch 2 to 6 meters ( 6 @.@ 6 to 19 @.@ 7 ft ) above the ground at dusk or at night . The sound carries for a distance of at least 200 meters ( 660 ft ) and may either attract a mate or defend a territory . The bird pumps its tail while giving this call . One territorial call is a series of soft boo notes , typically coming in sets of six to ten and descending in volume near the end . Another call , given by both sexes , is a series of chuckling tu @-@ tuc sounds lasting between 10 and 40 seconds that occasionally ends in a loud snapping sound produced by the wings . This call is given when birds are close to each other either on the ground or on low perches , and it does not carry over long distances . The use of wing @-@ snapping to produce a sound is a rare phenomenon in birds , and in the order <unk> only one other family , the <unk> , is known to do it . Low gu notes are given by mates as they come in contact with each other . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Endemic to the island nation of Madagascar , the long @-@ tailed ground roller inhabits a narrow strip of suitable habitat by the coast in the southwestern part of the island . This strip is bordered by the Mangoky River in the north , the Fiherenana River in the south , and lowland hills in the east . It totals about 10 @,@ 500 square kilometers ( 4 @,@ 100 sq mi ) in area ; however , the species is extremely uncommon within its range and occurs at densities of about 0 @.@ 8 to 10 per square kilometer ( 2 @.@ 1 to 25 per square mile ) . This area ranges in elevation from sea level to 100 meters ( 330 ft ) . The long @-@ tailed ground roller does not migrate , though it may disperse across a larger area outside of the breeding season . 
 This species ' prime habitat is spiny forest , a mix of sub @-@ arid thorn @-@ scrub and deciduous woodland that only receives on average 500 millimeters ( 20 in ) of water a year and is covered in sandy soil . The dominant plants in these spiny forests belong to the cactus @-@ like Didiereaceae family ( especially <unk> madagascariensis ) and more tree @-@ like Euphorbiaceae family ( especially Euphorbia <unk> ) . <unk> trees are also prevalent . It was formerly believed that the long @-@ tailed ground roller preferred an undisturbed forest habitat , while tolerating small amounts of disturbance . Later studies have concluded that it actually prefers degraded habitat . Despite this , shade is necessary , and the species is not found in deforested habitat or on the shadeless dunes prevalent in its range . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 The long @-@ tailed ground roller is a shy and elusive bird and , if seen by a human observer , it either freezes or runs away . As its short wings suggest , the species rarely flies , but it is a powerful runner . While largely terrestrial , it roosts in low trees and bushes , and sings from low perches . Long @-@ tailed ground rollers are solitary outside the breeding season . Although diurnal , it does occasionally forage at night unlike most other ground rollers . When calling , this ground roller bobs its head and raises its tail . The long @-@ tailed ground roller also raises its tail when it is excited . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 This species forages almost exclusively from the ground , where it alternates between remaining still and watching attentively and actively searching for it by rummaging through deep leaf litter . It eats a wide range of invertebrates , including ants , beetles , butterflies , caterpillars , cockroaches , grasshoppers , woodlice , and worms , and occasionally small vertebrates . Despite the long @-@ tailed ground roller 's poor flying abilities , it has been seen catching butterflies in midair . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The breeding season coincides with the rainy season , which lasts from October to January . During this period this bird abandons its solitary habits to find a mate , with which it remains monogamous . Males form territories during the breeding season , and they defend their area with territorial calls . These calls are given from a perch up to 6 meters ( 20 ft ) off the ground for an hour after sunrise and occasionally throughout the day and night . During courtship , males have been observed feeding the female . 
 Male and female long @-@ tailed ground rollers use their bills and feet to excavate a burrow in consolidated , flat sand and construct their nest at the end of it . The burrow , always constructed away from grassy vegetation , is downward @-@ sloping and is between 0 @.@ 8 and 1 @.@ 2 meters ( 2 @.@ 6 and 3 @.@ 9 ft ) long with a diameter of 8 centimeters ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) . The end of the burrow widens into a 20 @-@ centimeter ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) wide chamber with a shallow depression covered in dry leaves and earthy pellets . When digging its nest , the long @-@ tailed ground roller occasionally walks underneath a low branch , tilts its head upwards , and , while remaining motionless , releases a rising crescendo of its tu @-@ tuc calls . At the height of the crescendo the bird breaks off its call and flies upwards onto the branch while producing a " ripping and crackling sound " with its wingbeats . From the perch the bird releases a stream of boo notes . This display is thought to be part of a courtship ritual . Each pair digs one to six nesting burrows during the breeding season ; the extra burrows are known as speculative burrows . 
 Between October and January , and peaking in November , the species normally lays two smooth , white eggs , though sometimes it lays three or four . The incubation period and fledging time of this ground roller is unknown . After the young fledge , they live in a family group of four to five birds until approximately February , at which point the family disperses . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 Classified as vulnerable by the IUCN due to ongoing habitat destruction and a decline in the quality of the remaining habitat , the long @-@ tailed ground roller is believed to be the most threatened species of ground roller . Thirty percent of its already small habitat area was degraded between the mid @-@ 1970s and 2000 . Slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture , charcoal production , logging , and cattle grazing have all contributed to the loss of habitat . As of 2012 , no reserves protect any portion of its habitat , and as a result its habitat has been described as the area of Madagascar most in need of conservation efforts . It is also threatened by both hunting and egg @-@ collecting . In addition to humans , dogs hunt this species , and the introduced black rat is a nest predator . This ground roller is capable of tolerating some habitat disturbance , but requires a suitable amount of shade and leaf litter to continue living in the area . Although it was fairly common at the beginning of the twentieth century , its population went into decline and it was considered rare by the 1960s . As of 2012 , the estimated population of the long @-@ tailed ground roller is between 9 @,@ 500 and 32 @,@ 700 birds and declining . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 As the long @-@ tailed ground roller is remarkably silent and difficult to see during the non @-@ breeding season , the local inhabitants of Madagascar once believed that this bird hibernated in its burrows . While not particularly tasty , this species is hunted for food due to its large size and the relative ease of capture compared with arboreal birds . In the early twentieth century , it was hunted by herdsmen with blowguns . In the 1950s and 1960s , natives trapped this ground roller and dug out its nesting burrows . This bird has been featured on several of Madagascar 's stamps . Only one zoo , Germany 's <unk> <unk> , keeps this species . It is considered by birdwatchers to be one of the world 's most elusive birds . 
 = The Convention ( The Office ) = 
 " The Convention " is the second episode of the third season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's thirtieth episode overall . Written by the writing team of Gene Stupnitsky and Lee Eisenberg , and directed by Ken Whittingham , the episode originally aired in the United States on September 28 , 2006 on NBC . 
 In the episode , Josh and Jim from Dunder Mifflin Stamford , as well as Michael and Dwight from Dunder Mifflin Scranton leave for Philadelphia for the annual office supply convention . Michael , angry at both Jim for leaving the Scranton branch , as well as Josh for being superior to him , tries to one @-@ up both Jim and Josh at every opportunity . Meanwhile , Kelly sets up Pam on a double date with one of her friends which goes nowhere . Toby 's interest in Pam is piqued , beginning an unrequited crush on his part . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) and Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) from the Scranton branch of Dunder Mifflin , Josh Porter ( Charles Esten ) and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) from the Stamford branch , and Jan Levenson ( Melora Hardin ) from the corporate headquarters all descend upon Philadelphia for an office supply convention . Michael is bitter that Jim left Scranton for Stamford and tries to one @-@ up Josh at every opportunity . Michael also spreads the word that he is throwing a party in his hotel room that night . Later in the evening , Michael surprises everyone with the news that he has broken Staples 's exclusive hold on <unk> products . 
 In Scranton , Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) sets up Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) on a double date with her neighbor Alan , a cartoonist for the local newspaper . Kelly is quietly disappointed that Pam intends to wear just her normal work clothes to the date . On the double date , Kelly appears to be the only one having a good time with Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) . Pam chats awkwardly with the cartoonist , who at one point sneaks a peek down Pam 's shirt , and they fail to hit it off . At Michael 's party , Jim attends as the only guest , and explains that he did not leave Scranton because of Michael ( whom Jim claims is a great boss ) , but rather because Pam rejected him , twice . The two mend their friendship just as other guests arrive , and Michael promises he would take care of the situation . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Convention " was the fourth episode of the series written by the writing team of Gene Stupnitsky and Lee Eisenberg , and the third episode of the series directed by Ken Whittingham . This episode originally had a scene with Angela and Dwight in the office kitchen . Producer Greg Daniels stated : " They had a couple lines , there was a pause , and then Angela said , ' I 'm late ' , turned around , and left . " This would imply that she may be pregnant . The scene was cut because Daniels ultimately concluded , " It was a big move , but we had it in a show that had a lot of other big moves . ... You don 't introduce a C plot line of an illicit office romance and then all of a sudden have one of the characters get knocked up ! " Executive producer and show runner Greg Daniels had hoped to get Mackenzie Crook , Martin Freeman , and Lucy Davis from the original British Office series to appear in the episode as their respective characters ( Gareth Keenan , Tim Canterbury , and Dawn Tinsley ) but was unsuccessful due to scheduling conflicts . 
 The third season DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from the episode , including Michael unsuccessfully inviting Ryan to attend the convention , Michael reminiscing on being abandoned by Todd Packer at a club and being attacked by bouncers , Michael telling Dwight he almost worked at a local factory , Dwight asking Josh if he has ever been convicted of a felony , Dwight asking Josh about his experiences in the coast guard and in Israel , and Dwight leaving Michael to go see Angela . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Convention " received a 3 @.@ 8 / 10 in the Nielsen ratings among persons aged 18 – 49 , meaning that 3 @.@ 8 percent of all people aged 18 – 49 watched the episode , and ten percent of all people in the age group watching TV at the time watched the episode . It received an estimated audience of 7 @.@ 8 million viewers overall , and ranked # 1 in its time period among men 18 – 34 . 
 The episode was received generally well by critics . Brian Zoromski of IGN stated that : " Any episode that places Michael and Dwight outside of their normal office environment is set up for some very funny ( and usually awkward ) situations and ' The Convention ' is no exception . Some of the episode 's best uncomfortable moments centered on Michael believing he 's the life of the party and that he 's Jim 's friend . Michael and Dwight pretending to laugh along to an inside joke made by Jim 's new boss , Josh , is a prime example . Michael 's comment , ' I love inside jokes . Love to be part of one someday , ' creates the kind of uncomfortable silence that The Office excels at . " Also on IGN , the show received a 9 @.@ 8 out of 10 " incredible " rating from the site 's editorial staff . 
 Abby West , of Entertainment Weekly , praised the interactions between characters as some of the highlights of the episode , stating " Jim is the show 's salt — he makes everyone else seem just a little better . He 's the perfect straight man to showcase Michael 's insanity ... " West also commented on the awkwardness of the relationship between Ryan and Kelly , stating that " Speaking of weird love connections , I 'm really starting to worry about Ryan , who 's now letting crazy Kelly force @-@ feed him . What happened to him ? " Mat Brewster , of <unk> Magazine , felt that the episode didn 't live up to the status set by the previous episode " Gay Witch Hunt " , stating " this week ’ s episode , “ The Convention , ” failed to live up to my expectations . " 
 = Tylopilus tabacinus = 
 Tylopilus tabacinus is a species of bolete fungus in the Boletaceae family . It is characterized by a tawny @-@ brown cap measuring up to 17 @.@ 5 cm ( 6 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter , and a reticulated stem up to 16 @.@ 5 cm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) long by 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick . A characteristic microscopic feature is the distinctive crystalline substance encrusted on the hyphae in the surface of the cap . The species is known from the eastern United States from Florida north to Rhode Island , and west to Mississippi , and from eastern Mexico . It is a mycorrhizal species , and associates with oak and beech trees . The edibility of the mushroom is unknown . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described by American mycologist Charles Horton Peck in 1896 under the name Boletus tabacinus . Peck collected the type specimens in red clay on the bank of a roadside ditch in Alabama . William Alphonso Murrill transferred the species to his then newly described genus Ceriomyces in 1909 ; this genus has since been subsumed into Boletus . Rolf Singer moved the species to Tylopilus in 1944 . Although Singer considered B. tabacinus to be the same species as Boletus pisciodorus , this opinion was contested by William Alphonso Murrill , who , after examining the type specimens of both species , considered them to be distinct . Murrill 's conclusion was later corroborated by Alexander H. Smith and Harry D. Thiers in the 1971 monograph of boletes . In 1945 , Singer defined the varieties amarus and dubius that he collected in Florida . 
 = = Description = = 
 The caps of the fruit body initially have a rounded shape , but later become broadly convex and eventually flattened in age ; they reach dimensions of 4 @.@ 5 – 17 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 – 6 @.@ 9 in ) wide . The color ranges from yellowish @-@ brown to orangish @-@ brown to tobacco brown . The cap surface is dry with a somewhat velvet @-@ like texture , although in larger specimens the surface is areolate ( divided into small areas by cracks ) . The cap margin is even and wavy . 
 The tubes on the underside of the cap ( comprising the hymenium ) are dark brown to cinnamon @-@ brown . The angular to circular pores are lighter in color than the tubes and number about 1 – 2 pores per millimeter , while the tubes are up to 1 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 55 in ) long . The pore surface is depressed around the stem . The cap flesh is white , but typically stains purplish @-@ buff or pinkish @-@ buff when cut . The stipe typically measures 4 – 16 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 6 @.@ 5 in ) by 2 @.@ 5 – 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick . When young , it is bulbous , but matures to become more or less equal in width throughout . Its color is roughly the same as the cap , although it tends to be slightly darker in the upper portion , where it is reticulate ( covered with a net @-@ like patterns of ridges ) . The odor of the mushroom has been described variously as " not distinctive , fruity , fishy , or pungent " , while the taste is indistinct to slightly bitter . The edibility of the mushroom is unknown . The variety amarus is similar in appearance , but has bitter @-@ tasting flesh , while variety dubius has a lighter colored @-@ cap and less distinctive reticulations on the apex of the stem . 
 Fruit bodies produce a spore print ranging in color from pinkish @-@ brown to reddish @-@ brown . The spores measure 10 – 17 by 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 μm , and are fusoid ( somewhat spindle @-@ shaped ) to elliptical . Spores have a smooth surface , and a plage ( a depressed area where the spore was once attached to the basidium via the sterigma ) . The spore walls are thin , up to 0 @.@ 2 μm . They are pale yellow to cream green in a solution of potassium hydroxide , pale yellow @-@ rust in Melzer 's reagent , and blue in Methyl blue ; without stain , they appear hyaline to pale yellow . The cap cuticle is an interwoven trichodermium — a cellular arrangement whereby the hyphae are of roughly equal length and arranged perpendicularly to the surface . The terminal ( end ) cells of the trichodermium are 6 @.@ 5 – 11 @.@ 5 μm in diameter , and roughly equal in width throughout their length . They are encrusted with a crystalline substance , a feature that is uncommon in the Boletaceae . The hyphae of the tubes are 5 @.@ 0 – 13 @.@ 0 μm in diameter . Clamp connections are absent from the hyphae . 
 The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) of T. tabacinus are club @-@ shaped and measure 23 @.@ 5 – 37 @.@ 0 by 8 @.@ 5 – 13 @.@ 0 μm . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia found on the inner surface of the tubes ) are 45 @.@ 0 – 60 @.@ 0 by 6 @.@ 5 – 12 @.@ 5 μm , lanceolate ( lance @-@ shaped ) to narrowly fusoid @-@ ventricose ( enlarged in the middle and somewhat spindle @-@ shaped ) . Cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the outer edges of the tubes ) are absent . The caulocystidia ( cystidia on the stem ) form the reticulations on the stem ; they are usually club @-@ shaped and measure 21 @.@ 0 – 40 @.@ 5 by 6 @.@ 5 – 10 @.@ 5 μm . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Boletus pisciodorus is similar in form to Tylopilus tabacinus . Unlike , T. tabacinus however , B. pisciodorus has spores that are hyaline in mass , and dark yellowish @-@ brown rather than hyaline when viewed with a light microscope . Further , B. pisciodorus has a fishy odor that is apparent in both fresh and dried specimens . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Tylopilus tabacinus forms ectomycorrhizal associations with oaks , and fruit bodies are usually found solitarily , scattered , or in groups on sandy soil under oaks or in mixed oak @-@ pine woods from July to September . In the United States , the mushroom is distributed from Florida north to Rhode Island , and west to Mississippi . It has also been collected from a montane cloud forest of Mexican Beech ( Fagus grandifolia var. mexicana ) in the state of Hidalgo , Mexico . The occurrence of the mushroom is " occasional to fairly common " . The varieties amarus and dubius are rare , known only from their original collection locations in Gainesville , Florida . 
 = Artist 's Studio — Look Mickey = 
 Artist 's Studio — Look Mickey ( sometimes Artist 's Studio , Look Mickey , Artist 's Studio – Look Mickey or Artist 's Studio No. 1 ( Look Mickey ) ) is a 1973 painting by Roy Lichtenstein . It is one of five large @-@ scale studio interior paintings in a series . The series is either referred to as the Artist 's Studio series or more colloquially as the Studios and sometimes is described as excluding the other 1973 painting , reducing the series to four . 
 The series refers to a set of works by Henri Matisse , with this work specifically referring to L <unk> Rouge . The work incorporates several other Lichtenstein 's works and gets its name from the large portion of Lichtenstein 's Look Mickey that is included . Lichtenstein used a much more realistic representation of his own works than is standard for most artists . Elements of the work also refer to works from both Fernand Léger and Matisse . 
 = = Background = = 
 Lichtenstein 's studios reference what are known as Matisse 's four Symphonic Interiors of 1911 ( The Pink Studio , The Painter 's Family , Interior with <unk> , The Red Studio ) and an earlier Matisse The Dance . Artist 's Studio — Look Mickey was part of a series that included The Artist 's Studio – with Model , 1974 , Artist 's Studio , Foot Medication , 1974 , Artist 's Studio , the " Dance " , 1974 , Artist 's Studio / A Still Life , 1973 . Artist 's Studio — Look Mickey was the only one of the five to include a corner of the room , like The Red Studio . Many sources , including Lichtenstein himself only include four works in the series ( excluding Artist 's Studio / A Still Life , 1973 ) . In a 1995 lecture in conjunction with the Kyoto Prize , he said " I did a series of four large , about 8 ' <unk> ' , paintings of interiors of artists ' studios . They were inspired by Matisse 's paintings ... " Artist 's Studio — Look Mickey is regarded as the first of the four Artist 's Studio works . From among the Artist 's Studio series works , this depicts " the deepest , most plainly articulated interior space . " 
 = = Description = = 
 The work , which is in part a retrospective , " conflated early modernism with emergent postmodernism " . Lichtenstein refers to some of his paintings , including Look Mickey in this work , which depicts his own studio as the ideal studio and implies that the public consensus ratifies his choice of popular culture subject matter . The series depicts individual Lichtenstein works as well as groups of works in closed room that is ironically devoid of paint brushes or <unk> . The series served as a review of Lichtenstein 's post 1961 work , with objects of his prior works decorating the room as furnishings . In Artist 's Studio — Look Mickey , the couch , door , wall frieze , telephone and fruit all are drawn from earlier works and serve this setting as interior decoration , while Look Mickey is almost presented undisturbed in its entirety . Less notable works include the mirror and the Trompe @-@ l 'œil painting of the rear side of the canvas . Two other paintings were works in progress at the time of this work and one became a painting within a year after the completion of this work : the gull and the dune landscape . The speech balloon was never produced as a separate work . However , its juxtaposition to the speech balloon from Donald Duck is intriguing . He references his <unk> works as ceiling molding . 
 Lichtenstein 's approach to presenting his own works within his works was non @-@ traditional . The works were revisited as exact duplicates rather than the more standard distanced <unk> . This choice of exact duplication contrary to popular practice intrigued Lichtenstein . Lichtenstein liked this quality of his paintings within his paintings , saying " I like the combination of a very separate quality that each of my paintings has within the painting , and the fact that everything works as one painting too . " In fact , Lichtenstein commented on this as an attempt to eliminate any modulation : 
 A couple of years ago I started some paintings that had my own paintings in them , and which were similar to the Matisse studios . There was one difference that I think shows up mostly in the Look Mickey : When I reproduce one of my own paintings in my painting , it 's different from Matisse reproducing one of his paintings in his painting , because even though in both paintings the depicted painting is submerged for the good of the whole work , it 's much more so in Matisse . I wanted my paintings to read as individual paintings with the work , so that there would be some confusion . There ’ s no remove in my work , no modulation or subtlety of line , so the painting @-@ of @-@ a @-@ painting looks exactly like the painting it 's of . This is not true , of course , of many early — including Renaissance — depictions of paintings on walls , where there ’ s always a remove indicated through modulation , or some other way of showing that the depicted painting is not pasted on the picture or something like that . 
 The Studio series was inspired by Matisse paintings , and Diane Waldman claims that this particular effort was modelled upon Matisse 's L <unk> Rouge ( The Red Studio ) , although the Lichtenstein Foundation website credits two other Matisse works as inspiration as well as Fernand Léger 's The <unk> , 1925 , which is represented in the far right corner . Léger was one of Lichtenstein 's closest friends . By incorporating Matisse in his own studio setting , Lichtenstein is perceived as presenting himself as Matisse 's peer and in so doing repositions pop art as a historical style rather than a contemporary one . 
 A sketch for this work demonstrates Lichtenstein 's original intent to incorporate a " plant @-@ in @-@ vessel arrangement " as well as fruit on the table , but these Matisse references were instead depicted on the floor of the studio . The table instead includes the telephone from Lichtenstein 's own R @-@ R @-@ R @-@ R @-@ Ring ! ! with differences from the original that amount to puns . In the original , Lichtenstein depicted sound with motion lines that present a pronounced movement of the object . This contrasts with the same phone in the studio setting in " perfect stasis " , which contributes to the pacific still life setting . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to Janis Hendrickson , " For someone familiar with the artist 's oeuvre , the Studios could become mental playgrounds . " Waldman notes that " Perhaps the most significant aspect of the work is its retrospective nature and the decision by the artist to reflect on his life , past and present . " The small portion of the original that was cropped out was the majority of Mickey Mouse , emphasizing Donald Duck , who Graham Bader sees as Lichtenstein 's metaphorical representation . 
 = Psycho ( 1960 film ) = 
 Psycho is a 1960 American psychological horror thriller directed and produced by Alfred Hitchcock , and written by Joseph Stefano , starring Anthony Perkins , Janet Leigh , John Gavin , Vera Miles and Martin Balsam , and was based on the 1959 novel of the same name by Robert Bloch . The film centers on the encounter between a secretary , Marion Crane ( Leigh ) , who ends up at a secluded motel after stealing money from her employer , and the motel 's disturbed owner @-@ manager , Norman Bates ( Perkins ) , and its aftermath . 
 When originally made , the film was seen as a departure from Hitchcock 's previous film North by Northwest , having been filmed on a low budget , with a television crew and in black and white . Psycho initially received mixed reviews , but outstanding box office returns prompted reconsideration which led to overwhelming critical acclaim and four Academy Award nominations , including Best Supporting Actress for Leigh and Best Director for Hitchcock . Psycho is now considered one of Hitchcock 's best films and praised as a work of cinematic art by international film critics and film scholars . Ranked among the greatest films of all time , it set a new level of acceptability for violence , deviant behavior and sexuality in American films , and is widely considered to be the earliest example of the slasher film genre . 
 After Hitchcock 's death in 1980 , Universal Studios began producing follow @-@ ups : three sequels , a remake , a television film spin @-@ off , and a TV series . In 1992 , the US Library of Congress deemed the film " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a lunchtime tryst in Phoenix , Arizona , a real estate secretary named Marion Crane discusses with her boyfriend , Sam Loomis , how they cannot afford to get married because of Sam 's debts . After lunch , Marion returns to work , where a client drops off a $ 40 @,@ 000 cash payment on a property . Her boss asks her to deposit the money in the bank , and she asks if she can take the rest of the afternoon off . Returning home , she begins to pack for an unplanned trip , deciding to steal the money and give it to Sam in <unk> , California . She is seen by her boss on her way out of town , which makes her nervous . During the trip , she pulls over on the side of the road and falls asleep , only to be awakened by a state patrol officer . He is suspicious about her nervous behavior but allows her to drive on . Shaken by the encounter , Marion stops at an automobile dealership and trades in her Ford Mainline , with its Arizona license plates , for a Ford Custom 300 that has California tags . Her transaction is all for naught — the highway patrolman sees her at the car dealership and witnesses her purchase of the newer car . 
 Driving on , Marion encounters a sudden rainstorm and decides to stop for the night at the Bates Motel ; the proprietor , Norman Bates , invites her to a light dinner after she checks in . She accepts , but then hears an argument between Norman and his mother about bringing a woman into her house . They eat in the motel parlor , where he tells her about his hobby of taxidermy and his life with his mother , who is mentally ill and forbids him to have a life outside of her . Returning to her room , Marion decides to go back to Phoenix to return the stolen money . She prepares to take a shower , unaware that Norman is spying on her . As she is showering , a female figure suddenly appears and stabs her to death with a chef knife . Norman discovers the murder and meticulously cleans up the crime scene , putting Marion 's corpse and her possessions — including the embezzled money — into the trunk of her car and sinking it in the swamps near the motel . 
 A week later , Marion 's sister Lila arrives in <unk> and confronts Sam about the whereabouts of her sister . A private investigator named Arbogast approaches them and confirms that Marion is wanted for stealing the $ 40 @,@ 000 from her employer . He eventually comes across the Bates Motel , where Norman 's behavior arouses his suspicions . After hearing that Marion had met with Norman 's mother , he asks to speak with her , but Norman refuses . Arbogast calls Lila and Sam , informing them of what he has discovered and saying he intends to speak with Norman 's mother . He goes to the Bates ' home in search of her ; as he reaches the top of the stairs , Mrs. Bates suddenly appears from the bedroom and murders him . When Lila and Sam do not hear from Arbogast , they go to the local sheriff , who informs them that Mrs. Bates has been dead for ten years ; she had killed herself and her lover . Concerned , Lila and Sam make their way to the motel . Meanwhile , Norman takes his unwilling mother from her room , telling her he needs to hide her for a while in the fruit cellar . 
 At the motel , Lila and Sam meet Norman . Sam distracts him by striking up a conversation while Lila sneaks up to the house . When Norman eventually realizes what they want , he knocks Sam out and rushes to the house . Lila sees Norman approaching and attempts to hide by going down steps that lead to a cellar . There she finds Mrs. Bates sitting in a chair . Lila turns her around and discovers that she is in fact a mummified corpse . Lila screams as a figure comes running into the cellar : Norman , holding a chef knife and wearing his mother 's clothes and a wig . Before Norman can attack Lila , Sam , having regained consciousness , subdues him . 
 At the local courthouse , a psychiatrist explains that Norman murdered Mrs. Bates and her lover 10 years prior out of jealousy . Unable to bear the guilt , he exhumed her corpse and began to treat it as if she were still alive . In order to preserve that illusion , he recreated his mother in his own mind as an alternate personality , often dressing in her clothes and talking to himself in her voice . The " Mother " personality is as jealous and possessive as the real Mrs. Bates had been : Whenever Norman feels attracted to another woman , " Mother " flies into a rage and kills her . As " Mother " , Norman had killed two missing girls prior to Marion , as well as Arbogast . The psychiatrist then says the " Mother " personality has taken permanent hold of Norman 's mind . While Norman sits in a holding cell , Mrs. Bates ' voice is heard protesting that the murders were Norman 's doing and that she " wouldn 't even harm a fly . " The final shot of the film shows Marion 's car being dragged from the swamp . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Anthony Perkins as Norman Bates 
 Janet Leigh as Marion Crane 
 Vera Miles as Lila Crane 
 John Gavin as Sam Loomis 
 Martin Balsam as Detective Milton Arbogast 
 John McIntire as Al Chambers 
 Simon Oakland as Dr. Fred Richmond 
 Frank Albertson as Tom Cassidy 
 Pat Hitchcock as Caroline 
 Vaughn Taylor as George Lowery 
 Lurene Tuttle as Mrs. Chambers 
 John Anderson as California Charlie ( used car salesman ) 
 Mort Mills as Highway Patrol Officer 
 Virginia Gregg , Jeanette Nolan , and Paul Jasmin as voice of Norma Bates 
 Ted Knight as a policeman guarding Norman Bates ( uncredited ) 
 The success of Psycho jump @-@ started Perkins ' career , but he soon began to suffer from typecasting . However , when Perkins was asked whether he would have still taken the role knowing that he would be typecast afterwards , he replied with a definite " yes " . 
 Until her death , Leigh continued to receive strange and sometimes threatening calls , letters , and even tapes detailing what they would like to do to Marion Crane . One letter was so " grotesque " that she passed it along to the FBI , two of whose agents visited Leigh and told her the culprits had been located and that she should notify the FBI if she received any more letters of that type . 
 Norman 's mother was voiced by Virginia Gregg , Paul Jasmin , and Jeanette Nolan , who also provided some screams for Lila 's discovery of the mother 's corpse . The three voices were thoroughly mixed , except for the last speech , which is all Gregg 's . 
 As Perkins was in New York working on a Broadway stage show when the shower sequence was filmed , actresses Anne Dore and Margo <unk> stepped in as his body doubles for that scene . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Psycho is based on Robert Bloch 's 1959 novel of the same name , which was loosely inspired by the case of convicted Wisconsin murderer and grave robber Ed Gein . Both Gein , who lived just 40 miles from Bloch , and the story 's protagonist , Norman Bates , were solitary murderers in isolated rural locations . Each had deceased , domineering mothers , had sealed off a room in their home as a shrine to her , and dressed in women 's clothes . However , unlike Bates , Gein is not strictly considered a serial killer , having been charged with murder only twice . 
 Peggy Robertson , Hitchcock 's long @-@ time assistant , read Anthony Boucher 's positive review of the novel and decided to show the book to her employer , even though studio readers at Paramount Pictures had already rejected its premise for a film . Hitchcock acquired rights to the novel for $ 9 @,@ 500 and reportedly ordered Robertson to buy up copies to preserve the novel 's surprises . Hitchcock , who had come to face genre competitors whose works were critically compared to his own , was seeking new material to recover from two aborted projects with Paramount , Flamingo Feather and No Bail for the Judge . He disliked stars ' salary demands and trusted only a few people to choose prospective material , including Robertson . 
 Paramount executives balked at Hitchcock 's proposal and refused to provide his usual budget . In response , Hitchcock offered to film Psycho quickly and inexpensively in black and white using his Alfred Hitchcock Presents television series crew . Paramount executives rejected this cost @-@ conscious approach , claiming their sound stages were booked even though the industry was in a slump . Hitchcock countered he would personally finance the project and film it at Universal @-@ International using his Shamley Productions crew if Paramount would merely distribute . In lieu of his usual $ 250 @,@ 000 director 's fee he proposed a 60 % stake in the film negative . This combined offer was accepted and Hitchcock went ahead in spite of <unk> from producer Herbert Coleman and Shamley Productions executive Joan Harrison . 
 = = = Novel adaptation = = = 
 James P. Cavanagh , a writer on the Alfred Hitchcock Presents television series , penned the original screenplay . Hitchcock felt the script dragged and read like a television short horror story , an assessment shared by an assistant . Though Stefano had worked on only one film before , Hitchcock agreed to meet with him ; despite Stefano 's inexperience , the meeting went well and he was hired . 
 The screenplay is relatively faithful to the novel , with a few notable adaptations by Hitchcock and Stefano . Stefano found the character of Norman Bates — who , in the book , is middle @-@ aged , overweight , and more overtly unstable — unsympathetic , but became more intrigued when Hitchcock suggested casting Anthony Perkins . Stefano eliminated Bates ' drinking , which evidently necessitated removing Bates ' " becoming " the Mother personality when in a drunken stupor . Also gone is Bates ' interest in spiritualism , the occult and pornography . Hitchcock and Stefano elected to open the film with scenes in Marion 's life and not introduce Bates at all until 20 minutes into the film , rather than open with Bates reading a history book as Bloch does . Indeed , writer Joseph W. Smith notes that , " Her story occupies only two of the novel 's 17 chapters . Hitchcock and Stefano expanded this to nearly half the narrative " . He likewise notes there is no hotel tryst between Marion and Sam in the novel . For Stefano , the conversation between Marion and Norman in the hotel parlor in which she displays a maternal sympathy towards him makes it possible for the audience to switch their sympathies towards Norman Bates after Marion 's murder . When Lila Crane is looking through Norman 's room in the film she opens a book with a blank cover whose contents are unseen ; in the novel these are " pathologically pornographic " illustrations . Stefano wanted to give the audience " indications that something was quite wrong , but it could not be spelled out or overdone . " In his book of interviews with Hitchcock , François Truffaut notes that the novel " cheats " by having extended conversations between Norman and " Mother " and stating what Mother is " doing " at various given moments . 
 The first name of the female protagonist was changed from Mary to Marion , since a real Mary Crane existed in Phoenix . Also changed is the novel 's budding romance between Sam and Lila . Hitchcock preferred to focus the audience 's attention on the solution to the mystery , and Stefano thought such a relationship would make Sam Loomis seem cheap . Instead of having Sam explain Norman 's pathology to Lila , the film uses a psychiatrist . ( Stefano was in therapy dealing with his relationship with his own mother at the time of writing the film . ) The novel is more violent than the film ; for instance , Crane is beheaded in the shower as opposed to being stabbed to death . Minor changes include changing Marion 's telltale earring found after her death to a scrap of paper that failed to flush down the toilet . This provided some shock effect , since toilets were virtually never seen in American cinema in the 1960s . The location of Arbogast 's death was moved from the foyer to the stairwell . Stefano thought this would make it easier to conceal the truth about " Mother " without tipping that something was being hidden . As Janet Leigh put it , this gave Hitchcock more options for his camera . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Paramount , whose contract guaranteed another film by Hitchcock , did not want Hitchcock to make Psycho . Paramount was expecting No Bail for the Judge starring Audrey Hepburn , who became pregnant and had to bow out , leading Hitchcock to scrap the production . Their official stance was that the book was " too repulsive " and " impossible for films " , and nothing but another of his star @-@ studded mystery thrillers would suffice . They did not like " anything about it at all " and denied him his usual budget . In response Hitchcock financed the film 's creation through his own Shamley Productions , shooting at Universal Studios under the Revue television unit . The original Bates Motel and Bates house set buildings , which were constructed on the same stage as Lon Chaney Sr. ' s The Phantom of the Opera , are still standing at Universal Studios in Universal City near Hollywood and are a regular attraction on the studio 's tour . As a further result of cost cutting , Hitchcock chose to film Psycho in black and white , keeping the budget under $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Other reasons for shooting in black and white were his desire to prevent the shower scene from being too gory and his admiration for Les Diaboliques 's use of black and white . 
 To keep costs down , and because he was most comfortable around them , Hitchcock took most of his crew from his television series Alfred Hitchcock Presents , including the cinematographer , set designer , script supervisor , and first assistant director . He hired regular collaborators Bernard Herrmann as music composer , George Tomasini as editor , and Saul Bass for the title design and storyboarding of the shower scene . In all , his crew cost $ 62 @,@ 000 . 
 Through the strength of his reputation , Hitchcock cast Leigh for a quarter of her usual fee , paying only $ 25 @,@ 000 ( in the 1967 book Hitchcock / Truffaut , Hitchcock said that Leigh owed Paramount one final film on her seven @-@ year contract which she had signed in 1953 ) . His first choice , Leigh agreed after having only read the novel and making no inquiry into her salary . Her co @-@ star , Anthony Perkins , agreed to $ 40 @,@ 000 . Both stars were experienced and proven box @-@ office draws . 
 Paramount did distribute the film , but four years later Hitchcock sold his stock in Shamley to Universal 's parent company ( MCA ) and his next six films were made at and distributed by Universal Pictures . After another four years , Paramount sold all rights to Universal . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The film , independently produced and financed by Hitchcock , was shot at Revue Studios , the same location as his television show . Psycho was shot on a tight budget of $ 807 @,@ 000 , beginning on November 11 , 1959 and ending on February 1 , 1960 . Filming started in the morning and finished by six p.m. or earlier on Thursdays ( when Hitchcock and his wife would dine at Chasen 's ) . Nearly the whole film was shot with 50 mm lenses on 35 mm cameras . This trick closely mimicked normal human vision , which helped to further involve the audience . 
 Before shooting began in November , Hitchcock dispatched assistant director Hilton A. Green to Phoenix to scout locations and shoot the opening scene . The shot was supposed to be an aerial shot of Phoenix that slowly zoomed into the hotel window of a passionate Marion and Sam . Ultimately , the helicopter footage proved too shaky and had to be spliced with footage from the studio . Another crew filmed day and night footage on Highway 99 between Gorman and Fresno , California for projection when Marion drives from Phoenix . Footage of her driving into Bakersfield to trade her car is also shown . They also provided the location shots for the scene in which she is discovered sleeping in her car by the highway patrolman . In one street scene shot in downtown Phoenix , Christmas decorations were discovered to be visible ; rather than re @-@ shoot the footage , Hitchcock chose to add a graphic to the opening scene marking the date as " Friday , December the Eleventh " . 
 Green also took photos of a prepared list of 140 locations for later reconstruction in the studio . These included many real estate offices and homes such as those belonging to Marion and her sister . He also found a girl who looked just like he imagined Marion and photographed her whole wardrobe , which would enable Hitchcock to demand realistic looks from Helen Colvig , the wardrobe supervisor . The look of the Bates house was modeled on Edward Hopper 's painting The House by the Railroad , a fanciful portrait of the Second Empire Victorian home at 18 Conger Avenue in Haverstraw , NY . 
 Both the leads , Perkins and Leigh , were given freedom to interpret their roles and improvise as long as it did not involve moving the camera . An example of Perkins ' improvisation is Norman 's habit of eating candy corn . 
 Throughout filming , Hitchcock created and hid various versions of the " Mother corpse " prop in Leigh 's dressing room closet . Leigh took the joke well , and she wondered whether it was done to keep her on edge and thus more in character or to judge which corpse would be scarier for the audience . 
 During shooting , Hitchcock was forced to uncharacteristically do retakes for some scenes . The final shot in the shower scene , which starts with an extreme close @-@ up on Marion 's eye and pulls up and out , proved very difficult for Leigh , since the water splashing in her face made her want to blink , and the cameraman had trouble as well since he had to manually focus while moving the camera . <unk> were also required for the opening scene , since Hitchcock felt that Leigh and Gavin were not passionate enough . Leigh had trouble saying " Not inordinately " for the real estate office scene , requiring additional retakes . Lastly , the scene in which the mother is discovered required complicated coordination of the chair turning around , Miles hitting the light bulb , and a lens flare , which proved to be the sticking point . Hitchcock forced retakes until all three elements were to his satisfaction . 
 According to Hitchcock , a series of shots with Arbogast going up the stairs in the Bates house before he is stabbed were helmed by assistant director Hilton A. Green , working with storyboard artist Saul Bass ' drawings only while Hitchcock was incapacitated with the common cold . However , upon viewing the dailies of the shots , Hitchcock was forced to scrap them . He claimed they were " no good " because they did not portray " an innocent person but a sinister man who was going up those stairs " . Hitchcock later re @-@ shot the scene , though a little of the cut footage made its way into the film . Filming the murder of Arbogast proved problematic owing to the overhead camera angle necessary to hide the film 's twist . A camera track constructed on pulleys alongside the stairway together with a <unk> device had to be constructed and thoroughly tested over a period of weeks . 
 Alfred Hitchcock 's cameo is a signature occurrence in most of his films . In Psycho , he can be seen through a window — wearing a Stetson hat — standing outside Marion Crane 's office . Wardrobe mistress Rita Riggs has said that Hitchcock chose this scene for his cameo so that he could be in a scene with his daughter ( who played one of Marion 's colleagues ) . Others have suggested that he chose this early appearance in the film in order to avoid distracting the audience . 
 = = = The shower scene = = = 
 The murder of Leigh 's character in the shower is the film 's pivotal scene and one of the best @-@ known in all of cinema . As such , it spawned numerous myths and legends . It was shot from December 17 – 23 , 1959 , and features 77 different camera angles . The scene runs 3 minutes and includes 50 cuts . Most of the shots are extreme close @-@ ups , except for medium shots in the shower directly before and directly after the murder . The combination of the close shots with their short duration makes the sequence feel more subjective than it would have been if the images were presented alone or in a wider angle , an example of the technique Hitchcock described as " transferring the menace from the screen into the mind of the audience " . 
 In order to capture the straight @-@ on shot of the shower head , the camera had to be equipped with a long lens . The inner holes on the shower head were blocked and the camera placed a sufficient distance away so that the water , while appearing to be aimed directly at the lens , actually went around and past it . 
 The soundtrack of screeching violins , violas , and cellos was an original all @-@ strings piece by composer Bernard Herrmann titled " The Murder " . Hitchcock originally intended to have no music for the sequence ( and all motel scenes ) , but Herrmann insisted he try his composition . Afterward , Hitchcock agreed it vastly intensified the scene , and nearly doubled Herrmann 's salary . The blood in the scene is reputed to have been Bosco chocolate syrup , which shows up better on black @-@ and @-@ white film , and has more realistic density than stage blood . The sound of the knife entering flesh was created by plunging a knife into a <unk> melon . 
 There are varying accounts whether Leigh was in the shower the entire time or a body double was used for some parts of the murder sequence and its aftermath . In an interview with Roger Ebert and in the book Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho , Leigh stated she was in the scene the entire time and Hitchcock used a stand @-@ in only for the sequence in which Norman wraps Marion 's body in a shower curtain and places it in the trunk of her car . The 2010 book The Girl in Alfred Hitchcock 's Shower by Robert Graysmith contradicts this , identifying <unk> Renfro as Leigh 's body double for some of the shower scene 's shots . 
 A popular myth emerged that , in order for Leigh 's scream in the shower to sound realistic , ice @-@ cold water was used . Leigh denied this on numerous occasions , saying the crew was very accommodating , supplying hot water throughout the week @-@ long shoot . All of the screams are Leigh 's . 
 Another myth concerns Saul Bass , the graphic designer who created many of the title sequences of Hitchcock 's films and storyboarded some of Psycho 's scenes , claiming he had directed the shower scene . This was refuted by several figures associated with the film , including Leigh , who stated : " absolutely not ! I have emphatically said this in any interview I 've ever given . I 've said it to his face in front of other people ... I was in that shower for seven days , and , believe me , Alfred Hitchcock was right next to his camera for every one of those seventy @-@ odd shots . " Hilton A. Green , the assistant director , also refutes Bass ' claim : " There is not a shot in that movie that I didn 't roll the camera for . And I can tell you I never rolled the camera for Mr. Bass . " Roger Ebert , a longtime admirer of Hitchcock 's work , summarily dismissed the rumor , stating , " It seems unlikely that a perfectionist with an ego like Hitchcock 's would let someone else direct such a scene . " 
 However , commentators such as Stephen Rebello and Bill Krohn have argued in favor of Bass ' contribution to the scene in his capacity as visual consultant and storyboard artist . Along with designing the opening credits , Bass is termed " Pictorial Consultant " in the credits . When interviewing Hitchcock in 1967 , François Truffaut asked about the extent of Bass ' contribution , to which Hitchcock replied that in addition to the titles , Bass had provided storyboards for the Arbogast murder ( which he claimed to have rejected ) , but made no mention of Bass providing storyboards for the shower scene . According to Bill Krohn 's Hitchcock At Work , Bass ' first claim to have directed the scene was in 1970 , when he provided a magazine with 48 drawings used as storyboards as proof of his contribution . 
 Krohn 's analysis of the production of Psycho in his book Hitchcock at Work , while refuting Bass ' claims for directing the scene , notes that these storyboards did introduce key aspects of the final scene — most notably , the fact that the killer appears as a silhouette , and details such as the close @-@ ups of the slashing knife , Leigh 's desperate outstretched arm , the shower curtain being torn down , and the transition from the hole of the drainage pipe to Marion Crane 's dead eyes . Krohn notes that this final transition is highly reminiscent of the iris titles that Bass created for Vertigo . 
 Krohn 's research also notes that Hitchcock shot the scene with two cameras : one a BNC Mitchell , the other a handheld French Éclair camera which Orson Welles had used in Touch of Evil ( 1958 ) . In order to create an ideal montage for the greatest emotional impact on the audience , Hitchcock shot a lot of footage of this scene which he trimmed down in the editing room . He even brought a Moviola on the set to gauge the footage required . The final sequence , which his editor George Tomasini worked on with Hitchcock 's advice , however did not go far beyond the basic structural elements set up by Bass ' storyboards . 
 According to Donald Spoto in The Dark Side of Genius , Hitchcock 's wife , Alma Reville , spotted a blooper in one of the last screenings of Psycho before its official release : after Marion was supposedly dead , one could see her blink . According to Patricia Hitchcock , talking in Laurent Bouzereau 's " making of " documentary , Alma spotted that Leigh 's character appeared to take a breath . In either case , the postmortem activity was edited out and was never seen by audiences . Although Marion 's eyes should be dilated after her death , the contact lenses necessary for this effect would have required six weeks of acclimation to wear them , so Hitchcock decided to forgo them . 
 It is often claimed that , despite its graphic nature , the " shower scene " never once shows a knife puncturing flesh . However , a frame by frame analysis of the sequence shows one shot in which the knife appears to penetrate Leigh 's abdomen , but the effect may have been created by lighting and reverse motion . Leigh herself was so affected by this scene when she saw it , that she no longer took showers unless she absolutely had to ; she would lock all the doors and windows and would leave the bathroom and shower door open . She never realized until she first watched the film " how vulnerable and defenseless one is " . 
 Leigh and Hitchcock fully discussed what the scene meant : 
 Marion had decided to go back to Phoenix , come clean , and take the consequence , so when she stepped into the bathtub it was as if she were stepping into the baptismal waters . The spray beating down on her was purifying the corruption from her mind , purging the evil from her soul . She was like a virgin again , tranquil , at peace . 
 Film theorist Robin Wood also discusses how the shower washes " away her guilt " . He comments upon the " alienation effect " of killing off the " apparent center of the film " with which spectators had identified . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 = = = Score = = = 
 Hitchcock insisted that Bernard Herrmann write the score for Psycho despite the composer 's refusal to accept a reduced fee for the film 's lower budget . The resulting score , according to Christopher Palmer in The Composer in Hollywood ( 1990 ) is " perhaps Herrmann 's most spectacular Hitchcock achievement . " Hitchcock was pleased with the tension and drama the score added to the film , later remarking " 33 % of the effect of Psycho was due to the music . " The singular contribution of Herrmann 's score may be inferred from the unusual penultimate placement of the composer 's name in the film 's opening credit sequence , as it is followed only by Hitchcock 's directing credit . 
 Herrmann used the lowered music budget to his advantage by writing for a string orchestra rather than a full symphonic ensemble , contrary to Hitchcock 's request for a jazz score . He thought of the single tone color of the all @-@ string soundtrack as a way of reflecting the black @-@ and @-@ white cinematography of the film . The strings play con <unk> ( with a muting device placed across the bridge ) for all the music other than the shower scene , creating a darker and more intense effect . Hollywood composer Fred Steiner , in an analysis of the score to Psycho , points out that string instruments gave Herrmann access to a wider range in tone , dynamics , and instrumental special effects than any other single instrumental group would have . 
 The main title music , a tense , hurtling piece , sets the tone of impending violence , and returns three times on the soundtrack . Though nothing shocking occurs during the first 15 – 20 minutes of the film , the title music remains in the audience 's mind , lending tension to these early scenes . Herrmann also maintains tension through the slower moments in the film through the use of ostinato . 
 There were rumors that Herrmann had used electronic means , including amplified bird screeches to achieve the shocking effect of the music in the shower scene . The effect was achieved , however , only with violins in a " screeching , stabbing sound @-@ motion of extraordinary viciousness . " The only electronic amplification employed was in the placing of the microphones close to the instruments , to get a harsher sound . Besides the emotional impact , the shower scene cue ties the soundtrack to birds . The association of the shower scene music with birds also telegraphs to the audience that it is Norman , the stuffed @-@ bird collector , who is the murderer rather than his mother . 
 Herrmann biographer Steven C. Smith writes that the music for the shower scene is " probably the most famous ( and most imitated ) cue in film music , " but Hitchcock was originally opposed to having music in this scene . When Herrmann played the shower scene cue for Hitchcock , the director approved its use in the film . Herrmann reminded Hitchcock of his instructions not to score this scene , to which Hitchcock replied , " Improper suggestion , my boy , improper suggestion . " This was one of two important disagreements Hitchcock had with Herrmann , in which Herrmann ignored Hitchcock 's instructions . The second one , over the score for Torn Curtain ( 1966 ) , resulted in the end of their professional collaboration . A survey conducted by PRS for Music , in 2009 , showed that the British public consider the score from ' the shower scene ' to be the scariest theme from any film . 
 To honor the fiftieth anniversary of Psycho , in July 2010 , the San Francisco Symphony obtained a print of the film with the soundtrack removed , and projected it on a large screen in Davies Symphony Hall while the orchestra performed the score live . This was previously mounted by the Seattle Symphony in October 2009 as well , performing at the Benaroya Hall for two consecutive evenings . 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 Several CDs of the film soundtrack have been released , including : 
 The 1970s soundtrack recording with Bernard Herrmann conducting the National Philharmonic Orchestra [ Unicorn CD , 1993 ] . 
 The 1997 Varèse Sarabande CD features a re @-@ recording of the complete score performed by the Royal Scottish National Orchestra and conducted by Joel McNeely . 
 The 1998 Soundstage Records <unk> 585 CD claims to feature the tracks from the original master tapes . However , it has been asserted that the release is a bootleg recording . 
 The 2011 <unk> Records <unk> ( Italy ) 180 gram LP release of the complete original 1960 score conducted by Herrmann . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Psycho is a prime example of the type of film that appeared in the United States during the 1960s after the erosion of the Production Code . It was unprecedented in its depiction of sexuality and violence , right from the opening scene in which Sam and Marion are shown as lovers sharing the same bed , with Marion in a bra . In the Production Code standards of that time , unmarried couples shown in the same bed would be taboo . 
 According to the book Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho , the censors in charge of enforcing the Production Code wrangled with Hitchcock because some of them insisted they could see one of Leigh 's breasts . Hitchcock held onto the print for several days , left it untouched , and resubmitted it for approval . Each of the censors reversed their positions : those who had previously seen the breast now did not , and those who had not , now did . They passed the film after the director removed one shot that showed the buttocks of Leigh 's stand @-@ in . The board was also upset by the racy opening , so Hitchcock said that if they let him keep the shower scene he would re @-@ shoot the opening with them on the set . Since they did not show up for the re @-@ shoot , the opening stayed . 
 Another cause of concern for the censors was that Marion was shown flushing a toilet , with its contents ( torn @-@ up note paper ) fully visible . No flushing toilet had appeared in mainstream film and television in the United States at that time . 
 Internationally , Hitchcock was forced to make minor changes to the film , mostly to the shower scene . In Britain , the BBFC requested cuts to stabbing sounds and visible nude shots , and in New Zealand the shot of Norman washing blood from his hands was objected to . In Singapore , though the shower scene was left untouched , the murder of Arbogast , and a shot of Norman 's mother 's corpse were removed . 
 The most controversial move was Hitchcock 's " no late admission " policy for the film , which was unusual for the time . It was not entirely original as Clouzot had done the same in France for Diabolique . Hitchcock thought that if people entered the theater late and never saw the star actress Janet Leigh , they would feel cheated . At first theater owners opposed the idea , claiming that they would lose business . However , after the first day , the owners enjoyed long lines of people waiting to see the film . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Hitchcock did most of the promotion on his own , forbidding Leigh and Perkins to make the usual television , radio , and print interviews for fear of their revealing the plot . Even critics were not given private screenings but rather had to see the film with the general public , which , despite possibly affecting their reviews , certainly preserved the secret . 
 The film 's original trailer features a jovial Hitchcock taking the viewer on a tour of the set , and almost giving away plot details before stopping himself . It is " tracked " with Herrmann 's Psycho theme , but also jovial music from Hitchcock 's comedy The Trouble with Harry ; most of Hitchcock 's dialogue is post @-@ synchronized . The trailer was made after completion of the film , and since Janet Leigh was no longer available for filming , Hitchcock had Vera Miles don a blonde wig and scream loudly as he pulled the shower curtain back in the bathroom sequence of the preview . Since the title , " Psycho " , instantly covers most of the screen , the switch went unnoticed by audiences for years . However , a freeze @-@ frame analysis clearly reveals that it is Miles and not Leigh in the shower during the trailer . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film was so successful that it was reissued to theaters in 1965 . A year later , CBS purchased the television rights for $ 450 @,@ 000 . CBS planned to televise the film on September 23 , 1966 , but three days earlier , Valerie Percy , daughter of Illinois senate candidate Charles H. Percy , was murdered . As her parents slept mere feet away , she was stabbed a dozen times with a double @-@ edged knife . In light of the murder , CBS agreed to postpone the screening , but as a result of the Apollo pad fire of January 27 , 1967 , the network washed its hands of Psycho , and shortly afterward Paramount included the film in its first syndicated package of post @-@ 1950 movies , " Portfolio I " . WABC @-@ TV in New York City was the first station in the country to air Psycho ( with some scenes significantly edited ) , on its late @-@ night movie series , The Best of Broadway , on June 24 , 1967 . Following another successful theatrical reissue in 1969 , the film finally made its way to general television airing in one of Universal 's syndicated programming packages for local stations in 1970 . Psycho was aired for twenty years in this format , then leased to cable for two years before returning to syndication as part of the " List of a Lifetime " package . 
 The film was re @-@ released on September 20 & 23 , 2015 , as part of the " TCM Presents " series by Turner Classic Movies and Fathom Events . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Initial reviews of the film were thoroughly mixed . Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote , " There is not an abundance of subtlety or the lately familiar Hitchcock bent toward significant and colorful scenery in this obviously low @-@ budget job . " Crowther called the " slow buildups to sudden shocks " reliably melodramatic but contested Hitchcock 's psychological points , reminiscent of Krafft @-@ Ebing 's studies , as less effective . While the film did not conclude satisfactorily for the critic , he commended the cast 's performances as " fair " . British critic C. A. Lejeune was so offended that she not only walked out before the end but permanently resigned her post as film critic for The Observer . Other negative reviews stated , " a blot on an honorable career " , " plainly a gimmick movie " , and " merely one of those television shows padded out to two hours . " Positive reviews stated , " Anthony Perkins ' performance is the best of his career ... Janet Leigh has never been better " , " played out beautifully " , and " first American movie since Touch of Evil to stand in the same creative rank as the great European films . " A good example of the mix is the New York Herald Tribune 's review , which stated , " ... rather difficult to be amused at the forms insanity may take ... keeps your attention like a snake @-@ charmer . " 
 The public loved the film , with lines stretching outside of theaters as people had to wait for the next showing . This , along with box office numbers , led to a reconsideration of the film by critics , and it eventually received a very large amount of praise . It broke box @-@ office records in Japan and the rest of Asia , France , Britain , South America , the United States , and Canada , and was a moderate success in Australia for a brief period . It was the most profitable black @-@ and @-@ white sound film ever made , and Hitchcock personally realized well in excess of $ 15 million ( about $ <unk> today ) . He then swapped his rights to Psycho and his TV anthology for 150 @,@ 000 shares of MCA , making him the third largest shareholder in MCA Inc . , and his own boss at Universal , in theory ; however , this did not stop them from interfering with his later films . Psycho was , by a large margin , the most profitable film of Hitchcock 's career , earning over $ 12 million for the studio on release , and $ 15 million by the end of the year . Hitchcock 's second most profitable was Family Plot ( $ 7 @,@ 541 @,@ 000 ) , and third place was a tie between Torn Curtain ( 1966 ) and Frenzy ( 1972 ) , each earning $ 6 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . Around the time of the run 's end , the film had grossed $ 32 million in domestic theaters . 
 In the United Kingdom , the film shattered attendance records at the London Plaza Cinema , but nearly all British critics panned it , questioning Hitchcock 's taste and judgment . Reasons cited for this were the critics ' late screenings , forcing them to rush their reviews , their dislike of the gimmicky promotion , and Hitchcock 's expatriate status . Perhaps thanks to the public 's response and Hitchcock 's efforts at promoting it , the critics did a re @-@ review , and the film was praised . TIME switched its opinion from " Hitchcock bears down too heavily in this one " to " superlative " and " masterly " , and Bosley Crowther put it on his Top Ten list of 1960 . 
 Psycho was initially criticized for making other filmmakers more willing to show gore ; three years later , Blood Feast , considered to be the first " splatter film " , was released . Psycho 's success financially and critically had others trying to ride its coattails . Inspired by Psycho , Hammer Film Productions launched a series of mystery thrillers including The Nanny ( 1965 ) starring Bette Davis and William Castle 's Homicidal ( 1961 ) was followed by a slew of more than thirteen other splatter films . 
 On the review aggregator website , <unk> , Psycho holds a ' Certified : Fresh ' score of 96 % , with the critics consensus reading : " Infamous for its shower scene , but immortal for its contribution to the horror genre . Because Psycho was filmed with tact , grace , and art , Hitchcock didn 't just create modern horror , he validated it " . 
 = = Interpretations = = 
 = = = Subversion of romance through irony = = = 
 In Psycho , Hitchcock subverts the romantic elements that are seen in most of his work . The film is instead ironic as it presents " clarity and fulfillment " of romance . The past is central to the film ; the main characters " struggle to understand and resolve destructive personal histories " and ultimately fail . Lesley Brill writes , " The inexorable forces of past sins and mistakes crush hopes for regeneration and present happiness . " The crushed hope is highlighted by the death of the protagonist , Marion Crane , halfway through the film . Marion is like Persephone of Greek mythology , who is abducted temporarily from the world of the living . The myth does not sustain with Marion , who dies hopelessly in her room at the Bates Motel . The room is <unk> with floral print like Persephone 's flowers , but they are only " reflected in mirrors , as images of images — twice removed from reality " . In the scene of Marion 's death , Brill describes the transition from the bathroom drain to Marion 's lifeless eye , " Like the eye of the amorphous sea creature at the end of Fellini 's La Dolce Vita , it marks the birth of death , an emblem of final hopelessness and corruption . " Unlike heroines in Hitchcock 's other films , she does not reestablish her innocence or discover love . 
 Marion is deprived of " the humble treasures of love , marriage , home and family " , which Hitchcock considers elements of human happiness . There exists among Psycho 's secondary characters a lack of " familial warmth and stability " , which demonstrates the unlikelihood of domestic fantasies . The film contains ironic jokes about domesticity , such as when Sam writes a letter to Marion , agreeing to marry her , only after the audience sees her buried in the swamp . Sam and Marion 's sister Lila , in investigating Marion 's disappearance , develop an " increasingly <unk> " relationship , a development that Marion is denied . Norman also suffers a similarly perverse definition of domesticity . He has " an infantile and divided personality " and lives in a mansion whose past occupies the present . Norman displays stuffed birds that are " frozen in time " and keeps childhood toys and stuffed animals in his room . He is hostile toward suggestions to move from the past , such as with Marion 's suggestion to put his mother " someplace " and as a result kills Marion to preserve his past . Brill explains , " ' <unk> ' for Norman is where his delusions of love , home , and family are declared invalid and exposed . " 
 Light and darkness feature prominently in Psycho . The first shot after the intertitle is the sunny landscape of Phoenix before the camera enters a dark hotel room where Sam and Marion appear as bright figures . Marion is almost immediately cast in darkness ; she is preceded by her shadow as she reenters the office to steal money and as she enters her bedroom . When she flees Phoenix , darkness descends on her drive . The following sunny morning is punctured by a watchful police officer with black sunglasses , and she finally arrives at the Bates Motel in near darkness . Bright lights are also " the ironic equivalent of darkness " in the film , blinding instead of illuminating . Examples of brightness include the opening window shades in Sam 's and Marion 's hotel room , vehicle headlights at night , the neon sign at the Bates Motel , " the glaring white " of the bathroom tiles where Marion dies , and the fruit cellar 's exposed light bulb shining on the corpse of Norman 's mother . Such bright lights typically characterize danger and violence in Hitchcock 's films . 
 = = = Motifs = = = 
 The film often features shadows , mirrors , windows , and , less so , water . The shadows are present from the very first scene where the blinds make bars on Marion and Sam as they peer out of the window . The stuffed birds ' shadows loom over Marion as she eats , and Norman 's mother is seen in only shadows until the very end . More subtly , backlighting turns the rakes in the hardware store into talons above Lila 's head . 
 Mirrors reflect Marion as she packs , her eyes as she checks the rear @-@ view mirror , her face in the policeman 's sunglasses , and her hands as she counts out the money in the car dealership 's bathroom . A motel window serves as a mirror by reflecting Marion and Norman together . Hitchcock shoots through Marion 's windshield and the telephone booth , when Arbogast phones Sam and Lila . The heavy downpour can be seen as a foreshadowing of the shower , and its cessation can be seen as a symbol of Marion making up her mind to return to Phoenix . 
 There are a number of references to birds . Marion 's last name is Crane and she is from Phoenix . Norman comments that Marion eats like a bird . The motel room has pictures of birds on the wall . Brigitte <unk> also suggests that Norman 's hobby of stuffing birds <unk> the British slang expressions for sex - " stuffing " - and desirable women - " birds " . Robert Allan suggests that Norman 's mother is his original " stuffed bird " , both in the sense of having preserved her body and the incestuous nature of Norman 's emotional bond with her . 
 = = = Psychoanalytic interpretation = = = 
 Psycho has been called " the first psychoanalytical thriller . " The sex and violence in the film were unlike anything previously seen in a mainstream film . " The shower scene is both feared and desired , " wrote French film critic Serge <unk> . " Hitchcock may be scaring his female viewers out of their wits , but he is turning his male viewers into potential rapists , since Janet Leigh has been turning men on ever since she appeared in her brassiere in the first scene . " 
 In his documentary The Pervert 's Guide to Cinema , Slavoj Žižek remarks that Norman Bates ' mansion has three floors , paralleling the three levels of the human mind that are postulated by Freudian psychoanalysis : the top floor would be the superego , where Bates ' mother lives ; the ground floor is then Bates ' ego , where he functions as an apparently normal human being ; and finally , the basement would be Bates ' id . Žižek interprets Bates ' moving his mother 's corpse from top floor to basement as a symbol for the deep connection that psychoanalysis posits between superego and id . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 In 1992 , the film was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " by the United States Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry . 
 In 1998 , TV Guide ranked it # 8 on their list of the 50 Greatest Movies on TV ( and Video ) . 
 Leigh asserted , " no other murder mystery in the history of the movies has inspired such merchandising . " Any number of items emblazoned with Bates Motel , stills , lobby cards , and highly valuable posters are available for purchase . In 1992 , it was adapted scene @-@ for @-@ scene into three comic books by the Innovative Corporation . 
 Psycho has appeared on a number of lists by websites , television channels , and magazines . The shower scene was featured as number four on the list of Bravo Network 's 100 Scariest Movie Moments , whilst the finale was ranked number four on Premiere 's similar list . Entertainment Weekly 's book titled The 100 Greatest Movies of All Time ranked the film as # 11 . 
 American Film Institute lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies – # 18 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills – # 1 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : 
 Norman Bates – # 2 Villain 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " A boy 's best friend is his mother . " – # 56 
 " We all go a little mad sometimes . " – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years of Film Scores – # 4 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) – # 14 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 Psycho has become one of the most recognizable films in cinema history , and is arguably Hitchcock 's best known film . In his novel , Bloch used an uncommon plot structure : he repeatedly introduced sympathetic protagonists , then killed them off . This played on his reader 's expectations of traditional plots , leaving them uncertain and anxious . Hitchcock recognized the effect this approach could have on audiences , and utilized it in his adaptation , killing off Leigh 's character at the end of the first act . This daring plot device , coupled with the fact that the character was played by the biggest box @-@ office name in the film , was a shocking turn of events in 1960 . 
 The most original and influential moment in the film is the " shower scene " , which became iconic in pop culture because it is often regarded as one of the most terrifying scenes ever filmed . Part of its effectiveness was due to the use of startling editing techniques borrowed from the Soviet montage filmmakers , and to the iconic screeching violins in Bernard Herrmann 's musical score . The iconic shower scene is frequently spoofed , given homage to and referenced in popular culture , complete with the violin screeching sound effects ( see Charlie and the Chocolate Factory , among many others ) . 
 Psycho is now considered to be the first film in the slasher film genre , and has been referenced in films numerous times ; examples include the 1974 musical horror film Phantom of the Paradise , 1978 horror film Halloween ( which starred Jamie Lee Curtis , Janet Leigh 's daughter ) , the 1977 Mel Brooks tribute to many of Hitchcock 's thrillers , High Anxiety , the 1980 Fade to Black , the 1980 Dressed to Kill and Wes Craven 's 1996 horror satire Scream . Bernard Herrmann 's opening theme has been sampled by rapper Busta Rhymes on his song " Gimme Some More " ( 1998 ) . Manuel Muñoz 's 2011 novel What You See in the Dark includes a sub @-@ plot that fictionalizes elements of the filming of Psycho , referring to Hitchcock and Leigh only as " The Director " and " The Actress " . In the comic book stories of Jonni Future , the house inherited by title character is patterned after the Bates Motel . 
 = = = Sequels = = = 
 Three sequels were produced : Psycho II ( 1983 ) , Psycho III ( 1986 ) , and Psycho IV : The Beginning ( 1990 ) , the last being a part @-@ prequel television movie written by the original screenplay author , Joseph Stefano . Anthony Perkins returned to his role of Norman Bates in all three sequels , and also directed the third film . The voice of Norman Bates ' mother was maintained by noted radio actress Virginia Gregg with the exception of Psycho IV , where the role was played by Olivia Hussey . Vera Miles also reprised her role of Lila Crane in Psycho II . The sequels were well received but considered inferior to the original . 
 = = = 1987 Bates Motel pilot = = = 
 Bates Motel was a failed television pilot spin @-@ off which later aired as a television movie ( before the release of Psycho IV ) . Anthony Perkins declined to appear in the pilot , so Norman 's cameo appearance was played by Kurt Paul , who was Perkins ' stunt double on Psycho II and III . 
 = = = 1998 remake = = = 
 Gus Van Sant directed a 1998 remake of Psycho . The film is in color and features a different cast , but aside from this it is a near shot @-@ for @-@ shot remake copying Hitchcock 's camera movements and editing . The film was panned by critics and audiences alike and was a box office bomb . 
 A Conversation with Norman ( 2005 ) , directed by Jonathan M. <unk> , was a film inspired by Psycho . 
 = = = 2012 Hitchcock film = = = 
 In 2005 , it was reported that a new film was in development based on the book by Stephen Rebello , Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho . The film was originally titled Alfred Hitchcock Presents , and it was originally to be directed by Ryan Murphy . Later the film was retitled Hitchcock , and filming began on April 13 , 2012 . Filming was completed in early June 2012 with a worldwide release on December 14 , 2012 . The film centers on the relationship between Hitchcock and his wife and co @-@ worker Alma Reville during the filming of Psycho in 1959 . The film was directed by Sacha Gervasi and written by John McLaughlin and Stephen Rebello . The film stars Anthony Hopkins as Hitchcock , Helen Mirren as Reville , Scarlett Johansson as Janet Leigh , Jessica Biel as Vera Miles , and James D 'Arcy as Anthony Perkins . The film was released worldwide on December 14 , 2012 , to mostly positive reviews and one Academy Award nomination . 
 = = = The Psycho Legacy = = = 
 On October 19 , 2010 , an independent documentary called The Psycho Legacy was released on DVD . The documentary discussed the legacy and impact Psycho has had , not only on cinema , but on the world in general . The documentary also included production stories about Psycho II , Psycho III and Psycho IV : The Beginning . This documentary received mostly positive reviews from critics and fans . 
 = = = Bates Motel series = = = 
 On January 13 , 2012 , A & E announced that a television series called Bates Motel was in development at the network . The TV series has nothing to do with the earlier Bates Motel failed TV pilot released in 1987 . The series takes place before the events of the original film and chronicles Norman Bates ' teen years living at the Bates Motel , as did the flashback sequences in Psycho IV : The Beginning . However , the series is set in the present day in a seaside town in Oregon rather than the inland California town of the film — thus the series is a reboot , though it 's been widely reviewed as a prequel , as it is devoted to providing a backstory to a younger Norman Bates prior to his becoming a murderer . In July 2012 , A & E announced that the network had picked up the show for a 10 episode first season , skipping the initial pilot stage . The series premiered on March 18 , 2013 to high ratings and very positive reviews . The show aired a second season in 2014 , a third in 2015 , and a fourth in 2016 . Executive producer Carlston Cuse confirmed the series ' fifth season , which will air in early 2017 , will be the show 's last and will adapt the plot of Psycho , and will feature Marion Crane and the shower scene . 
 = = = Psychos = = = 
 On February 24 , 2014 , a mashup of Alfred Hitchcock 's and Gus Van Sant 's versions of Psycho appeared on Steven Soderbergh 's Extension 765 website . Retitled " Psychos " and featuring no explanatory text , the recut appears to be a fan edit of the two films by Soderbergh . Reaction to the mashup appears to reinforce the prejudice against the 1998 film . The opening credits intermingle names from both the 1960 and 1998 versions , and all color has been removed from Van Sant 's scenes . 
 = = Ratings = = 
 Psycho has been rated and re @-@ rated several times over the years by the MPAA . Upon its initial release , the film received a certificate stating that it was " Approved " ( certificate # <unk> ) under the simple pass / fail system of the Production Code in use at that time . Later , when the MPAA switched to a voluntary letter ratings system in 1968 , Psycho was one of a number of high @-@ profile motion pictures to be retro @-@ rated with an " M " ( Mature Audiences ) . This remained the only rating the film would receive for 16 years , and according to the guidelines of the time " M " was the equivalent of a " PG " rating . Then , in 1984 , during the uproar of increased parental concern regarding violence in " PG " films , Psycho was retro @-@ rated again to its current rating of " R " . This rating took effect , however , before the institution of the " PG @-@ 13 " rating by the MPAA that same year , and there are those who have speculated that if the rating had existed at the time , or if Psycho were rated in America today , it would receive a " PG @-@ 13 " . 
 = = Home media = = 
 The film has been released several times on videotape , LaserDisc , DVD , and Blu @-@ ray Disc . MCA <unk> Incorporated ( parent company , MCA Inc ) first released Psycho on the LaserDisc format in " standard play " ( 5 sides ) in 1979 , and " extended play " ( 2 sides ) in October 1981 . MCA / Universal Home Video released a new LaserDisc version of Psycho in August 1988 ( Catalog # : <unk> ) . In May 1998 , Universal Studios Home Video released a deluxe edition of Psycho as part of their Signature Collection . This THX ® certified Widescreen ( 1 @.@ 85 : 1 ) LaserDisc Deluxe Edition ( Catalog # : <unk> ) is spread across 4 extended play sides and 1 standard play side , and includes a new documentary and isolated Bernard Herrmann score . A DVD edition was released in at the same time as the LaserDisc . 
 Laurent Bouzereau produced a documentary looking at the film 's production and reception for the initial DVD release . Universal released a fiftieth Anniversary edition on Blu @-@ ray in the United Kingdom on August 9 , 2010 , with Australia following with the same edition ( featuring a different cover ) being made available on September 1 , 2010 . A Blu @-@ ray in US was released on October 19 , 2010 to mark the film 's 50th anniversary , featuring yet another different cover . The film is also included on two different Alfred Hitchcock Blu @-@ ray boxsets from Universal . 
 = Super Monkey Ball ( video game ) = 
 Super Monkey Ball ( <unk> , Sūpā <unk> Bōru ) is a 2001 platform / party video game developed by Amusement Vision and published by Sega . The game debuted in Japan at the 2001 Amusement Operators Union trade show as Monkey Ball ( <unk> , <unk> Bōru ) , an arcade cabinet running on Sega 's NAOMI hardware and controlled with a distinctive banana @-@ shaped analog stick . Due to the failure of Sega 's Dreamcast home console and the company 's subsequent restructuring , an enhanced port dubbed Super Monkey Ball was released as a launch title for Nintendo 's GameCube in late 2001 , garnering interest as Sega 's first game published for Nintendo hardware . 
 Conceived by Amusement Vision head Toshihiro Nagoshi , Super Monkey Ball involves guiding a transparent ball containing one of four monkeys — <unk> , <unk> , Baby and GonGon — across a series of maze @-@ like platforms . The player must reach the goal without falling off or letting the timer reach zero to advance to the next stage . There are also several multiplayer modes : independent minigames as well as extensions of the main single @-@ player game . 
 Super Monkey Ball received highly positive reviews from critics , who praised the simplicity and subtle depth of its control scheme as well as the new multiplayer modes not present in its arcade counterpart , although some felt its presentation was lacking . The game was commercially successful and remained one of Sega 's best @-@ sellers in the United States for much of 2002 , eventually spawning a direct sequel , Super Monkey Ball 2 , and an entire Super Monkey Ball franchise . 
 = = Modes = = 
 Super Monkey Ball has three game modes : main game , party games , and mini @-@ games . The mini @-@ games are unavailable at first , and must be unlocked by earning 2 @,@ 500 " play points " through playing the main game in single @-@ player mode . 
 = = = Main game = = = 
 Reminiscent of Marble Madness and Labyrinth , the objective of the main game is to guide one of four playable monkeys ( <unk> , <unk> , Baby and GonGon ) encased in a transparent ball across a suspended series of platforms and through a goal . By moving the analog stick , the player tilts the entire set of platforms that make up a level , called a floor , and the ball rolls accordingly . If the ball falls off a floor ( an event dubbed a fall out ) or the in @-@ game timer reaches zero , the player loses a life , and is given three lives to start . The speed , in miles per hour , at which the ball is moving is displayed in the corner of the screen . Pausing the game and selecting the " View Stage " option allows one to rotate the camera around and examine the floor . A replay is presented after a floor 's goal has been reached ; replays can be saved to a memory card and viewed at whim . Every second remaining on the timer when a floor is completed adds 100 points to the player 's score . Collectible bananas found throughout the game are also worth 100 points , while multipliers increasing the player 's score by a factor of two or four are activated when a floor is finished in under half the allotted time or via a warp gate . The player receives an extra life for every 100 bananas collected . 
 The main game features three difficulty levels — Beginner , Advanced , and Expert , consisting of 10 , 30 , and 50 floors each — as well as three modes — Normal , Practice , and Competition . Normal mode allows one to four players to take turns progressing through the arcade Monkey Ball , whereas competition mode involves two to four player simultaneous split screen races across a selection of floors . In practice mode , any floor already played in normal mode can be repeated indefinitely with no penalties for failure . In normal mode , the player experiences a " Game Over " when they have lost all of their lives , but is allowed six opportunities to continue ; eventually , unlimited " Continues " can be unlocked . Beginner Extra , Advanced Extra and Expert Extra floors are unlocked when each respective difficulty level is completed without using a continue ( or losing a life in Beginner and Advanced ) — and a hidden set of Master floors can be unlocked through playing the Extra floors . 
 = = = Party games = = = 
 The following party games are available : 
 Monkey Race : One to four players simultaneously race across six courses divided into three difficulty levels . Steering is handled with the analog stick , while the A button is used to activate items ( if enabled ) that can be used to produce an increase in speed or to adversely affect opponents . A Time Attack mode involves the careful use of three available speed items to achieve faster times . 
 Monkey Fight : One to four players simultaneously engage in combat by rolling in any direction with the analog stick and using the A button to punch opponents with a boxing glove attached to their monkey 's ball . Points are awarded for knocking opponents off one of the three available arenas , with more points being awarded when the player currently in the lead is knocked off . The player with the most points is declared the winner of a round when the in @-@ game timer reaches zero . Items can be used to extend the reach , size , and strength of one 's boxing glove . 
 Monkey Target : One to four players take turns rolling their monkey down a ramp , launching it into the sky . The monkey 's ball opens on command to resemble a pair of wings , allowing it to fly . The monkey 's trajectory is manipulated with the analog stick . Wind direction and strength , altitude , and speed ( in addition to random hazards selected by an optional " Wheel of Danger " feature before each flight ) impact the player 's ability to land the monkey on one of several <unk> @-@ like targets in the middle of the ocean . Bananas collected while airborne enable the use of items in later rounds that can eliminate wind resistance , control the ball 's roll , multiply the player 's score , or ensure a sticky landing . 
 = = = Mini @-@ games = = = 
 The mini @-@ games are based on real sporting activities , but with the player 's ball containing their monkey . The following mini @-@ games are available , once unlocked through the earning of play points : 
 Monkey Billiards : One to two players take turns competing in a game of nine @-@ ball . The analog stick determines the direction of each shot and the A button is used to stop the moving gauge that determines shot speed . A tournament mode featuring four AI challengers is also available . 
 Monkey Bowling : One to four players take turns competing in a game of ten @-@ pin bowling . The analog stick is used to move left and right , the A button sets the direction and strength for each throw , and the L or R buttons apply spin to the ball . A challenge mode featuring 10 pin arrangements and permitting only 12 throws is also available . 
 Monkey Golf : One to four players take turns competing across 18 holes in a game of golf with stroke play scoring , or two players compete using match play scoring . The direction and general rolling distance of each shot is arranged with the analog stick , and the shot 's strength is set by the A button . 
 = = Development = = 
 Super Monkey Ball was developed by Amusement Vision , a branch of the Japanese video game publisher Sega that was created in 2000 and composed of about fifty people . Amusement Vision president Toshihiro Nagoshi , who had previously worked under Sega AM2 's Yu Suzuki and been credited as the creator of the arcade titles Daytona USA and Virtua Striker , devised the concept of rolling spheres through mazes based on his desire to move away from realistic simulations and instead create a game that was instantly possible to understand and play . Prototypes involving a plain ball or a ball with an illustration were considered visually unappealing due to difficulties in perceiving its movement , so after a series of revisions monkey characters previously created by a female Amusement Vision designer were placed inside the ball , with their appearance being altered to include their " distinctive " ears . Intended to feature a " cute " aesthetic and accurate physics engine , the game debuted at the 2001 Amusement Operator Union trade show as Monkey Ball , a single @-@ player arcade cabinet controlled with a distinctive banana @-@ shaped analog stick . 
 In early 2001 , Sega announced that it was discontinuing its Dreamcast home console and restructuring itself into a " platform @-@ agnostic " third @-@ party publisher . As a result , an enhanced version of Monkey Ball dubbed Super Monkey Ball was released for the Nintendo GameCube as a launch game in Japan on September 14 , 2001 and North America on November 18 , 2001 . The GameCube version was demonstrated to the public at E3 in May 2001 and at Nintendo 's Space World show in August 2001 ; Sega confirmed that it would arrive in time for the GameCube 's launch at the June 2001 World Hobby Fair . As the first game Sega published for a Nintendo console , Super Monkey Ball was considered a milestone for the company . Although Monkey Ball had been developed for Sega 's NAOMI arcade board , which shared technology with the Dreamcast and was optimized to ensure games could be easily ported between the two platforms , Nagoshi commented that <unk> 's young demographic made the GameCube an even more fitting console for the title . According to Nagoshi , Amusement Vision staff felt more comfortable with the GameCube than Sega 's own hardware and this ease of development contributed to their decision to focus on the system over the PlayStation 2 or Xbox ; he also joked that Nintendo was the only hardware manufacturer the staff did not " hate " . Out of a team composed of ten to twenty individuals , it took four Amusement Vision employees between several weeks and two months to port Monkey Ball to the GameCube . Its graphics were enhanced with new background details as well as reflections and particle effects . Moreover , the developers spent an additional six months incorporating six extra modes into the game , with an emphasis on multiplayer competition and the introduction of GonGon as a fourth playable character . 
 The bananas in the game display the Dole Food Company logo , but this was removed in Super Monkey Ball Deluxe due to a licensing dispute . A theme song called " Ei Ei <unk> ! " , which was arranged by <unk> Watanabe and featured vocals by Yu <unk> , was created for the Japanese version of Super Monkey Ball but removed from its U.S. release . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Super Monkey Ball was commercially successful upon release and remained one of Sega 's best @-@ selling titles in the United States through much of 2002 , with total sales of the game and its immediate sequel estimated at over one million units . While it sold well in all major territories , Nagoshi was disappointed by the game 's performance in Japan , where he had expected it would be most successful ; weak GameCube launch sales were cited as negatively impacting its performance in the country . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Released to positive reviews , with aggregated scores of 87 / 100 on Metacritic and 88 @.@ 7 % on GameRankings , some journalists considered Super Monkey Ball the highlight of the GameCube 's launch lineup . The staff of Edge praised the main game as " absorb [ ing ] " due to its high level of difficulty , noting that the trial and error required to complete challenging levels forces one to learn the nuances of its " reductive control system " and eventually enables the player to perform seemingly impossible tasks with increasing ease : " Once a level falls , the mysticism around it vanishes . It 's beatable ; it 's an afterthought on the route to your next impossible hurdle . " Writing for GameSpy , Ben Turner commented on the " excellent progression of difficulty " engendered by three distinct difficulty modes and thoughtful stage design , expounding " most levels introduce some new idea or concept to the game " and " every single level played adds to your skill . " IGN 's Matt Casamassina commended the " great level variation " , with " well created mazes and puzzles that must be completed using a combination of physics calculations , careful planning and a huge helping of patience . " Turner complimented the frequent introduction of incentives to keep playing such as additional continues and hidden levels , adding that a high " ceiling of mastery " enhanced the game 's longevity through a " simple but well conceived " scoring system and the ability to test strategies in practice mode . Edge and Casamassina thought similarly , with the latter stating " there are shortcuts that can be carved out by the crafty player , physics to be considered when navigating and more . " N @-@ Sider 's Tim Knowles pointed out that " the latter levels in the game get extremely difficult and you will often get frustrated " , while Casamassina felt " it may be a little too difficult for the casual gamer . " However , N @-@ Sider 's Mark Medina called the learning curve " perfectly spot on " : " Any falling off the platforms feels entirely your fault and at the same time , you always get the sense that you 're just that little bit closer to that elusive goal . " Edge and N @-@ Sider 's Jason Nuyens and Will Stevenson agreed with this sentiment , with the latter emphasizing the addictive quality of the gameplay . On a technical note , GamePro 's Four @-@ Eyed Dragon faulted the camera system , which " can get out of position , making it hard to maneuver in tight spots . " In The Japan Times , Steven L. Kent described the game as " a test of nerve " requiring " advanced eye – hand coordination . " Turner reflected on the game 's ability to evoke feelings of " nervous excitement " , " intensity " , and " electrifying , stomach @-@ wrenching fear " : " It 's a thrilling feeling to be winding down a paper @-@ thin path with ten seconds on the clock , hoping against hope that you can keep your balance for just a few more seconds and make it to the goal before time expires . " Edge opined that the game is " defined " by " unrefined and angular " emotions : 
 " Every second brings another jagged spike of highrise elation or freefall despair , and that 's what makes the game so superb ... when you finally beat a maze on your 15th try , on the last life of your last continue , it 's all worth it . If that experience could be distilled into a single word , it would be euphoria ; reducing Super Monkey Ball to one word is simpler . It 's genius . " 
 On the party and mini games , Kent asserted " All of the activities ... were designed with an unerring eye for quality " , Edge contended " none are half @-@ assed throwaway rewards " , and the staff of Nintendo Power remarked " each one is a fully realized activity that you could play for hours . " GameSpot 's Ricardo Torres called Monkey Race " a solid little racer " , and Casamassina recounted it felt " polished and finely tuned . " Stevenson " loved Monkey Fight " , while Casamassina and Kent highlighted the use of a crown to identify the player currently in the lead as encouraging " players to gang up on each other . " Casamassina hailed Monkey Fight as " a thing of beauty " , but Turner dismissed it as " a dud , as it 's too much frantic button smacking and not enough skill or thought . " Monkey Target , lauded by Kent as the " most addictive interactive activity of 2001 " and considered " the most complex " of the party games by Turner , was complimented by Casamassina for its " simple and brilliantly intuitive " control scheme and " careful science of when to use an item and when to forgo it . " Nintendo Power and Medina , respectively , described Monkey Billiards as " a full @-@ blown pool game " and " a very fun alternative to the real game " ; Casamassina applauded its " ultra @-@ realistic physics engine that perfectly mimics how pool balls would react ... it all works just as good if not better than any pool simulation available to home consoles . " Casamassina was further impressed by the physics of Monkey Bowling , elaborating that " when the pins break apart one would swear it 's the real deal " , but Turner criticized its physics as " slightly wonky " . Medina singled out Monkey Bowling 's " <unk> " challenge mode as a personal favorite , while Nintendo Power considered Monkey Bowling " as good as <unk> gets " and Kent wrote it " is one of the most robust bowling simulations I have ever played . " Finally , Four @-@ Eyed Dragon conveyed that Monkey Golf provided " a humongous challenge " with " crazy , lopsided miniature golf course [ s ] " , while Kent called it an " absolutely infuriating ... test [ of ] your aim and your logic . " 
 Although " not extremely complex or technically impressive in the way that many other launch titles strive to be " Turner believed the graphics were " extremely well @-@ realized and perfectly suited to the game . " According to Torres , " while the four selectable monkey models and the various levels are simple in design , they are generously modeled with well @-@ textured and shaded polygons and have a very rich look . " Four @-@ Eyed Dragon spoke highly of the " hilarious " monkey animations , " sharp reflections and cool water effects " . Likewise , Casamassina enjoyed the dances performed by the monkeys after winning a match and cited the water effects as " particularly incredible " . Described by Turner as " colorful " and " crisp " and by Torres as " cartoony " and " clean " , Edge likened the game 's aesthetic to Sega 's Sonic the Hedgehog series : " Every surface is bright and solid and shiny , every aspect impeccably presented . " Casamassina , Turner , and Torres all praised the consistent frame rate , with Casamassina emphasizing " it truly , always runs at a full 60 frames per second . " However , Four @-@ Eyed Dragon noted the visuals were " not greatly detailed " and Casamassina observed " there isn 't much geometry being drawn at any single point in the title and the backgrounds are often barren , whether it be for power or stylistic purposes . " Moreover , Casamassina was disappointed that the three difficulty modes reused level themes and by the absence of progressive scan support . Torres regarded the game 's sound as " good " but " probably [ its ] weakest aspect " , calling the music " catchy " but finding the monkey noises repetitive and the remaining sound effects " unspectacular . " Conversely , Blue @-@ Eyed Dragon was favorable to the " boisterously entertaining monkey sounds that can be heard once a chimp hits a wall or falls off a ledge " as well as the " eclectic mix of instrumental tunes " . Turner " thought the music ... set the mood perfectly , but some may find it annoying " . 
 Kent named Super Monkey Ball " the best party game of all time . " Torres opined that the game " makes a strong case for the power of simple yet incredibly addictive gameplay . " Knowles stated it represented " Sega at its pure best . " The staff of Famitsu " liked the mini @-@ games in addition to the regular modes . " Nintendo Power hailed the game as " one of the ultimate party games " and " the best in serious gaming , too . " Turner declared it " that rarity of rarities : a perfectly @-@ realized launch title " , with a " bounty of extras " that set " a new standard for arcade to home conversions " . According to Medina , " probably the greatest thing about this game is that it 's so unassuming , in that you are genuinely very surprised at its extremely high quality . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The success of the game spawned a franchise , with 16 sequels or spin @-@ offs released to date . Due to its complex physics engine and abundance of possible shortcuts , Super Monkey Ball has been popular with professional speedrunners . A 2006 study conducted by the Beth Israel Medical Center found that surgeons who played the game for 20 minutes prior to performing a surgical drill finished slightly faster and made fewer mistakes . Super Monkey Ball inspired <unk> , a free game for Microsoft Windows , OS X , Linux , Dreamcast , and iOS . In 2006 , Nintendo Power ranked it the 38th best game available on Nintendo platforms , commenting " who knew that such cute characters with cinnamon roll ears could be the source of so much tension ( when the clock is ticking ) and so much relief ( when they finally break the ribbon ) ? " In 2009 , Edge ranked the game # 39 on its list of " The 100 Best Games To Play Today " , stating " Seeing its sturdy physics model being used to perform incredible acrobatic feats shows just how finely honed it is . " Writing in 1001 Video Games You Must Play Before You Die , Christian Donlan described Super Monkey Ball as " one of Sega 's grade @-@ A triumphs . " 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Saint Lucia at the 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 Saint Lucia sent a delegation to compete at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China . The 2008 Saint Lucian team included four athletes that competed in two sports : swimming and athletics . Of these four athletes , Danielle Beaubrun , at age 18 , was the youngest of the competitors . Dominic Johnson , at age 32 , was the oldest , and was the only man sent as part of the 2008 delegation ; additionally , Johnson was the only Saint Lucian athlete in the 2008 delegation who had previously participated in the Olympics . 
 None of the four athletes advanced past the qualifying stages , and thus did not win any medals . Evans ranked thirtieth overall in the qualifying round for javelin ; Johnson also ranked thirtieth overall in the pole vault qualifying round ; and Spencer ranked twenty @-@ seventh in the qualifying round for high jump . Additionally , Beaubrun ranked forty @-@ second in the swimming qualifying stages . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Saint Lucia Olympic Committee sent President Richard Peterkin , Minister of Youth and Sports Lenard <unk> , Chief de Mission Alfred Emmanuel , Coach Henry Bailey , and Coach Karen Beaubrun to Beijing alongside the four @-@ person athletic delegation . Saint Lucia was the 67th nation in line at the 2008 Summer Olympics opening ceremony , in which high jumper Levern Spencer was the flagbearer . Saint Lucians were unable to view the 7 : 00 am opening ceremony because of issues with the local cable provider . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Three of Saint Lucia 's four athletes competed in athletics : Dominic Johnson , <unk> Spencer , and Erma @-@ Gene Evans . Johnson , at age 32 , was the oldest of Saint Lucia 's athletes to participate in the 2008 Summer Olympics . 
 Erma @-@ Gene Evans participated in athletics as a javelin thrower . The 2008 Summer Olympics was her Olympic debut . Evans moved forward through two rounds after qualifying under the B standard during her event on 18 August 2008 , but did not rank in the third qualifying round . With a best mark distance of 56 @.@ 27 , Evans ranked thirtieth overall . She did not advance . 
 Dominic Johnson participated in athletics as a pole vaulter , returning to the Olympics for his third time ; Johnson had previously participated as a pole vaulter ( and , at one time , a relay runner ) on behalf of Saint Lucia in the 2000 Summer Olympics and 1996 Summer Olympics . Johnson flew to San Diego days before the competition cutoff and made the qualifying preliminary height for the Olympics shortly after winning a silver medal at the Central American and Caribbean Championships in Cali , Columbia . Johnson 's event took place on 20 August 2008 . With a height of 5 @.@ 30 metres , Johnson did not qualify , although he tied for seventeenth place in his qualifying group . As such , he did not advance . Johnson tied with the Czech pole vaulter <unk> Janáček for thirtieth place overall . 
 Levern Spencer participated in athletics as a high jumper , making her first appearance in the Olympics . Spencer trained with Coach Wayne Norton of the University of Georgia to hone her skills in the time preceding her performance in the Olympics . Levern Spencer 's personal best time has been compared to medal winners in the event from the 2004 Summer Olympics . Spencer 's best height cleared was 1 @.@ 85 , placing fourteenth in Qualifying Group B. However , during her event on 20 August 2008 , Spencer placed twenty @-@ seventh overall , and did not advance . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for track events are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or , in field events , by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 NR 
 = National record 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = Athlete not required to compete in round 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Danielle Beaubrun was the only Saint Lucian swimmer to participate in the Beijing Olympics . She was the youngest member of the Saint Lucian delegation , at age 18 . The 2008 Summer Olympics served as Beaubrun 's Olympic debut . Beaubrun did not initially qualify for Olympic standards . However , because Saint Lucia had no naturally qualifying swimmers , the country was invited by FINA to send two swimmers to the Olympics , granted the swimmer had participated in the 2007 World Championships . Beaubrun met this criterion , and was selected for this reason . At the time , Beaubrun was enrolled at The Bolles School in Jacksonville , Florida and trained with coach Sergio Lopez . 
 The event in which Beaubrun participated was the 100 meter breaststroke . This event took place on 10 August 2008 . In the second heat of the qualifying round , Beaubrun scored third , with a time of 1 : 12 @.@ 85 . However , overall , Danielle Beaubrun ranked forty @-@ second , and , as a result , did not advance . 
 Women 
 = Edwin P. Morrow = 
 Edwin Porch Morrow ( November 28 , 1877 – June 15 , 1935 ) was an American politician who served as the 40th Governor of Kentucky from 1919 to 1923 . He was the only Republican elected to this office between 1907 and 1927 . He championed the typical Republican causes of his day , namely equal rights for African @-@ Americans and the use of force to quell violence . Morrow had been schooled in his party 's principles by his father , Thomas Z. Morrow , who was its candidate for governor in 1883 , and his uncle , William O. Bradley , who was elected governor in 1895 . Both men were founding members of the Republican Party in Kentucky . 
 After rendering non @-@ combat service in the Spanish – American War , Morrow graduated from the University of Cincinnati Law School in 1902 and opened his practice in Lexington , Kentucky . He made a name for himself almost immediately by securing the acquittal of a black man who had been charged with murder based on an extorted confession and perjured testimony . He was appointed U.S. District Attorney for the Eastern District of Kentucky by President William Howard Taft in 1910 and served until he was removed from office in 1913 by President Woodrow Wilson . In 1915 , he ran for governor against his good friend , Augustus O. Stanley . Stanley won the election by 471 votes , making the 1915 contest the closest gubernatorial race in the state 's history . 
 Morrow ran for governor again in 1919 . His opponent , James D. Black , had ascended to the governorship earlier that year when Stanley resigned to take a seat in the U.S. Senate . Morrow encouraged voters to " Right the Wrong of 1915 " and ran on a progressive platform that included women 's suffrage and quelling racial violence . He charged the Democratic administration with corruption , citing specific examples , and won the general election in a landslide . With a friendly legislature in 1920 , he passed much of his agenda into law including an anti @-@ lynching law and a reorganization of state government . He won national acclaim for preventing the lynching of a black prisoner in 1920 . He was not hesitant to remove local officials who did not prevent or quell mob violence . By 1922 , Democrats regained control of the General Assembly , and Morrow was not able to accomplish much in the second half of his term . Following his term as governor , he served on the United States Railroad Labor Board and the Railway Mediation Board , but never again held elected office . He died of a heart attack on June 15 , 1935 , while living with a cousin in Frankfort . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Edwin Morrow was born to Thomas <unk> and Virginia Catherine ( Bradley ) Morrow in Somerset , Kentucky , on November 28 , 1877 . He and his twin brother , Charles , were the youngest of eight children . His father was one of the founders of the Republican Party in Kentucky and an unsuccessful candidate for governor in 1883 . His mother was a sister to William O 'Connell Bradley , who was elected the first Republican governor of Kentucky in 1895 . 
 Morrow 's early education was in the public schools of Somerset . At age 14 , he entered preparatory school at St. Mary 's College near Lebanon , Kentucky . He continued there throughout 1891 and 1892 . From there , he enrolled at Cumberland College ( now the University of the Cumberlands ) in Williamsburg , Kentucky , and distinguished himself in the debating society . He was also interested in sports , playing halfback on the football team and left field on the baseball team . 
 On June 24 , 1898 , Morrow enlisted as a private in the 4th Kentucky Infantry Regiment for service in the Spanish – American War . He was first stationed at Lexington , Kentucky , and later trained at Anniston , Alabama . Due to a bout with typhoid fever , he never saw active duty , and mustered out as a second lieutenant on February 12 , 1899 . In 1900 , he matriculated for the fall semester at the University of Cincinnati Law School . He graduated with a Bachelor of Laws degree in 1902 . 
 Morrow opened his practice in Lexington . He established his reputation in one of his first cases — the trial of William Moseby , a black man accused of murder . Moseby 's first trial had ended in a hung jury , but because the evidence against him included a confession ( which he later recanted ) , most observers believed he would be convicted in his second trial . Unable to find a defense lawyer for Moseby , the judge in the case turned to Morrow , who as a young lawyer was eager for work . Morrow proved that his client 's testimony had been extorted ; he had been told that a lynch mob waited outside the jail for him , but no such mob had ever existed . Morrow further showed that other testimony against his client was false . Moseby was acquitted September 21 , 1902 . 
 Morrow returned to Somerset in 1903 . There , he married Katherine Hale Waddle on June 18 , 1903 . Waddle 's father had studied law under Morrow 's father , and Edwin and Katherine had been playmates , schoolmates , and later sweethearts . The couple had two children , Edwina Haskell in July 1904 and Charles Robert in November 1908 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 In 1904 , Morrow was appointed city attorney for Somerset , serving until 1908 . President William Howard Taft appointed him U.S. District Attorney for the Eastern District of Kentucky in 1910 . He continued in this position until he was removed from office by President Woodrow Wilson in 1913 . 
 Morrow 's first political experience was working in his uncle William O. Bradley 's gubernatorial campaign in 1895 . In 1899 , Republican gubernatorial candidate William S. Taylor offered to make Morrow his Secretary of State in exchange for Bradley 's support in the election ; Bradley refused . Despite the encouragement of friends , Morrow declined to run for governor in 1911 . 
 In 1912 , Morrow was chosen as the Republican candidate for the Senate seat of Thomas Paynter . Paynter had decided not to seek re @-@ election , and the Democrats nominated Ollie M. James of Crittenden County . The General Assembly was heavily Democratic and united behind James . On a joint ballot , James defeated Morrow by a vote of 105 – 28 . Due to the passage of the Seventeenth Amendment the next year , this was the last time the Kentucky legislature would elect a senator . 
 At the state Republican convention in Lexington on June 15 , 1915 , Morrow was chosen as the Republican candidate for governor over <unk> F. McLaughlin . His Democratic opponent was his close friend , Augustus O. Stanley . Morrow charged previous Democratic administrations with corruption and called for the election of a Republican because " You cannot clean house with a dirty broom . " Both men ran on progressive platforms , and the election went in Stanley 's favor by only 471 votes . Although it was the closest gubernatorial vote in the state 's history , Morrow refused to challenge the results , which greatly increased his popularity . His decision was influenced by the fact that a challenge would be decided by the General Assembly , which had a Democratic majority in both houses . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 Morrow served as a delegate to the Republican National Convention in 1916 , 1920 , and 1928 . In 1919 , he was chosen by acclamation as his party 's candidate for governor . This time , his opponent was James D. Black . Black was Stanley 's lieutenant governor and had ascended to the governorship in May 1919 when Stanley resigned to take a seat in the U.S. Senate . 
 Morrow encouraged the state 's voters to " Right the Wrong of 1915 " . He again ran on a progressive platform , advocating an amendment to the state constitution to grant women 's suffrage . His support was not as strong for a prohibition amendment . He attacked the Stanley – Black administration as corrupt . Days before the election , he exposed a contract awarded by the state Board of Control to a non @-@ existent company . Historian Lowell H. Harrison argued that Black 's refusal to remove the members of the board following this revelation probably sealed his defeat . Morrow won the general election by more than 40 @,@ 000 votes . It was the largest margin of victory for a Republican gubernatorial candidate in the state 's history . 
 On January 6 , 1920 , Governor Morrow signed the bill ratifying the Nineteenth Amendment , making Kentucky the 23rd state to ratify it , and the moment is captured in a photograph with members of the Kentucky Equal Rights Association . During the 1920 legislative session , the Republicans held a majority in the state House of Representatives and were a minority by only two votes in the state Senate . During the session , Morrow was often able to convince C. W. Burton , a Democratic senator from Grant County , to support Republican proposals . Tie votes in the Senate were broken by Republican lieutenant governor S. Thruston Ballard . Consequently , Morrow was able to effect a considerable reorganization of the state government , including replacing the Board of Control with a nonpartisan Board of Charities and Corrections , centralizing highway works , and revising property taxes . He oversaw improvements to the education system , including better textbook selection and a tax on racetracks to support a minimum salary for teachers . Among Morrow 's reforms that did not pass was a proposal to make the judiciary nonpartisan . 
 Morrow urged enforcement of state laws against carrying concealed weapons and restricted activities of the Ku Klux Klan . During his first year in office , he granted only 100 pardons . This was a considerable decrease from the number granted by his immediate predecessors . During their first years in office , J. C. W. Beckham granted 350 pardons , James B. McCreary ( during his second stint as governor ) granted 139 , and Augustus O. Stanley granted 257 . He was also an active member of the Commission on Interracial Cooperation , a society for the elimination of racial violence in the South . 
 On February 9 , 1920 , Morrow dispatched the Kentucky National Guard to Lexington to protect Will Lockett , a black World War I veteran on trial for murder . Morrow told the state adjutant general " Do as much as you have to do to keep that negro in the hands of the law . If he falls into the hands of the mob I do not expect to see you alive . " Lockett had already confessed , without the benefit of a lawyer , to the murder . His trial took only thirty minutes as he pleaded guilty but asked for a life sentence instead of death . Despite his plea , he was sentenced to die in the electric chair . 
 A crowd of several thousand gathered outside the courthouse while Lockett 's trial was underway . A cameraman asked a large group of those gathered to shake their fists and yell so he could get a picture . The rest of the crowd mistakenly believed they were storming the courthouse and rushed forward . In the ensuing skirmish , one policeman was injured so badly that his arm later had to be amputated . The National Guard opened fire , killing six people and wounding approximately fifty . Some members of the mob looted nearby stores in search of weapons to retaliate , but reinforcements arrived from a nearby army post by mid @-@ afternoon . Martial law was declared , and no further violence was perpetrated . A month later , Lockett was executed at the Kentucky State Penitentiary in Eddyville . 
 The incident is believed to be the first forceful suppression of a lynch mob by state and local officials in the South . Morrow received a laudatory telegram from the NAACP , and most of the national press regarding the incident was favorable . W. E. B. Du Bois called it the " Second Battle of Lexington " . Morrow was consistent in his use of state troops to end violence in the state . In 1922 , he again dispatched the National Guard to quell a violent mill strike in Newport . 
 Morrow also demanded consistency from local law enforcement officials . In 1921 , he removed the Woodford County jailer from office because he allowed a black inmate to be lynched and offered a reward of $ 25 @,@ 000 for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the perpetrators . Citizens of Versailles were more outraged that the jailer had been removed from office than that the prisoner had been lynched . The locals refused to aid in the investigation , and the <unk> were never arrested or charged . Local officials appointed the jailer 's wife to finish his term in an attempt to skirt the removal . 
 In August 1922 , a traveling salesman named Jack Eaton was arrested for allegedly assaulting several young girls . The girls ' parents refused to press charges , and Eaton was released . Later , he was captured by a mob , who cut him several times and poured turpentine into his wounds . An investigation found that the Scott County sheriff had willfully delivered Eaton to the mob , and Morrow removed him from office . Though Eaton was a white man , blacks were elated with the removal because they hoped it would encourage other jailers to step up efforts to protect against lynchings and mob violence . 
 Morrow was frequently mentioned as a potential candidate for vice president in 1920 , but he withdrew his name from consideration , sticking to a campaign promise not to seek a higher office while governor . On July 27 , 1920 , he made a speech in Northampton , Massachusetts , officially notifying Calvin Coolidge of his nomination for that office . Although he supported Frank O. Lowden for president , the nomination went to Warren G. Harding , and Morrow campaigned vigorously on behalf of his party 's ticket . 
 In his address to the 1922 legislature , Morrow asked for $ 50 million for improvements to the state highway system and for the repeal of all laws denying equal rights to women . He also recommended a large bond issue to finance improvements to the state 's universities , schools , prisons , and hospitals . By this time , however , the Republicans had surrendered their majority in the state House , and practically all of Morrow 's proposals were voted down . Morrow countered by vetoing several Democratic bills , including $ 700 @,@ 000 in appropriations . Among the few accomplishments of the 1922 legislature were passage of an anti @-@ lynching law , the abolition of convict labor and the establishment of normal schools at Murray and Morehead . Today , these schools are Murray State University and Morehead State University , respectively . The 1922 legislature also established a commission to govern My Old Kentucky Home State Park and approved construction of the Jefferson Davis Monument . 
 Despite the fact that Morrow gained national praise for his handling of the Lockett trial , historian James C. Klotter opined that he " left behind a solid , and rather typical , record for a Kentucky governor . " He cited Morrow 's fiscal conservatism and inability to control the legislature in 1922 as reasons for his lackluster assessment , although he praised Morrow 's advancement of racial equality in the state . Morrow was prohibited by the state constitution from seeking a second consecutive term , and the achievements of his administration were not significant enough to ensure the election of Charles I. Dawson , his would @-@ be Republican successor in the gubernatorial election of 1923 . 
 = = = Later career and death = = = 
 Following his term as governor , Morrow retired to Somerset where he became active in the Watchmen of the Republic , an organization devoted to the eradication of prejudice and the promotion of tolerance . He served on the United States Railroad Labor Board from 1923 to 1926 and its successor , the Railway Mediation Board , from 1926 to 1934 . He resigned to run for a seat in the U.S. House of Representatives representing the Ninth District , but lost his party 's nomination to John M. Robsion . 
 Following his defeat in the congressional primary , Morrow made plans to return to Lexington to resume his law practice . On June 15 , 1935 , he died unexpectedly of a heart attack while temporarily living with a cousin in Frankfort . He is buried in Frankfort Cemetery . 
 = HMS Essex ( 1901 ) = 
 HMS Essex was one of 10 Monmouth @-@ class armoured cruisers built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . Upon completion in 1904 she was assigned to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron of the Channel Fleet . The ship was placed in reserve in March 1906 and recommissioned in 1909 for service with the 4th Cruiser Squadron on the North America and West Indies Station . In 1912 , Essex returned home and was assigned to the Training Squadron of the Home Fleet . After a refit the following year , she rejoined the 4th Cruiser Squadron in early 1914 . 
 After the beginning of World War I in August , the ship captured a German merchantman the following month . Essex spent most of the first half of the war in the Atlantic Ocean , escorting convoys and searching for German commerce raiders . The ship captured another German merchantman in mid @-@ 1916 and was reduced to second @-@ line roles such as depot ship and accommodation ship a few months later . She was paid off in 1919 and sold for scrap two years later . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Monmouths were designed to protect British merchant shipping from fast cruisers like the French Guichen , <unk> or the Dupleix class . The ships were designed to displace 9 @,@ 800 long tons ( 10 @,@ 000 t ) . They had an overall length of 463 feet 6 inches ( 141 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 66 feet ( 20 @.@ 1 m ) and a deep draught of 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) . They were powered by two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which produced a total of 22 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 16 @,@ 000 kW ) designed to give a maximum speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) . Essex , however , was one of three of the Monmouths that failed to meet her designed speed . The engines were powered by 31 Belleville boilers . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 600 long tons ( 1 @,@ 600 t ) of coal and her complement consisted of 678 officers and ratings . 
 The Monmouth @-@ class ships ' main armament consisted of fourteen breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 6 @-@ inch Mk VII guns . Four of these guns were mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure , and the others were positioned in casemates amidships . Six of these were mounted on the main deck and were only usable in calm weather . They had a maximum range of approximately 12 @,@ 200 yards ( 11 @,@ 200 m ) with their 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) shells . Ten quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 12 @-@ pounder ( 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) ) 12 @-@ cwt guns were fitted for defence against torpedo boats . Essex also carried three 3 @-@ pounder ( 1 @.@ 9 in ( 47 mm ) ) Hotchkiss guns and two submerged 18 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes . 
 Beginning in 1915 , the main deck six @-@ inch guns of the Monmouth @-@ class ships were moved to the upper deck and given gun shields . Their casemates were plated over to improve seakeeping . The twelve @-@ pounder guns displaced by the transfer were repositioned elsewhere . At some point in the war , a pair of three @-@ pounder anti @-@ aircraft guns were installed on the upper deck . 
 The waterline armour belt of the Monmouths had a maximum thickness of 4 inches ( 102 mm ) and was closed off by 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) transverse bulkheads . The armour of the gun turrets and their barbettes was 4 inches thick while that of the casemates had a thickness of 5 inches . The protective deck armour ranged in thickness from .75 – 2 inches ( 19 – 51 mm ) and the conning tower was protected by 10 inches ( 254 mm ) of armour . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Essex , named to commemorate the English county , was laid down at Pembroke Royal Dockyard , Wales , on 2 January 1900 and launched on 29 August 1901 , when she was christened by Mrs. Barlow , wife of the Captain @-@ Superintendent of the dockyard . The ship was completed on 22 March 1904 and was initially assigned to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron of the Channel Fleet . Essex was placed in reserve in March 1906 and suffered a six @-@ inch gun explosion in July while training . She was recommissioned in September 1909 and assigned to the 4th Cruiser Squadron on the North America and West Indies Station . She was transferred to the Home Fleet Training Squadron in 1912 and refitted the following year . Essex rejoined the 4th Cruiser Squadron in January 1914 with Commander Hugh Tweedie in command . 
 After visiting Madeira and Jamaica , the ship arrived in Veracruz , Mexico , on 9 February to relieve her sister ship , Suffolk , and protect British interests during the on @-@ going Mexican Revolution . Two weeks later , she visited Galveston , Texas , before heading for Tampico , Mexico where she arrived on 11 March . Essex only spent a few days there before returning to Veracruz on 13 March . She was in Tampico when Mexican soldiers briefly detained American sailors buying gasoline for their ship on 9 April ( the Tampico Affair ) and returned to Veracruz ten days later , two days before the Americans began landing there on 21 April . They were not satisfied by the Mexican apologies and U.S. President Woodrow Wilson ordered the city occupied in retribution and to forestall a major arms delivery to Victoriano Huerta 's forces . The Mexicans resisted and stray bullets hit Essex the next day , wounding one man who was shot in both feet . Tweedie , escorted by two ratings , was sent to take dispatches for the British Minister in Mexico City on the 26th and returned two days later . Rear @-@ Admiral Christopher Craddock inspected the ship and her crew on 5 – 6 May . Essex sailed for Tampico on 10 May before leaving Mexican waters on the 14th . A month later , the ship was in Quebec City when she was visited by the Canadian Minister of Marine and Fisheries on 16 June . The following month , Essex ferried the Governor General of Canada , Prince Arthur , Duke of Connaught and Strathearn , to Newfoundland and Labrador before returning to Quebec City on 20 July . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 When Craddock received the preliminary war warning on 27 July , he ordered Essex to join her sister Lancaster in Bermuda , which she reached three days later . The ship was ordered to patrol the area north and northwest to protect British shipping and destroy any German commerce raiders . As the Germans appeared to be concentrating their efforts in the Caribbean , Craddock ordered Essex south to reinforce his forces there in early September . On 7 September , she captured the tender , SS Bethania , for the armed merchant cruiser SS Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse , en route from Halifax to Jamaica . The ship continued to patrol the <unk> from the Caribbean Sea to Canadian waters until the end of February 1915 , when she escorted a troop convoy from Halifax to Queenstown , Ireland . Essex then sailed to Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness where she began a refit that lasted until 29 April . Now assigned to the 7th Cruiser Squadron of the Grand Fleet , she spent the next several weeks in Avonmouth or Scapa Flow before being transferred to Cruiser Force I and began patrolling the area between the Azores , Madeira , Cape Verde and Gibraltar on 8 June . Rear @-@ Admiral Archibald Moore , commander of the 9th Cruiser Squadron , hoisted his flag aboard the ship on 4 September and pulled it down on the 29th . Essex began a brief refit at Gibraltar on 1 October that lasted until the 26th and then resumed patrolling the Central Atlantic . She captured a German merchantman , SS <unk> , on 3 May 1916 in the Canary Islands . The ship resumed patrolling until her arrival in Devonport on 17 August ; Essex was paid off days later . 
 Later in the year , she was recommissioned and served as a destroyer depot ship at Devonport . By April 1918 , Essex was an accommodation ship there . As of 1 December , she was serving as a training ship , but she reverted to her previous role as an accommodation ship by 1 May 1919 . Essex was paid off again by October 1919 and was later sold for scrap on 8 November 1921 and broken up in Germany . 
 = Avon Gorge = 
 The Avon Gorge ( grid reference <unk> ) is a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ) long gorge on the River Avon in Bristol , England . The gorge runs south to north through a limestone ridge 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) west of Bristol city centre , and about 3 miles ( 5 km ) from the mouth of the river at Avonmouth . The gorge forms the boundary between the unitary authorities of North Somerset and Bristol , with the boundary running along the south bank . As Bristol was an important port , the gorge formed a defensive gateway to the city . 
 On the east of the gorge is the Bristol suburb of Clifton , and The Downs , a large public park . To the west of the gorge is Leigh Woods , the name of both a village and the National Trust forest it is situated in . There are three Iron Age hill forts overlooking the gorge , as well as an observatory . The Clifton Suspension Bridge , an icon of Bristol , crosses the gorge . 
 = = Geology and formation = = 
 The gorge cuts through a ridge mainly of limestone , with some sandstone . This particular ridge runs from Clifton to Clevedon , 10 miles ( 16 km ) away on the Bristol Channel coast , although limestone is found throughout the Bristol area . The fossil shells and corals indicate that the limestone formed in shallow tropical seas in the Carboniferous , 350 million years ago . For a long time it was unclear what caused the Avon to cut through the limestone ridge , rather than run south west through the Ashton Vale towards Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . However , Bristol was at the southern edge of glaciation during the last ice age , and it has been suggested that ice blocked the river 's natural route through Ashton Vale to the west . At the Clifton Suspension Bridge the Gorge is more than 700 feet ( 213 m ) wide and 300 feet ( 91 m ) deep . 
 In the 18th century the gorge was quarried to produce building stone for the city . Stone was taken by boat into the floating harbour . In the 19th century celestine was discovered in Leigh Court estate and the Miles family authorised quarrying . Between 1880 and 1920 Bristol was producing 90 % of the world 's Celestine , but the enterprise did not last long into the 20th century . Bristol Diamonds , brilliant quartz crystals found in <unk> in dolomitic conglomerate in the gorge , were popular souvenirs for visitors to the Hotwells spa in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries . Quarries on the Bristol side of the gorge are now popular with climbers and are a habitat for Peregrine falcons and other wildlife . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The steep walls of the gorge support some rare fauna and flora , including species unique to the gorge . There are a total of 24 rare plant species and two unique trees : the Bristol and <unk> 's whitebeams . Other notable plants include Bristol rock cress , Bristol onion , spiked speedwell , Autumn squill and honewort . Because of its steep sides , there are many parts of the gorge on which trees cannot grow , making way for smaller plants . The gorge is also home to rare invertebrate species . The gorge has a microclimate around 1 degree warmer than the surrounding land . The steep south @-@ west facing sides receive the afternoon sunlight , but are partially sheltered from the prevailing winds . When winds come from the Bristol Channel in the north west they may be funnelled into the gorge , creating harsh and wet conditions . 
 The steep gorge walls make an ideal habitat for peregrine falcons , with a plentiful supply of food nearby in the form of pigeons and sea gulls . Peregrines have a history of nesting in the gorge , but having become rare in the British Isles they did not breed and were rarely seen in the gorge after the 1930s . In 1990 Peregrines returned to the gorge , and have successfully bred in most of the following years . On warm days a strong uplift forms in the gorge , on which birds of prey soar while hunting . The gorge also houses large populations of <unk> and horseshoe bats , both of which find homes in the caves and bridge buttresses . 
 Due to its geology and ecology , an area of 155 @.@ 4 hectares ( 384 @.@ 0 acres ) of the gorge and surrounding woodland has been protected as a biological and geological Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) , the original notification taking place in 1952 . The site may in future be protected as a Special Area of Conservation under the European Commission Habitats Directive ( 92 / 43 / EEC ) . The Leigh Woods side of the gorge is largely owned by the National Trust . The Downs on the city side of the gorge are owned by Bristol City Council and managed as a large public park . The gorge side is protected in partnership with Bristol Zoo , WWF and English Nature . The council 's management of the gorge involves balancing the need to protect its ecology with recreational uses such as rock climbing . 
 Green @-@ flowered helleborine is found on the western side of the gorge , in a wooded area next to the towpath below Leigh <unk> lady orchid was discovered here in 1990 , in Nightingale Valley on the west side of the Gorge ; there is some doubt as to whether this was a wild plant or an <unk> fly orchid and bee orchid are found in the gorge , along with their hybrid . A single plant of lesser meadow @-@ rue is present in the gorge . Bristol rock @-@ cress occurs here , and at nearby <unk> Point ; in the gorge , there are about 3 @,@ 000 plants on the Bristol side , and about 2 @,@ 000 below Leigh Woods . <unk> is found on both sides of the gorge . Bloody crane 's @-@ bill grows on the Bristol side of the gorge , where it is believed to be native . Little robin occurs on both sides of the gorge . Spiked speedwell grows on both sides of the gorge : the first British record of this plant was from the gorge , in 1641 . 
 = = History of human use = = 
 The gorge area was inhabited at least as early as the Iron Age , probably by the Dobunni tribe . In Leigh Woods above Nightingale Valley , a steep dry valley beside the suspension bridge , is Stokeleigh Camp , one of three Iron Age hill forts in the area . Stokeleigh was occupied from <unk> to <unk> , and was also used in the Middle Ages . The camp was protected on two sides by the cliff faces of the gorge and Nightingale Valley , and was also protected by earthworks , and is now a scheduled ancient monument . A second hill fort was situated across Nightingale Valley , but has since been built on , and bridge road cuts through it . The third hill fort was situated on the opposite side of the gorge , in what is now observatory green . Archaeology , plus the configuration of the three forts , suggest they played a role in defending the gorge . 
 During the Middle Ages and industrial revolution the area which now forms The Downs was used as common grazing land . It was mined for lead , calamine , iron and limestone , and became home to a windmill which produced snuff from the tobacco which had become one of the city 's principal imports . In 1777 the windmill burnt out in a storm , and the building was converted into the observatory , which houses a camera obscura . In the 18th and 19th centuries Bristol 's economy boomed and Clifton became a desirable place to live . Mansion houses were built overlooking the gorge , but after grazing was stopped , trees grew and obscured the view from these mansions . In the Victorian era , with houses creeping further onto the Downs , an Act of Parliament was passed to protect them as a park for the people of Bristol . In 1754 a bridge to span the gorge was proposed , but it was nearly 80 years before work began on Isambard Kingdom Brunel 's Clifton Suspension Bridge , and a further 30 years before it was completed . Today the bridge is perhaps the best known landmark in Bristol . 
 Throughout Bristol 's history the gorge has been an important transport route , carrying the River Avon , major roads and two railways . It is the gateway to Bristol Harbour , and provided protection against storms or attack . The Bristol Channel and Avon estuary have a very high tidal range of 15 metres ( 49 ft ) , second only to Bay of Fundy in Eastern Canada ; and the gorge is relatively narrow and meandering , making it notoriously difficult to navigate . Several vessels have grounded in the gorge including the SS Demerara soon after her launch in 1851 , the schooner Gipsy in 1878 , the steam tug Black Eagle in 1861 and the Llandaff City . The phrase " ship shape and Bristol fashion " arises from when the main harbour in Bristol was tidal , the bottom of which was rocky . If ships were not of stout construction then they would simply break up as the tide receded , hence the phrase . 
 A railway , the Bristol Port Railway , was built through the gorge on the east side from Hotwells to Avonmouth between 1863 and 1865 . The Portishead Railway was opened on the west side in 1867 . The section of the Bristol Port Railway between Hotwells and Sneyd Park junction was closed in 1922 , when construction of a major road through the gorge , the Portway , was started . The Portway was opened in 1926 . The road is now part of the A4 road , linking Bristol city centre to the M5 motorway , which bypasses the city near Avonmouth . 
 Two railways still run through the gorge . On the east side the Severn Beach Line to Avonmouth and Severn Beach uses the remaining part of the Bristol Port Railway through part of the gorge , and through a tunnel under the Downs . On the west side the Portishead Railway was closed by the Beeching Axe in the 1960s , but has now been reopened for freight traffic as far as Royal Portbury Dock , 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 km ) downstream . Between 1893 and 1934 , the Clifton Rocks Railway linked the passenger steamer pier at Hotwells with Clifton on the rim of the gorge . 
 A footpath and National Cycle Network cycleway run alongside the Portishead Railway and along the old towpath . 
 = = Mythology = = 
 The formation of the Avon Gorge is the subject of mediaeval mythology . The myths tell tales of two giant brothers , Goram and Vincent , who constructed the gorge . One variation holds that Vincent and Goram were constructing the gorge together and Goram fell asleep , to be accidentally killed by Vincent 's pickaxe . Another variation tells of the brothers falling for <unk> , a girl from Wiltshire , who instructs the giants to drain a lake which stretches from Rownham Hill to Bradford @-@ on @-@ Avon ( i.e. the Avon valley ) . Goram began digging the nearby Hazel Brook Gorge in Blaise Castle estate , but consumed too much beer and fell asleep . Vincent dug the Avon Gorge and drained the lake , winning the affection of <unk> . Upon waking Goram stamped his foot , creating " The Giant 's Footprint " in the Blaise Castle estate , and threw himself into the Bristol Channel , turning to stone and leaving his head and shoulder above water as the islands of Flat Holm and Steep Holm . 
 = Old Court – New Court controversy = 
 The Old Court – New Court controversy was a 19th @-@ century political controversy in the U.S. state of Kentucky in which the Kentucky General Assembly abolished the Kentucky Court of Appeals and replaced it with a new court . The justices of the old court refused to recognize the action as valid , and for a time , two separate courts operated as the court of last resort for the state . 
 The controversy began when the financial Panic of 1819 left many Kentuckians in debt and unable to meet their financial obligations . A debt relief movement began in the state , and pro @-@ relief candidates won majorities in the General Assembly in 1820 . The Assembly passed a law of replevin that was extremely favorable to debtors . Disgruntled creditors challenged the constitutionality of the law , appealing their case to the Court of Appeals . The court opined in favor of the creditors . Attempts to remove the anti @-@ relief justices failed . The pro @-@ relief legislature passed a measure abolishing the Court of Appeals and replacing it with a new court , to which pro @-@ relief governor Joseph Desha appointed pro @-@ relief justices who upheld the replevin law . 
 As the economic situation in the state improved in the second half of the 1820s , the Old Court supporters regained control of both houses of the General Assembly . They abolished the New Court and restored the Old Court to power . In an 1829 case , the Court nullified decisions rendered by the New Court . In a 1935 case , the Court struck all the New Court cases from Kentucky common law . 
 = = Background = = 
 A period of national prosperity followed the end of the War of 1812 . In Kentucky , rapid population growth and strong demand for the state 's goods led to land speculation becoming a popular enterprise . The charter of the Kentucky Insurance Company in 1802 and the Bank of Kentucky in 1806 made currency for loans plentiful . The establishment of branches of the Second Bank of the United States in Louisville and Lexington further augmented the availability of credit . In 1818 , the General Assembly chartered 40 more state banks , and later added six more . 
 In late 1818 , however , demand for U.S. goods fell sharply in Europe . Land values also began to fall , touching off the Panic of 1819 . Many persons in the state were unable to repay their loans . A struggle began between creditors seeking to collect money owed to them and debtors seeking relief from obligations they could not meet . A Debt Relief Party sprang up in the state , which had long been a single @-@ party bastion . 
 In 1819 , Governor Gabriel Slaughter agreed to repeal the charters of the 46 banks — now known as " The Forty Thieves " — established by the General Assembly . He concurred when the General Assembly abolished damages on disputed bills of exchange . 
 = = Beginning of the controversy = = 
 In 1820 , the Debt Relief Party gained majorities in both houses of the General Assembly . On February 11 , 1820 , the Assembly passed a law of replevin , or " stay law , " that prevented creditors from seeking court order for payment of a debt for a period of one year . They hoped that this would provide time for an economic recovery which would allow debtors to save their investments . If the creditor would not accept bank notes issued by the Bank of Kentucky , he was forced to wait an additional year to collect the debt . 
 On November 29 , 1820 , the Assembly chartered the Bank of the Commonwealth , another source from which debtors could obtain money . Creditors did not want to accept payment from either the Bank of Kentucky or the Bank of the Commonwealth ; the notes of the former were depreciated due to a lack of capital and the latter had no capital and no guarantee of state credit . In December 1820 , the Assembly modified the replevin law to state that creditors who would accept payment in notes from the Bank of the Commonwealth but not the Bank of Kentucky would be forced to wait three months to collect on a debt . The wait was one year if the creditor accepted only notes from the Bank of Kentucky , and it remained two years for creditors who would not accept notes from either . 
 By 1821 , the Relief Party had successfully ended the practice of debt imprisonment in Kentucky . In December 1822 , the party became so dissatisfied with the sound money practices of the Bank of Kentucky that they revoked its charter . 
 = = = Williams v. Blair and Lapsley v. Brashear = = = 
 Forced to choose between accepting depreciated money in payment for outstanding debts or waiting long times to collect debts , creditors turned to the courts for relief . In 1822 , Bourbon County circuit court judge James Clark ruled in the case of Williams v. Blair that the replevin law violated the state and federal constitutions . This ruling was so unpopular with the Relief Party that they attempted to remove him from office , but the 59 – 35 vote fell just short of the needed two @-@ thirds majority . Fayette County circuit court judge Francis P. Blair issued a similar ruling in the case of Lapsley v. Brashear . 
 Both cases were appealed to the Kentucky Court of Appeals — then the highest court in Kentucky — in 1823 . In the case of Blair , the debt relief position was argued by George M. Bibb , while the anti @-@ relief position was represented by Robert Wickliffe . In Lapsley , Wickliffe joined George Robertson and Ben Hardin to represent the anti @-@ relief position , while the relief position was argued by John Rowan and William T. Barry . Chief Justice John Boyle wrote the majority opinion in Blair on October 8 , 1823 , and Associate Justice William Owsley issued the court 's opinion in Lapsley three days later . In both cases , the anti @-@ relief position was upheld . 
 = = Formation of the New Court = = 
 The Assembly passed resolutions against all three justices on the Court of Appeals , but did not possess the two @-@ thirds majority to remove them . Governor John Adair , a Relief Party supporter , urged the resistance , framing the issue as the court impeding the right of the people to self @-@ govern . His efforts drew a resolution against him from the anti @-@ relief minority on November 8 , 1823 . 
 Frustrated by their defeats in the judiciary , the Relief Party turned its attention to the gubernatorial election of 1824 , where they backed General Joseph Desha . Desha 's election by the overwhelming vote of 38 @,@ 378 – 22 @,@ 499 was seen by the party as a mandate to pursue the relief agenda . An early proposal to reduce the salaries of the Court of Appeals justices to 25 cents per year was discarded without a vote , but the House of Representatives mustered the votes to remove the offending justices . The justices were spared removal when the Senate failed to pass the measure with a two @-@ thirds majority . The vote was 23 – 12 . 
 On December 9 , 1824 , the Senate voted to repeal the law that had established the Court of Appeals and to establish a new Court of Appeals with four justices . The measure came to the House floor on December 23 . During the debate , Governor Desha personally lobbied legislators to support the measure , a blatant violation of the rules of the House . The next day the measure passed in the House by a vote of 54 – 43 . Governor Desha appointed pro @-@ relief stalwart William T. Barry as Chief Justice , and three associate justices who were also Relief Party supporters . 
 The existing court and the anti @-@ relief party refused to recognize the new court as valid . Achilles Sneed , clerk of the Old Court , refused a legislative mandate to turn over his records to the New Court by January 1825 . Francis Blair , the New Court clerk , assembled a group that broke into Sneed 's office and took what records they could find . Sneed was charged with contempt of court and fined for refusing to turn over the records . The Old Court continued to meet in a church in Frankfort ; with two supreme courts , the possibility of civil war in Kentucky loomed . 
 = = Resolution of the controversy = = 
 In the elections of 1825 , the Old Court supporters won control of the Kentucky House of Representatives . When the General Assembly 's session opened in November 1825 , Old Court partisans immediately formed a committee to make recommendations related to the court of appeals . On November 23 , Old Court supporters introduced a bill to repeal the reorganization act . The measure passed the House , but failed in the Senate , where Old Court and New Court supporters were equal in number ; the deciding vote was cast by Lieutenant Governor Robert B. McAfee , aligned with New Court advocates . In December , the Assembly 's committee concluded that the Old Court justices were " constitutional judges " and consequently , the legislature did not have power to abolish their positions . The best the Old Court supporters were able to do in 1825 was to pass a non @-@ binding resolution condemning the reorganization act . 
 By 1826 , economic prosperity was beginning to return to the state . The Old Court party augmented their majority in the House and gained a majority in the Senate . One legislator 's proposition to resolve the controversy was to call for the resignation of the governor and lieutenant governor , the entire General Assembly , as well as the justices from both the Old and New Courts , essentially allowing the state to reset its entire government . This extreme measure was rejected . Instead , on December 29 , 1826 , the General Assembly repealed the reorganization act , and overrode Governor Desha 's veto of the measure . They also repealed the replevin law that had touched off the controversy . On January 1 , 1827 , Francis Blair returned the court records in his possession to the Old Court . 
 Old Court chief justice John Boyle resigned to accept a federal judgeship . The General Assembly decided to speed the reconciliation of the two sides of the controversy by naming New Court partisan George Bibb as Boyle 's replacement . Old Court justices Mills and Owsley resigned , hoping to clarify the situation further . They were immediately reappointed , but the Senate refused to confirm their appointments . The governor appointed George Robertson and Joseph R. Underwood , who were both confirmed by the Senate . 
 In all , the New Court heard 77 cases during the Old Court – New Court controversy . In the April 1829 case of Hildreth 's Heirs v. McIntire 's <unk> , the reconstituted Court of Appeals declared all of these decisions void . In 1935 , in Smith v. Overstreet 's <unk> 'r , the court formally ruled that the decisions were not part of the common law of Kentucky . 
 = Late Registration = 
 Late Registration is the second studio album by American hip hop producer and rapper Kanye West , released on August 30 , 2005 , by Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records and Def Jam Recordings . It was recorded over the course of a year in sessions held across studios in New York City and Hollywood , with West collaborating with American record producer and composer Jon Brion . The album features guest contributions from Adam Levine , Lupe Fiasco , Jamie Foxx , Common , Jay @-@ Z , Brandy , and Nas , among others . Its production was notably more lush and elaborate than West 's 2004 debut album The College Dropout , as he utilized intricate sampling methods and string orchestration with Brion . West 's lyrics explore both personal and political themes , including poverty , drug trafficking , racism , healthcare , and the blood diamond trade . 
 Late Registration received rave reviews from critics and earned West several accolades , including a Grammy Award for Best Rap Album at the 2006 Grammy Awards and an Album of the Year nomination . It appeared at the top of several publications year @-@ end lists of top albums . Rolling Stone named it the best album of 2005 , and included it at number 118 on its list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time in 2012 . Late Registration debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart , selling 860 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . 
 The album has thus far sold over 3 @.@ 1 million copies in the United States and has been certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . Late Registration produced five singles , including the international hits " Touch the Sky " , " Heard ' Em Say " and " Gold Digger " , the latter of which topped the Billboard Hot 100 at number one . Music videos for all five singles were produced . West supported the album with a promotional concert tour , and the live album Late Orchestration . 
 = = Background = = 
 Late Registration is the second of Kanye West 's planned four education @-@ themed studio albums . Following the major success of The College Dropout , the album reveals his progression in writing lyrics and an incorporation of a wider range of musical styles . At the time , the focal point of West 's production style was the use of sped @-@ up vocal samples from soul records . However , due in part to the acclaim of The College Dropout , such sampling had been much copied by others ; with that overuse , and also because West felt he had become too dependent on the technique , he decided to find a new sound . 
 A longtime fan of the English trip hop group Portishead , West had been significantly influenced by Roseland NYC Live , the band 's 1998 live album with the New York Philharmonic Orchestra . Early in his career , the live album had inspired him to incorporate string arrangements into his hip hop production . Though West had not been able to afford many live instruments around the time of his debut album , the money from his commercial success enabled him to hire a string orchestra for his second album . West juxtaposed the lush , intricate melodies of the string section with the hard , pounding drum rhythms of hip @-@ hop , and used the sound for the foundation of his rapping . 
 West collaborated with American film score composer Jon Brion , who served as the album 's co @-@ executive producer for several tracks . West had been exposed to Brion 's work while watching the film Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind , for which Brion had composed music . West was also listening to songs Brion had produced for When the Pawn ... , the second studio album of alternative singer @-@ songwriter Fiona Apple , another one of West 's favorite musicians and sources of musical inspiration for the album . Although Brion had no prior experience in creating hip @-@ hop records , he and West found that they could productively work together after their first afternoon in the studio where they discovered that neither confined his musical knowledge and vision to one specific genre . When questioned if his presence made Late Registration any less hip @-@ hop , Brion replied , " There are colors and ideas that make [ the album ] different from average hip @-@ hop , but Kanye is already different from the average hip @-@ hop guy . He 's got this sense of pop record @-@ making which is really solid , and he likes tracks with a lot of things going on in them — which is not necessarily common for hip @-@ hop . He was already barking up that tree . This is definitely not just a hip @-@ hop album . But it is also by no means overtly arty , or non @-@ hip @-@ hop . I don 't think it 's a weird record by any means . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 West took over a year and invested two million dollars towards the construction of Late Registration . The majority of the recording sessions for the album took place at Sony Music Studios in New York City and at The Record Plant in Hollywood , California ; other sessions took place at Chalice Recording Studios and Grandmaster Recording Studios in Hollywood . He began working in the studio after he finished touring with Usher on the R & B singer 's The Truth Tour . By November 2004 , West had completed nearly seventy @-@ five percent of the album . However he felt unsatisfied with its outcome and in March of the following year , he brought in Jon Brion , which drastically altered the project 's direction . 
 The album 's recording sessions between West and Brion were largely exploratory , with the two experimenting with a broad spectrum of sounds . West would construct a song 's basic structure , bringing in samples , drum beat programming and occasionally unfinished rap verses . After brainstorming over the musical direction the album could go , he would then select from a variety of unique instruments that Brion provided ( and played ) and attempt to incorporate their distinctive sound into the song 's texture . West envisioned the album as like the creation of a film : visualizing the songs as scenes , outlining each in such a way that they efficiently conveyed their respective social or introspective context , and ensuring that all synchronized within the fabric of the complete set . This sentiment was shared by Jon Brion who said , " He thinks in frequency ranges . I can recognize when someone sees music architecturally , which is how I work . I see it as a spatial thing : left to right , front to back , up and down . It 's animated and it 's moving in real time . Kanye has that . He tries things out until it fits , until it sits where it is supposed to sit and everything has the correct emotional function . He has real instincts like any great record @-@ maker . " 
 Late Registration has a diverse number of collaborations for its individual tracks . West chose his guest artists based on the effect each of their voices had on him when he heard them , citing the serene vocals of Adam Levine , the trademark sound of Brandy , and the lyricism of Lupe Fiasco and Paul Wall as primary examples . Adam Levine , lead vocalist of pop rock band Maroon 5 is featured on the album 's opening track , " Heard ' Em Say . " The two had previously collaborated when Maroon 5 commissioned West to produce a remix for " This Love " and later developed a friendship while sitting together on a flight to Rome for the 2004 MTV Europe Music Awards . While playing songs from his second album on his iPod for him during the flight , West came across the demo for " Heard ' Em Say " to which Levine added a R & B hook he had recently written and thought was perfect for it . The track was recorded quickly after the 2005 Grammy Awards ceremony , as Levine only had a couple of free hours available for time in the studio , and Brion was able to translate the two compositions in a matter of hours . 
 West originally produced and recorded " Gold Digger " in Ludacris 's home in Atlanta , Georgia for Shawnna 's 2004 debut album Worth Tha Weight and had written the chorus from a female first @-@ person viewpoint . However , Shawnna passed on the song . West rewrote the two verses from a male 's point @-@ of @-@ view for himself ; about a year later , just before " Gold Digger " was set to be released , adding a third verse , recording and mastering it at Sony Music Studios in New York in a week . After he went with friend John Mayer to see Foxx 's portrayal of Ray Charles in the 2004 film Ray , West decided to have Foxx sing an interpolation of Charles ' song " I Got a Woman " in place of the original sample . Once the track was in place , it was layered with additional instruments provided by Brion and individually selected by West . 
 Houston @-@ based rapper Paul Wall appears alongside West and his G.O.O.D. Music label @-@ mate GLC on " Drive Slow " , which was recorded in Los Angeles after the two had met while posing for a photo shoot in an August issue of King magazine in a spread titled " Coming Kings " . West had originally wanted Sri Lankan rapper M.I.A. to appear on the track , but she opted out of the appearance due to a busy schedule . " My Way Home " is performed by West 's close friend and G.O.O.D. Music associate Common , whose sixth studio album Be was being produced and recorded by West simultaneously with Late Registration . Certain tracks West originally crafted for Be that Common passed on subsequently ended up on his second album . 
 While the original version of " Diamonds from Sierra Leone " featured West as the sole performer , he decided to record a remix to the song which included guest verse provided by Jay @-@ Z — who had come out of retirement from rapping — after learning of the civil war in Sierra Leone financed by conflict diamonds . Both the original and remix versions of " Diamond from Sierra Leone " appear on the album , with the former included as a bonus track . The song contains live drums played by Michel Gondry , the director of Eternal Sunshine and later the first music video for " Heard ' Em Say " , who had visited the studio on a day Brion set up a drum kit . According to Jay @-@ Z , West mixed " Diamonds from Sierra Leone " about fourteen times before he felt comfortable to release it as the album 's lead single . The recording also experienced delay when West and Brion were required to wait two weeks to rent the harpsichord that they used for percussion on the song . 
 West recorded a verse by rap artist Nas — one of his idol rappers — for the track " We Major " without informing Jay @-@ Z , who at the time was engaged in a feud with Nas . <unk> , music label @-@ mate Really Doe also appears on the track , delivering its elongated chorus . West later revealed that part of the reason he created the song was to dismantle the feud between the MCs , which they did later that year . " Hey Mama " , dedicated to his mother Donda West , was first recorded by West as early as 2000 . Brion ran into some obstruction while conducting a twenty @-@ piece orchestra for " Celebration " , as its musicians found themselves giggling at West 's humorous lyrics which hampered their playing . On " Roses , " West and Brion had some minor discord ; Brion initially layered it with keyboard arrangements , only for West to remove his keys along with the beat and completely reconfigure the entire song in such a way that its verses are built around the rhythm formed by his vocals and Brion 's arrangements arrive during the choruses . Brion later lightheartedly compared the indecision surrounding the construction of the track to that of Prince 's famous last @-@ minute removal of the bass line from " When Doves Cry . " 
 = = Music and production = = 
 On Late Registration , West drew inspiration from English trip hop band Portishead and collaborated with film score composer Jon Brion . The album 's music blends West 's primary soulful hip hop production with Brion 's elaborate chamber pop orchestration , and experimentally delves into a wide array of different genres , including jazz , blues , rock , R & B , spoken word , funk , turntablism , western classical , and psychedelic soul . With the presence of Brion , who conducts a twenty @-@ piece orchestra and plays instruments individually selected by West , the album is largely orchestral in nature , brandishing a euphony of string arrangements , piano chords , brass flecks , and horn riffs among other symphonic instrumentation . They also incorporated a myriad of foreign and vintage instruments not typical in popular music , let alone hip hop , such as a celesta , harpsichord , Chamberlin , CS @-@ 80 analog synthesizer , Chinese bells and berimbau , vibraphones , and marimba . 
 For Late Registration , Serena Kim of Vibe magazine took note of how West uses unconventional styles and sudden musical shifts in song structures , drawing comparisons to The Beatles during their experimental era . Rolling Stone described Late Registration as West claiming " the whole world of music as hip @-@ hop turf " chronicling the album as " his mad quest to explode every cliché about hip @-@ hop identity . " Kim concurred with this sentiment , stating , " West ambitiously attempts to depart from the street sensibilities of Dropout by giving Late Registration a shiny , quasi @-@ alt @-@ pop finish . " 
 The album 's opening track " Heard ' Em Say " exhibits a cascading piano melody provided by excerpts of " Someone That I Used To Love " as performed by Natalie Cole embellished over tumbling beats and warped bass as well as acoustic guitar . The song 's intricately composed outro , which adopts new sonic elements such as synthesizer and foreign bells , exemplifies the musical complexity of the album as a whole . " Touch the Sky " stands as the sole song on the entire album not to feature production by West . The song was produced by fellow Roc @-@ a @-@ Fella producer Just Blaze , who uses a slowed @-@ down sample of Curtis Mayfield 's " Move on Up " filled with jubilant Latin horn blares and dynamic drum patterns . " Gold Digger " contains an interpolation of " I Got a Woman " by Ray Charles and a bouncy beat formed from handclaps as well as scratches by West 's touring DJ A @-@ Trak . Towards the end , the song employs vintage 1970s synthesizers which emit a honking sound in cadence to Kanye 's voice . West 's production approach comes full circle within " Drive Slow " , a song that samples Hank Crawford 's " Wildflower " and distinctively retains a sluggish but smooth alto jazz @-@ infused drum loop , antithetical to his once essential sped @-@ up soul style . 
 The interlude " My Way Home " contains a sample of " Home is Where the Hatred Is " by Gil Scott @-@ Heron . This facet is accentuated by Common 's performance , which pays homage to the poet by the delivering its single verse in a distinctive proto @-@ rap manner reminiscent of Scott @-@ Heron 's influential vocal style . " Crack Music " is sparsely built on incessant snare drum hits and clipped horn blares . The track sees an ephemeral return of West 's old production attributes , as it possesses a syncopated martial beat , gospel choir symphony , and a spoken word passage within its coda . The poetic " Roses " is partially a cappella in structure , displaying verses rapped over sparse keyboards and a slowed rhythm with the music arriving at the chorus , which features additional vocals , trumpet riffs , electric guitar <unk> , and finally a vocal and piano sample from Bill Withers ' " Rosie " . " Bring Me Down " carries a bombast dramatic air , as it holds more orchestration than any other track on Late Registration . Additionally , it features an overdubbing of Brandy 's vocals to create a chorus effect , a recording technique in which her lone voice produces the illusion of a choir singing harmonies during the choruses . The up @-@ tempo arrangement of " Addiction " contains ambient , rhythmic guitar licks , congas , filtered hi @-@ hats and a sampled line from " My Funny Valentine " as performed by Etta James . All the while , West 's overdubbed vocals reverbs in and out of the track . For " Diamonds from Sierra Leone " , West used a music sample of the theme song for the 1971 James Bond film , Diamonds Are Forever as performed by Shirley Bassey and layered it with live drums , piano keys , harpsichord arpeggios , and string arrangements that all build in intensity with his voice . 
 Late Registration 's longest track , the seven minute @-@ long " We Major " , implements exuberant , amplified backing vocals and a " splashy disco groove " embellished by horn blares , droning bassline , and electric piano glissandos . The melody of " Hey Mama " is laced with a folksy looped " La @-@ la @-@ la " vocal sample from " Today Won 't Come Again " by Donal <unk> while its beat is produced by a tin drum . Additionally , it contains vocoder @-@ processed background vocals , a xylophone solo and a cascading synth outro . Opening with an electronic twinkling sound , " Celebration " contains samples of " Heavenly Dream " by The <unk> . A columnist for The Guardian described it as evoking " the lavish 1970s psychedelic soul of Rotary Connection . " Some of the most elaborate orchestral arrangement expressed on the entire album is contained within its closing track " Gone . " The composition begins with a vocal sample of " It 's Too Late " by Otis Redding and a two @-@ chord piano ostinato , followed by a simplistic funk beat . As the song progresses , its structure gradually morphs and develops more and more musicality . Overtime , the composition assumes ten violins , four violas and four cellos in the midst of verses , all of which initially come in brief staccato bursts that simply punctuate the rhythm but eventually expand and consolidate into a fully formed string section by the arrival of the harmonic choruses . After its third verse , the song enters an instrumental passage before returning with a fourth verse from West , where the rise and fall of his voice is intricately emulated by the fluctuation of the string orchestra . 
 = = Lyrics and themes = = 
 According to Josh Tyrangiel of Time magazine , Late Registration serves as an exhibition of " the stealthy power of West 's storytelling . " West stated that his goal for the album was to touch on topics that people from all walks of life could find relatable , while remaining true to himself : " [ I wanted to have ] raps that were just as ill as Jadakiss and just as understandable as Will Smith . " The opening track " Heard ' Em Say " is a " mournfully contemplative " song that " talks about being honest with yourself in a world that is not . " The song is written from the perspective of an afflicted , impoverished American quietly lamenting the fallacies of society and questioning the ways of the world around him . West delivers a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek lyrical narrative within " Gold Digger " in which he critically depicts the disastrous life of a man married to a woman who manipulates him for financial gain . However , another story arises within the third verse , which illustrates a once destitute black male who earns a fortune and decides to leave a loyal , unselfish girlfriend for a white woman . 
 " Crack Music " continues the avenue of socio @-@ political commentary initiated within " Heard ' Em Say . " However , two songs express polar opposite tones ; where " Heard ' Em Say " was self @-@ effacing and passive @-@ aggressive , " Crack Music " is audacious and straightforward . In the song , West dually discusses the spread and devastating impact of crack cocaine in black communities and champions the sovereignty of music pioneered by black musicians , metaphorically equating their contrarily addictive power and influence on American society . On the sentimental " Roses " , Kanye gives a firsthand account of the hospitalization of his ailing grandmother within a melancholic poem to produce a critique of the healthcare system . 
 The original version of " Diamonds from Sierra Leone " is largely free @-@ associative and is filled with a litany of lyrical punchlines which serve to loosely chronicle his past experiences being a part of the Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella family , from touring with Jay @-@ Z on his Blueprint Lounge Tour to the label 's subsequent fall out and revival . However , West uses the remix to " Diamonds from Sierra Leone " to directly address the issue of " blood diamonds " that people unknowingly wear every day are used to fund horrific civil wars in West Africa . Lyrically , the extensive , uplifting " We Major " is a spiritual <unk> of generational and personal success . " Hey Mama " is West 's dedication to his mother , Donda West . In the ballad , West recounts past hardships he and his mother suffered through together and expresses his love and devotion for her and appreciation for her tireless support , even when he was going directly against her expectations for him . 
 In addition , the album includes a series of humorous skits that involve West joining a fictional black fraternity , " Broke Phi Broke , " whose members pride themselves in living a life without money or worldly possessions , despite the glaring disadvantages such a lifestyle brings . His character is eventually expelled from the fraternity after their leader discovers that not only has West been making beats for cash on the side but has also been breaking some of its rules , such as eating meals everyday , buying new clothes , and taking showers . According to music writer Mickey Hess , the skits serve to encapsulate , " a contradiction at the core of contemporary American life : the need to belong , to fit in , with your fellow humans versus the Darwinistic mad grab at material things , success in the latter being the very definition of success in our culture . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 West presented music audiences with the first taste of Late Registration on April 20 , 2005 while appearing on New York radio station Hot 97 , where he played his lead single " Diamonds from Sierra Leone . " The album was originally set to be released on July 12 , 2005 , but was shifted to August 16 by Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella / Def Jam . It was pushed back once more to August 30 by West himself as he needed more time to complete the album . Late Registration was anticipated to become the biggest @-@ selling record of the year and over 1 @.@ 6 million copies were distributed to stores in preparation of its first week of release . On the iTunes Store , the album became one of the most pre @-@ ordered titles in the online digital media store 's history . West filmed a live album featuring tracks from Late Registration and College Dropout , titled Late Orchestration which was released April 2006 . 
 A television advertisement for Late Registration was directed and animated by Maggie Rogers , Abby Johnson and Paul <unk> of Mr & Mrs Smith Design Ltd . It featured a gigantic version of West 's teddy bear mascot Dropout Bear roaming through the streets of London . The advert received an award from British music magazine Music Week for Best Music TV Commercial . On the day of the album 's release , West made an in @-@ store appearance at New York 's Lincoln Center Tower Records to autograph copies for fans . That same day , Late Registration was released in its entirety for online streaming on AOL Music . 
 The art direction and music packaging for Late Registration was done by Brooklyn graphic design studio Morning Breath , Inc . Similar to its predecessor , the album artwork of the second album carries an educational motif . Where The College Dropout was designed in a manner reminiscent of a high school yearbook , the images contained within the liner notes of Late Registration were taken at Princeton University . West 's vision for the style of the pictures was inspired by the works of American satirical painter John Currin , one of his favorite artists . The liner notes also contain a banner that reads <unk> <unk> , which is Latin for Late Registration . The album artwork centers around " Dropout Bear " , West 's anthropomorphic teddy bear mascot , who is dressed in a collegian outfit . Entering Princeton on the front cover , Dropout wanders its hallways , sits in empty lecture halls , and reads multiple library books before departing from the institution the same way he came in on the back cover . 
 In its first week of release , Late Registration debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and sold 860 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . This was nearly double that of The College Dropout 's first @-@ week sales . It also debuted at number one on the charts in Canada . In the United Kingdom , the album debuted and peaked at number two on the UK Albums Chart for the issue date of September 5 . On the Billboard 200 , Late Registration remained at number one for two consecutive weeks and , by its second week , had reached sales of 1 @.@ 14 million copies . By June 2013 , it had sold 3 @.@ 1 million copies in the US . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Late Registration received widespread acclaim from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 85 , based on 31 reviews . Writing for Rolling Stone , Rob Sheffield deemed the record " an undeniable triumph , packed front to back , so expansive it makes the debut sound like a rough draft " , while calling West " a real MC " . Uncut magazine 's Simon Reynolds found most of the songs brilliant and highlighted by what he called an unparalleled use of vocal samples by West , while Josh Tyrangiel from Time said the sampling and string arrangements on " Gone " may persuade listeners to believe West 's own hype . In The Guardian , Alexis Petridis praised West 's topicality and subversive studio production , writing that " Late Registration suggests an artist effortlessly outstripping his peers : more ideas , better lyrics , bigger hooks , greater depth . " The Observer viewed the album as a significant milestone in hip hop while calling West " the Brian Wilson of hip @-@ hop " because he " plays up the struggle between conscience and covetousness , the pop mainstream and what can be achieved within the notional boundaries of hip hop " . Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times compared West 's dignified execution of pop crossover to that of The Beatles , Johnny Cash , and Bob Marley . Sean Fennessey from Pitchfork Media felt West avoided the sophomore slump with an " expansive , imperfect masterpiece " that drew on his enthusiastic , ambitious , and scattered personality . Christgau , writing in The Village Voice , praised the album 's " exquisite details " , both lyrical and musical , and concluded that West is " as good as he thinks he is ... He wants everybody to buy this record . So do I " . 
 In a less enthusiastic review for The New York Times , Jon Pareles believed West 's elevated status undermines the underdog quality that accentuated his debut album : " for much of Late Registration , the <unk> has turned into a hip @-@ hop V.I.P. , and a cool arrogance has crept into the songs " . Spin magazine 's Jon Caramanica viewed that the augmented versatility and eccentricity of West 's flow still " pales in comparison to his sonic ambition " . Hattie Collins of NME was highly impressed by the beats in the music , which she called " pure cranium @-@ crushing boom bap at its best " , but lamented the lack of " rubbish lyrics " and clumsy charm that distinguished West 's debut album . Nathan Rabin wrote in The A.V. Club that it is as ambitious but " less successful " than The College Dropout because of melodramatic lyrics and " symphonics " without a " strong narrative " to hold the songs together . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Late Registration topped numerous music critic polls and was called the best album of the year by numerous publications , including USA Today , Spin , and Time . Rolling Stone awarded the second effort the highest position on their year @-@ end top albums list and hailed it as a " sweepingly generous , absurdly virtuosic hip @-@ hop classic . " In The Village Voice 's 2005 Pazz & Jop nationwide poll of 795 popular music critics , Late Registration finished at number one by a wide margin over any of the other album nominees . This was the second year in a row that West topped the poll , a feat that had occurred only one other time over twenty years ago by The Clash . It was also named the year 's second best album by Pitchfork Media , and eighteenth best by PopMatters , Late Registration became West 's second consecutive album to be rated " XXL " by XXL , the magazine 's highest rank , which has been awarded to only sixteen other hip @-@ hop albums . 
 At the 2006 Grammy Awards , Late Registration received a nomination for Album of the Year and won Best Rap Album . West 's single " Gold Digger " was nominated for Record of the Year and received the award for Best Rap Solo Performance . He also won Best Rap Song for " Diamonds from Sierra Leone . " At the 37th NAACP Image Awards , the second album received a nomination for Outstanding Album . Late Registration was nominated for Album of the Year at the third annual Vibe Awards , but lost to Mariah Carey 's The Emancipation of Mimi . West received the awards for Top Rap Album for Late Registration as well as Hot Rap Track for " Gold Digger " at the 2006 Billboard R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Awards , where he also received nominations for Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Album and Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Song . Late Registration was nominated for best International Album at the 2006 BRIT Awards . In a decade @-@ end poll of critics and musicians , it finished number 40 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 100 Best Albums of the Decade . In his ballot for the magazine 's poll , Robert Christgau ranked it as the second best album of the 2000s decade . In 2012 , Rolling Stone ranked the album number 118 on its revised list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Track notes = = = 
 " Wake Up Mr. West " features additional vocals by <unk> . 
 " Heard ' Em Say " features additional vocals by Tony " Penafire " Williams . 
 " Gold Digger " features additional vocals by Plain Pat and Don C. 
 " Drive Slow " features additional vocals by Tony " Penafire " Williams . 
 " Crack Music " features additional vocals by Tony " Penafire " Williams , Keyshia Cole and Charlie Wilson . 
 " Roses " features additional vocals by Tony " Penafire " Williams . 
 " Addiction " features additional vocals by Strings . 
 " We Major " features additional vocals by Tony " Penafire " Williams . 
 " Hey Mama " features additional vocals by John Legend . 
 " Celebration " features additional vocals by John Legend . 
 = = = Sample credits = = = 
 " Wake Up Mr. West " and " Heard Em Say " both contain excerpts of " Someone That I Used to Love " as performed by Natalie Cole 
 " Touch the Sky " contains samples of " Move On Up " as performed by Curtis Mayfield 
 " Gold Digger " contains samples of " I Got a Woman " as performed by Ray Charles 
