 " Drive Slow " contains samples of " Wildflower " as performed by Hank Crawford 
 " My Way Home " contains samples of " Home Is Where the Hatred Is " as performed by Gil Scott @-@ Heron 
 " Crack Music " contains samples of " Since You Came in My Life " as performed by New York Community Choir 
 " Roses " contains samples of " Rosie " as performed by Bill Withers 
 " Addiction " contains elements of " My Funny Valentine " as performed by Etta James 
 " Diamonds from Sierra Leone " contains samples of " Diamonds Are Forever " as performed by Shirley Bassey 
 " We Major " contains samples of " Action " as performed by Orange Krush 
 " Hey Mama " contains samples of " Today Won 't Come Again " as performed by Donal <unk> 
 " Celebration " contains samples of " Heavenly Dream " as performed by The <unk> 
 " Gone " contains samples of " It 's Too Late " as performed by Otis Redding 
 " Late " contains samples of " I 'll Erase Away Your Pain " by The <unk> . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Vocalists = = = 
 Paul Wall – featured artist ( track 6 ) 
 Cam 'ron – featured artist ( track 19 ) 
 Brandy – featured artist ( track 10 ) 
 Common – featured artist ( track 7 ) 
 Consequence – featured artist ( track 19 ) 
 Lupe Fiasco – featured artist ( track 3 ) 
 The Game – featured artist ( track 8 ) 
 GLC – featured artist ( track 6 ) 
 Jay @-@ Z – featured artist ( track 13 ) 
 Adam Levine – featured artist ( track 2 ) 
 Nas – featured artist ( track 14 ) 
 Really Doe – featured artist ( track 14 ) 
 Jamie Foxx – featured artist ( track 4 ) 
 Tony Williams – additional vocals ( track 9 ) 
 Charlie Wilson – additional vocals ( track 8 ) 
 Keyshia Cole – additional vocals ( track 8 ) 
 DeRay Davis – additional vocals ( track 1 ) 
 John Legend – additional vocals ( tracks 16 and 17 ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 Chart precession and succession 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Hurricane Henriette ( 2007 ) = 
 Hurricane Henriette was a minimal Category 1 hurricane that affected portions of Mexico in late August and early September 2007 . The storm , which caused nine fatalities , formed from an area of disturbed weather on August 30 , 2007 , and became a tropical storm the next day . The cyclone moved parallel to the Mexican Pacific coast , but its proximity to the shore resulted in heavy rainfall over land . The most affected city was Acapulco , Guerrero , where six people were killed by landslides , and where over 100 families had to be evacuated after the La Sabana River flooded . Henriette then turned north and headed towards the Baja California peninsula , and became a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Henriette made its first landfall east of Cabo San Lucas at peak intensity , ( Eye witness reports state the first landfall was directly over Cabo ) causing the death of one woman due to high surf . 
 Hurricane Henriette then emerged over the Gulf of California , and made its second landfall near Guaymas , Sonora . After causing heavy rains in Sonora , the storm dissipated over the Sierra Madre Occidental and its remnants went on to cause flooding in New Mexico and Texas . Damage totaled about $ 275 million ( 2007 MXN , $ 25 million 2007 USD ) . It hit Mexico on the same day Hurricane Felix hit Nicaragua , only one of two occurrences in which a North Atlantic hurricane and a Pacific hurricane made landfall on the same day . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Henriette originated from a tropical wave that departed the west coast of Africa on August 20 , 2007 . The wave produced some convection while in the Caribbean Sea but reached Central America on August 28 before any significant development could occur . Early on August 30 , the area of low pressure , now 400 miles ( 640 km ) south @-@ southeast of Acapulco , Mexico , started to gain clusters of strong convection . By the afternoon of August 30 the system continued to show strong convection and had developed a broad but well defined area of low to mid level cyclonic turning . By 0600 UTC that day the system became a tropical depression about 360 miles ( 579 km ) southeast of Acapulco and was designated as Tropical Depression Eleven @-@ E. 
 Convection continued but the cyclone was encountering extensive easterly to north @-@ easterly wind shear which <unk> the strengthening of this storm throughout its history . The cyclone initially headed toward the west @-@ northwest around a subtropical ridge that was centered over the western Gulf of Mexico . The depression moved north west , parallel with the west coast of Mexico due to being steered by the mid / upper @-@ level ridge . On August 31 , it strengthened to become Tropical Storm Henriette , 85 miles ( 137 km ) south of Acapulco . 
 It continued to move along the Mexican coast bringing heavy rains . With continued strong convection , Henriette maintained its strengthening and was predicted to reach hurricane strength . However , despite the low wind shear and apparent warm waters . Henriette did not strengthen as expected . This is believed to be due to its proximity to land and colds waters being brought up due to Henriette 's slow movement . The convection and strengthening continued and maintained itself as it moved away from Jalisco . Henriette turned westward and away from the Pacific coast of Mexico late on September 1 as the subtropical ridge built westward over northern Mexico . 
 Henriette continued to improve in structure and with the formation of a distinct eye feature , reached hurricane strength on September 4 as it turned north @-@ northwestward toward the Baja California peninsula , ahead of a mid @-@ latitude trough approaching the west coast of the United States . The hurricane reached its peak intensity of 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) that morning while centered about 75 miles ( 120 km ) south @-@ southeast of Cabo San Lucas . 
 The center of Henriette made landfall just east of Cabo San Lucas on the afternoon of September 4 with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . It was over land for only about six hours before emerging into the Gulf of California . The brief interaction with land caused a slight weakening , but Henriette remained a Category 1 hurricane for most of that day . The next day it made final landfall near Guaymas in the state of Sonora . Henriette weakened quickly over land and dissipated over the mountains of northwestern Mexico early on September 6 . The remnants of Tropical Storm Henriette continued to track across west Texas and southeastern New Mexico as it was being absorbed by a cold front moving through New Mexico . The flow of moisture from originating from these remnants , moderate instability , and marginal shear contributed to flash flooding and severe thunderstorms . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The formation of Henriette was not anticipated well in NHC Tropical Weather Outlooks . The incipient system was first mentioned only about 31 hours before it became a tropical depression , and the potential for the formation of a depression was explicitly stated beginning only about 13 hours prior to genesis . 
 On August 31 , 2007 the National Meteorological Service in Mexico decreed zone of alert from Lagunas de Chacahua , Oaxaca to Cabo Corrientes , Jalisco . It requested the public to take precautions before the possible coming of rain , intense winds and storm surges in the south and southwestern coasts of Mexico . The Ministry of Education of Guerrero canceled classes at all schools in the evening and close the port navigation . Faced with the prospect of Henriette strengthening , The Head of the Harbor Bay in Acapulco stopped all travel for small craft and coastal fisheries . Also blue and yellow flags were raised as a preventive measure for swimmers . On September 4 , the port of Mazatlán , Sinaloa had to be shut down to all navigation due to the inclement weather produced by the hurricane . The port authority reported that Henriette produced waves surpassing 4 meters ( 13 ft ) in height . The Carnival Pride cruise scheduled to arrive at the port had to be diverted out to sea as a result of the port 's closure . In the city itself , school was suspended for two days , and officials stated that approximately 600 families might have to be evacuated . Further north , the port of Topolobampo , Sinaloa was also closed due to Henriette 's threat , and 20 families were evacuated from their homes in an <unk> . 
 In La Paz , the Municipal Direction of Civil defense informed that the first of 13 temporary shelters would be opened and anticipated the evacuation of more than 2000 people that lived in high @-@ risk zones . In some areas , the local police recommended to the population , mostly those living in areas of high risk , that they should take care not to leave their homes unless necessary and to find evacuation routes and temporary shelters . Both Manuel Márquez de León International Airport in La Paz and Los Cabos International Airport in San José del Cabo were shut down , stranding 7 @,@ 500 – 8 @,@ 500 tourists . Henriette also forced the ports in Los Cabos to close completely , and the port in La Paz to close to small craft . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Henriette struck hardest in the resort town of Acapulco . Though the storm never passed closer than 70 mi ( 110 km ) to the town , heavy rains along the coast saturated the ground , leading to mudslides . Six people were reported dead as a result of rockslides in two suburban neighborhoods of the city and in the port itself . Three were killed by a huge rock hitting their house , and the other three were killed when their dwellings partially collapsed . In addition , flooding from the overflowing of the River La Sabana , led to the evacuation of at least one hundred families from around the river by the Consejo <unk> de <unk> Civil . 
 Jorge Antonio Pacheco Albert , Director of Civil Protection for the Port of Acapulco , reported that approximately 800 were injured during the passage of Henriette along the coast and that 337 people relocated to temporary shelters . In Michoacán , Henriette damaged 10 @,@ 000 square meters ( 107 @,@ 000 sq. ft ) of beach near <unk> , destroying approximately 5 @,@ 000 Olive Ridley turtle nests , comprising 10 % of the endangered species 's nests in the state . 
 In Sonora , the hurricane destroyed 450 homes and damaged another 5 @,@ 000 dwellings in Etchojoa and Huatabampo , which both have large Mayo Indian populations . The storm 's precipitation flooded nearby agricultural fields , stopping wheat production , forcing local government to fumigate the region to try to prevent a dengue fever outbreak . In the Yaqui River valley , two people were killed , and another 70 homes were destroyed by Henriette 's winds . Throughout the state , 24 @,@ 000 families were left homeless . 
 One woman died due to high surf near Cabo San Lucas on the Baja California peninsula . Two fishermen were reported killed off the Sonora coast . The road connecting Guaymas to Ciudad Obregón was closed due to damage from the overflow of the brook <unk> which stranded around 600 cars . Lázaro Cárdenas was affected when the <unk> River broke its banks . At least 50 houses located in the community of El <unk> , were flooded by water levels of up to 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) . The residents had to leave their houses and be relocated in provisional housing . The remnants of Henriette caused flash floods and surface water 8 – 12 inches ( 20 – 30 cm ) deep which covered roads with depths up to 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 4 cm ) in the U.S. States of New Mexico and Texas . Hail also accumulated on roadways . Damage in Mexico totaled about $ 275 million ( 2007 MXN , $ 25 million 2007 USD ) . 
 = The Boat Race 1881 = 
 The 38th Boat Race , an annual side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames , took place on 8 April 1881 . In a race umpired by Robert Lewis @-@ Lloyd , Oxford won by a margin of three lengths in a time of 21 minutes 51 seconds taking the overall record to 20 – 17 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is an annual rowing eight competition between the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge . First held in 1829 , the competition is a 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) race along The Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions having won the previous year 's race by three @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter lengths , and held the overall lead , with 19 victories to Cambridge 's 17 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by Constantine William Benson ( who rowed for Cambridge in the 1872 , 1873 and 1875 races ) , Charles Gurdon ( a Blue four times from 1876 to 1879 ) , Thomas Edmund Hockin ( also rowed four times from 1876 to 1879 ) and Edward Henry Prest ( who represented Cambridge in the 1878 , 1879 and 1880 races ) . Oxford 's coaches were S. D. Darbishire ( who rowed for Oxford in the 1868 , 1869 and 1870 races ) , William Grenfell ( who rowed in 1877 and 1879 , and was non @-@ rowing boat club president in 1879 ) , H. B. Southwell ( a Blue three times from 1878 to 1880 ) and W. B. Woodgate ( who rowed twice , in the 1862 and 1863 races ) . The umpire for the race was Robert Lewis @-@ Lloyd ( who had rowed for Cambridge four times between 1856 and 1859 ) and the starter was Edward Searle . 
 The night before the race , an anniversary dinner was held to belatedly commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the event . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 11 st 11 @.@ 75 lb ( 75 @.@ 0 kg ) , 2 pounds ( 0 @.@ 9 kg ) more than their opponents . Cambridge 's crew included two former Blues , with Humphrey Sandford making his third appearance in the event . Oxford saw five rowers with Boat Race experience return , including J. H. T. Wharton who was rowing for a third time . 
 = = Race = = 
 On the day of the race , Oxford 's number six David Edward Brown was ill – author and rower George Drinkwater suggested that " it was necessary for West [ Oxford 's stroke ] to nurse him as much as possible . " Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . In a cold north @-@ easterly wind , the race commenced at <unk> with the Dark Blues outrating Cambridge and taking an early lead . Taking advantage of the favourable bend in the river , Oxford were half @-@ a @-@ length ahead by the Crab Tree pub . 
 Cambridge began to reduce the deficit as Oxford decreased their stroke rate , and by Harrods Furniture Depository the crews were nearly level . Although the bend of the river now was in favour of Cambridge , Oxford increased their rating once again and by Hammersmith Bridge held a three @-@ quarter @-@ length lead . They held off spurts from the Light Blues along Chiswick Reach and by Chiswick Eyot were clear . A two @-@ length lead at Barnes Railway Bridge was increased to three by the time Oxford passed the finishing post , winning in a time of 21 minutes 51 seconds . It was Oxford 's second consecutive victory and took the overall record to 20 – 17 in their favour . 
 = Beowulf : The Monsters and the Critics = 
 " Beowulf : The Monsters and the Critics " was a 1936 lecture given by J. R. R. Tolkien on literary criticism on the Old English heroic epic poem Beowulf . It was first published as a paper in that year in the Proceedings of the British Academy , and has since been reprinted in many collections . 
 Tolkien argues that the original poem has almost been lost under the weight of the scholarship on it ; that Beowulf must be seen as a poem , not just as a historical document ; and that the quality of its verse and its structure give it a powerful effect . He rebuts suggestions that the poem is an epic or exciting narrative , likening it instead to a strong masonry structure built of blocks that fit together . He points out that the poem 's theme is a serious one , mortality , and that the poem is in two parts : the first on Beowulf as a young man , defeating Grendel and his mother ; the second on Beowulf in old age , going to his death fighting the dragon . 
 The work has been praised by critics including the poet and Beowulf translator Seamus Heaney . Michael D. C. Drout called it the most important article ever written about the poem . Scholars of Anglo @-@ Saxon agree that the work was influential , transforming the study of Beowulf . 
 = = Overview = = 
 J. R. R. Tolkien 's essay " Beowulf : The Monsters and the Critics " , initially delivered as a lecture in 1936 , is regarded as a formative work in modern Beowulf studies . In it , Tolkien speaks against critics who play down the monsters in the poem , namely Grendel , Grendel 's mother , and the dragon , in favour of using Beowulf solely as a source for Anglo @-@ Saxon history . Tolkien argues that rather than being merely extraneous , these elements are key to the narrative and should be the focus of study . In doing so he drew attention to the previously neglected literary qualities of the poem and argued that it should be studied as a work of art , not just as a historical document . Later critics such as Hugh Magennis who agree with Tolkien on this point have cited him to defend their arguments . 
 The essay is a redacted version of a series of lectures that Tolkien delivered to Oxford undergraduates in the 1930s . Notes for these lectures exist in two manuscript versions published together in 2002 as Beowulf and the Critics , edited by Michael D. C. Drout ; these offer some insight into the development of Tolkien 's thinking on the poem , especially his much @-@ quoted metaphor of the material of the poem as a tower . " Beowulf : The Monsters and the Critics " is available in various collections including the 1983 The Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays edited by Christopher Tolkien . 
 = = Tolkien 's argument = = 
 = = = Rebuttal of earlier critics = = = 
 Tolkien begins by noting that the original book has almost been lost under the extensive " ' literature ' " ( his inverted commas ) on the subject . He explains that Beowulf had mainly been quarried as " an historical document " , and that most of the praise and censure of the poem was due to beliefs that it was " something that it was not – for example , primitive , pagan , Teutonic , an allegory ( political or mythical ) , or most often , an epic ; " or because the scholar would have liked it to be something else , such as " a heathen heroic lay , a history of Sweden , a manual of Germanic antiquities , or a Nordic Summa Theologica . " Tolkien gives an allegory of a man who inherits a field full of stone from an old hall . He builds a tower with some of it , but when people find the stones are older than the tower , they pull it down " to look for hidden carvings and inscriptions " . 
 Tolkien quotes at length what the scholar W. P. Ker thought of Beowulf , namely that " there is nothing much in the story " , and that " the great beauty , the real value , of Beowulf is in its dignity of style " . Tolkien notes that Ker 's opinion had been a powerful influence in favour of a paradoxical contrast between the poem 's supposed defect in speaking of monsters , and ( in Tolkien 's words ) its agreed " dignity , loftiness in converse , and well @-@ wrought finish " . Tolkien cites other critics , such as Raymond Wilson Chambers and Ritchie Girvan , who objected to the poem 's " wilderness of dragons " and its unworthy choice of theme . Tolkien finds it improbable that " a mind lofty and thoughtful " , as evidenced by the quality of the poetry , " would write more than three thousand lines ( wrought to a high finish ) on matter that is really not worth serious attention " . He notes that heroic human stories had been held to be superior to myth , but argues that myth has a special value : " For myth is alive at once and in all its parts , and dies before it can be dissected . " Finally Tolkien states directly " We do not deny the worth of the hero by accepting Grendel and the dragon . " 
 = = = Man in a hostile world = = = 
 In Tolkien 's view , the poem is essentially about a " man at war with the hostile world , and his inevitable overthrow in Time . " The essential tragedy is man 's brief mortal life . Grendel and the dragon are identified as enemies of a Christian God , unlike the monsters encountered by Odysseus on his travels . What had happened is that Northern courage , exultant , defiant in the face of inevitable defeat by " Chaos and Unreason " ( Tolkien cites Ker 's words ) , fuses with a Christian faith and outlook . The Beowulf poet uses both what he knew to be the old heroic tradition , darkened by distance in time , along with the newly acquired Christian tradition . The Christian , Tolkien notes , is " hemmed in a hostile world " , and the monsters are evil spirits : but as the transition was incomplete in the poem , the monsters remain real and the focus remains " an ancient theme : that man , each man and all men , and all their works shall die . " 
 Tolkien returns to the monsters , and regrets we know so little about pre @-@ Christian English mythology ; he resorts instead to Icelandic myth , which he argues must have had a similar attitude to monsters , men and gods . The Northern gods , like men , are doomed to die . The Southern ( Roman and Greek ) pagan gods were immortal , so to Tolkien ( a Christian ) , the Southern religion " must go forward to philosophy or relapse into anarchy " : death and the monsters are peripheral . But the Northern myths , and Beowulf , put the monsters , mortality and death in the centre . Tolkien is therefore very interested in the contact of Northern and Christian thought in the poem , where the scriptural Cain is linked to <unk> ( giants ) and <unk> ( elves ) , not through confusion but " an indication of the precise point at which an imagination , pondering old and new , was kindled . " The poem is , Tolkien states , " an historical poem about the pagan past , or an attempt at one " , obviously not with modern ideas of " literal historical fidelity " . The poet takes an old plot ( a marauding monster troubling the <unk> court ) paints a vivid picture of the old days , for instance using the Old Testament image of the shepherd patriarchs of Israel in the <unk> <unk> ( people 's shepherd ) of the Danes . 
 = = = Structure : youth versus age = = = 
 The general structure of the poem is then clear , writes Tolkien . " It is essentially a balance , an opposition of ends and beginnings . In its simplest terms it is a contrasted description of two moments in a great life , rising and setting ; an elaboration of the ancient and intensely moving contrast between youth and age , first achievement and final death . " Part A ( youth ) is lines 1 to <unk> ; part B ( age ) is lines 2200 to <unk> ( the end ) . 
 A secondary division of the poem occurs , Tolkien writes , at line 1887 , after which all the earlier story is summarized , so a complete account of Beowulf 's tragedy is given between 1888 and the end , but without the account of the gloomy court of Heorot , or of the contrast between the young Beowulf and the old Hrothgar . 
 The poem 's metre , too , is founded on a balance of two halves to each line , " more like masonry than music " . Tolkien argues that the poem is not meant to be an exciting narrative , nor a romantic story , but a word @-@ picture , " a method and structure that ... approaches rather to sculpture or painting . It is a composition not a tune . " Far from being weakly structured , it " is curiously strong " . It 
 is not an ' epic ' , nor even a magnified ' lay ' . No terms borrowed from Greek or other literatures exactly fit : there is no reason why they should . Though if we must have a term , we should choose rather ' elegy ' . It is an heroic @-@ elegiac poem ; and in a sense all its first 3 @,@ 136 lines are the prelude to a dirge . 
 = = = A singular effect = = = 
 Tolkien takes a moment to dismiss another criticism , that monsters should not have been made to appear in both halves . He replies he can see the point of no monsters , but not in complaining about their mere numbers ; the poet could not , he argues , have balanced Beowulf 's rise to fame through a war in Frisia , against death by dragon . Similarly , he dismisses notions that the poem is primitive : it is instead a late poem , using materials left over from a vanished age : 
 When new Beowulf was already antiquarian , in a good sense , and it now produces a singular effect . For it is now to us itself ancient ; and yet its maker was telling of things already old and weighted with regret , and he expended his art in making keen that touch upon the heart which sorrows have that are both poignant and remote . If the funeral of Beowulf moved once like the echo of an ancient dirge , far @-@ off and hopeless , it is to us as a memory brought over the hills , an echo of an echo . There is not much poetry in the world like this ; 
 Tolkien finishes by arguing that Beowulf " has its own individual character , and peculiar solemnity ; " and would still be powerful even if it came from some unknown time and place ; but that in fact its language , Old English , 
 has still essential kinship with our own , it was made in this land , and moves in our northern world beneath our northern sky , and for those who are native to that tongue and land , it must ever call with a profound appeal – until the dragon comes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Scholars = = = 
 Scholars and critics agree on the work 's wide influence . Tom Shippey wrote that the essay " was seized upon eagerly , even gratefully , by generations of critics " . Alvin A. Lee wrote that " Tolkien 's manifesto and interpretation have had more influence on readers than any other single study , even thought it has been challenged on just about every one of its major points . " Seth <unk> wrote that the essay " may well be the <unk> piece of modern Beowulf criticism . . . . The strategies . . . control the fundamental assumptions of Old English scholarship for the next fifty years . " R.D. Fulk commented that " No one denies the historical importance of this lecture . ... opening the way to the formalist principles that played such a vital role in the subsequent development of further Beowulf scholarship . ... the methodology ... remains a model for emulation . " . Bruce Mitchell and Fred C. Robinson call it in their Beowulf , An Edition ( 1998 ) " the most influential literary criticism of the poem ever written " . George Clark calls it " The most influential critical essay on the poem " , stating it without qualification or justification as a known fact . Michael Lapidge similarly names it " his widely influential critical discussion of the poem " . 
 The scholar and translator Roy <unk> commented that Tolkien 's essay " is usually credited with re @-@ establishing the fabulous elements and heroic combats at the center of the modern reader 's appreciation of the poem . " <unk> at once went on to write , however , that " the separation of the poem into ' mythical ' and ' historical ' elements is a false dichotomy " . He argues that if myth can condense and hold the deepest sources of tension between self and the social order , and dramatises current ideologies by projecting them into the past , then even the hero Beowulf 's mythic fights are at the same time throwing light on society and history . 
 The historian Patrick Wormald wrote of the essay : " it would be no exaggeration to describe [ it ] as one of the most influential works of literary criticism of that century , and since which nothing in Beowulf studies has been quite the same . " However , Wormald continues : " The arguments of Tolkien 's paper were not universally accepted , and some of its effects would perhaps have been disowned by the author , but its general impact could be summarized by saying that most critics have learnt to take the Beowulf poet a great deal more seriously " . Wormald added that 
 Tolkien argued powerfully that , for the Germanic mentality that gave birth to the myth of Ragnarök , the monsters of the poem were the only appropriate enemies for a great hero , and thus shifted Beowulf from the irrelevant fringes to the very centre of the Anglo @-@ Saxon thought world . This naturally encouraged a pre @-@ existent tendency to square the poem with what else was known of the ' serious ' levels of Anglo @-@ Saxon thought - chiefly the Latin scholarship of the Church . Secondly , Tolkien went far towards vindicating the structure of the poem by arguing that it was a balance of contrasting and interlocking halves . His thesis not only convinced many critics but inspired them to follow his example , with the result that Tolkien 's own position has been outflanked . Whereas previous generations of scholars , Tolkien included , had been quite prepared to explain what they considered structural and stylistic blemishes as interpolations , modern writers seek evidence of artistic refinement in some of the poem 's least promising features . 
 Michael D. C. Drout similarly describes the essay 's importance and arguments , writing that it 
 is the most important article ever written about Beowulf ... Tolkien 's shadow looms long over Beowulf scholarship . Much of this influence is because of the enormous success of [ the essay ] , which is viewed as the beginning of modern Beowulf criticism . ... Tolkien was so influential ... because he developed a big @-@ picture reading of the poem that has found favour with several generations of critics . ... [ He ] made the first widely accepted case for viewing Beowulf as aesthetically successful , and he showed how the monsters in Beowulf were symbolic ( not allegorical ) representations of chaos and night , set in opposition to stability and civilization . ... Thus , Tolkien interpreted the theme of Beowulf to be that " man , each man and all men and all their works shall die , " a theme consistent with the heathen past but one that " no Christian need despise . " It was this theme , Tolkien argued , that brought the great dignity to the poem that even scholars who had regretted the monsters had noted . 
 Drout then remarks on the paradoxical success of the essay : 
 The massive influence of " The Homecoming " and " Beowulf : The Monsters and the Critics " is in some ways ironic . The great majority of Tolkien 's work on Beowulf was of the sort represented by the textual <unk> in Finn and Hengest - detailed , philological , historical , and infinitely painstaking . Yet the most influential of Tolkien 's discussions of the poem are those in which he makes the greatest unsupported ( or lightly supported ) generalizations and in which he discusses the poem in the broadest possible terms . Tolkien would perhaps have seen a fundamental continuity between the detailed and philological and the broader and more interpret [ at ] <unk> work , but because of the accidents of publication — and because of Tolkien 's great gift for rhetoric — only the latter has shaped the field of Beowulf criticism . 
 John D. Niles observed that " Bypassing earlier scholarship , critics of the past fifty years have generally traced the current era of Beowulf studies back to 1936 " , meaning to Tolkien 's essay , which he called " eloquent and incisive " . Niles argued that the essay quickly came to be a starting point , as scholars from then on assumed — with Tolkien — that the poem was " an aesthetic unity endowed with spiritual significance . " In Niles 's view , Tolkien thought that the battles with monsters and the sombre , elegiac tone of the poem expressed the " artistic designs of a deep thinker , religiously enlightened , who let his mind play over a lost heroic world of the imagination " , in other words that the Beowulf poet was a man much like Tolkien . Niles cited George Clark 's observation that Tolkien left Beowulf scholars with the " myth of the poet as brooding intellectual , poised between a dying pagan world and a nascent Christian one . " Niles noted that Tolkien 's view of the melancholic vision of the Beowulf poet , and of the heroic fatalism of the poem 's leading characters , was not wholly new , but that his view of the poet himself as a hero was . 
 = = = Press = = = 
 Joan Acocella , writing in the The New Yorker , calls it " a paper that many people regard as not just the finest essay on the poem but one of the finest essays on English literature . " She adds that " Tolkien preferred the monsters to the critics . " 
 Regina Weinreich , reviewing The Monsters and the Critics : And Other Essays in The New York Times , wrote that the title essay " revolutionized the study of the early English poem Beowulf , in which a young hero crushes a human @-@ handed monster called Grendel . Against the scorn of critics , Tolkien defends the centrality and seriousness of literary monsters , declaring his own belief in the symbolic value of such preternatural representations of sheer evil . " Weinreich added that " Beowulf , like other ancient legends , served to nourish Tolkien 's imagination . " 
 John Garth , writing in The Guardian , describes the paper as " still well worth reading , not only as an introduction to the poem , but also because it decisively changed the direction and emphasis of Beowulf scholarship . Up to that point it had been used as a quarry of linguistic , historical and archaeological detail " . Garth notes that 
 Tolkien pushed the monsters to the forefront . He argued that they represent the impermanence of human life , the mortal enemy that can strike at the heart of everything we hold dear , the force against which we need to muster all our strength – even if ultimately we may lose the fight . Without the monsters , the peculiarly northern courage of Beowulf and his men is meaningless . Tolkien , veteran of the Somme , knew that it was not . 
 = = = Translator = = = 
 Tolkien 's paper was praised by the Irish poet Seamus Heaney in the introduction to his critically acclaimed translation of Beowulf . He wrote that the " epoch @-@ making paper " stood out in considering Beowulf as literature . Heaney argued that Tolkien " took for granted the poem 's integrity and distinction as a work of art " , and showed how the poem achieved that status : 
 Tolkien assumed that the poet had felt his way through the inherited material - the fabulous elements and the traditional accounts of a heroic past - and by a combination of creative intuition and conscious structuring had arrived at a unity of effect and a balanced order . He assumed , in other words , that the Beowulf poet was an imaginative writer rather than some kind of back @-@ formation derived from nineteenth @-@ century folklore and philology . 
 Heaney called the paper 's literary treatment " brilliant " . He suggested that it had changed the way that Beowulf was valued , and that it had started " a new era of appreciation " of the poem . 
 Tolkien 's own translation of Beowulf , published posthumously in 2014 as Beowulf : A Translation and Commentary , has been linked to the essay . 
 = = Editions = = 
 Tolkien , J. R. R. ( 1936 ) . " Beowulf : The Monsters and the Critics " . Proceedings of the British Academy 22 : 245 – 95 . 
 Tolkien , J. R. R. ( 1983 ) . The Monsters and the Critics . London : George Allen & Unwin . ISBN 0 @-@ 04 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Tolkien , J. R. R. ( 1997 ) . The Monsters and the Critics . London : HarperCollins . ISBN 0 @-@ 261 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Nicholson , Lewis E. , ed . ( 1963 ) . An Anthology of Beowulf Criticism . Notre Dame : University of Notre Dame Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 268 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Fulk , Robert Dennis , ed . ( 1991 ) . Interpretations of Beowulf : A Critical Anthology . Indiana University Press. pp. 14 – 43 . ISBN 0 @-@ 253 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 = = Translations = = 
 Icelandic : <unk> <unk> , trans . ( 2013 ) . <unk> : <unk> og <unk> . Reykjavík : <unk> <unk> <unk> . ISBN <unk> . 
 = Legacy of Pedro II of Brazil = 
 The legacy of Pedro II of Brazil began to become apparent soon after his death . Emperor Pedro II was the second and last monarch of Brazil , whose long 58 @-@ year reign ( 1831 – 1889 ) represented a time of remarkable prosperity and progress for his country . Despite his achievements , he was deposed in a coup by disgruntled republicans , though there was no desire for a change in the form of government among the majority of the Brazilian people . 
 His popularity among the citizenry had never waned , and support continued to be evident , even on the eve of his overthrow and throughout his exile . He was seen as a hero , a model citizen , a caring monarch , and the source of national unity and well @-@ being . Following his death , political wrangling prevented the return of his remains to Brazil . Continued efforts to repatriate the bodies of the Emperor and his wife dragged on for decades . The disputes were resolved and this was finally accomplished in 1920 with much fanfare . Over the decades , Pedro II gradually grew within Brazil to represent the archetypical benevolent , self @-@ effacing and effective ruler concerned only for the national welfare . 
 Aside from the prosperity and modernization Pedro II left to the nation , there was also a heritage of political and personal values . Many of his reforms and achievements had become so much a part of the national consciousness that they were accommodated by successor regimes . These formed the foundation for Brazilian democratic ideals . Historians have also largely agreed that Pedro II 's reign was not merely benign , but rather , exceptionally constructive and progressive . He has also consistently been ranked by scholars as the greatest Brazilian . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Aftermath of his death = = = 
 The monarchy fell at a point when it had reached its highest popularity among Brazilians , due in part to the abolition of slavery on 13 May 1888 . Indifferent to the new heroes , such as <unk> , imposed by the new republican government , Brazilians remained attached to the popular Emperor whom they regarded as a hero . He continued to be thought of as a national symbol , the Father of the People personified . This view was even stronger among those of African descent , who equated the monarchy with freedom . The afro @-@ Brazilians demonstrated their feeling of loyalty towards the monarch in subtle ways , such as by having the Imperial Crown tattooed on their bodies . 
 In cities throughout the nation , the years immediately following the end of monarchy witnessed the spread of music containing lyrics that reflected popular sentiments favorable to the Emperor . Examples include : " Pedro the Second left / to the kingdom of Lisbon . / The monarchy is over / and now Brazil is adrift . " and " The mother of Deodoro said : This son was once mine / Now he is cursed / by me and by God . " The Brazilian historian Ricardo Salles argued that among the " great — and few — names in our history [ of Brazil ] that hold a place in the popular imagination , is certainly the figure of Dom Pedro II . " The phenomenon of continued support for the deposed monarch is largely credited to an <unk> and generally held belief that he was a " wise , benevolent , austere and honest ruler . " The positive view towards Pedro II , and nostalgia for his reign , only grew as the nation quickly fell into a series of economic and political crises which Brazilians attributed to the Emperor 's overthrow . He never ceased being a popular hero , and would gradually become , once again , an official hero . 
 Surprisingly strong feelings of guilt were manifested among republicans , and these became increasingly evident upon the Emperor 's death in exile at the end of 1891 . In Brazil , the news of the Emperor 's death " aroused a genuine sense of regret among those who , without sympathy for a restoration , acknowledged both the merits and the achievements of their deceased ruler . " The overthrown monarchy was still a fresh memory to Brazilians , to which was added a feeling of remorse over what they perceived as an unjust exile , followed by his lonely demise . Some republicans " reconsidered the long banishment and reflected upon the severity of such action . " Even they believed that Pedro II deserved a better end , and nostalgia spread among them as they " started to see in the Imperial epoch a happier time , a golden age , forever gone . " The Empire began to be viewed more <unk> by the new governments , and its considerable achievements were openly recognized . Now appeared " a feeling that there was once a time when Brazil was more respectable , more honest , and more powerful . " 
 An odd predilection arose on the part of various republican politicians , including those " of higher standing " , for " praising D. Pedro II and the monarchy . " They did not desire a restoration , but believed that the Brazilian Republic might learn from the fallen regime . Thus , Pedro II " became , paradoxically , a model of republican ideals . " To these " republicans , d . Pedro appeared as the best of themselves ; for the monarchists the compliment meant , clearly , something else [ i.e. , that the Emperor was the best of the monarchists ] . " 
 After the death of the Emperor , appeals for the repatriation of his body increased over time . The republican periodical A Cidade do Rio ( The City of Rio ) stated that " Brazil is so large that it cannot begrudge some scant feet of land to him " and demanded : " Bring him back . " The Gazeta da Tarde ( Afternoon Gazette ) said that Pedro II deserved an official funeral within the country . In 1895 , Afonso Celso wrote in the Comércio de São Paulo ( Commerce of São Paulo ) : " The body of D. Pedro cannot continue to lie in foreign territory . " By 1906 the poet Olavo Bilac wrote , " The fatherland reclaims your body and it shall have it . " The Jornal do Comércio ( Commerce Newspaper ) predicted that " one day , when all passions have lost their strength , your body shall rest here . " 
 = = = The end of Pedro II 's exile = = = 
 A law was proposed in the Chamber of Deputies to authorize the transfer of the bodies of Pedro II and his wife . Although it had support from old republicans , it was put aside due to a precondition from Princess Isabel that this could only be permitted if the banishment of her family was also rescinded . The dedication of a statue of the Emperor in Petrópolis on 5 February 1911 was attended by more than 1 @,@ 500 people , including members of the federal government . Several statues of the monarch were erected throughout the country during the following years . At this time , a manifesto written by former Presidents of the Council of Ministers , Lafayette , Ouro Preto and João Alfredo declared that " given the love that Brazilians have for their sovereigns , we agree to the return of the venerable remains back from São Vicente de Fora . " 
 A proposed new bill , which would revoke the banishment , was debated in the Chamber in 1913 . The republican deputy Irineu Machado alleged that " futile objections " were being raised which denied " justice to the memory of the emperor . " Another member , Martim Francisco de Andrada III , affirmed that " D. Pedro II departed poor , leaving the country rich ; it was an injustice that the those who are rich and leave the country impoverished be against it . " The deputy Pedro <unk> believed that the return of the remains would represent " the perpetual gratitude of posterity towards the most clement , the most tolerant of all monarchs of his time . " The deputy Maurício de <unk> said that " now the traces of his political legacy — honesty — are disappearing . " In the Senate , however , the proposal was rejected due to intervention by the caudillo and radical republican Pinheiro Machado . The most famous speech in homage to Pedro II was made in 1914 by the last surviving republican leader of the 1889 coup , the person who had ordered the banishment : 
 The lack of justice , Mr. Senators , is the great evil of our land , the evil of evils , the origin of all our misfortunes , the source of all our discredit , is the supreme misery of this poor nation . [ ... ] After seeing so much futility triumph , after seeing so much dishonor prosper , after seeing so much power in the hands of evil people grow , man becomes disheartened about virtue , he laughs to himself at honor and becomes ashamed of being honest . This has been the work of the Republic in the last years . In the other regime [ the Monarchy ] the man who had a certain disgrace in his life was lost forever , as a political career would be closed to him . There was a vigilant sentinel [ Dom Pedro II ] , whose severity everyone feared and that , bright and very high , protected the surroundings as a lighthouse that never fades away , in benefit of honor , justice and morality . 
 Two years later , in 1916 , President <unk> <unk> agreed to the return of the bodies and revocation of the banishment , but opted to await the end of World War I to officially approve the Act . On 3 September 1920 , his successor <unk> Pessoa signed the law ( using a gold quill provided by the Brazilian Press Association ) which ended the banishment and allowed repatriation of the remains . Rui Barbosa said that those " who created the federal republic do not have claims against the ashes of the old emperor , whose virtues were much higher than his faults . " He concluded , " Therefore , in the republican gallery there is a proper place , and a great one , for D. Pedro II . " 
 = = = The Emperor returns home = = = 
 In 1920 the dreadnought São Paulo bore the imperial coffins to Brazil . The Portuguese republican government granted Pedro II an exhumation with dignities befitting a Head of State , and he received the same honors upon arrival in Brazil . The Count of Eu accompanied the remains , along with his only surviving son , Pedro de Alcântara . His wife , Princess Isabel , was elderly , unwell and unable to participate . She died one year later , without ever seeing her homeland again . President Artur <unk> declared a national holiday and the return of the Emperor was celebrated throughout the nation . 
 In attendance at the main ceremony in Rio de Janeiro was councilor Antonio Prado , the last minister of the Empire still living , who had traveled from São Paulo . Thousands of people attended the event . The " elderly people cried . Many kneeled . All clapped . There was no distinction between republicans and monarchists . They were all Brazilians . " It marked the reconciliation of Republican Brazil with its monarchical past . However , " the official return of the figure of d . Pedro as a national hero would truly come only in 1922 , owing to the great national commemoration of the centenary celebration of Brazilian independence " during which the Emperor was highly acclaimed . 
 Three years later , Brazilians spontaneously commemorated Pedro II 's centenary . There was a clear " disproportion between the enthusiasm generated by the festivities around the birth of d . Pedro , and the little interest in the anniversary of the Republic , which was then 36 years old . " President Artur <unk> recognized the popularity of the monarch and affirmed that he would not refuse " the justice that the Emperor deserves . He loved Brazil and while he had the strength and energy he served the country together with the best men of that time . " Pedro II became , once again , the " Father of the Fatherland " ( or " Father of the Nation " ) . 
 His body was temporarily housed in the Cathedral of Rio de Janeiro until construction on the Cathedral of Petrópolis was complete . The final burial would only occur on 5 December 1939 , when the dictator Getúlio Vargas took advantage of the ceremony as an opportunity to benefit his own popularity ( just as Mussolini had done during Anita Garibaldi 's funeral in 1932 ) . Vargas dedicated the funerary chapel in the Cathedral of Petrópolis where the mortal remains of the Emperor and his wife were interred . 
 Many of the most profound transformations achieved under Pedro II would survive him . Concepts such as a representative political system and a paradigm of citizenship had been allowed to flourish and become ingrained under the Empire , so much so that they survived " during three succeeding regimes : the Old Republic ( 1889 – 1930 ) , the Vargas Era ( 1930 – 45 ) , the Liberal Republic ( 1945 – 64 ) . " The concept of a nation @-@ state , as envisioned by Pedro II , was even appropriated by the military which seized control during 1964 . Though during the 1980s , this concept began to change , it still endures . At the beginning of the twenty @-@ first century his " name is widely employed to evoke both traditional values and the nation 's heritage . His image confers respectability , dignity , and integrity on whatever event or institution employs it . " 
 = = Historical assessments = = 
 Historians have expressed high regard for Pedro II and his reign . The scholarly literature dealing with him is vast and , with the exception of the period immediately after his ouster , overwhelmingly positive , and even laudatory . Emperor Pedro II is usually regarded by historians in Brazil as the greatest Brazilian . In a manner quite similar to methods which had been used by the republican politicians , historians point to the Emperor 's virtues as an example to be followed , although none go so far as to advocate a restoration of the monarchy . " Most twentieth @-@ century historians , moreover , have looked back on the period [ of Pedro II 's reign ] nostalgically , using their descriptions of the Empire to criticize — sometimes subtly , sometimes not — Brazil 's subsequent republican or dictatorial regimes . " 
 American historian Dana Munro wrote in her study about Latin America that Pedro II " grew up to be serious minded , irreproachable in his private life , and indefatigable in the performance of what he considered his duty . " She added that he was " an able and intelligent ruler if not a great statesman " . Another American historian writing on Brazilian history , Thomas Skidmore , remarked that the Emperor " brought a natural talent to his work . Even at age 14 , he was steady , equilibrated and discrete " . He states that during " his reign , he acquired the reputation of being just and objective , projecting the image of an honest and ethical sovereign who would not hesitate in disciplining politicians who were caught turning away from his strict standards " . The British historian Roderick . J. Barman wrote in his biography of Pedro II that he " was at once the model emperor and the model citizen . He literally and metaphorically towered above his fellow Brazilians . Pedro II 's achievements at home and the high reputation he established abroad convinced Brazilians that the goals he advocated would create a country as powerful and as civilized as France , Great Britain or the United States " . 
 The Brazilian American historian Richard Graham praised Brazilian politics affirming that " Brazil enjoyed all appearances of a functioning representative democracy . Foreign observers were virtually unanimous in praising a political system that seemed so like the bourgeois regimes of Europe . The main focus of their enthusiasm lay in the regularity of elections and in the alternation of parties in power . The government scrupulously observed the Constitution , individual rights seemed protected , and no military leader or other dictator overthrew the elected government . " The Brazilian historian Pedro Calmon in his work covering Brazilian history asserted that during Pedro II 's reign the " politics became British – like , and were improved , creating processes which began to function under the vigilant eyes of the emperor " , and which allowed " the evolution of democracy in Brazil " . 
 José Murilo de Carvalho , a biographer of the Emperor , wrote that at the time he was deposed the nation had been consolidated , the slave trade had been abolished , and the foundations of a representative system had been established due to uninterrupted elections and broad freedom of the press . He remarked that for " the longevity of his government and the transformations effected during its course , no other head of State has marked more deeply the history of the country . " 
 The historian Pedro Karp Vasquez wrote that the Emperor ushered " the country into a period of stability and prosperity after 1850 . <unk> interested in everything that was related to scientific discoveries , Dom Pedro II sought to modernize the nation , in many instances anticipating initiatives in European nations . " Another biographer of Pedro II , Renato <unk> Fleury , remarked that " in the History of Brazil , the pages dedicated to Pedro II , ascribe to him complete justice , heightening his moral greatness , his immense patriotism and the great well – being he accorded to Brazil " and that he " became immortal in the heart of the Brazilian people . Schools , libraries , hospitals , cultural societies , theaters , streets , squares , here , there , all over Brazil , exist which have received Pedro II 's name . " 
 = 2007 Indy Japan 300 = 
 The 2007 Indy Japan 300 was an IndyCar Series motor race held on April 21 , 2007 , at the Twin Ring Motegi in Motegi , Tochigi , Japan . It was the third race of the 2007 IndyCar Series season , the fifth annual edition of the Indy Japan 300 in the IndyCar Series , and the tenth anniversary running of the race ( including its five years on the Championship Auto Racing Teams ( CART ) schedule ) . Andretti Green Racing driver Tony Kanaan won the race with a 0 @.@ <unk> second margin of victory over Chip Ganassi Racing 's Dan Wheldon . Dario Franchitti , Scott Dixon , and Sam Hornish , Jr. rounded out the top five . 
 Hélio Castroneves , the defending champion of the Indy Japan 300 , won the pole position by posting the fastest lap in qualifying . In the race , Wheldon gained the lead from Castroneves on lap 44 and led for more than half of the 200 laps , but a pit stop with 14 laps remaining forced him to relinquish the top position . Kanaan took the lead because of a late pit stop by Dixon , and held off a late challenge by Wheldon to secure first place . 
 There were four cautions and nine lead changes among five different drivers during the race . It was Kanaan 's first win of the season , and the eighth of his career . The result moved Wheldon into the lead of the Drivers ' Championship , three points ahead of Kanaan . Dixon , who led the championship before the race , dropped to third . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Indy Japan 300 was confirmed as a part of the Indy Racing League 's ( IRL ) 2007 schedule for the IndyCar Series in September 2006 . It was to be the fifth consecutive year the race was held in the series , and the tenth Indy Japan 300 , counting the period from 1998 to 2002 when it was a CART event . Uniquely in the 2007 season , the race took place at a non @-@ American location . The Indy Japan 300 was the third race scheduled for 2007 by the IRL , out of 17 . At this early stage in the season , Dixon held the lead in the point standings with 80 points . Castroneves and Wheldon were tied for second with 75 points , and Kanaan and Hornish , Jr. were fourth and fifth on 65 and 61 points , respectively . 
 = = = Practice = = = 
 Two days before the race , on April 19 , a pair of two @-@ hour practice sessions were held at the Twin Ring Motegi . The racers were split into two groups , which were each allowed to run laps for one hour per session . The first practice session began at 10 : 30 a.m. Japan Standard Time ( JST ) ; five minutes later a yellow caution flag came out due to a crash by Vitor Meira , who was forced into a backup car when he returned later in the day . A second caution flag was shown at noon local time to allow for an inspection of the track ; 30 minutes later the session came to an end . From 1 : 30 to 3 : 30 p.m JST , the second practice session of the day took place . Danica Patrick posted the fastest lap of the day , going around the circuit in 26 @.@ <unk> seconds in an average speed of 202 @.@ 979 miles per hour ( 326 @.@ 663 km / h ) . Japanese driver Kosuke Matsuura , who called the Indy Japan 300 his " most important " race of the season , had the second @-@ fastest lap time of the day , followed by Castroneves , Kanaan , and Wheldon . 
 Before qualifying took place on April 20 , there was a third round of practice from 10 : 30 a.m. to 12 : 05 p.m JST ; the drivers were each allowed 45 minutes of track time . Two caution flags came out ; the first came half an hour into the session when Jeff Simmons spun out coming off the track 's fourth turn . The other caution was a track inspection , which came 18 minutes into the second group 's allotted time . Kanaan had the best lap of the session ; his average speed of 204 @.@ 465 miles per hour ( 329 @.@ 055 km / h ) topped Patrick 's leading mark from the previous day . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 An hour and 25 minutes after the last practice session ended , the 18 drivers determined the starting grid through qualifying . Each driver ran two laps , with the starting order determined by the competitors ' fastest times . Castroneves , the winner of the 2006 Indy Japan 300 , gained pole position with a lap time of 26 @.@ <unk> seconds ; it was the second consecutive year he qualified first . Two @-@ time race winner Wheldon earned the other front @-@ row starting position ; his lap was <unk> seconds slower than Castroneves ' . Kanaan and Patrick qualified third and fourth , respectively ; they were followed by Hornish , Jr. and Dixon , who would start in the third row . Dario Franchitti and Tomas Scheckter qualified in the fourth row , while Matsuura and Marco Andretti rounded out the top 10 . The difference between the first and tenth @-@ best lap times was less than three @-@ tenths of a second . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The conditions on the grid were dry but cloudy before the event with an air temperature between 70 – 74 ° F ( 21 – 23 ° C ) and a track temperature of 80 ° F ( 27 ° C ) . Bridgestone CEO <unk> Arakawa commanded the drivers to start their engines . The race began at 1 : 00 p.m. JST , as <unk> Fukuda , governor of Tochigi Prefecture ( location of the Twin Ring Motegi track ) , waved the opening green flag to signify the start . Shortly afterward , however , Matsuura suffered an accident ; he crashed into the turn two wall during the first lap after he spun , and did not return to the race . A caution flag came out as a result of the incident ; several drivers made pit stops for new tires , fuel and car adjustments during the caution , and Meira made two stops . On lap 9 , the field returned to green flag racing , and Castroneves maintained his lead , which reached nearly three seconds by lap 25 . The second caution flag of the race was flown on lap 31 , to allow for the removal of debris on the track in the fourth turn . A round of pit stops occurred during the caution ; Castroneves held on to the lead , with Wheldon and Kanaan in second and third . The green flag came back out on lap 39 , and Hornish , Jr. immediately took third place from Kanaan . Lap 44 saw a lead change as Wheldon passed Castroneves ; he would go on to lead 126 of the race 's 200 laps . Wheldon gradually increased the lead to almost two seconds by lap 80 . Kanaan had risen to second by this point , ahead of Franchitti and Castroneves . 
 From laps 81 to 90 , pit stops were made by all the drivers . After Ed Carpenter 's stop , one of his wheels came off while he attempted to return to the track ; he would ultimately finish 15th , eight laps behind . At the end of this series of pit stops under the green flag , Wheldon remained out in front , ahead of Kanaan . By the halfway point of the race , Kanaan had begun to narrow his deficit , which by lap 115 was less than a second . Wheldon , meanwhile , was faced with a <unk> problem — his radio was malfunctioning , preventing him from talking to his pit crew ; he later said that he and his team " lost radio contact early on " . On lap 122 , Kanaan made a pass while coming out of turn two , taking the lead from Wheldon . Soon after , the drivers began their third round of pit stops , and Wheldon took back the lead before Andretti was afflicted with oversteer and crashed into the turn four inside wall on lap 135 , bringing out a caution flag . The yellow flag period saw pit stops continue . Castroneves stopped twice on pit lane on top of a prior stop just before the caution ; during the second yellow flag stop , he overshot his designated area on pit road , and his car needed to be pushed into position by crew members . With 51 laps left , the caution period ended , and Wheldon slowly built a gap over Kanaan of 1 @.@ <unk> seconds entering the final 20 laps . 
 Wheldon made a pit stop on lap 186 , giving Kanaan , who had been conserving fuel since early in the race , the lead . Four laps later , Kanaan stopped , and the lead briefly went to Hornish , Jr . , before he too pitted and Dixon assumed the top spot . On lap 196 , however , Dixon was also forced into the pits . Kanaan had come off pit road ahead of Wheldon after his stop , and therefore was in position to assume the lead . Wheldon closed in on Kanaan , and by the final lap was less than four @-@ tenths of a second behind . Kanaan , though , held off Wheldon to win the race with a <unk> of a second margin of victory . Third place went to Franchitti , who was over 11 seconds off the pace . Dixon was fourth , followed by Hornish , Jr . , who finished one lap behind the leaders , having stalled his engine on pit road in the closing laps . Scott Sharp was the sixth @-@ place finisher , and early leader Castroneves wound up seventh . Simmons , Scheckter , and Buddy Rice finished eighth through tenth ; all other drivers ended the race two or more laps behind . 
 There were nine lead changes in the race ; five drivers reached the front of the field . Wheldon 's total of 126 laps led was the highest of any competitor . Kanaan led four different times , for a total of 26 laps . The victory was the eighth of Kanaan 's IRL career and the first of a series @-@ high five wins he posted in the 2007 season . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 In interviews after the race , Kanaan credited his team 's fuel strategy for being the main factor in his victory . During many of the laps that Wheldon led , Kanaan drafted behind him to use less gasoline than normal , and he was able to stay on the track longer than other drivers as a result . He said of the strategy , " that 's what probably gave me the win . " On the other hand , Wheldon later said that his radio problem forced more " conservative " pit stop planning by himself and his team . Third @-@ place finisher Franchitti said : " We had to take the gamble to try to get the win . I thought we had as good a car as TK ( Tony Kanaan ) and Dan ( Wheldon ) . I think I could have hung with them , but I don 't think I could have caught up with them . " Matsuura admitted his first @-@ lap accident was his fault and apologized to his Japanese fans . After his accident on the 135th lap , Andretti was taken to the track 's infield care center for a precautionary X @-@ ray scan of his right shoulder which showed a negative result . He said that he struggled with controlling his car but was happy . With his second @-@ place finish , Wheldon gained the season points lead with 188 , three ahead of Kanaan and 17 in front of Dixon . The standings were closely contested , with the top six drivers separated by 27 points . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for the drivers ' standings . 
 = BioShock = 
 BioShock is a first @-@ person shooter video game developed by 2K Boston ( later Irrational Games ) and 2K Australia , and published by 2K Games . The game was released for Microsoft Windows and Xbox 360 platforms in August 2007 ; a PlayStation 3 port by Irrational , 2K Marin , 2K Australia and Digital Extremes was released in October 2008 , and an OS X port by Feral Interactive in October 2009 . A mobile version was developed by IG Fun . The game 's concept was developed by Irrational 's creative lead , Ken Levine , and was based on the ideas of Objectivism as promulgated by Ayn Rand , while incorporating influences from other authors such as George Orwell . The game is considered a spiritual successor to the System Shock series , which many of Irrational 's team including Levine had worked on previously . 
 BioShock is set in 1960 . The player guides the protagonist , Jack , after his airplane crashes in the ocean near the bathysphere terminus that leads to the underwater city of Rapture . Built by the business magnate Andrew Ryan , the city was intended to be an isolated utopia , but the discovery of ADAM , a genetic material which can be used to grant superhuman powers , initiated the city 's turbulent decline . Jack tries to find a way to escape , fighting through hordes of ADAM @-@ obsessed enemies , and the iconic , deadly Big Daddies , while engaging with the few sane humans that remain and eventually learning of Rapture 's past . The player , as Jack , is able to defeat foes in a number of ways by using weapons , utilizing plasmids that give unique powers , and by turning Rapture 's own defenses against them . BioShock includes elements of role @-@ playing games , giving the player different approaches in engaging enemies such as by stealth , as well as moral choices of saving or killing characters ; additionally , the game and <unk> theme borrow concepts from the survival horror genre . 
 BioShock received critical acclaim and was particularly praised by critics for its morality @-@ based storyline , immersive environments , and its unique setting , and is considered to be one of the greatest video games of all time . It received several Game of the Year awards from different media outlets , including from BAFTA , Game Informer , Spike TV , and X @-@ Play . Since its release a direct sequel has been released , BioShock 2 by 2K Marin , as well as a third game titled BioShock Infinite by Irrational Games . A remastered version of the game will be released on Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 4 and Xbox One on September 13 , 2016 , as part of BioShock : The Collection , along with BioShock 2 and Infinite . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 BioShock is set in 1960 in the underwater city of Rapture ; the city 's history is mostly revealed via audio recordings the player can collect during the game . Rapture was planned and constructed in the 1940s by Objectivist business magnate Andrew Ryan who wanted to create a utopia for society 's elite to flourish outside of government control . Scientific progress greatly expanded , including the discovery of the genetic material " ADAM " created by sea slugs on the ocean floor . ADAM allows its users to alter their DNA to grant them super @-@ human powers like telekinesis and pyrokinesis . 
 Despite the apparent utopia , class distinctions grew , and former gangster and businessman Frank Fontaine used his influence of the lower class to plan a coup of Rapture . Fontaine created black market routes with the surface world , and together with Dr. Brigid Tenenbaum , created a cheap plasmid industry by mass @-@ producing ADAM through the implanting of the slugs in the stomachs of orphaned girls , nicknamed " Little Sisters " . Fontaine used his plasmid @-@ enhanced army to attack Ryan , but reportedly was killed in the battle . Ryan took the opportunity to seize his assets including the plasmid factories . In the months that followed , a second figure named Atlas rose to speak for the lower class , creating further strife . Atlas led attacks on the factories housing the Little Sisters , and Ryan countered by creating " Big Daddies " , plasmid @-@ enhanced humans surgically grafted into giant lumbering diving suits who were psychologically compelled to protect the Little Sisters at all costs . Ryan also created his own army of plasmid @-@ enhanced soldiers , named " Splicers " , which he controlled using pheromones distributed through Rapture 's air system . 
 Tension came to a head on New Year 's Eve of 1958 , when Atlas ordered an all @-@ out attack on Ryan . The battle left many dead , and the few sane survivors barricaded themselves away . What once was a beautiful utopia had fallen into a crumbling dystopia . Some of the events described above are revisited and expanded upon in the downloadable expansion BioShock Infinite : Burial at Sea , which takes place in Rapture during the latter months of 1958 and leads up to Atlas ' assault on Ryan 's forces . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 In 1960 , at the start of the game , player character Jack is a passenger on a plane that goes down in the Atlantic Ocean . As the only survivor , Jack makes his way to a nearby lighthouse that houses a bathysphere terminal that takes him to Rapture . 
 Jack is contacted by Atlas via radio , and is guided to safety from the Splicers and the perils of the run down city . Atlas requests Jack 's help in stopping Ryan , directing him to a docked bathysphere where he claims Ryan has trapped his family . When Jack encounters a wandering Little Sister and its fallen Big Daddy , Atlas urges Jack to kill the Little Sister to harvest her ADAM for himself ; Dr. Tenenbaum overhears this and intercepts Jack before he harms the Little Sister , urging him to spare the child and any other Little Sisters he encounters , providing him with a plasmid that would force the sea slug out of her body . Jack eventually works his way to the bathysphere , but Ryan destroys it before Jack can reach it . Enraged , Atlas directs Jack towards Ryan 's mansion through Ryan 's army of Splicers and Big Daddies . At times , Jack is forced to travel through areas controlled by Ryan 's allies that have now become deranged , such as Sander Cohen , a former musician that now takes enjoyment in watching the death and misery of others . 
 Ultimately , Jack enters Ryan 's personal office , where Ryan is patiently waiting for Jack by casually playing golf . Ryan explains he fully knew of Atlas ' plan , and explains that Jack is his illegitimate child , taken from his mother by Fontaine who placed him out of Ryan 's reach on the surface , and genetically modified to age rapidly . Fontaine had planned to use Jack as a trump card in his war with Ryan , bringing him back to Rapture when the time was right ; Jack 's genetics would allow him to access systems such as the bathysphere that Ryan had locked out long ago . With no place to run , Ryan is willing to accept death by his own free will , quoting one of his own principles : " A man chooses . A slave obeys . " He asks Jack " would you kindly " kill him with the golf club , and Jack is compelled to do so . As Ryan dies Jack becomes aware that the phrase " would you kindly " has preceded many of Atlas ' commands as a hypnotic trigger forcing him to follow Atlas ' orders without question ; a flashback reveals Jack himself was responsible for crashing his plane near the bathysphere terminal after reading a letter containing the trigger phrase . Atlas reveals himself as Fontaine , having used the Atlas alias to hide himself while providing a figure for the lower class to rally behind . Without Ryan , Fontaine takes over control of Ryan 's systems , and leaves Jack to die as he releases hostile security drones into Ryan 's locked office . 
 Jack is saved by Dr. Tenenbaum and the Little Sisters who had previously been rescued . Dr. Tenenbaum helps Jack to remove Fontaine 's conditioned responses , including one that would have stopped his heart . With the help of the Little Sisters , Jack is able to make his way to Fontaine 's lair to face him . Fontaine , being cornered by Jack , injects himself with a large amount of ADAM , becoming an inhuman monster . Jack is aided by the Little Sisters in draining the ADAM in Fontaine 's body and eventually killing him . 
 The ending depends on how the player interacted with the Little Sisters : 
 If the player has rescued all of the Little Sisters ( or harvest only one of them ) , Jack takes five of them back to the surface with him , and Tenenbaum happily narrates how they go on to live full lives under his care , eventually surrounding him on his deathbed . 
 If the player harvests more than one Little Sister , Jack turns on the Little Sisters to harvest their ADAM . Tenenbaum sadly narrates what occurred , condemning Jack and his actions . A submarine then comes across the wreckage of the plane , and finds itself suddenly surrounded by <unk> containing Splicers who attack the crew and take control of it . The submarine is revealed to be carrying nuclear missiles , with Tenenbaum claiming that Jack has now " stolen the terrible secrets of the world " : the more Little Sisters are harvested , the harsher and more furious Tenenbaum 's narrative becomes . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 BioShock is a first @-@ person shooter with role @-@ playing game customization and stealth elements , and is similar to System Shock 2 . The player takes the role of Jack as he is guided through Rapture towards various objectives . The player collects various weapons and plasmids as they work their way through enemy forces . The player can switch between one active weapon and one active plasmid at any time , allowing them to find combination attacks that can be effective against certain enemies , such as first shocking a <unk> then striking them down with a wrench . Weapons are limited by ammunition that the player collects ; many weapons have secondary ammo types that can be used instead for additional benefits , such as bullets that inflict fire damage . Plasmid use consumes a serum called EVE which can be restored using EVE syringes collected by the player . The player has a health meter that decreases when they take damage . The player can restore their health with medical packs found throughout Rapture . If the player 's health reduces to zero , they will be regenerated at the last Vita @-@ Chamber that they passed with limited amounts of health and EVE . A patch for the game allows players to disable these Vita @-@ Chambers , requiring players to restart a saved game if the character dies . 
 The game provides several options for players to face challenges . In addition to direct combat , the player can use plasmids to lure enemies into traps or to turn enemies against each other , or employ stealth tactics to avoid detection by hostiles including the security systems and turrets . The player can hack into any of Rapture 's automated systems ; the hacking process is done via a mini @-@ game similar to Pipe Mania where the player must connect two points on opposite sides of a grid with a limited set of piping within a fixed amount of time , with failure to complete in time costing health and potentially sounding alarms . Early in the game , the player is given a research camera ; by taking photographs of enemies , the player will cumulatively gain knowledge about the individual foes which translates into attack boosts and other benefits when facing that enemy type in the future . 
 The player collects money by exploring Rapture and from the bodies of defeated foes ; this money can be used at vending machines to restock on ammunition , health and EVE , and other items ; like security cameras , vending machines can also be hacked to reduce the costs of items from it . The player will also receive rewards in the form of ADAM from completing some tasks , as well as from either saving or killing the Little Sisters after defeating their Big Daddy guardian . ADAM is used to purchase new plasmids from Gatherer 's Garden machines scattered around Rapture . In addition to plasmids , the player will also collect and buy tonics that provide passive bonuses , such as increasing Jack 's strength , using EVE more efficiently , or making Jack more resistant to damage . The player can only have a limited number of plasmids and tonics active at any time , and can swap between the various plasmids and tonics at certain stations located throughout Rapture . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Game design = = = 
 Lead developer Ken Levine had created Irrational Games in 1997 out of former members from Looking Glass Studios . Their first game was System Shock 2 , a sequel to Looking Glass ' System Shock , and was met with critical success , though it did not prove a financial one . Levine had attempted to pitch a sequel to System Shock 2 to Electronic Arts , but the publisher rejected the idea based on the poor performance of the earlier game . Irrational would proceed to develop other games , including Freedom Force , Tribes : Vengeance , the cancelled title Deep Cover , and the completed The Lost which was never released due to legal complications , but at this point , Levine wanted to return to a game in the same style as System Shock 2 , a more free @-@ form game with strong narrative . 
 In 2002 , the team had come up with a core gameplay mechanic idea based on three groups of forces ; drones that would carry a desirable resource , protectors that would guard the drones , and harvesters that would attempt to take the resource from the drones ; these would eventually bear out as the Little Sisters , Big Daddies , and <unk> in the final game , but at the time of the concept , there was no set theme . They began working on creating a setting for the game as to be able to pitch the idea to game publishers . A 2002 demonstration version was based on the Unreal Engine 2 for the first Xbox . This demonstration was primarily set aboard a space station overtaken with genetically @-@ mutated monsters ; the main character was Carlos Cuello , a " cult deprogrammer " — a person charged with rescuing someone from a cult , and mentally and psychologically readjusting that person to a normal life . Ken Levine cites an example of what a cult deprogrammer does : " [ There are ] people who hired people to [ for example ] <unk> their daughter who had been in a lesbian relationship . They kidnap her and reprogram her , and it was a really dark person , and that was the [ kind of ] character that you were . " This story would have been more political in nature , with the character hired by a Senator . The team collectively agreed that this game was not what they had set out to make , and were having trouble finding a publisher . They considered ending development , but as news about their efforts to make a spiritual successor to System Shock 2 began to appear in gaming magazines and websites , the team opted to continue development , performing a full revamp the game . 
 By 2004 , 2K Games , a subsidiary of Take Two , offered to publish the game primarily based on the drone / protector / harvester concept , giving Irrational the freedom to develop the story and setting . By this point , the story and setting had changed significantly , taking place in an abandoned World War II @-@ era Nazi laboratory that had been recently unearthed by 21st century scientists . Over the decades , the genetic experiments within the labs had gradually formed themselves into an ecosystem centered on the three groups . This version of game included many of the gameplay elements that would remain in the final BioShock , themselves influenced by concepts from System Shock 2 . These elements included the use of plasmids and EVE , the need to use stealth or other options to deal with automated security systems , direction through the environment from a non @-@ player character relayed over a radio , and story elements delivered through audio recordings and " ghosts " of deceased characters . 
 While the gameplay with the 2004 reveal was similar to what resulted in the released version of BioShock , both design and story underwent changes , consistent with what Levine says was then @-@ Irrational Games ' guiding principle of putting game design first . These areas were also issued due to some internal strife and lack of communication between the various teams within Irrational , part of the result of having to expand the team from six to sixty members for the scope of the project . The environment was considered bland , and there were difficulties by the team 's artists to come up with a consistent vision to meet the level designer 's goals . A critical junction was a short experiment performed by level designer Jean Paul LeBreton and artist Hoagy de la Plante , setting themselves aside to co @-@ develop a level that would later become part of the " Tea Garden " area in the released game , which Levine would later use as a prime example of a " great BioShock space " , emphasizing the need for departments to work together . Levine also found that the cyberpunk theme had been overplayed considering their initial reject from Electronic Arts for System Shock 3 , leading towards the underwater setting of Rapture . 
 = = = Story and theme development = = = 
 The thematic core of BioShock was born when Levine was walking at Rockefeller Center near the GE Building . He saw the uniqueness of the art deco styling of the building along with imagery around the building such as the statue of Atlas near it , and recognized that these were spaces that had not been experienced in the first @-@ player shooter genre . The history of the Rockefeller Center also fed into the story concept ; Levine noted how the Center had started construction prior to the Great Depression of the 1920s ; when the primary financiers had pulled out , John D. Rockefeller backed the remaining construction to complete the project himself , as stated by Edge magazine " a great man building an architectural triumph against all the odds " . The history of Rapture and the character of Andrew Ryan is loosely based on Rockefeller 's story . 
 At this point in the development , the backdrop of Rapture had been fleshed out , but they had yet to come on how to represent the drones , protectors , and harvesters from their original game idea . The Big Daddy concept as the protector class was developed early in the process , but the team had yet to reach a satisfying design for the drones , having used several possible designs including bugs and dogs in wheelchairs . The team wanted to have the player care for the drones in some way and create pathos for these characters . The idea of using little girls came out of brainstorming , but was controversial and shocking within the team at first , recognizing that they could easily be killed and make the game more horrific in the style of Night Trap . However , as Levine worked on the story , he started to bring in the Objectivism philosophy of Ayn Rand , primarily outlined in the book Atlas Shrugged , into the storyline , tied in with his previous observations on Rockefeller and his writings . Levine , from his liberal arts degree , was already familiar with works from Rand and George Orwell , and considered their ideas " fascinating " . He brought in the ideas that Rand put forth , that man should be driven by selfishness and not altruism . This gave them the confidence to apply the same idea when it came to dealing with the little girls as drones ( now Little Sisters ) , whether the player should try to save the girls or harvest the ADAM for their own benefit . 2K Games expressed concern about the initial mechanic of the Little Sisters , where the player would actively prey on the Little Sister , which would have alerted a Big Daddy and setting up the fight with the player . This approach did not sit well with Levine , and 2K Games asserted that they would not ship a game " where the player gets punished for doing the right thing " . They altered this approach where the Little Sisters would be invulnerable until the player had dealt with their Big Daddy , though LeBreton considered this " a massive kludge " into the game 's fiction . The idea of creating the Little Sisters and presenting the player with this choice became a critical part of the game 's appeal to the larger gaming market though would still be met with criticism from some outlets . 
 Other elements came into the story design . Levine had an interest in " stem cell research and the moral issues that go around [ it ] " . In regard to artistic influences , Levine cited the books Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four and Logan 's Run , representing societies that have " really interesting ideas screwed up by the fact that we 're people " . The idea of the mind control used on Jack was offered by LeBreton , inspired by films like The Manchurian Candidate , as a means to provide a better reason to limit the player 's actions as opposed to the traditional use of locked doors to prevent them exploring areas they shouldn 't . The team had agreed that Jack 's actions would be controlled by a key phrase , but struggled with coming up with one that would not reveal Atlas ' true nature . Levine happened upon " Would you kindly " after working on marketing materials for the game that asked the reader hypothetical questions such as " Would you kill people , even innocent people , to survive ? " , later working that phrase into the first script for the game . Levine also noted that " it was never my intention to do two endings for the game . It sort of came very late and it was something that was requested by somebody up the food chain from me . " Another late addition , in response to lackluster playtesting feedback , was the initial plane crash into the water ; Levine based this on the premise of the television show Lost , as it helped to give enough information to the player about Jack before immersing them in the game , helping them to connect to the character . 
 Numerous tensions within the team and from publisher 2K Games continued during the development process . According to LeBreton , Levine was distrustful of some of the more egotistical newer hires and was often arguing with them to enforce his vision of BioShock . 2K Games was concerned with the growing budget for the title , and told Levine to market the title more as a first @-@ person shooter rather than the first @-@ person shooter / role player game hybrid they set out for . Near the targeted release date , Levine ordered the team into round @-@ the @-@ clock development , creating more strife in the team . Paul <unk> , the game 's lead designer , was often omitted from key design meetings , which he later recounted was due to his contrary nature to Levine , questioning several of his choices ; he used his frustration to put into the design efforts for the Medical Pavilion level that he was in charge of at that time . Near the anticipated completion date , 2K decided to give Irrational another three months to polish up the game , extending the current crunch time the studio was already under . A critical playtest of the game occurred in January 2007 , where initial feedback from the players was mostly negative , including issues of the setting being too dark , having no idea where to go , and distrusting Atlas , who at the time was voiced in a southern drawl , described as a " lecherous Colonel Sanders " . The team took this criticism to heart , revamping several elements during those extra months such as improving the lighting , implementing a quest marker , and using an Irish voice for Atlas to make him sound more trustworthy . 
 The game was successfully released in August 2007 with a final budget of about $ 25 million . Despite the critical success of the title , many of those on the team would leave Irrational to pursue other projects due to late development strife that occurred . 
 = = = Game engine = = = 
 BioShock uses a heavily modified Unreal Engine 2 @.@ 5 with some of the advanced technologies from Unreal Engine 3 . Irrational had previous experience with modifying and expanding on the Unreal Engine in SWAT 4 , and continued this advancement of the engine within BioShock . One major improvement they added was improved water effects , given the nature of the game 's setting , hiring a programmer and artist just to focus on the water effects . This graphical enhancement has been lauded by critics , with GameSpot saying , " Whether it 's standing water on the floor or sea water rushing in after an explosion , it will blow you away every time you see it . " BioShock also uses the Havok Physics engine that allows for an enhancement of in @-@ game physics , the integration of ragdoll physics , and allows for more lifelike movement by elements of the environment . The Windows version was built to work in both Direct3D 10 ( DirectX 10 ) and DirectX 9 , with the DirectX 10 version supporting additional water and particle effects . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 BioShock contains both licensed music and an original score . The licensed music from the 1940s and 1950s can be heard playing on phonograph throughout Rapture . In total , 30 licensed songs can be heard throughout the game . The original score was composed by Garry Schyman . He works his pieces to mesh well with the chosen licensed music as to keep the same feel , while also trying to bring out something that was " eerie , frightening and at times beautiful " to mesh well with Rapture 's environments . 
 2K Games released an orchestral score soundtrack on their official homepage on August 24 , 2007 . Available in MP3 format , the score — composed by Garry Schyman — contains 12 of the 22 tracks from the game . The Limited Edition version of the game came with The Rapture EP remixes by Moby and Oscar The Punk . The three remixed tracks on the CD include " Beyond the Sea " , " God Bless the Child " and " Wild Little Sisters " ; the original recordings of these songs are in the game . BioShock 's score was released on a vinyl LP with the BioShock 2 Special Edition 
 = = = Release and promotion = = = 
 An initial demo of the game was made available in August 2007 for Xbox 360 and Microsoft Windows . This demo included cutscenes to introduce the player to Rapture , the game 's tutorial section , and its first levels ; the demo also included weapons , plasmids , and tonics that would otherwise be introduced later in the full title , as to give the player more of the features that would be found in the published game . The Xbox demo was the fastest demo at that time to reach one million downloads on the Xbox Live service . The full game was released for these platforms on August 21 , 2007 . 
 The first patch for the Xbox 360 version was released about two weeks after release to fix some of the game stability issues players had reported The patch was found to introduce more problems to the game for some users , including occasional freezes , bad framerates , and audio @-@ related issues , though methods to resolve these issues through the console 's cache system were outlined by Irrational Games . 
 In December 2007 , a common patch was released for both the Xbox and Windows version . The patch included additional content such as new Plasmids , new achievements for the Xbox 360 version , and additional graphics settings to address some of the field @-@ of @-@ view issues identified by players . ( See below ) . The patch also added in an option to disable the use of Vita @-@ Chambers , a feature requested by players to make the game more challenging , as well as an achievement to complete the game at its hardest setting without using a Vita @-@ Chamber . 
 = = = Ports = = = 
 In an August 2007 interview , when asked about the possibility of a PlayStation 3 version of BioShock , Ken Levine had stated only that there was " no PS3 development going on " at the time ; however , on May 28 , 2008 , 2K Games confirmed that a PlayStation 3 version of the game was in development by 2K Marin , and it was released on October 17 , 2008 . On July 3 , 2008 2K Games announced partnership with Digital Extremes and said that the PlayStation 3 version is being developed by 2K Marin , 2K Boston , 2K Australia and Digital Extremes . Jordan Thomas was the director for the PlayStation 3 version . While there are no graphical improvements to the game over the original Xbox 360 version , the PlayStation 3 version offers the widescreen option called " horizontal plus " , introduced via a patch in the 360 version , while cutscene videos are of a much higher resolution than in the DVD version . Additional add @-@ on content will also be released exclusively for the PlayStation 3 version . One addition is " Survivor Mode " , in which the enemies have been made tougher , and Vita @-@ Chambers provide less of a health boost when used , making the player become creative in approaching foes and to rely more on the less @-@ used plasmids in the game . BioShock also supports Trophies and PlayStation Home . A demo version was released on the PlayStation Store on October 2 , 2008 . An update for the PlayStation 3 version was released on November 13 , 2008 to fix some graphical problems and occasions where users experienced a hang and were forced to reset the console . This update also incorporated the " Challenge Room " and " New Game Plus " features . 
 A port to OS X systems was made by Feral Interactive and released in October 2009 . 
 In early 2008 , IG Fun secured the rights to develop and publish a mobile phone version of BioShock . This version was developed as a top @-@ down , two @-@ dimensional platformer that attempted to recreate most of the plot and game elements of the original title ; IG Fun worked with Irrational to determine the key story elements they wanted to keep in the game . IG Fun recognized they would not be able to include the full storyline within a single mobile title , and so planned to split the title into three " episodes " . Only the first episode was released . 
 A port to iOS devices done by the 2K China studio was released on August 27 , 2014 . The iOS version is content complete and functionally equivalent to the original Xbox 360 and Windows version , featuring either the use of touch @-@ screen virtual gamepad controls or the use of a Bluetooth @-@ enabled controller , and with a graphics engine optimized for iOS devices . The game was later delisted from the App Store in September 2015 ; the game had become unplayable for many that upgraded to iOS 8 @.@ 4 on their devices , and while a patch had been discussed , a 2K representative stated that the decision to remove the game came from the developer . 2K later clarified that they will be working on resolving the issues with the game 's compatibility with the new firmware and will re @-@ release the title once that has been completed . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 BioShock has received universal acclaim . Mainstream press reviews have praised the immersive qualities of the game and its political dimension . The Boston Globe described it as " a beautiful , brutal , and disquieting computer game ... one of the best in years " , and compared the game to Whittaker Chambers ' 1957 riposte to Atlas Shrugged , Big Sister Is Watching You . Wired also mentioned the Ayn Rand connection ( a partial anagram of Andrew Ryan ) in a report on the game which featured a brief interview with Levine . The Chicago Sun @-@ Times review said " I never once thought anyone would be able to create an engaging and entertaining video game around the fiction and philosophy of Ayn Rand , but that is essentially what 2K Games has done ... the rare , mature video game that succeeds in making you think while you play " . 
 The Los Angeles Times review concluded , " Sure , it 's fun to play , looks spectacular and is easy to control . But it also does something no other game has done to date : It really makes you feel . " The New York Times reviewer described it as : " intelligent , gorgeous , occasionally frightening " and added , " Anchored by its provocative , morality @-@ based story line , sumptuous art direction and superb voice acting , BioShock can also hold its head high among the best games ever made . " 
 According to review aggregator Metacritic , the game received an average review score of 96 / 100 for Xbox 360 and Microsoft Windows , and 94 / 100 for PlayStation 3 . As of July 2013 , it is one of the highest @-@ rated games on Metacritic , tied with a number of other games for the third @-@ highest aggregate score . GameSpy praised BioShock 's " inescapable atmosphere " , and Official Xbox Magazine lauded its " inconceivably great plot " and " stunning soundtrack and audio effects . " The gameplay and combat system have been praised for being smooth and open @-@ ended , and elements of the graphics , such as the water , were praised for their quality . It has been noted that the combination of the game 's elements " straddles so many entertainment art forms so expertly that it 's the best demonstration yet how flexible this medium can be . It 's no longer just another shooter wrapped up in a pretty game engine , but a story that exists and unfolds inside the most convincing and elaborate and artistic game world ever conceived . " 
 Reviewers did highlight a few negative issues in BioShock , however . The recovery system involving " Vita @-@ Chambers " , which revive a defeated player at half life , but do not alter the enemies ' health , makes it possible to wear down enemies through sheer perseverance , and was criticised as one of the biggest flaws in the gameplay . IGN noted that both the controls and graphics of the Xbox 360 version are inferior to those of the PC version , in that switching between weapons or plasmids is easier using the PC 's mouse than the 360 's radial menu , as well as the graphics being slightly better with higher resolutions . The game has been touted as a hybrid first @-@ person shooter , but two reviewers found advances from comparable games lacking , both in the protagonist and in the challenges he faces . Some reviewers also found the combat behavior of the <unk> lacking in diversity ( and their A.I. behavior not very well done ) , and the moral choice too much " black and white " to be really interesting . Some reviewers and essayists such as Jonathan Blow also found that the " moral choice " the game offered to the player ( saving or harvesting the little sisters ) was flawed because it had no real impact on the game , which ultimately leads the player to think that the sisters were just mechanics of no real importance . Similarly , the game also inspired the coining of the term " <unk> dissonance " by former LucasArts employee Clint Hocking , a term used to describe inconsistencies between a game 's story and mechanics , in reference to how BioShock 's story advocates selflessness while its gameplay encourages selfishness . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 At E3 2006 , BioShock was given several " Games of the Show " awards from various online gaming sites , including GameSpot , IGN , GameSpy and GameTrailers 's Trailer of the Year . BioShock received an award for Best Xbox 360 Game at the 2007 Leipzig Games Convention . After the game 's release , the 2007 Spike TV Video Game Awards selected BioShock as Game of the Year , Best Xbox 360 Game , and Best Original Score , and nominated it for four awards : Best Shooter , Best Graphics , Best PC Game , Best <unk> and the game also won the 2007 BAFTA " Best Game " award . X @-@ Play also selected it as " Game of the Year " , " Best Original Soundtrack " , " Best Writing / Story " , and " Best Art Direction " . 
 At IGN 's " Best of 2007 " BioShock was nominated for Game of The Year 2007 , and won the award for PC Game of the Year , Best Artistic Design , and Best Use of Sound . GameSpy chose it as the third best game of the year , and gave BioShock the awards for Best Sound , Story and Art Direction . GameSpot awarded the game for Best Story , while GamePro gave BioShock the Best Story , Xbox 360 and Best Single @-@ Player Shooter awards . BioShock won the " Best Visual Art " , " Best Writing " , and " Best Audio " awards at the 2008 Game Developers Choice Awards . Guinness World Records awarded the game a record for " Most Popular Xbox Live Demo " in the Guinness World Records : Gamer 's Edition 2008 . BioShock is ranked first on Game Informer 's list of The Top 10 Video Game Openings . GamesRadar placed <unk> as the 12th best game of all time . In 2011 BioShock was awarded the number 1 spot in <unk> 's " Top 100 Video Game Trailers of All Time " , for submerging the viewer into the BioShock universe and its enduring impact . In August 2012 , IGN gave it the top spot on their list of the Top 25 Modern PC Games , a ranking of the best PC games released since 2006 . In November 2012 , Time named it one of the 100 greatest video games of all time . In July 2015 , the game placed 9th on USgamer 's The 15 Best Games Since 2000 list . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 The Xbox 360 version was the third best @-@ selling game of August 2007 , with 490 @,@ 900 copies . The Wall Street Journal reported that shares in Take @-@ Two " soared nearly 20 % " in the week following overwhelmingly favorable early reviews of the game . Take @-@ Two announced that by June 5 , 2008 , over 2 @.@ 2 million copies of BioShock had been shipped . In a June 10 , 2008 interview , Roy Taylor , Nvidia 's VP of Content Business Development , stated that the PC version has sold over one million copies . According to Take @-@ Two 's chairman Strauss Zelnick , the game had sold around 3 million copies by June 2009 . By March 2010 , BioShock has sold 4 million copies . 
 = = = Artistic recognition = = = 
 BioShock has received praise for its artistic style and compelling storytelling . In their book , Digital Culture : Understanding New Media , Glen <unk> and Royston Martin perform a case study of BioShock as a critical analysis of video games as an artistic medium . They praised the game for its visuals , sound , and ability to engage the player into the story . They viewed BioShock as a sign of the " coming of age " of video games as an artistic medium . 
 In February 2011 the Smithsonian Institution announced it would be holding an exhibit dedicated to the art of video games . Several games were chosen initially and the public could vote for which games they felt deserved to be displayed via a poll on the exhibit 's website . BioShock was considered a front runner to be displayed because of its status as a game that demonstrated how artistic the medium can be . 
 = = = PC technical issues and DRM = = = 
 The initial Windows release was criticized by players for several perceived shortcomings . The game was shipped with SecuROM copy protection that required activation from 2K Games ' servers over the Internet ; the unavailability of these servers was reported as the reason for the cancellation of the game 's midnight release in Australia . Players found that the SecuROM limited the number of times the game could be activated to two ; user feedback led to 2K Games to increase the activation count to five , and later offer a tool that allowed users to revoke previous activations on their own . Ultimately 2K Games removed the activation limit , though retail versions of the game still required the activation process . Levine admitted that their initial approach to the activation process was malformed , harming their reputation during the launch period . 
 The SecuROM software also caused some virus scanners and malware detector to believe the software was malicious . 2K Games assured players that the software installation process did not install any malicious code or <unk> However , players observed that some of the SecuROM software was not fully removed on <unk> of the game . 
 Some of the graphic capabilities of BioShock were also criticised by players . The initial release of the game was found to use a field of view ( FOV ) in widescreen that presented a smaller view compared to the game running at a 4 : 3 screen resolution , conflicting with original reports from a developer on how widescreen would have been handled . Though the choice of FOV was a design decision made during development , Irrational included an option for " Horizontal FOV Lock " in the December 2007 patch that allows widescreen users a wider field of view , without cutting anything off the image vertically . BioShock was also criticized for not supporting pixel shader <unk> video cards ( such as the Radeon <unk> / <unk> ) , which were considered high @-@ end graphics cards in 2004 – 2005 , and accounted for about 24 % of surveyed hardware collected through Valve 's Steam platform at the time of BioShock 's release . 
 On July 8 , 2014 , 2K Games released a DRM @-@ free version of BioShock on the Humble 2K Bundle , and then re @-@ released on the Humble Store . 
 = = Related media = = 
 = = = Sequels = = = 
 In response to the game 's high sales and critical acclaim , Take @-@ Two chairman Strauss Zelnick revealed in a conference call to analysts that the company now considered the game as part of a franchise . He also speculated on any follow @-@ ups mimicking the development cycle of Grand Theft Auto , with a new release expected every two to three years . 2K 's president Christoph Hartmann stated that BioShock could have five sequels , comparing the franchise to the Star Wars movies . 
 BioShock 2 was announced in 2008 , with its development being led by 2K Marin . Levine stated that Irrational ( then 2K Boston ) was not involved in the game 's sequel because they wanted to " swing for the fences " and try to come up with something " very , very different " , which was later revealed as BioShock Infinite . BioShock 3 was also announced , with its release assumed to likely coincide with the BioShock film . BioShock 2 takes place about ten years following the events of the first game . The player assumes the role of Subject Delta , a precursor of the Big Daddies who must search the fallen city of Rapture for his former Little Sister , Eleanor . BioShock 2 was released for Windows PC , Mac , Xbox 360 , and the PlayStation 3 worldwide on February 9 , 2010 . 
 While BioShock Infinite , developed by Irrational Games and released in 2013 , shares the name and many similar gameplay concepts with BioShock , the title is not a sequel or prequel in story , instead taking place aboard the collapsing air @-@ city of Columbia in the year 1912 , and following former Pinkerton agent Booker DeWitt as he tries to rescue a woman named Elizabeth from the dystopia it has become . Infinite involves the possibilities of multiple universes , and one scene during the game take place at the lighthouse and bathysphere terminus of Rapture as part of this exploration , though any direct canonical connection is not given in the main game . The episodic expansion , Burial at Sea , takes place in Rapture in 1959 , prior to the war between Atlas and Ryan , while continuing the story of Booker and Elizabeth . This content links the two stories while providing expansion on the causes and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes events alluded to by the in @-@ game background from BioShock . 
 After completing BioShock Infinite and its expansion , Levine announced that he was restructuring Irrational Games to focus on smaller , narrative @-@ driven titles . 2K Games continues to hold on to the BioShock intellectual property and plans to continue to develop games in this series , considering the framework set by Levine and his team as a " rich creative canvas " for more stories . 
 = = = Limited edition = = = 
 Following the creation of a fan petition for a special edition , Take @-@ Two stated that they would publish a special edition of BioShock only if the petition received 5 @,@ 000 signatures ; this number of signatures was reached after just five hours . Subsequently , a poll was posted on the 2K Games operated Cult of Rapture community website in which visitors could vote on what features they would most like to see in a special edition ; the company stated that developers would take this poll into serious consideration . To determine what artwork would be used for the Limited Edition cover , 2K Games ran a contest , with the winning entry provided by Crystal Clear Art 's owner and graphic designer Adam Meyer . 
 On April 23 , 2007 , the Cult of Rapture website confirmed that the Limited Collector 's Edition would include a 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) Big Daddy figurine ( many of which were damaged due to a dropped shipping container ; a replacement initiative is in place ) , a " Making Of " DVD , and a soundtrack CD . Before the special edition was released , the proposed soundtrack CD was replaced with The Rapture EP . 
 = = = Printed media = = = 
 BioShock : Breaking the Mold , a book containing artwork from the game , was released by 2K Games on August 13 , 2007 . It is available in both low and high resolution , in PDF format from 2K Games 's official website . Until October 1 , 2007 , 2K Games was sending a printed version of the book to the owners of the collector 's edition whose Big Daddy figurines had been broken , as compensation for the time it took to replace them . On October 31 , 2008 , the winners of " Breaking the Mold : Developers Edition Artbook Cover Contest " were announced on <unk> 
 A prequel novel , titled BioShock : Rapture written by John Shirley , was published July 19 , 2011 . The prequel book details the construction of Rapture and the events leading to its demise . The book follows multiple BioShock characters . 
 = = = Cancelled film = = = 
 Industry rumors after the game 's release suggested a film adaptation of the game would be made , utilizing similar green screen filming techniques as in the movie 300 to recreate the environments of Rapture . On May 9 , 2008 , Take Two announced a deal with Universal Studios to produce a BioShock movie , to be directed by Gore Verbinski and written by John Logan . The film was expected to be released in 2010 , but was put on hold due to budget concerns . On August 24 , 2009 it was revealed that Verbinski had dropped out of the project due to the studio 's decision to film overseas to keep the budget under control . Verbinski reportedly feels this would have hindered his work on Rango . Then Juan Carlos <unk> was in talks to direct with Verbinski as producer . 
 In January 2010 the project was in pre @-@ production stage , with director Juan Carlos <unk> and Braden Lynch , a voice artist from BioShock 2 both working on the film . By July the film was facing budget issues but producer Gore Verbinski said they were working it out . He also said the film would be a hard R. Ken Levine , during an interview on August 30 , 2010 , said : " I will say that it is still an active thing and it 's something we are actively talking about and actively working on . " Verbinski later cited that by trying to maintain the " R " rating , they were unable to find any studios that would back the effort , putting the film 's future in jeopardy . 
 Levine confirmed in March 2013 that the film has been officially cancelled . Levine stated that after Warner 's Watchmen film in 2009 did not do as well as the studio expected , they had concerns with the $ 200 million budget that Verbinski had for the BioShock film . They asked him to consider doing the film on a smaller $ 80 million budget , but Verbinski did not want to accept this . Universal then subsequently brought in a new director to work with the smaller budget , but Levine and 2K Games did not feel that the new director was a good fit with the material . Universal then let Levine make the decision to end the project , which he did believing that the film would not work with the current set of compromises they would have had to make . In January 2014 , artwork from the cancelled film surfaced online , showing what an adaptation could have looked like . 
 = Scottish crest badge = 
 A Scottish crest badge is a heraldic badge worn to show allegiance to an individual or membership in a specific Scottish clan . Crest badges are commonly called clan crests , but this is a misnomer ; there is no such thing as a collective clan crest , just as there is no such thing as a clan coat of arms . 
 Crest badges consist of a crest and a motto / slogan . These elements are heraldic property and protected by law in Scotland . Crest badges may be worn by anyone ; however , those who are not entitled to the heraldic elements within , wear a crest badge surrounded by a strap and buckle . Those who own the heraldic elements within , may wear a crest badge surrounded by a plain circlet . The strap and buckle represents that the wearer is a follower of the individual who owns the crest and motto . 
 Crest badges are commonly worn by members of Scottish clans . These badges usually consist of elements from the clan chief 's coat of arms . Clan members who wear their chief 's crest and motto surrounded by a strap and buckle , show they are a member of the chief 's clan ( family ) . There are established clans that do not have chiefs recognised by the Lord Lyon King of Arms . In such cases clan members sometimes wear the crest badge of the last known chief . Some clans wear crest badges derived from the arms of individuals who were never recognised as clan chiefs . Although " clan crests " are commonly bought and sold , the heraldic crest and motto belong to the chief alone and never the individual clan member . 
 Crest badges , much like clan tartans , do not have a long history , and owe much to Victorian era romanticism , having only been worn on the bonnet since the 19th century . The original badges used by clans are said to have been specific plants worn in bonnets or hung from a pole or spear . 
 = = Introduction = = 
 Although the term " clan crest " is most commonly used , it is a misnomer . There is in fact no such thing as a clan crest . Although it is possible to purchase " clan crests " , and the crest badge itself can be owned by a clan member , the heraldic crest and motto of the badge belong to the chief alone and never the clan member . The crest and motto within and are the sole property of the chief , and clan members are only permitted to wear the badge in a show of allegiance to their clan and clan chief . It is illegal for a clan member to <unk> the chief 's crest and motto in acts such as decorating silverware and inscriptions on signet rings and jewellery . In short , coats of arms , crests and mottos are the personal property of one person only , and in terms of " clan crests " they are the property of the clan chief . 
 Crest badges are specifically used for people to wear , and are made out of silver or white metal . When illustrated , crest badges should only be printed in monochrome , and should not coloured . Women are entitled to wear the crest badge as a brooch , generally worn on the left side , and as such the crest badge may be of gold . 
 There are established clans which do not have a chief recognised by the Lord Lyon King of Arms . In such cases , clan members usually wear a crest badge which contains the crest and motto of the last known chief . However , there are instances where such clans wear crest badges which are based upon the arms of someone who was never a recognised clan chief . For example , Clan Macfie , which current does not have a chief , uses a crest badge which is derived from the arms of one of the first two Macfies who registered Arms at Lyon Court . Another clan — Clan MacEwen — whose chiefly line has been <unk> since the 15th century , has a crest badge containing the crest and motto of a baronet bearing the surname McEwen . Oddly enough , the McEwen Baronets may not have any actual link with the main Clan MacEwen at all . Another instance is the crest badge of Clan MacInnes . This crest badge is based upon a modern coat of arms of an armigerous clan member , not a clan chief . 
 According to the English officers of arms John Martin Robinson and Thomas Woodcock , crests have played a relatively insignificant role in Scottish heraldry when compared to English heraldry . In consequence many Scottish armigers , including clan chiefs , have comparatively similar crests to one another . Because of this , crest badges can sometimes show an obvious association with another clan . For example , clans associated with the Chattan Confederation share very similar crest badges bearing wild cats . Clans associated with Clan MacTavish — Clan Campbell of Breadalbane , Clan MacIver and Clan Campbell — use a crest badges which contain similar crests and mottoes that allude to that of the chief of Clan MacTavish . 
 = = = Who is entitled to wear a crest badge ? = = = 
 A person does not need to be a member of a clan society to be able to wear a crest badge . Any clan member has a right to it , not just clan societies and clan society members . According to the Court of the Lord Lyon clan membership goes with the surname . Although , today many people who do not bear a clan surname do wear crest badges of their mother 's clan , and anyone who offers their allegiance to a clan chief is a member of a clan ( unless the chief decides to refuse that person 's allegiance ) . Many people bear names that , while not actual clan surnames , are sept names or associated names of certain clans . Surnames such as Smith , Wright , Fletcher , and Miller are examples as such names that are associated names of many clans ( as every clan would have its own smiths , wrights , <unk> and millers ) . It is up to the individual to explore their personal ancestry and discovery the correct clan that they belong to . 
 = = Elements = = 
 Scottish crest badges may contain the following elements : 
 = = Wearing the crest badge = = 
 Clan chiefs , clan chieftains , armigerous clan members , and un @-@ armigerous clan members may wear crest badges . However , there are differences in the type of crest badge they wear . 
 = = = Clan chiefs = = = 
 A clan chief is the head of his or her clan / family , and is the <unk> of the family 's founder . A clan chief must be recognised as such by the Lord Lyon King of Arms , and must possess the undifferenced arms of their name . 
 Clan chiefs may wear their crest <unk> , that is without being encircled by the motto and without any feathers . It is more common , however , for a clan chiefs to wear their own personal crest within a plain circlet inscribed with their motto or slogan ( pictured left ) . The chief 's crest badge does not contain the strap and buckle that other clan members are permitted to wear . Clan chiefs are also entitled to wear three eagle feathers behind the circlet of their crest badge . On certain occasions , such as clan gatherings , it may be appropriate to use real eagle feathers . Clan chiefs that are members of the British Peerage or a feudal baron are entitled to wear the appropriate coronet or baronial chapeau above the circlet on their crest badge , though this is a matter of personal preference . 
 = = = Clan chieftains = = = 
 Clan chieftains are the <unk> of large branches of a Scottish clan . They are officially recognised as clan chieftains by the Lord Lyon King of Arms . 
 Clan chieftains , like clan chiefs , may wear their own personal crest within a plain circlet inscribed with their own motto or slogan . Clan chieftains may also wear two small eagle feathers ( unlike the chief 's three ) . On certain occasions real eagle feathers may be worn behind the crest badge . If a clan chieftain is a member of the British Peerage or a feudal baron they are permitted to wear the appropriate coronet or baronial chapeau above the circlet on their crest badge . Recently feudal barons have taken to wearing two eagle feathers behind their armiger 's badge but there is no ancient tradition of this and it is solely based upon the fact that anciently feudal barons were most likely to have been chiefs or chieftains . If the feudal baron is a member of a clan it is advisable to consult the clan chief on clan customs and traditions . The Lord Lyon only gives guidance and not governance on the wearing of feathers and recommends consulting with a clan chief who approves the number of feathers worn by members of the clan . 
 Clan chieftains may also wear the crest badge of their chief in the same manner as an un @-@ armigerous clan member ( see Un @-@ armigerous clan members below ) . 
 = = = <unk> clan members = = = 
 In terms of Scottish Heraldry , an armiger is someone who has registered his or her own coat of arms , or has inherited a coat of arms according to the Laws of Arms in Scotland from an ancestor who had arms recorded in the Lyon Register . 
 <unk> , like clan chiefs and chieftains , may wear their own personal crest within a plain circlet inscribed with their own motto or slogan . <unk> are permitted to wear one silver eagle feather behind the circlet ( or on certain occasions a real eagle feather ) . If an Armiger is a member of the British Peerage or a feudal baron they are permitted to wear the appropriate coronet or baronial chapeau above the circlet on their crest badge . If an Armiger is a member of a Scottish clan he or she may wear the crest badge of their chief , however it must be encircled by a strap and buckle ( see Un @-@ armigerous clan members below ) . 
 = = = Non @-@ armigerous clan members = = = 
 Members of Scottish clans are considered , by the Court of the Lord Lyon , to be relatives of their clan chief . They can be either immediate family or extended family . Clan members can also be people who only bear the " clan surname " or a sept name associated with the clan . The Court of the Lord Lyon has also stated that anyone who professes allegiance to both the clan and its chief can be considered a clan member . All clan members may wear the chief 's crest encircled by a strap and buckle inscribed with their chief 's motto or slogan . The strap and buckle symbolises the membership to the clan and allegiance to the clan chief . 
 = Tales of Innocence = 
 Tales of Innocence ( Japanese : テイルズオブイノセンス , Hepburn : Teiruzu Obu Inosensu ) is an action role @-@ playing video game , developed and released for the Nintendo DS and PlayStation Vita . Innocence is the ninth main installment in the Tales series , developed by Alfa System and published by Bandai Namco Games . It was released in December 2007 . A remake for the Vita developed by 7th Chord , Tales of Innocence R ( テイルズオブイノセンス <unk> , Teiruzu Obu Inosensu Āru ) , was released in January 2012 . Multiple elements are carried over from previous entries in the series , including the action @-@ based Linear Motion Battle System . Innocence R includes both an updated battle system and additional story content . Both versions remain exclusive to Japan . 
 Both Innocence and Innocence R focus on Luca , a merchant 's son who encounters a fugitive named Illia . In rescuing her , he discovers he has inherited supernatural powers from his past life . He teams up with Illia and multiple others who have gained similar powers from past lives . The group become involved in the wars consuming the world , along with events pertaining to their past lives and the future of their world . 
 Innocence began production in 2006 at Alfa System as the next main entry in the Tales series . Developed parallel to the DS spin @-@ off title Tales of the Tempest , the goal was to include all the series ' main gameplay and narrative elements despite the limited medium . The character designs were done by Mutsumi Inomata , while the music was composed by series newcomer Kazuhiro Nakamura . Extensive voice acting was included using CRI Middleware 's Kyuseishu Sound Streamer compression algorithm . After release , it was decided to remake Innocence for the Vita , using platform @-@ specific gameplay functions , redone voice work and music , and new characters . Japanese singer @-@ songwriter Kokia created the opening theme songs for both versions of Innocence . Both versions have been positively received in Japan , and Western opinions on the two versions of Innocence have been mostly positive . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As with previous entries in the Tales series , Tales of Innocence is an action role @-@ playing video game . The player navigates overworld and town environments , and enters a separate arena @-@ like area during battle . The characters and environments are represented using full 3D graphics and models . Characters gain experience levels using experience points , gained by completing quests and fighting . Side @-@ quests separate from the main narrative can be taken through guilds in various parts of the overworld . As the player completes side @-@ quests , guilds level up with the character , providing extra materials and items . Guilds level up as players complete quests for them , and some of the game 's dungeons are directly linked to guild quests . Guilds are also used to communicate with other players using the Nintendo DS ' wireless function . Multiplayer allows two players to cooperate in battle . During navigation , extra plot @-@ related or casual conversations with characters called Skits can be triggered by the player . Some character interactions used a choice @-@ based " bonding " system , where a dialogue choice is offered while conversing with another character or during certain story scenes : choosing the right response increases the bond with a character , granting both items and special boons in battle . 
 As with previous games , Innocence uses an retouched version of the " Linear Motion Battle System " ( LMBS ) , a battle system involving direct control of characters similar to a fighting game . The version used is called the " Dimension Stride LMBS " . Full range of movement is available , and when enemies are launched into the air by attacks , characters can jump up after them and continue attacking . Three characters are controllable in battle , with one controlled by the player and two handled by the game 's artificial intelligence ( AI ) . There are standard attacks , and more powerful moves called Artes . The player can switch between characters instantly . By stringing attacks together into long combos or successfully defending against attacks , characters charge up their tension gauge . When fully charged , the selected character enters an " awakened " state , allowing their attacks to deal more damage . This state can be maintained as long as the player continues to successfully attack and defend without taking hits . If the right buttons are pressed during this period , the character teams up with the other two and unleashes powerful Artes . In addition to these standard and special attacks , each character can activate Mystic Artes , transforming into a form resembling their past selves to deal high amounts of damage . Defeated enemies drop items and currency that the player must collect before they fade or the battle ends . Whereas previous titles had set roles for characters in battle such as healing or ranged attacks , Innocence allows full customization of both the AI @-@ controlled characters ' rough roles and their detailed behavior . Materials gathered in exploration and battle can be fused with the weapons . Different fusions can both make the weapon stronger and grant special abilities , such as poisoning the enemy while striking it . 
 Innocence R uses altered and improved features and elements from the original , including character displays , the " awakened " character state , and the skit , title , grade and cooking systems . The dungeons are rebuilt , featuring new puzzle elements , switches and the need to push boulders to form pathways and unblock passages . An extra dungeon tied into the extra story content is also added . The game uses an altered battle system under the name " Direct Interface LMBS " , which includes a fourth playable character . During battle , the characters can be directly commanded using the PlayStation Vita 's touch screen . A second Mystic Arte is included for the old characters and two new ones introduced for the two extra characters . After each battle , characters earn Ability Points ( AP ) . AP are used in each character 's skill tree by purchasing abilities and stat boosts . Each character has their own unique skill trees . Another additional element is the " Rave Gauge " : players can line up different artes in the battle menu , then unleash them all at once on an enemy during battle . An arena is also open to players , where cameo characters from previous Tales titles can be fought . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The world of Innocence is divided between the " divine " world of Devaloka ( divided between the regions of Sensus and Ratio ) and the lower human world of Naraka . As Devaloka needed human souls to survive , the Sensus general Asura decided to use the Manifest , an artifact created by the ancient Primordial Giant , to merge Devaloka and Naraka . This plan was opposed by many , leading to war between Sensus and Ratio . Asura was aided by the <unk> Inanna , Orifiel and Sakuya ; his sentient sword Durandal ; and his dragon companion Vrtra . Asura eventually won , defeating the Ratio general Hypnos in battle . Before he could use the Manifest , Inanna betrayed and stabbed him with Durandal . He kills her before he dies , leaving the unification of Devaloka and Naraka unfinished . Most of Devaloka 's population is killed in the process , with the others eventually dying years later . In the present , Naraka is governed by the imperial capital of Regnum and the western country of Garam , who are in a state of war . Added to this is the emergence of " avatars " , <unk> reincarnated in human form who hold supernatural powers . They are hunted and inducted into Regnum 's military and used for experimentation or as front line troops in the war . 
 The story begins when Luca Milda , the reincarnation of Asura , encountering another avatar Illia <unk> , an avatar of Inanna . She is being chased by agents of Regnum . Luca decides to protect her , awakening his supernatural powers . The two are eventually captured and forced to become fighters on the front lines along with swordsman Spada <unk> , the reincarnation of Durandal . During their time as prisoners , Luca develops a relationship with Chitose <unk> , who is a reincarnation of Sakuya and retains her former self 's deep love for Asura . Luca , Illia and Spada eventually escape , briefly encountering the mercenary Ricardo <unk> , who is a reincarnation of Hypnos . The three are eventually joined by Ricardo , along with Ange Serena and Hermana <unk> , the respective reincarnations of Orifiel and Vrtra . During their travels across the war @-@ torn land , they are confronted by avatars in the service of multiple nations , and Arca , a cult made up of avatars led by a woman known as Mathias . Chitose joins Arca to further their cause of a utopia for avatars , and tries to persuade Luca to join , causing a rift between them . The conflicts between the groups is further inflamed as more people regain their memories as warriors of Sensus or Ratio , sparking old conflicts . During their adventures , the group work to end the fighting and learn about their past lives . When the full truth is revealed , they decide to fulfill Asura 's wishes and unite the two worlds . This brings them into conflict with Mathias , who is revealed to be the incarnation of Asura 's wrath at being betrayed , and now wishes to destroy both Devaloka and Naraka . Chitose , consumed by Sakuya 's love for Asura , helps Mathias in her task . The party confront Mathias and Chitose in Devaloka 's ruined capital , where the Manifest is hidden . They defeat Mathias , and Chitose kills herself in a fit of despair . Luca then proceeds to use the Manifest to merge Devaloka and Naraka , nullifying the avatars ' powers and lessening the chance of future conflicts . The group then returns to their normal lives . 
 Innocence R mostly preserves the story of Innocence , while adding two further characters : a <unk> named QQ <unk> , and a spellcaster named Kongwai Tao . These two belong to different worlds , and enter the world of Innocence through the so @-@ called " <unk> Gate " . Kongwai came to " save " two souls ( Chitose and the antagonist Hasta <unk> , a reincarnation of the demonic spear <unk> ) , while QQ is an archeologist who comes to investigate the world of Innocence . Each enters and leaves the world while leaving the main events mostly unaltered . While they appear to be on friendly terms , a second playthrough reveals that they are bitter enemies who have been playing a " friendship game " while in the world of Innocence . As they return to their world , they part ways , with QQ swearing to kill Kongwai the next time they meet . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Luca Milda ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Ruka <unk> ) is a merchant 's son living in the capital city of Regnum . A student with high school grades , he is naturally shy and often teased by his classmates . He is the reincarnation of the <unk> Asura ( <unk> ) , general of the Sensus army . Luca is voiced by Akiko Kimura , and Asura is voiced by Rikiya Koyama . 
 Iria <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Iria <unk> ) is an honest and independent village girl who was forced to flee from the Regnum authorities after her powers awaken . She is accompanied by Coda , one of a race called " <unk> " who follows her in order to eat nice food . Illia is the reincarnation of Inanna ( <unk> ) , a former ally of Asura . Illia is voiced by Yuko <unk> , and Inanna is voiced by Atsuko Tanaka . 
 Spada <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a swordsman from <unk> , a former noble who was rejected by his family . Spada is the reincarnation of Asura 's sentient sword and companion Durandal ( <unk> ) . Both characters are voiced by Yuji Ueda . 
 Ricardo <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a marksman and mercenary who is initially forced to fight Luca , Illia and Spada . Raised in the middle of war , he is a professional type who takes his job seriously . He is the reincarnation of the Ratio general Hypnos ( <unk> ) . Both characters are voiced by Hiroaki Hirata . 
 Ange Serena ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Anju Serena ) is a priestess who takes in and cares for avatars , using her powers to heal the sick and wounded , earning the nickname of " saint " . She acts as an older sister figure to Luca . She is the reincarnation of Orifiel ( <unk> ) , a strategist who defected from Ratio to Sensus . <unk> is voiced by Kaori <unk> , and Orifiel is voiced by Tomokazu Sugita . 
 Hermana <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a street urchin who looks after war orphans in Regnum 's sewers . Despite her deprived upbringing , she holds a positive outlook on life . She is the reincarnation of Vrtra ( <unk> ) , an ancient dragon who raised Asura . Both characters are voiced by Yuki Matsuoka . 
 QQ <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) and Kongwai Tao ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Tao ) are two characters introduced in Innocence R. Both traveled from other worlds . While Kongwai is a reserved spellcaster on a secretive mission , QQ is an outgoing , self @-@ proclaimed archeologist fascinated by the technology of Innocence 's world . Kongwai is voiced by Kenji Nojima , and QQ is voiced by Saki Fujita . 
 = = Development = = 
 Planning and early development of Innocence began between March and April 2006 , with full development beginning in late 2006 to early 2007 . Total development time came to roughly a year and a half . It was being developed at the same time as Tales of the Tempest , another Tales title for the DS , as the next main entry in the Tales series , as opposed to Tempest which would become a spin @-@ off title . While Tempest was conceived as a " compact " version of a Tales title , Innocence was designed to include all the elements expected from a mainline console title , meaning it was created with very different development goals . Rather than by established Tales developer Namco Tales Studio , Innocence was developed by Alfa System , a Japanese studio that had previously worked on the first two Tales of the World spin @-@ off titles . They were chosen to work on the game because of their previous successful efforts with these spin @-@ offs . It was the company 's first title for the DS . While developing the title , the team drew on previous difficulties suffered while developing Tempest to promote a smoother development and better final product . The team tweaked the battle system used for the title so that it felt fresh to series veterans while still retaining its identity . One of these aspects was the new character growth system , which relied on customization more than gaining levels in a linear fashion through experience ; the theme behind the creation of this system was " a more profound battle with wider frontage " . The team incorporated an updated version of the free @-@ running ability from Tales of the Abyss so players could have maximum freedom in battle . 
 The game 's title was inspired by Luca 's portrayal as an innocent young boy thrust into the world 's troubles . Luca himself was portrayed as a shy and introverted type , unlike many previous Tales protagonists , which were portrayed as outgoing and confident . As well as themes of coexistence common in the Tales series , the team incorporated aesthetics and motifs from the late 19th and early 20th centuries . The characters were designed by regular Tales artist Mutsumi Inomata , who almost turned down the offer to work on the title due to scheduling conflicts . She created the cast of Innocence at the same time as that of Tales of Hearts , leading to difficulties with her workload . Inomata 's brief was not to emphasise the characters ' status as heroes , with Luca being deliberately drawn and designed as a physically weak character . As with previous games , Innocence was given a characteristic genre name . The name for Innocence was Omoi o <unk> RPG ( <unk> ? , RPG To Tie Thoughts Together ) . This name was carried over into Innocence R. The game 's opening was animated by long @-@ time collaborator Production I.G. Innocence was first announced at a special event in July 2007 , alongside ports of Tales of Rebirth and Tales of Destiny as well as Tales of Symphonia : Dawn of the New World for the Wii . Innocence did not receive a localization , remaining a Japan @-@ exclusive title . Despite this , a fan translation group working under the name " Absolute Zero " created an patch for the game that both translated the text , and fixed bugs and glitches . 
 = = = Innocence R = = = 
 At a much later date , members of the team decided to remake Innocence , as fan feedback had pointed out many features they had wanted to include despite putting all that was possible into Innocence . Controlling the characters using the PlayStation Vita 's touch screen was included for ease of play , although gameplay features using the Vita 's other functions was considered during development . Innocence R was developed by Japanese developer 7th Chord . Innocence R was a ground @-@ up remake , with the " R " in the title standing for " re @-@ imagination " , referring to the team 's development wish for the gameplay and story . Everything from the coding to the animation was redone . The team hoped that the game would provide a boost to the sales of its prospective platform . Inomata returned in her role as character designer for the new characters , while Mika Murakita joined <unk> as a producer . New opening and in @-@ game anime cutscenes were created by Production I.G. Development overlapped with the Vita remake of Hearts , with staff from Innocence R also working on Hearts R. 
 The existence of Innocence R was first revealed through information from a leaked issue of V Jump about the Tales games that were scheduled to appear at the 2011 Tokyo Game Show . The game 's teaser site was officially unveiled shortly after this . The first details and gameplay footage were shown to the public during the show alongside Tales of the Heroes : Twin Brave . Innocence R was heavily promoted by the company , with one campaign involving playing out an animated skit using the outdoor monitors around Shibuya Station . As with the original , Innocence R has not received a localization , making it one of three mainline Tales titles not to be released in the west . The decision not to localize it was influenced by poor marketing feedback from western territories . Later , during an interview involving Hearts R and Tales of Xillia 2 , series producer Hideo Baba stated that while the game was never intended for localization , if Hearts R sold well , a localization could be considered . 
 = = Audio = = 
 Voice acting in Tempest was restricted to battles . Dissatisfied with this approach , the developers wanted to have full voice acting for Innocence while keeping as many planned features in the game as possible . After some trial and error , and on the verge of scrapping voice acting altogether , the team used CRI Middleware 's Kyuseishu Sound Streamer compression algorithm to fit the voice acting into the game alongside the other features . The team first learned of the algorithm in May 2006 , when the first prototype of Innocence had already been built . The inclusion of the algorithm forced the team to scrap elements of the first build and restart development . The new prototype was completed in November 2006 . The predicted amount of voice recording was estimated at 120 minutes . The final product included 40 minutes more than that . According to Ōdate , approximately 70 @-@ 80 % percent of the main scenario was voiced , with the rest of the game 's dialogue using text due to hardware limitations . The voice work took up one gigabit of storage space on the DS card . For Innocence R , the voice acting was re @-@ recorded , with the entire main scenario being voiced . This enabled minor changes to character portrayals , as in the case of Kimura when she was redoing Luca 's lines : according to her , she worked to inject a little more energy into Luca 's voice . For the two new characters , the team created a fictional language called the " <unk> Language " , which the characters ' actors sometimes had trouble speaking . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for Innocence was composed by Kazuhiro Nakamura , who had previously worked on the Time Crisis and Tekken series . The tracks were arranged with the help of <unk> Sawachika . For his work on the game , Nakamura chose a different style of music from that of Motoi Sakuraba , who had handled the majority of previous Tales titles : he used ethnic music to distinguish it from earlier games . For the battle music , he used Sakuraba 's battle compositions as a reference while keeping to his own style . The remixed and additional music for Innocence R was again handled and composed by Nakamura . 
 The theme song for Innocence , " Follow the Nightingale " , was created and sung by Japanese singer @-@ songwriter Kokia . She was asked on board by the game 's staff as they were favorably impressed by her voice . While composing the song , she was allowed to draw inspiration from storyboards and early footage . The theme and lyrics of " Follow the Nightingale " tie in with the characters ' status as people reincarnated in the game 's present , focusing on the main protagonist Luca asking why they were reborn . As with some of her earlier songs , she wrote some parts of it in code , with Kokia herself describing them as " perplexing riddle words " . For Innocence R , Kokia was brought in again and asked to create a different opening number , " New Day , New Life " . For this song , Kokia drew from the opening sequence , where Luca wakes from dreaming of his past life and opens the window . Unlike " Follow the Nightingale " , " New Day , New Life " was written entirely in standard Japanese , as she wanted to fully convey Luca 's feelings in the song , along with those of Kongwai . 
 The official soundtrack album , Tales of Innocence Original Soundtrack Another Innocence ( テイルズ オブ <unk> オリジナルサウンドトラック <unk> ) , was released on December 19 , 2007 . It did not enter the Oricon charts . Reviews of the soundtrack have been mixed to positive . Bryan Matheny , in a review published by Game @-@ OST , said that while the music would satisfy Tales fans , it felt Nakamura had missed the chance of doing something different in the vein of Tales of Legendia . RPGFan 's Patrick Gann called the album " solid " , and noted several tracks that stood out including the battle and overworld themes . Despite this , he felt that it was " forgettable " compared to other Tales soundtracks . " Follow the Nightingale " was released on November 21 , 2007 as a single alongside Innocence 's ending song " say goodbye & good day " . It reached # 33 in the Oricon charts , and remained in the charts for nine weeks . " New Day , New Life " was released on January 25 , 2012 . It reached # 29 in the charts , and remained for four weeks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Prior to release , Innocence was reporting to be one of the most pre @-@ ordered role @-@ playing title at Amazon Japan alongside Xbox 360 exclusive Lost Odyssey . The game received an initial shipment of 160 @,@ 000 copies , with projected sales estimated at 150 @,@ 000 . Innocence reached # 3 in the Japanese sales charts after Wii Fit and Mario Party DS , with estimated opening sales of 104 @,@ 000 copies . After the first week , sales dropped dramatically , selling only 28 @,@ 000 units the following week . Ultimately , Innocence was considered a success by the company , selling approximately 246 @,@ 000 copies and exceeding their sales forecasts for the title . Innocence R reached # 3 in the Japanese sales charts in its opening week , coming behind Armored Core V and Resident Evil : Revelations and selling 54 @,@ 853 copies . By July of that year , Innocence R was the sixth best @-@ selling title for the Vita , with total sales of 74 @,@ 718 copies . 
 Famitsu praised Innocence 's high @-@ polygon character models , and the story and characters , which were generally engaging and entertaining . Gameplay was also praised , with the increased freedom of movement in battle being positively noted , along with the breadth of character customization available . Some minor points came in for criticism , such as parts of the game that would be difficult for newcomers , and a lack of explanation for some parts of the story . The score given by the magazine was noted as being the highest given by Famitsu to a Tales game up to that point . Paul Koehler of RPGamer , writing up his impression of the game at TGS 2007 , was favorably impressed , calling map navigation " fluid " and saying that the graphics were " one of the better offerings at the show on the DS . " Cubed3 's Adam Riley was generally positive during his hands @-@ on preview . He called the game 's quality acting " amazingly high " , praised the amount of voice acting , and saw it as " one of the better @-@ rounded titles in the franchise so far . " Comparing the game to Tempest , he said that Innocence made the previous DS game " look amateur in nature . " RPGFan 's Neal Chandran shared many points of praise with Riley , saying that the game promised to be " both a high quality RPG for Nintendo 's DS and a high quality entry to this prolific RPG series . " 
 Innocence R was also well received by Famitsu . General praise to the graphical upgrade over the original version , the rebuilt battle system and added voice acting and story content . Japanese website Game Impress Watch was highly positive , praising the extra characters , updated gameplay and graphics . One minor reservation was that some aspects might be a little difficult or complex for players . The reviewer 's closing comment was that it was a role @-@ playing game they would " recommend to anyone " . Abraham Ashton Liu of RPGFan was fairly mixed about some aspects of it . While he found aspects of comparing the characters ' past and present lives and enjoyed the gameplay and side @-@ characters , he generally found the lead characters irritating . He also found the graphics rather poor for the Vita and saw some gameplay elements as archaic or poorly tuned . In March 2013 , Famitsu ranked the top games of 2012 , and Innocence R reached 13th place . In July 2014 , Innocence R was ranked by Japanese website Inside Games among the top ten popular role @-@ playing games for the Vita . 
 = = Additional media = = 
 Multiple pieces of media have been created either to promote or complement the game before and after release . To promote the original title 's release , the company created an " Adventure Voice DVD " , featuring multiple characters from previous Tales games . Multiple books were created after the game 's release , including three guidebooks , a two @-@ part novel adaptation released between January and March 2008 , and a three @-@ part weekly series of instruction guidebooks released between November 30 and December 30 , 2007 . The guidebooks contain gameplay hints , concept art and staff interviews . The game was also adapted into a two @-@ part audio drama . Titled Tales of Innocence Drama CD ( テイルズオブイノセンス <unk> , Teiruzu Obu Inosensu Dorama CD ) , the two volumes were released on June 25 and July 25 , 2008 . 
 Shortly after the release of Innocence R , Bandai Namco developed and released a free smartphone app and released it through iTunes on January 27 , 2012 . The app allowed users to play selected songs from Innocence R , as well as view concept art and character profiles . A rhythm game was also included for the tunes , allowing players to post their scores on Twitter . <unk> R was adapted into a manga . It was collected into a single volume and released on May 25 , 2012 as Tales of Innocence R Comic Anthology ( テイルズオブイノセンス R コミックアンソロジー , Teiruzu Obu Inosensu R Komikku Ansorojī ) . 
 = CMLL World Light Heavyweight Championship = 
 The CMLL World Light Heavyweight Championship ( Campeonato Mundial Semi Completo de CMLL in Spanish ) is a professional wrestling world heavyweight championship promoted by Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( CMLL ) since 1991 . As it is a professional wrestling championship , it is not won via legitimate competition ; it is instead won via a scripted ending to a match or on occasion awarded to a wrestler because of a storyline . The official definition of the light heavyweight division in Mexico is between 92 kg ( 203 lb ) and 97 kg ( 214 lb ) , but the weight limits are not always strictly adhered to . Because CMLL puts more emphasis on the lower weight classes , this division is considered more important than the heavyweight division , which is considered the most important championship by most promotions outside of Mexico . 
 The current CMLL World Light Heavyweight Champion in his first reign is La Máscara , who won it by defeating Ángel de Oro on April 8 , 2016 . La Máscara is the 15th overall champion and the 13th wrestler to officially hold the championship . The title has been vacated only once since its creation in 1991 , and has had one unofficial reign . 
 = = History = = 
 The Mexican professional wrestling promotion Empresa Mexicana de Lucha Libre ( EMLL ) was founded in 1933 and initially recognized a series of " Mexican National " wrestling championships , endorsed by the Comisión de Box y Lucha Libre Mexico D.F. ( Mexico City Boxing and Wrestling Commission ) . The Mexican National Light Heavyweight Championship was created in 1942 as EMLL began promoting matches for that championship with the approval and oversight of the wrestling commission . In the 1950s EMLL became a member of the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) and began promoting the NWA World Light Heavyweight Championship in the late 1950s . Previously that championship had been promoted in the US , but the NWA gave EMLL full control of the championship in 1958 , positioning the NWA title as the highest @-@ ranking title in the light heavyweight division with the Mexican National title positioned as the secondary championship . 
 In the late 1980s EMLL left the NWA to avoid the politics of the NWA and later rebranded themselves as " Consejo <unk> de Lucha Libre " ( CMLL ) . In 1991 CMLL decided to create a series of CMLL @-@ branded world championships , with the CMLL World Light Heavyweight Championship ( Campeonato Mundial Semi Completo de CMLL in Spanish ) created as the second CMLL @-@ branded championship , after the CMLL World Heavyweight Championship . Jerry Estrada was chosen as the first champion , with CMLL booking the tournament for the championship to end with Estrada defeating Pierroth Jr . In 1996 the then @-@ champion Dr. Wagner Jr. lost the championship to Aquarius on a show in Japan , but the title change was not approved by CMLL and thus was never officially recognized . Dr. Wagner Jr. won the title back eight days later before returning to Mexico . Since the title change was not officially recognized CMLL considers Dr. Wagner Jr. a two @-@ time champion , not a three @-@ time champion . 
 On January 15 , 2013 , then @-@ reigning champion Rush voluntarily gave up the CMLL World Light Heavyweight Championship as part of his ongoing storyline feud with then @-@ CMLL World Heavyweight Champion El Terrible . As part of the storyline El Terrible stated that he would not defend against someone who represented a lower weight class so Rush moved into the Heavyweight division for a title match . CMLL held a 16 @-@ man torneo cibernetico elimination match to determine which two wrestlers should compete in the finals for the vacant title . On January 29 , 2013 , Rey Escorpión defeated Volador Jr. in the tournament finals to become the 13th overall champion . 
 = = Reigns = = 
 La Máscara is the current CMLL World Light Heavyweight Champion in his first reign , since defeating Ángel de Oro on April 8 , 2016 . Overall , there have been 15 reigns shared between 13 wrestlers , which does not include one unofficial reign by Aquarius . Only two men have held the title more than once ; both Dr. Wagner Jr. and Atlantis have officially held the title twice . Dr. Wagner Jr. has the longest combined reigns with 1 @,@ 574 days , and Último Guerrero holds the record for the longest individual reign with 3 years , 213 days . Because Aquarius ' eight @-@ day reign in 1996 is not officially recognized by CMLL , the current champion La Máscara , at 109 days and counting , is the shortest reigning champion . If he remains the champion until October 2 , 2016 , he will surpass Estrada 's 175 @-@ day reign . Not only was Último Guerrero 's reign the longest of any individual reign , he is also credited with a record 28 successful championship defenses . 
 On one occasion CMLL declared the championship vacant , which meant that there was no champion for a period of time . Sometimes , a championship is vacated due to an injury to the reigning champion , or when a champion stops working for the promotion , but in the case of the CMLL World Light Heavyweight Championship , there was a storyline reason behind it being declared vacant . In late 2013 the light heavyweight champion Rush was working a long @-@ running storyline rivalry with El Terrible . When El Terrible won the CMLL World Heavyweight Championship CMLL decided to enhance the rivalry by having Rush voluntarily give up the light heavyweight championship in order to receive a CMLL World Heavyweight Championship match against El Terrible . This allowed CMLL to advance the storyline as well as move the championship off Rush without having Rush lose a match , allowing Rey Escorpión to become the next champion . 
 = = Rules = = 
 The official definition by the Mexican lucha libre commission for the light heavyweight division in Mexico is between 92 kg ( 203 lb ) and 97 kg ( 214 lb ) . In the 20th century CMLL were generally consistent and strict about enforcing the actual weight limits . In the 21st century the official definitions have at times been overlooked for certain champions . One example of this was when Mephisto , officially listed as 90 kg ( 200 lb ) , won the CMLL World Welterweight Championship , a weight class with a 78 kg ( 172 lb ) upper limit . Although the heavyweight championship is traditionally considered the most prestigious weight division in professional wrestling , CMLL places more emphasis on the lower weight divisions , often promoting those ahead of the CMLL World Heavyweight Championship . 
 With twelve CMLL @-@ promoted championships labelled as " World " titles , the promotional focus shifts from championship to championship over time with no single championship consistently promoted as the " main " championship ; instead CMLL 's various major shows feature different weight divisions and are most often headlined by a Lucha de Apuestas ( " Bet match " ) instead of a championship match . From 2013 until June 2016 only two major CMLL shows have featured championship matches , Sin Salida in 2013 and the 2014 Juicio Final show featuring the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship . The last time a CMLL World Light Heavyweight Championship match was featured on a major CMLL show was on September 18 , 2004 , when Último Guerrero successfully defended the title at the CMLL 71st Anniversary Show . Championship matches usually take place under best two @-@ out @-@ of @-@ three falls rules . On occasion single fall title matches have taken place , especially when promoting CMLL title matches in Japan , conforming to the traditions of the local promotion . Outside of CMLL , the light heavyweight championship has been defended on joint CMLL / Universal Wrestling Association ( UWA ) shows in 1993 , on W * ING , Big Japan Wrestling , <unk> and New Japan Pro Wrestling shows in Japan . 
 = = Tournaments = = 
 = = = 1991 = = = 
 CMLL held a 16 @-@ man tournament from September 15 to October 26 , 1991 to crown the first light heavyweight champion . Documentation on Pierroth Jr . ' s path to the finals has not been found . 
 Tournament brackets 
 = = = 2013 = = = 
 CMLL held a tournament to determine the next CMLL World Light Heavyweight Champion starting on January 22 , 2013 , and the finals were held the following week . The first round of the tournament was a 16 @-@ man torneo cibernetico elimination match , with the last two men in the match qualifying for the finals the following week on January 29 . The torneo featured two teams of eight wrestling against each other ; Team A consisted of Delta , El Felino , La Máscara , Mephisto , Mr. Águila , Rey Escorpión , Stuka Jr. and Volador Jr. and Team B consisted of Atlantis , Blue Panther , Diamante , Euforia , Maximo , <unk> , Psicosis and Sagrado . The match came down to Team A 's Rey Escorpión and <unk> Jr. versus Team B 's Euforia . Escorpión pulled off Volador Jr . ' s mask and threw it to rival Euforia , causing Euforia to be disqualified , which meant that Escorpión and Volador Jr. qualified for the finals the following week . On January 29 , Escorpión defeated Volador Jr. in the finals to become the 13th overall CMLL World Light Heavyweight champion . 
 Cibernetico order of elimination 
 = Goodison Park = 
 Goodison Park is a football stadium located in Walton , Liverpool , England . The stadium has been home to Premier League club Everton F.C. since its completion in 1892 and is one of the world 's oldest purpose @-@ built football grounds . The stadium is built in a residential area served by regular rail and bus services two miles ( 3 km ) from Liverpool city centre . 
 Goodison has undergone many changes over the years and it presently has an all @-@ seated capacity of 39 @,@ 572 . Everton fans refer to the stadium as " The Grand Old Lady " and the abridged " Goodison " . 
 It has hosted more top @-@ flight games than any other stadium in England . Goodison has hosted the maximum number of league games since the Premier League was formed in 1992 , as Everton have remained in the top tier of English football since 1954 . The club has only been outside the top division for four seasons , having only been relegated twice ( in 1930 and 1951 ) . 
 As well as hosting Everton games , the stadium has been the venue for an FA Cup Final and numerous international fixtures , including several in the 1966 FIFA World Cup . The record for the highest attendance in women 's football was set at Goodison Park in 1920 , which stood for 92 years until 31 July 2012 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Before Goodison Park = = = 
 Everton originally played on an open pitch in the south @-@ east corner of the newly laid out Stanley Park , the same site where Liverpool F.C. planned a stadium , however abandoned the project . The first official match took place in 1879 . In 1882 , a Mr J. <unk> donated land at Priory Road with the necessary facilities required for professional clubs . <unk> asked the club to leave his land after two years because the crowds became far too large and noisy . 
 Everton moved to nearby Anfield Road , a site where proper covered stands were built . Everton played at the Anfield ground from 1884 until 1892 . During this time the club turned professional and entered teams in the FA Cup . They became founding members of the Football League and won their first championship at the ground in 1890 – 91 . Anfield 's capacity grew to over 20 @,@ 000 and the club hosted an international match between England and Ireland . During their time at Anfield , Everton became the first club to introduce <unk> to professional football . 
 In the 1890s , a dispute about how the club was to be owned and run emerged with John Houlding , Anfield 's majority owner and Everton 's Chairman , at the forefront . Houlding and the club 's committee initially disagreed about the full purchase of the land at Anfield from minor land owner Mr Orrell escalating into a principled disagreement of how the club was run . Two such disagreements included Houlding wanting Everton to sell only his brewery produce during an event and for the Everton players to use his public house The Sandon as changing room facilities . 
 The most famous of the disagreements concerns the level of increased rent Everton were asked to pay . In 1889 , Everton paid £ 100 to Houlding in rent and by the 1889 – 90 season he was charging Everton £ 250 . Everton had to pay for all work and stands . The dispute escalated to a rent of £ 370 per year being demanded . In the complicated lead up to the split in the club , the rent dispute is too simplistic to be singled out as the prime cause . The dispute was compounded by many minor disputed points . 
 The flashpoint was a covenant in the contract of land purchase by Houlding from Orrell causing further and deep friction . A strip of land at the Anfield ground bordering the adjacent land owned by Mr Orrell , could be used to provide a right of way access road for Orrell 's landlocked vacant site . In early 1891 the club erected a stand on this now proposed roadway , which was also overlapping Orrell 's land , unbeknown to the Everton F.C. Committee . In August 1891 Orrell announced intentions of developing his land next to the football ground and building an access road on the land owned by Houlding and occupied by Everton F.C. 
 Everton F.C. stated they knew nothing of the covenant , Houlding stated they did . This situation created great distrust and friction between Houlding and the Everton F.C. Committee . The rift and distrust between the committee and Houlding was on three levels , Houlding 's personal business intentions , politically and morally . Nevertheless , the club faced a dilemma of having to destroy the new revenue generating stand or compensate Orrell . 
 Houlding 's way around the problem was to propose a limited company with floatation of the club enabling the club to purchase Houlding 's and Orrell 's land outright , hoping to raise £ 12 @,@ 000 . Previous attempts to raise money from the community had failed miserably . This would have meant the club would need to find £ 6 @,@ 000 in cash with an additional £ 4 @,@ 875 mortgage . The Everton Committee initially accepted Houlding 's proposal in principle , yet voted against it at a meeting . 
 After much negotiating and brinkmanship on both sides Everton vacated Anfield , leaving Houlding with an empty stadium and no one to play in it . As a consequence , Houlding formed his own football club , Liverpool , to take up residence at the stadium . 
 The clubs themselves have differing versions of events of why it occurred . 
 Houlding explained why this situation arose in a match programme against Cliftonville in April 1893 . He pointed out that he had given Everton a rent free loan until the club started to make money . If the club had gone bust he would have lost it all . 
 Despite making no profit in this respect , the issue that upset the members at Everton most was his plan to sell Anfield and the land adjoining , with Houlding himself profiting . He felt it was a reasonable reward for the risk he had ventured in the club for nine years . Houlding , as the ambitious businessman he was , saw a great future for the club . He wanted the club to have its own home ground and wanted them to buy land so the club could expand in due course . 
 Unfortunately most of the Everton FC board members failed to share his forward thinking and lacked confidence . They wanted instead a long term rent deal on all the land , but for this to be acceptable to Houlding , he wanted a rent at a price considered too high for the Club . The members reacted to that by " offering " Houlding less rent . Houlding unsurprisingly refused to accept this stating that he did not want to be dictated : " I cannot understand why a gentleman that has done so much for the club ( Everton ) and its members should be given such treatment " . 
 During their spell at Anfield , John Houlding decided to charge the Club rent based on the increase of gate receipts from attendances and not , as was previously the case , at a fixed rate . 
 " This – along with other conflicts with Everton – led to the Club being expelled from Anfield in 1892 and in need of a new home .... fully expecting Houlding to dismiss Everton from their Anfield home , he [ George Mahon ] acquired land on a patch off Stanley Park called ' Mere Green Field ' and also made sure that the Club kept their name . " 
 = = = Genesis of Goodison Park = = = 
 On 15 September 1891 , a general meeting took place at Royal Street Hall , near Everton Valley . Everton 's chairman John Houlding proposed that a limited company be formed and that the company should purchase his land and local brewer Joseph <unk> 's adjacent land for a combined £ 9 @,@ 237 . A club run as a limited company was unusual for the time as football clubs were usually run as “ sports clubs ” with members paying an annual fee . The proposal was supported by William Barclay , the club secretary and a close friend of Houlding . 
 Liberal Party politician and Everton board member George Mahon fought the proposal and put forward his own amendment which was carried by the Everton board . At the time Everton 's board contained both Conservative and Liberal Party councillors . Houlding and Mahon had previously clashed during local elections . 
 Both men agreed that Everton should operate as an limited company ; however , they had different ideas about share ownership . Houlding suggested that 12 @,@ 000 shares be created with each Everton board member given one share and the other shares sold to the public or Everton board members . Mahon disagreed and proposed that 500 shares be created with no member carrying more than 10 shares and board members being given " 7 or 8 " shares . Mahon reasoned " we would rather have a large number of individual applications so that there will be more supporters of the club . " 
 A special general meeting was convened at the former Liverpool College building on Shaw Street on 25 January 1892 . John Houlding 's proposal was defeated once more and George Mahon suggested that Everton relocate to another site . A heckler shouted , " You can 't find one ! " Mahon responded " I have one in my pocket " revealing an option to lease Mere Green field , in Walton , Lancashire , the site of the current Goodison Park . 
 The Liverpool press were partisan . The proposal was deemed to be a positive move for the club by the Liberal @-@ leaning Liverpool Daily Post which described Houlding 's ousting as " having shaken off the incubus . " The Tory @-@ supporting Liverpool Courier and Liverpool Evening Express — owned by Conservative MP for Everton , John A. <unk> , a Trustee of the Licensed Victuallers ' and Brewers ' Association — took Houlding 's side . The Courier published letters regularly criticising Mahon 's supporters — many of which were anonymous . Philanthropist William Hartley , a jam manufacturer and Robert William Hudson , a prominent soap @-@ manufacturer supported Mahon . 
 The stadium was named Goodison Park because the length of the site was built against Goodison Road . The road was named after a civil engineer named George Goodison who provided a sewage report to the Walton Local Board in the mid @-@ 1800s and later became a local land owner . 
 The Mere Green field was owned by Christopher Leyland with Everton renting until they were in a position to buy the site outright . Initially , the field needed work as parts of the site needed excavation , the field was levelled , a drainage system was installed and turf was laid . This work was considered to be a ' formidable initial expenditure ' with local contractor Mr Barton contracted to work on the 29 @,@ 471 square yards ( 25 @,@ 000 m2 ) site at 4 ½ d per square yard — a total cost of £ 552 . A J. Prescott was brought in as an architectural advisor and surveyor . 
 Walton @-@ based building firm Kelly Brothers were instructed to erect two uncovered stands that could each accommodate 4 @,@ 000 spectators . A third covered stand accommodating 3 @,@ 000 spectators was also requested . The combined cost of these stands was £ 1 @,@ 640 . Everton inserted a penalty clause into the contract in case the work was not completed by its 31 July deadline . Everton officials were impressed with the builder 's workmanship and agreed two further contracts : exterior hoardings were constructed at a cost of £ 150 and 12 turnstiles were installed at a cost of £ 7 each . In 1894 , Benjamin Kelly of Kelly Brothers was appointed as a director of Everton . 
 Dr. James Baxter of the Everton committee donated a £ 1 @,@ 000 interest @-@ free loan to build Goodison Park . The stadium was England 's first purpose @-@ built football ground , with stands on three sides . Goodison Park was officially opened on 24 August 1892 by Lord Kinnaird and Frederick Wall of the Football Association . No football was played ; instead the 12 @,@ 000 crowd watched a short athletics event followed by music and a fireworks display . Upon its completion the stadium was the first joint purpose @-@ built football stadium in the world ; Celtic 's basic Celtic Park ground in Glasgow , Scotland was inaugurated on the same day as Goodison Park . 
 The first football match at Goodison Park was on 2 September 1892 between Everton and Bolton Wanderers . Everton wore its new club colours of salmon and dark blue stripes and won the exhibition game 4 – 2 . The first league game at Goodison Park took place on 3 September 1892 against Nottingham Forest ; the game ended in a 2 – 2 draw . The stadium 's first competitive goal was scored by Forest 's Horace Pike and the first Everton goal scored by Fred Geary . Everton 's first league victory at their new ground came in the next home game with a 6 – 0 defeat of Newton Heath in front of an estimated 10 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 It was announced at a general meeting on 22 March 1895 that the club could finally afford to buy Goodison Park . Mahon revealed that Everton were buying Goodison Park for £ 650 less than the price of Anfield three years earlier , with Goodison Park having more land and a 25 % larger capacity . The motion to purchase Goodison Park was passed unanimously . Dr. Baxter also lent the club £ 5 @,@ 000 to redeem the mortgage early at a rate of 3 ½ % . By this time the redrawing of political boundaries put Walton , and hence Goodison Park , inside the City of Liverpool . 
 In 1999 , The Independent newspaper journalist David Conn unexpectedly coined the nickname " The Grand Old Lady " for the stadium when he wrote " Another potential suitor has apparently thought better of Everton , walking away on Tuesday from the sagging Grand Old Lady of English football , leaving her still in desperate need of a makeover . " 
 = = = Structural developments = = = 
 The Goodison Park structure was built in stages . In the summer of 1895 a new Bullens Road stand was built and a roof placed on the original Goodison Road stand but only after five directors , including Chairman , George Mahon had resigned over what was described in the club minutes as ' acute administrative difficulties ' . In 1906 , the doubled @-@ decker Goodison Avenue Stand was built behind the goal at the south end of the ground . The stand was designed by Liverpool architect Henry Hartley who went on to chair the Liverpool Architectural Society a year later . The club minutes from the time show that Hartley was unhappy with certain aspects of the stand and the poor sightlines meant that the goal line had to be moved seven metres north , towards Gwladys Street . In January 1908 , he complained that his fees had not been paid and the bill for the stand was near £ 13 @,@ 000 . There were 2 @,@ 657 seats on its upper tier with a terrace below . 
 Archibald Leitch designed the Goodison Road Stand with construction in 1909 . In September that year Ernest Edwards , the Liverpool Echo journalist who christened the terrace at Anfield the " Spion Kop " , wrote of the newly built stand , " The building as one looks at it , suggests the side of Mauretania at once . " The stand was occasionally referred to as the " Mauretania Stand " , in reference to the Liverpool @-@ registered RMS Mauretania , then the world 's largest ship , which operated from the Port of Liverpool . 
 The two @-@ tier steel frame and wooden floor Bullens Road Stand , designed by Archibald Leitch , was completed in 1926 . The upper tier was seated , with terracing below , a part of the ground called The Paddock . Few changes were made until 1963 when the rear of the Paddock was seated and an overhanging roof was added . The stand is known for Archibald Leitch 's highly distinctive balcony trusses which also act as handrails for the front row of seats in the Upper Bullens stand . Goodison Park is the only stadium with two complete trusses designed by Leitch . Of the 17 created , only Goodison Park , Ibrox and Fratton Park retain these trusses . 
 Everton constructed covered dugouts in 1931 . The idea was inspired by a visit to Pittodrie to play a friendly against Aberdeen , where such dugouts had been constructed at the behest of the Dons ' trainer Donald Colman . The Goodison Park dugouts were the first in England . 
 The ground become an entirely two @-@ tiered affair in 1938 with another Archibald Leitch stand at the Gwladys Street end . The stand completed at a cost of £ 50 @,@ 000 , being delayed because an old man would not move from his to be demolished home . The original Gwladys Street having had terraced houses on either side , with those backing on to the ground making way for the expansion . Architect Leitch and Everton Chairman Will Cuff became close friends with Cuff appointed as Leitch 's accountant with Leitch moving to nearby Formby . 
 In 1940 , during the Second World War , the Gwladys Street Stand suffered bomb damage . The bomb had landed directly in Gwladys Street and caused serious injury to nearby residents . The bomb splinter damage to the bricks on the stand is still noticeable . The cost of repair was £ 5 @,@ 000 and was paid for by the War Damage Commission . 
 The Director 's minutes read : " It was decided also that Messrs A. Leitch be instructed to value the cost of complete renewal of damaged properties and that a claim should be forwarded to the War Damage Claims department within the prescribed 30 days . 
 " The damage referred to included the demolition of a wide section of the new stand outer wall in Gwladys St , destruction of all glass in this stand , damage to every door , canteen , water and electricity pipe and all lead fittings : perforate roof in hundreds of places . 
 " On Bullens Road side , a bomb dropped in the school yard had badly damaged the exterior wall of this stand and the roof was badly perforated here also . A third bomb outside the practice ground had demolished the surrounding hoarding and had badly damaged glass in the Goodison Ave and Walton Lane property . " 
 The first floodlit match at Goodison Park took place when Everton hosted Liverpool on 9 October 1957 in front of 58 @,@ 771 spectators . Four pylons 185 feet ( 56 m ) each with 36 lamps installed were installed behind each corner of the pitch , at the time they were tallest in the country . There was capacity for 18 more lamps per pylon if it was felt the brightness was insufficient for the game . Each bulb was a 1 @,@ 500 watt tungsten bulb 15 inches in diameter and cost 25 shillings . It was recommended that the club made a habit of changing them after three to four seasons to save the club performing intermittent repairs . <unk> installed a transformer sub @-@ station to cope with the 6 @,@ 000 volt @-@ load . 
 The first undersoil heating system in English football was installed at Goodison Park in 1958 , with 20 miles ( 30 km ) of electric wire laid beneath the playing surface at a cost of £ 16 @,@ 000 . The system was more effective than anticipated and the drainage system could not cope with the quantity of water produced from the melting of frost and snow . As a consequence the pitch had to be relaid in 1960 to allow a more suitable drainage system to be installed . 
 The Everton chairman Sir John Moores who presided over the club between 1960 and 1973 provided finances for the club in the form of loans to become involved in large @-@ scale redevelopment projects and compete with other clubs for the best players , for a period of time under his stewardship Everton were known as ' The Mersey Millionaires ' . 
 Goodison Park featured in the filming of The Golden Vision , a BBC film made for television . The matches featured in the film were Division One games against Manchester City on 4 November 1967 ( 1 – 1 draw ) and 18 November 1967 versus Sheffield United ( 1 – 0 win ) — the scorer of the winner that day was Alex Young , also known as The Golden Vision or Golden Ghost after whom the film was named . 
 Everton were the first club to have a scoreboard installed in England . On 20 November 1971 Everton beat Southampton 8 – 0 with Joe Royle scoring four , David Johnson three and Alan Ball one . The scoreboard did not have enough room to display the goal scorer 's names and simply read " 7 9 7 9 8 9 9 7 " as it displayed the goal scorers ' shirt numbers instead . 
 The Goodison Road Stand was partially demolished and rebuilt during the 1969 – 70 season with striking images of both old and new stands side by side . The new stand opened 1971 , at a cost of £ 1 million . The new stand housed the 500 and 300 members clubs and an escalator to the tallest stand in the ground — the Top Balcony . However , not everyone thought that the upgrade was necessary at the time . Journalist Geoffrey Green of The Times wrote " Goodison Park has always been a handsome fashionable stage for football , a living thing full of atmospherics @-@ like a theatre . And now it has stepped into the demanding seventies with a facelift it scarcely seemed to need compared with some of us I know . New giant stands in place of the old ; the latest in dazzling floodlight systems that cast not a shadow . A cathedral of a place indeed , fit for the gods of the game . " 
 The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 saw the Bullens Road Stand extensively fireproofed with widened aisles , which entailed closure of parts of the stand . Because of the closure , Anfield was chosen over first choice Goodison Park for a Wales vs. Scotland World Cup qualifying tie . 
 Following Moores ' exit from Everton 's hierarchy , minimum changes have been made to Goodison Park 's structure due to costs , two British Government Acts ; the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and Football Spectators Act 1989 have forced the club 's hand into improving the facilities . Upon Moore 's death the club was sold to Peter Johnson . 
 Everton legends William Ralph ' Dixie ' Dean and former manager Harry Catterick both died at Goodison Park . Dean suffered from a heart attack aged 73 in 1980 , whilst Catterick died five years later , also suffering a heart attack aged 65 . 
 Everton F.C. celebrated the centenary of Goodison Park with a game against German club side Borussia Mönchengladbach in August 1992 . In addition , 200 limited edition medals were created and Liverpool based author and journalist Ken Rogers wrote a book One Hundred Years of Goodison Glory to commemorate the occasion . 
 = = = Post @-@ Taylor Report = = = 
 Following the publication of the 1990 Taylor Report , in the wake of the Hillsborough disaster , top @-@ flight English football grounds had to become all @-@ seated . At the time three of the four sides of the ground had standing areas . The Enclosure , fronting the main stand , had already been made all @-@ seated in time for the 1987 – 88 season and was given the new name of Family Enclosure . The Paddock , the Park End terrace and the Gwladys Street terrace , known as ' the Ground ' , were standing and had to be replaced . The fences around the perimeter of the ground fronting the terracing ( which were to prevent fans , notably hooligans , running onto the pitch ) were removed immediately post Hillsborough , in time for the rearranged league fixture with Liverpool . The Everton match versus Luton Town in May 1991 was the final time that Gwladys Street allowed standing spectators . Seats were installed in the Paddock , while the Lower Gwladys Street was later completely rebuilt to accommodate seating with new concrete steps . 
 Everton opted to demolish the entire Park End stand in 1994 and replace it with a single @-@ tier cantilever stand , with the assistance of a grant of £ 1 @.@ 3 million from the Football Trust . 
 = = Current structure = = 
 Goodison Park has a total capacity of 39 @,@ 572 all @-@ seated and comprises four separate stands : the Goodison Road Stand , Gwladys Street Stand , Bullens Road Stand , and the Park End Stand . 
 = = = Goodison Road Stand = = = 
 Built in sections from 1969 to 1971 , replacing the large double @-@ decker 1909 Archibald Leitch designed stand . The Goodison Road Stand is a double @-@ decker stand with the lower deck being two @-@ tier . Each level is given a separate name . The middle @-@ deck level is known as the Main Stand and is fronted by another seated section known as the Family Enclosure . The Enclosure was originally terracing prior to the advent of all @-@ seater stadia . The Top Balcony is the highest part of the stadium . The stand became all seated in 1987 and now has a capacity of 12 @,@ 664 . 
 The back wall of the stand cuts into the stand because of the non @-@ square nature of the Goodison Park site . The Goodison Road Stand is also home to the conference and hospitality facilities . On non @-@ match days Goodison Park holds conferences , weddings , meetings and parties on a daily basis . 
 = = = Bullens Road = = = 
 On the east side of the ground , the Bullens Road stand is divided into the Upper Bullens , Lower Bullens and The Paddock . The rear of the south end of the stand houses away supporters . The north corner of the stand is connected to the Gwladys Street Stand . The current capacity of the stand is 10 @,@ 546 . The stand takes its name from the adjacent Bullens Road . The Upper Bullens is decorated with Archibald Leitch 's distinctive truss design . 
 = = = Howard Kendall Gwladys Street End = = = 
 Behind the goal at the north end of Goodison Park , the Gwladys Street Stand is divided into Upper Gwladys and Lower Gwladys . This stand is the " Popular End " , holding the most boisterous and vociferous home supporters . It is known colloquially as " The Street End " . If Everton win the toss before kick @-@ off the captain traditionally elects to play towards the Gwladys Street End in the second half . One of the traditions of the stand is also to applaud the visiting goalkeeper as he runs out to the goal of the stand . The stand has a capacity of 10 @,@ 611 and gives its name to Gwladys Street 's Hall of Fame . 
 = = = Sir Philip Carter Park Stand = = = 
 At the south end of the ground , behind one goal , the Park End Stand backs onto Walton Lane which borders Stanley Park . The name of the stand was originally the Stanley Park End but it 's commonly referred to as the Park End . The single tiered stand broke from the multi @-@ tiered tradition of Goodison Park . The Park End has the smallest capacity at Goodison Park . The current layout of the stand was opened on 17 September 1994 with a capacity of 5 @,@ 750 . It was opened by David Hunt , a Member of Parliament . During the structure 's development , fans were able to watch matches by climbing trees in neighbouring Stanley Park . 
 In the late 1970s and 1980s the stand accommodated the away fans . Previously it was open to home supporters . The lower tier of the old stand was terracing and this was closed off by the turn of the 1980s due to it being a fire hazard as the terracing steps were wooden . The front concrete terracing remained and was one of the last standing areas at a Premiership ground . During the 1960s and 1970s , both ends of the ground featured a large arc behind the goals . This was created as a requirement for the 1966 World Cup because the crowd had to be a required distance from the goals . 
 The area around Goodison Park when built was a dense area full of terraced housing , and Goodison Avenue behind the Park End stand was no different . Oddly housing was built right into the stand itself ( as shown on old photographs of Goodison and in programmes ) . The club had previously owned many of the houses on the road and rented them to players . One of the players to live there , Dixie Dean later had a statue erected in his honour near the Park End on Walton Lane . By the 1990s the club had demolished virtually the whole street and this coincided with the redevelopment of the Park End stand . However at present the majority of the land is now an open car park for the club and its Marquee . 
 = = = St Luke 's Church = = = 
 Goodison Park is unique in the sense that a church , St Luke 's , protrudes into the site between the Goodison Road Stand and the Gwladys Street Stand only yards from the corner flag . Everton do not play early kick @-@ offs on Sundays in order to permit Sunday services at the church . The church is synonymous with the football club and a wooden church structure was in place when Goodison Park was originally built . Former Everton players such as Brian Harris have had their funeral service held there . 
 The church can be seen from the Park End and Bullens Road and has featured prominently over the years as a backdrop during live televised matches . It is also the home to the Everton Former Players ' Foundation of which the Reverend is a trustee . 
 The church has over the years curtailed development of the ground . Everton did attempt to pay for its removal in order to gain extra space for a larger capacity . One of two jumbotron screens ( both installed in 2000 ) has been installed between the Goodison Road stand and Gwladys Street stand partially obscuring the church from view . The other is situated between the Bullens Road and Park End . 
 Imaginative spectators would climb the church and watch a football game from the rooftop however they have now been deterred from doing so with the installation of security measures such as barbed wire and anti @-@ climb paint . In addition , the introduction of the ' all @-@ seater ' ruling following the Taylor Report has meant that spectators no longer resort to climbing nearby buildings for a glimpse of the event as a seat is guaranteed with a purchased ticket . 
 = = The future = = 
 Since the late 1990s the board of Everton have been seeking a new , alternative stadium to replace Goodison Park . Plans for a possible relocation were first mentioned in 1996 , when then chairman Peter Johnson announced his intention to build a new 60 @,@ 000 @-@ seat stadium for the club . At the time , no English league club had a stadium with such a high capacity . 
 In January 2001 , plans were drawn up to move to a 55 @,@ 000 @-@ seat purpose @-@ built arena on the site of the King 's Dock in Liverpool . The proposed stadium would have had a retractable roof enabling it to be used for concerts and chairman Bill Kenwright had hoped to have it ready for the 2005 – 06 season . 
 However , the plans were abandoned in April 2003 due to the club not being able to raise adequate funds . Following this , plans were made to move to Kirkby , just outside the city , in a joint venture with the supermarket chain Tesco . The scheme was greatly divisive amongst supporters and local authorities , but was rejected in late November 2009 following a decision by Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government . 
 The site of Goodison Park was earmarked in 1997 and 2003 for a food store by Tesco who offered £ 12 million which was valued at £ 4 million for the site but Liverpool City Council 's advisor 's advised against allowing planning permission . The club were advised that the planning permission required would not necessarily be granted , and chose not to take the scheme further . 
 Supporters ' groups have fought against the club moving to a new stadium twice . In 2007 a group was established called Keep Everton in Our City ( <unk> ) whose aim is to keep Everton FC inside the city of Liverpool . The <unk> attempted to prevent the club moving to a new stadium in Kirkby , just outside the city limits . The supporters ' groups have argued that it is possible to expand Goodison Park , despite the odd shaped landlocked site being surrounded by housing , local authority buildings , and have produced image renders , architectural drawings and costings for a redeveloped Goodison Park . The then Liverpool City Council leader Warren Bradley stated in November 2009 that a redevelopment of Goodison Park was his favoured option , and that relocation of the homes , infrastructure and businesses in streets adjoining the ground is " not a major hurdle " . The current Council leader Joe Anderson stated , " the setback for Everton was an opportunity for both clubs to go back to the drawing board " . 
 Everton 's current position regarding the future of Goodison Park is that they are considering all options , including relocation , redevelopment of the current ground , or a groundshare with Liverpool F.C. , in a new , purpose @-@ built stadium in Stanley Park , stressing that finance is the main factor affecting decision @-@ making . 
 In 2010 , Everton supporters approached University of Liverpool and Liverpool City Council to initiate a dedicated ' Football Quarter ' / ' Sports City ' zone around Goodison Park , Stanley Park and Anfield . The University and City Council met with the North West Development Agency , Everton and Liverpool F.C. representatives but no further action has been taken . 
 On 10 February 2011 , Liverpool City Council Regeneration and Transport Select Committee proposed to open the eastern section of the Liverpool Outer Loop line using " Liverpool Football Club and Everton Football Club as priorities , as economic <unk> of the project " . This proposal would place both football clubs on a rapid @-@ transit Merseyrail line circling the city giving high throughput , fast transport access . This would entail Liverpool FC abandoning the relocation plans from their Anfield ground to the planned nearby Stanley Park Stadium . 
 = = = Walton Lane development = = = 
 In August 2010 , Everton announced plans to build a new development situated between the Park End stand and Walton Lane , the site is currently used for a hospitality marquee . The £ 9m scheme was designed by Manchester @-@ based <unk> Architects . In September 2010 the club submitted a planning application to Liverpool City Council . 
 The proposed development is a four @-@ storey building which include a retail store , ticket office , offices , conference and catering facilities and a museum . The project has been delayed twice and is currently on hold . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Goodison Park is located two miles ( 3 km ) north of Liverpool City Centre . Liverpool Lime Street railway station is the nearest mainline station . The nearest station to the stadium is Kirkdale railway station on the Merseyrail Northern Line which is located just over half a mile ( 800 m ) away . On match days there is also a frequent shuttle bus service from Sandhills railway station known as " <unk> " . In 2007 Sandhills underwent a £ <unk> renovation to help encourage people to use the rail service . 
 Walton and Anfield railway station located on Walton Lane — the same road that the Park End backs onto — was the nearest station to Goodison Park until its closure in 1948 . It is possible that the station could be re @-@ opened should the freight only Canada Dock Branch line once again run passenger trains . A new Stanley Park railway station is proposed for nearby Liverpool FC , being near enough for use by both clubs . 
 There are on @-@ site parking facilities for supporters ( limited to 230 spaces ) and the streets around the ground allow parking only for residents with permits . The Car Parking resident parking scheme is operated by Liverpool City Council . 
 = = Records = = 
 Everton has staged more top @-@ flight football games than any other club in England , eight more seasons than second placed Aston Villa . Everton have played at Goodison Park for all but 4 of their 106 league seasons , giving Goodison Park the distinction of hosting more top @-@ flight games than any other ground in England . Goodison is the only English club ground to have hosted a FIFA World Cup semi final . Until the expansion of Old Trafford in 1996 Goodison Park held the record Sunday attendance on a Football League ground ( 53 @,@ 509 v West Bromwich Albion , FA Cup , 1974 ) . 
 Everton won 15 home league games in a row between 4 October 1930 and 4 April 1931 . In the 1931 – 32 season Goodison Park was the venue of the most goals scored at home in a league season , 84 by Everton . Between 23 April 1984 and 2 September 1986 Everton scored consecutively in 47 games . , registering 36 wins and 7 draws and scoring 123 goals in the process while conceding 38 . Scottish striker Graeme Sharp scored 32 of these goals . 
 Jack Southworth holds the record for most goals scored in one game at Goodison Park , scoring six versus West Bromwich Albion on 30 December 1893 . 
 The most goals scored in a game at Goodison Park is 12 , this occurred in two Everton games ; versus Sheffield Wednesday ( 9 – 3 ) on 17 October 1931 and versus Plymouth Argyle ( 8 – 4 ) on 27 February 1954 . 
 = = Attendances = = 
 Whilst at Goodison Park the club has had one of the highest average attendances in the country . The stadium has only had six seasons where Everton FC has not been amongst the top ten highest attendances in the country . 
 The highest average attendance in the club 's history has been 51 @,@ 603 ( 1962 – 63 ) and the lowest was 13 @,@ 230 ( 1892 – 93 ) which was recorded in Goodison Park 's first year . 
 The five highest attendances for Everton at Goodison Park are : 
 Source : 
 The five lowest attendances for Everton at Goodison Park are : 
 Source : 
 = = Other uses = = 
 Despite being purposefully built for Everton F.C. to play football , Goodison Park has hosted many other types of events . 
 = = = Goodison Park as host stadium for football = = = 
 Goodison Park became the first Football League ground to hold an FA Cup Final , in 1894 . Notts County beat Bolton Wanderers , watched by crowd of 37 @,@ 000 . An FA Cup final replay was staged in 1910 with Newcastle United beating Barnsley 2 – 0 . 
 On 26 December 1920 , Goodison Park hosted a match between ; Dick , Kerr 's Ladies & St Helens Ladies . An estimated 53 @,@ 000 attended the match , at a time when the average gate at Goodison Park in 1919 – 20 was near 29 @,@ 000 . Dick , Kerr 's Ladies won 4 – 0 . More than £ 3 @,@ 000 was raised for charity . Shortly after , the Football Association banned women 's football . The reasons given by the FA were not substantial and it is perceived by some that the women 's teams were a threat to the men 's game . The ban was lifted in 1970 . 
 During the Second World War , Goodison Park was chosen as a host venue for the " Football League – Northern Section " . 
 In 1949 , Goodison Park became the site of England 's first ever defeat on English soil by a non @-@ Home Nations country , namely the Republic of Ireland . The ground hosted five matches including a semi @-@ final for the 1966 FIFA World Cup . In April 1895 Goodison Park hosted England versus Scotland and so Everton became the first club to host England internationals on two grounds ( the other being Anfield in 1889 when England won 6 – 2 versus Ireland ) . The city of Liverpool also became the first English city to stage England games at three different venues , the other being Aigburth Cricket Club . 
 In 1973 Goodison hosted Northern Ireland 's home games against Wales and England . 
 = = = = 1966 FIFA World Cup = = = = 
 Goodison Park hosted five games during the 1966 FIFA World Cup . The original schedule of the 1966 World Cup meant that if England won their group and then reached the Semi final , the match would be held at Goodison Park . However , the organising committee were allowed to swap the venues , with England playing Portugal at Wembley Stadium . 
 = = = = = Group stage = = = = = 
 = = = = = Quarter Final = = = = = 
 = = = = = Semi Finals = = = = = 
 Portugal 's Eusébio won the tournament 's Golden Boot scoring nine goals , six of them at Goodison Park . Eusébio later stated that " Goodison Park is for me the best stadium in my life " . In <unk> 's 50 caps for Brazil , the only defeat he experienced was in the game versus Hungary at Goodison Park . 
 = = = = FA Cup Final = = = = 
 Two years after construction , Goodison Park was chosen by the Football Association to host the final of the FA Cup . 
 = = = = British Home championships = = = = 
 = = = = = England = = = = = 
 Goodison Park has played host to England on eight occasions during the Home Championships . When Everton player Alex Stevenson scored for Ireland in the 1935 British Home Championship versus England , he became the first player to score an international away goal on his club 's home ground . 
 = = = = = Northern Ireland = = = = = 
 On 22 February 1973 the Irish Football Association announced that Northern Ireland 's home matches in the 1973 British Home Championship would be moved to Goodison Park due to the civil unrest within Belfast at that time . 
 Both Northern Ireland goalscorers Dave Clements ( vs. England ) and Bryan Hamilton ( vs. Wales ) went on to play for Goodison Park 's club side Everton later on in their careers . 
 = = = = Other neutral matches at Goodison Park = = = = 
 = = = Non @-@ football usage = = = 
 On 11 July 1913 Goodison Park became the first English football ground to be visited by a reigning monarch when King George V and Queen Mary attended . The attending royals had opened Gladstone Dock on the same day . A tablet was unveiled in the Main Stand to mark the occasion . During the First World War Goodison frequently hosted Territorial Army training drill sessions . 
 On 19 May 1938 George VI and Queen Elizabeth attended Goodison Park to present new colours to the 5th Battalion the King 's Regiment ( Liverpool ) and the Liverpool Scottish ( Queens Own Cameron Highlanders ) in front of 80 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 In 1921 , Goodison Park played host to Lancashire 's rugby team when they took on Australia national rugby union team and lost 29 – 6 . Goodison Park was chosen as one of two English venues for the Sox @-@ Giants 1924 World Tour . On 23 October 1924 , 2 @,@ 000 spectators witnessed US baseball teams Chicago White Sox and New York Giants participate in an exhibition match . One player managed to hit a ball clear over the large Goodison Road Stand . The other English venue selected was Stamford Bridge . 
 In September 1939 , Goodison Park was commandeered by military , the club 's minutes read : " The Chairman reported that our ground has been commandeered as an anti @-@ aircraft ( Balloon Barrage section ) , post . " During World War Two , an American forces baseball league was based at Goodison Park . In addition , a baseball game between two Army Air Force nines watched by over 8 @,@ 000 spectators raised over $ 3 @,@ 000 for British Red Cross and St. John 's Ambulance fund . 
 The Liverpool Trojans and Formby Cardinals were the last two teams to play baseball at Goodison Park . This was in the Lancashire Cup Final in 1948 . 
 Goodison Park is used as a venue for weddings . More than 800 fans ' ashes have been buried at Goodison Park and since 2004 the club have had to reject further requests because there is no room for any more . Tommy Lawton wanted his ashes to be scattered at Goodison but his son chose to donate them to the national football museum because of Goodison 's uncertain future . 
 Goodison Park was the venue for the boxing match between " Pretty " Ricky Conlan ( played by Everton fan Tony Bellew ) and Adonis Creed ( Michael B. Jordan ) in the 2015 movie Creed . The stadium hosted the first outdoor boxing event in Liverpool since 1949 when Bellew defeated <unk> <unk> on 29 May 2016 to claim the vacant WBC Cruiserweight title . 
 = Tryon Creek = 
 Tryon Creek is a 4 @.@ 85 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 81 km ) tributary of the Willamette River in the U.S. state of Oregon . Part of the drainage basin of the Columbia River , its watershed covers about 6 @.@ 5 square miles ( 16 @.@ 8 km2 ) in Multnomah and Clackamas counties . The stream flows southeast from the Tualatin Mountains ( West Hills ) through the Multnomah Village neighborhood of Portland and the Tryon Creek State Natural Area to the Willamette in the city of Lake Oswego . Parks and open spaces cover about 21 percent of the watershed , while single @-@ family homes dominate most of the remainder . The largest of the parks is the state natural area , which straddles the border between the two cities and counties . 
 The bedrock under the watershed includes part of the last exotic terrane , a chain of seamounts , acquired by the North American Plate as it moved west during the Eocene . Known as the Waverly Hills Formation , it lies buried under ash and lava from later volcanic eruptions , sediments from flooding and erosion , and layers of wind @-@ blown silt . Two dormant volcanoes from the Boring Lava Field are in the Tryon Creek watershed . 
 Named for mid @-@ 19th century settler , Socrates Hotchkiss Tryon , Sr. , the creek ran through forests of cedar and fir that were later logged by the Oregon Iron Company and others through the mid @-@ 20th century . Efforts to establish a large park in the watershed began in the 1950s and succeeded in 1975 when the state park was formally established . As of 2005 , about 37 percent of the watershed was wooded and supported more than 60 species of birds as well as small mammals , amphibians , and fish . At the same time , the human population was about 18 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Course = = 
 Tryon Creek begins slightly north of Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) and Oregon Route 99W near Multnomah Village and flows southeast for 4 @.@ 85 miles ( 7 @.@ 81 km ) through Portland residential neighborhoods as well as Marshall Park and the Tryon Creek State Natural Area to its confluence with the Willamette River in the city of Lake Oswego . Not far from its source , the main stem runs through three closely spaced culverts with a combined length of 260 feet ( 79 m ) then flows on the surface before entering another culvert , 160 feet ( 49 m ) long under Southwest 30th Avenue at river mile ( RM ) 4 @.@ 56 or river kilometer ( RK ) 7 @.@ 34 . Shortly thereafter , the stream passes under Route 99W ( Barbur Boulevard ) and I @-@ 5 through another culvert , 560 feet ( 170 m ) long . 
 Tryon Creek receives Falling Creek from the right at 4 @.@ 16 miles ( 6 @.@ 69 km ) from the mouth . Quail and Burlingame creeks enter from the right shortly thereafter . At Marshall Park , the stream passes through a series of rock pools and steps known as the Marshall Cascade from RM 3 @.@ 48 ( RK 5 @.@ 60 ) to RM 3 @.@ 28 ( RK 5 @.@ 28 ) . Arnold Creek , which is Tryon Creek 's largest tributary , enters from the right 2 @.@ 68 miles ( 4 @.@ 31 km ) from the mouth . Almost immediately , the creek enters a culvert , about 150 feet ( 46 m ) long , that passes under Southwest Boones Ferry Road . 
 Shortly thereafter , Tryon Creek enters the Tryon Creek State Natural Area . To the stream 's right is the North Creek Trail . Soon the creek receives Fourth Avenue Creek from the left . At this point , the Fourth Avenue Trail runs parallel to the creek along the left bank . This trail soon merges with the Lewis and Clark Trail , which also runs parallel to the creek along the left bank . Then Tryon Creek passes under the High Bridge , the uppermost of five footbridges that span the main stem within the park . High Bridge carries the Middle Creek Trail as well as a linear horse trail connecting the park 's North and South horse loops . Below this bridge , the creek flows for about 0 @.@ 20 miles ( 0 @.@ 32 km ) before passing under the Beaver Bridge . In this stretch , the Middle Creek Trail parallels the stream along the right bank but crosses to the left bank at the bridge . Shortly thereafter , the creek passes under Obie 's Bridge , which carries the Old Man Trail . 
 Park Creek enters from the right at RM 1 @.@ 80 ( RK 2 @.@ 90 ) . Slightly below the confluence , the creek passes under the Red Fox Bridge , which carries the Red Fox Trail . Thereafter , the creek runs roughly parallel to the South Creek Trail , which is on the right for about 0 @.@ 40 miles ( 0 @.@ 64 km ) . The creek receives Red Fox Creek from the right and Palatine Hill Creek from the left , then flows out of Portland and Multnomah County and into the city of Lake Oswego and Clackamas County . The stream then passes under the Iron Mountain Bridge , which carries the Iron Mountain Trail . Just below the bridge , Nettle Creek enters from the right at 1 @.@ 06 miles ( 1 @.@ 71 km ) from the mouth , and shortly thereafter the creek passes a United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) stream gauge , which is on the right . The creek leaves the Tryon Creek State Natural Area just before entering a 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) culvert under Oregon Route 43 at RM 0 @.@ 24 ( RK 0 @.@ 39 ) and soon thereafter a set of Union Pacific Railroad tracks . Below this , Tryon Creek forms the boundary between the city of Lake Oswego and Briarwood , an unincorporated Clackamas County community , which is to the left . The Tryon Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant is on the right during this last stretch before the creek enters the Willamette River about 20 miles ( 32 km ) upstream from its confluence with the Columbia River . 
 = = = Discharge = = = 
 Since 2002 , the USGS has monitored the flow of Tryon Creek at a station 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the mouth . The average flow between 2002 and 2011 was 8 @.@ 72 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 25 m3 / s ) . This is from a drainage area of 6 @.@ 28 square miles ( 16 @.@ 27 km2 ) , about 97 percent of the total Tryon Creek watershed . The maximum flow recorded during this period was 1 @,@ 210 cubic feet per second ( 34 m3 / s ) on December 9 , 2010 . The minimum was 0 @.@ 09 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 0025 m3 / s ) on September 4 , 5 , and 12 , 2002 . 
 = = Geology = = 
 One hundred and fifty million years ago , Oregon did not exist . Not until plate tectonics separated North America from Europe and North Africa and pushed it westward did the continent acquire , bit by bit , what became the Pacific Northwest . Over many millions of years , the continent collided with and incorporated islands , reefs , and other exotic terranes . Part of the last major exotic terrane acquired by the North American Plate during the Eocene lies under the Tryon Creek watershed . The terrane consisted of a chain of seamounts that by 34 million years ago was being uplifted to become the Oregon Coast Range and the Tualatin Mountains ( West Hills ) . The easternmost exposure of the basalts of this terrane is in Waverly Heights , near Milwaukie , across the Willamette River from Tryon Creek , and this formation underlies most of Tryon Creek State Park . 
 Between 15 and 16 million years ago , in the Middle Miocene , eruptions of Columbia River basalts from volcanic vents in eastern Oregon and Washington flowed across much of northern Oregon , sometimes reaching the Pacific Ocean . Although these basalts have been mapped in the West Hills under Marquam Hill , Hoyt Arboretum , and the steepest slopes of Forest Park , they flowed around but did not completely cover the Waverly Hills Formation in the Tryon Creek watershed . 
 Starting about 3 million years ago and continuing at least through the late Pleistocene , extensional faulting of the Earth 's crust led to eruption of small volcanoes in the Boring volcanic field . This field extended roughly from Portland and Tualatin on the west to Battle Ground , Washington , on the north to Sandy and Boring on the east . Two of these volcanoes , Mount Sylvania and Cook 's Butte , are in the Tryon Creek watershed . The Mount Sylvania eruptions included ash plumes and lava flows that covered some of the Waverly Heights Formation and Columbia River basalts . 
 About 15 @,@ 000 years ago , cataclysmic ice age events known as the Missoula Floods or Bretz Floods originating in the Clark Fork region of northern Idaho inundated the Columbia River basin many times . These floods deposited huge amounts of debris and sediment and created new floodplains in the Willamette Valley . Over long stretches of time between the great floods , dry winds deposited silt . At elevations above 300 feet ( 90 m ) in the Tryon Creek watershed , wind @-@ blown silt covers the lava , while at lower elevations sand and gravel cover the bedrock . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The Tryon Creek watershed covers about 4 @,@ 100 acres ( 1 @,@ 700 ha ) or 6 @.@ 5 square miles ( 17 km2 ) . Of this , about 80 percent is within the Portland city limits , and the remaining 20 percent is split among the jurisdictions of the city of Lake Oswego , and the counties of Multnomah and Clackamas . These four overlap with the jurisdiction of the State of Oregon , which owns the natural area . Watersheds that border the Tryon Creek watershed are Fanno Creek to the west and northwest , Stephens Creek to the north , the Willamette River to the east and Oswego Lake to the south . More than 70 miles ( 110 km ) of surface streets , including parts of Interstate 5 , Oregon Route 99W , Oregon Route 43 , Boones Ferry Road , Taylors Ferry Road , and Terwilliger Boulevard , run through the watershed . 
 About 35 inches ( 890 mm ) of precipitation , almost entirely rain , fall on the watershed each year . Summers are dry , and most of the precipitation occurs between October and May . Elevations within the drainage basin vary from Mount Sylvania , which rises to 970 feet ( 300 m ) above sea level in the West Hills , to 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) where the creek enters the Willamette River . Between 60 and 75 percent of the slopes in the watershed exceed a 30 @-@ percent grade and are especially steep near the headwaters . <unk> surfaces cover about 24 percent of the basin . These surfaces and the relatively impermeable silt and clay soils that underlie the area contribute to rapid runoff and low <unk> in the creek and its tributaries . The total length of surface streams in the drainage basin is about 27 miles ( 43 km ) , while another 3 miles ( 5 km ) run through culverts or pipes . Although major flooding in 1996 caused landslides and severe damage to stream beds and banks along Tryon Creek and its tributaries , it caused no significant property damage in the watershed . 
 In 2000 , the population of the Tryon Creek watershed within Portland was about 18 @,@ 000 . In 2005 , Portland 's Bureau of Environmental Services ( BES ) described land @-@ use zoning in the watershed as follows : single @-@ family residential , 55 percent ; parks and open space , 14 percent ; multi @-@ family residential , 5 percent ; commercial , 3 percent , and insufficient data , 2 percent . To reach 100 percent , BES listed but did not differentiate by zoning type the roughly 20 percent of the watershed that lies beyond the Portland city limits . Metro , the regional government for the Portland metropolitan area , says that parks and natural areas cover about 21 percent of the total watershed , while single @-@ family housing dominates most of the rest . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 The major smaller streams in the Tryon Creek watershed are Arnold Creek and Falling Creek . The larger of the two , Arnold Creek , has a watershed of roughly 1 @.@ 2 square miles ( 3 @.@ 1 km2 ) or 18 percent of the 6 @.@ 5 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 17 km2 ) total , while Falling Creek 's watershed covers 0 @.@ 4 square miles ( 1 @.@ 0 km2 ) or 6 percent of the total . The seven named tributaries from mouth to source are Nettle , Palatine Hill , Red Fox , Park , Fourth Avenue , Arnold , and Falling creeks . 
 = = = Water quality = = = 
 Oregon Department of Environmental Quality ( DEQ ) developed the Oregon Water Quality Index ( OWQI ) in the 1970s to rate general water quality at different locations . Scores can vary from 10 ( worst ) to 100 ( ideal ) . Portland 's Bureau of Environmental Services ( BES ) incorporated the OWQI into its monitoring of Tryon Creek in 1997 . As of 2004 , the overall OWQI score for Tryon Creek was 74 or " poor " ; this was slightly better than nearby Fanno Creek at 67 . The State of Oregon listed Tryon Creek as " water @-@ quality limited " in 1998 because water temperatures on the lower 5 miles ( 8 km ) of the main stem as well as on Nettle , Arnold , and Falling creeks exceeded the upper limit for protecting salmonid fish rearing and migratory fish passage during the summer . 
 BES monitors water quality at three Tryon Creek sites . Two are near I @-@ 5 and Barbur Boulevard in the upper watershed , and the third is at Southwest Boones Ferry Road , about 2 @.@ 7 miles ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) from the mouth . BES looks at several indicators such as dissolved oxygen , nutrients , and total suspended solids . Diffuse pollution from nonpoint sources enters the creek from its urban surroundings . Point sources of pollution in the creek include two major upper @-@ watershed stormwater outfalls draining 368 acres ( 149 ha ) of the upper watershed and contributing about half of the creek 's total suspended solids . As of 2004 , the only water @-@ quality indicator in the watershed that failed to meet minimal standards was the water temperature . 
 = = = Annual report card = = = 
 In 2015 , BES began issuing annual " report cards " for watersheds or fractions thereof that lie within the city . BES assigns grades for each of four categories : hydrology , water quality , habitat , and fish and wildlife . Hydrology grades depend on the amount of pavement and other impervious surfaces in the watershed and the degree to which its streams flow freely , not dammed or diverted . Water @-@ quality grades are based on measurements of dissolved oxygen , E @-@ coli bacteria , temperature , suspended solids , and substances such as mercury and phosphorus . Habitat ranking depends on the condition of stream banks and floodplains , riparian zones , tree canopies , and other variables . The fish and wildlife assessment includes birds , fish , and macroinvertebrates . In 2015 , the BES grades for Tryon Creek are hydrology , B ; water quality , B ; habitat , B , and fish and wildlife , C − . 
 = = History = = 
 Multnomah and Clackamas counties were named after groups of Native Americans who lived in the area before settlement by European Americans in the 19th century . Evidence suggests that people lived in the northern Oregon Cascades as early as 10 @,@ 000 years ago . By 2 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 000 years ago , the Clackamas River basin , about 5 miles ( 8 km ) upriver from the mouth of Tryon Creek and on the east side of the Willamette , was home to the Clackamas tribe . They were a subgroup of the Chinookan speakers who lived near the Columbia River from Celilo Falls to the Pacific Ocean . The Clackamas lands included the lower Willamette River from Willamette Falls at what became Oregon City to its confluence with the Columbia River . When Lewis and Clark visited the area in 1806 , the Clackamas tribe consisted of about 1 @,@ 800 people living in 11 villages . Epidemics of smallpox , malaria , and measles reduced this population to 88 by 1851 , and in 1855 the tribe signed a treaty surrendering its lands . Another group of Chinookans , the Multnomahs , lived on Sauvie Island , about 17 miles ( 27 km ) downriver from the mouth of Tryon Creek . Lewis and Clark estimated that 800 Multnomahs inhabited 5 villages on the island in 1806 , but disease reduced them later in the century to near extinction . 
 In 1850 , Socrates Hotchkiss Tryon , Sr. , a pioneer settler of European descent , established a donation land claim at the south end of Tryon Creek canyon . Five years later , he died , leaving the land to his wife , Frances . The land then passed to other relatives , including Socrates Tryon , Jr . , who sold the 645 acres ( 261 ha ) in 1874 to the Oregon Iron Company . For nearly 25 years , the company cut virgin cedar and fir to use in its foundry in Lake Oswego . Its logging road later became Old Iron Mountain Trail in the Tryon Creek State Natural Area . In 1900 , fire in the upper canyon left charred snags still visible along the natural area 's Center and Big Fir trails . 
 Logging resumed in 1912 in the north part of the canyon , where The Boone 's Ferry Wood and Tie Company had a site near what became Alfred Street . A sawmill and steam donkey engine operated near the future sites of Beaver Bridge and Obie 's Bridge . The lumber was used chiefly for railroad ties , <unk> and flagpoles , and left huge cedar stumps that remain in the park . Intermittent logging continued through 1961 , and a 1962 windstorm known as the Columbus Day Storm blew down many remaining trees . 
 Local efforts began in the 1950s to establish a park along the creek , In 1969 , the government of Multnomah County bought 45 acres ( 18 ha ) to start a large regional park and sought citizen assistance with the project . This led to formation of Friends of Tryon Creek Park , which raised funds , helped arrange land deals , worked on problems of jurisdiction in a two @-@ county , two @-@ city park , and sought help from the state . In 1970 , Oregon Governor Tom McCall announced the formation of Tryon Creek State Park . 
 Over the next few years , the state bought more than 600 acres ( 240 ha ) of land for nearly $ 3 million , including federal matching funds . The Friends and the state collaborated in park planning and further fund @-@ raising . In 1973 , more than 300 volunteers built trails , and the nature center and shelter were finished by 1975 . The park was officially dedicated on July 1 , 1975 and later renamed Tryon Creek State Natural Area . 
 = = Vegetation and wildlife = = 
 About 37 percent of the watershed is wooded . Dominant trees are red alder , bigleaf maple , Douglas @-@ fir , western redcedar , and western hemlock . The forest understory in the Tryon Creek State Natural Area includes many trilliums ; they are celebrated each spring during the park 's Trillium Festival . More than 90 species of wildflower such as <unk> are found in the park as well as plants such as sword fern . Invasive species found in many parts of the watershed include English ivy , Himalayan blackberry , English holly , garlic mustard , and western clematis . 
 Riparian zones and floodplains are relatively intact along the lower reaches of the main stem in the state natural area , fairly intact in Marshall Park , and marginal in the upper reaches surrounded by homes . Arnold Creek has riparian corridors wider than 100 feet ( 30 m ) in good condition , while Falling Creek 's riparian zones , surrounded by homes , are in poor condition . Damaged zones from which native vegetation has been removed lead to erosion , stream bank failure , sedimentation , lack of shading , and higher stream temperatures . 
 Tryon Creek is among the few streams in the Portland metropolitan area with a run of steelhead Trout , and coho salmon have been recorded spawning in the creek . Surveys by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife in 2002 found coho , chinook salmon , steelhead , and coastal cutthroat trout in different parts of the creek at different times of the year . None was present in large number . Cutthroat trout had the biggest population , estimated at 53 individual fish during the spring of 2002 . Water striders , which are invertebrates that can walk on water , are common in the pools of Tryon Creek . More than 60 species of birds , including Cooper 's hawks , great blue herons , kingfishers , towhees , waxwings , and wrens frequent the area . Some of the resident mammals are bats , coyotes , moles , rabbits , skunks , and squirrels , while frogs , salamanders , snakes , and turtles also do well in the watershed . 
 = = Parks = = 
 Parks in the Tryon Creek watershed include Tryon Creek State Natural Area , Oregon 's only metropolitan state park . At about 630 acres ( 250 ha ) , the natural area is much larger than the watershed 's other parks . 
 The state park includes a 3 @-@ mile ( 5 km ) bicycle path that runs along Terwilliger Boulevard on the east edge of the park as part of the Portland metropolitan area 's system of greenway trails known as the 40 Mile Loop . <unk> can ride through the woods on horse trails totaling about 5 miles ( 8 km ) . Hikers can use the bike path , horse trails , and about 8 miles ( 13 km ) of hiking trails . A paved loop trail of about 0 @.@ 35 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 56 km ) , furnished with drinking fountains and interpretive signs , can accommodate wheelchairs . A park building called the Nature Center houses a gift shop , a large classroom , space for educational exhibits , and a play area for small children . 
 Tryon Creek , which flows through the middle of the state park , also runs through Marshall Park , a modified natural area of about 26 acres ( 11 ha ) in a canyon in the hills northwest of Mount Sylvania . It features hiking trails , a playground , picnic tables , a waterfall , and a stone bridge over the creek . Other parks in the watershed include West Portland Park , a natural area of about 15 acres ( 6 ha ) , and <unk> Park , a natural area of about 17 acres ( 7 ha ) . Metro plans to acquire additional land along the creek to add to the parks . 
 = British Airways = 
 British Airways , often shortened to BA , is the flag carrier and the largest airline in the United Kingdom based on fleet size . When measured by passengers carried , it is second @-@ largest in the United Kingdom behind easyJet . The airline is based in Waterside near its main hub at London Heathrow Airport . 
 A British Airways Board was established by the United Kingdom government in 1972 to manage the two nationalised airline corporations , British Overseas Airways Corporation and British European Airways , and two smaller , regional airlines , Cambrian Airways , from Cardiff , and Northeast Airlines , from Newcastle upon Tyne . On 31 March 1974 , all four companies were merged to form British Airways . After almost 13 years as a state company , British Airways was privatised in February 1987 as part of a wider privatisation plan by the Conservative government . The carrier soon expanded with the acquisition of British Caledonian in 1987 , followed by Dan @-@ Air in 1992 and British Midland International in 2012 . 
 British Airways is a founding member of the Oneworld airline alliance , along with American Airlines , Cathay Pacific , Qantas , and the now defunct Canadian Airlines . The alliance has since grown to become the third @-@ largest , after SkyTeam and Star Alliance . British Airways merged with Iberia on 21 January 2011 , formally creating the International Airlines Group ( IAG ) , the world 's third @-@ largest airline group in terms of annual revenue and the second @-@ largest in Europe . IAG is listed on the London Stock Exchange and in the FTSE 100 Index . 
 A long @-@ time Boeing customer , British Airways ordered 59 Airbus A320 family aircraft in August 1998 . In 2007 it purchased 12 Airbus A380s and 24 Boeing 787 Dreamliners , marking the start of its long @-@ haul fleet replacement . The centrepiece of the airline 's long @-@ haul fleet is the Boeing 777 , with 58 in the fleet . British Airways is the largest operator of the Boeing 747 @-@ 400 in the world , with 51 registered to the airline . 
 = = History = = 
 In January 1972 , a British Airways Board was established by the United Kingdom government following the passing of the Civil Aviation Act of 1971 , to manage British Overseas Airways Corporation ( BOAC ) and British European Airways ( BEA ) . On 1 September 1972 the management service functions of both BOAC and BEA were combined under the newly formed British Airways Group . 
 British Airways was established as an airline on 31 March 1974 by the dissolution of BOAC and BEA . Following two years of fierce competition with British Caledonian , the second @-@ largest airline in the United Kingdom at the time , the Government changed its aviation policy in 1976 so that the two carriers would no longer compete on long @-@ haul routes . 
 British Airways and Air France operated the supersonic airliner <unk> @-@ BAC Concorde , and the world 's first supersonic passenger service flew in January 1976 from London Heathrow to Bahrain . Services to the US began on 24 May 1976 with a flight to Washington Dulles airport , and flights to New York JFK airport followed on 22 September 1977 . Service to Singapore was established in co @-@ operation with Singapore Airlines as a continuation of the flight to Bahrain . Following the Air France Concorde crash in Paris and a slump in air travel following the 11 September attacks in New York in 2001 , it was decided to cease Concorde operations in 2003 after 27 years of service . The final commercial Concorde flight was <unk> from New York JFK to London Heathrow on 24 October 2003 . 
 In 1981 the airline was instructed to prepare for privatisation by the Conservative Thatcher government . Sir John King , later Lord King , was appointed chairman , charged with bringing the airline back into profitability . While many other large airlines struggled , King was credited with transforming British Airways into one of the most profitable air carriers in the world . The flag carrier was privatised and was floated on the London Stock Exchange in February 1987 . British Airways effected the takeover of the UK 's " second " airline , British Caledonian , in July of that same year . 
 The formation of Richard Branson 's Virgin Atlantic Airways in 1984 created a competitor for BA . The intense rivalry between British Airways and Virgin Atlantic culminated in the former being sued for libel in 1993 , arising from claims and counter claims over a " dirty tricks " campaign against Virgin . This campaign included allegations of poaching Virgin Atlantic customers , tampering with private files belonging to Virgin and undermining Virgin 's reputation in the City . As a result of the case BA management apologised " unreservedly " , and the company agreed to pay £ 110 @,@ 000 damages to Virgin , £ 500 @,@ 000 to Branson personally and £ 3 million legal costs . Lord King stepped down as chairman in 1993 and was replaced by his deputy , Colin Marshall , while Bob Ayling took over as CEO . Virgin filed a separate action in the US that same year regarding BA 's domination of the trans @-@ Atlantic routes , but it was thrown out in 1999 . 
 In 1992 British Airways expanded through the acquisition of the financially troubled Dan @-@ Air , giving BA a much larger presence at Gatwick airport . British Asia Airways , a subsidiary based in Taiwan , was formed in March 1993 to operate between London and Taipei . That same month BA purchased a 25 % stake in the Australian airline Qantas and , with the acquisition of <unk> Airways in May , formed British Airways <unk> ( later BA Connect ) . In September 1998 , British Airways , along with American Airlines , Cathay Pacific , Qantas , and Canadian Airlines , formed the Oneworld airline alliance . Oneworld began operations on 1 February 1999 , and is the third largest airline alliance in the world , behind SkyTeam and Star Alliance . 
 Bob Ayling 's leadership led to a cost savings of £ 750m and the establishment of a budget airline , Go , in 1998 . The next year , however , British Airways reported an 84 % drop in profits in its first quarter alone , its worst in seven years . In March 2000 , Ayling was removed from his position and British Airways announced Rod Eddington as his successor . That year , British Airways and KLM conducted talks on a potential merger , reaching a decision in July to file an official merger plan with the European Commission . The plan fell through in September 2000 . British Asia Airways ceased operations in 2001 after BA suspended flights to Taipei . Go was sold to its management and the private equity firm 3i in June 2001 . Eddington would make further workforce cuts due to reduced demand following 11 September attacks in 2001 , and BA sold its stake in Qantas in September 2004 . In 2005 Willie Walsh , managing director of Aer Lingus and a former pilot , became the chief executive officer of British Airways . BA unveiled its new subsidiary OpenSkies in January 2008 , taking advantage of the liberalisation of transatlantic traffic rights between Europe and the United States . OpenSkies flies non @-@ stop from Paris to New York 's JFK and Newark airports . 
 On July 2008 British Airways announced a merger plan with Iberia , another flag carrier airline in the Oneworld alliance , wherein each airline would retain its original brand . The agreement was confirmed in April 2010 , and in July the European Commission and US Department of Transport permitted the merger and began to co @-@ ordinate transatlantic routes with American Airlines . On 6 October 2010 the alliance between British Airways , American Airlines and Iberia formally began operations . The alliance generates an estimated £ 230 million in annual cost @-@ saving for BA , in addition to the £ 330 million which would be saved by the merger with Iberia . This merger was finalised on 21 January 2011 , resulting in the International Airlines Group ( IAG ) , the world 's third @-@ largest airline in terms of annual revenue and the second @-@ largest airline group in Europe . Prior to merging , British Airways owned a 13 @.@ 5 % stake in Iberia , and thus received ownership of 55 % of the combined International Airlines Group ; Iberia 's other shareholders received the remaining 45 % . As a part of the merger , British Airways ceased trading independently on the London Stock Exchange after 23 years as a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index . 
 In September 2010 Willie Walsh , now CEO of IAG , announced that the group was considering acquiring other airlines and had drawn up a shortlist of twelve possible acquisitions . In November 2011 IAG announced an agreement in principle to purchase British Midland International from Lufthansa . A contract to purchase the airline was agreed the next month , and the sale was completed for £ 172 @.@ 5 million on 30 March 2012 . The airline established a new subsidiary based at London City Airport operating Airbus <unk> . 
 British Airways was the official airline partner of the London 2012 Olympic Games . On 18 May 2012 it flew the Olympic flame from Athens International Airport to RNAS Culdrose while carrying various dignitaries , including Lord Sebastian Coe , Princess Anne , the Olympics minister Hugh Robertson and the London Mayor Boris Johnson , along with the footballer David Beckham . 
 = = Corporate affairs = = 
 = = = Operations = = = 
 British Airways is the largest airline based in the United Kingdom in terms of fleet size , international flights , and international destinations and was , until 2008 , the largest airline by passenger numbers as well . The airline carried 34 @.@ 6 million passengers in 2008 , but rival carrier easyJet transported 44 @.@ 5 million passengers that year , passing British Airways for the first time . British Airways holds a United Kingdom Civil Aviation Authority Type A Operating Licence , it is permitted to carry passengers , cargo , and mail on aircraft with 20 or more seats . 
 The airlines ' head office , Waterside , stands in Harmondsworth , a village near London Heathrow Airport . Waterside was completed in June 1998 to replace British Airways ' previous head office , Speedbird House , which was located on the grounds of Heathrow . 
 British Airways ' main base is at London Heathrow Airport , but it also has a major presence at Gatwick Airport . It also has a base at London City Airport ( <unk> ) , where its subsidiary BA CityFlyer is the largest operator . BA had previously operated a significant hub at Manchester Airport . Manchester to New York ( JFK ) services were withdrawn ; later all international services outside London ceased when the subsidiary BA Connect was sold . Passengers wishing to travel internationally with BA either to or from regional UK destinations must now transfer in London . Heathrow Airport is dominated by British Airways , which owns 40 % of the slots available at the airport . The majority of BA services operate from Terminal 5 , with the exception of some short @-@ haul and mid @-@ haul flights at Terminal 1 arising from the purchase of BMI and some short @-@ haul flights at Terminal 3 , owing to a lack of capacity at Terminal 5 . With the imminent opening of the brand @-@ new Terminal 2 in 2014 , Star Alliance airlines will progressively be moving all their services into the new terminal and Terminal 1 will be closed for demolition in due course . British Airways ' services will then be concentrated in Terminals 3 and 5 . 
 In August 2014 Willie Walsh advised the airline would continue to use flight paths over Iraq despite the hostilities there . A few days earlier Qantas announced it would avoid Iraqi airspace , while other airlines did likewise . The issue arose following the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over Ukraine , and a temporary suspension of flights to and from Ben Gurion Airport during the 2014 Israel – Gaza conflict . 
 = = = Subsidiaries and shareholdings = = = 
 BA CityFlyer , a wholly owned subsidiary , offers flights from its base at London City Airport to 23 destinations throughout Europe . It flies 17 Embraer E @-@ 170 / E @-@ 190 aircraft and two leased Saab 2000 . The airline focuses on serving the financial market , though it has recently expanded into the leisure market , offering routes to Ibiza , Palma and Venice . The onboard product is identical to that of the BA Short Haul product from both <unk> and <unk> . 
 In March 2015 , Qatar Airways purchased a 10 % stake in International Airlines Group , the parent of British Airways and Iberia , for € 1 @.@ 2 billion ( US $ 1 @.@ 26 billion ) . 
 BEA Helicopters was renamed British Airways Helicopters in 1974 and operated passenger and offshore oil support services until it was sold in 1986 . Other former subsidiaries include the German airline Deutsche BA from 1997 until 2003 and the French airline Air Liberté from 1997 to 2001 . British Airways also owned Airways Aero Association , the operator of the British Airways flying club based at Wycombe Air Park in High Wycombe , until it was sold to Surinder Arora in 2007 . 
 South Africa 's Comair and Denmark 's Sun Air of Scandinavia have been franchisees of British Airways since 1996 . British Airways obtained a 15 % stake in UK regional airline Flybe from the sale of BA Connect in March 2007 . It sold the stake in 2014 . BA also owned a 10 % stake in InterCapital and Regional Rail ( <unk> ) , the company that managed the operations of Eurostar ( UK ) Ltd from 1998 to 2010 , when the management of Eurostar was restructured . 
 With the creation of an Open Skies agreement between Europe and the United States in March 2008 , British Airways started a new subsidiary airline called OpenSkies ( previously known as " Project Lauren " ) . The airline started operations in June 2008 , and now flies direct from Paris to New York 's JFK and Newark airports . 
 British Airways Limited was established in 2012 to take over the operation of the premium service between London City Airport and New York @-@ JFK . BA began the service in September 2009 , using two Airbus <unk> fitted with 32 lie @-@ flat beds in an all business class cabin . Flights operate under the numbers previously reserved for Concorde : <unk> — <unk> . 
 British Airways provides cargo services under the British Airways World Cargo brand . The division has been part of IAG Cargo since 2012 , and is the world 's twelfth @-@ largest cargo airline based on total freight tonne @-@ kilometres flown . BA World Cargo operates using the main BA fleet . Until the end of March 2014 they also operated three Boeing 747 @-@ 8 freighter aircraft providing dedicated long @-@ haul services under a wet lease arrangement from Global Supply Systems . The division operates an automated cargo centre at London Heathrow Airport and handles freight at Gatwick and Stansted airports . 
 = = = Business trends = = = 
 The key trends for the British Airways Plc Group are shown below . 
 On the merger with Iberia , the accounting reference date was changed from 31 March to 31 December ; figures below are therefore for the years to 31 March up to 2010 , for the nine months to 31 December 2010 , and for the years to 31 December thereafter : 
 = = = Industrial relations = = = 
 Staff working for British Airways are represented by a number of trade unions , pilots are represented by British Air Line Pilots ' Association , cabin crew by British Airlines Stewards and Stewardesses Association ( a branch of Unite the Union ) , while other branches of Unite the Union and the GMB Union represent other employees . Bob Ayling 's management faced strike action by cabin crew over a £ 1 billion cost @-@ cutting drive to return BA to profitability in 1997 ; this was the last time BA cabin crew would strike until 2009 , although staff morale has reportedly been unstable since that incident . In an effort to increase interaction between management , employees , and the unions , various conferences and workshops have taken place , often with thousands in attendance . 
 In 2005 , wildcat action was taken by union members over a decision by Gate Gourmet not to renew the contracts of 670 workers and replace them with agency staff ; it is estimated that the strike cost British Airways £ 30 million and caused disruption to 100 @,@ 000 passengers . In October 2006 , BA became involved in a civil rights dispute when a Christian employee was forbidden to wear a necklace bearing the cross , a religious symbol . BA 's practice of forbidding such symbols has been publicly questioned by British politicians such as the former Home Secretary John Reid and the former Foreign Secretary Jack Straw . 
 Relations have been turbulent between BA and Unite . In 2007 , cabin crew threatened strike action over salary changes to be imposed by BA management . The strike was called off at the last minute , British Airways losing £ 80 million . In December 2009 , a ballot for strike action over Christmas received a high level of support , action was blocked by a court injunction that deemed the ballot illegal . Negotiations failed to stop strike action in March , BA withdrew perks for strike participants . Allegations were made by the Guardian newspaper that BA had consulted outside firms methods to undermine the unions , the story was later withdrawn . A strike was announced for May 2010 , British Airways again sought an injunction . Members of the Socialist Workers Party disrupted negotiations between BA management and Unite to prevent industrial action . Further disruption struck when Derek Simpson , a Unite co @-@ leader , was discovered to have leaked details of confidential negotiations online via Twitter . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 British Airways serves over 160 destinations , including six domestic . It is one of the few airlines to fly to all six permanently inhabited continents , along with Air China , Delta Air Lines , Emirates , Etihad Airways , Korean Air , Qantas , Qatar Airways , Singapore Airlines , South African Airways , United Airlines and Air Canada . 
 = = = Partnerships and codeshare agreements = = = 
 British Airways has codeshare agreements and / or partnerships with the following airlines : 
 = = = Alliance = = = 
 British Airways is a member and one of the founders of Oneworld Global Alliance . 
 = = Fleet = = 
 With the exception of the Boeing 707 and early Boeing 747 variants from BOAC , British Airways inherited a mainly UK @-@ built fleet of aircraft when it was formed in 1974 . The airline introduced the Boeing 737 and Boeing 757 into the fleet in the 1980s , followed by the Boeing 747 @-@ 400 , Boeing 767 and Boeing 777 in the 1990s . BA is now the largest operator of Boeing 747 @-@ 400s , with 57 in its fleet . Prior to the introduction of the 787 , when Boeing built an aircraft for British Airways , it was allocated the customer code 36 , which appeared in their aircraft designation as a suffix , such as 737 – 436 . 
 In 1991 , British Airways placed its first order for 777 @-@ 200 aircraft , ordering another four for fleet expansion in 2007 at a cost of around US $ 800 million . BA 's first 777s were fitted with General Electric GE90 engines , but BA switched to Rolls @-@ Royce Trent 800s for subsequent aircraft . A BA Boeing 777 @-@ 200 became the fastest subsonic New York to London flight at 5 hours and 16 minutes in January 2015 due to strong winds . 
 Later in 2007 , BA announced their order of thirty @-@ six new long @-@ haul aircraft , including twelve Airbus A380s and twenty @-@ four Boeing 787 Dreamliners . Rolls @-@ Royce Trent engines were again selected for both orders with Trent 900s powering the A380s and Trent 1000s powering the 787s . The Boeing 787s will replace 14 of British Airways ' Boeing 767 fleet , while the Airbus A380s will replace 20 of BA 's Boeing 747 @-@ 400s and will most likely be used to increase capacity on key routes from London Heathrow . 
 On 1 August 2008 , BA announced orders for six Boeing 777 @-@ 300ERs and options for four more as an interim measure to cover for delays over the deliveries of their 787 @-@ 8 / 9s . Of the six that have been ordered , four will be leased and two will be fully acquired by British Airways . 
 On 22 April 2013 , IAG confirmed that it had signed a memorandum of understanding to order 18 A350 @-@ 1000 aircraft for British Airways , with an option for a further 18 . The aircraft would replace some of the airline 's fleet of Boeing 747 @-@ 400s . Options for 18 Boeing 787 aircraft , part of the original contract signed in 2007 , have been converted into firm orders for delivery between 2017 and 2021 . 
 On 26 June 2013 , British Airways took delivery of its first 787s . The aircraft began operations to Toronto on 1 September 2013 , and began service to Newark on 1 October 2013 . BA 's first A380 was delivered on 4 July 2013 . It began regular services to Los Angeles on 24 September 2013 , followed by Hong Kong on 22 October 2013 . 
 The combined International Airlines Group entity ( that BA is now a part of ) , operates around 400 aircraft , carries over 62 million passengers annually , and serves more than 200 destinations . 
 = = = Current fleet = = = 
 As of July 2016 , the British Airways fleet is made up of the following registered aircraft ( including non @-@ operational aircraft ) : 
 = = = Fleet gallery = = = 
 Hover over each photo to view label detail 
 = = = Cargo fleet = = = 
 IAG 's cargo division , IAG Cargo , handles cargo operations using capacity on British Airways ' passenger aircraft . IAG reached an agreement with Qatar Airways in 2014 to operate flights for IAG Cargo using Boeing 777F of Qatar Airways Cargo . 
 British Airways World Cargo was the airline 's freight division prior to its merger with Iberia Cargo to form IAG Cargo . Aircraft types used by the division between 1974 and 1983 were Vickers <unk> , Boeing 707 @-@ <unk> and Boeing 747 @-@ 200F while the Boeing 747 @-@ 400F was operated from the 1990s to 2001 through Atlas Air and 2002 to early 2012 by Global Supply Systems , of these only one of Atlas Air 's aircraft wore BA livery , the others flew in Atlas and Global Supply 's own colours . From 2012 until the termination of Global Supply System 's contract in 2014 , three Boeing 747 @-@ 8F aircraft were flown for British Airways World Cargo . 
 = = = Former fleet = = = 
 = = = British Airways Engineering = = = 
 The company has its own engineering branch to maintain its aircraft fleet , this includes line maintenance at over 70 airports around the world . As well as hangar facilities at Heathrow and Gatwick airport it has two major maintenance centres at Glasgow and Cardiff Airports . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 = = = Branding = = = 
 The musical theme predominantly used on British Airways advertising is " The Flower Duet " by Léo Delibes . This , and the slogan " The World 's Favourite Airline " were introduced in 1989 with the launch of the iconic " Face " advertisement . The slogan was dropped in 2001 after Lufthansa overtook BA in terms of passenger numbers . " Flower Duet " is still used by the airline , and has been through several different arrangements since 1989 . The most recent version of this melody was shown in 2007 with a new slogan : " Upgrade to British Airways " . Other advertising slogans have included " The World 's Best Airline " , " We 'll Take More Care of You " , and " Fly the Flag " . 
 BA had an account for 23 years with Saatchi & Saatchi , an agency that created many of their most famous advertisements , including the influential " Face " campaign . Saatchi & Saatchi later imitated this advert for <unk> , a rival of BA , after BA discontinued their business activities . Since 2007 BA has used Bartle Bogle Hegarty as its advertising agency . 
 British Airways purchased the internet domain <unk> in 2002 from previous owner Bell Atlantic , ' BA ' being the company 's acronym and its IATA Airline code . In 2011 BA launched its biggest advertising campaign in a decade , including a 90 @-@ second cinematic advert celebrating the airline 's ninety @-@ year heritage and a new slogan " To Fly . To Serve " . 
 British Airways is the official airline of the Wimbledon Championship tennis tournament , and was the official airline and tier one partner of the 2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics . British Airways was also the official airline of England 's bid to host the 2018 Football World Cup . 
 High Life , founded in 1973 , is the official in @-@ flight magazine of the airlines . 
 = = = Liveries and tail fins = = = 
 Since its formation in 1974 , British Airways ' aeroplanes carried a Union Jack scheme painted on their tail fins . The original tail scheme was changed in 1984 as part of a new livery designed by Landor Associates . 
 In 1997 , there was a controversial change from the use of the former British Airways branding ( which incorporated stylised elements of the Union Jack ) to a new livery which was intended mainly to reflect the diversity of places served by the airline – so @-@ called " World Images " . This involved a range of different designs appearing on tailfins and elsewhere , although the bodies of all the planes would use the corporate colours consistently ; the exception was the Concorde fleet , which would have a new tailfin design based on a stylised , fluttering Union flag . What became known as the " ethnic images " included Delftware or Chinese calligraphy , related to countries on the company 's network of routes . This was reported to have caused problems with air traffic control : previously controllers had been able to tell pilots to follow a BA plane , but they were now harder to visually identify . Several people spoke out against the change , including the former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher , who famously covered the tail of a model 747 at an event with a handkerchief , to show her displeasure . BA 's traditional rival , Virgin Atlantic , took advantage of the negative press coverage by applying the Union flag to the winglets of their aircraft along with the slogan " Britain 's national <unk> " . In 1999 the CEO of British Airways , Bob Ayling , announced that all BA planes would adopt the tailfin design originally intended to be used only on the Concorde , based on the Union Flag . 
 = = = Loyalty programmes = = = 
 British Airways ' tiered loyalty programme , called the Executive Club , includes access to special lounges and dedicated " fast " queues . BA also invites its top corporate accounts to join a " Premier " incentive programme . British Airways operates airside lounges for passengers travelling in premium cabins , and these are available to certain tiers of Executive Club members . First class passengers , as well as Gold Executive Club members , are entitled to use First Class Lounges . Business class passengers ( called Club World or Club Europe in BA terms ) as well as Silver Executive Club members may use Business lounges . At airports in which BA does not operate a departure lounge , a third party lounge is often provided for premium or status passengers . In 2011 , due to the merger with Iberia , British Airways announced changes to the Executive Club to maximise integration between the airlines . This included the combination and rebranding of Air Miles , BA Miles and Iberia Plus points as the IAG operated loyalty programme <unk> . 
 = = = = Inflight Magazines = = = = 
 high life Magazine is the name for British Airways ' complimentary inflight magazine . The magazine is available to all customers across all cabins and aircraft types . 
 high life shop Magazine is the name for British Airways ' inflight shopping magazine . The magazine is available to all customers on all aircraft where the inflight shopping range can be carried . 
 First life is the name of the complimentary magazine offered to all customers travelling in the First cabin . The magazine has a of articles including fashion , trends and technology with an upmarket target audience . 
 Business life is the name of the complimentary magazine targeted towards the business traveller and frequent flyers of British Airways . The magazine can be found in all short haul aircraft seat pockets , in the magazine selection for Club World customers and in British Airways operated lounges . 
 = = Cabins & Services = = 
 = = = Short haul = = = 
 = = = = Economy Class = = = = 
 UK Domestic is British Airways ' economy class on domestic UK flights . Flights into Heathrow are mostly operated by Airbus A320 series aircraft – a small number of peak services to Glasgow and Edinburgh are operated by Boeing 767 @-@ 300ERs configured in an all @-@ economy layout . Flights into Gatwick are operated by Airbus A320 series aircraft in a one @-@ class configuration . On flights departing before 09 : 30 a complimentary hot breakfast item is served with orange juice and tea or coffee . For all flights departing after 09 : 30 a complimentary bar service is offered along with a light snack item . 
 Euro Traveller is British Airways ' economy class offering on flights from the UK to the rest of Europe . Heathrow based flights are operated by the Airbus A320 series aircraft and Boeing 767 @-@ 300ER aircraft . Gatwick based flights are operated by Airbus A320 series aircraft . Standard seat pitch varies from 29 " to 34 " depending on aircraft type and location of seat . Complimentary drinks and snacks are offered and vary depending on flight length and time of day . Longer services over 3 hours from Heathrow usually have a hot meal service . 
 = = = = Business Class = = = = 
 Club Europe is the short @-@ haul business class on all short @-@ haul flights ( excluding those within the UK ) . This class allows for access to business lounges at most airports . Club Europe provides seats in a 2 – 2 configuration on narrowbody aircraft , with the middle seat not used . Instead , a table folds up from under the middle seat on refurbished aircraft . Pillows and blankets are available on longer flights . 
 In @-@ flight entertainment is offered on selected longer flights operated by the Boeing 767 @-@ 300ER and some A320 aircraft . Headphones are provided to all customers on services where IFE is available . 
 = = = Mid @-@ haul = = = 
 In 2012 , British Airways launched a new mid @-@ haul product for the Airbus A321s on routes formerly operated by BMI . These aircraft have been designated to serve routes such as Almaty , Tbilisi , Baku , Cairo , Amman , Beirut and Tel Aviv . 
 = = = = Business = = = = 
 The ' Club World ' business class on these narrowbody aircraft is slightly different from the product operated on the rest of the long @-@ haul fleet : An alternating 1 : 2 / 2 : 1 configuration of 23 seats is used in the front section of the aircraft . The full Club World bar and main meal service is offered . Larger individual LCD TV screens are fitted to each seat back . 
 = = = = Economy = = = = 
 The ' World Traveller ' service is also offered on these flights with complimentary drinks , food and individual IFE screens . All seats on the aircraft are fitted with the Thales <unk> or Rockwell Collins in @-@ flight entertainment system . 
 = = = Long haul = = = 
 = = = = First class = = = = 
 First class is offered on all Airbus A380s , all Boeing 747 @-@ 400s , some Boeing 777 @-@ 200s , and all Boeing 777 @-@ 300ERs and Boeing 787 @-@ 9s on launch . There are fourteen ( eight on 787 @-@ 9 ) private " demi @-@ cabins " on most of these aircraft , each with a 6 ft 6 in ( 1 @.@ 98 m ) bed , a 15 @-@ inch ( 38 cm ) wide entertainment screen , and in @-@ seat power . Dedicated British Airways ' Galleries First ' lounges are available at some airports . The exclusive ' Concorde Room ' lounges at Heathrow Terminal 5 and New York JFK airports extend the offering with waiter service pre @-@ flight dining and more intimate space . Business lounges are used where these are not available . 
 = = = = Business Class = = = = 
 Club World is the long @-@ haul business class , and is offered on all long @-@ haul configured Boeing 767 , Boeing 777 , Boeing 787 , Boeing 747 @-@ 400 , Airbus A318 and A380 aircraft . The cabin features fully flat beds . In 2006 British Airways launched Next Generation New Club World , featuring larger seats . The Club World cabins are all configured in a similar design on widebody aircraft with aisle seats facing forwards while middle seats and window seats face backwards ( British Airways is one of only three carriers with backwards facing Business class seats ; American Airlines and United Airlines are the others ) . 
 = = = = Premium Economy = = = = 
 World Traveller Plus is the premium economy offering provided on all long @-@ haul aircraft except the Airbus A318 . This cabin offers wider seats , extended leg @-@ room , additional seat comforts such as larger IFE screen ( on most aircraft ) a foot rest and power sockets . A complimentary ' World Traveller ' bar is offered along with an upgraded main meal course . 
 = = = = Economy = = = = 
 World Traveller is the long @-@ haul economy class offered on international flights to destinations outside Europe . It offers seat @-@ back entertainment , complimentary drinks and meals . AVOD is offered on all A380s , 747s , long @-@ haul 767s , and all of the 777s and 787s . On the Airbus A380 , Boeing 787 , Boeing 777 @-@ 300ER and refurbished 777 @-@ 200 aircraft , AC power outlets and USB plug @-@ in points are offered in every seat row . The outlets accept both UK and US plugs . The outlets in World Traveller are located between each seat . 
 = = Incidents and accidents = = 
 In November 1974 , British Airways Flight 870 was hijacked shortly after take @-@ off from Dubai for London Heathrow , The Vickers VC10 landed at Tripoli for refuelling before flying on to Tunis . The captain , Jim <unk> , returned to the aircraft to fly it knowing the hijackers were on board . The hijackers eventually surrendered after 84 hours , but not before a hostage was murdered . <unk> was awarded the Queen 's Gallantry Medal , the Guild of Air Pilots and Air Navigators Founders Medal , the British Air Line Pilots Association Gold Medal and a Certificate of Commendation from British Airways for his actions during the hijacking . 
 On 10 September 1976 , a Trident 3B on British Airways Flight 476 departed from London Heathrow to Istanbul . It collided in mid @-@ air with an <unk> Adria <unk> @-@ 31 near Zagreb . All 54 passengers and 9 crew members on the BA aircraft died . This is the only fatal accident to a British Airways aircraft since the company 's formation in 1974 . 
 On 24 June 1982 , British Airways Flight 9 , a Boeing 747 @-@ 200 registration G @-@ <unk> , flew through a cloud of volcanic ash and dust from the eruption of Mount <unk> . The ash and dust caused extensive damage to the aircraft , including the failure of all four engines . The crew managed to glide the plane out of the dust cloud and restart all four of its engines , although one later had to be shut down again . The volcanic ash caused the cockpit window to be scratched to such an extent that it was difficult for the pilots to see out of the plane . However , the aircraft made a successful emergency landing at Halim Perdanakusuma International Airport just outside Jakarta . There were no fatalities or injuries . 
 On 10 June 1990 , British Airways Flight <unk> , a BAC One @-@ Eleven flight between Birmingham and Málaga , suffered a windscreen blowout due to the fitting of incorrect bolts the previous day . The Captain , Tim Lancaster , suffered major injuries after being partially blown out of the aircraft , but the co @-@ pilot landed the plane safely at Southampton Airport . Despite the physical trauma he suffered , Lancaster fully recovered , and five months later he returned to duty . The co @-@ pilot never returned to flying due to the trauma he sustained . 
 On 2 August 1990 , British Airways Flight 149 landed at Kuwait International Airport four hours after the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait . The aircraft , a Boeing 747 @-@ 100 G @-@ <unk> , was destroyed , and all passengers and crew were captured . Two of the landing gears were salvaged , and are on display in Waterside , BA Headquarters in London . 
 On 29 December 2000 , British Airways Flight 2069 was en route from London to Nairobi when a mentally @-@ ill passenger entered the cockpit and grabbed the controls . As the pilots struggled to remove the intruder , the Boeing 747 @-@ 400 stalled twice and banked to 94 degrees . Several people on board were injured by the violent manoeuvres , which briefly caused the aircraft to descend at 30 @,@ 000 ft per minute . The man was finally restrained with the help of several passengers , and the co @-@ pilot regained control of the aircraft . The flight landed safely in Nairobi . 
 On 17 January 2008 , British Airways Flight 38 , a Boeing 777 @-@ 200ER G @-@ <unk> , from Beijing to London crash @-@ landed approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) short of London Heathrow Airport 's runway 27L , and slid onto the runway 's displaced threshold . The aircraft sustained damage to its landing gear , wing roots and engines , resulting in the first hull loss of a Boeing 777 . There were no fatalities , but there was one serious injury and 12 minor injuries . The accident was caused by icing in the fuel system , resulting in a loss of power . 
 On 22 December 2013 , British Airways Flight 34 , a Boeing 747 – 436 G @-@ <unk> , hit a building at O. R. Tambo International Airport in Johannesburg after missing a turning on a taxiway . The starboard wing was severely damaged but there were no injuries amongst the crew or 189 passengers , however four members of ground staff were injured when the wing smashed into the building . The aircraft was officially withdrawn from service in February 2014 . 
 On 8 September 2015 , British Airways Flight 2276 , a Boeing 777 @-@ <unk> G @-@ <unk> , aborted its takeoff at Las Vegas McCarran International Airport due to the uncontained engine failure of its left ( # 1 ) General Electric GE90 engine , which led to a substantial fire . The aircraft was evacuated on the main runway . All 157 passengers and 13 crew escaped the aircraft , at least 14 people sustaining minor injuries . 
 = The Itchy & Scratchy Show = 
 The Itchy & Scratchy Show ( often shortened as Itchy & Scratchy ) is a running gag and fictional animated television series featured in the animated television series The Simpsons . It usually appears as a part of The Krusty the Clown Show , watched regularly by Bart and Lisa Simpson . Itself an animated cartoon , The Itchy & Scratchy Show depicts a sadistic anthropomorphic blue mouse , Itchy ( voiced by Dan Castellaneta ) , who repeatedly <unk> and kills an anthropomorphic , hapless threadbare black cat , Scratchy ( voiced by Harry Shearer ) . The cartoon first appeared in the Tracey Ullman Show short " The Bart Simpson Show " , which originally aired November 20 , 1988 . The cartoon 's first appearance in The Simpsons was in the 1990 episode " There 's No Disgrace Like Home " . Typically presented as 15 @-@ to @-@ 60 @-@ second @-@ long cartoons , the show is filled with gratuitous violence . The Simpsons also occasionally features characters who are involved with the production of The Itchy & Scratchy Show , including Roger Meyers , Jr . ( voiced by Alex Rocco , and , later , Hank Azaria ) , who runs the studio and produces the show . 
 The Itchy and Scratchy characters are grotesque , extremely violent parodies of Tom and Jerry and Herman and <unk> ; the names were inspired by " Pixie and Dixie " , who were mice on Pixie and Dixie and Mr. Jinks . The Italian comic strip Squeak the Mouse is also considered as an apparent inspiration for the characters . The mouse ( or mice ) are almost always the aggressors and , as in Tom and Jerry , are almost always the victors , killing Scratchy and any other cats around . The cartoons became popular among the show 's writers and animators and are often added when an episode needs expanding . As the shorts became popular with fans , the writers decided to have full episodes that centered on the production of The Itchy & Scratchy Show and featured multiple shorts . The first was " Itchy & Scratchy & Marge " ( season two , 1990 ) , which was a commentary on censorship . Other episodes to feature the show in a prominent role include " Itchy & Scratchy : The Movie " ( season four , 1992 ) , " The Front " ( season four , 1993 ) , " Itchy & Scratchy Land " ( season six , 1994 ) , " The Day the Violence Died " ( season seven , 1996 ) and " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show " ( season eight , 1997 ) and " Treehouse of Horror IX " ( season ten , 1998 ) . 
 = = Role in The Simpsons = = 
 The Itchy & Scratchy Show is a show within a show that appears occasionally in episodes of The Simpsons . They typically appear in the form of 15 @-@ 60 second cartoons that are filled with gratuitous violence , usually initiated by Itchy the mouse against Scratchy the cat ; Itchy is almost always the victor . Itchy & Scratchy airs as a segment on The Krusty the Clown Show , and also aired on its brief replacements , Sideshow Bob 's Cavalcade of <unk> and Gabbo . 
 Itchy & Scratchy is usually a parody of traditional cartoons or takeoffs on famous films , but the plot and content are always violent . The most direct and obvious example is Tom and Jerry , an animated series which was also about a constant battle between a cat and a mouse , with the mouse usually victorious . Itchy & Scratchy also includes shorts such as Scratchtasia , a parody of Fantasia , and <unk> , a parody of Pinocchio . Animation @-@ related jokes are <unk> in the show , such as the Manhattan Madness cartoon in " The Day the Violence Died " , which is based on very early animated cartoons such as Gertie the Dinosaur . The cartoons also occasionally serve to play out an exaggerated form of the conflict in the surrounding episode . For example , in " Deep Space Homer " ( season five , 1994 ) , Homer is recruited by NASA , and later watches an Itchy & Scratchy cartoon which directly ( and gruesomely ) parodies the films 2001 : A Space Odyssey and Alien . 
 = = = Fictional production history = = = 
 Chester J. Lampwick created Itchy for the now @-@ lost silent cartoon Manhattan Madness , in which the mouse brutally attacks and kills an Irishman and Theodore Roosevelt , in 1919 ( the year of the first Felix the Cat cartoon ) . However , the character was later stolen by Roger Meyers . Scratchy starred in his first cartoon in 1928 , titled That Happy Cat . The film , a 13 @-@ second @-@ long animation showing the cat whistling and tipping his hat , was a commercial failure . Later that year , Itchy and Scratchy starred in their first cartoon together , Steamboat Itchy , a violent parody of Disney 's Steamboat Willie . Along with the cartoon shorts , Itchy and Scratchy were featured in a World War II @-@ era radio series , at least two films — <unk> and Scratchtasia ( parodies of Pinocchio and Fantasia ) , and television commercials for Laramie Cigarettes . 
 Itchy & Scratchy Studios is run by Roger Meyers , Jr . , the son of Roger Meyers , the cartoon 's " creator . " The studio was bankrupted after it was sued by Lampwick for $ 800 billion , but was saved after receiving a large cash settlement from the government over its use of Mr. ZIP . The show underwent a brief , non @-@ violent retooling following a protest campaign led by Marge Simpson , but returned to its original violent format after Marge was later discredited . Itchy & Scratchy has spawned an Academy Award @-@ winning film adaptation , amusement parks , and a musical , and like Krusty 's show , localized versions are produced for other countries , such as Jamaica 's The <unk> and <unk> Blow . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = The Itchy & Scratchy Show = = = 
 Itchy and Scratchy are the main characters in the show . The duo first appeared in The Tracey Ullman Show short " The Bart Simpson Show , " which aired November 20 , 1988 . Their first appearance in The Simpsons was " There 's No Disgrace Like Home . " Itchy , voiced by Dan Castellaneta , is a blue mouse , and usually the aggressor and the victor over the hapless Scratchy in their battles . An exception is in " Homer Goes to College " ( season five , 1993 ) . Bart and Lisa watch a cartoon called " Burning Down the Mouse , " as Lisa puts it , " This is the one where Scratchy finally gets Itchy . " However , due to the Simpsons ' television being unplugged , the viewer does not see the end of the cartoon and Krusty proclaims that the network will never let it be shown again . Scratchy , voiced by Harry Shearer , is a black cat and is the victim of much abuse from the sadistic Itchy . The writers often forget which character is which ; a trick they use is that Scratchy contains the letters c , a and t . 
 Poochie , voiced by Dan Castellaneta and Alex Rocco , is an anthropomorphic dog that appeared in " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show " ( season eight , 1997 ) . In the episode , the producers of The Itchy & Scratchy Show believed the cartoons were getting stale , and needed a new character to reinvigorate the show . Homer Simpson gets the job of voicing Poochie , who is introduced in the cartoon , " The Beagle Has Landed . " A product of marketing department thinking , Poochie was near @-@ universally despised , and was killed off in his second appearance , despite Homer 's objections . The episode was both a reference to TV shows which added new characters purportedly to reinvigorate the show , and a commentary on the growing complaints of fans of The Simpsons . The original idea for the episode was that Poochie would be obnoxious because he was so rich , rather than because he was so cool . Poochie would later make brief speaking cameo appearances in " Treehouse of Horror IX " and " Little Big Mom . " 
 Disgruntled Goat , Uncle Ant , Ku Klux <unk> , an anthropomorphic goat , ant and clam , respectively , were characters introduced in a short @-@ lived " Itchy and Scratchy and Friends " show . Bart and Lisa find plush toys of them in a gift shop in the " Itchy and Scratchy Land " episode . 
 = = = Production staff = = = 
 Roger Meyers , Jr . , voiced by Alex Rocco and Hank Azaria , is the chairman and CEO of Itchy & Scratchy Studios and is the son of Roger Meyers . He first appeared in " Itchy & Scratchy & Marge " ( season two , 1990 ) . He distributes the cartoon and is a jaded and selfish businessman who has nothing but contempt for the children who comprise his audience . He also possesses an extremely obnoxious personality , where he only cares about people who can help him . This is displayed in his contempt for the writers of The Itchy & Scratchy Show . 
 Alex Rocco also voiced Meyers in " The Day the Violence Died " and " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show . " He said that he liked voicing Meyers because " I get to be a big @-@ shot . " He professed being nervous when voicing the character for the first time in " Itchy & Scratchy & Marge " because he said that he had never done a voice @-@ over before . At first he tried doing a special voice , but was told to " just be yourself . " Rocco was one of Bill Oakley 's and Josh Weinstein 's favorite guest stars , and they liked including him in their episodes so they could " have a little fun with him . " On occasions when Rocco was unavailable to do a voice over , Meyers was voiced by Hank Azaria in " The Front " ( season four , 1993 ) , " Lady Bouvier 's Lover " ( season five , 1994 ) and " Itchy & Scratchy Land . " 
 The spelling of Meyers ' name has been inconsistent in the show . His last name was spelt both Myers and Meyers in " Itchy & Scratchy & Marge , " and Myers the later episode " The Day the Violence Died . " His name is spelt Meyers in " The Front , " as well as in the book The Simpsons : A Complete Guide to Our Favorite Family . 
 Roger Meyers , Sr. first appeared in video footage in " Itchy & Scratchy Land " and has never had a speaking role . He was created because the writers felt it would have been " tortured logic " to have the Roger Meyers , Jr. be the creator . Roger Meyers Sr. has similarities to Walt Disney . For example , Disney 's alleged antisemitism is spoofed when it is revealed that Meyers made a cartoon called Nazi Supermen are Our Superiors . 
 June Bellamy , voiced by Tress MacNeille , is the actress who portrays both Itchy and Scratchy . Her only appearance was in " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show . " It is assumed she is a reference to veteran voice actress June Foray , based on the same first name . In the episode , Bellamy states that a woman voiced the characters , although Itchy and Scratchy are voiced by male actors . 
 Chester J. Lampwick , voiced by Kirk Douglas , is the creator of Itchy and only appeared in " The Day the Violence Died . " The producers ' first choice for the character , William Hickey , declined . Douglas 's recording session was fraught with interruptions because he refused to wear the supplied earphones , and said the maximum he would do was two takes . 
