 Writing staff : In several episodes revolving around the production of The Itchy & Scratchy Show , caricatures of the show 's staff are used as the staff of The Itchy & Scratchy Show . This first occurred in " Itchy & Scratchy & Marge " where caricatures of animators David Silverman , Wes Archer and Rich Moore can be seen . In " The Front " many of the show 's writers were used , this in @-@ joke was purely an idea of the animators . John Swartzwelder , George Meyer , Jeff Martin , Al Jean , Sam Simon , Jon Vitti and Mike Reiss all appeared in the episode . This joke returned in " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show " . Almost all of the writers shown are caricatures of the actual staff of The Simpsons . At the production table , David X. Cohen , Bill Oakley , Josh Weinstein are shown , while Meyer speaks out and gets fired . The animator shown designing Poochie is Silverman . Others who appear include Dan McGrath , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , Donick Cary , Ron Hauge , Ned Goldreyer and Mike Scully . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The Itchy & Scratchy Show first appeared in the Tracey Ullman Show short " The Bart Simpson Show , " which originally aired November 20 , 1988 . They were the first major recurring characters outside of the Simpson family to appear . They are based on Tom and Jerry and other cat and mouse cartoons . As a child , series creator Matt Groening and his friends would fantasize about an ultra violent cartoon and how much fun it would be to work on a show like that . The names " Itchy " and " Scratchy " were inspired by " Pixie and Dixie , " who were mice on the cartoon show Pixie and Dixie and Mr. Jinks . The comic strip Squeak the Mouse is also considered as an apparent inspiration for the characters . The show is also based on Herman and <unk> , a show that , according to director David Silverman , " is hilarious because it 's just bad . " As a child , Groening really liked the 1961 Disney film One Hundred and One Dalmatians , and it was one of the reasons to why he got into cartooning . In the film , the puppies watch television , and the idea that it is possible to have a cartoon within a cartoon thrilled Groening . From that idea he got the inspiration for The Itchy & Scratchy Show . 
 David Silverman states that Itchy and Scratchy cartoons are " an ironic commentary on cartoon mayhem in the sense that it 's taken to a more realistic level . The kids on The Simpsons are laughing at it , and we 're laughing too , but part of what you 're laughing at is the over @-@ the @-@ top <unk> of the violence . " 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Itchy and Scratchy cartoons are often added when a show needs expanding or when there is an issue that the writers wish to satirize . In some cases , notably in " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show , " the writers use Itchy & Scratchy as a way to comment on The Simpsons . The shorts are often difficult for the writers , and take much time to develop and devise a title , and in the end they fill little time . Writing the Itchy & Scratchy cartoons is quite often a group effort , with it being pitched out one gag after another . Itchy & Scratchy are a favorite of John Swartzwelder , who has written many of the episodes that center on them and quite often pitches the ideas for the shorts . In the early seasons , fans wanted more Itchy & Scratchy , so the writers decided to do " Itchy & Scratchy & Marge , " an episode also dealt with censorship issues which would allow them to show several cartoons . The cartoons are often kept short , because according to David Silverman , " it doesn 't really work as a long cartoon . " 
 During his tenure as showrunner ( season five and six ) David Mirkin was asked by the Fox network not to do any more Itchy & Scratchy cartoons due to the amount of violence in them . In response , the show produced " Itchy & Scratchy Land . " The network asked them not to do the episode , and threatened that if the episode was produced , they would cut the Itchy & Scratchy parts out themselves , but relented when Mirkin threatened to tell the media . The writers nevertheless promised to try not to overdo the violence and in some scenes the violence was cut . 
 During their tenure as executive producers , Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein tried to fit in one episode relating to The Itchy & Scratchy Show every season . They note that as the seasons progressed , it became increasingly difficult for them to create new Itchy & Scratchy episode ideas . Although the episode was difficult to animate , " Itchy & Scratchy Land " was " a dream come true " for the animators , as they enjoyed animating scenes filled with violence . 
 The theme song is adapted from the jazz standard " Should I ( Reveal ) ? " 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a 2006 article , IGN ranked Itchy & Scratchy in tenth position on their list of the " Top 25 Simpsons Peripheral Characters , " citing that " the Itchy & Scratchy Show shines a nice mirror on cartoons , showing just how funny cartoon violence really is . " In 2003 , Entertainment Weekly named " Itchy & Scratchy Land " and " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show " the 7th @-@ best and 23rd @-@ best episodes of The Simpsons , respectively . In 2007 , Vanity Fair named " The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show " the sixth @-@ best episode in the show 's history , describing it as " a classic satire of network influence , obsessed TV fans , and programs that survive long after the shark has been jumped , the episode is a meta @-@ celebration , a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek rebuttal to everyone who claimed that the quality of The Simpsons had declined over the years . " Todd Gilchrist called it a masterpiece , stating it " could easily be packaged and sold by [ itself ] . " Robert Canning of IGN writes that " it 's always fun to see an ' Itchy and Scratchy ' cartoon " but believes that the shorter and simpler cartoons are better than the longer more complex ones . In his book Planet Simpson , author Chris Turner describes Itchy & Scratchy as " by far the most gleeful visual riffing on The Simpsons [ ... ] each snippet of " Itchy & Scratchy " packs as much frenetically paced action , sight @-@ <unk> and physical humor into its half @-@ minute of screen time as a half @-@ dozen Road Runner cartoons and a dozen Tom & <unk> . " In a 2014 Vulture article , the Simpsons writers ranked their 9 favourite Itchy and Scratchy cartoons . Season @-@ wise their choices ranged from season 4 's " Steamboat Itchy " to Season 14 's " <unk> of the Pack " , while also including the opening scene of The Simpsons Movie and the safety video " Safety First " that plays before The Simpsons Ride at Universal Studios , both from 2007 . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 Itchy and Scratchy have appeared in various products and other media relating to The Simpsons . A video game named The Itchy & Scratchy Game was released for Genesis , Game Gear , Super NES and Game Boy . Another game , Itchy and Scratchy in Miniature Golf Madness , was released for Game Boy . Itchy , Scratchy and Poochie play roles in the " Grand Theft Scratchy " section in The Simpsons Game . Itchy & Scratchy have also appeared in commercials for various products , including a 1999 Butterfinger advert where Bart watches a short called " 500 Easy Pieces " . They appear in the very first scene of The Simpsons Movie . The writers of the film knew from the beginning that they were going to start with an Itchy & Scratchy short and the segment was the first scene that was storyboarded by the animators . 
 The duo also appear in the pre @-@ show video for The Simpsons Ride . They host a video called " Safety First " that shows riders what can happen to them if they do not follow ride requirements . Only Itchy has a speaking part in the ride , because Harry Shearer chose not to participate in the ride , so none of his characters have speaking parts . 
 British based street @-@ wear label Drop Dead released the first ever Itchy & Scratchy specific clothing range on May 31 , 2014 . The collection includes both men 's and women 's wear including leggings , sweat pants , hoodies , T @-@ shirts , and crew @-@ necks . The collection pays homage to classic <unk> , with a vintage theme throughout . Itchy & Scratchy feature on all almost all the garments , aside from a handful that feature Krusty the Clown . 
 = Morpholino = 
 A morpholino , also known as a morpholino oligomer and as a phosphorodiamidate morpholino oligomer ( PMO ) , is type of oligomer molecule ( colloquially , an oligo ) used in molecular biology to modify gene expression . The molecular structure has a backbone of <unk> rings and phosphorodiamidate linkages . Morpholinos block access of other molecules to small ( ~ 25 base ) specific sequences of the base @-@ pairing surfaces of ribonucleic acid ( RNA ) . Morpholinos are used as research tools for reverse genetics by knocking down gene function . They are being studied for application in medicine . 
 This article discusses only the morpholino antisense oligomers , which are nucleic acid analogs . The word " morpholino " can occur in other chemical names , referring to chemicals containing a six @-@ membered morpholine ring . To help avoid confusion with other morpholine @-@ containing molecules , when describing oligos " Morpholino " is often capitalized as a trade name , but this usage is not consistent throughout the scientific literature . 
 Gene knockdown is achieved by preventing cells from making a targeted protein . Morpholinos can also modify the splicing of pre @-@ mRNA . Knocking down gene expression is a powerful method for learning about the function of a particular protein ; in a similar manner , causing a specific exon to be spliced out of a protein can help to determine the function of the protein moiety encoded by that exon or can sometimes knock down the protein activity altogether . These molecules have been applied to studies in several model organisms , including mice , zebrafish , frogs , and sea urchins . 
 Morpholinos are in development as pharmaceutical therapeutics targeted against pathogenic organisms such as bacteria or viruses and for amelioration of genetic diseases . These synthetic oligos were conceived by James E. Summerton ( Gene Tools ) and originally developed in collaboration with Dwight D. Weller at a biotech corporation ( formerly Antivirals , renamed AVI <unk> , renamed Sarepta Therapeutics ) . The experimental Morpholino drug <unk> from Sarepta Therapeutics is currently ( April 2016 ) in Phase III clinical trials for treatment of some mutations causing Duchenne muscular dystrophy . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Morpholinos are synthetic molecules that are the product of a redesign of natural nucleic acid structure . Usually 25 bases in length , they bind to complementary sequences of RNA by standard nucleic acid base @-@ pairing . In terms of structure , the difference between Morpholinos and DNA is that , while Morpholinos have standard nucleic acid bases , those bases are bound to morpholine rings instead of deoxyribose rings and linked through phosphorodiamidate groups instead of phosphates . This may be easiest to visualize by referring to the first figure and comparing the structures of the two strands depicted there , one of RNA and the other of a Morpholino . Replacement of anionic phosphates with the uncharged phosphorodiamidate groups eliminates ionization in the usual physiological pH range , so Morpholinos in organisms or cells are uncharged molecules . The entire backbone of a Morpholino is made from these modified subunits . 
 = = Function = = 
 Morpholinos do not degrade their target RNA molecules , unlike many antisense structural types ( e.g. , phosphorothioates , siRNA ) . Instead , Morpholinos act by " steric blocking " , binding to a target sequence within an RNA and simply getting in the way of molecules that might otherwise interact with the RNA . Morpholino oligos are often used to investigate the role of a specific mRNA transcript in an embryo . Developmental biologists inject Morpholino oligos into eggs or embryos of zebrafish , African clawed frog ( Xenopus ) , sea urchin , and killifish ( F. <unk> ) producing morphant embryos , or <unk> Morpholinos into chick embryos at later stages of development . With appropriate cytosolic delivery systems , Morpholinos are effective in cell culture . Vivo @-@ Morpholinos , in which the oligo is covalently linked to a delivery dendrimer , enter cells when administered systemically in adult animals . 
 = = = Normal gene expression in eukaryotes = = = 
 In eukaryotic organisms , pre @-@ mRNA is transcribed in the nucleus , introns are spliced out , then the mature mRNA is exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm . The small subunit of the ribosome usually starts by binding to one end of the mRNA and is joined there by various other eukaryotic initiation factors , forming the initiation complex . The initiation complex scans along the mRNA strand until it reaches a start codon , and then the large subunit of the ribosome attaches to the small subunit and translation of a protein begins . This entire process is referred to as gene expression ; it is the process by which the information in a gene , encoded as a sequence of bases in DNA , is converted into the structure of a protein . A Morpholino can modify splicing or block translation , depending on the Morpholino 's base sequence . 
 = = = Blocking translation = = = 
 Bound to the 5 ' <unk> region of messenger RNA ( mRNA ) , Morpholinos can interfere with progression of the ribosomal initiation complex from the 5 ' cap to the start codon . This prevents translation of the coding region of the targeted transcript ( called " knocking down " gene expression ) . This is useful experimentally when an investigator wishes to know the function of a particular protein ; Morpholinos provide a convenient means of knocking down expression of the protein and learning how that knockdown changes the cells or organism . Some Morpholinos knock down expression so effectively that , after degradation of preexisting proteins , the targeted proteins become undetectable by Western blot ( e.g. , figure 1 in : ) . 
 = = = Modifying pre @-@ mRNA splicing = = = 
 Morpholinos can interfere with pre @-@ mRNA processing steps either by preventing splice @-@ directing small nuclear ribonucleoproteins ( snRNP ) complexes from binding to their targets at the borders of introns on a strand of pre @-@ mRNA , or by blocking the nucleophilic adenine base and preventing it from forming the splice lariat structure , or by interfering with the binding of splice regulatory proteins such as splice silencers and splice enhancers . Preventing the binding of snRNP U1 ( at the donor site ) or U2 / U5 ( at the <unk> moiety and acceptor site ) can cause modified splicing , commonly excluding exons from the mature mRNA . Targeting some splice targets results in intron inclusions , while activation of cryptic splice sites can lead to partial inclusions or exclusions . Targets of <unk> / U12 snRNPs can also be blocked . Splice modification can be conveniently assayed by reverse @-@ transcriptase polymerase chain reaction ( RT @-@ PCR ) and is seen as a band shift after gel electrophoresis of RT @-@ PCR products . 
 = = = Other applications : blocking other mRNA sites and use as probes = = = 
 Morpholinos have been used to block miRNA activity and maturation . <unk> tagged Morpholinos , combined with fluorescein @-@ specific antibodies , can be used as probes for in @-@ situ hybridization to miRNAs . Morpholinos can block ribozyme activity . U2 and U12 snRNP functions have been inhibited by Morpholinos . Morpholinos targeted to " slippery " mRNA sequences within protein coding regions can induce translational <unk> . Morpholinos can block editing of RNA . Activities of Morpholinos against this variety of targets suggest that Morpholinos can be used as a general @-@ purpose tool for blocking interactions of proteins or nucleic acids with mRNA . 
 = = Specificity , stability and non @-@ antisense effects = = 
 Morpholinos have become a standard knockdown tool in animal embryonic systems , which have a broader range of gene expression than adult cells and can be strongly affected by an off @-@ target interaction . Following initial injections into frog or fish embryos at the single @-@ cell or few @-@ cell stages , Morpholino effects can be measured up to five days later , after most of the processes of organogenesis and differentiation are past , with observed phenotypes consistent with target @-@ gene knockdown . Control oligos with irrelevant sequences usually produce no change in embryonic phenotype , evidence of the Morpholino oligo 's sequence @-@ specificity and lack of non @-@ antisense effects . The dose required for a knockdown can be reduced by <unk> of several Morpholino oligos targeting the same mRNA , which is an effective strategy for reducing or eliminating dose @-@ dependent off @-@ target RNA interactions . 
 mRNA rescue experiments can often restore the wild @-@ type phenotype to the embryos and provide evidence for the specificity of a Morpholino . In an mRNA rescue , a Morpholino is co @-@ injected with an mRNA that codes for the same protein that the <unk> is targeted to knock down . However , the rescue mRNA has a modified 5 ' -UTR ( untranslated region ) so that the rescue mRNA contains no target for the Morpholino but the rescue mRNA 's coding region encodes the protein of interest . Translation of the rescue mRNA replaces production of the protein that was knocked down by the Morpholino . Since the rescue mRNA would not affect phenotypic changes due to modulation of off @-@ target gene expression by the Morpholino , this return to wild @-@ type phenotype is further evidence of Morpholino specificity . 
 Because of their completely unnatural backbones , Morpholinos are not recognized by cellular proteins . Nucleases do not degrade Morpholinos , nor are they degraded in serum or in cells . Morpholinos do not activate toll @-@ like receptors and so they do not activate innate immune responses such as interferon induction or the NF @-@ κB @-@ mediated inflammation response . Morpholinos are not known to modify methylation of DNA . 
 Up to 18 % of Morpholinos appear to induce nontarget @-@ related phenotypes including cell death in the central nervous system and somite tissues of zebrafish embryos . Most of these effects have been shown to be due to activation of p53 @-@ mediated apoptosis , and can be suppressed by co @-@ injection of an anti @-@ p53 Morpholino along with the experimental Morpholino ; moreover , the p53 @-@ mediated apoptotic effect of a Morpholino knockdown has been <unk> using another antisense structural type , showing the p53 @-@ mediated apoptosis to be a consequence of the loss of the targeted protein and not a consequence of the oligo type used to knock down the protein . It appears that these effects are sequence @-@ specific ; as in most cases , if a Morpholino is associated with non @-@ target effects , the 4 @-@ base mismatch Morpholino will not trigger these effects . 
 A cause for concern in the use of Morpholinos is the potential for " off @-@ target " effects . Whether an observed morphant phenotype is due to the intended knockdown or an interaction with an off @-@ target RNA can often be addressed by running another experiment to confirm that the observed morphant phenotype results from the knockdown of the expected target . This can be done by recapitulating the morphant phenotype with a second , non @-@ overlapping Morpholino targeting the same mRNA or by confirmation of the observed phenotypes by use of a mutant strain or dominant @-@ negative methods . As mentioned above , rescue of observed phenotypes by <unk> a rescue mRNA is , when feasible , a reliable test of specificity of a Morpholino . 
 = = Delivery = = 
 For a Morpholino to be effective , it must be delivered past the cell membrane into the cytosol of a cell . Once in the cytosol , Morpholinos freely diffuse between the cytosol and nucleus , as demonstrated by the nuclear splice @-@ modifying activity of Morpholinos observed after microinjection into the cytosol of cells . Different methods are used for delivery into embryos , into cultured cells or into adult animals . A microinjection apparatus is usually used for delivery into an embryo , with injections most commonly performed at the single @-@ cell or few @-@ cell stage ; an alternative method for embryonic delivery is electroporation , which can deliver oligos into tissues of later embryonic stages . Common techniques for delivery into cultured cells include the Endo @-@ Porter peptide ( which causes the Morpholino to be released from endosomes ) , the Special Delivery system ( no longer commercially available , used a Morpholino @-@ DNA heteroduplex and an <unk> polyethylenimine delivery reagent ) , electroporation , or scrape loading . 
 Delivery into adult tissues is usually difficult , though there are a few systems allowing useful uptake of unmodified Morpholino oligos ( including the inherently leaky muscle cells caused by Duchenne muscular dystrophy or the vascular endothelial cells stressed during balloon angioplasty ) . Though they permeate through intercellular spaces in tissues effectively , unconjugated <unk> have limited distribution into the cytosol and nuclear spaces within healthy tissues following IV administration . Systemic delivery into many cells in adult organisms can be accomplished by using covalent conjugates of Morpholino oligos with cell @-@ penetrating peptides , and , while toxicity has been associated with moderate doses of the peptide conjugates , they have been used in vivo for effective oligo delivery at doses below those causing observed toxicity . An octa @-@ <unk> dendrimer attached to the end of a Morpholino can deliver the modified oligo ( called a Vivo @-@ Morpholino ) from the blood to the cytosol . Delivery @-@ enabled Morpholinos , such as peptide conjugates and Vivo @-@ Morpholinos , show promise as therapeutics for viral and genetic diseases . 
 = Weight Gain 4000 = 
 " Weight Gain 4000 " is the third episode of the American animated television series South Park . It first aired on Comedy Central in the United States on August 27 , 1997 . In the episode , the residents of South Park excitedly prepare for a visit by celebrity Kathie Lee Gifford , whom the boys ' third @-@ grade teacher Mr. Garrison plans to assassinate because of a childhood grudge . In the meantime , Cartman becomes extremely obese after buying a bodybuilding supplement called Weight Gain 4000 . 
 The episode was written and directed by series co @-@ founders Trey Parker and Matt Stone . After the South Park pilot episode , " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " , drew poor test audience results , Comedy Central requested a script for one more new episode before deciding whether or not to commit to a full series . The resulting script for " Weight Gain 4000 " helped the network decide to pick up the show . Although the second episode to be produced , it was originally broadcast as the third episode . It was also the first South Park episode created completely using computers rather than construction paper . 
 Although some reviewers criticized the episode for its profanity and other material deemed offensive at the time of its original broadcast , several others felt " Weight Gain 4000 " was a significant improvement over the pilot , particularly for its satirical element regarding American consumerism . The episode introduced such recurring characters as Jimbo Kern , Mayor McDaniels , Bebe Stevens and Clyde Donovan . The show 's portrayal of Kathie Lee Gifford was the first time a celebrity was spoofed in South Park . Cartman 's line " Beefcake " became one of the most popular catchphrases from the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 South Park Elementary teacher Mr. Garrison announces that Cartman has won the school 's " Save Our Fragile Planet " essay contest , much to the anger of his classmate Wendy Testaburger , who immediately suspects him of cheating . The rest of the town becomes a flurry of excitement upon learning celebrity television host Kathie Lee Gifford will come to South Park to present Cartman with an award on national television . Mayor McDaniels plans a big event to showcase the town , with hopes of furthering her own career . Mr. Garrison directs rehearsals for a play with the schoolchildren depicting the history of South Park , which is to be shown at the event . Mayor McDaniels is horrified , however , to learn the historically accurate play includes children playing pioneers who attack and brutally beat the students portraying Native Americans . 
 Unbeknownst to the rest of town , Mr. Garrison relives a traumatic childhood memory in which a young Gifford defeated him in a national talent show . Mr. Garrison is manipulated by his hand puppet , Mr. Hat , to assassinate Gifford out of revenge . He purchases a large rifle from Jimbo 's gun shop and plots to shoot Gifford . Meanwhile , Cartman is excited to appear on live television , and Mayor McDaniels instructs him to get into shape for Gifford 's visit . Seeing a television commercial for a bodybuilding supplement called " Weight Gain 4000 " , Cartman asks his mother to buy it for him . Cartman becomes extremely fat from the product , although he believes he is in excellent shape and the excess weight is strictly muscle . Back at the school , Wendy looks through Mr. Garrison 's papers and confirms Cartman indeed cheated on the contest by writing his name on a copy of Walden by Henry David Thoreau . Wendy also learns about Mr. Garrison 's assassination plan , and enlists the help of her friend Stan to stop him . 
 Gifford arrives , and most of the town attends the celebratory event , where Chef sings a song to seduce her . Mr. Garrison takes his position in a tall book depository , but he is frustrated to see that Gifford is hidden behind a bulletproof glass bubble . Wendy and Stan arrive and try unsuccessfully to stop Mr. Garrison , saying that they understand his pain , but when Stan accidentally reignites Garrisons anger , he decides to go through with the assassination . Just as he 's about to fire , <unk> new immense weight causes the stage to collapse , catapulting Gifford off it , and causing the bullet to hit Kenny in the head . Kenny is propelled through the air and impaled on a flagpole . Gifford 's bodyguards whisk Gifford away , costing a disappointed Cartman his chance to be on television . Wendy takes to the stage and reveals that Cartman cheated on his essay , but the townspeople are too upset about Gifford 's departure to care . Mr. Garrison is taken to a mental hospital , where Mr. Hat is placed into a straitjacket . Mr. Garrison apologizes to the kids for costing the town a chance to be on television , although Kyle explains to him that Cartman is now appearing on talk show Geraldo because of his tremendous obesity . The episode ends with Chef having sex with Gifford while watching Geraldo . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Weight Gain 4000 " was written and directed by series co @-@ founders Trey Parker and Matt Stone . It was first aired on Comedy Central in the United States on August 27 , 1997 . The South Park pilot , " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " , did not do well with test audiences , and Comedy Central executives were unsure whether they wanted to order any additional episodes . However , they paid Parker and Stone to write another script when Internet buzz began to generate about the duo and their work on The Spirit of Christmas , the 1995 animated short film that served as a precursor to South Park . The network opted not to commit to a full Comedy Central series until they could read the newly commissioned script . The result was " Weight Gain 4000 " , which the two South Park creators wrote while they were working on their 1997 comedy @-@ action film , Orgazmo . 
 In writing the script , the duo sought to give Comedy Central executives an idea of what the series would be like and how each show could differ from the others . Parker and Stone also said they would not write another script until the network signed off on the full show with a season of at least six episodes . Comedy Central liked the script and agreed to commit to a series . While " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " was created almost entirely with construction paper , " Weight Gain 4000 " was the first South Park episode made completely using computers . It was created in little over a month in a studio in Westwood , California , by about 15 animators using PowerAnimator , the Alias Systems Corporation animation program most commonly known as " Alias " , which would be used in subsequent episodes . In the future , South Park shows would be created within a week of their broadcast dates and require about 40 animators . " Weight Gain 4000 " was animated in chronological order from beginning to end . Although Parker and Stone sought to improve the details and textures of the characters and overall animation , they also specifically chose Alias because it would allow the animation to maintain the show 's deliberately crude visual style they first created with construction paper in The Spirit of Christmas and " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " . 
 The South Park creators and animators said they were still developing the characters and trying to figure out the future direction of the show with " Weight Gain 4000 " , which was more slow @-@ paced than the series would eventually become . The 30 @-@ page script was shorter than in later episodes , which would average between 45 to 50 pages . The child protagonists also spoke slower . While recording their voice performances , the actors read the lines slowly and the dialogue was then sped up to create the characters ' distinctive voices . At that time , Parker and Stone had not mastered the pace at which they needed to speak . The crowd shots in " Weight Gain 4000 " took a particularly long time to animate due to the large number of people featured , and the animators were especially proud of the use of depth and motion in the perspective of the crosshairs in Mr. Garrison 's rifle scope as he tried to assassinate Kathie Lee Gifford . Mr. Garrison 's hatred for Gifford was foreshadowed in " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " , where the sentence " I 'm not positive , but I think Cathy [ sic ] Lee Gifford is much older than she claims to be " , can be seen on his classroom 's chalkboard . During a flashback scene in " Weight Gain 4000 " , an eight @-@ year @-@ old Mr. Garrison is shown to already be bald on top with gray hair on the side of his ears . This led to an inconsistency in the first season episode " Cartman 's Mom is a Dirty Slut " , in which he has a full head of hair during a flashback . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Describing the general tone of the show , Teri Fitsell of The New Zealand Herald explains that " South Park is a vicious social satire that works by spotlighting not the immorality of these kids but their amorality , and contrasting it with the conniving hypocrisy of the adults who surround them . " The humor of the show comes from the disparity between the cute appearance of the characters and their crude behavior . However , Parker and Stone said in an early interview that the show 's language is realistic . " There are so many shows where little kids are good and sweet , and it 's just not real ... Don 't people remember what they were like in third grade ? We were little bastards . " 
 Although these elements were established in " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " and the Spirit of Christmas precursor cartoons , " Weight Gain 4000 " further pushed the conventions of television , and especially of animated television entertainment . In addition to a continued stream of profanities and the promiscuous activities of Chef , an elementary school employee , the episode presents the character of Mr. Garrison as more and more unhinged . Although entrusted with the care of an elementary school class , Mr. Garrison demonstrates a questionable gender identity , poor teaching and unusual relationship with his Mr. Hat hand puppet . 
 " Weight Gain 4000 " served as a commentary on American consumerism , the equation of personal happiness with consumption and the purchase of material possessions . This satire is particularly demonstrated by Cartman 's blind faith in the Weight Gain 4000 bodybuilding supplement product despite strong evidence that the product fails at its primary function . Specifically , the product promises to build muscle , and Cartman believes it has fulfilled this function even after he only becomes extremely overweight . This blind faith is also illustrated by the complete disregard Cartman demonstrates for warnings that Weight Gain 4000 carries a risk of permanent damage to the liver and kidneys . The tremendous amount of product Cartman buys is further indicative of American purchasing habits . 
 Cartman 's impulse to buy a bodybuilding supplement based on a single commercial has been described as a satire of the concept of " identity shopping " . The concept involves the obtaining of an identity through what one owns , wears or buys , just as Cartman seeks to remake himself as a bodybuilder by buying Weight Gain 4000 . " Weight Gain 4000 " also satirizes the obsession with celebrity prevalent among most Americans , particularly through the town 's overly enthusiastic reaction to Kathie Lee Gifford 's appearance . Additionally , Anglican theologian Paul F. M. <unk> has suggested Cartman 's addiction to food in the episode , combined with his blind faith in the Weight Gain 4000 supplement and his insistence to " Stay true to your dreams " , reflects the idea that many people falsely cling to the notion of free will when they in fact lack any self @-@ control whatsoever . <unk> wrote , " The two writers of South Park see through the myth of ' free will . ' " 
 = = Cultural references and impact = = 
 " Weight Gain 4000 " introduced several characters who would maintain important recurring roles throughout the rest of the series . Among them were Jimbo Kern , Mayor McDaniels , and Wendy 's best friend Bebe Stevens . It also introduces Clyde Donovan , a student from Mr. Garrison 's class who would eventually play significant roles in future seasons , although he was not identified by name . The characters demonstrate the wide range of often @-@ extreme personalities among the adult residents of South Park , as well as serving as individual satires . McDaniels , who imagines herself an instant star upon being seen on television with Gifford , is portrayed as more caring about her own fame than the needs of her constituents , and the neglect with which Jimbo sells a gun to an obviously unstable Mr. Garrison serves as a satire of gun control . Jimbo and his friend Ned ( who was not introduced until " Volcano " ) were inspired by caricatures Parker used to draw during high school . In creating McDaniels , Parker and Stone envisioned a sophisticated mayor who was convinced she was better than the other residents of South Park . The episode also marked the first reference to Jesus and Pals , the public @-@ access television talk show hosted by Jesus Christ . The fictional show is mentioned twice in the background during commercials on television sets , although footage from the show itself is not shown until " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " later in the season . Jesus and Pals , and the idea of Jesus as a South Park resident , are references to the original The Spirit of Christmas cartoon . Debbie Liebling , who served as a South Park producer at the time of the episode 's broadcast , said the inclusion of a television show hosted by Jesus helped convey for audiences the idea of South Park as a place where " anything can happen " . 
 Kathie Lee Gifford , then a television hostess on the morning talk show Live with Regis and Kathie Lee , was the first of many celebrities to be spoofed in a South Park episode . The South Park creators said they chose Gifford completely at random , not based on any particular reason or distaste for her . Shortly after " Weight Gain 4000 " aired , the tabloid The Globe hired <unk> Johnson to film herself seducing Frank Gifford , Gifford 's husband , for a newspaper story . The incident was the first of what Parker and Stone called the " South Park Curse " , in which something tragic or embarrassing supposedly happens to a celebrity shortly before or after they were featured in South Park . Actress Karri Turner provided the voice of Gifford in " Weight Gain 4000 " , marking her first and only guest appearance on South Park . Gifford appears at a parade hidden inside a bulletproof glass bubble . The bubble was inspired by an appearance Pope John Paul II made in the Popemobile during a trip to Denver , which was attended by Parker and Stone . They thought the design of the Popemobile , which has a bulletproof booth built into the back of a modified truck , was " hilarious " . The design of the trophy that Gifford was to give to Cartman is a reference to Parker and Stone 's 1997 film Orgazmo . 
 The line " Beefcake " , which Eric Cartman enthusiastically screams after hearing it on a Weight Gain 4000 commercial , became a well @-@ known catchphrase following the episode 's broadcast , and clothing items with Cartman shouting the line became very popular . One of the earliest and largest South Park fan sites was called <unk> @-@ <unk> Matt Stone and site creator <unk> Tan decided to shut the site down in April 2001 when the official site South Park Studios launched . South Park : Chef 's Luv Shack , a 1999 video game from developer Acclaim , included a mini @-@ game called " Beefcake " , in which players control a Cartman character who moves back and forth between the screen eating cans of Weight Gain 4000 that are thrown down at him . The salesmen from " Weight Gain 4000 " are featured as antagonists in the mini @-@ game . The " beefcake " commercial featured in the episode is also briefly seen in the third season episode " Two Guys Naked in a Hot Tub " , when Stan is quickly flipping through channels on his television . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 When " Weight Gain 4000 " was released , many writers in the mainstream media were still debating the longevity and overall quality of South Park . With the series still in its earliest stages , the episode continued to shock many with its frequent use of profanities by children and the apparent instability of school teacher Mr. Garrison . Audiences were especially shocked by the violence depicted among children during a South Park history play , which included the use of guns and portrayed the bloody slaughter of Native Americans at the hands of white settlers . Audiences were also shocked and offended by Chef 's sexually suggestive song about Gifford . Nevertheless , several reviewers declared " Weight Gain 4000 " a significant improvement over the pilot , " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " , and felt it went in a much more satirical direction . 
 Jeff Simon of The Buffalo News , who did not like " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " , felt " Weight Gain 4000 " proved the series could be funny . He specifically complimented the episode 's commentary on American consumerism . Simon wrote , " It 's all very bitter social satire , and if it weren 't on Comedy Central , believe me , no one in <unk> would think it ready for prime time . And you know what else ? It 's funny . " Likewise , The Washington Post critic Tom Shales strongly criticized " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " , but said the second episode was funny and included " cleverly intertwined " plot @-@ lines . Shales said , " [ It ] suggests the show may be an attempt at satire and not just <unk> humor ... Yes , it 's still sick and still twisted , but somehow this episode at least appears to have some comic ingenuity behind it , whereas the first was just a smutfest . " In 2006 , " Weight Gain 4000 " was identified by Winnipeg Free Press as one of the ten most memorable South Park episodes , and ranked twelfth in a list of the top 25 greatest Cartman moments , as determined by voters on the Comedy Central website . The Daily Record in Scotland listed the episode 's ending , and the " Beefcake ! " line , as one of the six most memorable moments in the series . 
 " Weight Gain 4000 " was released , alongside five other episodes , in a three @-@ VHS set on May 5 , 1998 , marking the first time South Park was made available on video . It was released on the " Volume II " video , along with " Big Gay Al 's Big Gay Boat Ride " ; other featured episodes included " Cartman Gets an Anal Probe " , " Volcano " , " An Elephant Makes Love to a Pig " and " Death " . " Weight Gain 4000 " , along with the other 12 episodes from the first season , was also included in the DVD release " South Park : The Complete First Season " , which was released on November 12 , 2002 . Parker and Stone recorded commentary tracks for each episode , but they were not included with the DVDs due to " standards " issues with some of the statements . They refused to allow the tracks to be edited and censored , so they were released in a CD separately from the DVDs . In 2008 , the duo made " Weight Gain 4000 " and all other South Park episodes available to watch for free on the show 's official website , " South Park Studios " . 
 = Keep = 
 A keep ( from the Middle English kype ) is a type of fortified tower built within castles during the Middle Ages by European nobility . Scholars have debated the scope of the word keep , but usually consider it to refer to large towers in castles that were fortified residences , used as a refuge of last resort should the rest of the castle fall to an adversary . The first keeps were made of timber and formed a key part of the motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles that emerged in Normandy and Anjou during the 10th century ; the design spread to England as a result of the Norman invasion of 1066 , and in turn spread into Wales during the second half of the 11th century and into Ireland in the 1170s . The Anglo @-@ Normans and French rulers began to build stone keeps during the 10th and 11th centuries ; these included Norman keeps , with a square or rectangular design , and circular shell keeps . Stone keeps carried considerable political as well as military importance and could take up to a decade to build . 
 During the 12th century , new designs began to be introduced – in France , quatrefoil @-@ shaped keeps were introduced , while in England polygonal towers were built . By the end of the century , French and English keep designs began to diverge : Philip II of France built a sequence of circular keeps as part of his bid to stamp his royal authority on his new territories , while in England castles were built without keeps . In Spain , keeps were increasingly incorporated into both Christian and Islamic castles , although in Germany tall towers called Bergfriede were preferred to keeps in the western fashion . In the second half of the 14th century , there was a resurgence in the building of keeps . In France , the keep at Vincennes began a fashion for tall , heavily machicolated designs , a trend adopted in Spain most prominently through the Valladolid school of Spanish castle design . Meanwhile , tower keeps in England became popular amongst the most wealthy nobles : these large keeps , each uniquely designed , formed part of the grandest castles built during the period . 
 By the 16th century , however , keeps were slowly falling out of fashion as fortifications and residences . Many were destroyed in civil wars between the 17th and 18th centuries , or incorporated into gardens as an alternative to follies . During the 19th century , keeps became fashionable once again and in England and France a number were restored or redesigned by Gothic architects . Despite further damage to many French and Spanish keeps during the wars of the 20th century , keeps now form an important part of the tourist and heritage industry in Europe . 
 = = Etymology and historiography = = 
 Since the 16th century , the English word keep has commonly referred to large towers in castles . The word originates from around 1375 to 1376 , coming from the Middle English term kype , meaning basket or cask , and was a term applied to the shell keep at Guînes , said to resemble a barrel . The term came to be used for other shell keeps by the 15th century . By the 17th century , the word keep lost its original reference to baskets or casks , and was popularly assumed to have come from the Middle English word keep , meaning to hold or to protect . 
 Early on , the use of the word keep became associated with the idea of a tower in a castle that would serve both as a fortified , high @-@ status private residence and a refuge of last resort . The issue was complicated by the building of fortified Renaissance towers in Italy called <unk> that were used as defences of last resort and were also named after the Italian for to hold or to keep . By the 19th century , Victorian historians incorrectly concluded that the etymology of the words " keep " and <unk> were linked , and that all keeps had fulfilled this military function . 
 As a result of this evolution in meaning , the use of the term keep in historical analysis today can be problematic . Contemporary medieval writers used various terms for the buildings we would today call keeps . In Latin , they are variously described as turris , turris castri or magna turris – a tower , a castle tower , or a great tower . The 12th @-@ century French came to term them a donjon , from the Latin <unk> " lordship " , linking the keep and feudal authority . Similarly , medieval Spanish writers called the buildings <unk> del <unk> , or " place of homage . " In England , donjon turned into dungeon , which initially referred to a keep , rather than to a place of imprisonment . 
 This ambiguity over terminology has made historical analysis of the use of " keeps " problematic . While the term remains in common academic use , some academics prefer to use the term donjon , and most modern historians warn against using the term " keep " simplistically . The fortifications that we would today call keeps certainly did not necessarily form part of a unified medieval style , nor were they all used in a similar fashion during the period . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Timber keeps ( 9th – 12th centuries ) = = = 
 The earliest keeps were built as part of motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles from the 10th century onwards – a combination of documentary and archaeological evidence places the first such castle , built at <unk> , in 979 . These castles were initially built by the more powerful lords of Anjou in the late 10th and 11th centuries , in particular Fulk III and his son , Geoffrey II , who built a great number of them between 987 and 1060 . William the Conqueror then introduced this form of castle into England when he invaded in 1066 , and the design spread through south Wales as the Normans expanded up the valleys during the subsequent decades . 
 In a motte @-@ and @-@ bailey design , a castle would include a mound called a motte , usually artificially constructed by piling up turf and soil , and a bailey , a lower walled enclosure . A keep and a protective wall would usually be built on top of the motte . Some protective walls around a keep would be large enough to have a wall @-@ walk around them , and the outer walls of the motte and the wall @-@ walk could be strengthened by filling in the gap between the wooden walls with earth and stones , allowing it to carry more weight – this was called a <unk> . Smaller mottes could only support simple towers with room for a few soldiers , whilst larger mottes could be equipped with a much grander keep . Many wooden keeps were designed with a <unk> , a square structure that overhung from the upper floors of the building , enabling better defences and a more sturdy structural design . These wooden keeps could be protected by skins and hides to prevent them being easily set alight during a siege . 
 One contemporary account of these keeps comes from Jean de Colmieu around 1130 , who described how the nobles of the Calais region would build " a mound of earth as high as they can and dig a ditch about it as wide and deep as possible . The space on top of the mound is enclosed by a palisade of very strong hewn logs , strengthened at intervals by as many towers as their means can provide . Inside the enclosure is a citadel , or keep , which commands the whole circuit of the defences . The entrance to the fortress is by means of a bridge , which , rising from the outer side of the moat and supported on posts as it ascends , <unk> to the top of the mound . " At Durham Castle , contemporaries described how the keep arose from the " tumulus of rising earth " with a keep reaching " into thin air , strong within and without " , a " stalwart house ... glittering with beauty in every part " . As well as having defensive value , keeps and mottes sent a powerful political message to the local population . 
 Wooden keeps could be quite extensive in size and , as Robert Higham and Philip Barker have noted , it was possible to build " ... very tall and massive structures . " As an example of what these keeps may have comprised , the early 12th @-@ century chronicler Lambert of Ardres described the wooden keep on top of the motte at the castle of Ardres , where the " ... first storey was on the surface of the ground , where were cellars and granaries , and great boxes , tuns , casks , and other domestic utensils . In the storey above were the dwelling and common living @-@ rooms of the residents in which were the <unk> , the rooms of the bakers and butlers , and the great chamber in which the lord and his wife slept ... In the upper storey of the house were garret rooms ... In this storey also the watchmen and the servants appointed to keep the house took their sleep . " 
 In the Holy Roman Empire , tall , free @-@ standing wooden towers called Bergfriede were commonly built by the 11th century , either as part of motte @-@ and @-@ bailey designs or , as part of <unk> castles , with characteristic inner and outer courts . Bergfriede , which take their name from the German for a belfry , had similarities to keeps , but are usually distinguished from them on account of Bergfriede having a smaller area or footprint , usually being non @-@ residential and being typically integrated into the outer defences of a castle , rather than being a safe refuge of last resort . 
 = = = Early stone keeps ( 10th – 12th centuries ) = = = 
 During the 10th century , a small number of stone keeps began to be built in France , such at the Château de Langeais : in the 11th century , their numbers increased as the style spread through Normandy across the rest of France and into England . Some existing motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles were converted to stone , with the keep amongst usually the first parts to be upgraded , while in other cases new keeps were built from scratch in stone . These stone keeps were introduced into Ireland during the 1170s following the Norman occupation of the east of the country , where they were particularly popular amongst the new Anglo @-@ Norman lords . Two broad types of design emerged across France and England during the period : four @-@ sided stone keeps , known as Norman keeps or great keeps in English – a donjon carré or donjon roman in French – and circular shell keeps . 
 The reasons for the transition from timber to stone keeps are unclear , and the process was slow and uneven , taking many years to take effect across the various regions . Traditionally it was believed that stone keeps had been adopted because of the cruder nature of wooden buildings , the limited lifespan of wooden fortifications and their vulnerability to fire ; recent archaeological studies have however shown that many wooden castles were as robust and as sophisticated as their stone equivalents . Some wooden keeps were not converted into stone for many years and were instead expanded in wood , such as at Hen Domen . Nonetheless , stone became increasingly popular as a building material for keeps for both military and symbolic reasons . 
 Stone keep construction required skilled craftsmen . Unlike timber and earthworks , which could be built using unfree labour or serfs , these craftsmen had to be paid and stone keeps were therefore expensive . They were also relatively slow to erect , due to the limitations of the lime mortar used during the period – a keep 's walls could usually be raised by a maximum of only 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 6 metres ) a year ; the keep at Scarborough was not atypical in taking ten years to build . The number of such keeps remained relatively low : in England , for example , although several early stone keeps had been built after the conquest , there were only somewhere between ten and fifteen in existence by 1100 , and only around a hundred had been built by 1216 . 
 Norman keeps had four sides , with the corners reinforced by pilaster buttresses ; some keeps , particularly in Normandy and France , had a <unk> design , being rectangular in plan with their length twice their width , while others , particularly in England , formed a square . These keeps could be up to four storeys high , with the entrance placed on the first storey to prevent the door from being easily broken down ; early French keeps had external stairs in wood , whilst later castles in both France and England built them in stone . In some cases the entrance stairs were protected by additional walls and a door , producing a forebuilding . The strength of the Norman design typically came from the thickness of the keep 's walls : usually made of rag @-@ stone , these could be up to 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 metres ) thick , immensely strong , and producing a steady temperature inside the building throughout summer and winter . The larger keeps were subdivided by an internal wall while the smaller versions had a single , slightly cramped chamber on each floor . Usually only the first floor would be vaulted in stone , with the higher storeys supported with timbers . 
 There has been extensive academic discussion of the extent to which Norman keeps were designed with a military or political function in mind , particularly in England . Earlier analyses of Norman keeps focused on their military design , and historians such as R. Brown Cathcart King proposed that square keeps were adopted because of their military superiority over timber keeps . Most of these Norman keeps were certainly extremely physically robust , even though the characteristic pilaster buttresses added little real architectural strength to the design . Many of the weaknesses inherent to their design were irrelevant during the early part of their history . The corners of square keeps were theoretically vulnerable to siege engines and galleried mining , but before the introduction of the trebuchet at the end of the 12th century , early artillery stood little practical chance of damaging the keeps , and galleried mining was rarely practised . Similarly , the corners of a square keep created dead space that defenders could not fire at , but missile fire in castle sieges was less important until the introduction of the crossbow in the middle of the 12th century , when arrowslits began to be introduced . 
 Nonetheless , many stone Norman keeps made considerable compromises to military utility . Norwich Castle , for example , included elaborate blind arcading on the outside of the building and appears to have had an entrance route designed for public ceremony , rather than for defence . The interior of the keep at Hedingham could certainly have hosted impressive ceremonies and events , but contained numerous flaws from a military perspective . Important early English and Welsh keeps such as the White Tower , Colchester , and Chepstow were all built in a distinctive Romanesque style , often reusing Roman materials and sites , and were almost certainly intended to impress and generate a political effect amongst local people . The political value of these keep designs , and the social prestige they lent to their builders , may help explain why they continued to be built in England into the late 12th century , beyond the point when military theory would have suggested that alternative designs were adopted . 
 The second early stone design , emerging from the 12th century onwards , was the shell keep , a donjon <unk> in French , which involved replacing the wooden keep on a motte , or the palisade on a ringwork , with a circular stone wall . Shell keeps were sometimes further protected by an additional low protective wall , called a chemise , around their base . Buildings could then be built around the inside of the shell , producing a small inner courtyard at the centre . The style was particularly popular in south @-@ east England and across Normandy , although less so elsewhere . Restormel Castle is a classic example of this development , as is the later Launceston Castle ; prominent Normandy and Low Country equivalents include Gisors and the <unk> van Leiden – these castles were amongst the most powerful fortifications of the period . Although the circular design held military advantages over one with square corners , as noted above these really mattered from only the end of the 12th century onwards ; the major reason for adopting a shell keep design , in the 12th century at least , was the circular design of the original earthworks exploited to support the keep ; indeed , some designs were less than circular in order to accommodate irregular mottes , such as that found at Windsor Castle . 
 = = = Mid @-@ medieval keeps ( late 12th – 14th centuries ) = = = 
 During the second half of the 12th century , a range of new keep designs began to appear across France and England , breaking the previous unity of the regional designs . The use of keeps in castles spread through Iberia , but some new castles never incorporated keeps in their designs . One traditional explanation for these developments emphasises the military utility of the new approaches , arguing , for example , that the curved surfaces of the new keeps helped to deflect attacks , or that they drew on lessons learnt during the Crusades from Islamic practices in the Levant . More recent historical analysis , however , has emphasised the political and social drivers that underlay these mid @-@ medieval changes in keep design . 
 Through most of the 12th century , France was divided between the Capetian kings , ruling from the Île @-@ de @-@ France , and kings of England , who controlled Normandy and much of the west of France . Within the Capetian territories , early experimentation in new keep designs began at <unk> in 1120 , where a circular keep was built with four round turrets ; internally , however , the structure remained conventionally square . A few years later , Château d <unk> adopted a quatrefoil design . These designs , however , remained isolated experiments . 
 In the 1190s , however , the struggle for power in France began to swing in favour of Philip II , culminating in the Capetian capture of Normandy in 1204 . Philip II started to construct completely circular keeps , such as the Tour Jeanne d 'Arc , with most built in his newly acquired territories . The first of Philip 's new keeps was begun at the Louvre in 1190 and at least another twenty followed , all built to a consistent standard and cost . The architectural idea of circular keeps may have come from Catalonia , where circular towers in castles formed a local tradition , and probably carried some military advantages , but Philip 's intention in building these new keeps in a fresh style was clearly political , an attempt to demonstrate his new power and authority over his extended territories . As historian Philippe Durand suggests , these keeps provided military security and were a physical representation of the <unk> <unk> , or Capetian renewal . 
 Keep design in England began to change only towards the end of the 12th century , later than in France . Wooden keeps on mottes ceased to be built across most of England by the 1150s , although they continued to be erected in Wales and along the Welsh Marches . By the end of the 12th century , England and Ireland saw a handful of innovative angular or polygonal keeps built , including the keep at Orford Castle , with three rectangular , clasping towers built out from the high , circular central tower ; the cross @-@ shaped keep of Trim Castle and the famous polygonal design at <unk> . Despite these new designs , square keeps remained popular across much of England and , as late as the 1170s , square Norman great keeps were being built at Newcastle . Circular keep designs similar to those in France really became popular in Britain in the Welsh Marches and Scotland for only a short period during the early 13th century . 
 As with the new keeps constructed in France , these Anglo @-@ Norman designs were informed both by military thinking and by political drivers . The keep at Orford has been particularly extensively analysed in this regard , and although traditional explanations suggested that its unusual plan was the result of an experimental military design , more recent analysis concludes that the design was instead probably driven by political symbolism and the need for Henry to dominate the contested lands of East Anglia . The architecture would , for mid @-@ 12th century nobility , have summoned up images of King Arthur or Constantinople , then the idealised versions of royal and imperial power . Even formidable military designs such as that at Château Gaillard were built with political effect in mind . Gaillard was designed to reaffirm Angevin authority in a fiercely disputed conflict zone and the keep , although militarily impressive , contained only an anteroom and a royal audience chamber , and was built on soft chalk and without an internal well , both serious defects from a defensive perspective . 
 During most of the medieval period , Iberia was divided between Christian and Islamic kingdoms , neither of which traditionally built keeps , instead building watchtowers or mural towers . By the 12th century , however , the influence of France and the various military orders was encouraging the development of square keeps in Christian castles across the region , and by the second half of the century this practice was spread across into the Islamic kingdoms . 
 By contrast , the remainder of Europe saw stone towers being used in castles , but not in a way that fulfilled the range of functions seen in the western European keeps . In the Low Countries , it became popular for the local nobility to build stand @-@ alone , square towers , but rarely as part of a wider castle . Similarly , square stone towers became popular in Venice , but these did not fulfil the same role as western keeps . In Germany , rectangular stone castles began to replace motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles from the 12th century onwards . These designs included stone versions of the traditional Bergfriede , which still remained distinct from the domestic keeps used in more western parts of Europe , with the occasional notable exception , such as the large , residential Bergfried at <unk> Castle . 
 Several designs for new castles emerged that made keeps unnecessary . One such design was the concentric approach , involving exterior walls guarded with towers , and perhaps supported by further , concentric layered defenses : thus castles such as Framlingham never had a central keep . Military factors may well have driven this development : R. Brown , for example , suggests that designs with a separate keep and bailey system inherently lacked a co @-@ ordinated and combined defensive system , and that once bailey walls were sophisticated enough , a keep became militarily unnecessary . In England , gatehouses were also growing in size and sophistication until they too challenged the need for a keep in the same castle . The classic Edwardian gatehouse , with two large , flanking towers and multiple portcullises , designed to be defended from attacks both within and outside the main castle , has been often compared to the earlier Norman keeps : some of the largest gatehouses are called gatehouse keeps for this reason . 
 The quadrangular castle design that emerged in France during the 13th century was another development that removed the need for a keep . Castles had needed additional living space since their first emergence in the 9th century ; initially this had been provided by halls in the bailey , then later by ranges of chambers alongside the inside of a bailey wall , such as at Goodrich . But French designs in the late 12th century took the layout of a contemporary unfortified manor house , whose rooms faced around a central , rectangular courtyard , and built a wall around them to form a castle . The result , illustrated initially at Yonne , and later at Château de <unk> , was a characteristic quadrangular layout with four large , circular corner towers . It lacked a keep , which was not needed to support this design . 
 = = = Late medieval keeps ( 14th – 16th centuries ) = = = 
 The end of the medieval period saw a fresh resurgence in the building of keeps in western castles . Some castles continued to be built without keeps : the Bastille in the 1370s , for example , combined a now traditional quadrangular design with machicolated corner towers , gatehouses and moat ; the walls , innovatively , were of equal height to the towers . This fashion became copied across French and in England , particularly amongst the nouveau riche , for example at Nunney . The royalty and the very wealthiest in France , England and Spain , however , began to construct a small number of keeps on a much larger scale than before , in England sometimes termed tower keeps , as part of new palace fortresses . This shift reflected political and social pressures , such as the desire of the wealthiest lords to have privacy from their growing households of retainers , as well as the various architectural ideas being exchanged across the region , despite the ongoing Hundred Years War between France and England . 
 The resurgence in French keep design began after the defeat of the royal armies at the battles of Crécy in 1346 and Poitiers in 1356 , which caused high levels of social unrest across the remaining French territories . Charles V of France attempted to restore French royal authority and prestige through the construction of a new range of castles . The Château de Vincennes , where a new keep was completed under Charles by 1380 , was the first example of these palace fortresses . The keep at Vincennes was highly innovative : six stories high , with a chemin de ronde running around the machicolated battlements ; the luxuriously appointed building was protected by an enceinte wall that formed a " fortified envelope " around the keep . The Vincennes keep was copied elsewhere across France , particularly as the French kings reconquered territories from the English , encouraging a style that emphasised very tall keeps with prominent machicolations . No allowance for the emerging new gunpowder weapons was made in these keeps , although later in the century gunports were slowly being added , as for example by Charles VI to his keep at Saint @-@ Malo . 
 The French model spread into Iberia in the second half of the century , where the most powerful nobles in Castile built a number of similar tall keeps , such as that at <unk> , taking advantage of the weakness of the Castilian Crown during the period . Henry IV of Castile responded in the 15th century by creating a sequence of royal castles with prominent keeps at the Castle of La Mota , Portillo , and Alcázar of Segovia : built to particular proportions , these keeps became known as a key element of the Valladolid school of Spanish castle design . Smaller versions of these keeps were subsequently built by many aspiring new aristocracy in Spain , including many converted Jews , keen to improve their social prestige and position in society . The French model of tall keeps was also echoed in some German castles , such as that at <unk> , although the layout and positioning of these towers still followed the existing <unk> model , rather than that in western castles . 
 The 15th and 16th centuries saw a small number of English and occasional Welsh castles develop still grander keeps . The first of these large tower keeps were built in the north of England during the 14th century , at locations such as Warkworth . They were probably partially inspired by designs in France , but they also reflected the improvements in the security along the Scottish border during the period , and the regional rise of major noble families such as the <unk> and the Nevilles , whose wealth encouraged a surge in castle building at the end of the 14th century . New castles at Raby , Bolton , and Warkworth Castle took the quadrangular castle styles of the south and combined them with exceptionally large tower keeps to form a distinctive , northern style . Built by major noble houses , these castles were typically even more opulent than the smaller castles like Nunney , built by the nouveau riche . They marked what historian Anthony Emery has described as a " ... second peak of castle building in England and Wales , " following on from the Edwardian designs at the end of the 14th century . 
 In the 15th century , the fashion for the creation of very expensive , French @-@ influenced palatial castles featuring complex tower keeps spread , with new keeps being built at Wardour , Tattershall , and Raglan Castle . In central and eastern England , some keeps began to be built in brick , with Caister and Tattershall forming examples of this trend . In Scotland , the construction of Holyrood Great Tower between 1528 and 1532 drew on this English tradition , but incorporated additional French influences to produce a highly secure but comfortable keep , guarded by a gun park . These tower keeps were expensive buildings to construct , each built to a unique design for a specific lord and , as historian Norman Pounds has suggested , they " ... were designed to allow very rich men to live in luxury and splendour . " 
 At the same time as these keeps were being built by the extremely wealthy , much smaller , keep @-@ like structures called tower houses or peel towers were built across Ireland , Scotland , and northern England , often by relatively poorer local lords and landowners . It was originally argued that Irish tower houses were based on the Scottish design , but the pattern of development of such castles in Ireland does not support this hypothesis . A tower house would typically be a tall , square , stone @-@ built , crenelated building ; Scottish and Ulster tower houses were often also surrounded by a barmkyn or bawn wall . Most academics have concluded that tower houses should not be classified as keeps but rather as a form of fortified house . 
 As the 16th century progressed , keeps fell out of fashion once again . In England , the gatehouse also began to supplant the keep as the key focus for a new castle development . By the 15th century , it was increasingly unusual for a lord to build both a keep and a large gatehouse at the same castle , and by the early 16th century , the gatehouse had easily overtaken the keep as the more fashionable feature : indeed , almost no new keeps were built in England after this period . The classical Palladian style began to dominate European architecture during the 17th century , causing a further move away from the use of keeps . Buildings in this style usually required considerable space for the enfiladed formal rooms that became essential for modern palaces by the middle of the century , and this style was impossible to fit into a traditional keep . The keep at Bolsover Castle in England was one of the few to be built as part of a Palladian design . 
 = = = Later use and destruction of keeps ( 17th – 21st centuries ) = = = 
 From the 17th century onwards , some keeps were deliberately destroyed . In England , many were destroyed after the end of the Second English Civil War in 1649 , when Parliament took steps to prevent another royalist uprising by slighting , or damaging , castles so as to prevent them from having any further military utility . <unk> was quite expensive and took considerable effort to carry out , so damage was usually done in the most cost efficient fashion with only selected walls being destroyed . Keeps were singled out for particular attention in this process because of their continuing political and cultural importance , and the prestige they lent their former royalist owners – at Kenilworth , for example , only the keep was slighted , and at Raglan , the keep was the main focus of parliamentary activity . There was some equivalent destruction of keeps in France in the 17th and 18th centuries , such as the slighting of <unk> by Cardinal Richelieu in 1624 , but the catalogue of damage was far less than that of the 1640s and early 1650s in England . 
 In England , ruined medieval castles became fashionable again in the middle of the 18th century . They were considered an interesting counterpoint to Palladian classical architecture , and gave a degree of medieval allure to their owners . Some keeps were modified to exaggerate this effect : Hawarden , for example , was remodelled to appear taller but also more decayed , the better to produce a good silhouette . The interest continued and , in the late 18th and 19th century , it became fashionable to build intact , replica castles in England , resulting in what A. Rowan has called the Norman style of new castle building , characterised by the inclusion of large keeps ; the final replica keep to be built in this way was at Penrhyn between 1820 and 1840 . 
 Where there was an existing castle on a site , another response across 19th @-@ century Europe was to attempt to improve the buildings , bringing their often chaotic historic features into line with a more integrated architectural aesthetic , in a style often termed Gothic Revivalism . There were numerous attempts to restore or rebuild keeps so as to produce this consistently Gothic style : in England , the architect Anthony Salvin was particularly prominent – as illustrated by reworking and heightening of the keep at Windsor Castle , while in France , Eugène Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc reworked the keeps at castles in locations like Pierrefonds during the 1860s and 1870s , admittedly in a largely speculative fashion , since the original keep had been mostly destroyed in 1617 . 
 The Spanish Civil War and First and Second World Wars in the 20th century caused damage to many castle keeps across Europe ; in particular , the famous keep at Coucy was destroyed by the German Army in 1917 . By the late 20th century , however , the conservation of castle keeps formed part of government policy across France , England , Ireland , and Spain . In the 21st century in England , most keeps are in ruins and form part of the tourism and heritage industries , rather than being used as functioning buildings – the keep of Windsor Castle being a rare exception . This is contrast to the fate of <unk> towers in Germany , large numbers of which were restored as functional buildings in the late 19th and early 20th century , often as government offices or youth hostels , or the modern conversion of tower houses , which in many cases have become modernised domestic homes . 
 = Typhoon Rammasun ( 2008 ) = 
 Typhoon Rammasun , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Butchoy , was recognized as the second typhoon of the 2008 Pacific typhoon season by the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) and the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) . Rammasun was also recognised as the third tropical storm , the second typhoon and the first super typhoon of the 2008 Pacific typhoon season by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) . 
 Rammasun formed on May 5 as a tropical disturbance . The next day the Joint Typhoon Warning Center issued a tropical cyclone formation alert on the developing disturbance . On May 7 both the JTWC and the Japan Meteorological Agency designated the disturbance as a tropical depression , while PAGASA named the depression Butchoy . Later that day both the JMA and the JTWC upgraded the depression to a tropical storm with the JMA naming the storm Rammasun . On May 9 both the JTWC and the JMA upgraded Rammasun to a typhoon . The next day the JMA and the JTWC reported that Rammasun had reached its peak winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) and 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) respectively , which made Rammasun a Category 4 super typhoon on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . After reaching its peak intensity , Rammasun weakened and was downgraded to severe tropical storm on May 12 , before the JTWC declared it extratropical and issued their final advisory . The JMA did not issue their final advisory until several hours later . Within Japan an estimated 10 hectares ( 24 @.@ 7 acres ) of farmland were damaged . In all , the typhoon killed four people , injured 40 others and caused $ 9 @.@ 6 million ( 2008 USD ) worth of damage in both the Philippines and Japan . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On May 4 , 2008 , an area of low pressure formed in the Pacific Ocean to the southeast of Yap . The next day , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) upgraded the area of low pressure to a tropical disturbance and assessed the disturbances chances of forming into a significant tropical cyclone within 24 hours as poor . This was because the developing low level circulation center was weak . Early on May 6 , the JTWC upgraded the disturbances chances of forming into a tropical cyclone within 24 hours to " fair " , as the low level circulation center had consolidated further . A Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert was then issued later that day , by the JTWC who upgraded the disturbance 's chances of becoming a tropical cyclone by the next day as good . 
 Early the next day both the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) and the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) designated the tropical disturbance as a tropical depression with PAGASA assigning the local name of Butchoy to the depression . At this time the depression was located 790 km , ( 490 miles ) , to the east of Mindanao in the Philippines . Later that morning the JMA started to issue full advisories on the tropical depression as forecasts showed that the depression could become a tropical storm within 24 hours . The JTWC then designated the depression as Tropical Depression 02W . Later that day both the JTWC and the JMA reported that the depression intensified into a tropical storm , with the JMA assigning the name Rammasun to the storm . 
 Rammasun continued to intensify and was designated as a severe tropical storm late on May 8 . The next day both the JMA and the JTWC reported that Rammasun had intensified into a typhoon . Later that day the JTWC reported that the typhoon had rapidly intensified within the last six hours and had become a Category 3 typhoon on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . At the same time the JMA were reporting that Rammasun had winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) . The typhoon then continued to intensify quickly with the JMA reporting that Rammasun had winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) , the JTWC then reported that Rammasun had become a Category 4 typhoon with winds of 225 km / h ( 140 mph ) . Later that day both the JMA and the JTWC reported that the typhoon had reached its peak winds . The JMA reported peak winds of 195 km / h ( 120 mph ) whilst the JTWC reported that Rammasun had peak winds of 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) , making it a category 4 super typhoon . Typhoon Rammasun 's minimum pressure was officially estimated at 915 hPa which tied with Intense Tropical Cyclone Hondo as second strongest storm of 2008 . 
 The JTWC kept Rammasun as a super typhoon until early on May 11 , when they reported that the typhoon had weakened into a category four typhoon , while the JMA were reporting that the typhoon had wind speeds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . Later that day both agencies reported that the typhoon had weakened even further , with the JMA reporting that Rammasun had winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) , while the JTWC reported that Rammasun had weakened into a Category 3 typhoon . The JTWC then reported within their next advisory that Rammasun had weakened into a Category 2 typhoon whilst the JMA reported that the typhoon had winds of 140 km / h ( 90 mph ) . The next day as the Typhoon moved out of PAGASA 's area of responsibility Rammasun was downgraded to a Category 1 typhoon by the JTWC . Later that day the JMA downgraded Rammasun to a Severe Tropical Storm whilst the JTWC downgraded it to an extratropical cyclone and released their final advisory on the system . The JMA continued to issue advisories on severe tropical storm Rammasun until early the next day when they downgraded it to an extratropical low . 
 = = Naming , preparations and impact = = 
 The name " Rammasun " was one of the 10 original names submitted by Thailand to the ESCAP / WMO Typhoon Committee for use from January 1 , 2000 . Rammasun is the Thai god for thunder . The name was last used in the 2002 Pacific typhoon season , though it was retired in 2015 after Typhoon Rammasun ( the same name used for the 2014 season , Typhoon Glenda in the Philippines ) left considerable damages in the Philippines , China and Vietnam . The Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) also assigned the local name of " Butchoy " to Rammasun ; the name " Butchoy " was last used by PAGASA to name a tropical depression in the Philippines in 2004 to name Tropical Storm 02W . 
 Within the Philippines , PAGASA issued no public storm warning signals , as the storm was too far away from the country to prompt the issuance of such advisories . However , they did warn that the cyclone was expected to enhance the southwest monsoon and bring rain over Central and Southern Luzon , Visayas and Mindanao . 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 On May 12 , a father of two drowned in rough seas produced by Rammasun after saving his children . Later that day , a boat carrying 17 people capsized due to rough seas produced by the typhoon . All of the passengers were rescued the following day by the Philippine Coast Guard . Heavy rains from the outer bands of Rammasun triggered flooding and mudslides in the Philippines . Strong winds also downed numerous trees , one of which , measured at 60 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) in diameter , fell on three forest guards , killing two and critically injuring the other . In Jaro , Iloilo City , a swollen river overflowed its banks , inundating the district . Local reports stated that water in the area was waist @-@ deep in places . In <unk> , a 15 @-@ year @-@ old girl drowned after being washed away while crossing a bridge . Flooding in <unk> @-@ an , Negros Occidental destroyed six homes and damaged 24 others . An estimated 3 @,@ 153 families were affected by the storm in the Philippines . A strong extratropical storm from the " tail " of the former typhoon struck the Philippines after Rammasun had become extratropical . The associated winds caused severe damage to buildings , and numerous trees were uprooted . The damage may have been due to a possible tornado , although this possibility is not confirmed . At least 40 people were injured and damage totaled to PHP 61 million ( $ 1 @.@ 2 million USD ) . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 On May 12 , the Japan Meteorological Agency issued warnings for the Tokyo area as Rammasun was forecast to make landfall near the city . As Rammasun became extratropical , the storm brushed the Japanese coastline on May 13 , producing winds gusting up to 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) and high waves for several hours . An estimated 10 hectares ( 24 @.@ 7 acres ) of farmland were damaged . Damage from the storm amounted to ¥ 770 million ( $ 8 @.@ 4 million 2008 USD ) in agricultural losses . 
 = 1855 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1855 Atlantic hurricane season featured tropical cyclone landfalls in the Gulf Coast of the United States , the Greater Antilles , and Mexico , but none along the East Coast of the United States . It was inactive , with only five known tropical cyclones . Operationally , another tropical storm was believed to have existed offshore Atlantic Canada in late August and early September , but HURDAT – the official Atlantic hurricane database – now excludes this system . The first system , Hurricane One , was initially observed on August 6 . The final storm , Hurricane Five , was last observed on September 17 . These dates fall within the period with the most tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic . At one point during the season , two tropical cyclones existed simultaneously . Two of the cyclones only have a single known point in their tracks due to a sparsity of data , so storm summaries for those systems are unavailable . 
 Of the season 's five tropical cyclones , four reached hurricane status . Furthermore , one of those four strengthened into a major hurricane , which are Category 3 or higher on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The strongest cyclone of the season , Hurricane Five , peaked at Category 3 strength with 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) winds . It brought only minor impact to Louisiana and Mississippi . The first storm of the season brought locally severe impact to Tampico , Tamaulipas , Mexico in early August . Tropical Storm Four caused severe damage in the Lesser Antilles . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with a low accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 18 . This was the lowest value on record until a rating of 13 during the 1907 season . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One = = = 
 Based on newspaper reports , the first hurricane of the season was within the vicinity of Tampico , Tamaulipas on August 6 . Maximum sustained winds were at 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , indicating a Category 2 hurricane . No further information is available on the meteorological history of this storm . However , it is possible that the storm developed in the Caribbean Sea in late July , due to data obtained from the barque <unk> . Torrential rainfall in the Tampico area caused disastrous flooding , with heavy damage to goods and property . Eleven vessels were docked at Tampico , some of which lost their cargo . At the mouth of the Pánuco River , a pilot station and a fort were swept away . The event was considered " the worst inundation of Tampico over the last 30 years " . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 The ship James Foster Jr. encountered a hurricane on August 10 , while located about 575 miles ( 925 km ) east @-@ southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland . Sustained winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) were observed , equivalent to a Category 2 hurricane . Data from the James Foster Jr. and Rebecca indicate that the storm moved rapidly northeastward . This system was last noted about 560 miles ( 900 km ) west of Ireland on August 11 . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 The HMS <unk> reported a hurricane at 12 @.@ 5 ° N , 83 @.@ 0 ° W , which is located about 15 miles ( 24 km ) north of Corn Islands , Nicaragua . A sustained wind speed of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) was observed . Shortly thereafter , the HMS <unk> was wrecked and no further information is known about this storm . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Four = = = 
 Based on reports of a strong gale , a tropical storm was first tracked about 250 miles ( 400 km ) east @-@ southeast of Barbados early on August 24 . It initially headed westward , before re @-@ curving west @-@ northwestward early on the following day . Shortly thereafter , the storm passed through the Windward Islands between Grenada and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines . The storm peaked with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) while moving northwestward across the Caribbean Sea . It weakened slightly before making landfall near San Pedro de Macorís , Dominican Republic with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) early on August 27 . The storm slowly weakened over Hispaniola and was last noted near <unk> , Haiti later that day . 
 There was considerable damage in the Lesser Antilles . On Saint Vincent , rains destroyed roads and a number of houses . Many sugar cane fields were also ruined . Several vessels were lost there and on other islands , including Barbados , Dominica , and Martinique . On Saint Croix in the present @-@ day U.S. Virgin Islands , at least one vessel was destroyed by the heavy gales . There were also strong gales reported in Puerto Rico and Dominican Republic . 
 = = = Hurricane Five = = = 
 The ship Orphan encountered a hurricane with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) in the central Gulf of Mexico on September 15 . It strengthened quickly while moving northward , becoming a Category 2 hurricane later that day . By 0000 UTC on September 16 , the storm peaked as a Category 3 hurricane with maximum sustained winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) , making it the strongest tropical cyclone of the season . Shortly thereafter , the hurricane made landfall near Buras @-@ Triumph , Louisiana at the same intensity . It weakened after moving inland , decreasing to Category 1 intensity later on September 16 . Early on the following day , the system weakened to a tropical storm , several hours before dissipating over central Alabama . 
 This was regarded as the worst hurricane in the region since 1819 . In Louisiana , winds and storm surge impacted the eastern portions of the state . The wharf and bathhouse in Proctorville were swept away . About 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) of water was reported at Proctor 's Landing . A combination of strong winds and storm surge destroyed a number of houses along the shores of Lake Borgne . Along the coast of Mississippi , most structures were swept to sea . The foundation of the Biloxi <unk> was endangered due to erosion from this storm . The Cat Island Lighthouse was also left in " severe peril " . Several ships were damaged or capsized in the Mississippi River , including the Atchafalaya , J.S. Chenoweth , Ship Shoal , and Venice . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 In addition to the five tropical systems , another storm was operationally believed to have existed in late August and early September . The ship Atlantic encountered a very heavy gale while located west of Sable Island , Nova Scotia on August 31 . The storm moved rapidly east @-@ northeastward offshore Atlantic Canada . It was last noted on September 2 and was thought to have transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . However , HURDAT no longer includes this system in its database . 
 = Excelsis Dei = 
 " Excelsis Dei " is the eleventh episode of the second season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered in the United States on the Fox network on December 16 , 1994 . It was written by Paul Brown and directed by Stephen Surjik . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Excelsis Dei " earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 9 , being watched by 8 @.@ 5 million households in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed reviews from television critics ; although some complimented the episode 's effects , others were critical of the way the show handled rape . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In the episode Mulder and Scully are called in to investigate a claim of rape made by a nurse at a nursing home ; the case falls into the purview of the X @-@ Files because the assailant appears to have been a disembodied spirit . 
 Surjik personally asked if he could direct the episode because he was a fan of the series ; this was his only credit for the series . Filming the episode was difficult for the cast and crew due largely to the fact that the script arrived for the cast and crew to film only two days in advance . Other issues arose because of technical reasons ; one scene required flooding a hallway with 3 @,@ 300 gallons of water . Many of the scenes were filmed at Riverview Hospital , a mental health facility located in Coquitlam , British Columbia . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) are called to the Excelsis Dei private nursing home in Worcester , Massachusetts in order to investigate a nurse 's claim that she was raped by an invisible entity . Severely bruised , Michelle Charters ( Teryl Rothery ) claims that she knows who was responsible and names the attacker as Hal Arden , an elderly resident of Excelsis Dei . When questioned , Arden admits that he made sexual overtures to her , but claims that it was harmless and that he is too elderly to have done anything . 
 As Mulder and Scully investigate , they discover a Malaysian orderly is illicitly giving the patients an herbal drug made of mushrooms he cultures in the building 's basement . The drug cures their Alzheimer 's , but also allows them to see the spirits of people who have died in the nursing home and channel them into existence . In this state , the spirits assault and murder the orderlies that have looked down on them and treated them poorly while they were patients . When a patient overdoses on the drug , the spirits once again attack Charters , trapping her and Mulder in the bathroom , which begins flooding . 
 As Scully and the home 's head doctor manage to stop the patient 's seizures , the spirits disappear and the bathroom door gives way , freeing Mulder and Charters . The government of Massachusetts takes over the facility , and the orderly supplying the medicine is turned over to immigration services . The remaining original patients , no longer having access to the drug , revert to their previous state of dementia . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Excelsis Dei " was written by Paul Brown , his second and last script after the earlier episode " Ascension " . The episode was directed by Stephen Surjik , his only credit for the series . Surjik requested to direct an episode because he was a fan of the show . The episode was noticeably difficult to create ; the book The Complete X @-@ Files notes that the entry " gave the staff headaches — both during the shoot and editing process " . This was due largely to the fact that the script arrived for the cast and crew to film only two days in advance . In order to film the scene featuring the bathroom door bursting with water — a scene Matt Hurwitz and Chris Knowles called " nail @-@ biting " — special effects supervisor Dave Gauthier built a tank and flooded the set hallway with 3 @,@ 300 gallons of water . One part of the episode that never made the final cut was an extended look at Michelle 's love life . In the script , she is explicitly described as a lesbian and her lover enters her apartment to talk to her . Series creator Chris Carter eventually decided to remove the scene because he felt it " felt gratuitous at that point " . 
 Many of the scenes were filmed at Riverview Hospital , a mental health facility located in Coquitlam , British Columbia . While filming at the site , several of the members of the production staff claimed they heard mysterious voices and did not dare to " venture into the bowels of the building " for fear that the location was haunted . The episode features several actresses that had previously had parts in other episode of The X @-@ Files . Tasha Simms , who portrayed the daughter of Stan Phillips in the episode , had previously played the part of Cindy Reardon 's mother in the first season episode " Eve " . Sheila Moore , who had appeared as a background character in the episode " Deep Throat " appears in the episode as the director of the home . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Excelsis Dei " premiered in the United States on the Fox network on December 16 , 1994 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 9 , with a 15 share , meaning that roughly 8 @.@ 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 15 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 8 @.@ 5 million households . 
 Critical reception to the episode was mostly mixed . Entertainment Weekly gave the episode a grade of B- , calling it " offbeat and cute " . Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club was mixed , writing that " the handling of the rape case left a bad taste in my mouth " and that the resolution was " a bit fuzzy " . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it a 6 / 10 , noting " Overall , this episode focused on a very interesting concept , but the execution of that concept is so hopelessly convoluted that it ’ s lost in the shuffle . However , using the disturbing and abusive atmosphere of a nursing home as a setting provides chills without the addition of sinister spirits , so on a gut level , the episode works well . " Sarah Stegall awarded the episode three stars out of five and noted " could have gotten five [ stars ] out of five " , but that the episode 's lack of closure and the presence of too many questions left unresolved caused it to be less than one of " the best episodes " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , gave the episode a largely critical review and rated it one star out of five . The two referred to the entry as " the idiot 's version " of the earlier episode " One Breath " . Shearman and Pearson derided the handling of the rape , noting that " there 's a sour atmosphere to the whole proceedings " , pointing out that " only Scully shows the slightest concern that a woman 's been sexually assaulted . " However , the two called the ghost effects " eerie " , but concluded that the scripting was " very stupid " . 
 = The Shirelles = 
 The Shirelles were an American girl group that achieved popularity in the early 1960s . They consisted of schoolmates Shirley Owens ( later Shirley Alston Reeves ) , Doris Coley ( later Doris Kenner @-@ Jackson ) , Addie " Micki " Harris ( later Addie Harris McFadden ) , and Beverly Lee . 
 Founded in 1957 for a talent show at their high school , they were signed by Florence Greenberg of Tiara Records . Their first single , " I Met Him on a Sunday " , was released by Tiara and licensed by Decca Records in 1958 . After a brief and unsuccessful period with Decca , they went with Greenberg to her newly formed company , Scepter Records . Working with Luther Dixon , the group rose to fame with " Tonight 's the Night " . After a successful period of collaboration with Dixon and promotion by Scepter , with seven top 20 hits , the Shirelles left Scepter in 1966 . Afterwards , they were unable to maintain their previous popularity . 
 The Shirelles have been described as having a " naive schoolgirl sound " that contrasted with the sexual themes of many of their songs . Several of their hits used strings and baião @-@ style music . They have been credited with launching the girl group genre , with much of their music reflecting the genre 's essence . Their acceptance by both white and black audiences , predating that of the Motown acts , has been noted as reflecting the early success of the African @-@ American Civil Rights Movement . They have received numerous honors , including the Pioneer Award from the Rhythm and Blues Foundation , as well as being accepted in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996 , and named one of the 100 best acts of all time by Rolling Stone in 2004 . Two of their songs , " Will You Love Me Tomorrow " and " Tonight 's the Night " , were selected by Rolling Stone on its list of the greatest songs of all time . 
 = = Initial career and success = = 
 The group that later became the Shirelles was formed in 1957 by four teenage girls from Passaic , New Jersey , under the name the <unk> ( or <unk> ) . The founding members , Shirley Owens ( born June 10 , 1941 ) , Doris Coley ( August 2 , 1941 – February 4 , 2000 ) , Addie " Micki " Harris ( January 22 , 1940 – June 10 , 1982 ) , and Beverly Lee ( born August 3 , 1941 ) , entered a talent show at Passaic High School at the suggestion of a teacher . After hearing them sing " I Met Him on a Sunday " , a song they had written for the show , their classmate Mary Jane Greenberg convinced the reluctant <unk> to meet with her mother , Florence , the owner of Tiara Records . After several months of avoiding Greenberg and telling her that they were not interested in singing professionally , they were booked to Tiara . By the end of the year they had changed their name to the Shirelles , a combination of the first syllable of Owens ' given name and <unk> , reminiscent of then @-@ popular group the Chantels , after briefly using the name the <unk> . That year , they released their first song , " I Met Him on a Sunday " ; after local success , it was licensed to Decca Records for national broadcast and charted at # 50 . The song was influenced by doo @-@ wop , but infused with pop melodies . 
 Tiara Records , along with the Shirelles ' contract , was sold to Decca Records in 1959 for $ 4 @,@ 000 ; Greenberg stayed as the manager , securing performances for the group , including one at the Howard Theatre in Washington D.C. After two singles did poorly , including their first release — with Coley as lead vocalist — of " Dedicated to the One I Love " , a cover of the " 5 " <unk> song of the same name , Decca returned them to Greenberg and gave up on them , considering them a one @-@ hit act . On Greenberg 's new label , Scepter Records , they rereleased " Dedicated to the One I Love " as a single , which peaked at # 89 ; Wayne Wadhams , David Nathan , and Susan Lindsay in Inside the Hits attribute the low rating to poor distribution . In order to better promote the group , Greenberg asked songwriter Luther Dixon , who had previously worked with Perry Como , Nat King Cole , and Pat Boone and co @-@ written the 1959 hit " 16 Candles " , to write for and produce songs for them . Dixon accepted . 
 Their first single produced with Dixon , " Tonight 's the Night " , was released in 1960 and peaked at # 39 . The success of " Tonight 's the Night " led to the girls being booked to perform with several major artists , such as Etta James and Little Richard , and facilitated Scepter 's move to a larger office . It was followed by " Will You Love Me Tomorrow " , written by husband @-@ wife songwriting team Gerry Goffin and Carole King ; the song went on to become the first Billboard number @-@ one hit by an African @-@ American girl group , possibly the first by any girl group . " Tonight 's the Night " was later used as the title song for the 1961 album Tonight 's the Night , which also included " Will You Love Me Tomorrow " and " Dedicated to the One I Love " . 
 After the success of their singles , the Shirelles became frequent guests of Murray the K , who hosted them on his " All Star Rock Shows " on the New York radio station <unk> . During this same period they reissued " Dedicated to the One I Love " , which peaked at # 3 , followed by " Mama Said " , then " Baby It 's You " , written by Burt Bacharach , Luther Dixon , and Mack David , " Soldier Boy " , and " Boys " , with saxophonist King Curtis . 
 In 1963 Dixon left Scepter , which presaged a tailing @-@ off of the number of the Shirelles ' singles to chart . However , they carried on performing and recording . Dionne Warwick replaced Owens and Coley , who took leave to marry their <unk> , in concerts and the group continued to record material . That year , their song " Foolish Little Girl " reached the pop / R & B Top 10 , and they had a cameo in the film It 's a Mad , Mad , Mad , Mad World . However , later in 1963 they learned that the trust , holding their royalties , that they were supposed to receive from Scepter on their 21st birthdays , did not exist . In response , they left the label , and later filed a breach of contract suit against the company . Scepter met this with a countersuit for quitting ; both suits were withdrawn in 1965 , after an agreement was reached . Knowing that Scepter had lied about the trust disappointed the Shirelles , who felt deceived . In a 1981 interview with Bruce Pollock , Owens said that Greenberg had put on a " mother routine " , which the girls had " fall [ en ] for ... completely " . 
 = = Later career = = 
 In later years , the Shirelles declined in popularity due to pressure from the British Invasion and the heavy competition from other girl groups , including the Chiffons , the Dixie Cups , the Ronettes , the Supremes , and the Crystals . During this period , Warwick often replaced Coley due to the latter 's family commitments . The Shirelles were still bound to Scepter and thus unable to record for another company until the end of their contract in 1966 . Their last single to chart was 1967 's " Last Minute Miracle " , which peaked at # 99 . 
 After the commercial failure of their most recent releases , Coley left the group in 1968 to attend to her family . The remaining three Shirelles recorded songs for several labels , including Bell Records , RCA , and United Artists until 1971 . Afterwards , they toured singing their older songs , and participated in the filming of the 1973 documentary Let the Good Times Roll , recording two songs for it . Coley returned as lead singer in 1975 , replacing Owens , who left that year to pursue a solo career . In 1982 Harris died of a heart attack in the Hyatt Regency after two performances in Atlanta , Georgia , with the group . The following year , the remaining three original members performed " Will You Love Me Tomorrow " with Warwick on her album How Many Times Can We Say Goodbye . 
 = = Current versions of the group = = 
 Today , the original members tour in different , separate , groups , although the trademark to the Shirelles name was eventually acquired by Lee . Shirley Owens performed on the Doo Wop 51 PBS special in 2000 , and continues to tour under the name ' Shirley Alston Reeves and her Shirelles ' . Lee currently tours with new members , billed as " The Shirelles " . Coley died in Sacramento , California , on February 4 , 2000 , of breast cancer . 
 = = Style = = 
 Wadhams , Nathan , and Lindsay describe the style of the Shirelles early work as " tight , almost doo @-@ wop harmony " . Owens ' vocals , described by rock n ' roll writer Alwyn W. Turner as being " wonderfully expressive " , were capable of sounding " almost , but not quite " out of tune , which in his opinion led to Owens ' sounding innocent in her songs ; music critic Albin Zak describes her vocals as being able to intone desire and vulnerability . The other members , singing backup , also convey what Michael Campbell , a professor of music at Western Illinois University , calls a " naive schoolgirl sound " . The lyrics sung by the Shirelles tended to be fairly simple and " barely " concealed the subtexts of the songs . The songs were implicitly directed at female listeners , with the male subjects of songs being referred to as " he " instead of " you " ; this was a change from previous female @-@ written songs , which tended to be more gender neutral , and helped pave the way for the " confessional " songs of 70s singers like Joni Mitchell and Carole King . 
 Musically , their works with Dixon were influenced by Brazilian baião and featured numerous instances of syncopation . 
 = = Influences = = 
 Steve Huey of AllMusic notes that the Shirelles defined " the so @-@ called girl group sound with their soft , sweet harmonies and yearning innocence " , with their songs predating Motown in their widespread crossing of racial demographics , both in the US and in Britain . He also notes that they spawned " legions of imitators " , and laid a blueprint for future female pop stars to follow . Turner writes that the Shirelles " launched [ the girl group ] genre " , noting that their early work already included " the essence " of the genre ; Alwyn Zak expands on the statement , noting that the influx of female groups started after the success of " Will You Love Me Tomorrow " . 
 Michael Campbell notes that the Shirelles ' success reflected the African @-@ American Civil Rights Movement . He indicates that works such as " Will You Love Me Tomorrow " , written by a white couple , produced by an African @-@ American man , with vocals by young African @-@ American women and strings sounding like they were targeted at a white audience , conveyed a " color @-@ blind " message on top of its more obvious sexual one . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 In 1994 , the Shirelles were honored by the Rhythm and Blues Foundation with the Pioneer Award for their contributions to music . The award was accepted by Owens , Lee , and Kenner . As Coley was accepting her award , she said " This is dedicated to the one I love " , and sang an impromptu rendition of " Soldier Boy " together with Owens and Lee . Two years later they were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , together with Gladys Knight and the Pips . At the ceremony in the Waldorf @-@ Astoria Hotel in New York , the three surviving members sang a medley of songs after being presented the awards by Merry Clayton , Marianne Faithfull , and Darlene Love . In 2002 , they were inducted into the Vocal Group Hall of Fame . Lee and Owens accepted the award . 
 In 2004 , Rolling Stone ranked them # 76 on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time . Paul Shaffer , who did the write @-@ up , wrote that the girl @-@ group sound , originated by them , was " everything to [ him ] " ; he also described their impromptu performance of " Soldier Boy " as inspiring . They also included two of the Shirelles ' songs , " Will You Love Me Tomorrow " and " Tonight 's the Night " , on their list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time . In the 2010 edition , " Will You Love Me Tomorrow " was ranked 126th , while " Tonight 's the Night " was ranked 409th . 
 In September 2008 , the Shirelles ' hometown of Passaic honored the group by renaming a section of Paulison Avenue between Passaic and Pennington Avenues ( the section where Passaic High School is located ) " Shirelles Boulevard " . The dedication ceremony was attended by both surviving Shirelles . Owens said that it was different than when they were inducted into the Hall of Fame , as it was their home town . She noted that " the people who loves [ sic ] us and we loved are right here . " 
 = = Stage musical = = 
 The Shirelles ' story was shown in Baby It 's You ! , a musical revue written by Floyd Mutrux and Colin Escott , which follows the story of Greenberg and Scepter Records . The revue played on Broadway for 148 performances , opening at the Broadhurst Theatre on April 27 , 2011 and closing on September 4 of the same <unk> use of their likenesses without permission led to Lee , as well as the estates of Coley and Harris , to sue Warner Bros. 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 = = = Compilation Albums = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 | * no RnB Charts printed by Billboard during these chart runs 
 = Richard Barre = 
 Richard Barre ( c . 1130 – c . 1202 ) was a medieval English justice , clergyman and scholar . He was educated at the law school of Bologna and entered royal service under King Henry II of England , later working for Henry 's son and successor Richard I. He was also briefly in the household of Henry 's son Henry the Young King . Barre served the elder Henry as a diplomat and was involved in a minor way with the king 's quarrel with Thomas Becket , which earned Barre a condemnation from Becket . After King Henry 's death , Barre became a royal justice during Richard 's reign and was one of the main judges in the period from 1194 to 1199 . After disagreeing with him earlier in his career , Barre was discharged from his judgeship during John 's reign as king . Barre was also archdeacon of Ely and the author of a work of biblical extracts dedicated to one of his patrons , William Longchamp , the Bishop of Ely and Chancellor of England . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Whether Barre was a native of England or of Normandy is unknown , but his surname appears to derive from the Norman village of La Barre , near Bernay , in the present @-@ day department of Eure . He was likely born around 1130 and was related to Normandy 's <unk> family , knights in Berkshire . Barre had a relative , Hugh Barre , who was Archdeacon of Leicester in the 1150s . Barre studied law at Bologna in Italy before 1150 and was a student there with Stephen of Tournai , who became Bishop of Tournai in 1192 . Another fellow student wrote a short verse addressed to Barre : " Pontificum <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , Qui tibi <unk> <unk> <unk> " , which translates to " May you manage the causes of bishops and the affairs of kings , Who provide riches and delights for you . " After finishing his schooling , Barre seems to have worked for either Robert de Chesney , the Bishop of Lincoln , or Nicholas , Archdeacon of Huntingdon ; the main evidence for this is that Barre witnessed charters for both men from 1160 to 1164 . By 1165 , Barre had joined the household of King Henry II of England . 
 = = Service to King Henry = = 
 Barre served King Henry during the king 's quarrel with Thomas Becket , the Archbishop of Canterbury , who had gone into exile in 1164 over the dispute about the limits of royal authority over the English Church . Because of Barre 's close ties to King Henry , Becket considered him one of the king 's " evil counselors " , and Barre was the subject of denunciations by the archbishop . In late August 1169 , Barre was in Normandy with Henry , where Barre was part of a group of ecclesiastics advising the king on how to resolve the Becket dispute . In September 1169 , Barre was sent along with two other clerks to Rome to complain about the behaviour of papal envoys during negotiations with Becket held at the beginning of September . The papal negotiators at first agreed to a compromise , but the next day claimed that the proposal was unacceptable . With the failure of the negotiations , Becket restored the sentences of excommunication on a number of royal officials , but Barre was not included among those specifically named even though many of his colleagues were . The historian Frank Barlow argues that Barre was not specifically named in the restoration of excommunications , as Becket considered him already excommunicated because of his association with those under the church 's ban . 
 During January and February 1170 the king sent Barre on a diplomatic mission to the pope in Rome , on a matter related to the king 's dispute with Becket . The mission attempted to secure the rescinding of the excommunication of those whom Becket had placed under clerical ban , but it was unsuccessful ; rumours circulated that the mission sought and secured papal permission for the coronation of King Henry 's eldest living son by someone other than Becket . When Becket protested to Pope Alexander III over this usurpation of the right of the archbishop to crown English kings , Alexander not only stated that no such permission had been granted but threatened to suspend or depose any bishop who crowned Henry 's heir . Barlow thinks it possible that Barre received a verbal agreement from the pope in January to allow the coronation , but there is no written evidence that Alexander agreed to allow the coronation in 1170 . 
 After Becket 's murder in December 1170 King Henry sent Barre to Rome , accompanied by the Archbishop of Rouen , the bishops of Évreux and Worcester , and other royal clerks , to plead the royal case with the papacy . The mission 's objective was to make it clear to Alexander that Henry had had nothing to do with Becket 's murder and that the king was horrified that it had taken place . Barre was at first refused a meeting with Alexander , but eventually the envoys were allowed to meet with the pope . Although the mission was not a complete success , the royal commission did manage to persuade the papacy not to impose an interdict , or ban on clerical rites , on England or to excommunicate the king . Shortly afterwards Barre was granted the office of Archdeacon of Lisieux , probably as a reward for his efforts in Rome in 1171 . In September he was named a royal justice . He was named chancellor to King Henry 's eldest living son Henry for a brief period in 1172 and 1173 , but when the younger Henry rebelled against his father and sought refuge at the French royal court , Barre refused to join him in exile and returned to the king 's service . Barre took with him the younger Henry 's seal . 
 In addition to the Lisieux archdeaconry , Barre held the prebend of <unk> and Burbage in the Diocese of Salisbury from 1177 and the prebend of Moreton and Whaddon in the Diocese of Hereford from 1180 through 1184 . He continued to hold the archdeaconry at Lisieux until 1188 , and was at Lisieux for most of the late 1170s and 1180s . In 1179 he was at Rouen for the display of the body of Saint Romanus and was one of the witnesses to the event . While holding his Norman archdeaconry , he gave land to the abbey of St @-@ Pierre @-@ sur @-@ Dives along with Ralph , Bishop of Lisieux . In February or March 1198 , King Henry sent Barre on a diplomatic mission to the continent with letters to Frederick Barbarossa , the German Emperor , Bela II , the King of Hungary , and Isaac II Angelos , the Emperor at Constantinople , seeking assistance for his projected crusade . Barre carried letters to the three rulers requesting passage through their lands and the right to procure supplies . Nothing came of this mission , as Henry died in 1189 before the crusade could set off . 
 = = Later years and death = = 
 After the death of King Henry , Barre joined the service of William Longchamp , the Bishop of Ely , who was justiciar and Lord Chancellor . Longchamp named Barre as Archdeacon of Ely , with the appointment occurring before 4 July 1190 . Longchamp sent Barre as a royal justice to the counties near Ely in 1190 . However , Longchamp was driven into exile in late 1191 owing to the hostility of the English nobility and Richard 's brother Prince John during Richard 's absence on the Third Crusade . Longchamp 's exile meant that Barre did not serve as a royal justice again until King Richard I returned to England in 1194 . Although Longchamp eventually returned to England , he did not return to his diocese , and much of the administration of Ely would have devolved on Barre during Longchamp 's absence . 
 Barre was one of the main royal justices between 1194 and 1199 . He also served as a lawyer for the new Bishop of Ely , Eustace , who was elected in August 1197 . But Barre had incurred the hostility of the king 's younger brother Prince John , and when John succeeded Richard as king in 1199 , Barre ceased to be employed as a royal justice , instead returning to Ely and business in his clerical office . His last sure mention in the historical record is on 9 August 1202 , when he was serving as a judge @-@ delegate for Pope Innocent III , but he may have been alive as late as 1213 , as he was part of a papal panel deciding a case that can only be securely dated to between 1198 and 1213 . Barre maintained his friendship with Stephen of Tournai , who corresponded with him later in their lives . 
 = = Literary work = = 
 Barre wrote a work on the Bible entitled Compendium de <unk> et novo testamento , which he dedicated to Longchamp . The work arranged passages from the Bible under topics , and then annotated the passages with marginal notations such as were done with glosses on Roman law . It is still extant in two manuscript ( MS ) copies , MS British Library Harley <unk> , and Lambeth Palace MS 105 . The Harley manuscript is shorter than the Lambeth manuscript . Richard Sharpe , a modern historian who studied both works , stated that the Harley manuscript " provides [ a ] well structured and systematic ( though not complete ) coverage of the whole Bible . " Because of the dedication to William Longchamp as " bishop , legate , and chancellor " , it is likely that the work was composed between January 1190 and October 1191 , as Longchamp only held those three offices together during that period . The prologue to the work describes it as something to be used privately , and thus Sharpe feels that it was not intended to be a publicly published work ; instead Barre may have intended it for Longchamp 's private use in preparing sermons . 
 A third copy of Barre 's Compendium may have existed at Leicester Abbey , where a late 15th @-@ century library catalogue records a work by Barre on the Bible that the catalogue titles " Compendium Ricardi Barre super <unk> testamento " . The title and contents make this manuscript likely to be a copy of the Compendium . The same catalogue also records five books once owned by Barre – copies of Gratian 's Decretum , Justinian 's Codex , glossed copies of the Psalter and some of the Epistles of Paul , as well as Peter Lombard 's Sentences . Also , another Leicester Abbey manuscript records some satirical verses that were said to have been written by Barre . 
 = Brian Twyne = 
 Brian Twyne ( c . 25 July 1581 – 4 July 1644 ) was an antiquarian and an academic at the University of Oxford . After being educated at Corpus Christi College , Oxford , and becoming a Fellow of the college in 1606 , he published his one main work , a history of the university , in 1608 . This was designed to prove that Oxford was older than Cambridge University , and has been described by a modern writer as a " remarkable achievement for a young scholar of twenty @-@ eight . " His main accomplishment was to play a leading role in the revision of the university statutes under William Laud ( Chancellor of the University of Oxford and Archbishop of Canterbury ) . He was rewarded by appointment in 1634 to the new position of Keeper of the Archives , in which role he obtained a new royal charter for Oxford to confirm its rights and privileges , and helped the university in its disputes with the city authorities . 
 = = Education and early career = = 
 Brian Twyne was born on or near 25 July 1581 in Southwark , Surrey ( now part of London ) . His father was the translator and doctor Thomas Twyne , and his grandfather was the schoolmaster and antiquarian John Twyne . He was educated at Corpus Christi College , Oxford ( his father 's college ) , probably after attending the grammar school in Lewes , Sussex , where his father then lived . He matriculated on about 6 February 1596 , taking a place normally kept for a scholar from the county borough of Southampton as there was no vacancy for one from the county of Surrey ( under the system at Corpus Christi for admitting students ) . Taking another county 's vacancy was not unusual , however . He obtained his Bachelor of Arts degree on 23 July 1599 . Despite the assistance of his father 's patron Thomas Sackville , 1st Earl of Dorset ( Lord High Treasurer and Chancellor of the University ) , he failed to be elected to a fellowship at Merton College , Oxford . He studied with the mathematician Thomas Allen , encountering modern developments in astronomy and navigation , and also learned French , Italian and Hebrew . He became a Fellow of Corpus Christi in 1606 , and was ordained in the following year ; although he later became vicar of Rye , Sussex , he stayed in Oxford and the parish duties were undertaken by curates . 
 = = First history of the University = = 
 Twyne published one main work : <unk> <unk> <unk> apologia , in 1608 . This has been described by Strickland Gibson ( Keeper of the Archives at Oxford 1927 – 1945 ) as being " of a controversial character , and not of a kind to establish his reputation as a sound historian . " It was the first history of the University of Oxford to appear in print , and addressed a dispute between Oxford and Cambridge Universities as to which was the older . Oxford 's contention was that it had originally been established at Cricklade ( or " <unk> " ) by Trojans and some Greek philosophers under the leadership of Brutus after the Trojan War . Cambridge claimed to have been founded by a King <unk> of Spain in the pre @-@ Christian era , and said that in contrast Oxford had only been founded by Alfred the Great in the 9th century . In 1603 , however , the historian William Camden published a new edition of the life of Alfred by the 9th @-@ century Welsh monk Asser . In this edition , Asser was recorded as stating that Alfred had visited Oxford in 886 to settle disputes between students – i.e. , the university existed before his visit . This strengthened Oxford 's claim to be older than Cambridge . 
 In the light of Camden 's publication , Twyne began collecting material to re @-@ establish Oxford as the senior university . He was given permission by the university to borrow documents for this purpose in May 1606 . The work ( running to 456 pages in three volumes ) relies upon archive documents held by the university , the colleges and the city of Oxford , as well as material from three Oxfordshire abbeys and the works of Homer , Aristotle , Cicero , and other classical authors . He submitted his work for inspection by a university committee in early 1608 . It was approved , with one of the four committee members praising the book 's style and learning . Gibson described it as " a remarkable achievement for a young scholar of twenty @-@ eight . " Nevertheless , it appears from Twyne 's records that he had considerable doubts as to the veracity of the material in Camden 's edition . Twyne had been unable to find the reference to Alfred 's visit to Oxford in any known manuscript of Asser 's work , and challenged Camden about it . Camden said that it came from a copy sent to him by Sir Henry Savile , Warden of Merton College , Oxford . It is now generally thought that Savile was responsible for the passage that made the false claim , and that Camden knew this . One more recent history of the university says that " even in his own time Twyne 's opinions on this subject [ i.e. when Oxford was founded ] were received with amused tolerance by the better informed of English antiquaries . " 
 Twyne dedicated the work to Robert Sackville , 2nd Earl of Dorset : the 1st Earl had died earlier in 1608 . It was published by the university printer , Joseph Barnes , who would have required guarantees for the costs : Gibson 's view was that these were probably provided by Thomas Allen , with the Earl paying " the customary honorarium " as dedicatee . 
 = = Work at Oxford = = 
 Twyne studied manuscripts at the Bodleian Library , founded by Thomas Bodley in 1602 . Thomas Twyne , his father , gave books to the library . When Bodley died in 1613 , Twyne was one of the contributors to a volume of verse commemorating him : he wrote eight poems in Latin and one in Greek , and recalled a comment by King James I that Bodley ought to be called " Sir Thomas Godley " . However , Twyne was displeased with the work of Thomas James , the first Bodley 's Librarian , complaining to the library authorities in November 1613 about missing manuscripts , inaccurate records and delays in accessing new acquisitions , and about the librarian 's poor attendance and his habit of scattering his papers around the desks . James was admonished for his conduct . 
 Thomas <unk> became President of Corpus Christi in 1614 , and he appointed Twyne as Greek lecturer . By 1623 , Twyne had resigned his fellowship , apparently ( according to the 17th @-@ century Oxford historian Antony Wood ) to avoid having to choose which side to support in a dispute between the college president and the fellows . He did not secure any further academic advancement : he hoped to be appointed Camden Professor of Ancient History on the death or resignation of <unk> Wheare ( the first professor ) . According to Twyne , Camden promised this to him in a conversation in 1623 , and a patent sealed by Camden in March of that year to this effect was read out to the university 's governing body in January 1624 . Camden , however , wrote to Wheare shortly after the patent was signed and said that he had been tricked by some " foul play " and did not intend to appoint Twyne . In the end , Twyne died three years before Wheare . In 1624 , a House of Commons committee criticised <unk> for , amongst other things , excessive lenience to Twyne for his drunkenness . 
 = = Statutes and archives = = 
 The university 's statutes at this time were written in the registers of the chancellor and proctors . The chancellor 's register dated from 1315 , and the contents had been confusingly rearranged by rebinding . The two proctors ' registers , which dated from 1407 and 1477 , were in better arrangement , but repealed statutes remained next to ones that were current . Twyne was first appointed to a 28 @-@ strong committee for revising the statutes in 1614 , although nothing came of their work . He led efforts to improve the archives of Corpus Christi in 1627 and 1628 , producing 30 volumes of manuscript transcriptions of title deeds . In 1630 , Twyne was part of a new <unk> appointed by the new Chancellor of the University William Laud ( who was also Archbishop of Canterbury ) to revise the statutes . The other members were Robert Pink ( Warden of New College ) , Thomas James ( Bodley 's Librarian , later replaced on the committee by Peter Turner ) , and Richard Zouch ( Regius Professor of Civil Law ) . By 1631 , an inventory of the university 's archives had been made . Twyne , assisted by Zouch , carried out the bulk of the work in drafting new statutes , and it was reported to the university 's governing body on 1 September 1633 that work was complete . The Vice @-@ Chancellor asked Turner to make a final revision , and requested that Twyne write a historical account of the previous attempts to reform the statutes as a preface . To Twyne 's intense displeasure , the preface that he hurriedly wrote was shortened and rewritten extensively by Turner . 
 His reward , however , was to be the university 's first Keeper of the Archives , appointed on 11 August 1634 . The new statute governing the position noted the losses that Oxford had suffered because of the careless keeping of its archives , and the need for an experienced person to take charge of them and to advise the university 's officers in defending its interests . He was to be paid not less than £ 40 annually , with a levy of one shilling from each graduate and undergraduate . Thereafter , he sought to obtain royal confirmation of Oxford 's rights and privileges , to keep the city of Oxford subordinate to the university , and to match the position of Cambridge . A new royal charter was obtained in 1636 to confirm the revised statutes . Under Twyne and his successor as Keeper ( Gerard <unk> ) , the archives were moved into one of the rooms in the Tower of the Five Orders in the Bodleian Library ; three of the wooden presses that were built at that time to store them are still in use . 
 Twyne advised the university authorities in their disputes with the city fathers in relation to courts , licensing , markets and other matters . He was " spurred on " , according to one historian of the university , by " violent antipathy towards townsmen " ; Twyne wrote that they were " too near engrafted into the university to be a body of themselves " . As a result , his actions in rejecting even minor claims by the local inhabitants sometimes led to worthless litigation . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Knowledge of Twyne 's private life is derived from his frugal habit of reusing blank sides of letters that he received for making notes upon : in this way , some letters to and from his father between 1596 and 1613 have survived . As a student , Twyne wrote assuring his father that he was working hard , and asking for " money , clothes , books and cheese " . He complained that his allowance was not enough to employ someone to carry out tasks such as making the fire , but his father was unsympathetic . He also is shown to be a keen lute player . Later , his father raised the issue of marriage , and Twyne was anxious to put forward reasons why his father 's suggestion came at the wrong time , because of ( for example ) his lack of an income . His father 's death in 1613 not only freed him from parental pressure to marry , but also ( as the only surviving son ) led to his inheriting his father 's estate ; he remained single for the rest of his life . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Twyne died on 4 July 1644 , having made a will earlier that day in which he left his books and manuscripts to his college and the university . He made some pecuniary bequests to friends and those who had assisted him in his final illness . His manuscript collections amounted to 24 main volumes ( about 12 @,@ 000 pages ) with other supplementary material . He was buried in the chapel of Corpus Christi . A hard @-@ working researcher and collector of manuscripts , he was highly regarded and consulted by the legal scholar John Selden , the historian William Camden and Archbishop James Ussher . A later Keeper of the Archives , Strickland Gibson , described him in 1940 as " one of the greatest of Oxford antiquaries " . Twyne 's collections , he said , were " one of his greatest achievements , and in themselves a monument . " They were used extensively by Antony Wood in his history of the university but ( noted Gibson ) without proper credit being given . He was , however , disliked intensely by the city authorities for his actions against them . As it happens , many of the town 's medieval records were lost in the early 17th century and are only known because Twyne had copied them into his collection . 
 = Alpine Spaniel = 
 The Alpine Spaniel is an extinct breed of dog which was used in mountain rescues by the Augustinian Canons , who run hospices in the region around the Great St. Bernard Pass . The spaniel was a large dog notable for its thick curly coat . One of the most famous specimens of the Alpine Spaniel is Barry , however his preserved body has been modified on more than one occasion to fit with descriptions of the extinct breed from earlier time periods . Due to the conditions in the Alps , and a series of accidents , extinction was discussed as a possibility by authors during the 1830s , and at some point prior to 1847 the entire breed was reduced to a single example due to disease . Evidence held at the Natural History Museum in Bern show that two distinct breeds of dog were being used in the area during this time period . The breed is thought to be the predecessor to the modern St. Bernard and the Clumber Spaniel . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Alpine was a large breed of spaniel , described as reaching two feet at the withers and six feet from the nose to the tail . It had a closely set coat , <unk> than that of the English Cocker Spaniel or the English Springer Spaniel . An intelligent breed , it was particularly adapted to the climate of the Swiss Alps . 
 Old skulls in the collection of the Natural History Museum in Bern demonstrate a diversity in head shapes . The collection proves at least two distinct variations during the same time period . The larger skulls have a greater pronounced stop with a shorter muzzle while the smaller skulls show a great deal less stop whilst having longer muzzles . 
 = = History = = 
 Alpine spaniels were kept by the canons of the monasteries in the Alps in order to search for travellers during heavy snow storms , including the Great St. Bernard Hospice in the Great St Bernard Pass between Italy and Switzerland . The dogs would be dispatched in pairs to search for fallen travellers , and were trained so that upon finding them would return to the canons in order to lead rescuers back to the unfortunate individuals . The Alpine breed was also used as a watchdog to guard sheep and cattle of mountainous regions , including the Himalayas . 
 Between 1800 and 1814 , a dog named Barry lived as a rescue dog at the hospice , and was famous enough at the time for his body to be preserved at the Natural History Museum of Bern . However , during the preservation , the taxidermist and the director of the Museum agreed to modify the body towards what they thought was a good example of the breed during that period . The head itself was further modified in 1923 to represent the Saint Bernard of that era . Prior to this the skull was a great deal flatter with a moderate stop . 
 In 1829 a Mastiff like dog was brought from the Great St Bernard Hospice and was exhibited in London and Liverpool to thousands of people . This publicised the existence of an Alpine Mastiff , but drawings of the dog did not match descriptions of the Alpine Spaniel from before the exhibition , and the descriptions of the Spaniel were ridiculed by later publications . 
 Because of the treacherous conditions in which this breed of dog was used , coupled with a succession of accidents , talk of the whole stock becoming extinct was raised as early as 1839 . However at some point prior to 1847 a pestilence swept through the region and reduced the number down to a single specimen , which forced the canons into crossing it with other breeds . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = St. Bernard = = = 
 The Alpine Spaniel was one of the direct genetic progenitors to the St. Bernard . Starting in 1830 , the monks and canons of the Swiss Alps began crossing the dogs with the Newfoundland , expecting that the resulting offspring would have the longer hair of the Newfoundland and this would protect the dogs better from the cold . Unfortunately ice would form on the longer hair , and seeing that the dogs were no longer effective rescue dogs , the monasteries gave them away to people in the surrounding Swiss valleys . 
 In 1855 a stud book was opened for these crosses , which supplied the hospice with suitable dogs and also exported the dogs overseas . Many people began breeding them indiscriminately , which resulted in their modern appearance . By 1868 , the breed was commonly being referred to as the " Saint Bernard Dog " first and the Alpine Spaniel second . 
 = = = Clumber Spaniel = = = 
 It is thought that the Clumber Spaniel originated in 18th century France from the Basset Hound and the Alpine Spaniel . The name " Clumber " itself comes from Clumber Park , Nottinghamshire . 
 = Kootenay River = 
 The Kootenay ( Kootenai in the U.S. and historically called the Flatbow ) is a major river in southeastern British Columbia , Canada and northern parts of the U.S. states of Montana and Idaho . It is one of the uppermost major tributaries of the Columbia River , which is the largest North American river that empties into the Pacific Ocean . The Kootenay River runs 781 kilometres ( 485 mi ) from its headwaters in the Kootenay Ranges of the Canadian Rockies , flowing from British Columbia 's East Kootenay region into northwestern Montana , thence into northernmost Idaho Panhandle and returning to British Columbia in the West Kootenay region , where it joins the Columbia at Castlegar . 
 Born in glaciers and flowing through a rugged landscape of mountains and valleys , the river drains an isolated and sparsely populated region of the Pacific Northwest . From its highest headwaters to its confluence with the Columbia River , the Kootenay falls more than two kilometers in elevation . Although comparable in length , watershed and discharge to the Columbia above the <unk> , the Kootenay is of a notably different character ; its much steeper gradient results in the formation of many rapids . 
 People of the Ktunaxa ( Kootenai ) tribe were the first to live along its banks , and for hundreds of years , they hunted and fished on the river , quite isolated from neighboring indigenous groups . In the 19th century , a Canadian explorer , David Thompson , became the first recorded European to reach the Kootenay and established trading posts throughout the region . A gold rush on the Kootenay and later silver and galena strikes in its western basins in the late 19th century drew thousands of miners and settlers to the region , who soon were followed by the arrival of railroads and steamboats . The Doukhobors , a Russian religious sect , immigrated and established a short @-@ lived colony , Brilliant , at the Kootenay 's mouth ; subsequently dispersing into many settlements , they contributed to the region 's lumber and agricultural industries . 
 As with many Pacific Northwest rivers , dams were built on the Kootenay in the 20th century to generate hydroelectricity , and protect against floods and droughts . Today , over 150 kilometres ( 93 mi ) of the river have been impounded behind five dams — and a sixth to raise the level of Kootenay Lake , the largest natural lake formed by the Kootenay , and one of the largest in British Columbia . 
 = = Name = = 
 The river was described with slightly different names by two groups of the local Ktunaxa ( Kootenai ) Indian tribes . These indigenous people who lived along the upper river knew it as <unk> , simply meaning " river " . The people along the lower river called it <unk> , a name whose meaning is not certain . The name " Flatbow River " comes from the name the Blackfeet used to call the Ktunaxa , for their " powerful , stylish bows " , and was later recorded by French @-@ Canadian fur traders . 
 While searching for the ultimate source of the Columbia River , explorer David Thompson encountered Columbia Lake , where the Columbia River starts north as a small stream and the Kootenay rushes south , already a powerful river . Already knowing from earlier maps that the region included two rivers called the Columbia and the Kootenay , Thompson thought that what is now called the Columbia was the Kootenay , and he thought that he had not yet found the real Kootenay . Thence he applied the name " McGillivray ’ s River " to the real Kootenay in honor of his trading partners William and Duncan McGillivray . In his writings , the Columbia from Columbia Lake to the Big Bend was actually called the Kootenae . 
 The name " Kootenai " was also used by French Canadians to refer to the Ktunaxa in the 19th century . " Kootenai " is thought to be a word meaning " water people " in an Algonquian language . The river is still referred to as Kootenai in the United States , while in Canada , where two @-@ thirds of its length and 70 percent of its drainage basin lies , the river is spelled slightly different into Kootenay . 
 Comparisons of various U.S. Geological Survey ( USGS ) topographic maps from the 20th century show many misinterpretations or alternative names being applied to the segment of the river within the United States . These include " <unk> " , " <unk> " , and " <unk> " . The Geographic Names Information System of the USGS lists " Swan River " as an alternate name although the origin of this name is uncertain . ( There , however , is a Swan River further southeast in Montana . ) 
 = = Course = = 
 The Kootenay rises on the northeast slopes of the <unk> Range of southeastern British Columbia , and flows initially southeast through the valleys of Kootenay National Park . Its first few kilometers ( miles ) are quiet , threading slowly through a series of marshes and small lakes . The river becomes significantly enlarged as it reaches the confluence with the Vermilion River , which is actually the larger of the two where they meet near the settlement of Kootenay Crossing . It continues southeast , receiving the Palliser River from the left , and swings southwards into a gorge at the confluence with the White River . 
 At the small town of Canal Flats , British Columbia it passes within 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) of Columbia Lake , the headwaters of the Columbia River , as it merges into the Rocky Mountain Trench and the eastern foothills of the Selkirk Mountains . It receives the Lussier River near <unk> Station of the Canadian Pacific Railway and the St. Mary and Wild Horse rivers at the historic mining town of Fort Steele , then the Bull River at the settlement of the same name . At <unk> , British Columbia , the Kootenay widens into the Lake Koocanusa reservoir , formed by Libby Dam over 130 kilometres ( 81 mi ) downstream at Jennings , Montana . Lake Koocanusa , fed by the Elk River ( one of the Kootenay 's larger tributaries ) spans the <unk> border . 
 Below Libby Dam the river , now known as the Kootenai , surges around the south side of the Purcell Mountains in what is known as the Big Bend , where it receives the Fisher River from the left and veers to the west , passing the city of Libby . The Kootenai then drops over Kootenai Falls in a gorge , and veers northwest at the town of Troy . The <unk> River and Moyie River join from the north from headwaters in British Columbia , the latter near the village of Moyie Springs , before and after the Kootenai crosses the Montana @-@ Idaho state line . In Idaho the Kootenai 's current slows significantly as it enters the Kootenai Valley , passing the city of Bonners Ferry , where it turns north . 
 The Kootenai re @-@ enters Canada and becomes the Kootenay again south of Creston , British Columbia , and slows as it enters the Kootenay Flats before broadening into 100 @-@ kilometre ( 62 mi ) -long Kootenay Lake , where the Duncan River , the largest tributary , contributes its waters . Near Balfour an arm of the lake branches westwards into canyons near Nelson , where below Corra Linn Dam the Kootenay becomes a river again , but not for long . The river drops over several waterfalls at Bonnington Falls , all of which are taken advantage of to generate hydropower . Four run @-@ of @-@ the river dams impound the river in the 22 @-@ kilometre ( 14 mi ) stretch that follows . At Brilliant it widens into a small inland delta , then at Castlegar it joins with the Columbia River . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 At 50 @,@ 298 square kilometres ( 19 @,@ 420 sq mi ) in size , the Kootenay river 's watershed is one of the largest sub @-@ basins of the Columbia Basin . Its drainage basin encompasses an area almost 400 kilometres ( 250 mi ) from north to south and 250 kilometres ( 160 mi ) from east to west , roughly defining a region of the Pacific Northwest known as the Kootenays . In Canada , the term " Kootenays " is loosely defined although the Kootenay Land District , which includes the whole region , is formally defined ; the name indirectly refers to the territory of the Kootenay indigenous people spanning from the Rockies on the east and the , Selkirks and Purcells ( <unk> in the U.S. ) on the west in southeastern British Columbia ( BC ) , and is used to mean more the area drained by the Kootenay River , namely including the lower Canadian stretches of the Columbia from Revelstoke to the US border , and also the reaches of the upper Columbia north from Canal Flats at least as far as Golden ( the Boundary Country is sometimes referred to as being part of the West Kootenay ) . 
 Over 70 percent of the Kootenay 's watershed is in Canada while the Montana and Idaho portions occupy 23 and 6 % , respectively . The Kootenay is one of the few major rivers in North America that begin in one country , cross into another , and return to the first — others include the Milk River , a tributary of the Missouri River ; the Souris River , a tributary of the Assiniboine River ; and the Kettle River , a tributary of the Columbia River . It is the third largest tributary of the Columbia by drainage basin and discharge . 
 The Kootenay River is defined by rocky uplands and steep mountains , and there is relatively little flat land in the watershed . Most of the reasonably level terrain lies in the narrow Kootenay River valley from Bonners Ferry to Kootenay Lake and in parts of the Rocky Mountain Trench from Canal Flats to Lake Koocanusa . Mountain ranges in the region generally trend from northwest to southeast and define drainage patterns with their steep and dramatic vertical relief , with the exception of the Kootenay itself which cuts westwards at its southern bend . Of the Kootenay 's many tributaries , the 206 @-@ kilometre ( 128 mi ) -long Duncan River is the largest . Hundreds of other tributaries join the river in its winding course , including the Vermilion , Cross , Palliser , White , Wild Horse , St. Mary , Elk , Fisher , <unk> , Moyie , Goat , and Slocan rivers . 
 Many river basins border on the Kootenay — some are part of the Columbia Basin , while others drain to distant shores of the North American continent . On the south and southeast , the divide formed by the Cabinet and Whitefish ranges separate the Kootenay and Flathead River watersheds . The Flathead is a tributary of the Clark Fork River @-@ Pend Oreille River system which borders the Kootenay watershed on the southwest . The upper Columbia River basin forms the boundary on the north , and the Kicking Horse River watershed also borders the north side of the Kootenay basin . To the southwest is the Priest River , a Pend Oreille tributary . On the east side , over the Continental Divide , the Bow River and Oldman River take rise . Both are tributaries of the South Saskatchewan River , which is part of the Hudson Bay drainage basin . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 The geologic story of the Kootenay is strongly connected to the geology of the Columbia , Selkirk and Rocky Mountains . The mountains in much of the Kootenay River catchment are composed of Precambrian sedimentary rock of the Belt Supergroup , in turn stratified into several subgroups with slightly different characteristics and ages . However , most of the rocks have one thing in common ; the rocks are generally hard and erosion @-@ resistant . The Rocky Mountain Trench is thought to be a partial graben , or a long narrow strip of land that has dropped in elevation over time because of parallel faults on both sides . Faults in the Kootenay River watershed trend north @-@ northwest to south @-@ southeast as is common in much of British Columbia . The underlying rock is generally stable and contains more outcroppings of metamorphic and igneous rock as one progresses westwards . Formations of Cambrian and Devonian rock also appear in small amounts in the U.S. portion of the Kootenay . 
 Bedrock composes much of the streambed in the upper and lower reaches of the Kootenay , but in the middle portion , alluvial sediments allow the river to meander over a broader valley floor . The sediments probably originated through heavy glaciation during the previous Ice Age . About 15 @,@ 000 years ago , the Cordilleran Ice Sheet advanced southwards into present @-@ day BC , Montana and Idaho , blocking the Kootenay River at the outlet of Kootenay Lake , which did not yet exist . Glaciers covered most of the northern Kootenay River watershed and heavily shaped the peaks and valleys one sees today . The glacier that formed Kootenay Lake caused the river to back up into an enormous body of water that stretched all the way to Libby , Montana , near where the Libby Dam now stands , and possibly even connected to Lake Pend Oreille , which also was much enlarged at the time . <unk> deposited sediments buried the old streambed of the Kootenay River and created a natural dam where the Kootenay turns west out of Kootenay Lake . After the glaciers retreated , Kootenay Lake receded to its present level and the Kootenay Flats were formed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First inhabitants = = = 
 The first peoples of the Kootenay River valley were the Ktunaxa people ( often referred to as Kootenai ) from whom the river 's name derives . Ktunaxa creation myths state that their people were created by the <unk> <unk> ( supreme being ) and have always lived in the region ; one reads " I have created you Kootenai people to look after this beautiful land , to honor and guard and celebrate my Creation here . " However , many historians believe that they are descended from Great Plains tribes that were driven out of their historic territory by the Blackfeet in the 16th century . The Ktunaxa are considered quite isolated from other Pacific Northwest and Great Plains tribes . Their language is an " isolate " , which is only distantly related ( if at all ) to the Salishan languages spoken by tribes of the Lake Pend d ' <unk> area . They were semi @-@ nomadic people and inhabited a large area of the Kootenay valley from the headwaters to Kootenay Lake . Four villages provided their shelter in the winter , while in the rest of the year , they traveled between fishing , hunting and berry @-@ picking areas . The northern Ktunaxa hunted buffalo , while the southerners mainly fished . Notably , the Ktunaxa were the first tribe west of the Rockies to capture and use feral European @-@ introduced horses for their own use . 
 The origin and meaning of the name " Kootenai " is uncertain . Prior to their discovery by Europeans , they were known as <unk> , " people of the standing arrow " . It is thought that French @-@ Canadian fur trappers of the Hudson 's Bay Company and other companies in the early 19th century were the first refer to them as Kootenai , which means " water people " in an Algonquian language . It may also mean " deer robes , " referring to their excellent skill for hunting deer . In some written records from the early 19th century , also by the French , the Ktunaxa were sometimes called the <unk> ( Arcs plats ) and the river called the Flatbow River . Other inhabitants of the area included the Montana Salish ( in the south ) and Shuswap ( in the north ) , but these tribes were mostly not on the main river . 
 = = = Exploration = = = 
 In 1806 , explorer David Thompson set out from Saskatchewan to find the source of the Columbia . He crossed over the Canadian Rockies through Howse Pass and eventually arrived on the banks of the Kootenay , which he thought to be the Columbia . Thompson traveled down the river a ways but turned back when he was attacked by Native Americans . The following year , Thompson , his family , and several men made another attempt at finding the Columbia . They crossed over the Rockies at a more northerly spot and traveled down the <unk> River to the Columbia , eventually discovering Columbia Lake and establishing there the trading post Kootenae House . In the spring of 1808 , he set off down the Kootenay River , this time reaching present @-@ day Montana and Idaho where he established <unk> House and <unk> House , trading posts on Lake Pend Oreille and the Clark Fork , respectively . After spending a winter in Montana , he tried to reach the Columbia by traveling down the Pend Oreille River but failed in this attempt , eventually returning to Kootenae House via the Kootenay River northwards the following spring . 
 Through the early 19th century , Thompson continued to trade furs throughout the Kootenay region for the North West Company , and for the few years when he had a total monopoly over the Canadian fur trade west of the Rockies , he outlawed alcoholic drinks altogether . He was known to have written " I had made it a law to myself that no alcohol should pass the mountains in my company " . When two of Thompson 's trading partners tried to make him take two barrels of rum to <unk> House , Thompson " placed the two kegs on a vicious horse and by noon the kegs were empty and in pieces , the horse rubbing his load against the rocks to get rid of it … I told them what I had done , and that I would do the same to every keg of alcohol . " Of course , wine , beer , rum and other intoxicating drinks were imported in time . 
 John Palliser crossed the Rockies through a pass in 1858 that led to the headwaters of the Palliser River , a tributary of the Kootenay River now named in his honor . ( However , at first , his party referred to it as Palliser 's River . ) His expedition made it downstream to Columbia Lake , but had some trouble making their way back to Alberta ; the return route that they had chosen proved too dangerous to negotiate . After trading for some horses and new supplies from a band of Ktunaxa , they made it back over the Rockies later that year through North Kootenay Pass near Lower and Upper Kananaskis Lakes , after traveling up the Elk River . The series of expeditions he would later lead through 1859 were to be known as the Palliser Expeditions , or officially , the British North American Exploring Expedition , which although involved some travel west of the Rockies , was mostly limited to the east side of the Continental Divide . Palliser 's earlier travels were credited for being a " vital forerunner to the European settlement of the Prairies [ of central Canada ] , providing volumes of information on the resources of this vast region . " 
 In September 1859 , Palliser traveled into the Kootenay River valley to find a suitable path for a trade route and possibly a railroad . Instead of crossing the Rockies , as Thompson did , Palliser set out from Fort Colville , a Hudson 's Bay Company trading post near Kettle Falls on the Columbia River . He then proceeded up the Pend Oreille River ( noted as ' <unk> ' ) and crossed into the Kootenay River valley , which in his records was either the " <unk> " or " Flat Bow River " . Kootenay Lake was called " Flat Bow Lake " . Palliser was told by Ktunaxa tribal members that a trail already existed along the Kootenay River , terminating at Columbia Lake , but was in decrepit condition ( having been out of use for many years ) and " entirely impracticable for horses " . They re @-@ blazed the trail for many miles and returned to Kootenay Lake by mid @-@ October of the same year . The expedition 's findings were later to become important transportation routes through the Rockies to the Kootenays area , and the trail that they followed later became the route of the Canadian Pacific Railway . 
 = = = Gold and silver boom = = = 
 In 1863 , a gold strike at the confluence of the Wild Horse and Kootenay Rivers in the East Kootenay region resulted in the Wild Horse Gold Rush in which between three and ten thousand men descended upon the area and the gold rush town of Fisherville was built ; it had to be moved when it was discovered the town sat atop some of the richest deposits . Originally , the river ( and the area ) were known as " Stud Horse " by the early miners , but government officials changed it to Wild Horse . The new town 's site was officially named Kootenai ( though still known as Fisherville ) , also spelled Kootenay and <unk> and also known as Wild Horse . Galbraith 's Ferry was established across the Kootenay near Fort Steele to facilitate crossing by the incoming rush of prospectors and merchants . Most of the gold was mined out by 1864 , in June of which one American prospector wrote that some 200 miners were arriving each day . By 1865 the peak of the rush was over and the diggings had been found not as rich as previously believed when news arrived in 1865 of the strikes in the Big Bend of the Columbia and the bulk of the mining population moved there en masse . 
 Fisherville , which had a Hudson 's Bay post and other businesses , continued on with a few hundred residents for a few years ( most of them Chinese by the end , as was the case with many other BC gold towns also ) but was eclipsed as a supply centre with the creation of nearby Fort Steele . The Chinese miners continued to work the " played @-@ out " claims abandoned by American and Canadian miners , taking what little gold was left . Fisherville eventually was abandoned , its buildings left to ruin , and little remains of the settlement today . Other gold rushes on the Moyie and Goat Rivers , tributaries of the Kootenay , were followed by the discovery of silver and galena mines in the Kootenay Lake and Slocan Valley areas ( <unk> Slocan ) , leading rapidly to the settlement of the region and the creation of various " silver city " boomtowns , notably Nelson , at the outlet of Kootenay Lake , <unk> , midway up its north arm , New Denver , Silverton , Slocan City and Sandon in the 1880s and 1890s . By 1889 , a smelter had been constructed close to the mouth of the Kootenay , near Revelstoke , to process ore from the mines . Serving the mines and settlers , steamer companies plied the Kootenai River from Bonner 's Ferry , Idaho to Nelson and to the <unk> or " <unk> " district at the north end of Kootenay Lake , and also on the upper Kootenay River between the Cranbrook @-@ Fort Steele area and points in Montana . 
 = = = Steamboats = = = 
 When the Canadian Pacific Railway ( CPR ) finished its transcontinental line across southern British Columbia , steamboats began to ply the upper Columbia and Kootenay Rivers , carrying passengers , produce , ore , and other trade items through the region to be distributed via the CPR 's line at Golden . The total run was about 500 kilometres ( 310 mi ) long , ranging from Golden to the north to Jennings , Montana in the south , with a portage at Canal Flats . The Kootenay 's steamboat era was short and lasted for only about 28 years . In 1882 , as part of an incentive to help navigation on the Golden @-@ Jennings run and possibly divert water northwards to the Interior of British Columbia in order to provide flood control for a low @-@ lying area south of Kootenay Lake , called Kootenay Flats , European adventurer William Adolf Baillie @-@ Grohman proposed the creation of a canal between the Kootenay River and Columbia Lake . Construction of the 2 @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) -long , 14 @-@ metre ( 46 ft ) <unk> channel was finished in 1889 . The Baillie @-@ Grohman Canal , as it was called , had one lock which was 30 metres ( 98 ft ) long and 9 metres ( 30 ft ) wide . 
 Because of the rugged terrain and rough waters on the two rivers , especially on the glacier @-@ fed Kootenay , steamboat operation was extremely difficult and proved to be anything but cost effective . The roughest water was in Jennings Canyon , now mostly submerged in the Lake Koocanusa reservoir behind Libby Dam . Two of the first steamers , the Duchess and the Cline , both sank when transporting miners to the Wild Horse gold rush on the Kootenay . Both ships had not even reached Canal Flats when they hit rocks in the Columbia . The first steamboat to actually run the Kootenay was the <unk> in 1893 . Later vessels , such as the Gwendoline , had mixed success . Captain Frank P. Armstrong , who had piloted several earlier steamboats on the Golden @-@ Jennings run , was her builder and when she was about three @-@ quarters completed , Armstrong decided to take her to Golden to complete the job . Gwendoline sailed up to the canal , which unfortunately was unusable because the gates of the lock had been dynamited due to a Kootenay flood . Armstrong was forced to portage the vessel and eventually made it to Golden . Gwendoline eventually sailed back south to Jennings to haul iron ore on the Kootenay . She was also the only ship to ever travel through the canal by proper means , and made two of the only three steamboat trips through the canal . 
 The last ship ever to pass through the canal and one of the last on the Kootenay was the North Star , also piloted by Captain Armstrong . In 1902 , Armstrong decided to take North Star to sail on the Columbia instead , finding business on the Kootenay less and less profitable as the mines in the region played out , as the CPR established its Kootenay Central Railway branch , and for a variety of other reasons . In June of that year , Armstrong took North Star to the Baillie @-@ Grohman Canal , which was in decrepit condition . The lock was also too small to accommodate the vessel . Armstrong had two makeshift dams built to create a temporary lock 40 metres ( 130 ft ) long , and then the forward dam was blown up so the ship could ride the surge of water ahead into Columbia Lake . The transit of North Star to Columbia Lake was the last time the canal was ever used by a steamboat and marked the end of the steamboat era on the Kootenay . 
 = = = Doukhobor settlement = = = 
 In the 20th century , members of a Russian religious sect called the Doukhobors living in the plains of Saskatchewan in central Canada were facing persecution , internal problems and land confiscation by the Canadian government . Their leader , Peter Verigin , decided to move them to British Columbia in 1909 , seeking land and an improved life . He chose a townsite on the north bank of the Kootenay , where it joins the Columbia , across the big river from where the present @-@ day town of Castlegar now stands . In 1909 , he purchased about 14 @,@ 000 acres ( 57 km2 ) adjoining the mouth of the Kootenay River partly using funds raised by sale of farm equipment in Saskatchewan , and added to other lands acquired throughout BC , Doukhobor @-@ owned lands ultimately totaled 19 @,@ 000 acres ( 77 km2 ) . There was already a small settlement on the site , called Waterloo , but Verigin renamed it Brilliant , supposedly for the " sparkling waters " of the river . The whole area was known by the name , Dolina <unk> , meaning " valley of consolation " . By 1913 , there were already more than 5 @,@ 000 Doukhobors living in the region . 
 When they first arrived in British Columbia , the Doukhobors began felling trees adjoining the Kootenay River to build their first homesteads . They also cleared areas of level ground in order to plant orchards and fields , and constructed sawmills on the Columbia and Kootenay rivers to process the logs into lumber . After more settlers began arriving , they built larger buildings that housed multiple families , instead of the small cabins then typical of the region . Each larger house or dom , holding 70 @-@ 100 persons each , was constructed on roughly 41 @-@ hectare ( 100 @-@ acre ) plots of land that Verigin had divided the entire community into back in 1911 . The Doukhobors then constructed a brick factory at the present @-@ day site of Grand Forks , from where they made bricks to be used mostly in the Brilliant settlement . Brilliant was also one of the first cities in the area to have running water — they constructed a reservoir to hold water from the Kootenay River and a local spring , and by 1912 , each household had running water . In 1913 , Verigin converted an abandoned factory in Nelson , about 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) up the Kootenay from Brilliant , to produce jam and marmalade . The Doukhobors then established a ferry across the Columbia River , and a suspension bridge serving the same purpose was completed in 1913 . Brilliant continued to be a major player in the lumber industry of the region , and before long , the settlement of Brilliant was prospering . 
 However , Doukhobor views on education and the extremist actions of a Doukhobor group called the Sons of Freedom eventually brought down their prosperous empire . In the 1920s , unknown arsonists destroyed several public schools in Brilliant as an act against British Columbia law . Then in 1924 , on a routine rail trip to Grand Forks , Peter Verigin and seven other people were killed by a dynamite explosion that completely destroyed the coach that he was traveling in . Pieces of battery and alarm clock indicated that this was the work of people who intentionally wanted to kill Verigin , most likely members of the Sons of Freedom , or as some historians put it , by the lover of one of Verigin 's handmaidens . Over 7 @,@ 000 people attended Verigin 's funeral . The Doukhobor leader was buried in an elaborate tomb on a headland overlooking the city of Brilliant and the Kootenay and Columbia Rivers . Verigin was succeeded by his son , Peter P. Verigin , who arrived from Russia in 1927 . Unfortunately , despite the economic reforms he created in response to debt to the federal government , his arrival coincided with a terrible depression and bankruptcy which caused the Doukhobors to lose most of their lands . Verigin Jr. died in 1939 and by 1963 , almost all Doukhobor lands were sold to the government . Today , little remains of the former settlement at Brilliant except for Verigin 's tomb . The Doukhobor suspension bridge spanning the Kootenay River still exists , and was designated a National Historic Site of Canada in 1995 . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The Northwest Power and Conservation Council divides the Kootenay River watershed into six biomes : aquatic ( rivers and lakes ) , riparian zones , wetlands , grassland / shrubs , moderately wet forest , and dry forest . The forested zones extend through the alpine and subalpine reaches of the watershed , while grasslands dominate the low terraces and plateaus surrounding the river , especially in the Lake Koocanusa area and the Montana @-@ Idaho portion of the watershed . In the Canada portion of the watershed , an alpine meadow ecozone occupies most of the high ridges and valleys of the mountains . 
 In the Canadian portion of the Columbia Basin , almost half of which is part of the Kootenay River basin , there are 447 species of terrestrial vertebrates . Most of the Kootenay basin lies within the Columbia Glaciated ecoregion which encompasses much of northeastern Washington , northern Idaho , northwestern Montana and southern British Columbia . Fish fauna in the region are largely shared with those of the Columbia Unglaciated ecoregion to the south , which has about fifty species of fish and only one endemic species . There are no endemic fish within the Columbia Glaciated region itself . 
 Riparian vegetation is mostly found along the lower two @-@ thirds of the Kootenay and many of the tributaries that join within the United States . The other sections of the river flow through far more rugged terrain and are characterized by braiding , low nutrient content , shifting channels and coarse sediments , making it difficult for riparian zones to be established , as is with most of its upper and lower tributaries . Wetlands are found primarily where the river broadens into a series of sloughs , side @-@ channels , marshes and small lakes before entering Kootenay Lake . This biologically diverse area , the Kootenay Flats , once supported over 1 million migratory birds every year , before the river was diked and many of the wetlands converted to agriculture . 
 Naturally , the Kootenay has a high sediment content because of high erosion of glacial sediments in the mountains . Because of the steep rapids and falls between Kootenay Lake and the river 's mouth , the Kootenay ( with the exception of its tributary , the Slocan River ) has never been a significant stream for the annual runs of Columbia River salmon . However , landlocked salmon inhabit the upper reaches of the river above and in Kootenay Lake . This is attributed to a Kootenay River flood a long time ago , before the construction of any dams on the Columbia ( Columbia River dams now block salmon from reaching any of the salmon run streams above Chief Joseph Dam ) which overflowed into Columbia Lake . It was with the creation of this temporary body of water that salmon somehow managed to swim over the submerged Canal Flats and into the Kootenay , where they became trapped . 
 Populations of large land mammals such as caribou , moose , deer , elk , have been declining dramatically since the reintroduction of wolves . Species almost entirely gone that were once common in the area include the white @-@ tailed jackrabbit , pygmy short @-@ horned lizard , band @-@ tailed pigeon and passenger pigeon . After exploitation of the Kootenay basin by fur trappers , the beaver population was nearly exterminated as well . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Even before non @-@ aboriginal people came to the region , the Kootenay River valley was an important path of trade and transport between the tribes of the Canadian Rockies and the Idaho Panhandle , mostly between the Ktunaxa ( who practiced agriculture and aquaculture ) and the Salish , Blackfeet and Pend d <unk> of the south and east , and with the Shuswap in the north . The physiographic continuation of the Kootenai Valley southwards from present @-@ day Bonners Ferry , Idaho into the Pend Oreille basin via the Purcell Trench formed a natural corridor through which natives of the area could interact . The barrier formed by the Rocky Mountains to the east , however , meant that tribes of the area , especially the Ktunaxa , were economically and linguistically isolated from the Great Plains tribes ( with the exception of the Shoshone , whose territory spanned both sides of the Rockies ) . 
 Logging began in the 19th century as a result of white emigration to the Kootenay region , and remains one of the primary industries of the area . In fact , much of the economy of the Pacific Northwest and Columbia Basin has historically , and even today , is dependent on the lumber industry . Lumber was required for the construction of buildings , forts , railroad tracks , and boats , and today is exported from the region in great amounts providing jobs and income for inhabitants of the area . Even in relatively uninhabited regions of the watershed , logging roads criss @-@ cross the hills and mountainsides . Over 90 percent of the Kootenay basin is forested , but only about 10 percent of the area is not affected by some kind of lumber @-@ industry development , now defined as about twenty " roadless areas " or " blocks " , with 18 in the US . 
 To a limited extent , the Kootenay River has also been used for navigation . Commercial navigation began with steamboats in the 19th century to transport ores , lumber , passengers and other imported and exported products between the Kootenay River valley and the Canadian Pacific Railway station at Golden , British Columbia . Boat travel on the upper river ceased when a rail line was built along the Kootenay upstream of the big bend . Steamboats also operated briefly on the lower river and Kootenay Lake to service silver mines in the nearby mountains . In modern times , boats continue to ply Kootenay Lake and limited reaches of the Kootenay River . 
 Mining is also an important economic support of the Kootenay River area . Although originally valuable minerals such as gold and silver were unearthed , today coal is the primary resource extracted from underground . Conventional coal deposits underlie much of the East Kootenay , especially in the Elk River valley which is home to the Elk Valley Coalfield , and the Crowsnest Coalfield in the Purcell Mountains . The East Kootenay is the most important coal @-@ producing area of British Columbia , has since 1898 produced over 500 million tons , and about 25 percent of the world 's steel @-@ making coal comes from the region . Most of the coal from the East Kootenay coalfields is exported to Japan and Korea . 
 Lead , zinc , copper and silver are still mined at some places in the Kootenay River basin , notably at the giant Sullivan Mine near Kimberley , British Columbia , which is the largest in the Kootenay watershed . Agriculture , however , is a much less important industry , and many of the fertile riverside lands have been flooded by the construction of dams ( most notably Libby Dam in Montana , which backs water into Canada ) . Only about two percent of the entire Kootenay basin ( 1 @,@ 005 square kilometres ( 388 sq mi ) is used for agriculture , and much of that is for pasture and foraging ) . Crops such as oats , barley and wheat account for 62 percent of the agricultural output of the region , much of which is used locally or exported by rail . The primary agricultural region is the Kootenai Valley of northern Idaho just south of Kootenay Lake . 
 The West Kootenay , however , is transitioning from a coal @-@ mining to a tourism @-@ based economy , and the rest of the Kootenay region is also starting to do so . The economy of southeastern British Columbia is becoming increasingly reliant on tourism , and several Canadian national and state parks have already been established , and several national forests in the U.S. 
 = = River modifications = = 
 Dams , power plants and diversions of the Kootenay River , of which there are many , have been built for a variety of reasons throughout the 19th and 20th centuries . The seven dams on the Kootenay serve many purposes , ranging from generation of local electricity to regulation of Columbia River flow between Canada and the United States . None provide for navigation or fish passage . In former times , the Kootenay would rise each spring and early summers with " enormous freshets that every summer flood the Kootenay River valley " , but because of water regulation nowadays , such extreme variation in flow are no longer common on the lower river below Libby Dam . 
 = = = The Falls = = = 
 As early as 1898 , without building a dam , the original Lower Bonnington Power Plant was generating hydroelectricity from Bonnington Falls in the Kootenay River near the confluence of the Slocan River in order to supply water to mines in Rossland , British Columbia . For Upper Bonnington , the first dam built on the river , the original goal was to improve navigation between Kootenay Lake and the Kootenay 's mouth on the Columbia by drowning the dangerous <unk> Falls rapids that also blocked fish migration , and hopefully introducing fish to the upper river by constructing a fish ladder . None of these amenities for steamboats or salmon were ever constructed — in fact , the dam ended up being built above the falls instead of below them — and Upper Bonnington Dam , when completed in 1906 , only generated hydroelectric power , and has served that purpose ever since . 
 Commercial demand led to two more dams at the falls , these were South Slocan Dam in 1928 , and Corra Linn Dam , at the rapids above Bonnington in 1932 . Three of the dams are of the run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ river type , the 4 @.@ 5 km length of the falls is now impounded in small lakes . All except Corra Linn , which was built to raise and regulate the level of Kootenay Lake . The Kootenay Canal Generating Station , completed in 1976 by BC Hydro , has its inlet at Kootenay Lake next to Corra Linn . The canal travels several kilometers , parallel to and above the river to utilize the roughly 84 @-@ metre ( 276 ft ) high water drop in elevation between Kootenay Lake and South Slocan , bypassing the old dams . The canal is used to generate hydroelectricity , as are the four dams . 
 = = = The Lower River = = = 
 After the falls and the junction with the Slocan River the last 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) of the river is a gradual slope to the merger with the Columbia . In 1944 the last privately owned development Brilliant Dam was built , just 2 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) before the Kootenay river flows into the Columbia River at Castlegar . 
 = = = Columbia River Treaty = = = 
 The Columbia Basin is noted for its spring floods , major flood years were 1876 , 1894 , 1948 and 1964 . As recently as the mid @-@ 1960s , the upper Columbia and Kootenay rivers in British Columbia were still free @-@ flowing and unaffected by dams and reservoirs , resulting in the 1948 Vanport Oregon flood . The uncontrolled discharge past the Canada @-@ U.S. border created problems for electricity generation in the US , and Canada also wanted to utilize the Columbia river for the production of hydroelectric power . <unk> in 1961 between the governments of the two countries , the Columbia River Treaty attempted to ratify these problems . Construction of the first three of the four dams authorized by the treaty — Mica , Keenleyside and Duncan — was implemented in 1964 . Of the four dams , the first two are on the Columbia , the third is on the Duncan River , a tributary of the Kootenay , and the fourth Libby , on the Kootenay River proper . However , operation of the dams has led to environmental problems in both rivers because they have caused unnatural flow fluctuations , blocked fish migration , flooded fertile agricultural land , and forced over 2 @,@ 000 people to relocate . 
 Solely built for the purpose of regulating water flow into Kootenay Lake , Duncan Dam , the first dam built for the treaty , was raised in 1967 and increased the 25 @-@ kilometre ( 16 mi ) long size of Duncan Lake to a reservoir 45 kilometres ( 28 mi ) long . Because of its purpose , it has no power generation facilities . Libby Dam , the fourth and last dam built under the treaty , was completed in 1975 by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers . It is the first of the dams that the Kootenay encounters <unk> its journey and provides further regulation of the water that flows into Kootenay Lake . The other two dams built for the treaty , Keenleyside and Mica , are both on the Columbia River . Kootenay basin reservoirs provide nearly 8 @.@ 6 cubic kilometres ( 7 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acre · ft ) of storage which constitutes almost half of the 19 @.@ 1 cubic kilometres ( 15 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 acre · ft ) stored in Columbia River Treaty reservoirs . 
 = = = Diversion proposal = = = 
 In the 1970s , it was proposed that the Kootenay River be diverted into the Columbia River ( the two rivers are separated by a distance of no more than 2 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) in the Rocky Mountain Trench in southeastern British Columbia ) . This would allow for the generation of increased hydroelectric power on the Columbia . It would also make easier the reclamation of the Kootenay Flats , an area south of Kootenay Lake , for agricultural purposes — spring freshets once raised the level of the lake by up to 8 metres ( 26 ft ) , inundating the lowlands around it . There were also never @-@ implemented plans to divert part of the Kootenay enlarged Columbia River through a tunnel to the headwaters of the Thompson River in the northwest , and thence to the Fraser River valley of southwestern British Columbia . 
 The proposal was strongly opposed by both environmentalists as well as local residents . The economy of southeastern British Columbia is strongly dependent on tourism , with the Columbia River , including Columbia Lake and Windermere Lake , being very popular for summer swimming and boating activities . Diversion of the glacier @-@ fed Kootenay River would have resulted in the Columbia River becoming much deeper and colder , flooding riverside communities and damaging tourism . At the opposite end of the scale , it would dry the bed of the Kootenay River downstream of Canal Flats , cutting off water supply to residents of the upper Kootenay Valley and invalidating the effectiveness of Libby Dam , whose construction was to begin in a few years . As a result , this proposed river diversion was never undertaken . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Many national , provincial and state parks , wilderness preserves , protected areas and national forests lie partially or wholly within the Kootenay River watershed . In Canada , these include those listed below as well as many others . 
 Popular Banff National Park lies just across the BC @-@ Alberta border , Yoho National Park sits to the north , and Glacier National Park in the northeast . The U.S. portion of the watershed includes Kootenai National Forest and Kaniksu National Forest ( part of the Idaho Panhandle National Forests , which stretch southwards into the state ) . 
 In Kootenay National Park alone , there are over 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) of hiking trails , ranging from short day hikes to long backpacking trips . Cross @-@ country skiing and snowshoeing are popular on the park 's trails in the winter . Mount Assiniboine Provincial Park , which sits right next to Kootenay in the Rocky Mountains , also has an extensive trail system affording extensive views of the surrounding ranges . <unk> Creek Provincial Park , on the northeast shore of Lake Koocanusa , includes campgrounds and access to boat launches on the east shore of the lake . The Kootenai River Trail along the Montana section of the river , about 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) long , follows the river from Libby to Kootenai Falls and the well known Swinging Bridge across the Kootenai . <unk> Reach Trail , on the lower river , is about 14 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) long , running from Brilliant to Glade . Further downstream , five separate sites around Kootenay Lake form the Kootenay Lake Provincial Park . West Arm Provincial Park is on the impounded stretch of the Kootenay River just west of Kootenay Lake , and to the northeast of Nelson . Smaller Kokanee Creek Provincial Park , one of the more popular recreation areas in the West Kootenay , sits across the river from West Arm . 
 Fishing is generally good on the middle reaches of the Kootenay River and in Kootenay Lake . Westslope cutthroat trout , bull trout , kokanee salmon ( the landlocked Pacific salmon ) , rainbow trout and white sturgeon are among the many species found in the river . Kokanee and rainbows are commonly found in Lake Koocanusa . Kootenai Falls , which drops some 90 metres ( 300 ft ) within a run of a few hundred meters , forms a natural boundary between fishes of the upper and lower river , but Libby Dam , several kilometres upstream , is an even more formidable barrier . Fish in the Kootenay have traditionally been abundant but the construction of the dam may have led to declines in the population of sturgeon , among other fishes , because of changes in water flow . The best season for fishing is from June to November . One may fish from banks , sandbars and islands , or from boats . Because of the size and strength of the river , fishing from drift boats is easier than from the shore . Also , because the Kootenay 's primary sources are glaciers , fishing conditions are quite different from most rivers in Montana and Idaho , which are fed by snowmelt . In the United States , the Kootenay , with its " exceptional " trout fishing , is considered a Blue Ribbon fishery . 
 Steep and strewn with rapids , the Kootenay , despite being unsuitable for commercial transportation of agricultural and mineral products , is considered an outstanding whitewater river . Whitewater rafting is popular on the Kootenay in two stretches : in Jennings Canyon between the Libby Dam in Montana and Bonners Ferry in Idaho , and in the upper reaches of the river in Kootenay National Park in British Columbia . 
 Rafting the middle Kootenay between Libby Dam and Bonners Ferry is best at flows of 230 to 340 cubic metres per second ( 8 @,@ 000 to 12 @,@ 000 cu ft / s ) . The run , about 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) from east to west , includes Class IV + rapids and includes Kootenai Falls , which rarely has been run safely , in the middle of its course . In Montana , the river is rated a Class I water under the Montana Stream Access Law for recreational purposes from Libby Dam to the Montana @-@ Idaho border . Class I represents bodies of water that are navigable and suitable for recreation . 
 Rafting is also popular in some of the Canadian stretches of the river , especially those near the headwaters that have the steepest gradient and the most challenging rapids . Several Canadian outfitters provide trips on the river near Kootenay National Park ranging from a few hours to several days . Canoeing in the numerous sloughs , side @-@ channels and distributaries of the Kootenay that thread through the wetlands of the Kootenay Flats has the additional benefit of watching birds and wildlife in the Creston Valley Wildlife Management Unit and other surrounding marshes . Larger craft such as houseboats are able to travel on Kootenay and Koocanusa Lakes . Rafting and kayaking is also an activity on the swift @-@ flowing Slocan River , the lowermost major tributary of the Kootenay , and in parts of other major Kootenay tributaries as well . 
 = = Crossings = = 
 Crossings of the Kootenay River are listed from upstream to downstream . The name of the road / track , the coordinates , and the location are given . 
 = = Additional reading = = 
 Bathymetric Surveys of the Kootenai River near Bonners Ferry , Idaho United States Geological Survey 
 Sullivan , Gordon ( 2008 ) . Saving <unk> : The Story of Montana 's Streams and Rivers . Woodstock , VT : The Countryman Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 679 @-@ 2 . 
 = Breakaway ( Kelly Clarkson album ) = 
 Breakaway is the second studio album by American singer Kelly Clarkson , released on November 30 , 2004 , by RCA Records . The album is a follow @-@ up to her successful debut album , Thankful ( 2003 ) . Executive produced by Clive Davis , Breakaway sees Clarkson collaborating with various producers and songwriters for the first time , primarily Dr. Luke , Max Martin , Avril Lavigne , Kara DioGuardi , Ben Moody , and David Hodges ; the latter two are former members of American rock band Evanescence . Despite the established commercial success of Thankful , music critics still continued to typecast Clarkson as an American Idol winner and were also critical of her attempts of establishing a commercial appeal on her own . Wanting to stray from those , she was convinced by Davis to work with Dr. Luke and Martin in Stockholm , and with Moody and Hodges in Los Angeles , in pursuit of a pop rock direction . This also led her to part ways with her manager Simon Fuller and hire the management services of Jeff Kwatinetz before the album 's release . Breakaway is predominately a pop rock album with elements of rock and soul music , marking a departure from the R & B @-@ oriented sound of Thankful ; its lyrics explore themes of heartbreak , love , and escapism . 
 Breakaway received a positive response from music critics , with many commending the album 's new @-@ found pop rock sound and Clarkson 's vocal performances . " It received several awards and nominations , including winning two Grammy Awards and receiving a nomination for a Juno Award . The album became a commercial success worldwide . By selling over 15 million copies worldwide , it remains her most successful album to date . After debuting at number three on the Billboard 200 in the United States , it stayed on the top twenty of the chart for more than a year , eventually being certified 6 × multi @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of more than six million copies . 
 Breakaway 's singles " Breakaway " , " Since U Been Gone " , " Behind These Hazel Eyes " , " Because of You " , and " Walk Away " became worldwide hits and have become some of Clarkson 's signature songs . Their successes prompted Billboard to credit her for landscaping the core sound of mainstream pop music as an uptempo dance @-@ oriented sound in the 2000s . Furthermore , Breakaway established Clarkson as one of the four highest @-@ selling acts of Sony BMG in the 2000s , and made Davis , Dr. Luke , and Martin prominent pop producers . Internationally , the album topped the music charts of Ireland and the Netherlands and became the world 's 7th biggest @-@ selling release of 2005 , eventually being certified platinum in over 17 countries . To support Breakaway , Clarkson embarked on three international concert tours from 2005 to 2006 : the Breakaway World Tour , Hazel Eyes Tour , and the Addicted Tour . Billboard placed the album 77th in the Greatest of All Time Billboard 200 Albums . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 In early 2004 , Clarkson began working on new material for her second studio album , which followed her successful debut album Thankful ( 2003 ) , while co @-@ headlining the Independent Tour with Clay Aiken , the runner @-@ up from the second season of American Idol . She had also expressed intentions to record with Fantasia Barrino , who had then just won the series ' third season ; both were expected to release their albums in the same month . 
 As she began to work for the album with music executive Clive Davis , Clarkson was invited by Whitney Houston to record the song " Breakaway " , which would be included for the soundtrack of the 2004 Walt Disney Pictures feature film The Princess Diaries 2 : Royal Engagement , which Houston had co @-@ produced . The song , written by Avril Lavigne , Matthew Gerrard , and Bridget Benenate , was initially written for Lavigne 's debut album Let Go ( 2002 ) but deemed unsuitable for the album 's themes at the time . Initially reluctant , Clarkson agreed to record the song . " Breakaway " was first released on July 2004 by Walt Disney Records as a single from the soundtrack , acting as an interim record until her second album 's lead single was released . After debuting on the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 60 , it peaked at number six , a week before the album 's release . 
 In April 2004 , Clarkson entered the studio immediately after the Independent Tour . She said in an interview , " I 've written most of ( the songs ) so far , but there 's some people who have some stuff for me . I 'm not one of those people who thinks you have to write everything . ( I 'll sing it ) as long as I can relate to it . " During the album 's development , Davis revealed that he was reluctant to let Clarkson write material for the album . He revealed , " I always encourage people to write their own songs , but in the pop arena , where the career is totally dependent on hits , you get skeptical . Artists with great voices like Melissa Manchester and Taylor Dayne could have had much longer careers if they didn 't insist on writing their own material . " Clarkson reiterates that she 's been writing songs since her teens , but rather than argue over labels or abilities , the two reached a détente — she would co @-@ write half the album , with the other half being penned by other songwriters and producers . She said , " I just think it 's funny that all these middle @-@ age guys told me , ' You don 't know how a pop song needs to sound . ' I 'm a 23 @-@ year @-@ old girl ! But I was fighting those battles alone . " In February 2004 , Clarkson met with musicians Ben Moody and David Hodges , who had just departed from their band Evanescence in late 2003 . She said , " I didn 't know that he ( Moody ) wasn 't with Evanescence anymore , " Clarkson said . " I just really liked their vibe and I thought it might be cool to work with one of them . So I just randomly asked people I work with , ' Hey , do you think that he 'd work with me ? ' And then I found out that he kind of split and that 's what he 's doing ... so it worked out perfectly . " Moody recalled , " It 's cool because she wants to do some branching out , and I 'm doing nothing but branching out , We got together and she had all these songs in mind of what she wanted to do . It 's just a really , really cool process for me , because everybody is a new experience . Everybody works differently . " 
 Worried of Clarkson being continually typecast as a talent show winner , Davis met with various producers , primarily Max Martin , and encouraged them to produce records for Clarkson in a pop rock direction . Clarkson revealed that she expected that she 'll always be labeled as an American Idol winner , she remarked , " I 'm the first one , so it 's going to be on my grave , I 'm aware of that . ( There 's no getting away from it ) so why even try ? " Upon their meeting , Martin presented songs he wrote with Dr. Luke . These songs include " Since U Been Gone " and a demo version of what would have been " Behind These Hazel Eyes " . Davis wanted Clarkson to record the songs , describing them having " a sharp rock edge but were still capable of being pop hits . They would push Kelly in a promising direction for her , while maintaining and even growing her audience . " Martin insisted that the songs should given to rock acts , wanting to stray from his reputation for producing pop singles for the Backstreet Boys and , Britney Spears in the 1990s . Davis recalled , " Max was looking to move on from what he had done with Backstreet Boys , and I really spent time convincing them that an American Idol winner could bring all the feeling and passion that was required to the song . " Martin and Dr. Luke eventually agreed and invited Clarkson to travel to Sweden to record the songs . Upon hearing the tracks , Clarkson was skeptical of the pop elements ; and the three eventually decided to develop a rock sound , a move Clarkson claimed Davis did not approve . Davis reiterated that he was ecstatic with the prospect , claiming that she disliked it and demanded that both the songs be removed from the album . Clarkson then asserted that she wanted it to be on the record and claimed that Davis had detested " Because of You " instead , saying that she " was a shitty writer ( sic ) who should be grateful for the gifts that he bestows upon . Davis reiterated the he loved the song and felt that Clarkson could indeed write hits . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Style and inspirations = = = 
 Wanting to stray away from the R & B @-@ styled music of Thankful , which she described as a showcase of versatility , she revealed that Thankful 's success " empowered me to step more into rock , step more into the soulful vibe . " She described the music of the second album as " like the first CD in the sense that it 's versatile , but it 's more into the rock , It 's more into the soulful roots , and it 's just a little bit deeper , so it 's pretty cool . " Dr. Luke revealed in an interview that alternative music and indie music were inspirations to " Since U Been Gone " , saying , " That was a conscious move by Max and myself , because we were listening to alternative and indie music and talking about some song @-@ I don 't remember what it was . I said , ' Ah , I love this song , ' and Max was like , ' If they would just write a damn pop chorus on it ! ' It was driving him nuts , because that indie song was sort of on six , going to seven , going to eight , the chorus comes ... and it goes back down to five . It drove him crazy . And when he said that , it was like , light bulb . ' Why don 't we do that , but put a big chorus on it ? ' It worked . " Songs such as " Behind These Hazel Eyes " , and " Because of You " were also inspired by her real life experiences , the former about her relationship with an ex @-@ boyfriend and the latter about her experience after her parents ' divorce . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 Clarkson shares writing credits on six songs from Breakaway . " Breakaway " was included as the album 's opening and title track . She described it as a simple song , and further explained , " I think that it 's simplicity is what 's beautiful about it . Whenever writers or producers come to work with me , they take advantage of the fact that I can really belt it out . What 's cool about ' Breakaway ' is that it doesn 't take advantage of that . The song just uses the simplicity of my voice . I 've done country music , I 've done pop , I 've done gospel ... all of my singles have sounded different . But this song was different from everything I 've done ; people didn 't even know it was me ! " Written by Martin and Dr. Luke , Clarkson described the second track " Since U Been Gone " , as " not as " smooth " as pop or R & B. Clarkson said of the track , the very last to be recorded for the album , " It 's very emotional . Vocally , it can be a lot more challenging , but is very fun to play live . " Written by Clarkson , Dr. Luke , and Martin , the third track " Behind These Hazel Eyes " , was the last song she had co @-@ written for the album . She recalled , " I wrote ' Behind The Hazel Eyes ' about my last boyfriend . It 's the last song I wrote for the album , I almost didn 't make the deadline . " The fourth track , " Because of You " , was originally intended for Thankful . Clarkson wrote a draft of the song after a late night talk with a friend who had hard time with her family , with Moody and Hodges providing additional writing . " Gone " , the fifth track , was written by Kara DioGuardi and John Shanks . Clarkson admits she cannot relate thoroughly on the song , but felt that it should be heard nonetheless . The sixth track , " Addicted , was written by Clarkson , Moody , and Hodges . Clarkson revealed that the song was inspired by the songs featured on Evanescence 's debut album Fallen ( 2003 ) . She remarked , " I wanted to work on them with someone as passionate about music as I am . And then I heard that Evanescence record ... I loved their record because of the passion behind it . 
 Clarkson co @-@ wrote the seventh track , " Where Is Your Heart " , with DioGuardi and Chantal Kreviazuk . She revealed that it was also about her boyfriend , Hodges , whom she described as " wanting to get really into our relationship , and I just thought , ' Where are you in our relationship ? ' " " Walk Away " , the eight track , was also written by the three , with additional writing by Raine Maida . Clarkson described it as " one of the brighter songs " on Breakaway , and said that " It 's very blunt and to the point . ' I 'm done with you , you 're upsetting me . ' " DioGuardi and Shanks co @-@ wrote the ninth track , " You Found Me " . Clarkson revealed , " When I recorded this one , I was actually in a good place with a guy . It was very fitting at the time that I recorded it . " DioGuardi had also co @-@ written the tenth track , " I Hate Myself for Losing You " , with Jimmy Harry and Shep Solomon . Clarkson described the song as " depressing " , but felt it could be used as a foreshadowing device . She explained " I read something that Sting said in an interview , he talked about how the great thing about writing is that it is an emotional and therapeutic thing and you can get it out . " The eleventh track , " Hear Me " , was written by Clarkson , DioGuardi , and Clif Magness . Clarkson explained the song , " It 's is almost like a prayer to God . I haven 't met the person whom I will spend the rest of my life with , but the song is a prayer to God about that . That 's what the song is . ' God , I 'm ready for ' the one ! ' " The twelfth and closing track is a live recording of " Beautiful Disaster " , originally from Thankful . Clarkson admitted that she hated Thankful 's version of the song , and thought the production was distracting from the lyrics . So she decided to record a piano ballad version instead . 
 = = Release = = 
 Breakaway was first released in the North America on November 30 , 2004 by RCA Records , 19 Recordings , and S Records , following an influx of releases by American Idol contestants Aiken , Ruben Studdard , and Barrino . The New York Times columnist Jeff Leeds noted that the release could benefit from a holiday season , but " it could also hinder their efforts to establish themselves as recording artists with distinctive personalities and the legitimacy needed for long careers . " Davis reiterated that the release was intended to recede from their ties from American Idol , saying , " I 'm not interested in merely souvenir sales " . The album was titled Breakaway to capitalize on the success of the The Princess Diaries 2 : Royal Engagement soundtrack single " Breakaway " , which was also reissued as the album 's final single . Immediately before the album was released , Clarkson left 19 Management , dismissed Fuller as her manager , and quickly hired the managing services of Jeff Kwatinetz of the The Firm , though still contracted to 19 Recordings . A promotion plan was created for Clarkson for Breakaway 's release . Davis positioned her to be RCA 's top global priority , and at the recommendation of The Firm , removed American Idol from her official biography . Rather than being booked on arenas for her tour , Kwatinetz booked Clarkson for smaller amphitheaters to hone her performance skills . He remarked , " American Idol gave her a lot of exposure that allowed her to skip some steps in her development , and that 's hazardous . " Breakaway was first released internationally on January 3 , 2005 by the Bertelsmann Music Group ( now Sony Music Entertainment ) , and was released in the United Kingdom on July 18 , 2005 by RCA . On November 2005 , a special edition CD + DVD was released , containing additional bonus tracks and music videos . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 Clarkson , along with Studdard and Barrino , hosted a television musical special on the Fox Broadcasting Company entitled Kelly , Ruben & Fantasia : Home for Christmas on November 25 , 2004 . On the eve of Breakaway 's release , she performed " Since U Been Gone " on the The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . On February 2005 , she appeared on Saturday Night Live to perform " Since U Been Gone " and " Breakaway " . On September 2005 , she appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show and performed " Breakaway " as well as " Because of You " . Clarkson also performed in award ceremonies and events , she performed " Since U Been Gone " on the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards at the <unk> Arena and on the 2006 BRIT Awards at the Earls Court . She performed " Because of You " on the 48th Annual Grammy Awards at the Staples Center and on the 15th Echo Awards at the <unk> Berlin . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 Breakaway 's lead single , " Since U Been Gone " , was released on November 2004 , but gained traction at the beginning of 2005 . After debuting at number seventy , it peaked on the Billboard Hot 100 at number two , and stayed in the chart 's top ten for 20 weeks . Despite a number two peak , " Since U Been Gone " remains as Clarkson 's most successful single on the Billboard Hot 100 , outpacing even her number one hits on the chart . It also topped nine other Billboard charts , including the Billboard Mainstream Top 40 and the Billboard Dance / Mix Show Airplay , and became a successful hit around the world . The second single , " Behind These Hazel Eyes " , was released on April 2005 and continued the chart success . After debuting at number 87 on the Billboard Hot 100 , it peaked at number six while " Since U Been Gone " is still in the top ten . It stayed on the chart 's top ten for 15 weeks , and also became an international hit . The third single , " Because of You " , released on August 2005 , performed successfully along with its predecessors , peaking at number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 . While " Since U Been Gone " became Breakaway 's most successful release in the United States , " Because of You " became the album 's most successful release internationally . It topped the Dutch Top 40 chart in the Netherlands , Schweizer Hitparade chart in Switzerland , the Tracklisten Airplay chart in Denmark and became a number one single on the Billboard European Hot 100 Singles chart ; while also attaining a top ten position in nine regions . The follow @-@ up track , " Walk Away " , was released on January 2006 as Breakaway 's fourth single and its final release in the United States . After debuting at number 97 , it peaked at number 12 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and became a top forty hit internationally . Originally released as a single from The Princess Diaries 2 : Royal Engagement soundtrack in July 2004 , the title track " Breakaway " was reissued as the album 's fifth and final single in May 2006 . After peaking on the Billboard Hot 100 at number six , it became a top twenty hit internationally . 
 = = = Tours = = = 
 From 2005 to 2006 , Clarkson embarked on three concert tours to promote Breakaway : the Hazel Eyes Tour , the Breakaway World Tour , and the Addicted Tour . The Hazel Eyes tour took place in various theaters throughout North America , with the concert at UCF Arena being streamed live on AOL and AOL Radio . The Breakaway World Tour , which took place in between the Hazel Eyes Tour , marked as her first world tour , visiting theaters and arenas throughout in Europe and Oceania . Upon returning to the United States , she then embarked on the Addicted Tour , performing at various amphitheaters across North America . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The album received positive reviews from music critics . AllMusic senior editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine , who gave it four out of five stars , wrote " what gives Breakaway its spine are the driving , anthemic pop tunes , numbers that sound simultaneously mainstream and youthful , which is a hard trick to pull off " and describing the tracks as the ones that illustrate Clarkson as a rare thing in the 2000s : a pop singer who 's neither hip nor square , just solidly and enjoyably in the mainstream . Sputnikmusic 's Dave Donnelly gave it a " 4 " rating , remarking that " Breakaway is not a Thriller to her Off The Wall by no means , but that she has at least created a rare type of album : a one that which offers a full selection of potential singles , reminiscent of Michael Jackson 's Bad or Thriller , which he described as having a mass appeal with artistic integrity and perceived longevity . Breakaway may be remembered in years to come as a pop classic , alongside Madonna 's early material perhaps . " Raymond Fiore of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a " B " rating , noting it 's rock direction and describing it as " Avril @-@ meets @-@ Evanescence , with a splash of Pat Benatar . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine gave Breakaway a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half star rating , and commented that though her rocky leanings were hinted at on the less coherent Thankful , Clarkson had always cited Mariah Carey as a primary influence and that she still owes a lot to that former powerhouse artist . Furthering describing it as " what Mariah might sound like if she ever decided to rock out . " Charles Merwin wrote for Stylus Magazine that the album 's probable non @-@ singles still maintain a quality " high enough to quell worries about the " I love the singles , but that 's all I really need to hear " arguments . " He described Clarkson as ranking some where at the top of her class as far as rock albums go among the teen pop set , saying that she " has a long way to go before we 'll ever feel comfortable calling her anything besides an American Idol , but for now she has a sound that seems believable enough to support her considerable chops . " In a quick review , Billboard described Breakaway as a " rare exhibition of substance over style " . 
 Some critics , however , were less impressed by the album . Shirley Halperin of the Rolling Stone offered a mixed review . Giving the album a three @-@ star rating , saying Clarkson isn 't ready for her new sound . She asked , " You can 't help but wonder , Who is the real Kelly Clarkson , and when will she stop wearing her big sister 's hand @-@ me @-@ downs ? " Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian gave it a two @-@ star rating , saying that the title track expresses Clarkson 's novel desire to " spread my wings and learn to fly " , but settles into a catchy enough rut that at times . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Breakaway is currently Clarkson 's most successful release to date , with sales of over 15 million copies worldwide . On the week ending December 18 , 2004 , the album debuted at number three on Billboard 200 chart in the United States with 250 @,@ 000 copies , which were 47 @,@ 000 less than her first week sales of Thankful . Music commercial analysts noted that Clarkson 's commercial appeal has endured beyond American Idol , but also commented on its slumping performance . Billboard director Geoff Mayfield noted the lackluster performance may have been caused by being released in a competitive holiday market . Despite failing to top the chart , the record stayed on the top twenty of the Billboard 200 for 61 consecutive weeks , and became the first title in five years to spend its entire year in the top twenty of the chart . By the end of 2005 , Breakaway became the year 's third best @-@ selling album in the United States , according to Nielsen Soundscan . It was certified 6 × multi @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America on May 23 , 2007 , and as of 2014 , it has sold over 6 @,@ 307 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and becoming her best @-@ selling record in the region . 
 Breakaway has also enjoyed commercial success internationally ; it became her first album to chart in over nineteen regions . By the end of 2005 , the album became the world 's seventh best @-@ selling release of the year according to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry . In the United Kingdom , it debuted on the Official UK Albums Chart at number ten with 17 @,@ 631 copies . At the beginning of 2006 , the album ascended to number three on the chart . As of 2012 , it has sold over 1 @,@ 571 @,@ 278 copies in the region . In Australia , Breakaway debuted on the ARIA Albums Chart at number twenty @-@ nine , and also spent its entire year on the top fifty , peaking at number two . In Ireland , the album debuted on the IRMA Artist Albums chart at number twenty @-@ one , and topped the chart in 2006 . Together with the Australian Recording Industry Association , the Irish Recorded Music Association certified the record as 7 × multi @-@ platinum , its highest certification overall . In the Netherlands , the album debuted on the Mega Album Top 100 at number forty @-@ seven and topped the chart for three weeks . In other regions , Breakaway peaked in the top five in the national charts of Austria , Belgium , Denmark , Germany , Greece , New Zealand , Portugal , and Switzerland ; and has attained a top twenty position in six regions worldwide . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 It has received various accolades from several music industry awards . It won Grammy Awards for Best Pop Vocal Album and Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for " Since U Been Gone " at the 49th ceremony , marking the first time she won a Grammy Award . It was also nominated for a Juno Award for International Album of the Year at the 36th Juno Awards . In the 2005 American Music Awards , Breakaway received four nominations , including Favorite Pop / Rock Album , and earned Clarkson two awards for Artist of the Year and Favorite Adult Contemporary Artist . In addition , she won the award for Favorite Pop / Rock Female Artist at the 2006 American Music Awards . It also earned her twelve nominations at the 2005 Billboard Music Awards , nine of which she had won . At the 2005 Teen Choice Awards , Breakaway won four awards , including a Choice Album award . At the TMF Awards , the album enabled Clarkson to win three awards , including a Best Pop Artist and a Best Female Artist award . 
 Breakaway also appeared on decade @-@ end best @-@ of lists . Newsweek ranked it as the ninth best album of the 2000s . Entertainment Weekly ranked it as the 29th of the 100 best albums from 1988 to 2008 . Rolling Stone ranked it as the 11th top album of the decade @-@ end reader 's poll . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Music commercial analysts reported that Clarkson has attained a commercial appeal on her own with Breakaway , despite their initial skepticism of her establishing prominence beyond American Idol . Davis recalled that " With the songs " Since U Been Gone " and " Behind These Hazel Eyes " , we were able to take Clarkson to a major seller of albums all over the world where they had never even heard of American Idol . " According to Mediabase , which monitors radio station airplay in North America , Clarkson was the most played artist on the radio of 2006 . David Corey , program director of WXKS @-@ FM , described it as " very rare " . Just before the release of her third studio album , Davis also stated that she was one of the top four artists at Sony BMG " . 
 Billboard credits Clarkson for landscaping the core sound of mainstream pop music in the 2000s to a uptempo dance @-@ oriented sound with the release of " Since U Been Gone " and the singles that followed it . The album 's producers also came into prominence due to the album 's success . Dr. Luke , who was the house band lead guitarist for Saturday Night Live at the time of the Breakaway 's release , has credited " Since U Been Gone " as his first big break . Max Martin , who had already found major success as a music producer in the 1990s and early 2000s with , among others , Britney Spears , Backstreet Boys and NSYNC , achieved more prominence due to the success of " Since U Been Gone " and " Behind These Hazel Eyes " . 
 Breakaway 's critical acclaim also enabled Clarkson to also earn critical respect , particularly from the rock and indie music scene , who had looked down upon American Idol contestants . In his memoir , Davis recalled a meeting Fuller and BMG President Charles <unk> , where Fuller acknowledged how the worldwide success of Breakaway has validated American Idol itself . The popularity of " Since U Been Gone " among the rock community has also resulted to various cover versions by rock acts , such as A Day to Remember , Ted Leo , and Tokyo Police Club . She recalled , " It 's ridiculous how well that song was received by hard rockers , by indie people . I was walking around with a friend of mine and this hard @-@ rock guy came up to me and was like , ' I look stupid , but I tell my friends I love this song . ' People at concerts are like , ' That 's my guilty pleasure . I don 't mean to be mean , but I didn 't want to like the American Idol girl . ' But they love that song , and it kind of won them over . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits lifted from the album 's liner notes . 
 Recorded at 
 Performance credits 
 Instruments 
 Production 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = <unk> = 
 The mitochondrion ( plural mitochondria ) is a double membrane @-@ bound organelle found in all eukaryotic organisms , although some cells in some organisms may lack them ( e.g. Red blood cells ) . A number of organisms have reduced or transformed their mitochondria into other structures . To date , only one eukaryote is known to have completely lost its mitochondria . The word mitochondrion comes from the Greek <unk> , mitos , i.e. " thread " , and <unk> — , <unk> , i.e. " granule " or " grain @-@ like " . 
 Mitochondria are commonly between 0 @.@ 75 and <unk> in diameter but vary considerably in size and structure . Unless specifically stained , they are not visible . Mitochondria have been described as " the powerhouse of the cell " because they generate most of the cell 's supply of adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , used as a source of chemical energy . In addition to supplying cellular energy , mitochondria are involved in other tasks , such as signaling , cellular differentiation , and cell death , as well as maintaining control of the cell cycle and cell growth . Mitochondrial biogenesis is in turn temporally coordinated with these cellular processes . Mitochondria have been implicated in several human diseases , including mitochondrial disorders , cardiac dysfunction , and heart failure . In 2014 , a study including ten children diagnosed with severe autism suggests that autism may be correlated with mitochondrial defects . 
 The number of mitochondria in a cell can vary widely by organism , tissue , and cell type . For instance , red blood cells have no mitochondria , whereas liver cells can have more than 2000 . The organelle is composed of compartments that carry out specialized functions . These compartments or regions include the outer membrane , the intermembrane space , the inner membrane , and the cristae and matrix . Mitochondrial proteins vary depending on the tissue and the species . In humans , 615 distinct types of protein have been identified from cardiac mitochondria , whereas in rats , 940 proteins have been reported . The mitochondrial proteome is thought to be dynamically regulated . Although most of a cell 's DNA is contained in the cell nucleus , the mitochondrion has its own independent genome that shows substantial similarity to bacterial genomes . 
 = = History = = 
 The first observations of intracellular structures that probably represented mitochondria were published in the 1840s . Richard Altmann , in 1894 , established them as cell organelles and called them " <unk> " . The term " mitochondria " was coined by Carl Benda in 1898 . Leonor Michaelis discovered that Janus green can be used as a <unk> stain for mitochondria in 1900 . In 1904 , Friedrich <unk> , made the first recorded observation of mitochondria in plants in cells of the white waterlily , Nymphaea alba and in 1908 , along with Claudius <unk> , suggested that they contain proteins and lipids . Benjamin F. Kingsbury , in 1912 , first related them with cell respiration , but almost exclusively based on morphological observations . In 1913 , particles from extracts of guinea @-@ pig liver were linked to respiration by Otto Heinrich Warburg , which he called " grana " . Warburg and Heinrich Otto Wieland , who had also postulated a similar particle mechanism , disagreed on the chemical nature of the respiration . It was not until 1925 , when David <unk> discovered cytochromes , that the respiratory chain was described . 
 In 1939 , experiments using minced muscle cells demonstrated that cellular respiration using one oxygen atom can form two adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) molecules , and , in 1941 , the concept of the phosphate bonds of ATP being a form of energy in cellular metabolism was developed by Fritz Albert Lipmann . In the following years , the mechanism behind cellular respiration was further elaborated , although its link to the mitochondria was not known . The introduction of tissue fractionation by Albert Claude allowed mitochondria to be isolated from other cell fractions and biochemical analysis to be conducted on them alone . In 1946 , he concluded that cytochrome oxidase and other enzymes responsible for the respiratory chain were isolated to the <unk> . Eugene Kennedy and Albert Lehninger discovered in 1948 that mitochondria are the site of oxidative phosphorylation in eukaryotes . Over time , the fractionation method was further developed , improving the quality of the mitochondria isolated , and other elements of cell respiration were determined to occur in the mitochondria . 
 The first high @-@ resolution electron micrographs appeared in 1952 , replacing the Janus Green stains as the preferred way of visualising the mitochondria . This led to a more detailed analysis of the structure of the mitochondria , including confirmation that they were surrounded by a membrane . It also showed a second membrane inside the mitochondria that folded up in ridges dividing up the inner chamber and that the size and shape of the mitochondria varied from cell to cell . 
 The popular term " powerhouse of the cell " was coined by Philip <unk> in 1957 . 
 In 1967 , it was discovered that mitochondria contained ribosomes . In 1968 , methods were developed for mapping the mitochondrial genes , with the genetic and physical map of yeast mitochondrial DNA being completed in 1976 . 
 = = Origin and evolution = = 
 There are two hypotheses about the origin of mitochondria : endosymbiotic and autogenous . The endosymbiotic hypothesis suggests that mitochondria were originally prokaryotic cells , capable of implementing oxidative mechanisms that were not possible for eukaryotic cells ; they became endosymbionts living inside the eukaryote . In the autogenous hypothesis , mitochondria were born by splitting off a portion of DNA from the nucleus of the eukaryotic cell at the time of divergence with the prokaryotes ; this DNA portion would have been enclosed by membranes , which could not be crossed by proteins . Since mitochondria have many features in common with bacteria , the most accredited theory at present is endosymbiosis . 
 A mitochondrion contains DNA , which is organized as several copies of a single , circular chromosome . This mitochondrial chromosome contains genes for redox proteins , such as those of the respiratory chain . The <unk> hypothesis proposes that this co @-@ location is required for redox regulation . The mitochondrial genome codes for some RNAs of ribosomes , and the 22 tRNAs necessary for the translation of messenger RNAs into protein . The circular structure is also found in prokaryotes . The proto @-@ mitochondrion was probably closely related to the Rickettsia . However , the exact relationship of the ancestor of mitochondria to the <unk> and whether the mitochondrion was formed at the same time or after the nucleus , remains controversial . 
 A recent study by researchers of the University of Hawaii at Manoa and the Oregon State University indicates that the <unk> clade of bacteria shares a relatively recent common ancestor with the mitochondria existing in most eukaryotic cells . 
 The ribosomes coded for by the mitochondrial DNA are similar to those from bacteria in size and structure . They closely resemble the bacterial 70S ribosome and not the 80S cytoplasmic ribosomes , which are coded for by nuclear DNA . 
 The endosymbiotic relationship of mitochondria with their host cells was popularized by Lynn Margulis . The endosymbiotic hypothesis suggests that mitochondria descended from bacteria that somehow survived endocytosis by another cell , and became incorporated into the cytoplasm . The ability of these bacteria to conduct respiration in host cells that had relied on glycolysis and fermentation would have provided a considerable evolutionary advantage . This symbiotic relationship probably developed 1 @.@ 7 to 2 billion years ago . 
 A few groups of unicellular eukaryotes have only vestigial mitochondria or derived structures : the microsporidians , <unk> , and <unk> . These groups appear as the most primitive eukaryotes on phylogenetic trees constructed using rRNA information , which once suggested that they appeared before the origin of mitochondria . However , this is now known to be an artifact of long @-@ branch attraction — they are derived groups and retain genes or organelles derived from mitochondria ( e.g. , <unk> and hydrogenosomes ) . 
 <unk> appear to have lost their mitochondria completely and at least some of the mitochondrial functions seem to be carried out by cytoplasmic proteins now . 
 = = Structure = = 
 A mitochondrion contains outer and inner membranes composed of phospholipid bilayers and proteins . The two membranes have different properties . Because of this double @-@ <unk> organization , there are five distinct parts to a mitochondrion . They are : 
 the outer mitochondrial membrane , 
 the intermembrane space ( the space between the outer and inner membranes ) , 
 the inner mitochondrial membrane , 
 the cristae space ( formed by <unk> of the inner membrane ) , and 
 the matrix ( space within the inner membrane ) . 
 Mitochondria stripped of their outer membrane are called <unk> . 
 = = = Outer membrane = = = 
 The outer mitochondrial membrane , which encloses the entire organelle , is 60 to 75 angstroms ( Å ) thick . It has a protein @-@ to @-@ phospholipid ratio similar to that of the eukaryotic plasma membrane ( about 1 : 1 by weight ) . It contains large numbers of integral membrane proteins called porins . These porins form channels that allow molecules of 5000 daltons or less in molecular weight to freely diffuse from one side of the membrane to the other . Larger proteins can enter the mitochondrion if a signaling sequence at their N @-@ terminus binds to a large <unk> protein called translocase of the outer membrane , which then actively moves them across the membrane . Mitochondrial pro @-@ proteins are imported through specialised translocation complexes . The outer membrane also contains enzymes involved in such diverse activities as the elongation of fatty acids , oxidation of epinephrine , and the degradation of tryptophan . These enzymes include monoamine oxidase , rotenone @-@ insensitive NADH @-@ cytochrome c @-@ reductase , kynurenine hydroxylase and fatty acid Co @-@ A ligase . Disruption of the outer membrane permits proteins in the intermembrane space to leak into the cytosol , leading to certain cell death . The mitochondrial outer membrane can associate with the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) membrane , in a structure called MAM ( mitochondria @-@ associated ER @-@ membrane ) . This is important in the ER @-@ mitochondria calcium signaling and is involved in the transfer of lipids between the ER and mitochondria . Outside the outer membrane there are small ( diameter : <unk> ) particles named sub @-@ units of Parson . 
 = = = <unk> space = = = 
 The intermembrane space is the space between the outer membrane and the inner membrane . It is also known as <unk> space . Because the outer membrane is freely permeable to small molecules , the concentrations of small molecules , such as ions and sugars , in the intermembrane space is the same as in the cytosol . However , large proteins must have a specific signaling sequence to be transported across the outer membrane , so the protein composition of this space is different from the protein composition of the cytosol . One protein that is localized to the intermembrane space in this way is cytochrome c . 
 = = = Inner membrane = = = 
 The inner mitochondrial membrane contains proteins with five types of functions : 
 Those that perform the redox reactions of oxidative phosphorylation 
 ATP synthase , which generates ATP in the matrix 
 Specific transport proteins that regulate metabolite passage into and out of the matrix 
 Protein import machinery 
 Mitochondrial fusion and fission protein 
 It contains more than 151 different polypeptides , and has a very high protein @-@ to @-@ phospholipid ratio ( more than 3 : 1 by weight , which is about 1 protein for 15 phospholipids ) . The inner membrane is home to around 1 / 5 of the total protein in a mitochondrion . In addition , the inner membrane is rich in an unusual phospholipid , cardiolipin . This phospholipid was originally discovered in cow hearts in 1942 , and is usually characteristic of mitochondrial and bacterial plasma membranes . <unk> contains four fatty acids rather than two , and may help to make the inner membrane impermeable . Unlike the outer membrane , the inner membrane doesn 't contain porins , and is highly impermeable to all molecules . Almost all ions and molecules require special membrane transporters to enter or exit the matrix . Proteins are ferried into the matrix via the translocase of the inner membrane ( TIM ) complex or via <unk> . In addition , there is a membrane potential across the inner membrane , formed by the action of the enzymes of the electron transport chain . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The inner mitochondrial membrane is compartmentalized into numerous cristae , which expand the surface area of the inner mitochondrial membrane , enhancing its ability to produce ATP . For typical liver mitochondria , the area of the inner membrane is about five times as large as the outer membrane . This ratio is variable and mitochondria from cells that have a greater demand for ATP , such as muscle cells , contain even more cristae . These folds are studded with small round bodies known as F1 particles or <unk> . These are not simple random folds but rather <unk> of the inner membrane , which can affect overall <unk> function . 
 One recent mathematical modeling study has suggested that the optical properties of the cristae in filamentous mitochondria may affect the generation and propagation of light within the tissue . 
 = = = Matrix = = = 
 The matrix is the space enclosed by the inner membrane . It contains about 2 / 3 of the total protein in a mitochondrion . The matrix is important in the production of ATP with the aid of the ATP synthase contained in the inner membrane . The matrix contains a highly concentrated mixture of hundreds of enzymes , special mitochondrial ribosomes , tRNA , and several copies of the mitochondrial DNA genome . Of the enzymes , the major functions include oxidation of pyruvate and fatty acids , and the citric acid cycle . 
 Mitochondria have their own genetic material , and the machinery to manufacture their own RNAs and proteins ( see : protein biosynthesis ) . A published human mitochondrial DNA sequence revealed 16 @,@ 569 base pairs encoding 37 genes : 22 tRNA , 2 rRNA , and 13 peptide genes . The 13 mitochondrial peptides in humans are integrated into the inner mitochondrial membrane , along with proteins encoded by genes that reside in the host cell 's nucleus . 
 = = = Mitochondria @-@ associated ER membrane ( MAM ) = = = 
 The mitochondria @-@ associated ER membrane ( MAM ) is another structural element that is increasingly recognized for its critical role in cellular physiology and homeostasis . Once considered a technical snag in cell fractionation techniques , the alleged ER vesicle contaminants that invariably appeared in the mitochondrial fraction have been re @-@ identified as membranous structures derived from the MAM — the interface between mitochondria and the ER . Physical coupling between these two organelles had previously been observed in electron micrographs and has more recently been probed with fluorescence microscopy . Such studies estimate that at the MAM , which may comprise up to 20 % of the mitochondrial outer membrane , the ER and mitochondria are separated by a mere 10 – 25 nm and held together by protein tethering complexes . 
 Purified MAM from subcellular fractionation has been shown to be enriched in enzymes involved in phospholipid exchange , in addition to channels associated with Ca2 + signaling . These hints of a prominent role for the MAM in the regulation of cellular lipid stores and signal transduction have been borne out , with significant implications for mitochondrial @-@ associated cellular phenomena , as discussed below . Not only has the MAM provided insight into the mechanistic basis underlying such physiological processes as intrinsic apoptosis and the propagation of calcium signaling , but it also favors a more refined view of the mitochondria . Though often seen as static , isolated ' powerhouses ' hijacked for cellular metabolism through an ancient endosymbiotic event , the evolution of the MAM underscores the extent to which mitochondria have been integrated into overall cellular physiology , with intimate physical and functional coupling to the endomembrane system . 
 = = = = <unk> transfer = = = = 
 The MAM is enriched in enzymes involved in lipid biosynthesis , such as phosphatidylserine synthase on the ER face and phosphatidylserine decarboxylase on the mitochondrial face . Because mitochondria are dynamic organelles constantly undergoing fission and fusion events , they require a constant and well @-@ regulated supply of phospholipids for membrane integrity . But mitochondria are not only a destination for the phospholipids they finish synthesis of ; rather , this organelle also plays a role in inter @-@ organelle trafficking of the intermediates and products of phospholipid biosynthetic pathways , ceramide and cholesterol metabolism , and <unk> anabolism . 
 Such trafficking capacity depends on the MAM , which has been shown to facilitate transfer of lipid intermediates between organelles . In contrast to the standard vesicular mechanism of lipid transfer , evidence indicates that the physical proximity of the ER and mitochondrial membranes at the MAM allows for lipid flipping between opposed bilayers . Despite this unusual and seemingly energetically unfavorable mechanism , such transport does not require ATP . Instead , in yeast , it has been shown to be dependent on a multiprotein tethering structure termed the ER @-@ mitochondria encounter structure , or ERMES , although it remains unclear whether this structure directly mediates lipid transfer or is required to keep the membranes in sufficiently close proximity to lower the energy barrier for lipid flipping . 
 The MAM may also be part of the secretory pathway , in addition to its role in intracellular lipid trafficking . In particular , the MAM appears to be an intermediate destination between the rough ER and the Golgi in the pathway that leads to very @-@ low @-@ density lipoprotein , or <unk> , assembly and secretion . The MAM thus serves as a critical metabolic and trafficking hub in lipid metabolism . 
 = = = = Calcium signaling = = = = 
 A critical role for the ER in calcium signaling was acknowledged before such a role for the mitochondria was widely accepted , in part because the low affinity of Ca2 + channels localized to the outer mitochondrial membrane seemed to fly in the face of this organelle 's purported responsiveness to changes in intracellular Ca2 + flux . But the presence of the MAM resolves this apparent contradiction : the close physical association between the two organelles results in Ca2 + <unk> at contact points that facilitate efficient Ca2 + transmission from the ER to the mitochondria . Transmission occurs in response to so @-@ called " Ca2 + puffs " generated by spontaneous clustering and activation of IP3R , a canonical ER membrane Ca2 + channel . 
 The fate of these puffs — in particular , whether they remain restricted to isolated locales or integrated into Ca2 + waves for propagation throughout the cell — is determined in large part by MAM dynamics . Although reuptake of Ca2 + by the ER ( concomitant with its release ) modulates the intensity of the puffs , thus insulating mitochondria to a certain degree from high Ca2 + exposure , the MAM often serves as a firewall that essentially buffers Ca2 + puffs by acting as a sink into which free ions released into the cytosol can be funneled . This Ca2 + tunneling occurs through the low @-@ affinity Ca2 + receptor <unk> , which recently has been shown to be physically tethered to the IP3R clusters on the ER membrane and enriched at the MAM . The ability of mitochondria to serve as a Ca2 + sink is a result of the electrochemical gradient generated during oxidative phosphorylation , which makes tunneling of the cation an exergonic process . Normally , mild calcium influx from cytosol into the mitochondrial matrix causes transient depolarization that is corrected by pumping out protons . 
 But transmission of Ca2 + is not unidirectional ; rather , it is a two @-@ way street . The properties of the Ca2 + pump SERCA and the channel IP3R present on the ER membrane facilitate feedback regulation coordinated by MAM function . In particular , the clearance of Ca2 + by the MAM allows for spatio @-@ temporal patterning of Ca2 + signaling because Ca2 + alters IP3R activity in a biphasic manner . SERCA is likewise affected by mitochondrial feedback : uptake of Ca2 + by the MAM stimulates ATP production , thus providing energy that enables SERCA to reload the ER with Ca2 + for continued Ca2 + efflux at the MAM . Thus , the MAM is not a passive buffer for Ca2 + puffs ; rather it helps modulate further Ca2 + signaling through feedback loops that affect ER dynamics . 
 Regulating ER release of Ca2 + at the MAM is especially critical because only a certain window of Ca2 + uptake sustains the mitochondria , and consequently the cell , at homeostasis . Sufficient <unk> Ca2 + signaling is required to stimulate metabolism by activating dehydrogenase enzymes critical to flux through the citric acid cycle . However , once Ca2 + signaling in the mitochondria passes a certain threshold , it stimulates the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis in part by collapsing the mitochondrial membrane potential required for metabolism . Studies examining the role of pro- and anti @-@ apoptotic factors support this model ; for example , the anti @-@ apoptotic factor Bcl @-@ 2 has been shown to interact with <unk> to reduce Ca2 + filling of the ER , leading to reduced efflux at the MAM and preventing collapse of the mitochondrial membrane potential post @-@ apoptotic stimuli . Given the need for such fine regulation of Ca2 + signaling , it is perhaps unsurprising that <unk> mitochondrial Ca2 + has been implicated in several neurodegenerative diseases , while the catalogue of tumor suppressors includes a few that are enriched at the MAM . 
 = = = = Molecular basis for tethering = = = = 
 Recent advances in the identification of the tethers between the mitochondrial and ER membranes suggest that the scaffolding function of the molecular elements involved is secondary to other , non @-@ structural functions . In yeast , ERMES , a multiprotein complex of interacting <unk> and mitochondrial @-@ resident membrane proteins , is required for lipid transfer at the MAM and exemplifies this principle . One of its components , for example , is also a constituent of the protein complex required for insertion of transmembrane beta @-@ barrel proteins into the lipid bilayer . However , a homologue of the ERMES complex has not yet been identified in mammalian cells . Other proteins implicated in scaffolding likewise have functions independent of structural tethering at the MAM ; for example , ER @-@ resident and mitochondrial @-@ resident <unk> form <unk> that regulate the number of inter @-@ organelle contact sites , although <unk> were first identified for their role in fission and fusion events between individual mitochondria . Glucose @-@ related protein 75 ( <unk> ) is another dual @-@ function protein . In addition to the matrix pool of <unk> , a portion serves as a chaperone that physically links the mitochondrial and ER Ca2 + channels <unk> and IP3R for efficient Ca2 + transmission at the MAM . Another potential tether is Sigma @-@ 1R , a non @-@ opioid receptor whose stabilization of ER @-@ resident IP3R may preserve communication at the MAM during the metabolic stress response . 
 = = = = Perspective = = = = 
 The MAM is a critical signaling , metabolic , and trafficking hub in the cell that allows for the integration of ER and mitochondrial physiology . Coupling between these organelles is not simply structural but functional as well and critical for overall cellular physiology and homeostasis . The MAM thus offers a perspective on mitochondria that diverges from the traditional view of this organelle as a static , isolated unit appropriated for its metabolic capacity by the cell . Instead , this mitochondrial @-@ ER interface emphasizes the integration of the mitochondria , the product of an endosymbiotic event , into diverse cellular processes . 
 = = Organization and distribution = = 
 Mitochondria ( and related structures ) are found in all eukaryotes ( except one — the <unk> <unk> sp . ) . Although commonly depicted as bean @-@ like structures they form a highly dynamic network in the majority of cells where they constantly undergo fission and fusion . Mitochondria vary in number and location according to cell type . A single mitochondrion is often found in unicellular organisms . Conversely , numerous mitochondria are found in human liver cells , with about 1000 – 2000 mitochondria per cell , making up 1 / 5 of the cell volume . The mitochondrial content of otherwise similar cells can vary substantially in size and membrane potential , with differences arising from sources including uneven partitioning at cell divisions , leading to extrinsic differences in ATP levels and downstream cellular processes . The mitochondria can be found nestled between <unk> of muscle or wrapped around the sperm flagellum . Often , they form a complex 3D branching network inside the cell with the cytoskeleton . The association with the cytoskeleton determines mitochondrial shape , which can affect the function as well : different structures of the mitochondrial network may afford the population a variety of physical , chemical , and signalling advantages or disadvantages . Mitochondria in cells are always distributed along microtubules and the distribution of these organelles is also correlated with the endoplasmic reticulum . Recent evidence suggests that <unk> , one of the components of the cytoskeleton , is also critical to the association with the cytoskeleton . 
 = = Function = = 
 The most prominent roles of mitochondria are to produce the energy currency of the cell , ATP ( i.e. , phosphorylation of ADP ) , through respiration , and to regulate cellular metabolism . The central set of reactions involved in ATP production are collectively known as the citric acid cycle , or the Krebs cycle . However , the mitochondrion has many other functions in addition to the production of ATP . 
 = = = Energy conversion = = = 
 A dominant role for the mitochondria is the production of ATP , as reflected by the large number of proteins in the inner membrane for this task . This is done by oxidizing the major products of glucose : pyruvate , and NADH , which are produced in the cytosol . This type of cellular respiration known as aerobic respiration , is dependent on the presence of oxygen . When oxygen is limited , the glycolytic products will be metabolized by anaerobic fermentation , a process that is independent of the mitochondria . The production of ATP from glucose has an approximately 13 @-@ times higher yield during aerobic respiration compared to fermentation . Recently it has been shown that plant mitochondria can produce a limited amount of ATP without oxygen by using the alternate substrate nitrite . ATP crosses out through the inner membrane with the help of a specific protein , and across the outer membrane via porins . ADP returns via the same route . 
 = = = = Pyruvate and the citric acid cycle = = = = 
 Pyruvate molecules produced by glycolysis are actively transported across the inner mitochondrial membrane , and into the matrix where they can either be oxidized and combined with coenzyme A to form CO2 , acetyl @-@ CoA , and NADH , or they can be <unk> ( by pyruvate carboxylase ) to form oxaloacetate . This latter reaction ” fills up ” the amount of oxaloacetate in the citric acid cycle , and is therefore an anaplerotic reaction , increasing the cycle ’ s capacity to metabolize acetyl @-@ CoA when the tissue 's energy needs ( e.g. in muscle ) are suddenly increased by activity . 
 In the citric acid cycle , all the intermediates ( e.g. citrate , iso @-@ citrate , alpha @-@ ketoglutarate , succinate , fumarate , malate and oxaloacetate ) are regenerated during each turn of the cycle . Adding more of any of these intermediates to the mitochondrion therefore means that the additional amount is retained within the cycle , increasing all the other intermediates as one is converted into the other . Hence , the addition of any one of them to the cycle has an anaplerotic effect , and its removal has a <unk> effect . These anaplerotic and <unk> reactions will , during the course of the cycle , increase or decrease the amount of oxaloacetate available to combine with acetyl @-@ CoA to form citric acid . This in turn increases or decreases the rate of ATP production by the mitochondrion , and thus the availability of ATP to the cell . 
 <unk> @-@ CoA , on the other hand , derived from pyruvate oxidation , or from the beta @-@ oxidation of fatty acids , is the only fuel to enter the citric acid cycle . With each turn of the cycle one molecule of acetyl @-@ CoA is consumed for every molecule of oxaloacetate present in the mitochondrial matrix , and is never regenerated . It is the oxidation of the acetate portion of acetyl @-@ CoA that produces CO2 and water , with the energy thus released captured in the form of ATP . 
 In the liver , the carboxylation of cytosolic pyruvate into intra @-@ mitochondrial oxaloacetate is an early step in the <unk> pathway , which converts lactate and de @-@ <unk> alanine into glucose , under the influence of high levels of glucagon and / or epinephrine in the blood . Here , the addition of oxaloacetate to the mitochondrion does not have a net anaplerotic effect , as another citric acid cycle intermediate ( malate ) is immediately removed from the mitochondrion to be converted into cytosolic oxaloacetate , which is ultimately converted into glucose , in a process that is almost the reverse of glycolysis . 
 The enzymes of the citric acid cycle are located in the mitochondrial matrix , with the exception of succinate dehydrogenase , which is bound to the inner mitochondrial membrane as part of Complex II . The citric acid cycle oxidizes the acetyl @-@ CoA to carbon dioxide , and , in the process , produces reduced cofactors ( three molecules of NADH and one molecule of FADH2 ) that are a source of electrons for the electron transport chain , and a molecule of GTP ( that is readily converted to an ATP ) . 
 = = = = NADH and FADH2 : the electron transport chain = = = = 
 The redox energy from NADH and FADH2 is transferred to oxygen ( O2 ) in several steps via the electron transport chain . These energy @-@ rich molecules are produced within the matrix via the citric acid cycle but are also produced in the cytoplasm by glycolysis . Reducing equivalents from the cytoplasm can be imported via the malate @-@ aspartate shuttle system of antiporter proteins or feed into the electron transport chain using a glycerol phosphate shuttle . Protein complexes in the inner membrane ( NADH dehydrogenase ( ubiquinone ) , cytochrome c reductase , and cytochrome c oxidase ) perform the transfer and the incremental release of energy is used to pump protons ( H + ) into the intermembrane space . This process is efficient , but a small percentage of electrons may prematurely reduce oxygen , forming reactive oxygen species such as superoxide . This can cause oxidative stress in the mitochondria and may contribute to the decline in mitochondrial function associated with the aging process . 
 As the proton concentration increases in the intermembrane space , a strong electrochemical gradient is established across the inner membrane . The protons can return to the matrix through the ATP synthase complex , and their potential energy is used to synthesize ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate ( Pi ) . This process is called chemiosmosis , and was first described by Peter Mitchell who was awarded the 1978 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work . Later , part of the 1997 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to Paul D. Boyer and John E. Walker for their clarification of the working mechanism of ATP synthase . 
 = = = = Heat production = = = = 
 Under certain conditions , protons can re @-@ enter the mitochondrial matrix without contributing to ATP synthesis . This process is known as proton leak or mitochondrial uncoupling and is due to the facilitated diffusion of protons into the matrix . The process results in the unharnessed potential energy of the proton electrochemical gradient being released as heat . The process is mediated by a proton channel called <unk> , or <unk> . <unk> is a 33 kDa protein first discovered in 1973 . <unk> is primarily found in brown adipose tissue , or brown fat , and is responsible for non @-@ shivering <unk> . Brown adipose tissue is found in mammals , and is at its highest levels in early life and in hibernating animals . In humans , brown adipose tissue is present at birth and decreases with age . 
 = = = Storage of calcium ions = = = 
 The concentrations of free calcium in the cell can regulate an array of reactions and is important for signal transduction in the cell . Mitochondria can transiently store calcium , a contributing process for the cell 's homeostasis of calcium . In fact , their ability to rapidly take in calcium for later release makes them very good " cytosolic buffers " for calcium . The endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) is the most significant storage site of calcium , and there is a significant interplay between the mitochondrion and ER with regard to calcium . The calcium is taken up into the matrix by the mitochondrial calcium <unk> on the inner mitochondrial membrane . It is primarily driven by the mitochondrial membrane potential . Release of this calcium back into the cell 's interior can occur via a sodium @-@ calcium exchange protein or via " calcium @-@ induced @-@ calcium @-@ release " pathways . This can initiate calcium spikes or calcium waves with large changes in the membrane potential . These can activate a series of second messenger system proteins that can coordinate processes such as neurotransmitter release in nerve cells and release of hormones in endocrine cells . 
 Ca2 + influx to the mitochondrial matrix has recently been implicated as a mechanism to regulate respiratory <unk> by allowing the electrochemical potential across the membrane to transiently " pulse " from <unk> @-@ dominated to pH @-@ dominated , facilitating a reduction of oxidative stress . In neurons , concomitant increases in cytosolic and mitochondrial calcium act to synchronize neuronal activity with mitochondrial energy metabolism . Mitochondrial matrix calcium levels can reach the tens of micromolar levels , which is necessary for the activation of <unk> dehydrogenase , one of the key regulatory enzymes of the <unk> 's cycle . 
 = = = Additional functions = = = 
 Mitochondria play a central role in many other metabolic tasks , such as : 
 Signaling through mitochondrial reactive oxygen species 
 Regulation of the membrane potential 
 Apoptosis @-@ programmed cell death 
 Calcium signaling ( including calcium @-@ evoked apoptosis ) 
 Regulation of cellular metabolism 
 Certain heme synthesis reactions ( see also : porphyrin ) 
 Steroid synthesis . 
 Hormonal signaling Mitochondria are sensitive and responsive to hormones , in part by the action of mitochondrial estrogen receptors ( <unk> ) . These receptors have been found in various tissues and cell types , including brain and heart 
 Some mitochondrial functions are performed only in specific types of cells . For example , mitochondria in liver cells contain enzymes that allow them to detoxify ammonia , a waste product of protein metabolism . A mutation in the genes regulating any of these functions can result in mitochondrial diseases . 
 = = Cellular proliferation regulation = = 
 The relationship between cellular proliferation and mitochondria has been investigated using cervical cancer HeLa cells . Tumor cells require an ample amount of ATP ( Adenosine triphosphate ) in order to synthesize bioactive compounds such as lipids , proteins , and nucleotides for rapid cell proliferation . The majority of ATP in tumor cells is generated via the oxidative phosphorylation pathway ( <unk> ) . Interference with <unk> have shown to cause cell cycle arrest suggesting that mitochondria play a role in cell proliferation . Mitochondrial ATP production is also vital for cell division in addition to other basic functions in the cell including the regulation of cell volume , solute concentration , and cellular architecture . ATP levels differ at various stages of the cell cycle suggesting that there is a relationship between the abundance of ATP and the cell 's ability to enter a new cell cycle . ATP 's role in the basic functions of the cell make the cell cycle sensitive to changes in the availability of mitochondrial derived ATP . The variation in ATP levels at different stages of the cell cycle support the hypothesis that mitochondria play an important role in cell cycle regulation . Although the specific mechanisms between mitochondria and the cell cycle regulation is not well understood , studies have shown that low energy cell cycle checkpoints monitor the energy capability before committing to another round of cell division . 
 = = Genome = = 
 The human mitochondrial genome is a circular DNA molecule of about 16 kilobases . It encodes 37 genes : 13 for subunits of respiratory complexes I , III , IV and V , 22 for mitochondrial tRNA ( for the 20 standard amino acids , plus an extra gene for leucine and serine ) , and 2 for rRNA . One mitochondrion can contain two to ten copies of its DNA . 
 As in prokaryotes , there is a very high proportion of coding DNA and an absence of repeats . Mitochondrial genes are transcribed as <unk> transcripts , which are cleaved and polyadenylated to yield mature mRNAs . Not all proteins necessary for mitochondrial function are encoded by the mitochondrial genome ; most are coded by genes in the cell nucleus and the corresponding proteins are imported into the mitochondrion . The exact number of genes encoded by the nucleus and the mitochondrial genome differs between species . Most mitochondrial genomes are circular , although exceptions have been reported . In general , mitochondrial DNA lacks introns , as is the case in the human mitochondrial genome ; however , introns have been observed in some eukaryotic mitochondrial DNA , such as that of yeast and protists , including Dictyostelium discoideum . Between protein @-@ coding regions , tRNAs are present . During transcription , the tRNAs acquire their characteristic L @-@ shape that gets recognized and cleaved by specific enzymes . Mitochondrial tRNA genes have different sequences from the nuclear tRNAs but lookalikes of mitochondrial tRNAs have been found in the nuclear chromosomes with high sequence similarity . 
 In animals , the mitochondrial genome is typically a single circular chromosome that is approximately 16 kb long and has 37 genes . The genes , while highly conserved , may vary in location . Curiously , this pattern is not found in the human body louse ( Pediculus humanus ) . Instead , this mitochondrial genome is arranged in 18 <unk> chromosomes , each of which is 3 – 4 kb long and has one to three genes . This pattern is also found in other sucking lice , but not in chewing lice . Recombination has been shown to occur between the <unk> . The reason for this difference is not known . 
 While slight variations on the standard code had been predicted earlier , none was discovered until 1979 , when researchers studying human mitochondrial genes determined that they used an alternative code . Although , the mitochondria of many other eukaryotes , including most plants , use the standard code . Many slight variants have been discovered since , including various alternative mitochondrial codes . Further , the <unk> , AUC , and <unk> codons are all allowable start codons . 
 Some of these differences should be regarded as pseudo @-@ changes in the genetic code due to the phenomenon of RNA editing , which is common in mitochondria . In higher plants , it was thought that <unk> encoded for tryptophan and not arginine ; however , the codon in the processed RNA was discovered to be the UGG codon , consistent with the standard genetic code for tryptophan . Of note , the arthropod mitochondrial genetic code has undergone parallel evolution within a phylum , with some organisms uniquely translating <unk> to lysine . 
 Mitochondrial genomes have far fewer genes than the bacteria from which they are thought to be descended . Although some have been lost altogether , many have been transferred to the nucleus , such as the respiratory complex II protein subunits . This is thought to be relatively common over evolutionary time . A few organisms , such as the Cryptosporidium , actually have mitochondria that lack any DNA , presumably because all their genes have been lost or transferred . In Cryptosporidium , the mitochondria have an altered ATP generation system that renders the parasite resistant to many classical mitochondrial inhibitors such as cyanide , azide , and atovaquone . 
 = = = Replication and inheritance = = = 
 Mitochondria divide by binary fission , similar to bacterial cell division . The regulation of this division differs between eukaryotes . In many single @-@ celled eukaryotes , their growth and division is linked to the cell cycle . For example , a single mitochondrion may divide synchronously with the nucleus . This division and segregation process must be tightly controlled so that each daughter cell receives at least one mitochondrion . In other eukaryotes ( in mammals for example ) , mitochondria may replicate their DNA and divide mainly in response to the energy needs of the cell , rather than in phase with the cell cycle . When the energy needs of a cell are high , mitochondria grow and divide . When the energy use is low , mitochondria are destroyed or become inactive . In such examples , and in contrast to the situation in many single celled eukaryotes , mitochondria are apparently randomly distributed to the daughter cells during the division of the cytoplasm . Understanding of mitochondrial dynamics , which is described as the balance between mitochondrial fusion and fission , has revealed that functional and structural alterations in mitochondrial morphology are important factors in pathologies associated with several disease conditions . 
 The hypothesis of mitochondrial binary fission has relied on the visualization by fluorescence microscopy and conventional transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) . The resolution of fluorescence microscopy ( ~ 200 nm ) is insufficient to distinguish structural details , such as double mitochondrial membrane in mitochondrial division or even to distinguish individual mitochondria when several are close together . Conventional TEM has also some technical limitations in verifying mitochondrial division . <unk> @-@ electron tomography was recently used to visualize mitochondrial division in frozen hydrated intact cells . It revealed that mitochondria divide by budding . 
 An individual 's mitochondrial genes are not inherited by the same mechanism as nuclear genes . Typically , the mitochondria are inherited from one parent only . In humans , when an egg cell is fertilized by a sperm , the egg nucleus and sperm nucleus each contribute equally to the genetic makeup of the zygote nucleus . In contrast , the mitochondria , and therefore the mitochondrial DNA , usually come from the egg only . The sperm 's mitochondria enter the egg , but do not contribute genetic information to the embryo . Instead , paternal mitochondria are marked with ubiquitin to select them for later destruction inside the embryo . The egg cell contains relatively few mitochondria , but it is these mitochondria that survive and divide to populate the cells of the adult organism . Mitochondria are , therefore , in most cases inherited only from mothers , a pattern known as maternal inheritance . This mode is seen in most organisms , including the majority of animals . However , mitochondria in some species can sometimes be inherited paternally . This is the norm among certain coniferous plants , although not in pine trees and yews . For <unk> , paternal inheritance only occurs within males of the species . It has been suggested that it occurs at a very low level in humans . There is a recent suggestion that mitochondria that shorten male lifespan stay in the system because they are inherited only through the mother . By contrast , natural selection weeds out mitochondria that reduce female survival as such mitochondria are less likely to be passed on to the next generation . Therefore , it is suggested that human females and female animals tend to live longer than males . The authors claim that this is a partial explanation . 
 <unk> inheritance leads to little opportunity for genetic recombination between different lineages of mitochondria , although a single mitochondrion can contain 2 – 10 copies of its DNA . For this reason , mitochondrial DNA is usually thought to reproduce by binary fission . What recombination does take place maintains genetic integrity rather than maintaining diversity . However , there are studies showing evidence of recombination in mitochondrial DNA . It is clear that the enzymes necessary for recombination are present in mammalian cells . Further , evidence suggests that animal mitochondria can undergo recombination . The data are a bit more controversial in humans , although indirect evidence of recombination exists . If recombination does not occur , the whole mitochondrial DNA sequence represents a single haplotype , which makes it useful for studying the evolutionary history of populations . 
 Entities undergoing <unk> inheritance and with little to no recombination may be expected to be subject to Muller 's ratchet , the inexorable accumulation of deleterious mutations until functionality is lost . Animal populations of mitochondria avoid this buildup through a developmental process known as the mtDNA bottleneck . The bottleneck exploits stochastic processes in the cell to increase in the cell @-@ to @-@ cell variability in mutant load as an organism develops : a single egg cell with some proportion of mutant mtDNA thus produces an embryo where different cells have different mutant loads . Cell @-@ level selection may then act to remove those cells with more mutant mtDNA , leading to a stabilisation or reduction in mutant load between generations . The mechanism underlying the bottleneck is debated , with a recent mathematical and experimental <unk> providing evidence for a combination of random partitioning of <unk> at cell divisions and random turnover of mtDNA molecules within the cell . 
 = = Population genetic studies = = 
 The near @-@ absence of genetic recombination in mitochondrial DNA makes it a useful source of information for scientists involved in population genetics and evolutionary biology . Because all the mitochondrial DNA is inherited as a single unit , or haplotype , the relationships between mitochondrial DNA from different individuals can be represented as a gene tree . Patterns in these gene trees can be used to infer the evolutionary history of populations . The classic example of this is in human evolutionary genetics , where the molecular clock can be used to provide a recent date for mitochondrial Eve . This is often interpreted as strong support for a recent modern human expansion out of Africa . Another human example is the sequencing of mitochondrial DNA from Neanderthal bones . The relatively large evolutionary distance between the mitochondrial DNA sequences of Neanderthals and living humans has been interpreted as evidence for the lack of interbreeding between Neanderthals and anatomically modern humans . 
 However , mitochondrial DNA reflects only the history of the females in a population and so may not represent the history of the population as a whole . This can be partially overcome by the use of paternal genetic sequences , such as the non @-@ recombining region of the Y @-@ chromosome . In a broader sense , only studies that also include nuclear DNA can provide a comprehensive evolutionary history of a population . 
 Recent measurements of the molecular clock for mitochondrial DNA reported a value of 1 mutation every <unk> years dating back to the most recent common ancestor of humans and apes , which is consistent with estimates of mutation rates of autosomal DNA ( 10 − 8 per base per generation ) . 
 = = Dysfunction and disease = = 
 = = = Mitochondrial diseases = = = 
 Damage and subsequent dysfunction in mitochondria is an important factor in a range of human diseases due to their influence in cell metabolism . Mitochondrial disorders often present themselves as neurological disorders , including autism . They can also manifest as myopathy , diabetes , multiple <unk> , and a variety of other systemic disorders . Diseases caused by mutation in the mtDNA include Kearns @-@ Sayre syndrome , <unk> syndrome and Leber 's hereditary optic neuropathy . In the vast majority of cases , these diseases are transmitted by a female to her children , as the zygote derives its mitochondria and hence its mtDNA from the ovum . Diseases such as Kearns @-@ Sayre syndrome , Pearson syndrome , and progressive external ophthalmoplegia are thought to be due to large @-@ scale mtDNA rearrangements , whereas other diseases such as <unk> syndrome , Leber 's hereditary optic neuropathy , myoclonic epilepsy with ragged red fibers ( <unk> ) , and others are due to point mutations in mtDNA . 
 In other diseases , defects in nuclear genes lead to dysfunction of mitochondrial proteins . This is the case in Friedreich 's ataxia , hereditary spastic paraplegia , and Wilson 's disease . These diseases are inherited in a dominance relationship , as applies to most other genetic diseases . A variety of disorders can be caused by nuclear mutations of oxidative phosphorylation enzymes , such as coenzyme Q10 deficiency and Barth syndrome . Environmental influences may interact with hereditary predispositions and cause mitochondrial disease . For example , there may be a link between pesticide exposure and the later onset of Parkinson 's disease . Other pathologies with etiology involving mitochondrial dysfunction include schizophrenia , bipolar disorder , dementia , Alzheimer 's disease , Parkinson 's disease , epilepsy , stroke , cardiovascular disease , chronic fatigue syndrome , retinitis pigmentosa , and diabetes mellitus . 
 Mitochondria @-@ mediated oxidative stress plays a role in cardiomyopathy in Type 2 diabetics . Increased fatty acid delivery to the heart increases fatty acid uptake by <unk> , resulting in increased fatty acid oxidation in these cells . This process increases the reducing equivalents available to the electron transport chain of the mitochondria , ultimately increasing reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) production . ROS increases uncoupling proteins ( <unk> ) and <unk> proton leakage through the adenine nucleotide <unk> ( ANT ) , the combination of which <unk> the mitochondria . <unk> then increases oxygen consumption by the mitochondria , compounding the increase in fatty acid oxidation . This creates a vicious cycle of uncoupling ; furthermore , even though oxygen consumption increases , ATP synthesis does not increase proportionally because the mitochondria is uncoupled . Less ATP availability ultimately results in an energy deficit presenting as reduced cardiac efficiency and contractile dysfunction . To compound the problem , impaired <unk> reticulum calcium release and reduced mitochondrial reuptake limits peak cytosolic levels of the important signaling ion during muscle contraction . The decreased intra @-@ mitochondrial calcium concentration increases dehydrogenase activation and ATP synthesis . So in addition to lower ATP synthesis due to fatty acid oxidation , ATP synthesis is impaired by poor calcium signaling as well , causing cardiac problems for diabetics . 
 = = = Possible relationships to aging = = = 
 Given the role of mitochondria as the cell 's powerhouse , there may be some leakage of the high @-@ energy electrons in the respiratory chain to form reactive oxygen species . This was thought to result in significant oxidative stress in the mitochondria with high mutation rates of mitochondrial DNA ( mtDNA ) . <unk> links between aging and oxidative stress are not new and were proposed in 1956 , which was later refined into the mitochondrial free radical theory of aging . A vicious cycle was thought to occur , as oxidative stress leads to mitochondrial DNA mutations , which can lead to enzymatic abnormalities and further oxidative stress . 
 A number of changes can occur to mitochondria during the aging process . Tissues from elderly patients show a decrease in enzymatic activity of the proteins of the respiratory chain . However , mutated mtDNA can only be found in about 0 @.@ 2 % of very old cells . Large deletions in the mitochondrial genome have been hypothesized to lead to high levels of oxidative stress and neuronal death in Parkinson 's disease . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Madeleine L 'Engle 's 1973 science fantasy novel A Wind in the Door prominently features the mitochondria of main character Charles Wallace Murry , as being inhabited by creatures known as the <unk> . The novel also features other characters travelling inside one of Murry 's mitochondria . 
 The 1995 horror fiction novel Parasite Eve by Hideaki Sena depicts mitochondria as having some consciousness and mind control abilities , attempting to use these to overtake eukaryotes as the dominant life form . This text was adapted into an eponymous film , video game , and video game sequel all involving a similar premise . 
 In the Star Wars franchise , microorganisms referred to as " midi @-@ chlorians " give some characters the ability to sense and use the Force . George Lucas , director of the 1999 film Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace , in which midi @-@ chlorians were introduced , described them as " a loose depiction of mitochondria " . The non @-@ fictional <unk> genus of bacteria was later named after the midi @-@ chlorians of Star Wars . 
 As a result of the mitochondrion 's prominence in modern science education , the phrase " mitochondria is [ sic ] the powerhouse of the cell " became a popular Internet meme . The meme is used to imply that secondary education places an insufficient focus on life skills , compared to academic knowledge such as the role of the mitochondrion , which has been considered comparatively impractical . 
 = 1965 FA Cup Final = 
 The 1965 FA Cup Final was an association football match between Liverpool and Leeds United on 1 May 1965 at Wembley Stadium , London . It was the final match of the 1964 – 65 FA Cup , the 93rd season of England 's primary cup competition , the Football Association Challenge Cup , better known as the FA Cup . Liverpool were appearing in their third final , they had lost the previous two in 1914 and 1950 , while Leeds were appearing in their first . 
 Both teams entered the competition in the third round . The majority of Liverpool 's matches were close affairs , they didn 't score more than two goals in any of their matches and this was also their biggest margin of victory . Leeds ' matches ranged from close affairs to comfortable victories . They won their third round tie against Stockport County 3 – 0 , while they beat Manchester United 1 – 0 in a semi @-@ final replay following a 0 – 0 draw in the initial match . 
 Watched by a crowd of 100 @,@ 000 , the first 90 minutes of the match were goalless as both sides struggled to create goalscoring chances . Liverpool defender Gerry Byrne broke his collarbone early in the match but carried on as there were no substitutes . He was involved in the opening goal in extra time . Byrne found striker Roger Hunt in the 93rd minute , with a cross from the right @-@ hand side of the pitch , which Hunt headed into the Leeds goal to give Liverpool the lead . Leeds equalised seven minutes later when Billy Bremner scored . However , Liverpool regained the lead in the 113th minute when striker Ian St. John headed in a pass from Ian Callaghan . Liverpool won the match 2 – 1 to win the FA Cup for the first time . 
 Liverpool manager Bill Shankly was delighted with his team 's victory and hailed it as his greatest moment in management . His Leeds counterpart , Don Revie , conceded Liverpool had been the better team , but was determined to make amends the following season . The national media was critical of the final , labelling it ' boring ' . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Liverpool entered the competition in the third round , where they were drawn with West Bromwich Albion . Roger Hunt gave Liverpool the lead in the match held at West Bromwich 's home ground , The Hawthorns , in the 44th minute . They extended their lead in the 63rd minute when Ian St. John scored . West Bromwich were awarded a penalty in the 77th minute , after Liverpool defender Ron Yeats handled the ball , thinking the referee had blown for a free @-@ kick . Cram missed the subsequent penalty , but West Bromwich scored three minutes later through Jeff Astle . However , they were unable to score a second and Liverpool won 2 – 1 to progress to the fourth round . Stockport County were the opposition in the fourth round . The match , at Anfield , finished 1 – 1 , Gordon Milne equalised for Liverpool after Len White had given Stockport the lead in the 18th minute . Liverpool won the replay , at Edgeley Park , 2 – 0 courtesy of two goals from Hunt . 
 Bolton Wanderers were the opposition in the fifth round . The match at Bolton 's home ground , Burnden Park , remained goalless until the 85th minute when Liverpool midfielder Ian Callaghan scored . The goal caused the Liverpool fans behind the goal to surge forward , which resulted in the collapse of a wooden railing . There were no serious injuries and the referee continued with the match , which Liverpool won 1 – 0 , to progress to the sixth round . They faced Leicester City in the sixth round . Despite chances for both teams throughout the match at Filbert Street , neither team scored and the match finished 0 – 0 . The match was replayed at Anfield four days later , which Liverpool won 1 – 0 when Hunt scored in the 72nd minute . 
 Liverpool opponents in the semi @-@ final at Villa Park were Chelsea . Before the match , Liverpool manager Bill Shankly found a brochure designed for Chelsea 's appearance in the final should they win . He pinned it on the team 's dressing room wall and told his players to " stuff those wee cocky south buggers . " The first half was goalless , but Liverpool opened the scoring in the 63rd minute when Peter Thompson scored . A penalty by Willie Stevenson , secured a 2 – 0 victory for Liverpool and their place in the final . 
 = = = Leeds United = = = 
 Leeds entered the competition in the third round and were drawn against Fourth Division team Southport . Jimmy Greenhoff opened the scoring for Leeds in the 26th minute at their home ground , Elland Road . Albert Johanneson added a second in the 81st minute and Terry Cooper scored a third before the end of the match to secure a 3 – 0 win for Leeds . Everton were the opposition in the fourth round . The match finished 1 – 1 at Elland Road , with Jim Storrie scoring Leeds ' goal in the 50th minute . A replay was held at Everton 's home ground , Goodison Park , three days later . Goals from Don Weston and Jack Charlton secured a 2 – 1 victory for Leeds and progression to the fifth round . 
 Shrewsbury Town were the opposition in the fifth round . Leeds won 2 – 0 at Elland Road , courtesy of goals from Johnny Giles and Albert Johanneson to secure their passage to the sixth round . Their opposition was Crystal Palace , in a match played at their home ground , Selhurst Park . Leeds won 3 – 0 with two goals from Alan Peacock and one from Storrie . Local rivals Manchester United were the opposition in the semi @-@ finals . Neither side was able to score in a fiery match at Hillsborough , which The Guardian referred to as " a sordid shambles that would have been flattered by being played on an <unk> . " The match was replayed a few days later at the City Ground . The match was goalless until the 89th minute when Bremner headed in a free @-@ kick by Giles to secure a 1 – 0 victory for Leeds . The replay was not without incident , following the end of the match , hundreds of fans ran onto the pitch . A 16 @-@ year @-@ old Manchester United supporter knocked the referee Dick Windle unconscious , he was subsequently caught and handed into the police . 
 = = Background = = 
 The match was Liverpool 's third appearance in the final . They had reached the final in 1914 , when they lost 1 – 0 to Burnley and in 1950 , when they were beaten 2 – 0 by Arsenal . Leeds were appearing in their first final , the furthest they had reached before was the quarter @-@ finals of the 1949 – 50 FA Cup , when they lost to Arsenal . The two previous meetings between the teams during the season resulted in a win each . Leeds won the first match 4 – 2 in August , at Elland Road . The return fixture at Anfield was won 2 – 1 by Liverpool . 
 Liverpool played Wolverhampton Wanderers a week before the final in their last match of the 1964 – 65 Football League First Division . Shankly rested most of the first @-@ choice players , but Liverpool still won the match 3 – 1 , with goals from Geoff Strong , John Sealey and Alf Arrowsmith , the victory meant they finished the season in seventh place . Leeds went into their final match of the league season with a chance of winning the championship . However , they drew their match with Birmingham City 3 – 3 , which meant they were level on points with Manchester United , who had a match remaining . As United had a superior goal average only a defeat of 17 – 0 or greater would result in Leeds being champions . United lost 2 – 1 to Aston Villa in their final match and won the title by a goal average of 0 @.@ 686 . 
 Liverpool manager Bill Shankly was complimentary of Leeds United in the build @-@ up to the final , stating : " Our opponents , Leeds United , have proved themselves beyond doubt to be a great team , clearly the whole set up at Leeds is one of the finest . But the better the opposition , the better we play . " Liverpool 's coach was caught in heavy traffic on the way to Wembley Stadium and there was a possibility that the start of the final would have to be delayed . However , they managed to organise an escort when a police motorcycle was spotted and arrived in time for the kick @-@ off . Midfielder Gordon Milne was injured in the days before the final and would miss the match , he was expected to be replaced by Geoff Strong . 
 Leeds midfielder Albert Johanneson would become the first black player to play in an FA Cup final . However , before walking out onto the pitch Johanneson suffered racial abuse : “ When we walked out , all I could hear was a cacophony of Zulu @-@ like noises coming from the terraces . It was dreadful , I could barely hear myself think for those screams . I wanted to run back down the tunnel . " 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = First half = = = 
 Both teams started with a 4 – 4 – 2 formation and it was Liverpool that kicked the final off . Five minutes into the match , Liverpool defender Gerry Byrne and Leeds captain Bobby Collins collided , which resulted in Bryne breaking his collarbone . As substitutions were not allowed , Byrne decided to continue playing . He was unaware of the extent of his injury , as manager Shankly decided against telling him . The first action of the match was from a Liverpool free @-@ kick , which Willie Stevenson played into the Leeds penalty area . Leeds goalkeeper Gary Sprake and defender Jack Charlton did not deal with it and it went out of play for a Liverpool corner . Liverpool captain Ron Yeats headed the ball on from the corner and striker Ian St. John was close to reaching it , before it was gathered by Sprake . Leeds were trying to get winger Albert Johanneson into the match , but a pass to him from Johnny Giles was intercepted by Liverpool defender Tommy Smith . He passed to Ian Callaghan , who advanced before passing to Stevenson , he and Smith exchanged passes before Stevenson passed to Callaghan , whose shot was saved by Sprake . 
 Liverpool had another attack in the early minutes , but Strong 's shot from distance deflected off Charlton for a corner . The opening sixteen minutes saw three Leeds players , Billy Bremner , Charlton and Jim Storrie require treatment as they struggled to impose themselves on the match . Liverpool continued to press forward and an attack was thwarted when St. John was dispossessed by Collins , who passed the ball back to Sprake . Leeds striker Alan Peacock fouled Smith following Sprake 's clearance and Liverpool were able to build another attack , but St. John 's subsequent shot went wide of the Leeds goal . Leeds had an attack in the eighteenth minute , but Bremner 's pass to Paul Reaney was intercepted by Liverpool goalkeeper Tommy Lawrence . Leeds began to grow in confidence and minutes later , Collins had a chance , but his shot from 35 yards ( 32 m ) went wide of the Liverpool goal . Minutes later , Leeds had another chance to score . Callaghan nullified an attack from Willie Bell and the ball went out for a Leeds corner . However , Peacock 's header from the corner went wide . 
 Liverpool had another chance on 25 minutes . A pass from Callaghan into the Leeds Penalty area was missed by Sprake , but Giles managed to clear the ball before Liverpool striker Roger Hunt could reach it . The game started to become scrappy , both sides struggled to find a way through their opposition defences and were misplacing passes . Three minutes before the end of the half , Liverpool had an attack . Strong passed to Smith , whose first touch caused the ball to bounce upwards , his subsequent shot went over the Leeds goal . A minute before the end of the half , Liverpool another chance , but Hunt 's shot from 25 yards ( 23 m ) was saved by Sprake . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Early in the second half , Liverpool had a chance to score . Callaghan took a throw @-@ in , which he threw to Lawler , his cross into the Leeds penalty area was met by Hunt , but his header went wide of the goal . Liverpool continued to pressure and only an interception from Bremner , before Stevenson could reach the ball , prevented a Liverpool goal . Leeds had a free @-@ kick a few minutes later , but Giles ' effort was saved by Lawrence . A few minutes later , St. John found Peter Thompson , who ran past Bremner and shot , but it was diverted wide by Sprake . The ball found dropped to hunt , but his cross was gathered by the Leeds goalkeeper . 
 Charlton received treatment midway throughout the second half after he ran into a photographer chasing an over @-@ hit pass . Leeds had an attack soon after , but after Storrie received the ball from Bremner , his pass went behind the Liverpool goal . Liverpool had more chances , but St. John slipped at the back post when a Callaghan cross was diverted towards him . Then Thompson saw a shot saved by Sprake . Leeds reacted to the increased pressure , by moving Bremner to centre @-@ forward and Giles reverting to midfield . Johanneson switched positions with Storrie , moving from the right to the left . Liverpool continued to press for a winner as the half drew to a close , but Thompson and Strong saw shots saved by Sprake . Neither team managed to score before full @-@ time and the match went to extra time , the first time this happened since the 1947 final . 
 = = = Extra time = = = 
 It only took three minutes of extra time for the first goal to be scored . Thompson passed to Bryne , who cross was headed into the Leeds goal by Hunt . Liverpool 's lead was short @-@ lived as Leeds equalised eight minutes later . Norman Hunter crossed the ball into the Liverpool penalty area from the left @-@ hand side of the pitch . Charlton headed the ball down to Bremner , whose shot beat Lawrence in the Liverpool goal to level the score at 1 – 1 . 
 Liverpool pressed and Thompson forced Sprake into a number of saves . Leeds had another chance as Bremner had a shot saved by Lawrence after receiving the ball from Reaney . A few minutes later , Strong forced Sprake into a save , which resulted in a corner . St. John came close to scoring from the subsequent corner , but his shot went over the Leeds goal . However , with three minutes of extra time remaining , St. John scored . Smith found Callaghan , who ran past two Leeds defenders , his cross into the Leeds penalty area was headed into the goal by St. John to give Liverpool a 2 – 1 lead . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Liverpool captain Yeats collected the trophy from Queen Elizabeth II in the Royal box at Wembley Stadium . The victory was the club 's first in the competition . Liverpool manager Shankly was delighted with the result and hailed the achievement : " To think a team like Liverpool had never won the FA up was unbelievable , so many had prayed for it to happen over all the years , but it had never come to pass . So when we beat Leeds , the emotion was unforgettable . " Despite breaking his collarbone in the opening minutes , Liverpool defender Gerry Byrne completed the whole match . Shankly was full of praise for the defender stating : " Byrne was absolutely fantastic . He played the best game of his life . " Bryne was concerned about collecting his medal , stating : " I was worried about going up to collect my medal , so many of our fans wanted to slap me on the back . I had to keep twisting and turning to avoid the congratulations . " 
 The final was criticised by the media , with both teams receiving flak . Ken Jones of The Mirror wrote , " Discipline was destroyed by tiredness , determination blunted by the pain of having to run some more . Behind the boredom was the failure of individuals like Leeds left winger Albert Johanneson and Liverpool left winger Peter Thompson , men who could and should have lifted the game with their talent . " The Times was slightly less critical of the match : " In spite of much lateral ' method ' play it was a tense battle of human qualities . The opening half , in particular , was a quiet prelude . This was the careful shadow boxing that led up to a pulsating finish . Indeed , there was a certain hypnotic element about the whole thing . The fascination lay in trying to assess which side would first break the stalemate . " 
 Liverpool manager Bill Shankly was asked after the match whether Leeds United had failed during the season : " Failed ? Second in the championship . Cup finalists . Ninety percent of managers would pray for ' failures ' like that . " Leeds manager Don Revie was disappointed to lose , but praised his players efforts in defeat : " There 's no doubt about it , the better side won , but , at least the lads played their guts out for me . He admitted it was disappointing to finish second in both the League and FA Cup : " It 's a bit disappointing to finish second in both Cup and League , but we have had a wonderful first season back in Division One , and I am very pleased with the team . " Captain Collins echoed his manager 's sentiments : " We have had a great season , but lost both honours . We shall be having a go again next season . " 
 The Liverpool team were welcomed back to the city by approximately half a million people , as the open @-@ top bus drove through the city to the town hall . Three days after the final , Liverpool faced Italian team Internazionale in the first leg of the semi @-@ finals of the 1964 – 65 European Cup . Before the match kicked off , Bryne and Gordon Milne paraded the FA Cup around the stadium . Liverpool won the match 3 – 1 , but they perform as well in the second leg at the San Siro , as they lost 3 – 0 to exit the competition 4 – 3 on aggregate . 
 = Homestead Extension of Florida 's Turnpike = 
 The Homestead Extension of Florida 's Turnpike ( HEFT ) , designated as the Ronald Reagan Turnpike and originally known as the West Dade Expressway , is a north – south free @-@ flow toll road southern extension of the similarly tolled Florida 's Turnpike . The 48 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 77 km ) expressway runs around the west and north sides of the Greater Miami area , extending from U.S. Route 1 in Florida City ( near Homestead ) to the Turnpike mainline four miles north of the Golden Glades Interchange . The road carries the hidden designation of State Road 821 ( SR 821 ) . It was opened in stages between 1973 and 1974 , after the main line of the Turnpike was completed , and is used by both commuters and travelers to the Florida Keys and Everglades National Park . Due to its path , it acts as a de facto outer beltway for Miami . Unlike other Florida 's Turnpike Enterprise highways , it is treated as if it were part of Florida 's Turnpike mainline by highway signs and exit numbers , despite its separate state road number . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The road begins at a partial interchange with US 1 in Florida City next to the Florida Keys Outlet Center , where the road heads northeast as a four lane expressway . Travelers to here from the northern parts of the Turnpike Extension can continue south along US 1 to the Florida Keys or the Everglades National Park ( via SR <unk> ) . This point also marks the beginning of the HEFT 's hidden designation of State Road 821 . 
 Between Florida City and Cutler Bay , the HEFT acts as a bypass for the communities along US 1 . The first 16 miles of the tollway are located within mostly new residential developments that were constructed after Hurricane Andrew , which destroyed most of the area in 1992 . Some farms line the rest of this stretch . The first interchange northbound is Campbell Drive / Southwest 312th Street in Homestead , which allows travelers to access the Homestead Hospital and the Homestead @-@ Miami Speedway . The Turnpike then has an exit with Southwest 288th Street at mile 5 , providing a connection to the Homestead Air Reserve Base , before leaving Homestead and entering parts of unincorporated Miami @-@ Dade County . At mile 6 , the tollway has a southbound exit and northbound entry for Southwest 137th Avenue , with the HEFT heading east @-@ northeast until the exit with SR 989 ( <unk> Road / Southwest 112th Avenue ) at mile 9 . The road then curves to a northerly direction towards the Homestead Toll Gantry , the first of four on the route , at mile 10 . It then enters Cutler Bay , where the highway is also known as the John F. Cosgrove Highway for the next five miles . The first exit in Cutler Bay is with Southwest 216th Street / Cutler Ridge Blvd at mile 11 , followed by another at Caribbean Blvd at mile 12 . Following exit 11 , the turnpike widens to six lanes . The tollway then crosses back over US 1 at the Southland Mall and leaves Cutler Bay . Continuing north , the HEFT serves SR 994 ( Quail Roost Drive ) at exit 13 and gains another lane in each direction . This is followed by SR 992 ( Coral Reef Drive ( Southwest 152nd Street ) ) at exit 16 , which marks the northern terminus of the John F. Cosgrove Highway . 
 The tollway passes through older , predominantly residential areas for the next ten miles . Between exits 16 and 17 , the Turnpike Extension swells to ten lanes ; this section of the tollway also has the highest traffic count at 172 @,@ 000 vehicles per day ( as of 2014 ) . Past exit 17 , where SR 874 ( Don Shula Expressway ) leaves the HEFT to connect to SR 826 ( Palmetto Expressway ) , the tollway drops back to six lanes and soon reaches an interchange with Southwest 120th Street at mile 19 . Just north of the Southwest 120th Street exit , still at mile 19 , lies the Snapper Creek Service plaza , which is located on the center median with access from both directions and is the only plaza on the extension ; unlike the more robust services along the mainline , it only offers a convenience store inside the gas station . The next exit is with SR 94 ( Kendall Drive ) , followed by the Bird Road Toll Gantry at mile 23 ; from here , the HEFT takes a <unk> path north for the next ten miles . The next exit is with SR 976 ( Southwest 40th Street ) , after which the HEFT gains two extra lanes in preparation for the next two exits . After the tollway forms the western end of the Florida International University campus , it meets the Tamiami Trail ( US 41 ) at exit 25 , and then SR 836 ( Dolphin Expressway ) at exit 26 in Fontainebleau , which provides access to Miami International Airport eastbound . 
 North of this interchange , the Turnpike Extension enters a stretch where it forms the border between undeveloped Miami @-@ Dade County to the west and residential developments to the east for the rest of its journey in the county , its width varying between six and eight lanes , with exits at Northwest 12th Street at mile 26 , Northwest 41st Street at mile 29 , and at Northwest 74th Street at mile 31 . Half a mile north of Northwest 74th Street lies the Okeechobee Toll gantry , with the HEFT then intersecting Northwest 106th Street / Beacon Station Boulevard at mile 34 . The tollway starts to curve in a north @-@ easterly direction and comes to exit 35 with US 27 . Afterwards , the expressway fully enters an undeveloped portion of Miami @-@ Dade County until the next exit at I @-@ 75 northbound at exit 39 , which is a northbound only exit , with the southbound direction of the Turnpike Extension receiving some traffic from I @-@ 75 south . North of the I @-@ 75 interchange , the HEFT becomes a four @-@ laned highway again . It crosses the Broward County line , entering the suburban community of Miramar , and then curves eastward . The expressway has an interchange with SR 823 ( Red Road ) at exit 43 , after which the Turnpike Extension is just one block north of the Miami @-@ Dade County line for the remainder of the tollway 's length . Residential and commercial developments line both sides of the HEFT through here . The next exit is with SR 817 ( University Drive ) at exit 46 , allowing access to Sun Life Stadium and the Calder Race Course . The Miramar Toll gantry then follows the interchange before the Turnpike Extension ends four miles north of the Golden Glades Interchange at the mainline of Florida 's Turnpike . 
 = = Tolls = = 
 The HEFT is an all @-@ electronic toll road that only accepts tolls via SunPass transponders or billing by the toll @-@ by @-@ plate at a higher cost . The toll road does not accept cash . The toll gantries are located at the former toll plazas , which closed on February 19 , 2011 . As of July 1 , 2015 , the total cost for a two @-@ axled vehicle to drive the whole length of the Turnpike Extension is $ 4 @.@ 24 with SunPass and $ 5 @.@ 28 via the toll @-@ by @-@ plate system . The HEFT has a toll gantry approximately every 12 miles ( 19 km ) , compared to toll plazas every 45 miles ( 72 km ) on average on the mainline . In addition to the mainline toll gantries , most interchanges have individual toll gantries for entering or exiting vehicles ; typically , these can be found either on the northbound entry and southbound exit , or the southbound entry and northern exit . Most of these gantries charge $ 0 @.@ 53 via SunPass or $ 0 @.@ 79 via toll @-@ by @-@ plate per entry or exit , but the <unk> Road , Northwest 74th Street and Northwest 27th Avenue interchanges charge $ 0 @.@ 79 via SunPass or $ 1 @.@ 06 via toll @-@ by @-@ plate . 
 = = Services = = 
 The Snapper Creek service plaza is the lone service plaza on the HEFT , located at mile 19 in the median of the expressway . It is accessible from both directions . The service plaza is open 24 hours a day , featuring a gas station and a convenience store . 
 = = History = = 
 After the Turnpike mainline was completed in 1964 , the Turnpike Authority ( precursor to Florida 's Turnpike Enterprise ) explored several extensions to the Turnpike system , including an expressway in western Dade County from Florida City to the Turnpike mainline at the Dade / Broward county line . Construction on the tollway began in July 1971 . The northernmost thirteen miles of the tollway between US 27 and the Turnpike mainline was open to traffic on May 1 , 1973 , at a cost of $ 22 million and a $ 0 @.@ 40 toll to motorists . During the first half of 1974 , the expressway between Campbell Drive ( SW 312th Street ) and US 27 was opened in five stages , with the road running uninterrupted from the Turnpike in Miramar to Homestead on May 20 , 1974 , with the last section to Florida City connecting to US 1 completed later in 1974 . The total toll of the expressway was $ 0 @.@ 80 . 
 The HEFT has used mile @-@ based exit numbers and an open toll collection system since its opening ; both concepts that were implemented on the Turnpike mainline in the late 1980s and early 1990s . 
 On April 27 , 1986 , the Okeechobee toll plaza opened with a $ .25 toll , with the toll plaza at the US 27 exit being removed , and tolls at the Miramar plaza being lowered from $ .40 to $ .25 . On February 2 , 1989 , tolls on the Expressway doubled from $ 1 @.@ 00 to $ 2 @.@ 00 , with $ .50 being charged at each toll plaza . Toll hikes , raising the cost of travelling the expressway from $ 2 to $ 3 were supposed to take effect on the Homestead Extension in 1993 to match the rest of the Turnpike , but Hurricane Andrew 's impact in the area in 1992 had the state delay toll hikes on the highway until July 9 , 1995 . In 1997 , the Bird Road toll plaza was reconfigured to its current two part form to accommodate the then @-@ bottleneck section of the expressway . The SunPass electronic toll collection system was implemented during 1999 , with the toll plazas being reconfigured to allow lanes dedicated to transponder users . A toll hike took effect on March 7 , 2004 , increasing the toll rate for non SunPass users to $ 4 for a full length trip , with SunPass users still using the 1995 toll rates . 
 The portion of the HEFT between Exits 11 ( Cutler Ridge Boulevard ) and 16 ( State Road 992 ) was designated the " John F. Cosgrove Highway " in 2008 by the Florida Legislature , following his death in 2006 . A lawyer and former legislator , Cosgrove was also the first mayor of Cutler Bay , a city along the HEFT . He was instrumental in passing legislation to keep insurers from leaving the state following Hurricane Andrew . 
 On February 19 , 2011 , the HEFT ceased cash toll collections , becoming an exclusively electronic toll road , a move that was announced in November 2009 . The manned toll plazas were converted into all electronic toll gantries , and the only ways to pay are either by SunPass transponders or billing by the toll @-@ by @-@ plate program . 
 In 2007 , legislation was passed in Florida to index toll rates across the state to the national Consumer price index ( CPI ) , to be enacted by the end of June , 2012 . As a result , the toll rates on the HEFT were raised on June 24 , 2012 , an increase of 11 @.@ 7 % to reflect the previous five years . In keeping with the legislation , SunPass and toll @-@ by @-@ plate rates were then raised again on July 1 , 2013 by 2 @.@ 1 % . Since the indexing of tolls to the national CPI , the entry and exit toll rates have risen by approximately 30 cents , in some cases more than double their pre @-@ 2012 rates . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 Despite being designated by the Florida Department of Transportation as a separate route ( SR 821 ) from the main portion of Florida 's Turnpike ( SR 91 ) , the HEFT 's exit numbers are regarded to be a continuation of the Turnpike 's mainline . 
 = What 's Cooking ? with Jamie Oliver = 
 What 's Cooking ? with Jamie Oliver is a cooking video game for the Nintendo DS narrated by celebrity chef Jamie Oliver . It was developed and published by Atari , Inc . ( Atari , SA subsidiary ) and released in North America on October 21 , 2008 , and in Europe on October 24 . 
 The game features several recipes , each listing preparation times , ingredients and courses . In addition , What 's Cooking ? can be used as a shopping list to remind players what items to purchase , and it can act as a timer to count down from a specified time and make an audible sound when it is done . 
 The game was first revealed by Atari at the Games Convention 2008 . The game was poorly received after its release ; video game critics gave it an aggregated score of 49 % at Metacritic . Reviewers generally agreed that presenting a cooking guide as a video game was a good idea , but they found that the game was poorly executed and mediocre as a result . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 What 's Cooking ? is an interactive cookbook and food preparation video game with recipes that each list preparation times , ingredients and courses . Recipes can be sorted by criteria such as dishes that take less than 20 minutes to prepare , or vegetarian @-@ only meals . After opening a recipe , an ingredient list is presented . Items on the list can be earmarked and added to a shopping list as a reminder to purchase in the future . A timer option is also available , which counts down from a specified time and makes an audible sound when it is done . Before doing any real cooking , a virtual representation of each step in the recipe is given on the screen that must be performed by the player . The Nintendo DS touchscreen and stylus are used to perform tasks such as whisking eggs , pouring sauces and cutting vegetables . Tutorials are also available to teach the player how to perform simple cooking preparation tasks . While cooking , the Nintendo DS responds to audible commands ; saying " next " into the device 's microphone will move the recipe on to the next step . One hundred recipes are included in the game , and players can create their own dishes in the game . Afterward , they can share them with others via Wi @-@ Fi . In addition to the game 's cooking aspects , What 's Cooking ? features challenges in which the player uses the stylus to chop , stir , and serve as quickly as possible . 
 = = Development = = 
 What 's Cooking ? was first revealed by Atari at the Games Convention 2008 . The game is narrated by Jamie Oliver . In an interview with Official Nintendo Magazine , Oliver noted that he tries to make his games as " three dimensional as possible " , and he wanted to " make it relevant " to the player . The developers also wanted to make the game as interactive as possible . 
 = = Reception = = 
 What 's Cooking ? was generally poorly received by video game critics , receiving a 49 % aggregated score on Metacritic . IGN 's Daemon Hatfield called disguising a cooking tutorial as a video game a " pretty brilliant idea " , but only as long as it was done well . He stated that both the cookbook and food preparation halves of the game were not strong enough to make the game worth purchasing . Hatfield commented that the game 's controls are " terribly unintuitive , and the cookbook doesn 't offer anything its physical counterpart can 't for cheaper " . He was also disappointed that there were no pictures to illustrate each step , and not every cooking process is explained . Eurogamer 's Ellie Gibson was satisfied with the number of recipes available , most of which were " pretty easy to follow " . Gibson , however , preferred to see instructional videos to observe how a recipe was made before making it . 
 In their review of the game , Official Nintendo Magazine commented that the stylus @-@ controlled cooking tutorials are not user @-@ friendly , and the recipe sharing is as good as it could be since players can only use ingredients and methods from recipes that they have unlocked through playing the game . They felt that the game attempts to appeal to gamers rather than aspiring chefs , concluding , " [ The game has ] some great recipes but the experience is marred by some fiddly cooking games . " 
 = Star Wars Battlefront : Renegade Squadron = 
 Star Wars Battlefront : Renegade Squadron is the third entry in the Star Wars : Battlefront series of video games , first released on October 9 , 2007 in North America and later in Australia and Europe . The game was designed as a PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) exclusive and features the eponymous Rebel Alliance covert ops unit Renegade Squadron , previously unmentioned in Star Wars canon . Renegade Squadron was one of the first games available in a bundle pack with the newly released PSP redesign . 
 The single @-@ player campaign follows the exploits of Renegade Squadron from its inception by Han Solo throughout its operational history , until its dissolution after the Battle of Endor . During play the Renegades participate in several battles , including those of Yavin and Hoth . The game also features several types of multiplayer modes . In contrast with previous titles in the series that require characters to have a set class , players in Renegade Squadron are able to build their character as they see fit . 
 Renegade Squadron received a mixed reaction from the video gaming community . The game was considered superior to its predecessor ( the PSP version of Star Wars : Battlefront II ) and it was praised for its customization options and online play , but the single @-@ player campaign was criticized for being brief and shallow . Opinions on the graphics were mixed , and the controls were generally described as inadequate . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The overall structure of Renegade Squadron is similar to other games in the Battlefront series in that it is a war game played primarily from a third @-@ person view . Battles take place on the ground and in space and require the player to capture command posts , specific areas of territory represented by floating icons on the playing field and colored dots on the player 's heads @-@ up display . Each map has a set number of command posts , and it is beneficial for the player to occupy as many as possible ( space battles use a modified command post system ) . Each side has a set number of reinforcement tickets at the beginning of the battle — any time a soldier dies , that team loses one ticket when that soldier respawns . To win a match , a player must capture every command post or reduce their opponent 's ticket count to zero . 
 At the ending of each mission , every time the character respawns , and when at a command post , it is possible for the player to adjust their character ’ s weapons , appearance , and other traits to their liking . The player gets 100 credits to purchase weapons and equipment for their character . In previous games in the series , players chose a character 's class before battle from a list of pre @-@ made options , such as pilot or other regular infantry units . Each class had a specific combination of weapons and equipment . Before Renegade Squadron 's release , LucasArts stated that the customization engine would allow millions of different character combinations . Another new feature allows players to enter asteroid bases on some space maps . In addition , players can earn medals by achieving set objectives , such as destroying a certain number of spaceships . 
 = = = Single @-@ player = = = 
 There are three options for single play : the campaign , instant action , and galactic conquest . During the story campaign , the player takes control of Renegade Squadron , under the command of Col Serra and occasionally Han Solo . Serra describes the formation of the unit in the beginning cutscene of the campaign ; the player then starts a series of missions with a range of different objectives , with voiced cutscenes in a static , comic book style between the missions to provide background information and move the story along . The final mission features the Battle of Endor , where the objectives are similar to the corresponding footage in Return of the Jedi . 
 With instant action , players are able to take part in battles against computer @-@ controlled opponents . There are four types of missions . Conquest is the Battlefront standard and pits two opposing forces against each other on a space or ground map , with the objective of controlling all of the command posts on the map , or defeating every member of the opposing force . There are also three variants of capture the flag , including a new mode called Hero flag , whereby players are permitted to control famous Star Wars characters during standard flag battles by physically carrying their team 's flag . These heroes span the Clone Wars and Civil War periods and include Asajj Ventress , Jango Fett , and Kit <unk> . 
 A holdover from previous Battlefront games , galactic conquest is played as a type of turn @-@ based board game with segmented turns , similar to Risk . The board is a simplified representation of the Star Wars galaxy , with four quadrants containing several planets each . The player and the AI opponent each start with several planets ( including a headquarters planet which has more reinforcements ) , which generate revenue each turn in the form of galactic credits . Credits are used to purchase reinforcements and hire special commanders , who are leaders like Admiral Ackbar and Tarkin . During each turn , a player is allowed to move reinforcements around their controlled planets and attack opponent @-@ controlled planets . Attacking a planet initiates either a ground or space battle , which can be fought manually or automatically . The player wins by conquering all of their opponent 's planets . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 In addition to the single @-@ player story missions , Renegade Squadron allows up to 16 players to compete via the PSP 's infrastructure mode , which is a wi @-@ fi internet connection . It can also support eight @-@ person matches with ad @-@ hoc , which is a local connectivity option for players in close physical proximity . The multiplayer game types are limited to conquest and capture the flag . A GameSpy network account is required to play using infrastructure , and offers players a rankings system so they can track their performance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Renegade Squadron takes place during the second chronological trilogy of the Star Wars films , mostly during and in @-@ between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi . Some time after the events of the Galactic Civil War as portrayed in Return of the Jedi , the New Jedi Order is formed by Luke Skywalker . The game begins with Tionne <unk> , the New Jedi Order 's chief historian , researching the forces of the Rebel Alliance during the Galactic Civil War . Tionne finds several vague references to a " Renegade Squadron " and its commander , Col Serra , who were apparently involved in covert ops missions during the war . Tionne manages to contact Serra and he candidly relates the entire history of the unit . The single @-@ player campaign follows the major exploits of Renegade Squadron throughout the war , as told in flashbacks by Serra to Tionne . 
 Renegade Squadron was formed shortly before the Battle of Yavin at the request of Han Solo and General Jan <unk> , who were looking for experienced warriors that required no additional training . Solo contacted one of his former smuggling associates , Col Serra , and asked him to help . Serra agreed to Solo 's request and put together a unit of mercenaries , bounty hunters , smugglers , and other Fringe types that would work behind @-@ the @-@ scenes to further the goals of the Alliance . All of the members of the aptly named Renegade Squadron were wanted by the Empire and generally harbored an intense hatred for it , ensuring that they would remain loyal to the Alliance . 
 Under Serra 's command , the unit was responsible for several operations undertaken for the Alliance throughout the war . The unit operated in secrecy and was able to work anonymously at several major incidents , including the battles of Yavin , Hoth , and Endor . The unit was made up of skilled pilots in addition to ground operatives , and so was able to assist in missions both in @-@ space and planetside . The unit was considered elite by the Alliance , and despite its anonymity , took part in several high @-@ profile battles against Imperial luminaries , including IG @-@ 88 and Darth Vader . After the Battle of Endor , the squadron was disbanded , its purpose fulfilled . Its surviving members disappeared , many of them returning to their former criminal roots . 
 = = Development = = 
 LucasArts announced Renegade Squadron in May 2007 . The announcement stated that the game would be the only original Battlefront game of 2007 , and it was to be developed by British @-@ based independent game design company Rebellion Developments . Despite having never worked on a Star Wars game , Rebellion had prior development experience with other PlayStation Portable titles , such as a port of the third @-@ person shooter game Gun . 
 The game 's developers made it clear that it was being designed specifically for the PSP . LucasArts made this decision after Rebellion convinced them that the PSP 's multiplayer capabilities were well @-@ suited to another Battlefront game , in addition to the strong sales of Battlefront II on the PSP . The game 's lead designer , Mike Hosser , stated that the development team tried to retain some aspects of Battlefront II , specifically its " fast and furious action " . Other elements borrowed from Battlefront II included the controls — LucasArts solicited feedback from players of the previous game and subsequently decided to make Renegade Squadron 's controls more " arcadey " so players could learn them faster . After screenshots of the game were released , several forum posts from fans complained about the game 's visuals compared to its predecessor . In response , Hosser claimed that Renegade Squadron " boasts a longer view distance , higher resolution textures and better lighting " . 
 The design team stated repeatedly that the focus of Renegade Squadron was its customization system . There were initially concerns in Rebellion that the feature would lead to unbalanced gameplay ; lead programmer Richard May stated he was " worried it might lead to uber @-@ classes and be a balancing nightmare , losing some of the trade @-@ off structure that the old class system provided . " Prolific testing of the game eventually assured LucasArts that the system had been implemented appropriately . 
 The game 's setting was based primarily on the Clone Wars and Civil War eras of Star Wars history . Rebellion took inspiration for several missions from comments made in passing from the Star Wars films . Hosser stated in an interview , " For instance , a diversionary attack on Sullust is mentioned during a conversation between Vader and the Emperor in Return of the Jedi . In Renegade Squadron , you 'll get to take part in that attack . " The planet of Boz Pity was similarly mentioned in Star Wars : Episode III – Revenge of the Sith but wasn 't portrayed in the movie , so Renegade Squadron 's artists took the opportunity to create the planet based on ancient Cambodian architecture like Angkor Wat . Concept art for the game was provided by Rebellion 's comic artists , and the cutscenes were based on the company 's comic properties like 2000 AD . While storyboarding the in @-@ game cinematics , Rebellion assistant producer James Valls was careful to ensure that Renegade Squadron was in accordance with established Star Wars canon . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Renegade Squadron was featured at the LucasArts booth at Comic @-@ Con 2007 as part of the " 25 Years of LucasArts Games " display , along with other upcoming games like Lego Indiana Jones : The Original Adventures and The Force Unleashed . The game was released on October 9 , 2007 in North America , and on October 10 and 12 in Australia and Europe respectively . <unk> 's official launch event was at the Sony PlayStation Store in the Metreon shopping center in San Francisco . Star Wars fans attended in costume , including the 501st Squadron , a large Star Wars cosplaying fanclub . Attendees were eligible to win several prizes . In addition , the first 200 customers to purchase Sony 's new Star Wars PSP bundle were given a Han Solo @-@ in @-@ carbonite case for their PSP . The bundle was announced in July 2007 as the second available PSP @-@ 2000 bundle ( after Daxter ) and titled the Star Wars Battlefront PSP Entertainment Pack . Bundled PSPs were presented in a white case with a black silkscreen of Darth Vader on the battery cover , in addition to the copy of Renegade Squadron . 
 LucasArts and Rebellion have discussed downloadable content for Renegade Squadron , but were not strongly invested in exploring the prospect during the game 's development . LucasArts has also stated that issues with Sony have hindered its implementation . Rebellion has considered the possibility of a comic book or novel based on Renegade Squadron . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception of the game was mixed , and as of March 2009 it holds a score of 73 % on media aggregator site Metacritic , which indicates " mixed or average reviews . " Reviewers praised the game 's customization options and multiplayer , and it was accepted as marginally superior to Battlefront II on PSP , though one reviewer stated " it 's not a true sequel . " The game won the Reader 's PSP Game of the Month Award from IGN for October 2007 , with one fan stating that the game was more " Star Wars @-@ like " than its predecessor . It was the second best @-@ selling PSP game in the US the week of its release and was still among the list of GameFly 's most @-@ rented PSP games in December 2007 . It continued to be a top seller in the US and UK several months after its release . The game was later re @-@ released as a Greatest Hits title , indicating that it had sold at least 250 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Comments about Renegade Squadron 's controls were mostly negative , and they were typically described as clumsy or sluggish . GameZone referred to the space dogfights as " unplayable " and Eurogamer called the lock @-@ on feature " a waste of time " . One reviewer complained about the PSP 's lack of a second analog nub . Despite the criticism , a few reviewers were more favorable towards the controls , with GameSpot noting that they were an improvement over Battlefront II . 
 Reviewers were polarized on the game 's graphics . The cutscenes during the single @-@ player campaign were accepted positively , but reception of the in @-@ game visuals was less glowing . GamePro stated that the " character and vehicle models look great " , but the visuals were also described as " blah " and " substandard . " GameDaily said " the graphics look good but there 's a lack of polish . " 
 Though the single @-@ player campaign was criticized for being short , Renegade Squadron 's multiplayer was widely praised . GameSpot noted that the game included an infrastructure mode , a feature which Battlefront II did not have , and GameZone commented that the game ran smoothly in multiplayer even when handling the maximum number of players . GameSpy described the multiplayer as " fantastic , " and GamesRadar said that it promised hours of satisfaction . Many reviewers said that the multiplayer was the most important part of the game , with some of the less positive reviews advising players to play the game primarily for the multiplayer experience . 
 = Ewelina Hańska = 
 Eveline Hańska ( Ewelina , née Rzewuska , 6 January c . 1805 – 11 April 1882 ) was a Polish noblewoman best known for her marriage to French novelist Honoré de Balzac . Born at the Wierzchownia estate in Volhynia , ( now Ukraine ) Hańska married landowner Wacław Hański ( Wenceslas <unk> ) when she was a teenager . Hański , who was about 20 years her senior , suffered from depression . They had five children , but only a daughter , Anna , survived . 
 In the late 1820s , Hańska began reading Balzac 's novels , and in 1832 , she sent him an anonymous letter . This began a decades @-@ long correspondence in which Hańska and Balzac expressed a deep mutual affection . In 1832 , they met for the first time , in Switzerland . Soon afterward he began writing the novel Séraphîta , which includes a character based on Hańska . 
 After her husband died in 1841 , a series of complications obstructed Hańska 's marriage to Balzac . Chief of these was the estate and her daughter Anna 's inheritance , both of which might be threatened if she married him . Anna married a Polish count , easing some of the pressure . About the same time , Hańska gave Balzac the idea for his 1844 novel Modeste Mignon . In 1850 they married and moved to Paris , but he died five months later . Though she never remarried , she took several lovers , and died in 1882 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family and early life = = = 
 Hańska was the fourth of seven children born to Adam Wawrzyniec Rzewuski and his wife , Justyna Rzewuska ( née <unk> ) . Their family was established as Polish nobility , known for wealth and military prowess . One ancestor had imprisoned his own mother in a tower to extract his part of an inheritance . Hańska 's great @-@ grandfather , Wacław Rzewuski , was a famous writer and Grand Crown Hetman . When the Russian Empire gained control of lands owned by the family through the Partitions of Poland at the end of the 18th century , Rzewuski swore his allegiance to Catherine II . He was rewarded with a comfortable position in the ranks of the empire . Moving between assignments in Kiev , St. Petersburg , and elsewhere , he chose as his primary residence the village of Pohrebyszcze in the region of Volhynia . 
 She was born in the Pohrebyszcze castle , in the Kiev Governorate of Russian partition of Poland . Although scholars agree that Hańska was born on 6 January , the year is disputed . Her biographers and those of her Balzac offer conflicting evidence of her age , taken from correspondence , family records , and testimonies from descendants . Most estimates range between 1801 and 1806 . Balzac 's biographer Graham Robb writes : " Balzac chose 1806 as her date of birth and he was probably right . " Roger Pierrot 's 1999 biography of Hańska , however , contends that she was born in 1804 . Polish Biographical Dictionary gives 24 December 1805 ( Georgian ) which converts to 5 January 1805 ( Julian ) . 
 Like her brothers and sisters , Hańska was educated by her parents about family lineage and religion . Her mother was a devout Catholic , but her father also taught the children about Voltairian rationality . The family was secluded in Pohrebyszcze , with only occasional trips away . Once a year , the family visited Kiev for a market gathering , during which Rzewuski sold grain and her mother purchased clothing and supplies for the estate . 
 Ewelina had three bothers : Adam , Ernest and Henryk , and three sisters : Alina , Karolina ( better known as Karolina <unk> ) and Paulina . Hańska was closest to her brother Henryk , who later became famous for his work in the genre of Polish folk literature known as <unk> . They shared a passion for philosophical discussions , especially related to love and religion . Hańska 's other brothers , Adam and Ernest , both pursued military careers . Hańska 's eldest sister , Karolina , was admired as a child for her beauty , intellect , and musical talent . She later married a man 34 years her senior , a landowner from <unk> named Hieronim <unk> . They separated after two years , and she began a series of passionate affairs with some of her many suitors . These included the Russian general Ivan <unk> Witt , the Polish poet Adam Mickiewicz , and the Russian writer Alexander Pushkin . The Tsar considered her behavior scandalous and declared her dangerously disloyal . As a result , Hańska and the other Rzewuski women were watched carefully by police when they visited the Russian capital of St Petersburg . Hańska 's younger sisters , Alina and Paulina , married early into comfortable upper @-@ class families . Alina married a wealthy landowner from <unk> , whose father had gained his fortune by managing property for the <unk> family . Her nephew Stanisław Moniuszko became a renowned composer . Paulina married a banker from Odessa named Jan <unk> . 
 = = = Marriage to Hański = = = 
 In 1819 Eveline married Wacław Hański , a noble who lived nearby at <unk> ( Wierzchownia ) . Their marriage was a union of wealthy families , not of passion . His estate covered 21 @,@ 000 acres ( 85 km2 ) and employed over 3 @,@ 000 serfs , including 300 domestic servants . The manor had been designed by a French architect , and its owner filled it with luxuries from around the world : paintings from galleries in Milan and London , dinnerware from China , and a library of 25 @,@ 000 books in a variety of languages . Hański boasted that none of the furniture was Russian . 
 Hański was more than twenty years older than Ewelina , who was a teenager at the time of their wedding , and his personality clashed with her youthful vigor . He spent most of the day supervising the grounds , by some accounts with an iron fist . After dinner he was usually too fatigued to spend time with his wife , and retired early . He was generally dour , and lived with a depressed condition that Hańska referred to as " blue devils " . Although she was surrounded by opulence , Hańska found herself dissatisfied with her new life and with her husband 's emotional distance in particular . As one biographer put it : " He loved Eve but he was not deeply in love with her . " 
 In the first five years of their marriage , Hańska gave birth to five children , four of whom died as infants . The surviving daughter , Anna , was a welcome joy to Hańska , and she trusted her care to a young governess named Henriette Borel who had moved to Wierzchownia from the Swiss town of Neuchâtel . 
 The estate at Wierzchownia was isolated . Hańska was bored by visits to the court at St. Petersburg , and even more bored by noble guests in her own home . She found nothing in common with the ladies of high society , and longed for the stimulating discussions she had enjoyed with her brother Henryk . She spent her time reading the books her husband imported from faraway lands . 
 = = = Becoming " The Stranger " = = = 
 One of the writers who most enchanted Hańska was the French novelist Honoré de Balzac . After laboring in pseudonymous obscurity for ten years , Balzac published Les Chouans ( The Chouans ) in 1829 . A tale of star @-@ crossed love amidst a royalist uprising in Brittany , it was the first work to which he signed his own name . Hańska was intrigued by the glowing portrayal of the female protagonist , driven by true love to protect the object of her desire . She also enjoyed Balzac 's Physiologie du mariage ( The Physiology of Marriage ) , also published in 1829 , which heaps satirical scorn on husbands and celebrates the virtue of married women . 
 When she read his 1831 novel La Peau de chagrin ( The Magic Skin ) , however , Hańska was appalled by the coarse depiction of Foedora , the so @-@ called " femme sans cœur " ( " woman without a heart " ) . She felt that Balzac had lost the reverence shown in his earlier works , and worried that he had based Foedora on a real woman from his life . Motivated partly by concern , partly by boredom , and partly by a desire to influence the life of a great writer ( as her sister Karolina had done ) , she wrote to Balzac . 
 On 28 February 1832 Hańska posted a letter from Odessa with no return address . In it , she praised Balzac for his work , but scolded him for the negative portrayal of women in La Peau de chagrin . She urged a return to the glowing representations in his earlier novels , and signed enigmatically : " L 'Étrangère " ( " The Stranger " or " The Foreigner " ) . Balzac was intrigued by the letter ; he took out a personal advertisement in the Gazette de France indicating his receipt of an anonymous letter and expressing regret for being unable to reply . She probably never saw this notice . 
 Hańska wrote to Balzac several times during 1832 . On 7 November she posted a seven @-@ page letter filled with praise and flattery : 
 Your soul embraces centuries , Monsieur ; its philosophical concepts appear to be the fruit of long study matured by time ; yet I am told that you are still young . I would like to know you , but feel that I have no need to do so . I know you through my own spiritual instinct ; I picture you in my own way and feel that were I to set eyes upon you I should exclaim , ' That is he ! ' Your outward semblance probably does not reveal your brilliant imagination ; you have to be moved , the sacred fire of genius has to be lit , if you are to show yourself as you really are , and you are what I feel you to be — a man superior in his knowledge of the human heart . 
 She insisted , however , that they could never meet , and indeed that he should never know her name : ( " For you I am The Stranger , and shall remain so all my life . " ) Still , she wished for him to write back , so she advised him to place a notice in La Quotidienne to " L <unk> " from " H.B. " . He purchased a notice similar to the earlier one in the Gazette , and signed it according to her instructions . 
 In her next letter Hańska made arrangements for a trusted courier to collect letters from Balzac , and thereby allow for a direct correspondence . Before long she sent him the news that she and her husband would be traveling Europe , and visiting Vienna , <unk> 's childhood home . They would also travel to the Swiss village of Neuchâtel , to visit the family of her daughter 's governess . Contradicting her vow of eternal anonymity , she suggested a meeting . Balzac agreed immediately , and began to make preparations for the journey . Also , sometime in 1833 , Balzac wrote his first confession of love to her , despite being at that time in another relationship . 
 = = = Meeting Balzac = = = 
 In September 1833 , after traveling to the French village of Besançon to find cheap paper for a publishing enterprise , Balzac crossed into Switzerland and registered at the Hôtel du Faucon under the name Marquis d <unk> . He sent word to Hańska that he would visit the garden of the Maison <unk> , where she and her family were staying . He looked up and saw her face at the window , then – as he described it later – he " lost all bodily sensation " . They met later that day ( September 25 ) at a spot overlooking Lake Neuchâtel ; according to legend , he noticed a woman reading one of his books . He was overwhelmed with her beauty , and she wrote soon afterwards to her brother , describing Balzac as " cheerful and lovable just like you " . 
 Hańska and Balzac met several times over the next five days , and her husband became enchanted with Balzac as well , inviting him to meals with the family . During a trip to Lake Biel , Hański went to arrange lunch , leaving his wife and Balzac alone . In the shade of a large oak tree , they kissed and exchanged vows of patience and fidelity . She told him of the family 's plan to visit Geneva for Christmas ; Balzac agreed to visit before the end of the year . Before he left <unk> , she sent a passionate letter to his hotel : " Villain ! Did you not see in my eyes all that I longed for ? But have no fear , I felt all the desire that a woman in love seeks to provoke " . 
 Arriving in Geneva on December 26 , the Christmas Eve , Balzac stayed at the Auberge de l 'Arc , near the Maison <unk> where the Hański family had settled for the season . She left a ring for him at the hotel , with a note asking for a new promise of love . He gave it , and described how he began wearing the ring on his left hand , " with which I hold my paper , so that the thought of you clasps me tight . " At this time he began working on a philosophical novel , Séraphîta , about a hermaphroditic angel united by the love of a mortal man for a compassionate and sensual woman . Balzac explained that she was his model for the latter . It was clear to all that Hański was in ill health , and Hańska began to think about her future with the French author . In the meantime , she asked Balzac to begin collecting for her autographs of the famous people he spent time with in Paris and elsewhere . 
 After leaving Geneva on 8 February , the Hański family spent several months visiting the major cities of Italy . In Florence the sculptor Lorenzo <unk> started work on a bust of Hańska . In the summer of 1834 they returned to Vienna , where they would stay for another year . During this time Balzac continued writing to Hańska , and by accident two especially amorous letters fell into the hands of her husband . He wrote to the French author , furious , and demanded an explanation . Balzac wrote to Hański claiming that it was nothing more than a game : " One evening , in jest , she said to me that she would like to know what a love @-@ letter was . This was said wholly without meaning .... I wrote those two unfortunate letters to Vienna , supposing that she remembered our joke .... " Hański apparently accepted the explanation , and invited Balzac to visit them in Vienna , which he did in May 1835 . 
 Balzac 's biographers agree that , despite his vows of loyalty to Hańska , he conducted affairs with several women during the 1830s , and may have fathered children with two of them . One was an Englishwoman named Sarah who had married the Count Emilio <unk> @-@ Visconti . Hańska wrote to Balzac about these rumors in 1836 , and he flatly denied them . Her suspicion was raised again , however , when he later dedicated his novel <unk> to " Sarah " . Balzac also corresponded with Hański ; while most of their family disapproved of Balzac , Hański respected him , and the two exchanged letters on literature and agronomy . Meanwhile , Hańska was experiencing a renewal of religious interest , partly because her daughter 's governess , Henriette Borel , left to join a nunnery in Paris . Hańska taught her daughter Anna from the works of Christian scholars including Jean Baptiste Massillon and St. François de Sales . Her religious interest was more towards mysticism than mainstream religions ; she corresponded with Baroness Barbara von <unk> , and read on Rosicrucianism , <unk> and Swedenborgianism . Balzac treated this attack of devotion with the sharpest disapproval . When Balzac sent her works in progress , her only replies were moral queries , rather than the stylistic criticism for which he hoped . 
 = = = Hański 's death = = = 
