 Hański died in November 1841 . She sent Balzac a letter , sealed in black , with the news . He instantly wrote back : " je n 'en <unk> peut @-@ être pas <unk> <unk> d 'autre de vous , <unk> ce que vous me <unk> de triste sur vous et votre santé " ( " I could not perhaps wish to have received any other [ news ] from you , in spite of the sad things you tell me about yourself and your health " ) . He made plans to visit Dresden in May , and obtain a visa to visit her in Russia . 
 The future , however , was not as simple as Balzac wanted to believe . Hańska 's family did not approve of the French author ; her Aunt <unk> was especially disdainful . To make matters worse , her late husband 's uncle protested the Hański 's will in which she had inherited Hański 's estate . Horrified that her daughter would be robbed of everything , Hańska insisted that she must end her relationship with Balzac . " You are free " , she wrote to him . As she made plans to protest the uncle 's interference in St. Petersburg , Balzac wrote back to offer his help . He suggested that he could become a Russian citizen and " go to the Czar myself and ask him to sanction our marriage " . She asked for his patience , which he offered anew . 
 Soon after she arrived in the Russian capital of St. Petersburg , in order to resolve some of the litigation issues surrounding her inheritance , she took Anna to a recital by the Hungarian composer and pianist Franz Liszt . Although she did not succumb to Lisztomania , she was impressed by his musical talent and his good looks . " He is an extraordinary mixture " , she wrote in her diary , " and I enjoy studying him . " They saw one another on several occasions , but she ultimately rejected his advances . One biographer says that their last meeting " gives striking evidence of her loyalty to Balzac " . 
 In late July 1843 Balzac visited her in St. Petersburg , the first time they had seen one another in eight years . He was struck by Hańska 's resilient beauty , but his condition had deteriorated over the years . Biographers agree that she was much less physically attracted to him at this time . Still they renewed their vows of love and planned to marry as soon as she won her lawsuit . In early October he returned to Paris . Soon afterwards , she wrote a story based on her own experience writing to Balzac for the first time . Unhappy with it , she threw it into the fire , but the French author begged her to rewrite it so he could adapt it . He assured her that she would " know something of the joys of authorship when you see how much of your elegant and delightful writing I have preserved " . Her story became Modeste Mignon , Balzac 's 1844 novel about a young woman who writes to her favorite poet . 
 Also in 1844 Hańska won her lawsuit . The wealth of her late husband 's estate would go to Anna , who had become engaged to a Polish Count , Jerzy Mniszech . They planned to marry in 1846 , after which time Hańska would bestow the inheritance . Thus Hańska 's marriage to Balzac would have to wait . In the meantime , two urgent problems began to complicate their plans . One was his health , which had been deteriorating for years . In October 1843 he wrote to her about " horrible suffering which has its seat nowhere ; which cannot be described ; which attacks both heart and brain " . Balzac 's other problem was financial : despite his illness , he could not afford to relax his work schedule , since he owed more than 200 @,@ 000 francs to various creditors . 
 = = = Second marriage and widowhood = = = 
 Hańska and Balzac were determined , however , and in 1845 she visited him in Paris with Anna and Jerzy . In April of the following year they visited Italy ; Balzac joined them for a tour of Rome , and they proceeded to Geneva . Soon after he returned to Paris , she wrote with the news that she was pregnant . Balzac was overjoyed , certain that they would have a boy , and insisting on the name Victor @-@ Honoré . The thought of having a son , he wrote , " stirs my heart and makes me write page upon page " . To avoid scandal , he would have to marry Hańska in secret , to hide the fact that their child was conceived out of wedlock . In the meantime , Anna married Jerzy Mniszech on 13 October in Wiesbaden . Balzac served as a witness and wrote an announcement for the Paris newspapers , which offended Hańska 's sister Alina . 
 Hańska , living for a time in Dresden , was not soothed , either , by Balzac 's disregard for financial stability . For years he had planned to buy a house for them to share , but in August 1846 she sent him a stern admonition . Until his debts were paid , she wrote , " we must postpone buying any property " . One month later he purchased a house on the Rue Fortunée for 50 @,@ 000 francs . Having collected finery from his many travels , he searched across Europe for items to properly complete the furnishings : carpets from Smyrna , embroidered pillowcases from Germany , and a handle for the lavatory chain crafted from Bohemian glass . 
 In November , Hańska suffered a miscarriage ; she wrote to Balzac with the tragic news . He wanted to visit her , but Anna wrote asking him to remain in Paris . The emotion involved , she wrote , " would be fatal " . Hańska made plans to return to Wierzchownia , but Balzac begged her to visit him , which she did in the spring of 1847 . As soon as she was back in Ukraine , however , a new wrinkle unfolded . Hańska had long been unhappy with the presence of Balzac 's housekeeper , Louise Breugniot , and he promised to break with her before marrying . He wrote with alarm to Hańska explaining that <unk> had stolen her letters to him and blackmailed the author for 30 @,@ 000 francs . Biographers disagree about truth of this story ; Robb suggests it was " a convincing hysterical performance put on for the benefit of his jealous fiancée " . 
 Still , Balzac believed that keeping her letters was dangerous and , in a moment of characteristic impulse , threw them into the fire . He described it to her as " the saddest and most frightful day of my life ... I am looking at the ashes as I write to you , and I tremble seeing how little space fifteen years takes up . " On 5 September 1847 he left Paris to join her for the first time in Wierzchownia . They spent several happy months together , but financial obligations required his presence in France . The Revolution of 1848 began one week after his return . Back in Wierzchownia , Hańska lost 80 @,@ 000 francs due to a granary fire , and her time was consumed with three lawsuits . These complications , and Balzac 's constant debt , meant that their finances were unstable , and she hesitated anew at the idea of marriage . In any case , a wedding would be impossible without approval from the Tsar , which he did not grant until spring of 1850 . On 2 July 1849 Russian authorities responding to Balzac request of December 1847 to marry widow Hańska stated that he can do so but she cannot keep her lands . 
 Balzac returned to Wierzchownia in October , and immediately fell ill , with heart issues . His condition deteriorated throughout 1849 , and doubts persisted in her mind about their union . Biographers generally agree that Hańska was convinced by Balzac 's frail state and endless devotion . One wrote : " It was charity , as much as love or fame , which finally turned the scale . " Robb indicates that the wedding was " surely an act of compassion on her part " . To avoid rumors and suspicion from the Tsar , Hańska transferred ownership of the estate to her daughter . On 14 March 1850 they traveled to Berdychiv and , accompanied by Anna and Jerzy , were married in a small ceremony at the parish church of St. Barbara . 
 Both Hańska and Balzac took ill after the wedding ; she suffered from a severe attack of gout , for which her doctor prescribed an unusual treatment : " Every other day she has to thrust her feet into the body of a sucking @-@ pig which has only just been slit open , because it is necessary that the entrails should be quivering . " She recovered , but he did not . They returned to Paris in late May , and his health improved slightly at the start of summer . By July , however , he was confined to his bed . Hańska nursed him constantly , as a stream of visitors – including the writers Victor Hugo and Henri <unk> – came to pay their respects . When Balzac 's vision started to give out , she began to act as his secretary , helping him with his writing . 
 In mid @-@ August Balzac succumbed to gangrene and began having fits of delirium . At one point he called out for Horace Bianchon , the fictional doctor he had included in many novels . But he also expressed great worry for Hańska , once telling Hugo : " My wife is more intelligent than I , but who will support her in her solitude ? I have accustomed her to so much love . " He died on 18 August 1850 . 
 As most of Balzac 's biographers point out , Hańska was not in the room when he died . Robb says she " must have retired for a moment " , while André Maurois notes that she had been by his side for weeks with no way of knowing how long it would continue , and " there was nothing to be done " . Vincent Cronin attributes her absence to the nature of their relationship : " From the first day by the lakeside at Neuchâtel theirs had been a Romantic love and Eve wanted to guard it to the end against that terrible taint of corruption . " 
 = = = Later years and death = = = 
 Hańska lived with Balzac 's mother for a time after his death , in the house he had spent so much time and expense furnishing . The elder Mme. Balzac moved in with a friend after several months , and Hańska approached the remains of her late husband 's writing . Several works had been left incomplete , and publishers inquired about releasing a final edition of his grand collection La Comédie humaine . Hańska sponsored new editions of his works and was involved in editing some of them , even adding occasional content . Balzac 's debt , meanwhile , still exceeded 200 @,@ 000 francs , which Hańska paid while also providing for his mother 's living expenses . One of her letters at the time gives voice to her frustrations : " In nursing my husband 's incurable malady I ruined my health , just as I have ruined my private fortune in accepting the inheritance of debts and embarrassments which he left me . " Anna and Jerzy moved into a nearby house in Paris . 
 Despite her obligations , Hańska was a beautiful unmarried woman of means living in Paris . The writer Jules Amédée Barbey d 'Aurevilly described her this way : " Her beauty was imposing and noble , somewhat massive , a little fleshy , but even in <unk> she retained a very lively charm which was spiced with a delightful foreign accent and a striking hint of sensuality . " As she began sorting through Balzac 's papers , she called on his friend , Champfleury , for assistance . As they worked one evening , he complained of a headache . " I 'll make it go away , " she said , and began massaging his forehead . As he wrote later : " There are certain magnetic <unk> , in such situations , of which the effect is that the matter does not stop there . " Her affair with the man twenty years her junior was brief , but it provided a tremendous release to Hańska , who had spent decades with older men in various states of ill health . She began partaking of the social life around her . " The night before last I laughed as I have never done before , " she wrote in 1851 . " Oh , how wonderful it is not to know anyone or have to worry about anyone , to have one 's independence , liberty on the mountain @-@ tops , and to be in Paris ! " 
 Champfleury was intimidated by her vitality and jealousy , and removed himself from her life . On his recommendation , she turned creative control of Balzac 's unfinished novels Le <unk> d <unk> and Les Petits Bourgeois to another writer , Charles Rabou . Rabou added extensively to them and published both books in 1854 . To soothe the publisher , Hańska falsely claimed that Balzac had chosen Rabou as his literary successor . 
 Hańska met the painter Jean <unk> when she hired him in 1851 to paint Anna 's portrait . They began a relationship that lasted many years , but never married . Over the next thirty years , Hańska and particularly her spend @-@ thrift daughter spent the remainder of their fortune on fine clothing and jewelry . Jerzy , meanwhile , succumbed to mental disorders and died in 1881 , leaving behind a trail of debts . Hańska was forced to sell the house , but was allowed to continue living there . She died on 11 April 1882 and was buried in Balzac 's grave at Père Lachaise Cemetery . 
 = = Influence on Balzac 's works = = 
 Eveline was an inspiration for many of Balzac 's characters . She can be seen as the model for La <unk> , Mme Claes , Modesta Mignon , Ursule <unk> , Adelina <unk> , and especially Eugenie Grandet and Mme de <unk> . There is less agreement among scholars on whether she was also the inspiration for more negative characters such as Fedora and lady Dudley , as Balzac seems to have used her mostly as a model for more positive personas . His works also mention numerous characters named Eve or Eveline , and have several dedications to her . 
 In addition to Eveline , her daughter Anna , sister Alina , aunt <unk> , first love ( Tadeusz <unk> ) , and several other figures that she introduced Balzac to or told him about , were also incorporated into his works . After they met , Poland , Polish topics , Polish names , and Polish ( Slavic ) mysticism began to appear much more frequently in his works , as exemplified by such characters as <unk> <unk> , <unk> and General Chodkiewicz . 
 = = Defenders and detractors = = 
 Hańska became a controversial figure among the biographers and researchers of Balzac . As Zygmunt Czerny notes , the " mysterious Pole " was criticized by some ( Henry Bordeaux , Octave Mirbeau ( La Mort de Balzac ) , Adolf <unk> , Józef Ignacy Kraszewski , Charles Léger and Pierre <unk> ) , and praised by others ( Philippe <unk> , Marcel <unk> , Barbey d 'Aurevilly , Sophie de Korwin @-@ <unk> , Tadeusz Boy @-@ Żeleński , Tadeusz Grabowski , Juanita Helm Floyd and André Billy ) . Czerny notes that one of the " greatest experts on Balzac " , <unk> de <unk> , referred to her as " one of the best women of the epoch " , and that while there are those who deride her influence on Balzac , and question her feelings and motivations , few deny she had a crucial impact on him , and , for most , the " Great Balzac " emerged only after meeting her in early 1830s . Czerny concludes by saying : " However one could analyze her and their relationship , the impact of her love on Balzac was persistent , all @-@ enveloping and decisive " . 
 = William M. Callaghan = 
 William McCombe Callaghan ( August 8 , 1897 – July 8 , 1991 ) was a United States Navy officer who served as the first captain of the battleship USS Missouri ( BB @-@ 63 ) and the inaugural commander of the Military Sea Transportation Service . Through the course of almost 40 years , he served his country in three wars . His naval career began on a destroyer in the final months of World War I. Following command of the destroyer USS Reuben James ( DD @-@ 245 ) and logistical work prior to World War II , he took command of the Missouri in 1944 . 
 Callaghan is perhaps best known for ordering , despite disagreement from some of his crew , that an honorable funeral be held for an enemy pilot who died during a suicide attack on the Missouri in 1945 . Following World War II , he directed the US Navy 's transportation service and filled senior command roles in eastern Asia , including leadership of the US Pacific Fleet 's Amphibious Force during the Korean War . He retired from the US Navy at the rank of Vice Admiral in 1957 and worked in civilian maritime transport before retiring to Maryland . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Callaghan was born on August 8 , 1897 , the son of businessman Charles William Callaghan and Rose Wheeler Callaghan . The family was devout Roman Catholic . His elder brother , Daniel Callaghan ( 1890 – 1942 ) , would later become a US Navy Rear Admiral and posthumous Medal of Honor recipient . Both brothers studied at Saint Ignatius College Preparatory in San Francisco , the elder graduating in the class of 1911 . He subsequently attended the United States Naval Academy , graduating in 1918 . 
 = = Military career = = 
 = = = Early service = = = 
 Callaghan served on a destroyer during the last six months of World War I. He received a Master of Science degree in electrical engineering from Columbia University in 1925 , and would become a Knight of Malta . In the mid @-@ 1920s , he served as assistant engineering officer on board the light cruiser USS Concord , which was then performing scouting duties . From 1932 to 1933 , he was a Lieutenant aboard the aircraft carrier USS Saratoga . 
 = = = Ship commands = = = 
 At the rank of Commander , Callaghan captained the destroyer USS Reuben James from June 1936 to March 1938 , and subsequently joined the staff of the Chief of Naval Operations in 1939 . Before the US entered World War II , he was stationed in London in a logistical role . During the first part of World War II , he served as a logistics officer on the staff of the Commander in Chief , US Pacific Fleet , Admiral Chester Nimitz . He received the Legion of Merit for this work . 
 On June 11 , 1944 , Callaghan became the first captain of the USS Missouri , the last battleship commissioned by the US Navy . He commanded the Missouri in engagements at Iwo Jima , Okinawa , and Tokyo . 
 = = = Attack on the USS Missouri = = = 
 At 2 : 42 PM on April 11 , 1945 , off the coast of Kikaijima Island , a Japanese fighter pilot in an <unk> Zero launched a kamikaze attack on the USS Missouri . Bill <unk> , a Seaman at the time , recalled that the attacking plane approached at an extreme angle and estimated that it was 20 feet ( 6 m ) above the water . Although struck by intense antiaircraft fire , the plane survived and struck the ship 's starboard side at frame 169 below the main deck . While the impact of one of the plane 's wings started a fire at 5 @-@ inch mount number 3 , its 500 @-@ pound bomb did not detonate , so the damage was minimal . There were no American casualties , but the Japanese pilot died . Parts of the plane 's wreckage and the top half of the pilot 's body landed on board the Missouri . The plane 's wing was turned over to the crew to be cut up for souvenirs . 
 Despite protests from some of his crew , Callaghan insisted that the young Japanese airman had done his job to the best of his ability , with honor , and deserved a military funeral . Stephen Cromwell , a corpsman at the time , later recalled , " I was able to recover his body and I called up to the bridge to ask if I should throw it overboard ... Captain Callaghan said , ‘ No , when we secure , take it down to the sick bay , and we 'll have a burial for him tomorrow . ’ " Ivan Dexter , another crew member , gave his account of events to Herb <unk> , recalling that the top half of the Japanese pilot 's body was scattered over the deck , while the bottom half fell with the rest of the plane into the sea . What remained of the body was brought to sick bay for examination , and various Missouri crew took souvenirs from the clothing , including the helmet , scarf , and jacket . Following examination , the remains were placed in a canvas bag with dummy shell casings to weigh it down . 
 The following day , the Japanese pilot received a military funeral at sea . An improvised Japanese flag , sewn by one of the ship 's bosun 's mates , covered the bag holding the man 's remains . The ship 's chaplain committed the body to the sea and the six pallbearers let it slide overboard , accompanied by a volley of rifle fire . <unk> wrote , " There was still much bitterness on the part of many in the crew , but now , the honorable thing was done . " According to Lee Collins , visitor operations director for the Battleship Missouri Memorial , Callaghan said that the ceremony was simply a tribute to " a fellow warrior who had displayed courage and devotion , and who had paid the ultimate sacrifice with his life , fighting for his country . " 
 On May 14 , 1945 , Callaghan passed command of the Missouri on to Captain Stuart Murray , who had been a classmate of his at the US Naval Academy . 
 = = = Senior commands = = = 
 In 1946 , Callaghan held the rank of Rear Admiral , and in that year gave a presentation to the Naval War College on his experience in the Naval Transportation Service before the war . On October 1 , 1949 , he was appointed as the first commander of the Military Sea Transportation Service , which would later become the Military Sealift Command . He was promoted from Rear Admiral to Vice Admiral around this time . From 1953 to 1954 , during the Korean War , he commanded the Amphibious Force of the US Pacific Fleet . From 1954 to 1956 , he served as Commander , US Naval Forces Far East . He then replaced retiring Vice Admiral Francis Low as Commander of the Western Sea Frontier . He retired from the US Navy at the rank of Vice Admiral in 1957 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following retirement from military service , Callaghan served as Vice President of American Export Lines , and then as Chairman of the Maritime Transportation Research Board under the National Academy of Sciences . He would later have a transport ship named after him : the GTS Admiral W. M. Callaghan ( T @-@ AKR @-@ 1001 ) . 
 Late in life , Callaghan resided in Chevy Chase , Maryland . Following a stroke , he died on July 8 , 1991 , at Bethesda Naval Hospital . His first wife , Helen <unk> Callaghan ( 1896 – 1970 ) , and second wife , Martha Rawlins Callaghan ( 1905 – 1973 ) , predeceased him . He was survived by his third wife , Sarah <unk> Callaghan ( 1914 – 2011 ) , and two children , William M. Callaghan Jr . ( a retired US Navy Rear Admiral ) and Jane Callaghan Gude ( c . 1925 – 2008 ) , as well as eight grandchildren . Callaghan 's grandchildren include William Callaghan III , Chad Callaghan , and A. Carey Callaghan . His great @-@ grandchildren include Caitlin Callaghan , Larkin Callaghan , and Connor Callaghan , and many others . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Callaghan 's decision on the Japanese pilot 's funeral in 1945 would receive praise years later , although a memorial service aboard the Missouri in April 2001 attracted controversy . Leading up to the service , Callaghan 's son said , " My father believed a burial at sea for the pilot was the right thing to do . He felt it would set a good example for the crew in showing respect for the life of people , even for the people you are opposing . " 
 Junko Kamata , a niece of one of the Japanese pilots killed in the April 1945 battle , said , " I want to thank Captain Callaghan for his humanitarian consideration for kamikaze soldiers . " Minoru Shibuya , Japanese Consul General , called Callaghan 's actions " a glorious deed , to salute the [ pilot 's ] bravery . " Daniel Inouye , US Senator from Hawaii , reflected that " from the dawn of civilization , warriors respected their adversaries ; it was an unspoken code of honor . When Callaghan saw the broken body of his sworn enemy lying upon his ship , he saw him not as an enemy , but simply as a man . " 
 At a 1998 reunion of Missouri veterans , many of those present who had served during World War II felt that , on reflection , their captain had acted correctly . Robert <unk> , a retired US Navy Vice Admiral , said , " In wartime , courage is measured as much by one 's actions as their strength of leadership during the heat of battle ... I think the leadership qualities showed by Captain Callaghan illustrate the ideal of what we want our military leaders to follow . " 
 = WrestleMania IX = 
 WrestleMania IX was the ninth annual WrestleMania professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by the World Wrestling Federation . The event took place at Caesars Palace in Paradise , Nevada on April 4 , 1993 , and was the first WrestleMania event held outdoors . The buildup to the pay @-@ per @-@ view consisted of feuds scripted by the WWF 's writers , and the matches that took place at the event had pre @-@ determined outcomes that had been decided by the promotion . 
 WrestleMania IX was built around two main storylines . The first was the seemingly unstoppable Yokozuna challenging Bret Hart for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship in the main event , a right he earned by winning the 1993 Royal Rumble . The other major storyline was the return of Hulk Hogan , who had departed the WWF following WrestleMania VIII but returned to team with Brutus Beefcake against the WWF Tag Team Champions , Money Inc . ( Ted DiBiase and Irwin R. Schyster ) . Hogan and Beefcake lost the tag team match , but Hogan later faced Yokozuna for the title in an impromptu , unadvertised 22 @-@ second match after Yokozuna defeated Hart to win the championship . In addition , Shawn Michaels retained the Intercontinental Championship , though he lost his match against Tatanka . 
 Several reviewers have been critical of the event . The most frequent criticism has been related to the match between The Undertaker and Giant Gonzalez , Hulk Hogan 's title win , and the Roman togas worn by announcers . Both the pay @-@ per @-@ view buyrate and the attendance for the event dropped from the previous year 's WrestleMania . 
 = = Background = = 
 One of the staged feuds heading into the event was between Tatanka <unk> Champion Shawn Michaels . Tatanka was in the midst of an undefeated streak and had wrestled Michaels twice in the months leading up to WrestleMania IX . Tatanka pinned Michaels in a singles match on the February 13 , 1993 episode of WWF Superstars of Wrestling and later teamed with The Nasty Boys in a six @-@ man match against Michaels and the Beverly Brothers ; Tatanka pinned Michaels to win this match as well . Michaels was also feuding with Sensational Sherri , who stood in Tatanka 's corner during the match . Sherri had been Michaels ' valet . When Marty Jannetty tried to hit Michaels with a mirror , however , Michaels pulled Sherri in front of him to protect himself . Sherri 's anger at getting hit over the head with a mirror caused her to turn on him at Royal Rumble 1993 . 
 The match between The Steiner Brothers ( Rick and Scott ) and The Headshrinkers ( Samu and Fatu ) had little background , although Afa , who managed The Headshrinkers , claimed that his team would " tear [ the Steiners ' ] heads off " . Doink the Clown and Crush had been feuding since the January 2 , 1993 episode of WWF Superstars of Wrestling . After Crush 's match on that show , he confronted Doink , who had thrown a ball at a child in the audience . Crush grabbed Doink by the arm and warned him not to play any more pranks on children . Doink , wearing a cast on the arm that Crush had supposedly injured by grabbing , came to ringside during Crush 's match on the January 18 episode of WWF Monday Night Raw . He apologized to Crush and gave him a flower ; when Crush walked away , Doink removed a prosthetic arm from his cast and attacked Crush , who was later taken away in an ambulance due to kayfabe ( storyline ) injuries . For storyline purposes , Crush was said to be too injured to compete in the 1993 Royal Rumble match . Doink continued his pranks by squirting Crush with a water pistol and recording video messages to Crush , which showed two Doinks on the screen . 
 The feud between The Mega @-@ Maniacs ( Brutus Beefcake and Hulk Hogan ) and WWF Tag Team Champions Money Inc . ( Ted DiBiase and Irwin R. Schyster ) stemmed from a legitimate parasailing accident in 1990 that forced Beefcake to undergo reconstructive surgery to his face . He was unable to wrestle again until the February 15 , 1993 episode of Raw . He faced DiBiase in his return match , after which DiBiase and Schyster attacked him . DiBiase held Beefcake for Schyster to hit him in the face with a briefcase , but Jimmy Hart , who managed Money Inc . , repeatedly got in the way before Schyster shoved him out of the ring . Schyster then hit Beefcake in the face with the briefcase . Hart later claimed that he felt the need to " step up and do the right thing " and that he " had a change of heart " , and his intervention led to him becoming a babyface , or crowd favorite . Shortly thereafter , Hulk Hogan made his return to the WWF and joined with Beefcake , and manager Jimmy Hart , to form The Mega @-@ Maniacs and challenge Money Inc. for the WWF Tag Team Championship . 
 Mr. Perfect 's rivalry with Bobby Heenan dated back to Survivor Series ( 1992 ) . Perfect and Ric Flair were managed by Heenan , but Perfect turned on Flair and Heenan by agreeing to face them as part of a tag team match at Survivor Series . Flair feuded briefly with Perfect but left the company to return to World Championship Wrestling . Lex Luger had joined Vince McMahon 's World Bodybuilding Federation , but he signed with McMahon 's WWF when the bodybuilding company failed . He made his debut at Royal Rumble 1993 , where he was unveiled as Heenan 's latest wrestler , Narcissus ( although the ring name was changed to " The Narcissist " Lex Luger ) . 
 The Undertaker 's feud with Giant Gonzalez was an offshoot of The Undertaker 's feud with manager Harvey Wippleman . The Undertaker defeated Kamala , who was managed by Wippleman , at SummerSlam 1992 . A rematch was held at Survivor Series 1992 , and The Undertaker beat Kamala in a coffin match . Wippleman vowed revenge , and he introduced Gonzalez at Royal Rumble 1993 and instructed him to attack The Undertaker . The Undertaker was eliminated from the Royal Rumble match as a result of the interference , and a match was scheduled between The Undertaker and Giant Gonzalez for WrestleMania IX . 
 Beginning with his debut with the company in 1992 , Yokozuna was pushed by the WWF as an unstoppable monster heel . Weighing over 500 pounds , he used the Banzai Drop , a move in which he jumped from the second rope and sat on his opponent 's chest , to defeat several of the WWF 's biggest stars . In a notable match on the February 6 , 1993 episode of WWF Superstars of Wrestling , Yokozuna attacked " Hacksaw " Jim Duggan and performed the Banzai Drop four times . Due to the kayfabe injuries from the attack , Duggan was unable to wrestle for over two months . Yokozuna earned a title shot against WWF World Heavyweight Champion Bret Hart by winning the 1993 Royal Rumble match . During the contract signing , Yokozuna attacked Hart and performed the Banzai Drop on him . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the televised broadcast began , Tito Santana defeated Papa Shango in a dark match . In the first match of the pay @-@ per @-@ view event , WWF Intercontinental Champion Shawn Michaels was accompanied to the ring by a new valet , Luna Vachon . Sensational Sherri followed Tatanka to the ring to prevent Vachon from getting involved in the match . During the match , Vachon approached Tatanka twice outside the ring , but Sherri was able to intervene and stop Vachon from interfering . Tatanka spent much of the match trying to injure Michaels with an armbar hold . Michaels gained the advantage and almost pinned Tatanka with a victory roll , but Tatanka escaped the pin attempt and performed a war dance to channel his energy . Michaels threw Tatanka out of the ring and tried to jump at him to attack , but Tatanka moved . Michaels was unable to return to the ring within ten seconds ; he pulled the referee out of the ring . Tatanka was awarded the victory by countout but did not win the championship because titles can only change hands as a result of pinfall or submission . Vachon attacked Sherri after the match , and Tatanka had to help Sherri make it back to the dressing rooms . 
 In the next match , the Steiner Brothers ( Rick and Scott ) faced The Headshrinkers ( Samu and Fatu ) . The advantage switched back and forth several times , as the Steiners threw The Headshrinkers with several suplex variations and used their aerial abilities to attack their opponents from the ring ropes . The Headshrinkers relied mainly on using their power to wear down the Steiners . At one point , Fatu picked Rick Steiner up on his shoulders so that Samu could attack Rick from the top rope . Rick caught Samu instead and performed a bodyslam on Samu from Fatu 's shoulders . The match ended when Scott Steiner performed a Frankensteiner to pin Samu and win the match . 
 Crush attacked Doink the Clown outside the ring prior to the next match . After getting Doink inside the ring , Crush used his strength advantage to overpower Doink . Doink gained the advantage but missed two attacks from the top rope . Crush used more power moves to wear down Doink , and Doink tried to crawl under the ring . Crush forced Doink back into the ring and performed the Cranium Crunch , a head vice submission hold , on Doink . Doink pulled himself to the ropes and broke the hold . Doink hit the referee and knocked him unconscious ; as a result of this staged ref bump , a second Doink the Clown ( portrayed by Steve Keirn ) was able to interfere . He hit Crush with a prosthetic arm , which enabled the first Doink to win by pinfall when the referee regained consciousness . 
 Razor Ramon faced Bob Backlund next . Ramon used his power to dominate the majority of the match , but Backlund used hip tosses to attempt a comeback . Ramon won the match in under four minutes by pinning Backlund with a small package . 
 In the following match , Money Inc . ( Ted DiBiase and Irwin R. Schyster ) defended their WWF Tag Team Championship against The Mega @-@ Maniacs ( Hulk Hogan and Brutus Beefcake ) . Beefcake wore a protective titanium facemask because of his injured face , and Hulk Hogan came to the ring with a black eye , which led the announcers to speculate about the cause . Money Inc. gained the early advantage , but DiBiase soon injured himself by hitting Beefcake 's mask . Hogan and Beefcake brawled with their enemies and controlled the match until Money Inc. was counted out . Referee Earl Hebner announced , however , that he would strip them of their title if they did not return to the ring and continue the match . DiBiase returned to the ring and rendered Hogan unconscious with the Million Dollar Dream chokehold . Beefcake attacked DiBiase by applying a sleeper hold and then turned his attention to Schyster , but DiBiase hit him in the back with Schyster 's briefcase . Money Inc. attacked Beefcake and removed his facemask , but Beefcake fought back and applied a sleeper hold to Schyster . The referee was accidentally knocked unconscious , and Hogan recovered and attacked both members of Money Inc. with Beefcake 's facemask . He tried to make the cover for a pinfall , but the referee still unconscious . Manager Jimmy Hart turned his jacket inside @-@ out to reveal a striped referee jacket ; he made the three @-@ count and declared The Mega @-@ Maniacs the winners of the match . Referee Danny Davis came to the ring and disqualified Hogan for using the facemask as a weapon . Money Inc. won the match and retained their championship , but The Mega @-@ Maniacs threw them out of the ring and opened Schyster 's briefcase to reveal stacks of cash . They celebrated in the ring and threw the money into the crowd . 
 Lex Luger was accompanied to the ring by four women with revealing outfits as he prepared to face Mr. Perfect . The match began with technical wrestling , and Perfect tried to injure Luger 's knee while Luger worked on Perfect 's back . Perfect took control of the match with a powerslam and tried to pin Luger after performing a dropkick from the top rope . Luger 's foot was on the ropes , however , so the referee halted the three @-@ count and continued the match . Luger gained momentum and pinned Perfect ; Perfect 's feet were on the rope , but the referee did not see them . Luger continued to attack Perfect after the match and hit him with his forearm , which contains a steel plate as the result of a legitimate motorcycle accident . When Perfect got up , he chased Luger but was attacked by Shawn Michaels backstage . 
 In the next match , The Undertaker faced Giant Gonzalez . Both men tried to use their size and power to control the match . Gonzalez used a reverse chinlock to wear The Undertaker down and attacked him outside the ring . The Undertaker regained control of the match and knocked Gonzalez onto his knees . Harvey Wippleman threw Gonzalez a rag soaked with chloroform , which Gonzalez used to knock The Undertaker unconscious . The referee disqualified Gonzalez for using a foreign object and awarded the match to The Undertaker . After the match , The Undertaker recovered and attacked Giant Gonzalez . 
 In the main event and final scheduled match on the card , Bret Hart defended the WWF World Heavyweight Championship against Yokozuna . Hart tried to use his technical wrestling abilities against Yokozuna , while Yokozuna relied on his size advantage in the match . Hart gained control at the beginning , but Yokozuna came back with a clothesline , leg drop , and nerve hold . Hart regained the advantage when Yokozuna missed a running splash . Yokozuna applied another nerve hold but missed a running splash again . He recovered and carried Hart to the middle of the ring , but Hart removed the protective padding on the turnbuckle in the corner of the ring . He threw Yokozuna 's head into the turnbuckle and applied the Sharpshooter , his signature submission hold that stretches the opponent 's legs and back . Mr. Fuji , Yokozuna 's manager , threw salt in Hart 's eyes , which enabled Yokozuna to pin Hart and win the WWF World Heavyweight Championship . 
 After the match , Hulk Hogan came to ring to check on Hart 's condition . Hogan had stated during an interview earlier in the broadcast that he wanted to face the winner of the match , and Fuji challenged Hogan to face Yokozuna immediately in an impromptu bout . Hogan agreed and entered the ring . Fuji tried to throw salt in Hogan 's eyes , but he missed and the salt hit Yokozuna . Hogan performed a leg drop and pinned Yokozuna to win the title in 22 seconds . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 A feud began between Shawn Michaels and Mr. Perfect after WrestleMania IX as a result of Michaels attacking Perfect . They faced each other at SummerSlam 1993 , and Michaels won by countout after his new bodyguard , Diesel attacked Perfect . Perfect then feuded with Diesel until leaving the WWF . 
 Money Inc. lost the WWF Tag Team Championship to the Steiner Brothers on June 14 , 1993 . Money Inc. won the belts back in a rematch on June 16 , but the Steiners won them again three days later . Money Inc. received several rematches but were unable to regain the title ; they soon focused on singles wrestling , and DiBiase retired shortly thereafter . 
 The Undertaker continued to feud with Harvey Wippleman . On the June 12 , 1993 episode of WWF Superstars of Wrestling , Wippleman , Giant Gonzalez , and Mr. Hughes attacked The Undertaker , and his manager Paul Bearer , and stole the urn that was said to be the source of his power . The Undertaker and Giant Gonzalez faced each other one final time at SummerSlam 1993 in a Rest in Peace match , in which neither wrestler could be disqualified . The Undertaker won the match to end the feud . After the match , a frustrated Gonzalez chokeslammed Wippleman to the delight of the fans and turned face in the process . 
 Bret Hart later claimed that during a conversation with Vince McMahon , he was told that Hulk Hogan refused to drop the WWF World Heavyweight Championship to him . However , Hulk Hogan stated that , during a conversation with Vince McMahon , a deal was made for Hogan to drop the belt to the top heel at the time , Yokozuna , at the following King of The Ring . All three men eventually wound up in a meeting , where McMahon outlined the plan to have Hogan drop the belt to Yokozuna and denied telling Bret that Hogan refused to drop the championship to him . 
 After regaining the title , Yokozuna challenged any American athlete to bodyslam him on the deck of the USS Intrepid on July 4 , 1993 . After many challengers failed , Lex Luger arrived by helicopter and bodyslammed Yokozuna . Luger became a fan favorite and changed his gimmick to an American patriot . He faced Yokozuna for the WWF World Heavyweight Championship at SummerSlam 1993 ; he won the match by countout but did not win the title . Lex Luger and Bret Hart each earned a title match against Yokozuna the following year at WrestleMania X. Luger was disqualified in his match , but Hart won the championship later that night . 
 = = Production = = 
 This was the first WrestleMania held entirely outdoors , a concept the company did not use again until WrestleMania XXIV in 2008 . Because WrestleMania IX was held in Caesars Palace , the WWF promoted the event as the " World 's Largest Toga Party " . The arena was made to look like a Roman coliseum , and the event featured guards , trumpeters , and several live animals . The company built on this theme by having the commentators , including debuting announcer Jim Ross , wear togas . Ring announcer Howard Finkel was also renamed " <unk> Maximus " for the day . Randy Savage came to the broadcast booth accompanied by women throwing flower petals and feeding him grapes while he rode on a couch carried by guards . Bobby Heenan made his entrance wearing a toga and riding a camel backwards . 
 Hulk Hogan 's visibly damaged eye was explained in the storyline as the result of Ted DiBiase hiring a group of men to attack Hogan before the match . In reality , the cause of injury has been open to debate . One theory is that Randy Savage punched Hogan because he believed that his ex @-@ wife Elizabeth <unk> had an affair with Hogan while Savage and <unk> were married ( the couple divorced in September 1992 ) . WWF officials claimed that the injury was the result of a Jet Ski accident . 
 A match was scheduled between Bam Bam Bigelow and Kamala , but it was canceled due to time constraints before the event began . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The event was attended by 16 @,@ 891 fans , who paid a total of $ 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 in admission fees . This represents less than one @-@ third of the number of fans at WrestleMania VIII , which had an attendance of 62 @,@ 167 . The pay @-@ per @-@ view drew a 2 @.@ 3 buyrate , which was lower than the previous year 's 2 @.@ 8 buyrate . It was higher , however , than the <unk> for any of the following four WrestleManias . 
 WrestleMania IX has received criticism for what some reviewers have perceived as a poorly booked event . Writing for SLAM ! Wrestling , John Powell states that , aside from the Intercontinental and Tag Team Championship matches and the scantily @-@ clad women that accompanied Lex Luger to the ring , the rest of the broadcast was poor . He is also critical of some of the outfits worn for the event , notably Jim Ross 's toga and Giant Gonzalez 's spray @-@ painted suit . Reviewing the event for Online Onslaught , Adam Gutschmidt claims that several of the matches flowed poorly and had ill @-@ conceived conclusions . He also claims that the match between Giant Gonzalez and The Undertaker was a " dud " and that Hulk Hogan 's ego made the conclusion the " worst WrestleMania ending ever " . RD Reynolds , owner of the website <unk> , has inducted the event into the site 's list of " the very worst in pro wrestling " . He cites Giant Gonzalez , Papa Shango , Luger 's " narcissist " gimmick , and Jim Ross wearing a toga as his reasons for including the event in the list . 
 WWE places two events from WrestleMania IX in its top 50 WrestleMania moments : Bobby Heenan 's entrance on the camel , which the company calls " one of the most hilarious moments in WWE history " , and Hulk Hogan 's title victory . Matt Anoa 'i , who wrestled for WWE as Rosey , and is the cousin of Samu and Fatu , has identified The Headshrinkers performing a double splash on Scott Steiner at this event as his favorite moment at WrestleMania . 
 WrestleMania IX was released on VHS by Coliseum Video . It was then released as part of the WWF 's WrestleMania : The Collection ( 1985 – 1997 ) box set in 1997 . The video was re @-@ released six years later in March 1999 . That month , it was also released as part of the WWF 's WrestleMania : The Legacy box set . It was also released on DVD for WWE 's History of WrestleMania I @-@ IX box set on September 14 , 2004 . 
 In the United Kingdom , the event was released on VHS on July 5 , 1993 . Packaged together with WrestleMania X , it was released on DVD for the WWE Tagged Classics series on May 8 , 2006 . 
 = = Results = = 
 = 1996 Manchester bombing = 
 The 1996 Manchester bombing was an attack carried out by the Provisional Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) on Saturday 15 June 1996 . The IRA detonated a powerful 3 @,@ 300 @-@ pound ( 1 @,@ 500 kg ) truck bomb on Corporation Street in the centre of Manchester , England . The biggest bomb detonated in Great Britain since World War II , it targeted the city 's infrastructure and economy - causing devastating damage , estimated by insurers at £ 700 million ( £ 1 @.@ 2 billion as of 2016 ) . 
 The IRA had sent telephoned warnings about 90 minutes before the bomb detonated . At least 75 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from the area , which has been called one of the most ' extraordinary policing operations ' in the UK , but the bomb squad were unable to defuse the bomb in time . More than 200 people were injured but there were no fatalities , much to the amazement of many , particularly considering the strength of the bomb . At the time , England was hosting the Euro ' 96 football championships and a Russia vs Germany match was to take place in Manchester the following day . 
 Since 1970 the Provisional IRA had been waging a campaign aimed at forcing the British government to withdraw from Northern Ireland . Although Manchester had been the target of IRA bombs before 1996 , it had not been subjected to an attack on this scale . In February 1996 , the IRA had ended its seventeen @-@ month ceasefire with a large truck bomb attack on London 's Canary Wharf financial district , though the 3 @,@ 300 lbs bomb of Manchester was three times the size of Canary Wharf . The Manchester bombing was condemned by the British and Irish governments and US President Bill Clinton . Five days after the blast , the IRA issued a statement in which it claimed responsibility , but regretted causing injury to civilians . 
 Several buildings near the explosion were damaged beyond repair and had to be demolished , while many more were closed for months for structural repairs . Most of the rebuilding work was completed by the end of 1999 , at a cost of £ 1 @.@ 2 billion , although redevelopment continued until 2005 . The perpetrators of the attack have not been caught , and Greater Manchester Police have conceded it is unlikely that anyone will be charged in connection with the bombing . The bombing has however been credited for starting the city 's mass regeneration and turning Manchester into a modern British ' powerhouse ' city . 
 = = Background = = 
 From 1970 the Provisional Irish Republican Army was carrying out an armed campaign aimed ultimately at bringing about a united Ireland . As well as attacking military and political targets , it also bombed infrastructure and commercial targets in Northern Ireland and England . It believed that by damaging the economy and causing severe disruption , it could pressure the British government to negotiate a withdrawal from Northern Ireland . Manchester had been the target of earlier IRA bombs . <unk> damaged city centre businesses in 1973 and 1974 , for which a man was later imprisoned . In April 1974 , a bomb exploded at Manchester Magistrates ' Court , injuring twelve . In 1975 , IRA bomb factories were found in Greater Manchester and five men were imprisoned for planning attacks in North West England . On 4 December 1992 , the IRA detonated two small bombs in Manchester city centre , forcing police to evacuate thousands of shoppers . More than 60 were hurt by shattered glass and the blasts cost an estimated £ 10 million in damage and business losses . 
 The Downing Street Declaration of 1993 allowed Sinn Féin , a political party associated with the IRA , to participate in all @-@ party peace negotiations on condition that the IRA called a ceasefire . The IRA called a ceasefire on 31 August 1994 . John Major 's government , dependent on Ulster Unionist Party votes , then began insisting that the IRA must fully disarm before there could be any all @-@ party negotiations . The IRA saw this as a demand for total surrender and believed the British were unwilling to hold negotiations . It ended its ceasefire on 9 February 1996 when it detonated a powerful truck bomb in Canary Wharf , one of the two financial districts of London . The blast killed two people and caused an estimated £ 150 million worth of damage . The IRA then planted five other devices in London within the space of 10 weeks . 
 The IRA planned to carry out a similar bombing in Manchester . The city may have been chosen because it was one of the host cities of the Euro ' 96 football tournament , attended by visitors and media organisations from all over Europe , guaranteeing the IRA what Margaret Thatcher called the " oxygen of publicity " . A Russia vs Germany match was to take place at Old Trafford in Manchester a day after the bombing . The year before , Manchester had also won its bid to host the 2002 Commonwealth Games , at the time the biggest multi @-@ sport event ever to be staged in Britain . 
 On 10 June 1996 , multi @-@ party negotiations began in Belfast . Sinn Féin had been elected to take part but were barred because the IRA had not resumed its ceasefire or agreed to disarm . 
 = = Details of the bombing = = 
 The IRA 's South Armagh Brigade was tasked with planning and carrying out the attack . It had also been responsible for the Canary Wharf bombing in February , and the Bishopsgate bombing in 1993 . Its members mixed the explosives in Ireland and shipped them by freight from Dublin to England . In London , the bomb was assembled and loaded into the back of a red and white Ford Cargo box truck . On 14 June it was driven north towards Manchester , accompanied by a Ford Granada which served as a ' scout car ' . 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 At about 9 : 20 am on Saturday 15 June 1996 , the Ford Cargo truck was parked on Corporation Street , outside the Marks & Spencer store , near the Arndale Centre . After setting the bomb 's timer , two men – wearing hooded jackets , baseball caps and sunglasses – left the vehicle and walked to Cathedral Street , where a third man picked them up in the Ford Granada . The truck had been parked on double yellow lines with its hazard lights flashing . Within three minutes a traffic warden had issued the vehicle with a parking ticket and called for its removal . At about 9 : 40 am , Granada Studios on Quay Street received a telephone call claiming that there was a bomb at the corner of Corporation Street and Cannon Street and that it would explode in one hour . The caller had an Irish accent and gave an IRA codeword so that police would know the threat was genuine . Four other telephoned warnings were sent to television / radio stations , newspapers and a hospital . 
 The first policeman to arrive on the scene noticed wires running from the truck 's dashboard through a hole into the back and reported that he had found the bomb . Forensic experts later estimated that the bomb weighed 3 @,@ 300 to 3 @,@ 500 pounds ( 1 @,@ 500 – 1 @,@ 600 kg ) and was a mixture of <unk> , a military @-@ grade plastic explosive , and ammonium nitrate fertiliser , a cheap and easily obtainable explosive used extensively by the IRA . Components of what may have been a tremble trigger were also found later , designed to detonate the bomb if it was tampered with . 
 = = = Evacuation = = = 
 At 10 : 00 am , there were an estimated 75 @,@ 000 – 80 @,@ 000 people shopping and working in the vicinity . An evacuation of the area was undertaken by police officers from Bootle Street police station , supplemented by officers drafted into Manchester to control the football crowds . The police were helped by security guards from local shops . 
 One group worked to move people away from the bomb while another , assisted by firefighters and security guards , established a continuously expanding cordon around the area to prevent entry . By 11 : 10 am the cordon was at the greatest extent that available manpower would permit , about a quarter of a mile ( 400 m ) from the truck and 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) in circumference . 
 = = = Explosion = = = 
 The bomb squad arrived from their Liverpool base at 10 : 46 am and attempted to defuse the bomb using a remote @-@ controlled device , but they ran out of time . The bomb exploded at 11 : 17 am , causing an estimated £ 700 million ( £ 1 @.@ 2 billion as of 2016 ) of damage and affecting a third of the city centre 's retail space . Marks & Spencer , the sky bridge connecting it with the Arndale Centre , and neighbouring buildings were destroyed . It was the largest peacetime bomb ever detonated in Great Britain , and the blast created a mushroom cloud which rose 300 metres ( 1 @,@ 000 feet ) from the ground . The explosion could be heard up to 15 miles away and left a crater 15 metres wide . Glass and masonry were thrown into the air , and behind the police cordon – up to 1 ⁄ 2 mi ( 800 m ) away , people were showered by falling debris . There were no fatalities , but 212 people were injured . A search of the area for casualties was confused by mannequins blasted from shop windows , which were sometimes mistaken for bodies . Hospitals across Greater Manchester were made ready to receive those injured in the blast . The police commandeered a Metrolink tram to take 50 of the casualties to North Manchester General Hospital , which treated 79 in total ; a further 80 were cared for at the Manchester Royal Infirmary , and many others were treated in the streets by ambulance crews assisted by doctors and nurses who happened to be in the city centre that morning . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 The bombing was condemned by British Prime Minister John Major and his government , by the opposition , and by individual members of parliament ( MPs ) as a " sickening " , " callous " and " barbaric " terrorist attack . Early on , Major stated that , " This explosion looks like the work of the IRA . It is the work of a few fanatics and ... causes absolute revulsion in Ireland as it does here " . Sinn Féin was criticised by Taoiseach John Bruton for being " struck mute " on the attack in the immediate aftermath . Bruton described the bombing as " a slap in the face to people who 've been trying , against perhaps their better instincts , to give Sinn Féin a chance to show that they could persuade the IRA to reinstate the ceasefire " . The President of the United States , Bill Clinton , stated he was " deeply outraged by the bomb explosion " and joined Bruton and Major in " utterly condemning this brutal and cowardly act of terrorism " . Sinn Féin President , Gerry Adams , stated that he was " shocked and saddened " by the bombing . He insisted that his party was committed to achieving a peace settlement and argued " it is sheer folly to return to the old agenda of excluding Sinn Féin and seeking to isolate republicans " . On 20 June 1996 , the IRA claimed responsibility for the bombing , and stated that it " sincerely regretted " causing injury to civilians . The IRA statement continued : 
 The British Government has spent the last 22 months since August ' 94 trying to force the surrender of IRA weapons and the defeat of the republican struggle . We are still prepared to enhance the democratic peace process [ ... ] but if there is to be a lasting peace [ ... ] then the British Government must put the democratic rights of all of the people of Ireland before its own party political self interest . 
 The bombing came five days after the beginning of the peace talks in Belfast , and represented the IRA 's opposition to talks which excluded republicans . The attack was part of a political strategy by the IRA to be included in negotiations on the IRA 's own terms . According to historian Richard English : " What they were doing with their return to bombings like the Manchester bomb was saying , ' We can still return to war if we want to . We can still put off a huge bomb in your cities and devastate them and therefore you have to deal with us ' " . 
 In an effort to allay fears that Manchester 's considerable Irish community might be subjected to reprisal attacks , Councillors Richard Leese and Martin Pagel – leader and deputy leader of Manchester City Council respectively – made a public visit to the Irish World Heritage Centre in Cheetham Hill . In the event there were only a few incidents , the most serious of which occurred on the evening of the bomb when a gang of ten men rampaged through an Irish @-@ themed bar in the centre of Middleton shouting the Ulster loyalist slogan " No surrender " and smashing furniture and windows . Seven days after the bombing , Manchester Council held a ' family fun day ' in front of the Town Hall in Albert Square to encourage shoppers and visitors back into the city centre , the first of a " series of events and entertainments " . The Euro ' 96 football match between Russia and Germany at Old Trafford went ahead as planned the day following the bombing , after the stadium had been heavily guarded overnight and carefully searched ; the game , which Germany won 3 – 0 , was watched by a capacity crowd of 50 @,@ 700 . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 In an effort to trace the route of the Ford Cargo truck , police examined CCTV footage from every major road and motorway taken in England within two days of the bombing . Footage revealed that the truck was driven south along the M1 motorway into London on the Friday afternoon before the attack . It was seen again heading north along the motorway at 7 : 40 pm , accompanied by the Ford Granada . Detectives surmised that the truck had been loaded with explosives in London and that the Granada was intended to be the getaway vehicle . The truck was last recorded travelling east along the M62 motorway towards Manchester at 8 : 31 am on the morning of the explosion . 
 Police in Manchester were aware that their Metropolitan Police colleagues in London were investigating a suspected IRA unit based in the capital , and wondered whether the London unit was responsible for the Manchester bombing . On 15 July , Metropolitan police arrested six men suspected of IRA membership : Donal Gannon , John Crawley , Gerard Hanratty , Robert Morrow , Patrick Martin , and Francis Rafferty . Each was tried and convicted of " conspiracy to cause explosions at National Grid electricity stations " , and sentenced to 35 years in jail . Police in Manchester meanwhile worked to establish if the men were also responsible for the Manchester bomb . 
 Their investigation was led by Detective Chief Inspector Gordon Mutch of the Greater Manchester Police ( GMP ) , " astonishingly ... the only person ever charged with a criminal offence in connection with the Manchester bomb " . The truck 's last registered owner told police that he had sold it to a dealer in Peterborough , who had in turn sold the truck on to a man calling himself Tom Fox , two weeks before the bombing . After the purchase price was delivered in cash by a taxi driver , the dealer was instructed to take the truck to a nearby lorry park , and leave it there with the keys and documents hidden inside . 
 On checking records of telephone calls made to the dealer , the police found that some had been made from a mobile phone registered in Ireland , and on further checking the records of that phone it appeared that the calls were made from locations consistent with the known whereabouts of the Ford truck . One call was to a known IRA member . The phone was last used at 9 : 23 am on the morning of the bombing , just three minutes after the bombers had parked their truck in Corporation Street . On 27 June , the phone 's registered owner reported that it had been stolen 17 days earlier , but the police felt they had gathered enough evidence to bring a prosecution against the six IRA men held in London . 
 At a meeting attended by the commander of Special Branch in Manchester , a GMP assistant chief constable and a " senior officer " from the Royal Ulster Constabulary , it was decided , for reasons never made public , not to present the findings of the investigation to the Crown Prosecution Service ( CPS ) ; the body responsible for undertaking criminal prosecutions in England . The three may have felt that as the IRA suspects were already in police custody they were no longer a threat , or that to pursue the case against them may have jeopardised ongoing undercover operations . It was not until 1998 that the police finally sent their file to the CPS , who decided not to prosecute . 
 = = Leak = = 
 Early in 1999 , Steve Panter , chief crime reporter for the Manchester Evening News , was leaked classified Special Branch documents naming those suspected of the bombing . The documents also revealed that the man suspected of organising the attack had visited Manchester shortly after the bombing and been under covert police surveillance as he toured the devastated city centre before returning to his home in South Armagh . Suspicion fell on Mutch as the source of the leaked documents after an analysis of mobile phone records placed both him and Panter at the same hotel in Skipton , North Yorkshire , about 40 miles ( 64 km ) from Manchester on the same evening . 
 On 21 April 1999 , the Manchester Evening News named a man it described as " a prime suspect in the 1996 Manchester bomb plot " . The newspaper reported that the file sent by Greater Manchester Police to the Crown Prosecution Service contained the sentence : " It is the opinion of the investigating officers of GMP that there is sufficient evidence to charge [ him ] with being a party in a conspiracy to cause explosions in the United Kingdom . " The man denied any involvement . The Attorney General wrote in a letter to a local MP that the advice given to the CPS by an independent lawyer was that " there was not a case to answer on the evidence available ... a judge would stop the case " : the Attorney General further wrote that the decision not to prosecute was not influenced by the government . The newspaper also identified the six men arrested in London on 15 July as having planned the attack . By July 2000 all six had been released under the terms of the 1998 Belfast Agreement . 
 As of 2016 , Panter and Mutch are the only people to have been arrested in connection with the bombing . Mutch was tried for " misconduct in a public office " during an 11 @-@ day trial held in January 2002 , but was acquitted . During the trial Panter was found in contempt of court for refusing to reveal his source , an offence punishable by a term of imprisonment without the right of appeal . Greater Manchester Police announced in 2006 that there was no realistic chance of convicting those responsible for the bombing . 
 = = Reconstruction = = 
 About twelve buildings in the immediate vicinity of the explosion were severely damaged . Overall , 530 @,@ 000 square feet ( 49 @,@ 000 m2 ) of retail space and 610 @,@ 000 square feet ( 57 @,@ 000 m2 ) of office space were put out of use . Insurers paid out £ 411 million ( £ 700 million as of 2016 ) in damages for what was at the time one of the most expensive man @-@ made disasters ever , and there was considerable under @-@ insurance . Victims of the bombing received a total of £ 1 @,@ 145 @,@ 971 in compensation from the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority ; one individual received £ 146 @,@ 524 , the largest amount awarded as a result of this incident . 
 According to Home Office statistics , an estimated 400 businesses within half a mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) of the blast were affected , 40 % of which did not recover . The heaviest damage was sustained by the three buildings nearest the bomb : Michael House , comprising a Marks & Spencer store and a six @-@ storey office block ; Longridge House , offices for Royal and Sun Alliance , an insurance company ; and the Arndale Centre , a shopping mall . Michael House was deemed beyond economic repair and demolished . Marks & Spencer took the opportunity to acquire and demolish the adjacent Longridge House , using the enlarged site for the world 's biggest branch of the store . The company 's fortunes changed during construction , and Selfridges subsequently co @-@ occupied the building ; Marks & Spencer leased part of the Lewis 's store in the interim . The frontage of the Arndale was badly damaged and was removed in a remodelling of that part of the city centre . 
 The glass domes of the Corn Exchange and the Royal Exchange were blown in . The landlord of the Corn Exchange invoked a force majeure condition in the lease to evict all tenants , and the building was converted into a shopping centre . The dome of the Royal Exchange shifted in the blast ; its reconstruction took two and a half years and cost £ 32 million , paid for by the National Lottery . 
 The possibility of rebuilding parts of the city centre was raised within days of the bomb . On 26 June 1996 , Michael Heseltine , the Deputy Prime Minister , announced an international competition for designs of the redevelopment of the bomb @-@ affected area . Bids were received from 27 entrants , five of whom were invited to submit designs in a second round . It was announced on 5 November 1996 that the winning design was one by a consortium headed by <unk> . 
 = = Redevelopment = = 
 Much of the 1960s redevelopment of Manchester 's city centre was unpopular with residents . Market Street , near the explosion and at that time the second @-@ busiest shopping street in the UK , was considered by some commentators a " fearful " place , to be " avoided like the plague " . Until Margaret Thatcher 's third consecutive election victory in 1987 , the staunchly Labour @-@ controlled Manchester Council believed that Manchester 's regeneration should be funded solely by public money , despite the government 's insistence on only funding schemes with a significant element of private investment . Graham Stringer , leader of Manchester City Council , later admitted that after the 1987 General Election result " there was no get out of jail card . We had gambled on Labour winning the General Election and we lost . " Thatcher 's victory effectively put paid to Manchester 's " socialist experiment " , and Stringer shortly afterwards wrote a letter of capitulation to Nicholas Ridley , then Secretary of State for the Environment , saying , " in a nutshell ; OK , you win , we 'd like to work together with you " . 
 Efforts at improvement before the bombing had in some respects made matters worse , cutting off the area north of the Arndale Centre – the exterior of which was widely unloved – from the rest of the city centre . A large building nearby , now redeveloped as The <unk> and formerly occupied by the Daily Mirror newspaper , had been unoccupied since 1987 . Many locals therefore considered that " the bomb was the best thing that ever happened to Manchester " , as it cleared the way for redevelopment of the dysfunctional city centre , a view also expressed in 2007 by Terry Rooney , MP for Bradford North . The leader of the Liberal Democrat opposition on Manchester City Council , Simon Ashley , responded that " I take exception to his [ Rooney 's ] comments about the IRA bomb . No one who was in the city on that day , who lost their jobs or was scared witless or injured by the blast , would say the bomb was the best thing to happen to Manchester " . Sir Gerald Kaufman , MP for Manchester Gorton , stated that the bomb provided the opportunity for redeveloping Manchester city centre , although it was not fully exploited . " The bomb was obviously bad but from a redevelopment point of view , it was a lost opportunity . While the area around St Ann 's Square and Deansgate is not disagreeable , if you compare it with Birmingham and its exciting development , we 've got nothing to touch that in Manchester " . Howard Bernstein , chief executive of Manchester City Council , has been quoted as saying " people say the bomb turned out to be a great thing for Manchester . That 's rubbish . " There was already substantial regeneration and redevelopment taking place in the city centre before the bombing , in support of the Manchester bid for the 2000 Summer Olympics , its second Olympic bid . Tom Bloxham , chairman of property development group Urban Splash and of the Arts Council England ( North West ) , agreed with Bernstein that the bomb attack was not the trigger for the large @-@ scale redevelopment that has taken place in Manchester since the early 1990s : 
 For me the turning point for Manchester came before the bomb ... it was the second Olympic Games bid [ in 1992 ] when we lost but the city suddenly had a realisation . There was a huge party in Castlefield and people grasped the idea that Manchester should no longer consider itself in competition with the likes of Barnsley and Stockport . It was now up against Barcelona , Los Angeles and Sydney and its aspirations increased accordingly . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 A pillar box that survived the blast , despite being yards from the explosion , now carries a small brass plaque recording the bombing . It was removed during construction and redevelopment work , and returned to its original spot when Corporation Street reopened . The plaque reads : 
 This postbox remained standing almost undamaged on June 15th 1996 when this area was devastated by a bomb . The box was removed during the rebuilding of the city centre and was returned to its original site on 
 November 22nd 1999 
 A Thanksgiving service for the " Miracle of Manchester " was held at Manchester Cathedral on 24 July 2002 , to coincide with the arrival of the Commonwealth Games baton , attended by Queen Elizabeth II and The Duke of Edinburgh . At 11 : 17 am on 15 June 2006 , a candle was lit at a memorial held at Manchester Cathedral to mark the tenth anniversary of the bombing . 
 = HMS Drake ( 1901 ) = 
 HMS Drake was the lead ship of her class of armoured cruisers built for the Royal Navy around 1900 . She was assigned to several different cruiser squadrons in home waters upon completion , sometimes as flagship , until 1911 when she became the flagship of the Australia Station . Upon her return home , she was assigned to the 6th Cruiser Squadron of the 2nd Fleet and became the squadron 's flagship when the fleet was incorporated into the Grand Fleet upon the outbreak of the First World War . 
 She remained with the Grand Fleet until refitted in late 1915 , when she was transferred to the North America and West Indies Station for convoy escort duties . In 1916 she participated in the unsuccessful search for the German commerce raider SMS Möwe . In late 1917 Drake was torpedoed by a German submarine off Northern Ireland and sank in shallow water with the loss of eighteen lives . The wreck was partly salvaged , beginning in 1920 ; a fishing trawler collided with the remainder of the wreck in 1962 and sank the next day . The wrecks of the two ships were demolished during the 1970s , but their remnants remain a popular dive site . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Drake @-@ class ships were designed as faster and larger versions of the preceding Cressy class with a slightly more powerful armament . They displaced 14 @,@ 100 long tons ( 14 @,@ 300 t ) , over 2 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 032 t ) more than the earlier ships . The Drakes had an overall length of 553 feet 6 inches ( 168 @.@ 7 m ) , a beam of 71 feet 4 inches ( 21 @.@ 7 m ) and a deep draught of 26 feet 9 inches ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . They was powered by two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which produced a total of 30 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 22 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) using steam provided by 43 Belleville boilers . On her sea trials , Drake reached a speed of 24 @.@ 11 knots ( 44 @.@ 65 km / h ; 27 @.@ 75 mph ) . She carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 500 long tons ( 2 @,@ 500 t ) of coal and her complement consisted of 900 officers and ratings . 
 The main armament of the Drake class consisted of two breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) Mk X guns in single turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . Her secondary armament of sixteen BL 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Mk VII guns was arranged in casemates amidships . Eight of these were mounted on the lower deck and were only usable in calm weather . A dozen quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 12 @-@ pounder ( 76 mm ) 12 @-@ cwt guns were fitted for defence against torpedo boats . Two additional 12 @-@ pounder 8 @-@ cwt guns could be dismounted for service ashore . The ships also carried three 3 @-@ pounder ( 47 mm ) Hotchkiss guns and two submerged 18 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes . 
 By February 1916 , all of the lower casemates for her six @-@ inch guns had been plated over and six of them had been remounted on the upper deck so they could be used in heavy weather . Several twelve @-@ pounders had to be removed to make room for the six @-@ inch guns . 
 The ship 's waterline armour belt had a maximum thickness of 6 inches and was closed off by 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) transverse bulkheads . The armour of the gun turrets and their barbettes was 6 inches thick while that of the casemates was 5 inches thick . The protective deck armour ranged in thickness from 1 – 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 25 – 64 mm ) and the conning tower was protected by 12 inches ( 305 mm ) of armour . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 HMS Drake , named after the Elizabethan adventurer Sir Francis Drake , was laid down at Pembroke Dock on 24 April 1899 , and launched on 5 March 1901 , when she was christened by Mrs. Lort Phillips , wife of local landowner F. Lort Phillips , of <unk> . She was completed on 13 January 1903 and assigned to the Cruiser Squadron of the Channel Fleet , under the command of the future First Sea Lord , Captain Francis Bridgeman . 
 John Jellicoe , also a future First Sea Lord and commander of the Grand Fleet , was her next captain in 1903 – 04 . In 1907 the ship was commanded by Captain Arthur Hayes @-@ Sadler and serving as the flagship of the 2nd Cruiser Squadron under the command of Rear Admiral Charles Henry Adair . The following year , Drake became the flagship of 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Channel Fleet ( attending the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration during this time ) and then was assigned to the 5th Cruiser Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet of the Channel Fleet from 1910 – 11 . She served as the flagship of the Australia Station from 1911 – 13 before returning home and joined the 6th Cruiser Squadron of the 2nd Fleet in reserve . 
 That fleet was merged into the Grand Fleet upon mobilization in mid @-@ 1914 and Drake became flagship of Rear Admiral William Grant , commander of the squadron . The squadron was briefly deployed at the beginning of the war to blockade the northern exit from the North Sea . In October 1914 , under the command of Aubrey Smith , the ship was used to carry Russian bullion worth eight million pounds to Britain ; on arrival , Drake lay thirty miles off Archangel , and the gold was brought to her at night . The ship was refitted in October 1915 and then transferred to the North America and West Indies Station for convoy escort duties . She participated in the unsuccessful search in the West Indies for the German commerce raider SMS Möwe in December 1916 . 
 Drake was torpedoed by the German submarine U @-@ 79 , commanded by Kapitänleutnant Otto <unk> , on 2 October 1917 after her Convoy <unk> had dispersed for its several destinations . The ship was about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) off Rathlin Island at the tip of Northern Ireland when she was hit . The torpedo struck the No. 2 Boiler Room and caused two of her engine rooms and the boiler room to flood , killing 18 crewmen . These gave her a list and knocked out her steam @-@ powered steering . Her captain decided to steam for Church Bay on Rathlin Island and accidentally collided with the merchant ship SS Mendip Range before she dropped anchor . The collision did not damage Drake much , but Mendip Range was forced to beach herself lest she sink . Drake 's crew was taken off before she capsized later that afternoon . 
 Her wreck at 55 ° 17 @.@ 1084 ′ N 06 ° 12 @.@ <unk> ′ W in Church Bay is a favourite site for divers because the wreck is only at a depth between 15 – 19 metres ( 49 – 62 ft ) and generally has good visibility . Salvage of the wreck began in 1920 and continued for several years . On the night of 3 November 1962 , the steam trawler Ella Hewett struck the wreck and subsequently sank almost atop Drake . Ammunition and ordnance was salvaged during the 1970s and the wrecks were demolished with depth charges to reduce the chance of any other ships coming to grief on the wrecks . In 1978 , the remaining fuel oil was salvaged to reduce pollution from leaking oil . 
 = Neil Druckmann = 
 Neil Druckmann ( born December 5 , 1978 ) is an Israeli @-@ American writer , creative director and programmer for the video game developer Naughty Dog , known for his work in the video games The Last of Us and Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End . He was born and raised until the age of 10 in Israel , where his experiences with entertainment would later influence his storytelling techniques . He studied computer science at Carnegie Mellon University , before searching for work in the video game industry . 
 Druckmann 's first video game work was as an intern at Naughty Dog . In 2004 , he became a programmer on Jak 3 and Jak X : Combat Racing , before becoming game designer for Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune and Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves . He was later chosen to lead development on The Last of Us as creative director , a role he continued during the development of Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End . In addition , Druckmann has also written comic books . He worked on the motion comic Uncharted : Eye of Indra , prior to the creation of his own graphic novel A Second Chance at Sarah . He later co @-@ wrote The Last of Us : American Dreams with artist Faith Erin Hicks . 
 Druckmann has received high praise for his work on The Last of Us , receiving several awards and nominations for his contributions , including two BAFTA Awards , a DICE Award , and two Writers Guild of America Awards . His work on Uncharted 4 was also praised . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Druckmann was born in Israel on December 5 , 1978 , to Judy and Jerry Druckmann . At a young age , Druckmann 's older brother Emanuel showed him comic books , video games , and movies . These forms of entertainment , particularly video games by Sierra Entertainment and LucasArts , helped Druckmann to learn English . Druckmann became particularly interested in story @-@ telling , and wrote his own comic books . He moved to the United States with his family in 1989 . He attended middle school and high school in Miami , Florida , then studied criminology at the University of Florida . 
 Druckmann soon became a research assistant at Florida State University , while living in Tallahassee , Florida . He spent a year at the university working at the Visualization Lab within the School of Computational Science and Information Technology , beginning in July 2002 . During this time , he began developing the game Pink @-@ Bullet , for Linux and Microsoft Windows , with some friends . At one point , he wanted to be an animator , which required enlisting in art classes , but his parents forbade him from doing so . After taking a programming class , Druckmann realized that it was his preference , and began a Bachelor of Computer Science in December 2002 , which he completed the following year . Druckmann moved to Pittsburgh , where he attended Carnegie Mellon University ; in August 2003 , he began his Master 's degree in Entertainment Technology , which he earned in 2005 from the Entertainment Technology Center . In April 2004 , Druckmann developed the game <unk> <unk> in : TKO for the Third Reich for the Nintendo Entertainment System as a student at Carnegie Mellon , in collaboration with fellow student Allan Blomquist . 
 = = Career = = 
 At the Game Developers Conference , Druckmann met Naughty Dog co @-@ founder Jason Rubin . After Druckmann " bugged " Rubin , the latter gave him his business card . In 2004 , Druckmann joined Naughty Dog as a programming intern , before being promoted to a full @-@ time position as a gameplay programmer a few months later . During the development of Jak 3 ( 2004 ) and Jak X : Combat Racing ( 2005 ) , Druckmann continued to ask co @-@ president Evan Wells about joining the design team . Wells restrained from moving him to the design team , as he was originally employed as a programmer , but agreed to review Druckmann 's design work if he completed them after working hours . Following the development of Jak X , Wells concluded that Druckmann was skilled in the field of design , and gave him the role of game designer for Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune ( 2007 ) . In this position , he worked closely with Amy Hennig to construct the story of Uncharted , before working on Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves ( 2009 ) as a lead game designer , becoming more involved with the core writing of the game . Druckmann also worked on the original design and story of Jak and Daxter : The Lost Frontier ( 2009 ) , prior to Naughty Dog 's abandonment of the game ; High Impact Games completed development . 
 In 2009 , Druckmann worked on the motion comic Uncharted : Eye of Indra , as writer and director . A prequel to Drake 's Fortune , Eye of Indra tells the story of Nathan Drake prior to the events of the first game . Druckmann 's first graphic novel , A Second Chance at Sarah , was published by Ape Entertainment in February 2010 . With illustrations by artist <unk> Wong , the novel relates Druckmann 's interest in traveling back in time to meet his wife at a younger age . " There 's something cute and poetic about that idea , " Druckmann explained . He felt that he shares many similarities with the novel 's protagonist Johnny , and that " a lot of Johnny 's flaws and fears are based on [ his ] own shortcomings " . The comic was originally released on February 24 , 2010 ; critics particularly praised Wong 's illustrations , as well as Druckmann 's writing and character development . 
 Following the development of Uncharted 2 , Naughty Dog split into two teams to work on projects concurrently . With one team working on Uncharted 3 : Drake 's Deception ( 2011 ) , co @-@ presidents Evan Wells and Christophe Balestra chose Druckmann and Bruce Straley to lead development on a new game ; Druckmann was chosen for his determination and talent for design . Though they were originally set to develop a new game in the Jak and Daxter series , the team felt that they " weren 't doing service to the fans of [ the ] franchise " , and decided to create a new game , titled The Last of Us . 
 When conceiving ideas for The Last of Us , Druckmann used a concept that he created as a student at Carnegie Mellon University . His idea was to merge the gameplay of Ico ( 2001 ) in a story set during a zombie apocalypse , like that of Night of the Living Dead ( 1968 ) , with a lead character similar to John Hartigan from Sin City ( 1991 – 2000 ) . The lead character , a police officer , would be tasked with protecting a young girl ; however , due to the lead character 's heart condition , players would often assume control of the young girl , reversing the roles . He based The Last of Us on this concept , replacing the police officer with Joel , and naming the young girl Ellie . Prior to directing the game , Druckmann took acting classes in order to " talk to [ the actors ] in the same language " . The game was released on June 14 , 2013 to critical acclaim , with particular praise directed towards Druckmann 's work on the story . He earned numerous awards for his work on the game , including a BAFTA , a DICE Award , a Game Developers Choice Award , a Golden Joystick Award , and a Writers Guild of America Award . 
 Druckmann later worked on the downloadable expansion pack The Last of Us : Left Behind , a prequel focusing on Ellie 's relationship with her friend Riley , which received critical acclaim . He earned additional accolades for his work on Left Behind , including a second BAFTA and Writers Guild of America Award . In particular , he was praised for writing a scene involving a kiss between two female characters , which was named a " breakthrough moment " for video games . He also co @-@ wrote the four @-@ issue comic book miniseries The Last of Us : American Dreams , with writer and artist Faith Erin Hicks . It was published by Dark Horse Comics , with the first issue released in April 2013 , and was lauded for Druckmann 's writing and character development , as well as Hicks ' simplistic illustrations . 
 Following Hennig 's departure from Naughty Dog in March 2014 , it was announced that Druckmann and Straley were working on Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End ( 2016 ) as creative director and game director , respectively . Initial reports claimed that Hennig was " forced out " of Naughty Dog by Druckmann and Straley , though co @-@ presidents Evan Wells and Christophe Balestra later denied this . Druckmann co @-@ wrote the story alongside Josh Scherr . The game was released on May 10 , 2016 to critical acclaim , with continued praise directed towards the story . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Druckmann currently resides in Los Angeles , California with his wife Maya and daughter . He became a father during the development of The Last of Us ; his daughter was a " huge inspiration " to him when writing the game . He found that the birth of his daughter reinforced his ideas about family , realizing he would " do anything " for her . Druckmann is Jewish , although found he regularly writes about " white , straight , Christian male " characters , encouraging him to instead create more diverse characters . Druckmann 's favorite video games include Monkey Island 2 : LeChuck 's Revenge ( 1991 ) , Ico , and Resident Evil 4 ( 2005 ) , and he is often inspired by character @-@ focused comics such as Preacher ( 1995 – 2000 ) , and Y : The Last Man ( 2002 – 2008 ) . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Phedina = 
 Phedina is a small genus of passerine birds in the swallow family . It has two members , the Mascarene martin , Phedina borbonica , which has two subspecies in Madagascar and the Mascarene Islands respectively , and Brazza 's martin , P. brazzae , which breeds in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( DRC ) , the Republic of the Congo , and northern Angola . The nearest relative of the Phedina martins is the banded martin , Riparia cincta , which resembles Brazza 's martin in nesting habits and vocalisations . Both Phedina martins have grey @-@ brown upperparts and paler , heavily streaked underparts . Adult Mascarene martins are 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) in length , and Brazza 's martin is smaller at 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) long . Both species have brown wings , dark brown eyes and a black bill and legs . Juvenile birds have more diffuse breast streaking and pale edges to the feathers of the back and wings than the adults . Both species can be distinguished from most other swallows in their breeding or wintering ranges by the streaking on the underparts and lack of a deeply forked tail . The Mascarene martin has a warbled siri @-@ liri siri @-@ liri song given in flight , but Brazza 's martin has quite different vocalisations , its song consisting of a series of short notes followed by a complex buzz and sometimes some final clicks . 
 Both species typically breed in small groups : the Mascarene martin builds a shallow cup nest of twigs and coarse plant material with a soft inner lining , whereas Brazza 's martin makes a small heap of soft material such as feathers or dry grass at the end of a typically 50 @-@ cm ( 20 @-@ in ) tunnel in a riverbank . The normal clutch is three eggs for Brazza 's martin , two for Mascarene martins on Madagascar and Mauritius , and two or three for those on Réunion . As with other swallows , both martins feed on flying insects , hunting in single @-@ species groups or with other swallows and swifts . 
 Brazza 's martin may be hunted by humans , and both species may be infected with a variety of parasites . These swallows may be affected by poor weather when breeding , but neither appears to be under serious threat . The small islands which are the home of the Mascarene martin subspecies P. b. borbonica may be devastated by cyclones , which have the potential to cause severe temporary losses to the populations on Mauritius and Réunion . The legal protection afforded to the Phedina martins varies with jurisdiction , and ranges from none for Mascarene martins on Réunion to special protection for the same species on Madagascar . The Brazza 's martin is not a protected species anywhere in its range . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The French biologist Charles Lucien Bonaparte created the genus Phedina in 1855 to accommodate the Mascarene martin , previously Hirundo borbonica , which he considered to be sufficiently different from other Hirundo species to merit its own genus . The only other member of the genus is the Brazza 's martin , P. brazzae , first described by French zoologist Émile Oustalet in 1886 . The genus name is derived from the Greek phaios ( φαιός ) " brown " and the Italian rondine " swallow " . The species name for the Mascarene martin refers to the Île de Bourbon ( Réunion ) , and that for Brazza 's martin commemorates Italian @-@ born French explorer Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza , later to become governor @-@ general of the French Congo , who collected the type specimen . 
 The Phedina species are members of the swallow family of birds , and are classed as members of the Hirundininae subfamily , which comprises all swallows and martins except the very distinctive river martins . DNA sequence studies suggest that there are three major groupings within the Hirundininae , broadly correlating with the type of nest built . These groups are the " core martins " , including burrowing species like the sand martin ; the " nest @-@ adopters " , which are birds like the tree swallow that utilise natural cavities ; and the " mud nest builders " , such as the barn swallow , which build a nest from mud . Based on the DNA analysis , the Phedina species are placed in the " core martins " . 
 The genus Phedina is thought to be an early offshoot from the main swallow lineage , although their striped plumage suggests a distant relationship with several streaked African Hirundo species . In the past it has sometimes been suggested that Brazza 's martin should be moved to its own genus Phedinopsis due to the significant differences in vocalisations and nest type from its relative . The nearest relative of the Phedina martins is the banded martin , Riparia cincta , which appears not to be closely related to the other members of its current genus and resembles Brazza 's martin in nesting habits and vocalisations . The current Association of European Rarities Committees ( AERC ) -recommended practice is to move the banded martin to its own genus as Neophedina cincta , rather than to merge it into Phedina , since the banded martin 's larger size , different bill and nostril shape and non @-@ colonial nesting are differences from the other Phedina species . 
 = = Description = = 
 Both Phedina martins have grey @-@ brown upperparts and paler , heavily streaked underparts . Adult Mascarene martins of the nominate subspecies are 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) long with wings averaging 116 @.@ 6 mm ( 4 @.@ 59 in ) and weigh 23 @.@ 9 g ( 0 @.@ 84 oz ) . The tail is slightly forked and the wings are blackish @-@ brown . The Madagascan subspecies is overall paler and larger @-@ billed than the nominate form . It has denser streaking on the breast , but only very fine lines on the lower abdomen and on the white undertail . It is distinctly smaller than the nominate subspecies , 12 – 14 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) in length with an average weight of 20 @.@ 6 g ( 0 @.@ 73 oz ) . The Brazza 's martin is 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) long with dark brown wings averaging 100 @.@ 5 mm ( 3 @.@ 96 in ) . It has a brownish tint to the breast plumage and a square tail . Both species have dark brown eyes and a black bill and legs . Juvenile birds have more diffuse breast streaking , and white tips or buff edges to the feathers of the back and wings . 
 Both species can be distinguished from most other swallows in their breeding or wintering ranges by the streaking on the underparts . Although the lesser striped swallow has white underparts with dark streaking , it is larger , has a deeply forked tail and a very different plumage , with dark blue upperparts , a red rump and a chestnut head . 
 The vocalisations of the two martins are quite different . Mascarene martin has a warbled siri @-@ liri siri @-@ liri song given in flight or when perched ; some calls given by perched birds end in a glissando . Other vocalisations may be used during mating or displays of aggression . There is a chip contact call , and the young birds produce a fast twittering sound when begging for food . Birds wintering in mainland Africa are usually silent . The song of Brazza 's martin consists of a series of short notes increasing in frequency which are followed by a complex buzz and sometimes completed by a number of clicks . The song becomes increasingly loud , although the final clicks are quite soft . The song is similar to that of the banded martin , and does not resemble that of the Mascarene martin , suggesting unresolved taxonomic problems . 
 The flight of both species is heavy , with slow wingbeats interspersed with glides . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Both species occur in sub @-@ Saharan Africa . The Mascarene martin 's breeding range is restricted to Madagascar and the Mascarene Islands . The nominate subspecies breeds on Mauritius and Réunion and P. b. madagascariensis occurs in Madagascar . It may also nest on Pemba where it has been seen in the breeding season . Breeding habitat can be anywhere with suitable sites for constructing a nest , such as ledges , buildings , tunnels , caves or amongst rocks . The martin is found on the east side of Réunion between 200 – 500 m ( 660 – 1 @,@ 640 ft ) , and on the south and west coasts of Mauritius . It also occurs on inland cliffs on Mauritius . P. b. borbonica is resident on Mauritius and Réunion , although there are local seasonal movements on these island , but the Madagascan subspecies is migratory , with the martins moving to lower ground or to the African mainland outside the breeding season . It is normally uncommon and local in coastal Mozambique , Zambia , Malawi and Pemba Island , and very rare in Kenya and mainland Tanzania , although large numbers sometimes winter in Mozambique or Malawi . It has also been recorded from Comoros and other Indian Ocean locations including at least four islands in the Seychelles . Some of these records may be due to vagrant birds carried by cyclones . There are unsubstantiated claims of occurrences in the Transvaal . 
 The distribution of the Brazza 's martin was initially poorly studied , although it is now known to breed in the south of the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( DRC ) , the Republic of the Congo , and in northern Angola . There is one probable sighting from southeast Gabon . In the breeding season this martin is found near rivers with the steep banks that are needed for the nest burrows . Suitable habitat occurs along lowland tropical rivers like the Congo or rivers with sandbanks in the highlands of Angola . The highland locations have wide grassy riverways running through miombo woodlands , whereas the Congo Basin is tropical forest with over 200 cm ( 79 in ) of rain a year . The lowland habitats are a patchwork of dry , seasonally flooded and permanently wet woodland , and seasonally flooded savanna . This martin seems to be able to adapt to open savanna habitats containing Hymenocardia acida , in which it will roost overnight when not breeding , and is therefore not heavily dependent on the neighbouring forests as long as the riverine breeding sites survive . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The Mascarene martin nests in the wet season , August to November in Madagascar , and September to early January on Mauritius and Réunion . Brazza 's martin breeds from July to October . Both species typically breed in small groups , but their nesting habits are quite different . The Mascarene martin builds a shallow cup nest of twigs and coarse plant material such as grass and Casuarina with a softer lining of feathers and finer vegetation . It may be constructed anywhere suitably flat and inaccessible to predators , including locations 3 – 5 m ( 9 @.@ 8 – 16 @.@ 4 ft ) over water , on slate ledges , or in underground passageways , whereas Brazza 's martin makes a small heap of soft material such as feathers or dry grass at the end of a typically 50 @-@ cm ( 20 @-@ in ) tunnel in a riverbank . The normal clutch is three eggs for Brazza 's martin , two for Mascarene martins on Madagascar and Mauritius , but two or three for those on Réunion . 
 The Mascarene martin eggs are white with brown spots and average 21 @.@ 6 mm × 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 85 in × 0 @.@ 59 in ) with a weight of 2 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 088 oz ) and are incubated by the female alone . The white eggs of Brazza 's martin measure 18 @.@ 5 mm × 112 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 73 in × 4 @.@ 43 in ) and weigh 1 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 053 oz ) . The incubation and fledging times are unknown for both species , although as with all hirundines the chicks are altricial , hatching naked and blind . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 As with other swallows , both martins feed on flying insects , hunting in single @-@ species groups or with other swallows and swifts . They feed low over a variety of open habitats or woodland . Prey items recorded for the Mascarene martin include scarab , click and other beetles , Hemiptera and flying ants , and Brazza 's martins will take termites . In eastern Africa , areas deforested by logging or conversion to agriculture are used for hunting by Brazza 's martins . 
 = = Predators and parasites = = 
 No predators or parasites are recorded for Brazza 's martin , but Mascarene martins will mob the Mauritius kestrel , suggesting that it is perceived as a potential predator . Mascarene martins may host a variety of parasites . On Mauritius they may be infected by an endemic trypanosome , Trypanosoma <unk> , although the pathogenicity is unknown . Protozoan blood parasites of the genus Haemoproteus have also been found in the Mascarene martin on Mauritius , although no blood parasites were found in a Madagascan specimen . A new species of louse fly , Ornithomya <unk> , was first found on a martin in Madagascar , and another bird from that island carried the feather mite <unk> hirsutus , more commonly found in parrots . 
 = = Status = = 
 Until 2008 the Brazza 's martin was classified as Data Deficient because there had been so little ornithological research in this part of Africa , but a 2007 paper presented evidence that extended its known range by 500 km ( 310 mi ) to the north and 175 km ( 109 mi ) southwards , a quadrupling of the area . It has a large range of 402 @,@ 000 km2 ( 155 @,@ 000 sq mi ) although the total population is unknown . Its extensive range and apparently stable population means this bird is classed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List . It is likely that this species is dug out for food by humans , but its small , dispersed colonies in firm soil suggests that it is a less rewarding target than the densely packed sandbank nests of species such as the African river martin and rosy bee @-@ eater . 
 The breeding range of the Mascarene martin is restricted to three islands . Madagascar has an area of 592 @,@ 800 km2 ( 228 @,@ 900 sq mi ) , but the next largest island , Réunion , is just 2 @,@ 512 km2 ( 790 km2 ) . Although this bird has a limited range , it is abundant on Mauritius and Réunion , and locally common in Madagascar . The population is unknown , but exceeds the vulnerability threshold of 10 @,@ 000 mature individuals and is believed to be stable . This martin is therefore also classed as a species of Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature . 
 Both species may be affected by poor weather . Breeding colonies of Brazza 's martins in river sandbars are liable to flooding , but this does not appear to be having a serious impact , and this species appears to be under no immediate threat . Its ability to use degraded habitats also aids its survival . Tropical cyclones present a threat to the Mascarene martin , particularly on the small islands inhabited by the nominate subspecies . The populations on Mauritius and Réunion were badly affected by a six @-@ day cyclone in February 1861 , taking many years to recover , but by about 1900 it was reported to be common but local , and in 1973 – 74 there were 200 – 400 pairs on Réunion and 70 – 75 pairs in Mauritius . More recent cyclones , like one in 1980 , seem to have had less damaging effects than the 1861 storm . Several species have been lost from the Mascarene islands since human colonisation in the seventeenth century , but the martin and the Mascarene swiftlet occur on all the main islands , and are less vulnerable to the effects of human activities , especially since they can utilise houses for nest sites . 
 The Brazza 's martin is not a protected species in Angola , the DRC , or the Republic of Congo . In Mauritius , the Mascarene martin is legally protected as a " Species of wildlife in respect of which more severe penalties are provided " , although Madagascar and the African mainland countries have no special measures for this species beyond general bird protection legislation . Réunion is an overseas department of France , but the Birds Directive does not apply outside Europe , so there is no bird protection legislation effective on the island , despite the possibility that EU agricultural and other funding may be adversely affecting birds and vulnerable habitats . 
 = Battle of Gettysburg = 
 The Battle of Gettysburg ( local / <unk> / , with an / s / sound ) was fought July 1 – 3 , 1863 , in and around the town of Gettysburg , Pennsylvania , by Union and Confederate forces during the American Civil War . The battle involved the largest number of casualties of the entire war and is often described as the war 's turning point . Union Maj. Gen. George Meade 's Army of the Potomac defeated attacks by Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee 's Army of Northern Virginia , ending Lee 's attempt to invade the North . 
 After his success at Chancellorsville in Virginia in May 1863 , Lee led his army through the Shenandoah Valley to begin his second invasion of the North — the Gettysburg Campaign . With his army in high spirits , Lee intended to shift the focus of the summer campaign from war @-@ ravaged northern Virginia and hoped to influence Northern politicians to give up their prosecution of the war by penetrating as far as Harrisburg , Pennsylvania , or even Philadelphia . <unk> by President Abraham Lincoln , Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker moved his army in pursuit , but was relieved of command just three days before the battle and replaced by Meade . 
 Elements of the two armies initially collided at Gettysburg on July 1 , 1863 , as Lee urgently concentrated his forces there , his objective being to engage the Union army and destroy it . Low ridges to the northwest of town were defended initially by a Union cavalry division under Brig. Gen. John Buford , and soon reinforced with two corps of Union infantry . However , two large Confederate corps assaulted them from the northwest and north , collapsing the hastily developed Union lines , sending the defenders retreating through the streets of town to the hills just to the south . 
 On the second day of battle , most of both armies had assembled . The Union line was laid out in a defensive formation resembling a fishhook . In the late afternoon of July 2 , Lee launched a heavy assault on the Union left flank , and fierce fighting raged at Little Round Top , the Wheatfield , Devil 's Den , and the Peach Orchard . On the Union right , Confederate demonstrations escalated into full @-@ scale assaults on Culp 's Hill and Cemetery Hill . All across the battlefield , despite significant losses , the Union defenders held their lines . 
 On the third day of battle , fighting resumed on Culp 's Hill , and cavalry battles raged to the east and south , but the main event was a dramatic infantry assault by 12 @,@ 500 Confederates against the center of the Union line on Cemetery Ridge , known as Pickett 's Charge . The charge was repulsed by Union rifle and artillery fire , at great loss to the Confederate army . 
 Lee led his army on a torturous retreat back to Virginia . Between 46 @,@ 000 and 51 @,@ 000 soldiers from both armies were casualties in the three @-@ day battle , the most costly in US history . 
 On November 19 , President Lincoln used the dedication ceremony for the Gettysburg National Cemetery to honor the fallen Union soldiers and redefine the purpose of the war in his historic Gettysburg Address . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 Shortly after the Army of Northern Virginia won a major victory over the Army of the Potomac at the Battle of Chancellorsville ( April 30 – May 6 , 1863 ) , Robert E. Lee decided upon a second invasion of the North ( the first was the unsuccessful Maryland Campaign of September 1862 , which ended in the bloody Battle of Antietam ) . Such a move would upset U.S. plans for the summer campaigning season and possibly reduce the pressure on the besieged Confederate garrison at Vicksburg . The invasion would allow the Confederates to live off the bounty of the rich Northern farms while giving war @-@ ravaged Virginia a much @-@ needed rest . In addition , Lee 's 72 @,@ 000 @-@ man army could threaten Philadelphia , Baltimore , and Washington , and possibly strengthen the growing peace movement in the North . 
 = = = Initial movements to battle = = = 
 Thus , on June 3 , Lee 's army began to shift northward from Fredericksburg , Virginia . Following the death of Thomas J. " Stonewall " Jackson , Lee reorganized his two large corps into three new corps , commanded by Lt. Gen. James Longstreet ( First Corps ) , Lt. Gen. Richard S. Ewell ( Second ) , and Lt. Gen. A.P. Hill ( Third ) ; both Ewell and Hill , who had formerly reported to Jackson as division commanders , were new to this level of responsibility . The Cavalry Division remained under the command of Maj. Gen. J.E.B. Stuart . 
 The Union Army of the Potomac , under Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker , consisted of seven infantry corps , a cavalry corps , and an Artillery Reserve , for a combined strength of more than 100 @,@ 000 men . 
 The first major action of the campaign took place on June 9 between cavalry forces at Brandy Station , near Culpeper , Virginia . The 9 @,@ 500 Confederate cavalrymen under Stuart were surprised by Maj. Gen. Alfred Pleasonton 's combined arms force of two cavalry divisions ( 8 @,@ 000 troopers ) and 3 @,@ 000 infantry , but Stuart eventually repulsed the Union attack . The inconclusive battle , the largest predominantly cavalry engagement of the war , proved for the first time that the Union horse soldier was equal to his Southern counterpart . 
 By mid @-@ June , the Army of Northern Virginia was poised to cross the Potomac River and enter Maryland . After defeating the U.S. garrisons at Winchester and Martinsburg , Ewell 's Second Corps began crossing the river on June 15 . Hill 's and Longstreet 's corps followed on June 24 and 25 . Hooker 's army pursued , keeping between the U.S. capital and Lee 's army . The U.S. crossed the Potomac from June 25 to 27 . 
 Lee gave strict orders for his army to minimize any negative impacts on the civilian population . Food , horses , and other supplies were generally not seized outright , although quartermasters reimbursing Northern farmers and merchants with Confederate money were not well received . Various towns , most notably York , Pennsylvania , were required to pay indemnities in lieu of supplies , under threat of destruction . During the invasion , the Confederates seized some 40 northern African Americans . A few of them were escaped fugitive slaves , but most were freemen ; all were sent south into slavery under guard . 
 On June 26 , elements of Maj. Gen. Jubal Early 's division of Ewell 's Corps occupied the town of Gettysburg after chasing off newly raised Pennsylvania militia in a series of minor skirmishes . Early laid the borough under tribute but did not collect any significant supplies . Soldiers burned several railroad cars and a covered bridge , and destroyed nearby rails and telegraph lines . The following morning , Early departed for adjacent York County . 
 Meanwhile , in a controversial move , Lee allowed Jeb Stuart to take a portion of the army 's cavalry and ride around the east flank of the Union army . Lee 's orders gave Stuart much latitude , and both generals share the blame for the long absence of Stuart 's cavalry , as well as for the failure to assign a more active role to the cavalry left with the army . Stuart and his three best brigades were absent from the army during the crucial phase of the approach to Gettysburg and the first two days of battle . By June 29 , Lee 's army was strung out in an arc from Chambersburg ( 28 miles ( 45 km ) northwest of Gettysburg ) to Carlisle ( 30 miles ( 48 km ) north of Gettysburg ) to near Harrisburg and Wrightsville on the Susquehanna River . 
 In a dispute over the use of the forces defending the Harpers Ferry garrison , Hooker offered his resignation , and Abraham Lincoln and General @-@ in @-@ Chief Henry W. Halleck , who were looking for an excuse to get rid of him , immediately accepted . They replaced Hooker early on the morning of June 28 with Maj. Gen. George Gordon Meade , then commander of the V Corps . 
 On June 29 , when Lee learned that the Army of the Potomac had crossed the Potomac River , he ordered a concentration of his forces around Cashtown , located at the eastern base of South Mountain and eight miles ( 13 km ) west of Gettysburg . On June 30 , while part of Hill 's Corps was in Cashtown , one of Hill 's brigades , North Carolinians under Brig. Gen. J. Johnston Pettigrew , ventured toward Gettysburg . In his memoirs , Maj. Gen. Henry Heth , Pettigrew 's division commander , claimed that he sent Pettigrew to search for supplies in town — especially shoes . 
 When Pettigrew 's troops approached Gettysburg on June 30 , they noticed Union cavalry under Brig. Gen. John Buford arriving south of town , and Pettigrew returned to Cashtown without engaging them . When Pettigrew told Hill and Heth what he had seen , neither general believed that there was a substantial U.S. force in or near the town , suspecting that it had been only Pennsylvania militia . Despite General Lee 's order to avoid a general engagement until his entire army was concentrated , Hill decided to mount a significant reconnaissance in force the following morning to determine the size and strength of the enemy force in his front . Around 5 a.m. on Wednesday , July 1 , two brigades of Heth 's division advanced to Gettysburg . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 = = = Union = = = 
 The Army of the Potomac , initially under Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker ( Maj. Gen. George G. Meade replaced Hooker in command on June 28 ) , consisted of more than 100 @,@ 000 men in the following organization : 
 I Corps , commanded by Maj. Gen. John F. Reynolds , with divisions commanded by Brig. Gen. James S. Wadsworth , Brig. Gen. John C. Robinson , and Maj. Gen. Abner Doubleday . 
 II Corps , commanded by Maj. Gen. Winfield S. Hancock , with divisions commanded by Brig. Gens . John C. Caldwell , John Gibbon , and Alexander Hays . 
 III Corps , commanded by Maj. Gen. Daniel E. Sickles , with divisions commanded by Maj. Gen. David B. Birney and Maj. Gen. Andrew A. Humphreys . 
 V Corps , commanded by Maj. Gen. George Sykes ( George G. Meade until June 28 ) , with divisions commanded by Brig. Gens . James Barnes , Romeyn B. Ayres , and Samuel W. Crawford . 
 VI Corps , commanded by Maj. Gen. John Sedgwick , with divisions commanded by Brig. Gen. Horatio G. Wright , Brig. Gen. Albion P. Howe , and Maj. Gen. John Newton . 
 XI Corps , commanded by Maj. Gen. Oliver O. Howard , with divisions commanded by Brig. Gen. Francis C. Barlow , Brig. Gen. Adolph von Steinwehr , and Maj. Gen. Carl Schurz . 
 XII Corps , commanded by Maj. Gen. Henry W. Slocum , with divisions commanded by Brig. Gens . Alpheus S. Williams and John W. Geary . 
 Cavalry Corps , commanded by Maj. Gen. Alfred Pleasonton , with divisions commanded by Brig. Gens . John Buford , David McM . Gregg , and H. Judson Kilpatrick . 
 Artillery Reserve , commanded by Brig. Gen. Robert O. Tyler . ( The preeminent artillery officer at Gettysburg was Brig. Gen. Henry J. Hunt , chief of artillery on Meade 's staff . ) 
 During the advance on Gettysburg , Maj. Gen. Reynolds was in operational command of the left , or advanced , wing of the Army , consisting of the I , III , and XI Corps . Note that many other Union units ( not part of the Army of the Potomac ) were actively involved in the Gettysburg Campaign , but not directly involved in the Battle of Gettysburg . These included portions of the Union IV Corps , the militia and state troops of the Department of the Susquehanna , and various garrisons , including that at Harpers Ferry . 
 = = = Confederate = = = 
 In reaction to the death of Lt. Gen. Thomas J. " Stonewall " Jackson after Chancellorsville , Lee reorganized his Army of Northern Virginia ( 75 @,@ 000 men ) from two infantry corps into three . 
 First Corps , commanded by Lt. Gen. James Longstreet , with divisions commanded by Maj. Gens . Lafayette McLaws , George E. Pickett , and John Bell Hood . 
 Second Corps , commanded by Lt. Gen. Richard S. Ewell , with divisions commanded by Maj. Gens . Jubal A. Early , Edward " Allegheny " Johnson , and Robert E. Rodes . 
 Third Corps , commanded by Lt. Gen. A.P. Hill , with divisions commanded by Maj. Gens . Richard H. Anderson , Henry Heth , and W. Dorsey Pender . 
 Cavalry division , commanded by Maj. Gen. J.E.B. Stuart , with brigades commanded by Brig. Gens . Wade Hampton , Fitzhugh Lee , Beverly H. Robertson , Albert G. Jenkins , William E. " Grumble " Jones , and John D. Imboden , and Col. John R. Chambliss . 
 = = First day of battle = = 
 = = = Herr Ridge , McPherson Ridge and Seminary Ridge = = = 
 Anticipating that the Confederates would march on Gettysburg from the west on the morning of July 1 , Buford laid out his defenses on three ridges west of the town : Herr Ridge , McPherson Ridge and Seminary Ridge . These were appropriate terrain for a delaying action by his small cavalry division against superior Confederate infantry forces , meant to buy time awaiting the arrival of Union infantrymen who could occupy the strong defensive positions south of town at Cemetery Hill , Cemetery Ridge , and Culp 's Hill . Buford understood that if the Confederates could gain control of these heights , Meade 's army would have difficulty dislodging them . 
 Heth 's division advanced with two brigades forward , commanded by Brig. Gens . James J. Archer and Joseph R. Davis . They proceeded easterly in columns along the Chambersburg Pike . Three miles ( 5 km ) west of town , about 7 : 30 a.m. on July 1 , the two brigades met light resistance from vedettes of Union cavalry , and deployed into line . According to lore , the Union soldier to fire the first shot of the battle was Lt. Marcellus Jones . In 1886 Lt. Jones returned to Gettysburg to mark the spot where he fired the first shot with a monument . Eventually , Heth 's men reached dismounted troopers of Col. William Gamble 's cavalry brigade , who raised determined resistance and delaying tactics from behind fence posts with fire from their <unk> carbines . Still , by 10 : 20 a.m. , the Confederates had pushed the Union cavalrymen east to McPherson Ridge , when the vanguard of the I Corps ( Maj. Gen. John F. Reynolds ) finally arrived . 
 North of the pike , Davis gained a temporary success against Brig. Gen. Lysander Cutler 's brigade but was repulsed with heavy losses in an action around an unfinished railroad bed cut in the ridge . South of the pike , Archer 's brigade assaulted through Herbst ( also known as McPherson 's ) Woods . The U.S. Iron Brigade under Brig. Gen. Solomon Meredith enjoyed initial success against Archer , capturing several hundred men , including Archer himself . 
 General Reynolds was shot and killed early in the fighting while directing troop and artillery placements just to the east of the woods . Shelby Foote wrote that the Union cause lost a man considered by many to be " the best general in the army . " Maj. Gen. Abner Doubleday assumed command . Fighting in the Chambersburg Pike area lasted until about 12 : 30 p.m. It resumed around 2 : 30 p.m. , when Heth 's entire division engaged , adding the brigades of Pettigrew and Col. John M. Brockenbrough . 
 As Pettigrew 's North Carolina Brigade came on line , they flanked the 19th Indiana and drove the Iron Brigade back . The 26th North Carolina ( the largest regiment in the army with 839 men ) lost heavily , leaving the first day 's fight with around 212 men . By the end of the three @-@ day battle , they had about 152 men standing , the highest casualty percentage for one battle of any regiment , North or South . Slowly the Iron Brigade was pushed out of the woods toward Seminary Ridge . Hill added Maj. Gen. William Dorsey Pender 's division to the assault , and the I Corps was driven back through the grounds of the Lutheran Seminary and Gettysburg streets . 
 As the fighting to the west proceeded , two divisions of Ewell 's Second Corps , marching west toward Cashtown in accordance with Lee 's order for the army to concentrate in that vicinity , turned south on the Carlisle and Harrisburg roads toward Gettysburg , while the Union XI Corps ( Maj. Gen. Oliver O. Howard ) raced north on the Baltimore Pike and Taneytown Road . By early afternoon , the U.S. line ran in a semicircle west , north , and northeast of Gettysburg . 
 However , the U.S. did not have enough troops ; Cutler , who was deployed north of the Chambersburg Pike , had his right flank in the air . The leftmost division of the XI Corps was unable to deploy in time to strengthen the line , so Doubleday was forced to throw in reserve brigades to salvage his line . 
 Around 2 p.m. , the Confederate Second Corps divisions of Maj. Gens . Robert E. Rodes and Jubal Early assaulted and out @-@ flanked the Union I and XI Corps positions north and northwest of town . The Confederate brigades of Col. Edward A. O 'Neal and Brig. Gen. Alfred Iverson suffered severe losses assaulting the I Corps division of Brig. Gen. John C. Robinson south of Oak Hill . Early 's division profited from a blunder by Brig. Gen. Francis C. Barlow , when he advanced his XI Corps division to Blocher 's Knoll ( directly north of town and now known as Barlow 's Knoll ) ; this represented a salient in the corps line , susceptible to attack from multiple sides , and Early 's troops overran Barlow 's division , which constituted the right flank of the Union Army 's position . Barlow was wounded and captured in the attack . 
 As U.S. positions collapsed both north and west of town , Gen. Howard ordered a retreat to the high ground south of town at Cemetery Hill , where he had left the division of Brig. Gen. Adolph von Steinwehr in reserve . Maj. Gen. Winfield S. Hancock assumed command of the battlefield , sent by Meade when he heard that Reynolds had been killed . Hancock , commander of the II Corps and Meade 's most trusted subordinate , was ordered to take command of the field and to determine whether Gettysburg was an appropriate place for a major battle . Hancock told Howard , " I think this the strongest position by nature upon which to fight a battle that I ever saw . " When Howard agreed , Hancock concluded the discussion : " Very well , sir , I select this as the battle @-@ field . " Hancock 's determination had a morale @-@ boosting effect on the retreating Union soldiers , but he played no direct tactical role on the first day . 
 General Lee understood the defensive potential to the Union if they held this high ground . He sent orders to Ewell that Cemetery Hill be taken " if practicable . " Ewell , who had previously served under Stonewall Jackson , a general well known for issuing peremptory orders , determined such an assault was not practicable and , thus , did not attempt it ; this decision is considered by historians to be a great missed opportunity . 
 The first day at Gettysburg , more significant than simply a prelude to the bloody second and third days , ranks as the 23rd biggest battle of the war by number of troops engaged . About one quarter of Meade 's army ( 22 @,@ 000 men ) and one third of Lee 's army ( 27 @,@ 000 ) were engaged . 
 = = Second day of battle = = 
 = = = Plans and movement to battle = = = 
 Throughout the evening of July 1 and morning of July 2 , most of the remaining infantry of both armies arrived on the field , including the Union II , III , V , VI , and XII Corps . Longstreet 's third division , commanded by Maj. Gen. George Pickett , had begun the march from Chambersburg early in the morning ; it did not arrive until late on July 2 . 
 The Union line ran from Culp 's Hill southeast of the town , northwest to Cemetery Hill just south of town , then south for nearly two miles ( 3 km ) along Cemetery Ridge , terminating just north of Little Round Top . Most of the XII Corps was on Culp 's Hill ; the remnants of I and XI Corps defended Cemetery Hill ; II Corps covered most of the northern half of Cemetery Ridge ; and III Corps was ordered to take up a position to its flank . The shape of the Union line is popularly described as a " fishhook " formation . The Confederate line paralleled the Union line about a mile ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) to the west on Seminary Ridge , ran east through the town , then curved southeast to a point opposite Culp 's Hill . Thus , the Union army had interior lines , while the Confederate line was nearly five miles ( 8 km ) long . 
 Lee 's battle plan for July 2 called for Longstreet 's First Corps to position itself stealthily to attack the Union left flank , facing northeast <unk> the Emmitsburg Road , and to roll up the <unk> The attack sequence was to begin with Maj. Gens . John Bell Hood 's and Lafayette McLaws 's divisions , followed by Maj. Gen. Richard H. Anderson 's division of Hill 's Third Corps . The progressive en echelon sequence of this attack would prevent Meade from shifting troops from his center to bolster his left . At the same time , Maj. Gen. Edward " Allegheny " Johnson 's and Jubal Early 's Second Corps divisions were to make a demonstration against Culp 's and Cemetery Hills ( again , to prevent the shifting of U.S. troops ) , and to turn the demonstration into a full @-@ scale attack if a favorable opportunity presented itself . 
 Lee 's plan , however , was based on faulty intelligence , exacerbated by Stuart 's continued absence from the battlefield . Instead of moving beyond the U.S. left and attacking their flank , Longstreet 's left division , under McLaws , would face Maj. Gen. Daniel Sickles 's III Corps directly in their path . Sickles had been dissatisfied with the position assigned him on the southern end of Cemetery Ridge . Seeing higher ground more favorable to artillery positions a half mile ( 800 m ) to the west , he advanced his corps — without orders — to the slightly higher ground along the Emmitsburg Road . The new line ran from Devil 's Den , northwest to the <unk> farm 's Peach Orchard , then northeast along the Emmitsburg Road to south of the Codori farm . This created an untenable salient at the Peach Orchard ; Brig. Gen. Andrew A. Humphreys 's division ( in position along the Emmitsburg Road ) and Maj. Gen. David B. Birney 's division ( to the south ) were subject to attacks from two sides and were spread out over a longer front than their small corps could defend effectively . 
 Longstreet 's attack was to be made as early as practicable ; however , Longstreet got permission from Lee to await the arrival of one of his brigades , and while marching to the assigned position , his men came within sight of a Union signal station on Little Round Top . <unk> to avoid detection wasted much time , and Hood 's and McLaws 's divisions did not launch their attacks until just after 4 p.m. and 5 p.m. , respectively . 
 = = = Attacks on the Union left flank = = = 
 As Longstreet 's divisions slammed into the Union III Corps , Meade was forced to send 20 @,@ 000 reinforcements in the form of the entire V Corps , Brig. Gen. John C. Caldwell 's division of the II Corps , most of the XII Corps , and small portions of the newly arrived VI Corps . The Confederate assault deviated from Lee 's plan since Hood 's division moved more to the east than intended , losing its alignment with the Emmitsburg Road , attacking Devil 's Den and Little Round Top . McLaws , coming in on Hood 's left , drove multiple attacks into the thinly stretched III Corps in the Wheatfield and overwhelmed them in <unk> 's Peach Orchard . McLaws 's attack eventually reached Plum Run Valley ( the " Valley of Death " ) before being beaten back by the Pennsylvania Reserves division of the V Corps , moving down from Little Round Top . The III Corps was virtually destroyed as a combat unit in this battle , and Sickles 's leg was amputated after it was shattered by a cannonball . Caldwell 's division was destroyed piecemeal in the Wheatfield . Anderson 's division , coming from McLaws 's left and starting forward around 6 p.m. , reached the crest of Cemetery Ridge , but it could not hold the position in the face of counterattacks from the II Corps , including an almost suicidal bayonet charge by the small 1st Minnesota regiment against a Confederate brigade , ordered in desperation by Hancock to buy time for reinforcements to arrive . 
 As fighting raged in the Wheatfield and Devil 's Den , Col. Strong Vincent of V Corps had a precarious hold on Little Round Top , an important hill at the extreme left of the Union line . His brigade of four relatively small regiments was able to resist repeated assaults by Brig. Gen. Evander M. Law 's brigade of Hood 's division . Meade 's chief engineer , Brig. Gen. Gouverneur K. Warren , had realized the importance of this position , and dispatched Vincent 's brigade , an artillery battery , and the 140th New York to occupy Little Round Top mere minutes before Hood 's troops arrived . The defense of Little Round Top with a bayonet charge by the 20th Maine , initiated by Lt. Holman S. Melcher , was one of the most fabled episodes in the Civil War and propelled Col. Joshua L. Chamberlain into prominence after the war . 
 = = = Attacks on the Union right flank = = = 
 About 7 : 00 p.m. , the Second Corps ' attack by Johnson 's division on Culp 's Hill got off to a late start . Most of the hill 's defenders , the Union XII Corps , had been sent to the left to defend against Longstreet 's attacks , and the only portion of the corps remaining on the hill was a brigade of New Yorkers under Brig. Gen. George S. Greene . Because of Greene 's insistence on constructing strong defensive works , and with reinforcements from the I and XI Corps , Greene 's men held off the Confederate attackers , although the Southerners did capture a portion of the abandoned U.S. works on the lower part of Culp 's Hill . 
 Just at dark , two of Jubal Early 's brigades attacked the Union XI Corps positions on East Cemetery Hill where Col. Andrew L. Harris of the 2nd Brigade , 1st Division , came under a withering attack , losing half his men ; however , Early failed to support his brigades in their attack , and Ewell 's remaining division , that of Maj. Gen. Robert E. Rodes , failed to aid Early 's attack by moving against Cemetery Hill from the west . The Union army 's interior lines enabled its commanders to shift troops quickly to critical areas , and with reinforcements from II Corps , the U.S. troops retained possession of East Cemetery Hill , and Early 's brigades were forced to withdraw . 
 Jeb Stuart and his three cavalry brigades arrived in Gettysburg around noon but had no role in the second day 's battle . Brig. Gen. Wade Hampton 's brigade fought a minor engagement with newly promoted 23 @-@ year @-@ old Brig. Gen. George Armstrong Custer 's Michigan cavalry near <unk> to the northeast of Gettysburg . 
 = = Third day of battle = = 
 = = = Lee 's plan = = = 
 General Lee wished to renew the attack on Friday , July 3 , using the same basic plan as the previous day : Longstreet would attack the U.S. left , while Ewell attacked Culp 's Hill . However , before Longstreet was ready , Union XII Corps troops started a dawn artillery bombardment against the Confederates on Culp 's Hill in an effort to regain a portion of their lost works . The Confederates attacked , and the second fight for Culp 's Hill ended around 11 a.m. Harry Pfanz judged that , after some seven hours of bitter combat , " the Union line was intact and held more strongly than before . " 
 Lee was forced to change his plans . Longstreet would command Pickett 's Virginia division of his own First Corps , plus six brigades from Hill 's Corps , in an attack on the U.S. II Corps position at the right center of the Union line on Cemetery Ridge . Prior to the attack , all the artillery the Confederacy could bring to bear on the U.S. positions would bombard and weaken the enemy 's line . 
 = = = The largest artillery bombardment of the war = = = 
 Around 1 p.m. , from 150 to 170 Confederate guns began an artillery bombardment that was probably the largest of the war . In order to save valuable ammunition for the infantry attack that they knew would follow , the Army of the Potomac 's artillery , under the command of Brig. Gen. Henry Jackson Hunt , at first did not return the enemy 's fire . After waiting about 15 minutes , about 80 U.S. cannons added to the din . The Army of Northern Virginia was critically low on artillery ammunition , and the cannonade did not significantly affect the Union position . 
 = = = Pickett 's Charge = = = 
 Around 3 p.m. , the cannon fire subsided , and 12 @,@ 500 Southern soldiers stepped from the ridgeline and advanced the three @-@ quarters of a mile ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) to Cemetery Ridge in what is known to history as " Pickett 's Charge " . As the Confederates approached , there was fierce flanking artillery fire from Union positions on Cemetery Hill and north of Little Round Top , and musket and canister fire from Hancock 's II Corps . In the Union center , the commander of artillery had held fire during the Confederate bombardment ( in order to save it for the infantry assault , which Meade had correctly predicted the day before ) , leading Southern commanders to believe the Northern cannon batteries had been knocked out . However , they opened fire on the Confederate infantry during their approach with devastating results . Nearly one half of the attackers did not return to their own lines . Although the U.S. line wavered and broke temporarily at a jog called the " Angle " in a low stone fence , just north of a patch of vegetation called the Copse of Trees , reinforcements rushed into the breach , and the Confederate attack was repulsed . The farthest advance of Brig. Gen. Lewis A. Armistead 's brigade of Maj. Gen. George Pickett 's division at the Angle is referred to as the " High @-@ water mark of the Confederacy " , arguably representing the closest the South ever came to its goal of achieving independence from the Union via military victory . Union and Confederate soldiers locked in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , attacking with their rifles , bayonets , rocks and even their bare hands . Armistead ordered his Confederates to turn two captured cannons against Union troops , but discovered that there was no ammunition left , the last double canister shots having been used against the charging Confederates . Armistead was shortly after wounded three times . 
 There were two significant cavalry engagements on July 3 . Stuart was sent to guard the Confederate left flank and was to be prepared to exploit any success the infantry might achieve on Cemetery Hill by flanking the U.S. right and hitting their trains and lines of communications . Three miles ( 5 km ) east of Gettysburg , in what is now called " East Cavalry Field " ( not shown on the accompanying map , but between the York and Hanover Roads ) , Stuart 's forces collided with U.S. cavalry : Brig. Gen. David McMurtrie Gregg 's division and Brig. Gen. Custer 's brigade . A lengthy mounted battle , including hand @-@ to @-@ hand sabre combat , ensued . Custer 's charge , leading the 1st Michigan Cavalry , blunted the attack by Wade Hampton 's brigade , blocking Stuart from achieving his objectives in the U.S. rear . Meanwhile , after hearing news of the day 's victory , Brig. Gen. Judson Kilpatrick launched a cavalry attack against the infantry positions of Longstreet 's Corps southwest of Big Round Top . Brig. Gen. Elon J. Farnsworth protested against the futility of such a move , but obeyed orders . Farnsworth was killed in the attack , and his brigade suffered significant losses . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 The two armies suffered between 46 @,@ 000 and 51 @,@ 000 casualties . Union casualties were 23 @,@ 055 ( 3 @,@ 155 killed , 14 @,@ 531 wounded , 5 @,@ 369 captured or missing ) , while Confederate casualties are more difficult to estimate . Many authors have referred to as many as 28 @,@ 000 Confederate casualties , and Busey and Martin 's more recent 2005 work , Regimental <unk> and Losses at Gettysburg , documents 23 @,@ 231 ( 4 @,@ 708 killed , 12 @,@ 693 wounded , 5 @,@ 830 captured or missing ) . Nearly a third of Lee 's general officers were killed , wounded , or captured . The casualties for both sides during the entire campaign were 57 @,@ 225 . 
 The following tables summarize casualties by corps for the Union and Confederate forces during the three @-@ day battle . 
 Bruce Catton wrote , " The town of Gettysburg looked as if some universal moving day had been interrupted by catastrophe . " But there was only one documented civilian death during the battle : Ginnie Wade ( also widely known as Jennie ) , 20 years old , was hit by a stray bullet that passed through her kitchen in town while she was making bread . Nearly 8 @,@ 000 had been killed outright ; these bodies , lying in the hot summer sun , needed to be buried quickly . Over 3 @,@ 000 horse carcasses were burned in a series of piles south of town ; townsfolk became violently ill from the stench . 
 = = = Confederate retreat = = = 
 The armies stared at one another in a heavy rain across the bloody fields on July 4 , the same day that the Vicksburg garrison surrendered to Maj. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant . Lee had reformed his lines into a defensive position on Seminary Ridge the night of July 3 , evacuating the town of Gettysburg . The Confederates remained on the battlefield , hoping that Meade would attack , but the cautious Union commander decided against the risk , a decision for which he would later be criticized . Both armies began to collect their remaining wounded and bury some of the dead . A proposal by Lee for a prisoner exchange was rejected by Meade . 
 Lee started his Army of Northern Virginia in motion late the evening of July 4 towards Fairfield and Chambersburg . Cavalry under Brig. Gen. John D. Imboden was entrusted to escort the miles @-@ long wagon train of supplies and wounded men that Lee wanted to take back to Virginia with him , using the route through Cashtown and Hagerstown to Williamsport , Maryland . Meade 's army followed , although the pursuit was half @-@ spirited . The recently rain @-@ swollen Potomac trapped Lee 's army on the north bank of the river for a time , but when the Union troops finally caught up , the Confederates had forded the river . The rear @-@ guard action at Falling Waters on July 14 added some more names to the long casualty lists , including General Pettigrew , who was mortally wounded . 
 In a brief letter to Maj. Gen. Henry W. Halleck written on July 7 , Lincoln remarked on the two major Union victories at Gettysburg and Vicksburg . He continued : 
 Now , if Gen. Meade can complete his work so gloriously prosecuted thus far , by the literal or substantial destruction of Lee 's army , the rebellion will be over . 
 Halleck then relayed the contents of Lincoln 's letter to Meade in a telegram . Despite repeated pleas from Lincoln and Halleck , which continued over the next week , Meade did not pursue Lee 's army aggressively enough to destroy it before it crossed back over the Potomac River to safety in the South . The campaign continued into Virginia with light engagements until July 23 , in the minor Battle of Manassas Gap , after which Meade abandoned any attempts at pursuit and the two armies took up positions across from each other on the Rappahannock River . 
 = = = Union reaction to the news of the victory = = = 
 The news of the Union victory electrified the North . A headline in The Philadelphia Inquirer proclaimed " <unk> ! <unk> <unk> ! " New York diarist George Templeton Strong wrote : 
 The results of this victory are priceless . ... The charm of Robert E. Lee 's invincibility is broken . The Army of the Potomac has at last found a general that can handle it , and has stood nobly up to its terrible work in spite of its long disheartening list of hard @-@ fought failures . ... Copperheads are palsied and dumb for the moment at least . ... Government is strengthened four @-@ fold at home and abroad . 
 However , the Union enthusiasm soon dissipated as the public realized that Lee 's army had escaped destruction and the war would continue . Lincoln complained to Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles that " Our army held the war in the hollow of their hand and they would not close it ! " Brig. Gen. Alexander S. Webb wrote to his father on July 17 , stating that such Washington politicians as " Chase , Seward and others , " disgusted with Meade , " write to me that Lee really won that Battle ! " 
 = = = Effect on the Confederacy = = = 
 In fact , the Confederates had lost militarily and also politically . During the final hours of the battle , Confederate Vice President Alexander Stephens was approaching the Union lines at Norfolk , Virginia , under a flag of truce . Although his formal instructions from Confederate President Jefferson Davis had limited his powers to negotiate on prisoner exchanges and other procedural matters , historian James M. McPherson speculates that he had informal goals of presenting peace overtures . Davis had hoped that Stephens would reach Washington from the south while Lee 's victorious army was marching toward it from the north . President Lincoln , upon hearing of the Gettysburg results , refused Stephens 's request to pass through the lines . Furthermore , when the news reached London , any lingering hopes of European recognition of the Confederacy were finally abandoned . Henry Adams wrote , " The disasters of the rebels are unredeemed by even any hope of success . It is now conceded that all idea of intervention is at an end . " 
 The immediate reaction of the Southern military and public sectors was that Gettysburg was a setback , not a disaster . The sentiment was that Lee had been successful on July 1 and had fought a valiant battle on July 2 – 3 , but could not dislodge the Union Army from the strong defensive position to which it fled . The Confederates successfully stood their ground on July 4 and withdrew only after they realized Meade would not attack them . The withdrawal to the Potomac that could have been a disaster was handled masterfully . Furthermore , the Army of the Potomac had been kept away from Virginia farmlands for the summer and all predicted that Meade would be too timid to threaten them for the rest of the year . Lee himself had a positive view of the campaign , writing to his wife that the army had returned " rather sooner than I had originally contemplated , but having accomplished what I proposed on leaving the Rappahannock , viz . , relieving the Valley of the presence of the enemy and drawing his Army north of the Potomac . " He was quoted as saying to Maj. John Seddon , brother of the Confederate secretary of war , " Sir , we did whip them at Gettysburg , and it will be seen for the next six months that that army will be as quiet as a sucking dove . " Some Southern publications , such as the Charleston Mercury , criticized Lee 's actions in the campaign and on August 8 he offered his resignation to President Davis , who quickly rejected it . 
 Gettysburg became a postbellum focus of the " Lost Cause " , a movement by writers such as Edward A. Pollard and Jubal Early to explain the reasons for the Confederate defeat in the war . A fundamental premise of their argument was that the South was doomed because of the overwhelming advantage in manpower and industrial might possessed by the North . However , they claim it also suffered because Robert E. Lee , who up until this time had been almost invincible , was betrayed by the failures of some of his key subordinates at Gettysburg : Ewell , for failing to seize Cemetery Hill on July 1 ; Stuart , for depriving the army of cavalry intelligence for a key part of the campaign ; and especially Longstreet , for failing to attack on July 2 as early and as forcefully as Lee had originally intended . In this view , Gettysburg was seen as a great lost opportunity , in which a decisive victory by Lee could have meant the end of the war in the Confederacy 's favor . 
 = = = Gettysburg Address = = = 
 The ravages of war were still evident in Gettysburg more than four months later when , on November 19 , the Soldiers ' National Cemetery was dedicated . During this ceremony , President Abraham Lincoln honored the fallen and redefined the purpose of the war in his historic Gettysburg Address . 
 = = Historical assessment = = 
 = = = Decisive victory controversies = = = 
 The nature of the result of the Battle of Gettysburg has been the subject of controversy for years . Although not seen as overwhelmingly significant at the time , particularly since the war continued for almost two years , in retrospect it has often been cited as the " turning point " , usually in combination with the fall of Vicksburg the following day . This is based on the observation that after Gettysburg Lee 's army conducted no more strategic offensives — his army merely reacted to the initiative of Ulysses S. Grant in 1864 and 1865 — and by the speculative viewpoint of the Lost Cause writers that a Confederate victory at Gettysburg might have resulted in the end of the war . 
 It is currently a widely held view that Gettysburg was a decisive victory for the Union , but the term is considered imprecise . It is <unk> that Lee 's offensive on July 3 was turned back decisively and his campaign in Pennsylvania was terminated prematurely ( although the Confederates at the time argued that this was a temporary setback and that the goals of the campaign were largely met ) . However , when the more common definition of " decisive victory " is intended — an indisputable military victory of a battle that determines or significantly influences the ultimate result of a conflict — historians are divided . For example , David J. Eicher called Gettysburg a " strategic loss for the Confederacy " and James M. McPherson wrote that " Lee and his men would go on to earn further laurels . But they never again possessed the power and reputation they carried into Pennsylvania those <unk> summer days of 1863 . " 
 However , Herman Hattaway and Archer Jones wrote that the " strategic impact of the Battle of Gettysburg was ... fairly limited . " Steven E. Woodworth wrote that " Gettysburg proved only the near impossibility of decisive action in the Eastern theater . " Edwin Coddington pointed out the heavy toll on the Army of the Potomac and that " after the battle Meade no longer possessed a truly effective instrument for the accomplishments of his task . The army needed a thorough reorganization with new commanders and fresh troops , but these changes were not made until Grant appeared on the scene in March 1864 . " Joseph T. <unk> wrote that " Lost opportunities and near successes plagued the Army of Northern Virginia during its Northern invasion , " yet after Gettysburg , " without the distractions of duty as an invading force , without the breakdown of discipline , the Army of Northern Virginia [ remained ] an extremely formidable force . " Ed <unk> wrote , " Lee 's invasion of the North had been a costly failure . Nevertheless , at best the Army of the Potomac had simply preserved the strategic stalemate in the Eastern Theater ... " 
 Peter Carmichael refers to the military context for the armies , the " horrendous losses at Chancellorsville and Gettysburg , which effectively destroyed Lee 's offensive capacity , " implying that these cumulative losses were not the result of a single battle . Thomas Goss , writing in the U.S. Army 's Military Review journal on the definition of " decisive " and the application of that description to Gettysburg , concludes : " For all that was decided and accomplished , the Battle of Gettysburg fails to earn the label ' decisive battle ' . " The military historian John Keegan agrees . Gettysburg was a landmark battle , the largest of the war and it would not be surpassed . The Union had restored to it the belief in certain victory , and the loss dispirited the Confederacy . If " not exactly a decisive battle " , Gettysburg was the end of Confederate use of Northern Virginia as a military buffer zone , the setting for Grant 's Overland Campaign . 
 = = = Lee vs. Meade = = = 
 Prior to Gettysburg , Robert E. Lee had established a reputation as an almost invincible general , achieving stunning victories against superior numbers — although usually at the cost of high casualties to his army — during the Seven Days , the Northern Virginia Campaign ( including the Second Battle of Bull Run ) , Fredericksburg , and Chancellorsville . Only the Maryland Campaign , with its tactically inconclusive Battle of Antietam , had been less than successful . Therefore , historians have attempted to explain how Lee 's winning streak was interrupted so dramatically at Gettysburg . Although the issue is tainted by attempts to portray history and Lee 's reputation in a manner supporting different partisan goals , the major factors in Lee 's loss arguably can be attributed to : ( 1 ) his overconfidence in the invincibility of his men ; ( 2 ) the performance of his subordinates , and his management thereof ; ( 3 ) his failing health , and ( 4 ) the performance of his opponent , George G. Meade , and the Army of the Potomac . 
 Throughout the campaign , Lee was influenced by the belief that his men were invincible ; most of Lee 's experiences with the Army of Northern Virginia had convinced him of this , including the great victory at Chancellorsville in early May and the rout of the Union troops at Gettysburg on July 1 . Since morale plays an important role in military victory when other factors are equal , Lee did not want to dampen his army 's desire to fight and resisted suggestions , principally by Longstreet , to withdraw from the recently captured Gettysburg to select a ground more favorable to his army . War correspondent Peter W. Alexander wrote that Lee " acted , probably , under the impression that his troops were able to carry any position however formidable . If such was the case , he committed an error , such however as the ablest commanders will sometimes fall into . " Lee himself concurred with this judgment , writing to President Davis , " No blame can be attached to the army for its failure to accomplish what was projected by me , nor should it be censured for the unreasonable expectations of the public — I am alone to blame , in perhaps expecting too much of its prowess and valor . " 
 The most controversial assessments of the battle involve the performance of Lee 's subordinates . The dominant theme of the Lost Cause writers and many other historians is that Lee 's senior generals failed him in crucial ways , directly causing the loss of the battle ; the alternative viewpoint is that Lee did not manage his subordinates adequately , and did not thereby compensate for their shortcomings . Two of his corps commanders — Richard S. Ewell and A.P. Hill — had only recently been promoted and were not fully accustomed to Lee 's style of command , in which he provided only general objectives and guidance to their former commander , Stonewall Jackson ; Jackson translated these into detailed , specific orders to his division commanders . All four of Lee 's principal commanders received criticism during the campaign and battle : 
 James Longstreet suffered most severely from the wrath of the Lost Cause authors , not the least because he directly criticized Lee in postbellum writings and became a Republican after the war . His critics accuse him of attacking much later than Lee intended on July 2 , squandering a chance to hit the Union Army before its defensive positions had firmed up . They also question his lack of motivation to attack strongly on July 2 and 3 because he had argued that the army should have maneuvered to a place where it would force Meade to attack them . The alternative view is that Lee was in close contact with Longstreet during the battle , agreed to delays on the morning of July 2 , and never criticized Longstreet 's performance . ( There is also considerable speculation about what an attack might have looked like before Dan Sickles moved the III Corps toward the Peach Orchard . ) 
 J.E.B. Stuart deprived Lee of cavalry intelligence during a good part of the campaign by taking his three best brigades on a path away from the army 's . This arguably led to Lee 's surprise at Hooker 's vigorous pursuit ; the meeting engagement on July 1 that escalated into the full battle prematurely ; and it also prevented Lee from understanding the full disposition of the enemy on July 2 . The disagreements regarding Stuart 's culpability for the situation originate in the relatively vague orders issued by Lee , but most modern historians agree that both generals were responsible to some extent for the failure of the cavalry 's mission early in the campaign . 
 Richard S. Ewell has been universally criticized for failing to seize the high ground on the afternoon of July 1 . Once again the disagreement centers on Lee 's orders , which provided general guidance for Ewell to act " if practicable . " Many historians speculate that Stonewall Jackson , if he had survived Chancellorsville , would have aggressively seized Culp 's Hill , rendering Cemetery Hill indefensible , and changing the entire complexion of the battle . A differently worded order from Lee might have made the difference with this subordinate . 
 A.P. Hill has received some criticism for his ineffective performance . His actions caused the battle to begin and then escalate on July 1 , despite Lee 's orders not to bring on a general engagement ( although historians point out that Hill kept Lee well informed of his actions during the day ) . However , Hill 's illness minimized his personal involvement in the remainder of the battle , and Lee took the explicit step of removing troops from Hill 's corps and giving them to Longstreet for Pickett 's Charge . 
 In addition to Hill 's illness , Lee 's performance was affected by heart troubles , which would eventually lead to his death in 1870 ; he had been diagnosed with pericarditis by his staff physicians in March 1863 , though modern doctors believe he had in fact suffered a heart attack . He wrote to Jefferson Davis that his physical condition prevented him from offering full supervision in the field , and said , " I am so dull that in making use of the eyes of others I am frequently misled . " 
 As a final factor , Lee faced a new and formidable opponent in George G. Meade , and the Army of the Potomac fought well on its home territory . Although new to his army command , Meade deployed his forces relatively effectively ; relied on strong subordinates such as Winfield S. Hancock to make decisions where and when they were needed ; took great advantage of defensive positions ; nimbly shifted defensive resources on interior lines to parry strong threats ; and , unlike some of his predecessors , stood his ground throughout the battle in the face of fierce Confederate attacks . Lee was quoted before the battle as saying Meade " would commit no blunders on my front and if I make one ... will make haste to take advantage of it . " That prediction proved to be correct at Gettysburg . Stephen Sears wrote , " The fact of the matter is that George G. Meade , unexpectedly and against all odds , thoroughly <unk> Robert E. Lee at Gettysburg . " Edwin B. Coddington wrote that the soldiers of the Army of the Potomac received a " sense of triumph which grew into an imperishable faith in [ themselves ] . The men knew what they could do under an extremely competent general ; one of lesser ability and courage could well have lost the battle . " 
 Meade had his own detractors as well . Similar to the situation with Lee , Meade suffered partisan attacks about his performance at Gettysburg , but he had the misfortune of experiencing them in person . Supporters of his predecessor , Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker , lambasted Meade before the U.S. Congress 's Joint Committee on the Conduct of the War , where Radical Republicans suspected that Meade was a Copperhead and tried in vain to relieve him from command . Daniel E. Sickles and Daniel Butterfield accused Meade of planning to retreat from Gettysburg during the battle . Most politicians , including Lincoln , criticized Meade for what they considered to be his half @-@ hearted pursuit of Lee after the battle . A number of Meade 's most competent subordinates — Winfield S. Hancock , John Gibbon , Gouverneur K. Warren , and Henry J. Hunt , all heroes of the battle — defended Meade in print , but Meade was embittered by the overall experience . 
 = = Battlefield preservation = = 
 Today , the Gettysburg National Cemetery and Gettysburg National Military Park are maintained by the U.S. National Park Service as two of the nation 's most revered historical landmarks . Although Gettysburg is one of the best known of all Civil War battlefields , it too faces threats to its preservation and interpretation . Many historically significant locations on the battlefield lie outside the boundaries of Gettysburg National Military Park and are vulnerable to residential or commercial development . 
 On July 20 , 2009 , a Comfort Inn and Suites opened on Cemetery Hill , adjacent to Evergreen Cemetery , just one of many modern edifices infringing on the historic field . The Baltimore Pike corridor attracts development that concerns preservationists . 
 Some preservation successes have emerged in recent years . Two proposals to open a casino at Gettysburg were defeated in 2006 and most recently in 2011 , when public pressure forced the Pennsylvania Gaming Control Board to reject the proposed gambling hub at the intersection of Routes 15 and 30 , near East Cavalry Field . The Civil War Trust also successfully purchased and transferred 95 acres at the former site of the Gettysburg Country Club to the control of the U.S. Department of the Interior in 2011 . 
 Less than half of the over 11 @,@ 500 acres on the old Gettysburg Battlefield have been preserved for posterity thus far . The Civil War Trust has preserved 815 acres around the site , some of which is now part of the 4 @,@ 998 acres of Gettysburg National Military Park . 
 = = Commemoration in U.S. postage and coinage = = 
 During the Civil War Centennial , the U.S. Post Office issued five postage stamps commemorating the 100th anniversaries of famous battles , as they occurred over a four @-@ year period , beginning with the Battle of Fort Sumter Centennial issue of 1961 . The Battle of Shiloh commemorative stamp was issued in 1962 , the Battle of Gettysburg in 1963 , the Battle of the Wilderness in 1964 , and the Appomattox Centennial commemorative stamp in 1965 . 
 A commemorative half dollar for the battle was produced in 1936 . As was typical for the period , mintage was very low , just 26 @,@ 928 . On January 24 , 2011 , the America the Beautiful quarters released a 25 @-@ cent coin commemorating Gettysburg National Military Park and the Battle of Gettysburg . The reverse side of the coin depicts the monument on Cemetery Ridge to the 72nd Pennsylvania Infantry . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Film records survive of two Gettysburg reunions , held on the battlefield . At the 50th anniversary ( 1913 ) , veterans re @-@ enacted Pickett 's Charge in a spirit of reconciliation , a meeting that carried great emotional force for both sides . At the 75th anniversary ( 1938 ) , 2500 veterans attended , and there was a ceremonial mass hand @-@ shake across a stone wall . This was recorded on sound film , and some Confederates can be heard giving the Rebel Yell . 
 Iced Earth 's three @-@ part song cycle " Gettysburg " , published in 2004 , dramatizes the battle . 
 The Battle of Gettysburg was depicted in the 1993 film Gettysburg , based on Michael Shaara 's 1974 novel The Killer Angels . The film and novel focused primarily on the actions of Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain , John Buford , Robert E. Lee , and James Longstreet during the battle . The first day focused on Buford 's cavalry defense , the second day on Chamberlain 's defense at Little Round Top , and the third day on Pickett 's Charge . 
 The south winning the Battle of Gettysburg is a popular premise for a point of divergence in American Civil War alternate histories . Here are some examples which either depict or make significant reference to an alternate Battle of Gettysburg ( sometimes simply inserting fantasy or sci @-@ fi elements in an account of the battle ) : 
 Novels : Bring the Jubilee by Ward Moore ; If the South Had Won the Civil War by <unk> Kantor ; Civil War Trilogy ( Gettysburg , Grant Comes East , Never Call Retreat ) by Newt Gingrich , William R. Forstchen , and Albert S. <unk> ; Stonewall Jackson at Gettysburg by Douglas Lee <unk> ; By Force of Arms by Billy Bennett . Also : Harry Turtledove 's Southern Victory series has an analogous battle taking place at Camp Hill , another southeast Pennsylvania town . 
 Short fiction : " If Lee Had NOT Won the Battle of Gettysburg " by Winston Churchill in If It Had Happened Otherwise and If , or History <unk> , " Sidewise in Time " by Murray Leinster in various collections , " A Hard Day for Mother " by William R. Forstchen in Alternate Generals 1 , " An Old Man 's Summer " by Esther <unk> also in AG 1 , " If the Lost Order Hadn 't Been Lost " by James M. McPherson in What If ? and What <unk> ? of American History , " East of Appomattox " by Lee Allred in Alternate Generals 3 . Also : In " Maureen Birnbaum on the Art of War " ( tribute to <unk> ) within George Alec <unk> 's sword and sorcery spoof Maureen Birnbaum , Barbarian <unk> , two armies in a post @-@ apocalyptic world fight a battle at the Gettysburg site sometime in our distant future . 
 Film and television : The Time Tunnel episode 25 " The Death Merchant , " Twin Peaks Season 2 ( as a play within a play acted out by characters in the 1990s ) , C.S.A. : The Confederate States of America , Abraham Lincoln : Vampire Hunter . 
 Ultimate General : Gettysburg is a tactical battle simulator video game released in October 2014 that allows the user to lead thousands of soldiers in the Battle of Gettysburg . It was developed by Game Labs and designed by the creator of " <unk> " ( a series of mods that improve AI in the Total War games ) and one of the most celebrated modders in the Total War modding community . 
 = = = Memoirs and primary sources = = = 
 Paris , Louis @-@ Philippe @-@ Albert d 'Orléans . The Battle of Gettysburg : A History of the Civil War in America . Digital Scanning , Inc . , 1999 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 066 @-@ 0 . First published 1869 by Germer <unk> . 
 New York ( State ) , William F. Fox , and Daniel Edgar Sickles . New York at Gettysburg : Final Report on the Battlefield of Gettysburg . Albany , NY : J.B. Lyon Company , Printers , 1900 . OCLC <unk> . 
 U.S. War Department , The War of the Rebellion : a Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies . Washington , DC : U.S. Government Printing Office , 1880 – 1901 . 
 = Bryce Dallas Howard = 
 Bryce Dallas Howard ( born March 2 , 1981 ) is an American actress , filmmaker , and writer . She made her acting debut as an extra in her father Ron Howard 's film Parenthood ( 1989 ) and went on to have small roles in films and make stage appearances for the next several years . During this time , Howard also attended New York University 's Tisch School of the Arts , later receiving a BFA and moving on to professional drama schools . After she came to the attention of M. Night Shyamalan , he cast her in what would be her breakout film , the psychological thriller The Village ( 2004 ) and then in the fantasy thriller Lady in the Water ( 2006 ) . Her performance in As You Like It ( 2006 ) , directed by Kenneth Branagh and based on the play of the same name by William Shakespeare , earned her a Golden Globe Award nomination . In 2006 , she co @-@ wrote and directed the short film Orchids . 
 Howard became more recognizable to audiences as Victoria in The Twilight Saga : Eclipse ( 2010 ) . This project , as well as Terminator Salvation ( 2009 ) , was financially successful , but both films garnered mixed reviews from the press . In 2011 , she had supporting roles in 50 / 50 and The Help . She also played a lead role , Claire Dearing , in the science fiction adventure film Jurassic World ( 2015 ) , the fourth installment in the Jurassic Park film series and her most financially successful film to date . She has signed on to reprise her role in the sequel to Jurassic World . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Howard was born in Los Angeles , California , to writer Cheryl Howard Crew ( née Alley ) and actor @-@ director Ron Howard , on March 2 , 1981 . Through her father , she is a granddaughter of actors Rance Howard ( born Harold Rance <unk> ) and Jean <unk> Howard and a niece of actor Clint Howard . Her godfather is actor Henry Winkler , who co @-@ starred on Happy Days with her father . 
 She has two younger sisters , twins Jocelyn and Paige ( born 1985 ) , and a younger brother named Reed ( born 1987 ) . All of the Howard children were raised away from the world of show business . Their parents did not allow them access to television and instead encouraged outdoor activities and hobbies . At the age of 7 , however , she was allowed to be an extra in her father 's movies . In an appearance on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , she mentioned that she and her siblings were babysat by family friend Tom Cruise on several occasions . She was raised in Westchester County , New York and on a farm in Greenwich , Connecticut . 
 Howard attended <unk> Manor , a performing arts camp in upstate New York , with actress Natalie Portman . After attending Greenwich Country Day School until 1996 and then graduating from Byram Hills High School in 1999 , Howard studied at New York University 's ( NYU ) Tisch School of the Arts for three years , during which time she also attended the Stella Adler Conservatory , The Experimental Wing , and International Theatre Wing in Amsterdam . During her schooling , she took part in the concept recording of the Broadway @-@ bound musical A Tale of Two Cities . She graduated with her BFA in Drama in 2003 . Howard is also an alumna of the Steppenwolf Theatre Company 's School at Steppenwolf in Chicago , and of The Actors Center in New York City . During her time in New York , Howard was also a member of downtown theater company Theater <unk> , in residence at New York Theatre Workshop , who are known for their exploration of theatrical forms . When she had applied to drama schools she dropped her last name to avoid special treatment because of her father . She later had second thoughts because she felt her first and middle name combined made her sound like a porn star . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1989 – 2006 = = = 
 After her film debut , Parenthood , as an uncredited extra , Howard played an extra in her father 's critically lauded Apollo 13 ( 1995 ) and the 2000 holiday live action Universal Studios film How the Grinch Stole Christmas . While on her father 's film sets , she would often socialize with the crew rather than the actors . For the next several years , Howard appeared in New York plays . Among these were House and Garden , a 2002 Alan Ayckbourn production held at the Manhattan Theatre Club , in which she portrayed a disdainful , flirtatious teen . While performing as Rosalind in the critically acclaimed 2003 William Shakespeare comedy production As You Like It , Howard caught the eye of director M. Night Shyamalan . Howard was not familiar with the play and was cast just one day before it started . She then starred in the Alan Brown @-@ directed 2004 drama Book of Love , about a young woman having an affair with a lonely teenage boy , destroying her marriage . It was generally ignored by critics and movie goers alike . 
 Her breakthrough role came in Shyamalan 's fantasy thriller The Village ( 2004 ) . When Kirsten Dunst could not commit to the schedule , Howard was cast without having to audition two weeks after Shyamalan first saw her onstage . Its story is about a " turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ 20th @-@ century " village whose residents live in fear of the creatures inhabiting the woods beyond it . She plays the female lead , the chief 's blind daughter and love interest to Joaquin Phoenix 's part . Her performance was applauded by critics and Howard was nominated for several awards , mostly in the category of " Best Breakthrough Performance " . The Village did well commercially , but had a mixed reception . Following that , Howard was cast by Lars Von Trier to replace Nicole Kidman as Grace Mulligan in Manderlay , the 2005 sequel to Dogville ( 2003 ) . The director said that it is " quite clear " his movie , set in a plantation , can be seen as an allusion to the Iraq War . Manderlay was a box office bomb , making only $ 674 @,@ 000 of its $ 14 @.@ 2 million production budget . 
 Howard reunited with Shyamalan for Lady in the Water , in which she acts as Story , a type of water nymph called a <unk> . The 2006 fantasy film release also stars Paul Giamatti as the co @-@ lead . Shyamalan 's project follows the story of Giamatti 's character rescuing what he thinks is a young woman ( Howard ) from his pool . Once he discovers that she is actually a character from a bedtime story who is trying to get back home , he teams up with his tenants to protect her from creatures that try to keep her in their world . It underperformed at the box office , falling short of its $ 75 million budget , and got largely negative reviews from critics . Next , she once again played Rosalind in Kenneth Branagh 's 2006 film version of Shakespeare 's As You Like It . It played in theatres in Europe before going directly to cable in the United States , premiering on HBO . Howard was nominated for a Golden Globe Award at the 2008 ceremony . The project got soundly negative reviews from the British media , while American reviewers gave it more favorable notice . Writing in USA Today , Robert Bianco observed : " As Rosalind , the show 's leading lady , Bryce Dallas Howard is a bit uncontrolled , particularly compared with such more precise co @-@ stars as Alfred Molina , David Oyelowo and Brian Blessed . But she 's incredibly appealing , and that in itself sells the love story . " That year , she wrote and directed a short film , Orchids , as part of Glamour magazine 's " Reel Moments " series funded by Cartier and <unk> International . 
 = = = 2007 – present = = = 
 In 2007 , Howard starred in her first blockbuster , Spider @-@ Man 3 as Peter Parker 's classmate Gwen Stacy , a fan favorite . A challenge that came with playing Gwen was reminding fans of the good @-@ intentioned character who was Peter 's first love in the comics , yet came off as " the other woman " in the movie . Howard dyed her naturally red hair blonde for the role and performed many of her own stunts , unaware that she was several months pregnant . Grossing $ 890 <unk> Salvation was her next project . Cast in June 2008 , she replaced Claire Danes as Kate Connor . Howard was already a fan of the series . It grossed a total of $ 370 million , but was not well received critically . 
 Howard starred as the lead character in The Loss of a Teardrop Diamond in 2009 . Based on a 1957 screenplay by Tennessee Williams , it did not play at many theaters . She played the role of Victoria , a vampire seeking revenge , in the Twilight series ' third installment The Twilight Saga : Eclipse . She landed the part after Rachelle Lefevre was dropped due to a scheduling conflict and filming started in August 2009 . Howard had already been a huge fan of the books and considered Victoria to be an " incredible character " . Released on June 30 , 2010 the film made nearly $ 700 million and although reviews were mixed , Critics gave very positive reviews for Howard in the role . 
 In December 2009 , Howard was cast in Clint Eastwood 's Hereafter ( 2010 ) , as a burgeoning love interest of Matt Damon 's character . When Howard first read the script to Hereafter , she was hooked on it , having been attracted to its central character ( Damon ) – a reclusive man with the ability to speak to the deceased . " It 's personal for me because a lot of my family members actually have that ability . It 's kind of wild , " Howard said . 
 In early January 2011 , Howard became the first celebrity ambassador for purse designer Kate Spade . Her first film of 2011 was The Help , a movie adaption of Kathryn Stockett 's 2009 best @-@ selling novel of the same name . She received critical acclaim for her performance in the film , and was nominated for many Best Supporting Actress Awards , along with winning awards shared with the rest of the cast . Howard then teamed up with her father to help produce Gus Van Sant 's Restless , a dark coming of age movie about a teenage boy and girl who are engrossed with death . She had a supporting role opposite Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt in the cancer dramedy 50 / 50 , which was based on a true story . " It 's viewing that experience through a very truthful lens of humour " , she stated of 50 / 50 's take on its heavy subject matter . Both films had September releases . Also in 2011 , she announced that she would be directing a film called The Originals . She co @-@ wrote the screenplay with her brother @-@ in @-@ law Dane Charbonneau and described it as " a Breakfast Club for my generation " . This would mark her feature directorial debut . 
 Howard has recently finished directorial duties for the short film When You Find Me , a social film developed through a collaboration with Canon . The film was developed under the premise of gathering inspiration through images selected from a photography contest . 96 @,@ 362 entries were accepted , while only eight final images were selected to be utilized for the production of the film . 
 In 2015 , Howard appeared in the lead role , alongside Chris Pratt , in Jurassic World as the park 's operations manager Claire Dearing . In 2016 , she is set to appear in two films , Gold and the remake of the 1977 film Pete 's Dragon . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Howard became a devoted vegan when Joaquin Phoenix , a co @-@ star in The Village , showed her a documentary on animal cruelty called Earthlings . However , in August 2006 , Howard announced that she had switched her diet from vegan to vegetarian in order to help boost her amino acid levels in preparation for her pregnancy . Due to a rare medical condition she developed after her pregnancy , she began eating meat . 
 During her senior year of high school , Howard learned of existentialism . " I was like , ' This is it ! This is my religion . ' I had never felt a connection to any sort of spirituality before that . It was very basic – you 're responsible for the choices that you make – but it was mind @-@ blowing at the time . " Her hobby is writing and she is good friends with Kirsten Dunst , Natalie Portman and Jake Gyllenhaal . Howard has said that she gets " freaked out " by " the Hollywood scene " and has never had a sip of alcohol in her entire life . She credits seeing the negative effects of alcoholism in her family as the reason behind the decision . " When I was in high school , I would never go to parties because I would be embarrassed to say no . Consequently , I had almost no social group , " Howard recalled . 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 Howard met actor Seth Gabel at New York University and the two dated for five years before marrying on June 17 , 2006 . She had only one previous boyfriend and claims to have pursued Gabel vigorously after first meeting him . They had planned to start a family together in their 30s ; however , seven days after their wedding , she learned that she was expecting their first child . Howard gave birth to their child , a son named Theodore , nicknamed Theo , in February 2007 . Theo 's godfather is actor Josh Gad . Howard openly discussed having experienced post @-@ partum depression . Howard had difficulty breast @-@ feeding , which she found to be more painful than experiencing natural child birth and would often cry in the shower . She was often disgusted when she saw her son ; rather than refer to him by name , she would call him " it " . Feeling overwhelmed and unable to make decisions , Howard also felt not only disconnected from her husband and baby , but herself as well . With the help of a physician and a therapist she recovered from the depression , which lasted for about 18 months . Howard said of the depression in 2010 @,@ 
 Do I wish I had never endured post @-@ partum depression ? Absolutely . But to deny the experience is to deny who I am . I still mourn the loss of what could have been , but I also feel deep gratitude for those who stood by me , for the lesson that we must never be afraid to ask for help , and for the feeling of summer that still remains . 
 Howard gave birth to the couple 's second child , daughter Beatrice , in January 2012 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Sd.Kfz. 9 = 
 The Sd.Kfz. 9 ( also known as " <unk> " ) was a German half @-@ track that saw widespread use in World War II , and the heaviest half @-@ track vehicle of any type built in quantity in Nazi Germany during the war years . Its main roles were as a prime mover for very heavy towed guns such as the 24 cm <unk> 3 and as a tank recovery vehicle . Approximately 2 @,@ 500 were produced between 1938 and 1945 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Sd.Kfz. 9 had a ladder frame chassis . Power was provided by a Maybach 12 @-@ cylinder , water @-@ cooled , 10 @.@ 838 litres ( 661 @.@ 4 cu in ) HL 108 gasoline engine of 270 horsepower ( 270 PS ) . It had a <unk> ZF G 65 VL 230 transmission with four forward and one reverse gears . It had two fuel tanks , one of 90 litres ( 24 US gal ) and the other of 230 litres ( 61 US gal ) capacity . 
 Both tracks and wheels were used for steering . The steering system was set up so that shallow turns used only the wheels , but brakes would be applied to the tracks the further the steering wheel was turned . The drive sprocket , like all German halftracks , had rollers rather than the more common teeth . The rear suspension consisted of six double sets of overlapping , interleaved Schachtellaufwerk layout roadwheels mounted on swing arms sprung by torsion bars . An idler wheel , mounted at the rear of the vehicle , was used to control track tension . The front wheels had leaf springs and shock absorbers . 
 The upper body had a crew compartment common to all versions . This had bench seats , one for the driver and his assistant , and another for the crew . The rear portion of the upper body was adapted for the vehicle 's intended role . The artillery model had two extra bench seats for the gun 's crew and space for its ammunition . The cargo version had just two storage compartments mounted in the front of the cargo compartment , one on each side , that opened to the outside . The windshield could fold forward and was also removable . A convertible canvas top was mounted at the upper part of the rear body . It fastened to the windshield when erected . 
 The Sd.Kfz. 9 was designed to have a towing capacity of 28 tonnes ( 28 long tons ; 31 short tons ) . This was adequate for medium tanks like the Panzer IV , but two or even three or four were necessary for heavier vehicles like the Tiger I , Panther or King Tiger . It towed <unk> 116 low @-@ loader trailers to carry disabled vehicles . 
 All were equipped with a winch , mounted at the middle of the vehicle , just under the cargo platform . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 Preliminary design of all the German half @-@ tracks of the early part of the war was done by Dipl.Ing. Ernst Kniepkamp of the Military Automotive Department ( Wa Prüf 6 ) before the Nazis took power in 1933 . His designs were then turned over to commercial firms for development and testing . <unk> und <unk> GmbH ( <unk> ) of Breslau received the contract for the 18 t ( 18 long tons ; 20 short tons ) heavy towing tracked vehicle . Their first prototype , the FM gr 1 , was completed in 1936 . It had a 200 horsepower ( 200 PS ) Maybach HL 98 <unk> engine and was only 7 @.@ 7 metres ( 25 ft ) long . The F 2 prototype appeared in 1938 , but differed only in detail from its predecessor . 
 The F 3 appeared in 1939 and was the production version . The design was simplified over the course of the war to reduce costs and the use of strategic metals . Some vehicles produced by Tatra had its 12 @-@ cylinder , air @-@ cooled Type 103 diesel engine fitted . Large spades were added at the rear of the chassis during the war to improve the vehicle 's ability to recover tanks and other heavy vehicles . 
 = = = Variants = = = 
 A new upper body was used for the Sd.Kfz. 9 / 1 which mounted a 6 t ( 5 @.@ 9 long tons ; 6 @.@ 6 short tons ) capacity crane in lieu of the crew 's bench seat and the cargo compartment . It was issued to tank maintenance units beginning in September 1941 . A larger , gasoline @-@ electric , 10 t ( 9 @.@ 8 long tons ; 11 short tons ) crane was fitted on the later Sd.Kfz. 9 / 2 , but this required outriggers to stabilize the vehicle before operations could begin . There was also a tank recovery version with a giant spade @-@ like metal plate connected to the rear of the frame . The spade holding frame could be lifted straight up for transport . It was meant to stabilize the vehicle while <unk> a heavy object on soft ground . 
 8 @.@ 8 cm Flak 18 anti @-@ aircraft guns were mounted on fifteen Sd.Kfz. 9s in 1940 as the 8 @.@ 8 cm Flak 18 ( <unk> . ) auf Zugkraftwagen <unk> ( Sd.Kfz. 9 ) for anti @-@ tank duties . The crew and engine compartments were lightly ( 14 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 57 in ) ) , but completely , armored , which limited the gun 's ability to fire directly ahead . A platform with drop @-@ down sides was fitted for the gun . Outriggers were necessary to brace the platform sides to support the weight of the gun crew . The vehicle weighed 25 tonnes ( 25 long tons ; 28 short tons ) , was 9 @.@ 32 metres ( 30 @.@ 6 ft ) long , 3 @.@ 67 metres ( 12 @.@ 0 ft ) tall and 2 @.@ 65 metres ( 8 @.@ 7 ft ) wide . One source claims that these vehicles were produced as prototypes in 1943 . 
 = = Production = = 
 <unk> of Plauen began producing the Sd.Kfz. 9 in 1940 and Tatra joined in the last years of the war . 855 were on hand on 20 December 1942 . 643 were built in 1943 and 834 in 1944 . Approximately 2 @,@ 500 were built in total . 
 = New Jersey Route 324 = 
 Route 324 is an isolated state highway in Logan Township in the U.S. state of New Jersey . The two @-@ lane concrete route runs along the 1 @.@ 51 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 2 @.@ 43 km ) alignment of Old Ferry Road from the shore of the Delaware River to a cul @-@ de @-@ sac near the interchange between U.S. Route 322 and U.S. Route 130 in Logan Township . The route does not intersect with any state routes or county routes along its entire alignment . 
 Route 324 was a former alignment of U.S. Route 322 that served the Bridgeport @-@ Chester ferry between Bridgeport , New Jersey , and Chester , Pennsylvania . The ferry first ran on July 1 , 1930 , with Route 322 being designated along the ferry and its access road in 1936 from Pennsylvania . The highway and ferry also shared the co @-@ designation of State Highway Route S @-@ 44 , a spur off State Highway Route 44 in Bridgeport . Route S @-@ 44 was decommissioned in the state highway renumbering while Route 322 remained intact until the opening of the Commodore Barry Bridge in February 1974 . The ferry made its last run at 8 p.m. on February 1 , and closed down for good . Route 322 was realigned onto the Commodore Barry Bridge while the former ferry alignment became Route 324 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 324 begins at a dead @-@ end along the shoreline of the Delaware River and the wreckage of the old ferry dock in Logan Township . Route 324 heads eastward along Old Ferry Road , a two @-@ lane concrete roadway surrounded by trees and fields . The two @-@ lane concrete highway remains such for a distance , paralleling U.S. Route 322 to the south , passing a business . The route heads to the east , crossing south of a pond and intersecting with Springer Lane and a dirt road in Logan Township . 
 At Springer Lane , which is a former alignment of Route 44 , the highway comes into the open , crossing under power lines and intersecting with former alignments of roadway , overgrown with grass . A short distance from Springers Lane , the highway continues to the only other intersection along the route , which is for Island Road , a connector to U.S. Route 130 . The highway , however , continues through the desolate portions of Logan Township along a power line . A short distance later , the route passes to the south of the only development along the highway , a boat marina and two homes . Route 324 continues as a two @-@ lane concrete road eastward until reaching a cul @-@ de @-@ sac just short of the U.S. Route 130 / U.S. Route 322 interchange in Logan Township , where the designation ends . 
 = = History = = 
 The ferry route that Route 324 serviced first made its crossings of the Delaware River on July 1 , 1930 , from Chester , Pennsylvania , to Bridgeport , New Jersey . The ferry service was run with two boats , Chester , a large boat with a capacity of 60 motor vehicles , and Bridgeport , a smaller boat with a capacity of 48 . The ferry system was seen as an advantage across the Delaware , providing drivers a backup from the few bridges that existed along the river . In 1936 , the Bridgeport – Chester Ferry was granted the alignment for the extension of U.S. Route 322 from Pennsylvania and into New Jersey . Along with the U.S. Route 322 designation , the New Jersey State Highway Department designated the alignment of Route 322 from the ferry to U.S. Route 130 , then designated as State Highway Route 44 , as State Highway Route S @-@ 44 . 
 Route 322 survived the state highway renumbering because of the fact that it was a U.S. Route . However , the co @-@ designation on the ferry stretch , State Highway Route S @-@ 44 was decommissioned in favor of just one designation . U.S. Route 322 remained on the ferry route for several years , and plans arose during the 1960s to construct a new bridge between the Delaware Memorial and Walt Whitman bridges . Construction began that year , and on February 1 , 1974 , the newly named Commodore Barry Bridge opened for traffic . At 8 p.m. that evening , the Bridgeport – Chester Ferry ran its final 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) boat ride across the Delaware , and the service was closed down for good . The alignment of U.S. Route 322 was moved onto the Commodore Barry Bridge , while the former alignment was redesignated Route 324 . The route has remained virtually intact since then . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Logan Township , Gloucester County . 
 = Daddy ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " Daddy " is a song recorded by American singer Beyoncé for her debut studio album , Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) . It was composed by Beyoncé as well as Mark Batson . The song was not originally intended to be featured on the final track listing of the album . Beyoncé was able to record the song as the release date of her debut album had been postponed . " Daddy " was released to US iTunes Store as a digital single on June 3 , 2003 , through Columbia Records . 
 Beyoncé explained that the song 's development was motivated by the devotion and the loyalty her father / manager , Mathew Knowles has towards his family members . Many of the songs on the album examine aspects of relationships . However , " Daddy " was considered to be an element analyzing the kinship ties between a father and his offspring from a different and more powerful perspective . Music critics , who generally received the song with positive reception , commented that the song was a way for Beyoncé to pay tribute to her father . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 " Daddy " was written by Beyoncé as well as Mark Batson . It is the final song on Dangerously in Love , and is a hidden track on some copies . Beyoncé initially was not going to include the song on the album , however after undergoing multiple push @-@ backs , she was able to work on extra material for the album which included " Daddy " . Over forty @-@ three songs were recorded for Dangerously in Love , all of which were overseen by father Mathew , however Beyoncé secretly planted the song on the album as a hidden track which left Mathew speechless out of shock and appreciation . He later revealed during an interview with Billboard magazine in 2009 : " My favorite songs is ... ' Daddy ' ... It basically says ' Thank you for all you 've given me and when I marry a man , it will be like my daddy ' " . Preceding the album 's release , the song was released to iTunes Store exclusively in the United States on June 23 , 2003 , through Columbia Records . It is also featured on the soundtrack of Tyler Perry 's Daddy 's Little Girls ( 2007 ) . 
 Concerning the conception of " Daddy " , Beyoncé told MTV News : 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Daddy " is a nearly five @-@ minute long R & B song . The first verse of the song begins with Beyoncé reminiscing about the times she and her father / manager , Mathew Knowles shared as a child and through her adolescence . She sings about wanting to be with a man and a child who has similar qualities as her father . This is illustrated in the lyrics : " I treasure every irreplaceable memory and that 's why I want my unborn son to be like my daddy , I want my husband to be like my daddy , there is no one else like my daddy . " According to Marc Anthony Neal of the PopMatters , Beyoncé also confidently embraces her womanhood in the song . In a way , Beyoncé pays tribute to her father through this song . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Mark Edward Nero of About.com stated that " Daddy " was probably written specifically for the soundtrack album of Daddy 's Little Girls and that it may even " play a part in a pivotal scene . " Making reference to Beyoncé long @-@ time relationship with Jay @-@ Z and then recent rumors about them possibly getting married , Nero added that the song might leave several numerous fans wondering what could happen next . Marc Anthony Neal of the international webzine PopMatters considered " Daddy " to be the " most affecting song on Dangerously in Love . " He went on writing that the song is an extraordinary tribute to her father Mathew Knowles , stating that Beyoncé " embraces [ ... ] the man that has helped take the kind of artistic leap that Dangerously in Love represents . " He ended up by adding that " By the time listeners get to the fifteenth and final track , they will have been so pleasantly surprised and impressed by Beyoncé 's performance throughout , that ' Daddy ' seems less corny " but it is in this song that she finally accepts the state of being a woman , rather than a girl . Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine described the song as an ode dedicated to the man that " instilled perseverance " . 
 Anthony DeCurtis of Rolling Stone commented that the album , which starts with " [ a ] cauldron of energy " on " Crazy in Love " ( 2003 ) , ends by contrast with " Daddy " which he described as a five @-@ minute tribute to her manager @-@ father , and considered to be " an anthology of vocal and lyrical cliches . " MTV News wrote that " Daddy " is different from the other relationship songs on Dangerously in Love , and added that it has a powerful message . By contrast , Allison Stewart of The Washington Post and Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times both called " Daddy " a " creepy bonus track " . Similarly , Spence D. , writing for IGN Music stated that " Daddy " is not really worth uncovering , as it follows suit in terms of being " a by @-@ the @-@ books contempo R & B rendition " , and he commented that " there is something oddly eerie about an attractive woman such as Beyoncé crooning the words ' I want my husband to be like my Daddy . ' " Mike Wass of the website Idolator called the song one of the " duds " on the album and added that it was a " best forgotten ode to the superstar 's father complete with stomach @-@ churning lyrics like ' I want my husband to be like my daddy ' " . In 2014 , Louis Virtel of the website HitFix reviewed the song negatively , calling it the worst on Dangerously in Love and describing its lyrics as " seriously simplistic " . " Daddy " peaked at number 26 on the Billboard Hot <unk> charts in the United States in 2014 . 
 = Oil tanker = 
 An oil tanker , also known as a petroleum tanker , is a merchant ship designed for the bulk transport of oil . There are two basic types of oil tankers : the crude tanker and the product tanker . Crude tankers move large quantities of unrefined crude oil from its point of extraction to refineries . Product tankers , generally much smaller , are designed to move refined products from refineries to points near consuming markets . 
 Oil tankers are often classified by their size as well as their occupation . The size classes range from inland or coastal tankers of a few thousand metric tons of deadweight ( DWT ) to the mammoth ultra large crude carriers ( ULCCs ) of 550 @,@ 000 DWT . Tankers move approximately 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 2 @.@ 2 × 109 short tons ) of oil every year . Second only to pipelines in terms of efficiency , the average cost of oil transport by tanker amounts to only two or three United States cents per 1 US gallon ( 3 @.@ 8 L ) . 
 Some specialized types of oil tankers have evolved . One of these is the naval replenishment oiler , a tanker which can fuel a moving vessel . Combination ore @-@ bulk @-@ oil carriers and permanently moored floating storage units are two other variations on the standard oil tanker design . Oil tankers have been involved in a number of damaging and high @-@ profile oil spills . As a result , they are subject to stringent design and operational regulations . 
 = = History = = 
 The technology of oil transportation has evolved alongside the oil industry . Although anthropogenic use of oil reaches to prehistory , the first modern commercial exploitation dates back to James Young 's manufacture of paraffin in 1850 . In the early 1850s , oil began to be exported from Upper Burma , then a British colony . The oil was moved in earthenware vessels to the river bank where it was then poured into boat holds for transportation to Britain . 
 In the 1860s , Pennsylvania oil fields became a major supplier of oil , and a center of innovation after Edwin Drake had struck oil near Titusville , Pennsylvania . Break @-@ bulk boats and barges were originally used to transport Pennsylvania oil in 40 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 150 l ) wooden barrels . But transport by barrel had several problems . The first problem was weight : the standard empty barrel weighed 64 pounds ( 29 kg ) , representing 20 % of the total weight of a full barrel . Other problems with barrels were their expense , their tendency to leak , and the fact that they were generally used only once . The expense was significant : for example , in the early years of the Russian oil industry , barrels accounted for half the cost of petroleum production . 
 = = = Early designs = = = 
 In 1863 , two sail @-@ driven tankers were built on England 's River Tyne . These were followed in 1873 by the first oil @-@ tank steamer , the Vaderland , which was built by Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company for Belgian owners . The vessel 's use was curtailed by U.S. and Belgian authorities citing safety concerns . By 1871 , the Pennsylvania oil fields were making limited use of oil tank barges and cylindrical railroad tank @-@ cars similar to those in use today . 
 = = = Modern oil tankers = = = 
 The modern oil tanker was developed in the period from 1877 to 1885 . In 1876 , Ludvig and Robert Nobel , brothers of Alfred Nobel , founded <unk> ( short for Brothers Nobel ) in Baku , Azerbaijan . It was , during the late 19th century , one of the largest oil companies in the world . 
 Ludvig was a pioneer in the development of early oil tankers . He first experimented with carrying oil in bulk on single @-@ hulled barges . Turning his attention to self @-@ propelled <unk> , he faced a number of challenges . A primary concern was to keep the cargo and fumes well away from the engine room to avoid fires . Other challenges included allowing for the cargo to expand and contract due to temperature changes , and providing a method to ventilate the tanks . 
 The first successful oil tanker was the Zoroaster , which carried its 242 long tons of kerosene cargo in two iron tanks joined by pipes . One tank was forward of the midships engine room and the other was aft . The ship also featured a set of 21 vertical watertight compartments for extra buoyancy . The ship had a length overall of 184 feet ( 56 m ) , a beam of 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) , and a draft of 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) . Unlike later Nobel tankers , the Zoroaster design was built small enough to sail from Sweden to the Caspian by way of the Baltic Sea , Lake Ladoga , Lake Onega , the Rybinsk and <unk> Canals and the Volga River . 
 In 1883 , oil tanker design took a large step forward . Working for the Nobel company , British engineer Colonel Henry F. Swan designed a set of three Nobel tankers . Instead of one or two large holds , Swan 's design used several holds which spanned the width , or beam , of the ship . These holds were further subdivided into port and starboard sections by a longitudinal bulkhead . Earlier designs suffered from stability problems caused by the free surface effect , where oil sloshing from side to side could cause a ship to capsize . But this approach of dividing the ship 's storage space into smaller tanks virtually eliminated free @-@ surface problems . This approach , almost universal today , was first used by Swan in the Nobel tankers <unk> , Lumen , and Lux . 
 Others point to the <unk> , another design of Colonel Swan , as being the first modern oil tanker . It adopted the best practices from previous oil tanker designs to create the prototype for all subsequent vessels of the type . It was the first dedicated steam @-@ driven ocean @-@ going tanker in the world and was the first ship in which oil could be pumped directly into the vessel hull instead of being loaded in barrels or drums . It was also the first tanker with a horizontal bulkhead ; its features included cargo valves operable from the deck , cargo main piping , a vapor line , cofferdams for added safety , and the ability to fill a ballast tank with seawater when empty of cargo . The ship was built in <unk> and was purchased by Wilhelm Anton <unk> , an agent for the Standard Oil Company along with several of her sister ships . After the <unk> was lost in 1893 after being grounded in fog , Standard Oil purchased the sister ships . 
 = = = Asian trade = = = 
 The 1880s also saw the beginnings of the Asian oil trade . The idea that led to moving Russian oil to the Far East via the Suez Canal was the brainchild of two men : importer Marcus Samuel and shipowner / broker Fred Lane . Prior bids to move oil through the canal had been rejected by the Suez Canal Company as being too risky . Samuel approached the problem a different way : asking the company for the specifications of a tanker it would allow through the canal . 
 Armed with the canal company 's specifications , Samuel ordered three tankers from William Gray & Company in northern England . Named the Murex , the Conch and the Clam , each had a capacity of 5 @,@ 010 long tons of deadweight . These three ships were the first tankers of the Tank Syndicate , forerunner of today 's Royal Dutch Shell company . 
 With facilities prepared in Jakarta , Singapore , Bangkok , Saigon , Hong Kong , Shanghai , and Kobe , the fledgling Shell company was ready to become Standard Oil 's first challenger in the Asian market . On August 24 , 1892 , the Murex became the first tanker to pass through the Suez Canal . By the time Shell merged with Royal Dutch Petroleum in 1907 , the company had 34 steam @-@ driven oil tankers , compared to Standard Oil 's four case @-@ oil steamers and 16 sailing tankers . 
 = = = The supertanker era = = = 
 Until 1956 , tankers were designed to be able to navigate the Suez Canal . This size restriction became much less of a priority after the closing of the canal during the Suez Crisis of 1956 . Forced to move oil around the Cape of Good Hope , shipowners realized that bigger tankers were the key to more efficient transport . While a typical T2 tanker of the World War II era was 532 feet ( 162 m ) long and had a capacity of 16 @,@ 500 DWT , the ultra @-@ large crude carriers ( ULCC ) built in the 1970s were over 1 @,@ 300 feet ( 400 m ) long and had a capacity of 500 @,@ 000 DWT . Several factors encouraged this growth . Hostilities in the Middle East which interrupted traffic through the Suez Canal contributed , as did nationalization of Middle East oil refineries . Fierce competition among shipowners also played a part . But apart from these considerations is a simple economic advantage : the larger an oil tanker is , the more cheaply it can move crude oil , and the better it can help meet growing demands for oil . 
 In 1955 the world 's largest supertanker was 30 @,@ 708 GRT and 47 @,@ 500 LT DWT : the SS Spyros Niarchos launched that year by Vickers Armstrongs Shipbuilders Ltd in England for Stavros Niarchos . 
 In 1958 United States shipping magnate Daniel K. Ludwig broke the record of 100 @,@ 000 long tons of heavy displacement . His Universe Apollo displaced 104 @,@ 500 long tons , a 23 % increase from the previous record @-@ holder , Universe Leader which also belonged to Ludwig . 
 The world 's largest supertanker was built in 1979 at the Oppama shipyard by Sumitomo Heavy Industries , Ltd. as the Seawise Giant . This ship was built with a capacity of 564 @,@ 763 DWT , a length overall of 458 @.@ 45 metres ( 1 @,@ 504 @.@ 1 ft ) and a draft of 24 @.@ 611 metres ( 80 @.@ 74 ft ) . She had 46 tanks , 31 @,@ 541 square metres ( 339 @,@ 500 sq ft ) of deck , and at her full load draft , could not navigate the English Channel . 
 Seawise Giant was renamed Happy Giant in 1989 , Jahre Viking in 1991 , and Knock Nevis in 2004 ( when she was converted into a permanently moored storage tanker ) . In 2009 she was sold for the last time , renamed Mont , and scrapped . 
 As of 2011 , the world 's two largest working supertankers are the TI class supertankers TI Europe and TI Oceania . These ships were built in 2002 and 2003 as the Hellespont Alhambra and Hellespont Tara for the Greek Hellespont Steamship Corporation . Hellespont sold these ships to Overseas <unk> Group and <unk> in 2004 . Each of the sister ships has a capacity of over 441 @,@ 500 DWT , a length overall of 380 @.@ 0 metres ( 1 @,@ 246 @.@ 7 ft ) and a cargo capacity of 3 @,@ 166 @,@ 353 barrels ( 503 @,@ 409 @,@ 900 l ) . They were the first ULCCs to be double @-@ hulled . To differentiate them from smaller ULCCs , these ships are sometimes given the V @-@ Plus size designation . 
 With the exception of the pipeline , the tanker is the most cost @-@ effective way to move oil today . Worldwide , tankers carry some 2 billion barrels ( 3 @.@ 2 × 1011 l ) annually , and the cost of transportation by tanker amounts to only US $ 0 @.@ 02 per gallon at the pump . 
 = = Size categories = = 
 In 1954 Shell Oil developed the average freight rate assessment ( <unk> ) system which classifies tankers of different sizes . To make it an independent instrument , Shell consulted the London Tanker Brokers ’ Panel ( <unk> ) . At first , they divided the groups as General Purpose for tankers under 25 @,@ 000 tons deadweight ( DWT ) ; Medium Range for ships between 25 @,@ 000 and 45 @,@ 000 DWT and Large Range for the then @-@ enormous ships that were larger than 45 @,@ 000 DWT . The ships became larger during the 1970s , which prompted <unk> . 
 The system was developed for tax reasons as the tax authorities wanted evidence that the internal billing records were correct . Before the New York Mercantile Exchange started trading crude oil futures in 1983 , it was difficult to determine the exact price of oil , which could change with every contract . Shell and BP , the first companies to use the system , abandoned the <unk> system in 1983 , later followed by the US oil companies . However , the system is still used today . Besides that , there is the flexible market scale , which takes typical routes and lots of 500 @,@ 000 barrels ( 79 @,@ 000 m3 ) . 
 Merchant oil tankers carry a wide range of hydrocarbon liquids ranging from crude oil to refined petroleum products . Their size is measured in deadweight metric tons ( DWT ) . Crude carriers are among the largest , ranging from 55 @,@ 000 DWT Panamax @-@ sized vessels to ultra @-@ large crude carriers ( ULCCs ) of over 440 @,@ 000 DWT . 
 Smaller tankers , ranging from well under 10 @,@ 000 DWT to 80 @,@ 000 DWT Panamax vessels , generally carry refined petroleum products , and are known as product tankers . The smallest tankers , with capacities under 10 @,@ 000 DWT generally work near @-@ coastal and inland waterways . Although they were in the past , ships of the smaller <unk> and <unk> classes are no longer regarded as supertankers . 
 = = = <unk> ( VLCC and ULCC ) = = = 
 " <unk> " are the largest tankers , including very large crude carriers ( VLCC ) and ULCCs with capacities over 250 @,@ 000 DWT . These ships can transport 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 barrels ( 320 @,@ 000 m3 ) of oil / 318 @,@ 000 metric tons . By way of comparison , the United Kingdom consumed about 1 @.@ 6 million barrels ( 250 @,@ 000 m3 ) of oil per day in 2009 . ULCCs , commissioned in the 1970s , were the largest vessels ever built , but the longest ones have already been scrapped . By 2013 only a few ULCCs remain in service , none of which are more than 400 meters long . 
 Because of their great size , supertankers often cannot enter port fully loaded . These ships can take on their cargo at off @-@ shore platforms and single @-@ point moorings . On the other end of the journey , they often pump their cargo off to smaller tankers at designated <unk> points off @-@ coast . A supertanker 's routes are generally long , requiring it to stay at sea for extended periods , up to and beyond seventy days at a time . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The act of hiring a ship to carry cargo is called chartering . Tankers are hired by four types of charter agreements : the voyage charter , the time charter , the bareboat charter , and contract of affreightment . In a voyage charter the charterer rents the vessel from the loading port to the discharge port . In a time charter the vessel is hired for a set period of time , to perform voyages as the charterer directs . In a bareboat charter the charterer acts as the ship 's operator and manager , taking on responsibilities such as providing the crew and maintaining the vessel . Finally , in a contract of affreightment or COA , the charterer specifies a total volume of cargo to be carried in a specific time period and in specific sizes , for example a COA could be specified as 1 million barrels ( 160 @,@ 000 m3 ) of JP @-@ 5 in a year 's time in 25 @,@ 000 @-@ barrel ( 4 @,@ 000 m3 ) shipments . A completed chartering contract is known as a charter party . 
 One of the key aspects of any charter party is the freight rate , or the price specified for carriage of cargo . The freight rate of a tanker charter party is specified in one of four ways : by a lump sum rate , by rate per ton , by a time charter equivalent rate , or by Worldscale rate . In a lump sum rate arrangement , a fixed price is negotiated for the delivery of a specified cargo , and the ship 's owner / operator is responsible to pay for all port costs and other voyage expenses . Rate per ton arrangements are used mostly in chemical tanker chartering , and differ from lump sum rates in that port costs and voyage expenses are generally paid by the charterer . Time charter arrangements specify a daily rate , and port costs and voyage expenses are also generally paid by the charterer . 
 The Worldwide Tanker Normal Freight Scale , often referred to as Worldscale , is established and governed jointly by the Worldscale Associations of London and New York . Worldscale establishes a baseline price for carrying a metric ton of product between any two ports in the world . In Worldscale negotiations , operators and <unk> will determine a price based on a percentage of the Worldscale rate . The baseline rate is expressed as WS 100 . If a given charter party settled on 85 % of the Worldscale rate , it would be expressed as WS 85 . Similarly , a charter party set at 125 % of the Worldscale rate would be expressed as WS 125 . 
 = = = Recent markets = = = 
 As of 2007 , the chartering market is persistently volatile across all tanker sectors . The market is affected by a wide variety of variables such as the supply and demand of oil as well as the supply and demand of oil tankers . Some particular variables include winter temperatures , excess tanker tonnage , supply fluctuations in the Persian Gulf , and interruptions in refinery services . 
 In 2006 , the sustained rise in oil prices had only a limited impact on demand . It was a good year across all segments of the tanker market segments , but not as good as 2004 and 2005 . Amidst high oil prices , geopolitical tension , and fears of disruptions to the oil supply , growing demand was the main driving force in the tanker shipping market for the year . As demand grew moderately in the United States and Western Europe , expanding economies such as China fueled exponential growth in demand . Despite these strengths , each of the five tanker freight indices dropped during 2006 . Product tanker demand increased in 2006 due to economic expansion in Asia , especially China and India , however , average time charter equivalent earnings for these ships decreased compared with the two prior years . 
 In 2006 , time @-@ charters tended towards long term . Of the time charters executed in that year , 58 % were for a period of 24 or more months , 14 % were for periods of 12 to 24 months , 4 % were from 6 to 12 months , and 24 % were for periods of less than 6 months . The average one @-@ year time charter rate for a 5 @-@ year @-@ old tanker of 280 @,@ 000 metric tons of deadweight varied from $ 56 @,@ 500 per day in December 2005 to $ 53 @,@ 000 per day in September 2007 with a high of $ 64 @,@ 500 per day in September 2006 . 
 The first half of 2007 was relatively strong , but in the second half rates dropped significantly . A sudden rise in oil production , longer transport routes , and slow steaming because of high bunker prices led to a shortage in tonnage towards the end of the year . Overnight , VLCC rates climbed from $ 20 @,@ 000 per day to $ 200 – $ 300 @,@ 000 per day , and even higher numbers were recorded . 
 From 2003 , the demand for new ships started to grow , resulting in 2007 in a record breaking order backlog for shipyards , exceeding their capacity with rising <unk> prices as a result . This resulted in a glut of ships when demand dropped due to a weakened global economy and dramatically reduced demand in the United States . The charter rate for very large crude carriers , which carry two million barrels of oil , had peaked at $ 309 @,@ 601 per day in 2007 , and has dropped , as of 2012 , to $ 7 @,@ 085 per day , far below the operating costs of these ships . As a result , several tanker operators laid up their ships . 
 Owners of large oil tanker fleets include <unk> Corporation , A P Moller Maersk , DS <unk> , Frontline , MOL Tankship Management , Overseas <unk> Group , and <unk> . 
 = = Fleet characteristics = = 
 In 2005 , oil tankers made up 36 @.@ 9 % of the world 's fleet in terms of deadweight tonnage . The world 's total oil tankers deadweight tonnage has increased from 326 @.@ 1 million DWT in 1970 to 960 @.@ 0 million DWT in 2005 . The combined deadweight tonnage of oil tankers and bulk carriers , represents 72 @.@ 9 % of the world 's fleet . 
 = = = Cargo movement = = = 
 In 2005 , 2 @.@ 42 billion metric tons of oil were shipped by tanker . In 2006 , 76 @.@ 7 % of this was crude oil , and the rest consisted of refined petroleum products . This amounted to 34 @.@ 1 % of all seaborne trade for the year . Combining the amount carried with the distance it was carried , oil tankers moved 11 @,@ 705 billion metric @-@ ton @-@ miles of oil in 2005 . 
 By comparison , in 1970 1 @.@ 44 billion metric tons of oil were shipped by tanker . This amounted to 34 @.@ 1 % of all seaborne trade for that year . In terms of amount carried and distance carried , oil tankers moved 6 @,@ 487 billion metric @-@ ton @-@ miles of oil in 1970 . 
 The United Nations also keeps statistics about oil tanker productivity , stated in terms of metric tons carried per metric ton of deadweight as well as metric @-@ ton @-@ miles of carriage per metric ton of deadweight . 2006 In 2005 , for each 1 DWT of oil tankers , 6 @.@ 7 metric tons of cargo was carried . Similarly , each 1 DWT of oil tankers was responsible for 32 @,@ 400 metric @-@ ton miles of carriage . 
 The main loading ports in 2005 were located in Western Asia , Western Africa , North Africa , and the Caribbean , with 196 @.@ 3 , 196 @.@ 3 , 130 @.@ 2 and 246 @.@ 6 million metric tons of cargo loaded in these regions . The main discharge ports were located in North America , Europe , and Japan with 537 @.@ 7 , 438 @.@ 4 , and 215 @.@ 0 million metric tons of cargo discharged in these regions . 
 = = = Flag states = = = 
 International law requires that every merchant ship be registered in a country , called its flag state . A ship 's flag state exercises regulatory control over the vessel and is required to inspect it regularly , certify the ship 's equipment and crew , and issue safety and pollution prevention documents . As of 2007 , the United States Central Intelligence Agency statistics count 4 @,@ 295 oil tankers of 1 @,@ 000 long tons deadweight ( DWT ) or greater worldwide . Panama was the world 's largest flag state for oil tankers , with 528 of the vessels in its registry . Six other flag states had more than 200 registered oil tankers : Liberia ( 464 ) , Singapore ( 355 ) , China ( 252 ) , Russia ( 250 ) , the Marshall Islands ( 234 ) and the Bahamas ( 209 ) . The Panamanian , Liberian , Marshallese and Bahamian flags are open registries and considered by the International Transport Workers ' Federation to be flags of convenience . By comparison , the United States and the United Kingdom only had 59 and 27 registered oil tankers , respectively . 
 = = = Vessel life cycle = = = 
 In 2005 , the average age of oil tankers worldwide was 10 years . Of these , 31 @.@ 6 % were under 4 years old and 14 @.@ 3 % were over 20 years old . In 2005 , 475 new oil tankers were built , accounting for 30 @.@ 7 million DWT . The average size for these new tankers was 64 @,@ 632 DWT . Nineteen of these were VLCC size , 19 were <unk> , 51 were <unk> , and the rest were smaller designs . By comparison , 8 @.@ 0 million DWT , 8 @.@ 7 million DWT , and 20 @.@ 8 million DWT worth of oil tanker capacity was built in 1980 , 1990 , and 2000 respectively . 
 Ships are generally removed from the fleet through a process known as scrapping . Ship @-@ owners and buyers negotiate scrap prices based on factors such as the ship 's empty weight ( called light ton displacement or LDT ) and prices in the scrap metal market . In 1998 almost 700 ships went through the scrapping process at shipbreakers in places like Alang , India and Chittagong , Bangladesh . In 2004 and 2005 , 7 @.@ 8 million DWT and 5 @.@ 7 million DWT respectively of oil tankers were scrapped . Between 2000 and 2005 , the capacity of oil tankers scrapped each year has ranged between 5 @.@ 6 million DWT and 18 @.@ 4 million DWT . In this same timeframe , tankers have accounted for between 56 @.@ 5 % and 90 @.@ 5 % of the world 's total scrapped ship tonnage . In this period the average age of scrapped oil tankers has ranged from 26 @.@ 9 to 31 @.@ 5 years . 
 = = = Vessel pricing = = = 
 In 2005 , the price for new oil tankers in the 32 @,@ 000 – 45 @,@ 000 DWT , 80 @,@ 000 – 105 @,@ 000 DWT , and 250 @,@ 000 – 280 @,@ 000 DWT ranges were US $ 43 million , $ 58 million , and $ 120 million respectively . In 1985 these vessels would have cost $ 18 million , $ 22 million , and $ 47 million respectively . 
 Oil tankers are often sold second @-@ hand . In 2005 , 27 @.@ 3 million DWT worth of oil tankers were sold used . Some representative prices for that year include $ <unk> for a 40 @,@ 000 DWT tanker , $ 60 @.@ 7 million for a 80 @,@ 000 – 95 @,@ 000 DWT , $ 73 million for a 130 @,@ 000 – 150 @,@ 000 DWT , and $ 116 million for 250 @,@ 000 – 280 @,@ 000 DWT tanker . For a concrete example , in 2006 , Bonheur subsidiary First Olsen paid US $ 76 @.@ 5 million for Knock Sheen , a 159 @,@ 899 DWT tanker . 
 The cost of operating the largest tankers , the Very Large Crude Carriers , is currently between $ 10 @,@ 000 and $ 12 @,@ 000 per day . 
 = = Current structural design = = 
 Oil tankers generally have from 8 to 12 tanks . Each tank is split into two or three independent compartments by fore @-@ and @-@ aft bulkheads . The tanks are numbered with tank one being the forwardmost . Individual compartments are referred to by the tank number and the <unk> position , such as " one port " , " three starboard " , or " six center . " 
 A cofferdam is a small little space left open between two bulkheads , to give protection from heat , fire , or collision . Tankers generally have cofferdams forward and aft of the cargo tanks , and sometimes between individual tanks . A <unk> room houses all the pumps connected to a tanker 's cargo lines . Some larger tankers have two <unk> . A <unk> generally spans the total breadth of the ship . 
 = = = Hull designs = = = 
 A major component of tanker architecture is the design of the hull or outer structure . A tanker with a single outer shell between the product and the ocean is said to be " single @-@ hulled " . Most newer tankers are " double hulled " , with an extra space between the hull and the storage tanks . Hybrid designs such as " double @-@ bottom " and " double @-@ sided " combine aspects of single and double @-@ hull designs . All single @-@ hulled tankers around the world will be phased out by 2026 , in accordance with the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships , 1973 ( MARPOL ) . The United Nations has decided to phase out single hull oil tankers by 2010 . 
 In 1998 , the Marine <unk> Board of the National Academy of Science conducted a survey of industry experts regarding the pros and cons of double @-@ hull design . Some of the advantages of the double @-@ hull design that were mentioned include ease of ballasting in emergency situations , reduced practice of saltwater ballasting in cargo tanks decreases corrosion , increased environmental protection , cargo discharge is quicker , more complete and easier , tank washing is more efficient , and better protection in low @-@ impact collisions and grounding . 
 The same report lists the following as some drawbacks to the double @-@ hull design , including higher build costs , greater operating expenses ( e.g. higher canal and port tariffs ) , difficulties in ballast tank ventilation , the fact that ballast tanks need continuous monitoring and maintenance , increased transverse free surface , the greater number of surfaces to maintain , the risk of explosions in double @-@ hull spaces if a vapor detection system not fitted , and that cleaning ballast tanks is more difficult for double hull ships . 
 In all , double @-@ hull tankers are said to be safer than a single @-@ hull in a grounding incident , especially when the shore is not very rocky . The safety benefits are less clear on larger vessels and in cases of high speed impact . 
 Although double @-@ hull design is superior in low energy casualties and prevents spillage in small casualties , in high energy casualties where both hulls are breached , oil can spill through the double @-@ hull and into the sea and spills from a double @-@ hull tanker can be significantly higher than designs like the mid @-@ deck tanker , the <unk> egg tanker and even a pre @-@ MARPOL tanker , as the last one has a lower oil column and reaches hydrostatic balance sooner . 
 = = = Inert gas system = = = 
 An oil tanker 's inert gas system is one of the most important parts of its design . Fuel oil itself is very difficult to ignite , but its hydrocarbon vapors are explosive when mixed with air in certain concentrations . The purpose of the system is to create an atmosphere inside tanks in which the hydrocarbon oil vapors cannot burn . 
 As inert gas is introduced into a mixture of hydrocarbon vapors and air , it increases the lower flammable limit or lowest concentration at which the vapors can be ignited . At the same time it decreases the upper flammable limit or highest concentration at which the vapors can be ignited . When the total concentration of oxygen in the tank reaches about 11 % , the upper and lower flammable limits converge and the flammable range disappears . 
 Inert gas systems deliver air with an oxygen concentration of less than 5 % by volume . As a tank is pumped out , it is filled with inert gas and kept in this safe state until the next cargo is loaded . The exception is in cases when the tank must be entered . Safely gas @-@ freeing a tank is accomplished by purging hydrocarbon vapors with inert gas until the hydrocarbon concentration inside the tank is under about 1 % . Thus , as air replaces the inert gas , the concentration cannot rise to the lower flammable limit and is safe . 
 = = Cargo operations = = 
 Operations aboard oil tankers are governed by an established body of best practices and a large body of international law . Cargo can be moved on or off of an oil tanker in several ways . One method is for the ship to moor alongside a pier , connect with cargo hoses or marine loading arms . Another method involves mooring to offshore buoys , such as a single point mooring , and making a cargo connection via underwater cargo hoses . A third method is by ship @-@ to @-@ ship transfer , also known as <unk> . In this method , two ships come alongside in open sea and oil is transferred manifold to manifold via flexible hoses . <unk> is sometimes used where a loaded tanker is too large to enter a specific port . 
 = = = Pre @-@ transfer preparation = = = 
 Prior to any transfer of cargo , the chief officer must develop a transfer plan detailing specifics of the operation such as how much cargo will be moved , which tanks will be cleaned , and how the ship 's ballasting will change . The next step before a transfer is the pretransfer conference . The pretransfer conference covers issues such as what products will be moved , the order of movement , names and titles of key people , particulars of shipboard and shore equipment , critical states of the transfer , regulations in effect , emergency and spill @-@ containment procedures , watch and shift arrangements , and shutdown procedures . 
 After the conference is complete , the person in charge on the ship and the person in charge of the shore installation go over a final inspection checklist . In the United States , the checklist is called a Declaration of Inspection or DOI . Outside the U.S. , the document is called the " Ship / Shore Safety Checklist . " Items on the checklist include proper signals and signs are displayed , secure mooring of the vessel , choice of language for communication , securing of all connections , that emergency equipment is in place , and that no repair work is taking place . 
 = = = Loading cargo = = = 
 Loading an oil tanker consists primarily of pumping cargo into the ship 's tanks . As oil enters the tank , the vapors inside the tank must be somehow expelled . Depending on local regulations , the vapors can be expelled into the atmosphere or discharged back to the pumping station by way of a vapor recovery line . It is also common for the ship to move water ballast during the loading of cargo to maintain proper trim . 
 Loading starts slowly at a low pressure to ensure that equipment is working correctly and that connections are secure . Then a steady pressure is achieved and held until the " topping @-@ off " phase when the tanks are nearly full . Topping off is a very dangerous time in handling oil , and the procedure is handled particularly carefully . Tank @-@ gauging equipment is used to tell the person in charge how much space is left in the tank , and all tankers have at least two independent methods for tank @-@ gauging . As the tanker becomes full , crew members open and close valves to direct the flow of product and maintain close communication with the pumping facility to decrease and finally stop the flow of liquid . 
 = = = Unloading cargo = = = 
 The process of moving oil off of a tanker is similar to loading , but has some key differences . The first step in the operation is following the same pretransfer procedures as used in loading . When the transfer begins , it is the ship 's cargo pumps that are used to move the product ashore . As in loading , the transfer starts at low pressure to ensure that equipment is working correctly and that connections are secure . Then a steady pressure is achieved and held during the operation . While pumping , tank levels are carefully watched and key locations , such as the connection at the cargo manifold and the ship 's <unk> are constantly monitored . Under the direction of the person in charge , crew members open and close valves to direct the flow of product and maintain close communication with the receiving facility to decrease and finally stop the flow of liquid . 
 = = = Tank cleaning = = = 
 Tanks must be cleaned from time to time for various reasons . One reason is to change the type of product carried inside a tank . Also , when tanks are to be inspected or maintenance must be performed within a tank , it must be not only cleaned , but made gas @-@ free . 
 On most crude @-@ oil tankers , a special crude oil washing ( COW ) system is part of the cleaning process . The COW system circulates part of the cargo through the fixed tank @-@ cleaning system to remove wax and <unk> deposits . Tanks that carry less viscous cargoes are washed with water . Fixed and portable automated tank cleaning machines , which clean tanks with high @-@ pressure water jets , are widely used . Some systems use rotating high @-@ pressure water jets to spray hot water on all the internal surfaces of the tank . As the spraying takes place , the liquid is pumped out of the tank . 
 After a tank is cleaned , provided that it is going to be prepared for entry , it will be purged . Purging is accomplished by pumping inert gas into the tank until hydrocarbons have been sufficiently expelled . Next the tank is gas freed which is usually accomplished by blowing fresh air into the space with portable air powered or water powered air blowers . " Gas freeing " brings the oxygen content of the tank up to 20 @.@ 8 % O2 . The inert gas buffer between fuel and oxygen atmospheres ensures they are never capable of ignition . Specially trained personnel monitor the tank 's atmosphere , often using hand @-@ held gas indicators which measure the percentage of hydrocarbons present . After a tank is gas @-@ free , it may be further hand @-@ cleaned in a manual process known as mucking . <unk> requires protocols for entry into confined spaces , protective clothing , designated safety observers , and possibly the use of airline respirators . 
 = = Special @-@ use oil tankers = = 
 Some sub @-@ types of oil tankers have evolved to meet specific military and economic needs . These sub @-@ types include naval replenishment ships , oil @-@ bulk @-@ ore combination carriers , floating storage and offloading units ( <unk> ) and floating production storage and offloading units ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Replenishment ships = = = 
 Replenishment ships , known as oilers in the United States and fleet tankers in Commonwealth countries , are ships that can provide oil products to naval vessels while on the move . This process , called underway replenishment , extends the length of time a naval vessel can stay at sea , as well as her effective range . Prior to underway replenishment , naval vessels had to enter a port or anchor to take on fuel . In addition to fuel , replenishment ships may also deliver water , ammunition , rations , stores and personnel . 
 = = = Ore @-@ bulk @-@ oil carriers = = = 
 An ore @-@ bulk @-@ oil carrier , also known as combination carrier or OBO , is a ship designed to be capable of carrying wet or dry bulk cargoes . This design was intended to provide flexibility in two ways . Firstly , an OBO would be able to switch between the dry and wet bulk trades based on market conditions . Secondly , an OBO could carry oil on one leg of a voyage and return carrying dry bulk , reducing the number of unprofitable ballast voyages it would have to make . 
 In practice , the flexibility which the OBO design allows has gone largely unused , as these ships tend to specialize in either the liquid or dry bulk trade . Also , these ships have endemic maintenance problems . On one hand , due to a less specialized design , an OBO suffers more from wear and tear during dry cargo <unk> than a bulker . On the other hand , components of the liquid cargo system , from pumps to valves to piping , tend to develop problems when subjected to periods of disuse . These factors have contributed to a steady reduction in the number of OBO ships worldwide since the 1970s . 
 One of the more famous OBOs was the MV Derbyshire of 180 @,@ 000 DWT which in September 1980 became the largest British ship ever lost at sea . It sank in a Pacific typhoon while carrying a cargo of iron ore from Canada to Japan . 
 = = = Floating storage units = = = 
 Floating storage and offloading units ( FSO ) are used worldwide by the offshore oil industry to receive oil from nearby platforms and store it until it can be offloaded onto oil tankers . A similar system , the floating production storage and offloading unit ( FPSO ) , has the ability to process the product while it is on board . These floating units reduce oil production costs and offer mobility , large storage capacity , and production versatility . 
 FPSO and <unk> are often created out of old , stripped @-@ down oil tankers , but can be made from new @-@ built hulls Shell España first used a tanker as an FPSO in August 1977 . An example of a FSO that used to be an oil tanker is the Knock Nevis . These units are usually moored to the seabed through a spread mooring system . A turret @-@ style mooring system can be used in areas prone to severe weather . This turret system lets the unit rotate to minimize the effects of sea @-@ swell and wind . 
 = = Pollution = = 
 Oil spills have devastating effects on the environment . Crude oil contains polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( PAHs ) which are very difficult to clean up , and last for years in the sediment and marine environment . Marine species constantly exposed to PAHs can exhibit developmental problems , susceptibility to disease , and abnormal reproductive cycles . 
 By the sheer amount of oil carried , modern oil tankers must be considered a threat to the environment . As discussed above , a VLCC tanker can carry 2 million barrels ( 320 @,@ 000 m3 ) of crude oil . This is about eight times the amount spilled in the widely known Exxon Valdez incident . In this spill , the ship ran aground and dumped 10 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 41 @,@ 000 m3 ) of oil into the ocean in March 1989 . Despite efforts of scientists , managers , and volunteers over 400 @,@ 000 seabirds , about 1 @,@ 000 sea otters , and immense numbers of fish were killed . Considering the volume of oil carried by sea , however , tanker owners ' organisations often argue that the industry 's safety record is excellent , with only a tiny fraction of a percentage of oil cargoes carried ever being spilled . The International Association of Independent Tanker Owners has observed that " accidental oil spills this decade have been at record low levels — one third of the previous decade and one tenth of the 1970s — at a time when oil transported has more than doubled since the mid 1980s . " 
 Oil tankers are only one source of oil spills . According to the United States Coast Guard , 35 @.@ 7 % of the volume of oil spilled in the United States from 1991 to 2004 came from tank vessels ( ships / barges ) , 27 @.@ 6 % from facilities and other non @-@ vessels , 19 @.@ 9 % from non @-@ tank vessels , and 9 @.@ 3 % from pipelines ; 7 @.@ 4 % from mystery spills . On the other hand , only 5 % of the actual spills came from oil tankers , while 51 @.@ 8 % came from other kinds of vessels . The detailed statistics for 2004 shown in the table below show tank vessels responsible for somewhat less than 5 % of the number of total spills but more than 60 % of the volume . In summary , spills are much more rare but much more serious on tank vessels than on non @-@ tank vessels . 
 The International Tanker Owners Pollution Federation has tracked 9 @,@ 351 accidental spills that have occurred since 1974 . According to this study , most spills result from routine operations such as loading cargo , discharging cargo , and taking on fuel oil . 91 % of the operational oil spills are small , resulting in less than 7 metric tons per spill . On the other hand , spills resulting from accidents like collisions , groundings , hull failures , and explosions are much larger , with 84 % of these involving losses of over 700 metric tons . 
 Following the Exxon Valdez spill , the United States passed the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 ( OPA @-@ 90 ) , which excluded single @-@ hull tank vessels of 5 @,@ 000 gross tons or more from US waters from 2010 onward , apart from those with a double bottom or double sides , which may be permitted to trade to the United States through 2015 , depending on their age . Following the sinkings of the Erika ( 1999 ) and Prestige ( 2002 ) , the European Union passed its own stringent anti @-@ pollution packages ( known as Erika I , II , and III ) , which also require all tankers entering its waters to be double @-@ hulled by 2010 . The Erika packages are controversial because they introduced the new legal concept of " serious negligence " . 
 = = = Air pollution = = = 
 Air pollution from normal tanker engines operation and from cargo fires is another serious concern . Large ships are often run on low quality fuel oils , such as bunker oil which are highly polluting and have been shown to be a health risk . Ship fires may not only result in the loss of the ship due to lack of specialized firefighting gear and techniques but the fires sometimes burn for days and require evacuations of nearby residents due to the dangerous smoke . 
 = National Museum of Beirut = 
 The National Museum of Beirut ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is the principal museum of archaeology in Lebanon . The collection was begun after World War I , and the museum was officially opened in 1942 . The museum has collections totaling about 100 @,@ 000 objects , most of which are antiquities and medieval finds from excavations undertaken by the Directorate General of Antiquities . About 1300 artifacts are exhibited , ranging in date from prehistoric times to the medieval Mamluk period . 
 During the 1975 Lebanese Civil War , the museum stood on the front line that separated the warring factions . The museum 's Egyptian Revival building and its collection suffered extensive damage in the war , but most of the artifacts were saved by last @-@ minute preemptive measures . 
 Today , after a major renovation , the National Museum of Beirut has regained its former position , especially as a leading collector for ancient Phoenician objects . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 In 1919 , a small group of ancient artifacts collected by Raymond Weill , a French officer stationed in Lebanon , was exhibited at a provisional museum in the <unk> <unk> ' building in Georges Picot Street , Beirut . Meanwhile , a forerunner of the Archaeological and Fine Arts Service began to assemble items from the region round Beirut . The initial collection was rapidly expanded under successive antiquity directors with the addition of finds from the excavations led by Dr. Georges <unk> at Saida and Ernest Renan at Saida , Tyre and Byblos . Donations of private collections included those of Henry Seyrig ’ s coin collection , General Weygand in 1925 and Dr George Ford , the Director of the American Mission School of Sidon , in 1930 . 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 In 1923 , the " Friends of the Museum Committee " , headed by Bechara El Khoury , then Prime Minister and minister of education and fine arts , was created to raise funds to build a national museum . The founding committee included : Alfred <unk> , Marios <unk> , Albert <unk> , Omar <unk> , Kamil <unk> , Ali <unk> , Henry <unk> , George <unk> , Assad Younes , Hassan <unk> , Joseph <unk> , George <unk> , Jean Debs , <unk> <unk> and Jack <unk> . The committee accepted the plans presented by architects Antoine <unk> and Pierre Leprince @-@ Ringuet . Construction began in 1930 on a plot of land donated by the municipality near the Beirut Hippodrome , and was completed in 1937 . The opening of the museum was scheduled for 1938 , but was postponed because of the political situation in the lead @-@ up to World War II . The National Museum of Beirut was finally opened on May 27 , 1942 by President Alfred <unk> . Until 1928 , the conservation of the Lebanese National Museum was put in the hands of Charles <unk> , the director of the service of antiquities and Philippe de <unk> , the Lebanese conservator of the National Library . The collection continued to grow under the direction of Mir Maurice Chehab , head curator for 33 years , until the start of the Lebanese Civil War in 1975 . 
 = = = Closing and devastation = = = 
 In 1975 , with the outbreak of the Lebanese war , Beirut was split into two opposing areas . The national museum and the directorate general of antiquities were on the demarcation line known as “ Museum alley ” which separated the warring militias and armies . Conditions in the immediate vicinity of the museum rapidly worsened , as the museum endured shelling and bombing , and was turned into a barracks for combatants . " Museum alley " became a checkpoint controlled by various Lebanese militias , or the Syrian or Israeli armies , who opened and closed the road under short @-@ lived truces . The authorities decided to close the museum . The first protective measures inside the museum were initiated by Mir Maurice Chehab and his wife during alternating fire @-@ fights and moments of truce . The vulnerable small artifacts were removed from their showcases and hidden in storerooms in the basement , which was then walled up , banning any access to the lower floors . On the ground floor , mosaics which had been installed in the floor were covered with a layer of concrete . Statues and sarcophagi were protected by sandbags . When the situation reached its worst in 1982 , the heavier artifacts were encased in wood and concrete . 
 When the final cease @-@ fire was declared in 1991 , the museum and the Directorate General of Antiquities were in a state of near @-@ destruction . The museum was flooded with rainwater and the outer facade was badly marked by bullets and craters from shells . Militiamen who occupied the premises had covered the internal walls with graffiti . The state of the museum collection was also very serious : the small objects had been left in the storerooms for more than fifteen years in a totally inappropriate environment . The national museum had been built on a high water table , which caused a dangerous increase in humidity , and collection of water inside the storerooms . The large stone artifacts has been left in their emergency casings without any ventilation and traces of corrosion from salts were visible on the lower edges of the stone monuments . The wing adjacent to the Directorate General of Antiquities was devastated by shells which started a fire , destroying documents such as maps , photographs , and records , as well as 45 boxes containing archaeological objects . All of the laboratory equipment was lost . During the war , some items were looted and are now exhibited in Turkish museums , whilst others have been auctioned . Ironically , these had been stolen from external stores , mainly in Byblos and Sidon , in which they were kept to avoid damage and looting . 
 = = = Reopening and renovation = = = 
 The first plans to restore the national museum came in 1992 from Michel <unk> , then Minister of Culture and Higher Education . The proposal to tear down the concrete walls and cases which protected the national treasures was turned down by the general director of antiquities , Camille Asmar , since the museum still had no doors or windows to prevent further looting . Ghassan <unk> donated the funds for the museum 's massive new main door . Once the doors and windows were put in , the decision was made to pull down the concrete wall that protected the entrance to the basement . Restoration work started in 1995 and focused on the building itself , and the inventorying and restoration of the collection . The museum was officially inaugurated on November 25 , 1997 by then president Elias <unk> but only parts of the ground floor and basement were made accessible since the remainder of the building was still under repair and important modifications were needed to meet the requirements of modern <unk> standards . The museum was again closed to the public in July 1998 to achieve restoration works . On October 8 , 1999 , the museum re @-@ opened its doors to the public under the patronage of president Emile Lahoud . 
 The rehabilitation of the National Museum was undertaken by the Ministry of Culture , the Directorate General of Antiquities and the National Heritage Foundation , to the plans of the French architect , urban planner and designer Jean @-@ Michel <unk> . In 1999 the Lebanese government started a massive campaign to recover antiquities that were stolen or traded during the civil war . Many artifacts were recovered from warehouses or private homes since Lebanese law dictates that any item more than 300 years old belongs to the state . 
 = = = Basement reopening = = = 
 Opening of the basement floor was scheduled for November 2010 , but as of June 2011 , only the ground and first floors are open to the public . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The museum was designed in a French inspired Egyptian Revival style by the architects Antoine <unk> and Pierre Leprince Ringuet , and built with Lebanese ochre limestone . It comprises a basement , a ground floor , a mezzanine floor and a terrace ; the central block is covered by a glass roof , above the mezzanine , giving natural overhead light . 
 The whole site is approximately 5 @,@ 500 square metres ( 59 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , and the exhibition floor space totals 6 @,@ 000 square metres ( 65 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . The immediately adjoining museum annexes and administrative offices occupy about 1 @,@ 000 square metres ( 11 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . 
 = = Collections = = 
 The National Museum of Beirut currently exhibits 1300 artifacts from its collection of approximately 100 @,@ 000 objects . The museum displays follow a chronological circuit beginning in Prehistory and ending in the Ottoman era . The circuit begins on the ground floor where 83 large objects are displayed , these include sarcophagi , mosaics statues and reliefs . The upper floor displays 1243 small and medium @-@ sized artifacts arranged by chronological order and by theme in modern showcases with soft lighting and magnifying glasses that emphasize the aesthetic aspect of the artifacts . 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 The collection has prehistoric artifacts from early hunter @-@ gatherer societies ranging from the Lower Paleolithic ( <unk> BC ) to the Neolithic ( 9000 – 3200 BC ) , typically spearheads , flints , hooks and pottery . These were found in caves and rock shelters all over Lebanese territory . Around five hundred prehistoric sites have been surveyed in Lebanon as a whole , and around fifty sites in Beirut itself . 
 = = = Bronze age = = = 
 The Bronze Age ( 3200 – 1200 BC ) saw the birth of Lebanon 's first fortified villages , the development of commercial and maritime activities and the invention of the world 's first alphabet in Byblos . This collection includes the Museum 's masterpiece : the sarcophagus of <unk> , which holds the oldest text written in the Phoenician alphabet . 
 Collection highlights : 
 Sarcophagus of King <unk> : limestone , Byblos royal cemetery , 10th century B.C. 
 Votive statuettes : gilded bronze , Obelisk temple – Byblos , 19 @-@ 18th century B.C. 
 Decorated knife : gold and ivory , Obelisk temple – Byblos , 19 @-@ 18th century B.C. 
 <unk> axes : gold , Obelisk temple – Byblos , 19 @-@ 18th century B.C. 
 King Ip Shemu Abi 's crown and scepter : gold and bronze , Royal cemetery , Byblos , 18th century B.C. 
 King Abi Shemu 's jewelry collection : gold and precious stones , Royal cemetery , Byblos , 18th century B.C. 
 <unk> of <unk> : gilded bronze , Obelisk temple – Byblos , 19 @-@ 18th century B.C. 
 Duck shaped cosmetic box : ivory , Sidon , 14th century B.C. 
 = = = Iron age = = = 
 The Iron Age ( 1200 – 333 BC ) in Lebanon saw the climax of the Phoenician civilization , which culminated in its maritime expansion and the transmission to other cultures of the alphabet ( which was attributed by the Greek legend to the Tyrian Cadmus ) . During this period , after an era of autonomy , the city @-@ states of the area came under Assyrian , Babylonian and Persian hegemony . The occupying civilizations influenced Phoenician ceramics , jewelry and ivory work , statues , and sarcophagi . 
 Key highlights of the collections include : 
 the Ford collection of anthropoid sarcophagi : marble , 4th century B.C. 
 votive statues from the Eshmun temple : marble , Bustan esh Sheikh , 4th century B.C. 
 capital with bull <unk> , : marble , Sidon , 5th century B.C. 
 = = = Hellenistic period = = = 
 The Hellenistic period ( 333 – 64 BC ) In 333 BC , the decisive victory won by Alexander the Great over the Persian king Darius III opened Phoenicia to the Greek conqueror . 
 After Alexander 's death , Phoenicia first came under Ptolemaic rule from Egypt , then , after the Battle of Panium , under the Seleucids based in modern Iraq . The Seleucids abolished local monarchies , and appointed governors ( bearing Greek names ) to rule the Phoenician cities . 
 Greek influence , which had made its way to Phoenicia during the Persian period , now became stronger . Figurines found in <unk> show Aegean influence on local craftsmen . This spreading Hellenization interacted with the local Semitic population substratum , which remained faithful to its gods and its language . It resulted in an artistic and architectural symbiosis best illustrated in the artifacts of Umm el ' Amed and Bustan esh Sheikh . 
 Collection highlights : 
 Sanctuary of Eshmun tribune : marble , Bustan esh Sheikh ( near Sidon ) , ca . 350 B.C. 
 Statue of Aphrodite : marble , Beirut 
 Greek gods figurines : terracotta , <unk> 
 = = = Roman period = = = 
 In 64 BC , the military expedition of the Roman general Pompey put an end to the anarchy prevailing in the Seleucid Empire , and Phoenicia became part of the Roman world . But Roman civil wars continued to disrupt the region until 31 BC , after which , with the reign of Augustus , the pax romana extended over the area . The pax romana favored international trade , and local industries in silversmithing , glass , textiles and ceramics developed . 
 Roman Period ( 64 BC – 395 AD ) section collection highlights include : 
 Achilles sarcophagus : marble , Tyre , 2nd century A.D. 
 drunken Cupids sarcophagus : marble , Tyre , 2nd century A.D. 
 Abduction of Europe mosaic : Byblos , 3rd century A.D. 
 statue of Hygieia : marble , Byblos 
 Calliope and the seven wise men mosaic : <unk> , 3rd century A.D. 
 Dionysus bust : marble , Tyre , 3rd century A.D. 
 = = = Byzantine period = = = 
 After the death of Theodosius I in 395 AD , the Roman Empire was divided into a western and an eastern empire . The Lebanese cities were attached to the latter , and converted to Christianity which became the state religion in 392 . The emperor ordered the destruction of pagan temples , but cults like those of Adonis and Jupiter <unk> were kept alive by the local population and survived in some form for centuries . 
 Artifacts from the Byzantine period ( 395 – 636 AD ) include : 
 the " Jealousy " mosaic : Beirut 
 elements of a church chancel : marble , Beirut 
 coins and jewelry collection 
 = = = Arab conquest , Mamluk period = = = 
 The Arab conquest of Lebanon was completed in 637 AD . The expansion of the coastal cities , which had slowed down after earthquakes in the 6th century , revived during the Umayyad period . Their harbors and shipyards showed renewed activity , and the hinterland saw extensive irrigation work for agriculture . 
 Lebanon was directly affected by the various dynastic changes which brought to power successively the Umayyads , Abbasids , Fatimids , Seljuks , Ayyubids and Mamluks . During this long period , Islam spread and Arabic became the language of the administration , then progressively replaced local dialects among the population . Artifacts from the Mamluk period ( 636 – 1516 AD ) include coins , gold jewelry , and glazed terracotta bowls . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Maurice Chehab initiated in 1936 the museum 's first publication , the Bulletin du Musée de Beyrouth ( " Beirut Museum Bulletin " ) , which reached 36 volumes before publication was stopped in 1986 by the civil war . The journal covered archaeological finds , sites and ancient civilizations . In 1995 the Museum and the Lebanese British Friends of the National Museum foundation resumed publication of a bi @-@ annual journal entitled Archaeology and History in Lebanon ( ISSN 1475 @-@ <unk> ) . <unk> ( " Bulletin d ’ <unk> et d ’ Architecture <unk> " – Lebanese Archaeology and Architecture Bulletin ) is an annual journal issued by the Directorate General of Antiquities in cooperation with the Lebanese Ministry of Culture in keeping in the tradition of the Beirut Museum Bulletin . The first volume of <unk> was issued in 1996 ; the journal publishes research papers , excavations and archaeological surveys and reports . 
 = = Location and facilities = = 
 The museum is located in Beirut 's <unk> 'a district on the intersection of Abdallah al @-@ <unk> avenue and Damascus road ; it is flanked by the Beirut hippodrome and the Directorate General of Antiquities building . The museum 's ground floor houses a restoration lab , a small theater and a gift shop . < / ref name = " Museum " > 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = You Don 't Know Anything = 
 " You Don 't Know Anything " is a song recorded by American indie rock band Ivy . It was released by Atlantic Records on April 29 , 1999 as the fourth and final single from their second studio album , Apartment Life ( 1997 ) . The single was made available exclusively in Europe and featured the same two B @-@ sides as previous single , " This Is the Day " , which had been released by 550 Music in Austria . The track was written by Dominique Durand , Adam Schlesinger and Andy Chase while production was handled by the latter two and Peter Nashel . 
 Released alongside " This Is the Day " , " You Don 't Know Anything " received promotion by Atlantic Records after the former track was included on the soundtrack for the 1998 film , There 's Something About Mary . The recording received generally favorable reviews from music critics who compared the song to the works of Irish rock group My Bloody Valentine . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " You Don 't Know Anything " was written by Ivy band members Dominique Durand , Adam Schlesinger and Andy Chase . The production of the track was handled by Chase and Schlesinger , with additional production provided by Peter Nashel . Musically , " You Don 't Know Anything " is a pop rock / indie rock song , also incorporating elements of indie pop and guitar accords . Lyrically , the song discusses a lover being " clueless " and " in the wrong " . 
 The single was heavily compared to My Bloody Valentine ; in their review of the track , Sputnikmusic stated that it " comes off like a My Bloody Valentine song with intelligible vocals , with a sliding , reverb heavy hook and pummeling drums " , while AllMusic writer Jack Rabid drew similar comparisons . Patrick <unk> of West Net stated that with " You Don 't Know Anything " , Ivy " have an indie @-@ ethic rock side that compliments their pop sensibilities to the tee " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The recording was released simultaneously with the release of the single " This Is the Day " ; this occurred after the latter track was featured in the 1998 film , There 's Something About Mary . " You Don 't Know Anything " was released as a CD single exclusively in European countries ; the CD included two B @-@ side tracks , " Sleeping Late " and " Sweet Mary " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " You Don 't Know Anything " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Stephen Thompson of The A.V. Club praised the track and Apartment Life for " sound [ ing ] slickly pretty and mannered " . A reviewer from Sputnikmusic also enjoyed the recording , calling it a " mid @-@ album stand out " , while AllMusic named the song " a knockout " and praised it for having " the guitars get mean " . Reviewer Scott <unk> was more mixed with his review , finding the track to " pass by pleasantly but <unk> " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from " You Don 't Know Anything " liner notes and Andy Chase 's discography . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at The Place , New York City ; <unk> Studios , New York City ; and Compositions , New York City 
 Personnel 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Heartbreak Hotel = 
 " Heartbreak Hotel " is a song recorded by American singer Elvis Presley . It was released as a single on January 27 , 1956 , Presley 's first on his new record label RCA Victor . It was written by Tommy Durden and Mae Boren Axton . 
 A newspaper article about the suicide of a lonely man who jumped from a hotel window inspired the lyrics . Axton presented the song to Presley in November 1955 at a country music convention in Nashville . Presley agreed to record it , and did so on January 10 , 1956 , in a session with his band , the Blue Moon Boys , the guitarist Chet Atkins , and the pianist Floyd Cramer . " Heartbreak Hotel " comprises an eight @-@ bar blues progression , with heavy reverberation throughout the track , to imitate the character of Presley 's Sun recordings . 
 The single topped Billboard 's Top 100 chart for seven weeks , Cashbox 's pop singles chart for six weeks , was number one on the Country and Western chart for seventeen weeks and reached number three on the R & B chart , becoming Presley 's first million @-@ seller , and one of the best @-@ selling singles of 1956 . " Heartbreak Hotel " achieved unheard of feats as it reached the top 5 of Country and Western , pop , and Rhythm ' n ' Blues charts simultaneously . It would eventually be certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . Presley had first performed " Heartbreak Hotel " during a live show in December 1955 during a tour of the Louisiana Hayride , but the song gained strong popularity after his appearance on Stage Show in March 1956 . It became a staple of Presley 's repertoire in live appearances , last performed by him on May 29 , 1977 , at the Civic Center in Baltimore , Maryland . 
 In 1995 " Heartbreak Hotel " was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame , and in 2004 Rolling Stone magazine named it one of the " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . That year it was also included in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's " 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll " . A rock and roll standard , since its original release " Heartbreak Hotel " has been covered by several rock and pop acts , including Willie Nelson and Leon Russell , who recorded a duet version that topped the Country charts in 1979 . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 The song was written in 1955 , by Mae Boren Axton , a high school teacher with a background in musical promotion , and Jacksonville based singer – songwriter Tommy Durden . The lyrics were based on a report supposedly in The Miami Herald about a man who had destroyed all his identity papers and jumped to his death from a hotel window , leaving a suicide note with the single line , " I walk a lonely street " . In 2016 , an article in Rolling Stone magazine suggested that the story in reality originated from a report about a painter and petty criminal , Alvin Krolik , whose marriage had failed and who wrote a partial autobiography including the line " This is the story of a person who walked a lonely street . " Krolik 's story was published in news media , and received further publicity after he was shot and killed in an attempted robbery in El Paso , Texas . On August 25 , 1955 , the El Paso Times reported Krolik 's death under the headline " Story Of Person Who Walked Lonely Street " . 
 Axton and Durden give different accounts of how the song was written . Durden 's account is that he had already written the song and performed it with his band the Swing <unk> before he presented it to Axton . Axton 's account is that Durden had only written a few lines of the song and asked her to help him finish it . She says that the report of the suicide " stunned " her , and she told Durden , " Everybody in the world has someone who cares . Let 's put a Heartbreak Hotel at the end of this lonely street " . They were interrupted by the arrival of Glen Reeves , a local performer who had previously worked with Axton . The duo asked Reeves to help with the song , but after hearing the title he remarked that it was " the silliest thing I 've ever heard " , and left them to finish it themselves . The song was written within an hour , and Durden recorded it onto Axton 's tape recorder . Reeves returned , and after hearing the song he was asked to provide a voice demo for Axton in the style of Elvis Presley . Reeves obliged , but once again turned down the offer of a writing credit for his input . 
 Axton approached the popular singing duo the Wilburn Brothers , and offered them the chance to record " Heartbreak Hotel " . However , Doyle and Teddy Wilburn declined , describing the song as " strange and almost morbid " . Axton , however , agreed to a publishing deal with Buddy Killen , a young Nashville bass player , who had recently set up his own publishing company called Tree Publishing . With a publishing deal in place , Axton arranged through Presley 's manager Colonel Tom Parker to present the song to Presley at the annual Country Music Disc Jockey Convention in Nashville , Tennessee , where he was to be named the most promising male country star of 1955 . Axton had been hired earlier in the year to publicise the Hank Snow Jamboree concerts at the Gator Bowl Stadium in Jacksonville , Florida , which included Presley in the line up . During one concert Axton observed the reaction of the audience to Presley 's performance , in which a crowd of screaming fans chased him back to his dressing room and ripped his clothes off to take as souvenirs . Axton followed Presley 's career closely after this incident , and met him at a July 28 concert in Jacksonville , this time interviewing him for the local media . According to author Albert Goldman , Axton made writing Presley 's first big hit one of her ambitions . 
 Rumors had been circulating in the press for several weeks that Presley , who had begun his career at Sun Records , was ready to move to RCA Victor to help launch him nationally . Axton played the demo to him in his room at the Andrew Jackson Hotel on November 10 , 1955 . Upon hearing the demo , Presley exclaimed " Hot dog , Mae , play that again ! " , and listened to it ten times , memorizing the song . After signing with RCA on November 21 , 1955 , Presley accepted Axton 's offer of a third of the royalties if he made the song his first single on his new label . Presley performed the song for the first time in <unk> , Arkansas on December 9 , 1955 , and declared to the audience that it would be his first hit . 
 = = Recording = = 
 " Heartbreak Hotel " was the second song Presley recorded at RCA Victor , following " I Got a Woman " , during his debut session at 1525 <unk> Street in Nashville on January 10 , 1956 . Presley arrived at the studio with the song ready to record without seeking RCA 's approval , and although producer Steve Sholes was not sure that it would be a success , he recorded " Heartbreak Hotel " believing that Presley knew what he was doing . Recording at RCA Victor was a different experience for Presley and his band , who were used to a more relaxed atmosphere at Sun Studio . Guitar player Scotty Moore later commented , " It was a larger studio than Sun 's and more regimented - they called everything by a tape number . We would sit around at Sun , eat hamburgers and then somebody would say , ' Let 's try something . ' " 
 Almost immediately Sholes discovered a problem while recording Presley . RCA Victor had always insisted their performers stay still as they sang so the microphone would pick up the vocals ; even the slightest tilt of the head would result in missing sound . Sholes had told Presley to stand on a painted X on the floor , telling him " Whatever you do , don 't move " . During the recording of " I Got a Woman " , Sholes noticed that Presley 's voice and guitar were not always being picked up by the microphone . Presley explained to Sholes that he had to " jump around to sing it right . It 's something that just happens — just a part of the way I sing " . Sholes arranged for the whole studio to be re @-@ miked so that Presley 's voice and guitar could be picked up from anywhere in the studio , and recording continued . 
 As well as the Blue Moon Boys , his regular backing band of Moore , bassist Bill Black and drummer D.J. Fontana , Presley was joined by established RCA Victor musicians Chet Atkins ( who also helped Sholes produce the session ) on guitar , and Floyd Cramer on piano . Following a suggestion from Presley , Sholes used a hallway at the studio to get an unusual echo for the single . Sholes was attempting to recapture the Sun Records sound , but he was unaware that Sun founder Sam Phillips had used two tape recorders and a slight time delay to create it on previous Presley recordings . When Phillips first heard " Heartbreak Hotel " , he remarked that it was a " morbid mess " . Most others at RCA agreed , declaring " Heartbreak Hotel " a terrible choice of song , especially after hearing that the finished recording sounded nothing like Presley 's Sun recordings . Internal memos from the time show that every one of RCA 's executive corps disliked it so much that one of them insisted " We certainly can 't release that one " . 
 In an interview , Durden conceded that he did not recognize his song after Presley had made the changes to it in the studio , including the tempo , phrasing , lyrics , and overall sound . In subsequent recordings , these major modifications to the existing material became a normal procedure for Presley who took over the role of producer , although Sholes was still credited . Speaking of Sholes ' producing credits , Phillips said " he was not a producer . Steve was just at every session " . 
 Mae Boren Axton was <unk> by Elvis ' manager , Colonel Parker , into giving up a third of the song 's royalties to Elvis , as well as adding Elvis ' name to the list of songwriters for the song . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Heartbreak Hotel " was released as a single on January 27 , 1956 , with B @-@ side " I Was the One " , a song that was also recorded during Presley 's RCA debut sessions . Billboard magazine praised it as " a strong blues item wrapped up in his usual powerful style and a great beat " . However , " Heartbreak Hotel " was less @-@ than @-@ warmly received by the British music press . The New Musical Express wrote that , " If you appreciate good singing , I don 't suppose you 'll manage to hear this disc all through " . BBC , which held a monopoly on broadcasting in Britain at the time , didn 't consider it fit for general entertainment and placed it on its " restricted play " list . 
 Presley made his national television debut on January 28 , appearing on CBS ' Stage Show , starring Tommy and Jimmy Dorsey . As Stage Show 's ratings had been slipping , producer Jack Philbin agreed to have Presley on because he was relatively cheap at $ 1 @,@ 250 ; after looking at a photograph of the singer , Philbin exclaimed , " He 's a guitar playing Marlon Brando ! " Despite the single having been released only a day before to coincide with Presley 's national television debut , the Dorsey brothers did not allow Presley to perform it on their show because it didn 't work well in rehearsals . For his second appearance , on February 4 , Presley was again aware that he could not perform " Heartbreak Hotel " . However , at his third appearance on Stage Show a week later , Sholes pressured CBS to give consent . Subsequently , Presley and his band performed " Heartbreak Hotel " with borrowed instruments ( their own were being driven to Florida in preparation for a tour ) with the backing of the Dorsey Brothers ' orchestra . 
 On February 22 , the song entered the Billboard pop chart at number 68 , and the Country and Western chart at number nine . Within two months , " Heartbreak Hotel " reached number one on both charts . It also made top five on the R & B chart , the first Presley single to chart there . This resulted in " Heartbreak Hotel " becoming only the second single in history to reach all three Billboard charts , after Carl Perkins ' " Blue Suede Shoes " . The song spent a total of twenty @-@ seven weeks in the top 100 . By April , " Heartbreak Hotel " became a million @-@ seller , earning Presley his first RIAA @-@ certified gold record , and going on to be the biggest selling single of 1956 . " Heartbreak Hotel / I Was the One " was certified Platinum by on March 27 , 1992 and 2 × Platinum on July 15 , 1999 by the RIAA . The song made its debut on the UK Singles Chart in May 1956 ; it peaked at the second spot the next month and stayed on the charts for 22 weeks . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Elvis Presley – lead vocals 
 Scotty Moore – electric guitar 
 Chet Atkins – acoustic guitar 
 Bill Black – double bass 
 D.J. Fontana – drums 
 Floyd Cramer – piano 
 Steve Sholes – producer , A & R 
 Bob Farris – engineer 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Presley would perform the song during most of his live shows between 1956 and 1977 , performing it for the last time on May 29 , 1977 , at the Civic Center in Baltimore , Maryland . The song has been released on almost every Presley compilation album since 1956 , and alternative takes have also surfaced on several compilation albums . " Heartbreak Hotel " was awarded by the Broadcast Music Incorporated in its Country music Awards . It was re @-@ released in 1971 for the UK market where it charted at number ten . In 1979 , following Presley 's death , author Robert Matthew @-@ Walker wrote " Heartbreak Hotel became one of the legendary rock performances . For many people it is Elvis Presley , and it continues to excite and fascinate listeners . Heartbreak Hotel is a classic performance , yet when it is analyzed it appears so simple that one cannot recall a time when one did not know it . " In 1995 , the song was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame , and was re @-@ released in 1996 to coincide with the fortieth anniversary of its recording . 
 In a 1975 interview , John Lennon recalled his friend Don Beatty introducing him to Presley 's music . Lennon said that his family rarely had the radio on , unlike other members of the Beatles who grew up under its influence . Beatty showed Lennon a picture of Presley that appeared along with the charts on the New Musical Express , and Lennon later heard " Heartbreak Hotel " on Radio Luxembourg . Lennon has said : 
 When I first heard " Heartbreak Hotel " , I could hardly make out what was being said . It was just the experience of hearing it and having my hair stand on end . We 'd never heard American voices singing like that . They always sang like Sinatra or enunciate very well . Suddenly , there 's this hillbilly hiccuping on tape echo and all this bluesy stuff going on . And we didn 't know what Elvis was singing about ... It took us a long time to work what was going on . To us , it just sounded as a noise that was great 
 George Harrison described " Heartbreak Hotel " as a " rock n roll epiphany " when in 1956 , at age 13 , he overheard it while riding his bike at a neighbor 's house . Some have said that " Heartbreak Hotel " turned that well @-@ mannered schoolboy into a guitar @-@ crazed truant who would audition for John Lennon 's Quarrymen the following year . 
 The Rolling Stones ' guitarist Keith Richards wrote in his 2010 autobiography that " Heartbreak Hotel " had had a huge effect on him . Beyond Presley 's singing itself , it was the total effect of his sound and his silence that so totally affected Richards : 
 Then , " Since my baby left me " — it was just the sound ... That was the first rock and roll I heard . It was a totally different way of delivering a song , a totally different sound , stripped down , no bullshit , no violins and ladies ' choruses and schmaltz , totally different . It was bare right to the roots that you had a feeling were there but hadn 't yet heard . I 've got to take my hat off to Elvis . The silence is your canvas , that 's your frame , that 's what you work on ; don 't try and deafen it out . That 's what " Heartbreak Hotel " did to me . It was the first time I 'd heard something so stark . 
 Led Zeppelin 's lead singer Robert Plant stated that the song " changed his life . " He recalled hearing it for the first time when he was eight years old : 
 It was so animal , so sexual , the first musical arousal I ever had . You could see a twitch in everybody my age . All we knew about the guy was that he was cool , handsome and looked wild . 
 Critic Robert Cantwell wrote in his unpublished memoir Twigs of Folly : 
 The opening strains of " Heartbreak Hotel " , which catapulted Presley 's regional popularity into national hysteria , opened a fissure in the massive mile @-@ thick wall of post @-@ war regimentation , standardization , <unk> , and commercialization in American society and let come rushing through the rift a cataract from the immense waters of sheer , human pain and frustration that have been building up for ten decades behind it . 
 President Bill Clinton performed the song on saxophone during his appearance on The Arsenio Hall Show on June 3 , 1992 . In 2004 it was ranked number forty @-@ five on Rolling Stone 's list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " , the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame included it in its unranked list 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll and in 2005 , Uncut magazine ranked the first performance of " Heartbreak Hotel " in 1956 by Presley as the second greatest and most important cultural event of the rock and roll era . Paul McCartney , who participated in Uncut 's poll stated , " It 's the way [ Presley ] sings it as if he is singing from the depths of hell . His phrasing , use of echo , it 's all so beautiful . Musically , it 's perfect . " 
 Heartbreak Hotel , a film based on a mythical incident involving the kidnapping of Presley , was released theatrically in 1988 . It starred David Keith as Elvis Presley , and was directed by Chris Columbus . In 1999 , Elvis Presley Enterprises purchased a Wilson World Hotel branch and after several renovations , opened it and named the hotel after the song , located across the street from Presley 's home , Graceland , in Memphis , Tennessee . 
 In 2015 , " Heartbreak Hotel " was named as The # 2 Song of the Rock Era in the book The Top 500 Songs of the Rock Era : 1955 @-@ 2015 . 
 = = Early cover versions = = 
 Radio humorist Stan Freberg parodied " Heartbreak Hotel " immediately after its release , because the vocals on the original record featured a heavy use of reverb . In the cover , the lead singer repeatedly asks for " more echo on [ his ] voice . " When Presley recorded " Hound Dog " a few months later , he had taken over the role of producer , using what he learned at Sun Records ( although Sholes was still credited ) and decided not to use echo . 
 Connie Francis recorded the song for her 1959 album Rock ' n ' Roll Million Sellers ; this album also features " Don 't Be Cruel " . Country singer Johnny Cash parodied the song in 1959 on the television show Town Hall Party , imitating Presley 's characteristic crib and hip movements . Before the performance Cash explained that it was " an impersonation of a rock and roll singer impersonating Elvis , is what this really is " . 
 Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn noted that , at first as The Quarrymen then later as the Beatles , the group performed " Heartbreak Hotel " live from 1957 until 1961 ( in Liverpool then later in Hamburg and elsewhere ) . It is unclear whether the lead vocal was by John Lennon or Paul McCartney or both . A recorded version has not been forthcoming . However , McCartney ( using Bill Black 's upright bass ) did a version for a documentary Elvis - Viva Las Vegas , which also appears on DVD . 
 = = Later renditions = = 
 Part of the original personnel of the 1956 recording released their own versions , Chet Atkins recorded it for the 1963 album The Guitar Genius , and also , Presley 's lead guitarist Scotty Moore recorded the song for his 1964 album The Guitar that Changed the world . Willie Nelson and Leon Russell had a number one cover version in 1979 on the country charts , it was Russell 's only number one hit on the charts . 
