 Paul McCartney later also made another cover of the song in Chaos and Creation at Abbey Road , performing it with Bill Black 's bass . Others who have covered the song include Ann @-@ Margret , who would later co @-@ star with Presley in the 1964 motion picture Viva Las Vegas , the Cadets , Delaney Bramlett , Justin Timberlake , Cher , Roger Miller , Bob Dylan , Bruce Springsteen , John Cale , Merle Haggard , Tom Jones , Dax Riggs , Roger McGuinn , Suzi Quatro , Van Halen , Jimi Hendrix , Neil Diamond , Lynyrd Skynyrd , and Guns N ' Roses . 
 In the 1992 film Honeymoon in Vegas , Billy Joel made a version of " Heartbreak Hotel " and " All Shook Up " , while the same year in True Romance , actor Val Kilmer performed an a cappella version . Nicole Kidman and Hugh Jackman covered the song in a medley with Prince 's " Kiss " , for the 2006 Warner Bros. film Happy Feet . The song was also featured in Alvin and the Chipmunks ' 1990 television special Rockin ' Through the Decades , as part of the fifties medley and its soundtrack and again for the 2007 video game Alvin and the Chipmunks . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Elvis Presley = = = 
 = = = Willie Nelson and Leon Russell = = = 
 = St Kilda , South Australia = 
 St Kilda is a seaside suburb in Adelaide , South Australia . St Kilda has a small number of houses and a 2006 population of 246 . There is a single connecting road to the rest of Adelaide which , where the road enters the suburb 's residential area , is surrounded by salt crystallisation lagoons used in the manufacture of soda ash . The inhabited section of the suburb occupies less than 100 hectares along the seafront , with the remainder used for salt lagoons and also settlement ponds of nearby Bolivar sewage treatment works . 
 What was originally a seaside town was named by John Harvey , the founder of nearby Salisbury , as it reminded him of St Kilda in the Outer Hebrides of Scotland with its similar abundance of birdlife . St Kilda is an internationally recognised bird watching area with over 100 species of birds feeding in and around the mudflats , salt Lagoons , mangroves and seagrass beds . The suburb is home to a number of tourist attractions , including an adventure playground , tram museum , mangrove forest walk and an abundance of birdlife . 
 = = History = = 
 The suburb was originally three low lying islands that were covered in shell grit and saltbush and surrounded by mangrove and samphire swamps . Fishermen had established huts on the islands by 1865 and by 1873 there were 13 huts and a boathouse recorded when the area was surveyed by Thomas Evans . By the 1890s people were visiting the islands attracted to the supposed curative properties of the mangrove mud , using the beach for bathing and fishing for crabs . 
 St Kilda was proclaimed a town on 31 July 1893 with sales of the first allotments made on the same day . In 1886 it became part of the Munno Para West District Council area , moving to the district of Salisbury on 1 July 1933 along with most of the Munno Para West area . The islands were extensively modified after floods in 1948 and 1957 which cut off St Kilda from the rest of Adelaide . Salisbury council began building up the area , expanding seawalls and reclaiming additional land by dumping of earth spoil . 
 The St Kilda Hotel , built out of limestone from east of what is now Elizabeth , opened in 1898 with Matthias Lucas as the first publican and remains the suburb 's only hotel . A school opened in October 1902 , where the tram museum is now sited , admitting students in November of the same year . The school was closed from 1917 to 1924 and finally closed permanently in 1949 with students moving to Salisbury North Primary School and the building eventually being used at Virginia Primary School . In 1924 a telegraph office opened in Shell Street and , due to the suburb of St Kilda in Melbourne having the same name , the post office service requested that the name be changed . Over some local objections the name was changed to <unk> ( a Kaurna word for Where the tide comes in ) but this was reversed after local protests . <unk> Telegraph Office opened in 1924 , was upgraded to a post office in 1945 , renamed Saint Kilda in 1965 and closed in 1974 . 
 St Kilda 's population has never been large with 50 non @-@ permanent residents counted in the 1901 census , 68 ( including 20 permanent ) in 1911 , 30 total residents in 1933 , 80 in 2002 and increasing to 246 by 2006 . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Adventure Playground = = = 
 St Kilda 's adventure playground covers 4 hectares along the seafront and is one of South Australia 's best known . The playground has a constructed shipwreck , wooden castle , huge slides , a spiral slide inside a hill , flying foxes and numerous other pieces of play equipment , with South Australian children naming it in 2002 as the best adventure park in the state . 
 The park was conceived by the Lions club of Salisbury and funded through club fundraising activities , council matching funding and government employment schemes providing free labour . It was opened by Salisbury mayor Ron White on 24 October 1982 and has had recent upgrades to the park , including a shaded set of equipment shaped like a submarine for younger children , and the building of a small maze . 
 = = = St Kilda Boat Club and marina = = = 
 St Kilda has an extensive marina with floating moorings for about 50 boats , two boat ramps and a sheltered channel out into the Barker Inlet , part of Gulf St Vincent . Recently expanded the marina now has hard stands for boats and some slipping facilities . 
 The boat club was founded as the " St Kilda <unk> Association Incorporated " in 1964 , after permission was gained from the council and landowners to develop St Kilda tidal creek as the area lacked boat launching facilities . The creek was straightened and deepened repeatedly , originally by hand , and a causeway extended out to sea to protect the channel . A new clubhouse was opened by MP Lynn Arnold in 1980 and the latest boat ramp in 2002 by the mayor of Salisbury Tony <unk> . 
 = = = Saltwater lagoons = = = 
 Large , constructed saltwater evaporation lagoons surround the only road into the suburb . Imperial Chemical Industries ( ICI ) began construction of the Solar Evaporation Lagoons in 1935 using up to 600 workers to dig out the lagoons by hand and then expanded them mechanically after World War II . The lagoons stretch in a broken chain from Dry Creek to Port Gawler alongside the Barker Inlet , and are approximately 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) north – south by 3 kilometres ( 2 mi ) east – west . The lagoons are filled in spring and salt normally harvested in autumn when it is piped as saturated brine solution to Osborne on the Le Fevre peninsula , and used by <unk> Soda Products in the only soda ash production facility in Australia . The lagoons proliferate with bird life and have been recognised as a bird sanctuary due to their status as an important breeding and feeding area for species from as far away as Alaska . As of 2006 the Lagoons are operated by Cheetham Salt Limited with 600 @,@ 000 tonnes of salt used by <unk> in creating soda ash via the <unk> process . 
 = = = Mangrove trail and interpretative centre = = = 
 St Kilda is adjacent to the mangrove forest bordering Barker Inlet , part of the largest tidal estuary of Gulf St Vincent . Late in the 19th Century embankments were constructed through the mangroves in an effort to reclaim land for pasturing . With the construction of the banks of the adjacent <unk> maintenance of the embankments ceased and the mangroves began to reclaim them . One of these embankments is used as the beginning of a boardwalk through the mangroves which forms a 1 @.@ 7 km loop through the samphire saltmarsh flats and mangroves reaching the border between the ocean and forest . 
 The boardwalk was constructed in 1984 by the City of Salisbury to encourage appreciation of the mangrove 's ecological importance . On 29 April 1995 , South Australian Premier Dean Brown and federal MP Chris Schacht opened the St Kilda <unk> Centre at the entrance to the boardwalk which showcases the flora , fauna and processes within the mangrove forest . Since 1997 the mangrove trail has been privately managed , hosting school visits as well as casual visitors . 
 The boardwalk is within the barker inlet aquatic reserve , where the taking of crabs shellfish and plants is prohibited and pets are not allowed . The mangroves , saltmarsh and adjacent lagoons form a habitat for over 200 bird species with the mangroves being part of a nursery area for most of the commercial and recreational fish species of Gulf St Vincent . The 2005 Adelaide Dolphin Sanctuary Act established a sanctuary for the Bottlenose dolphins that live in the inlet and adjacent Port River . The sanctuary 's northern extent is the boat channel and dolphins can sometimes be seen at high tide in the tidal creeks passing under the boardwalk . 
 = = = Tramway museum = = = 
 Adelaide had an extensive tram system , beginning as horse trams in 1878 , moving to electric trams in 1909 and reduced in 1958 to a single tram line which then ran from Adelaide 's Central Business District to Glenelg . Built on the site of the 1902 school , the Adelaide Tramway Museum at St Kilda showcases trams and trolleybuses that were either used or built in Adelaide . The museum is operated by the Australian Electric Transport Museum ( SA ) Inc , a not @-@ for @-@ profit volunteer organisation accredited with the History Trust of South Australia and dedicated to preserving and restoring Adelaide ’ s former transport vehicles . The museum houses over 30 electric trams , horse trams and electric trolley buses , many of which are restored and operational . Visitors can ride the electric trams along 2 km of purpose @-@ built track that runs between the museum and the adventure playground . 
 Work commenced in 1958 with the arrival of donated vehicles , the first of which was an old trolley bus from the Municipal Tramways Trust , and the museum was opened in 1967 as a static display . Workshops were built to enable the restoration of the old trams to operating condition and , in 2001 a large additional museum building was completed so as to house the increasing number of donated trams . 
 ICI , then operator of the salt lagoons , donated land for the tramway to run down the side of the main St Kilda road between the museum and the sea with funding obtained from the State Unemployment Relief Scheme . The tramway opened for trials in 1973 and was officially opened in 1974 by Harry Bowey , mayor of Salisbury , and Frank Kneebone , Minister for Lands , to coincide with St Kilda 's centenary . 
 The tram used in the opening ceremonies and now housed at the museum was Adelaide 's first electric tram , which had its trial run on 30 November 1908 and first operated in 1909 . The museum 's collection continues to expand with Adelaide tram 104 the latest acquisition . After spending 48 years as a shack on the Yorke Peninsula it will be stored , and possibly restored , at the museum on behalf of the Sydney tramway museum . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Flora 
 The mangroves found on the coastline of St Kilda consist of a single species , Avicennia marina var <unk> . In the upper intertidal zone mangroves are reduced in size landwards and give way to a variety of samphire species , including beaded glasswort ( Tecticornia flabelliformis ) and <unk> glasswort ( Tecticornia <unk> ) as well as saltbush on the <unk> of the <unk> zone . Nitre bush grows on the highest parts of the seawall and the abundant summer fruits provide a food source for birds . 
 Fauna 
 St Kilda is part of a nursery area for many of the commercially important fish and crustaceans in South Australian including King George whiting , western king prawns and blue swimmer crabs . There are brown snakes and skinks in dense bushes along the top of the embankments . 
 Each year in late summer thousands of black swans and ducks descend on the area as the inland waterways they inhabit dry up . Waterbirds such as pelicans , cormorants , oyster catchers and terns are common often year round . <unk> , ibis , herons and spoonbills feed on the seagrass and fairy wrens , chats , fantails and thornbills feed on insects and plants amongst the samphire . Each September stints and sandpipers arrive from the Northern Hemisphere in a spectacular display . With the abundance of birdlife the area attracts birds of prey with swamp harriers , collared sparrowhawks , black @-@ shouldered kites , kestrels and little falcons are all seen in the skies over St Kilda . 
 The salt lagoons , mangroves and samphire wetlands are recognised as important areas for migratory birds by their coverage under the China @-@ Australia and Japan @-@ Australia migratory bird agreements . The agreements are treaties created to for the protection of the birds and their environment . 
 = = Geography = = 
 St Kilda is a flat , low lying suburb mostly less than 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) above sea level , dominated by the salt lagoons managed by Cheetham Salt , and the treatment ponds of SA Water 's nearby Bolivar sewage works . The lagoons , ponds and surrounding land are fenced off and generally closed to the public . 
 Transport 
 St Kilda road is the only access road and connects to Port Wakefield road at Waterloo Corner . St Kilda can be driven to from Salisbury in approximately 10 minutes and from Adelaide 's CBD in 30 minutes . There are no scheduled bus services with the nearest public transport the <unk> 900 bus route which passes along Port Wakefield road , 2 kilometres outside the suburb 's boundary . 
 Weather 
 Adelaide has a Mediterranean climate with St Kilda being slightly hotter and dryer than the Adelaide average . Summer daytime temperatures can be expected to exceed 40 ° C on 4 days of the year . Conversely , nighttime temperatures in winter are expected to drop below 0 ° C on 1 day , although generally the season is mild with moderate rainfall . 
 = Mercury Hayes = 
 Mercury Wayne Hayes ( born January 1 , 1973 ) is a former professional American football and Canadian football wide receiver , kickoff returner , and punt returner . He has played in the National Football League ( NFL ) for the New Orleans Saints and Atlanta Falcons , and he has played in the Canadian Football League ( CFL ) for the Montreal Alouettes . Prior to his professional football experience he was a University of Michigan Wolverines football star . He was drafted with the 136th overall pick in the 5th round of the 1996 National Football League draft . 
 Although he had a modest professional career , he was involved in many of the University of Michigan 's most memorable football moments . He is notable for his game @-@ winning catch in the 1995 Pigskin Classic against the University of Virginia . Hayes also once held the Michigan record for consecutive games with a reception ( 30 ) . Hayes was a member of the 1992 Big Ten Champions who won the 1993 Rose Bowl . He had attended Booker T. Washington High School in Houston , Texas . 
 = = College career = = 
 After attending Booker T. Washington High School in Houston , Hayes , son of Richard Hayes , was recruited by several college football programs . He selected the University of Michigan over several elite football programs , including the Colorado Buffaloes , Florida State Seminoles , Arkansas Razorbacks , and USC Trojans . During Hayes ' Michigan Wolverines career , the team 's best finish was as 1992 Big Ten Conference Champions , when coached by Gary Moeller . During that year , the team finished ranked fifth nationally in both the Associated Press college football final poll and the CNN / USA Today college football final poll , and the team beat the Washington Huskies 38 – 31 in the January 1 , 1993 Rose Bowl in a game that is memorable for Tyrone Wheatley 's MVP performance . Hayes had a 10 @-@ yard reception during the game . 
 Hayes ' 179 @-@ yard performance against the Virginia Cavaliers was the 1995 single @-@ game high by any of the Wolverines wide receivers , tight ends and running backs , which included Amani Toomer , Jay Riemersma , Chris Howard , Jerame Tuman , Tshimanga Biakabutuka , Tai Streets and Chris Floyd . The effort tied Jack Clancy 's 1966 single @-@ game total and Amani Toomer 's 1994 single @-@ game total for fourth on the Michigan all @-@ time single game reception yards list . It is worth noting that Clancy is the Michigan all @-@ time single @-@ game yardage recordholder at 197 yards . Braylon Edwards and Tai Streets have since surpassed 179 yards , in 2004 and 1998 respectively , to move the trio down to sixth . Hayes ' 48 receptions and 923 yards also led all Wolverines in receiving for the 1995 season . At the end of his Michigan career , Hayes ' 923 yards ranked sixth on the single @-@ season yardage list , but it is now fifteenth . His <unk> career yards ranked fifth and now ranks eleventh . The quarterbacks during his 1995 season were Brian Griese and Scott Dreisbach . Other quarterbacks during his collegiate career were Todd Collins and Elvis Grbac . 
 In 1995 , Hayes established the Michigan football record for most consecutive games with a reception by stringing together thirty such games . His record was broken by Marquise Walker 's 32 games in 2001 and later surpassed by Braylon Edwards 's 38 games and Jason Avant 's 35 games . Hayes ranks tenth in career yards per reception at 17 @.@ 3 and eleventh in career all @-@ purpose yards . He is listed prominently among Michigan 's all @-@ time leaders in kickoff returns and yards as well as total returns ( kickoff , punt , fumble and interception ) and return yards . 
 Amani Toomer and Hayes were the fourth pair of Michigan receivers to have played together with 2000 career reception yards . With 2 @,@ 144 career yards and 124 receptions he ranks 10th and 12th on the All @-@ time Michigan lists 2 yards behind Desmond Howard and 1 reception behind Derrick Alexander respectively . 
 = = Notable games = = 
 Hayes , who wore # 9 for the Michigan Wolverines from 1992 to 1995 , was recruited by University of Colorado , Florida State University , University of Arkansas , and University of Southern California . The University of Colorado was so interested in having him in the 1992 incoming class with <unk> Detmer and Rashaan Salaam that they reserved their 25th scholarship for him , hoping he would change his mind after having committed to Michigan . 
 In the September 24 , 1994 Miracle at Michigan , # 7 @-@ ranked Colorado , with former Michigan coaching staff member Bill McCartney as their coach , exacted their revenge on # 4 @-@ ranked Michigan . Kordell Stewart completed a 64 @-@ yard hail <unk> pass to Detroit native Michael Westbrook against Ty Law and Chuck Winters as time expired to complete a miracle 27 – 26 comeback . In the game , Hayes had 3 receptions for 62 yards as well as a run for 14 yards . He also returned 3 kickoffs for 54 yards . The ending of this game has been described as one of the two wildest finishes in University of Michigan Football history . 
 Hayes is notable for his 7 @-@ reception 179 @-@ yard performance culminating in a game @-@ winning , fourth down , time expired 15 @-@ yard touchdown catch on August 26 , 1995 from Scott Dreisbach to seal an 18 – 17 win in Michigan 's greatest comeback , a record that stood for eight years until 2003 , when the Wolverines pulled off a 21 @-@ point comeback against Minnesota . The reception was recorded against University of Virginia Cavaliers defensive backs Ronde Barber and Paul London in the Pigskin Classic to complete what was at the time the largest comeback in Michigan Football history in Lloyd Carr 's coaching debut . The game constituted the other of the two wildest finishes in Michigan Football history . 
 Hayes is notable as one of the victims of Beaver Stadium attendees ' ice and snowball hurling on November 18 , 1995 . In the game , Hayes caught 6 receptions for 132 yards and had 3 kickoff returns for 48 yards . The game ended as a 27 – 17 loss to the Penn State Nittany Lions . 
 Hayes also had season highs in reception yards as a freshman and sophomore against his hometown Houston Cougars football team . As a sophomore , he totalled 127 yards on six receptions ; three punt returns for 38 yards ; and two kickoff returns for 54 yards in a 42 – 21 win on September 25 , 1993 . The game included Hayes ' longest punt return as a Wolverine ( 26 yards ) and represented Hayes career high in all @-@ purpose yards . The game was also Hayes ' third highest receiving yards total and the highest total he would have until his senior season . The freshman game , Michigan 's third of the season , marked Hayes ' debut as a kickoff returner . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 The 1996 NFL draft was a quality draft for wide receivers . Among the wide receivers drafted that year were first rounders Keyshawn Johnson , Terry Glenn , Eddie <unk> , Marvin Harrison and Eric Moulds . Additionally , Bobby Engram , Terrell Owens , Muhsin Muhammad , Joe Horn and former Michigan teammate Amani Toomer were also drafted that year . Hayes was the first of three 1996 fifth round picks by the Saints . He was drafted just after Pro Bowl wide receiver Joe Horn , the 135th pick . Mercury Hayes ' NFL career longest reception of 50 yards , caught in week 14 of the 1996 National Football League season in a 26 – 10 loss to the St. Louis Rams , was the first NFL pass by Doug Nussmeier ( Nussmeier 's second pass was his only touchdown completion ) . Although Hayes only compiled 4 receptions for 101 yards ; 2 rushes for 7 yards and 2 kickoff returns for 30 yards while appearing in 7 games , he earned nearly $ 39 @,@ 000 in bonus money over the course of his rookie season . Hayes started the 1997 National Football League season on the New Orleans Saints ' roster and appeared in 4 games . 
 Hayes signed with the Atlanta Falcons on October 27 , 1997 and appeared in two games for the Falcons . He was released by the Falcons in the pre @-@ season of the following year . Hayes was picked up on September 18 , 1998 by the Washington Redskins and added to their practice squad , but was released 19 days later . In February 1999 , he was drafted by the Barcelona Dragons , but he was released from the team five weeks later . 
 Mercury Hayes was signed by the Montreal Alouettes in June 1999 . They released him in July and re @-@ signed him in August . His 2000 season began productively with an impressive pre @-@ season effort ( including 67 and 77 @-@ yard touchdown runs in the same quarter of one game ) followed by effective 65 @-@ yard and 68 @-@ yard regular season reception totals in early August . However , by the end of August , Hayes was on the sidelines nursing an injury . He failed to accumulate 259 yards receiving on the season , which would have placed him among the top 15 Canadian Football League receivers in yardage for the 2000 Canadian Football League season . In September , he was released from the team . In 2002 , he attempted comeback with the Norfolk Nighthawks of the af2 , and this was his last attempt at professional football . 
 = Bømlafjord Tunnel = 
 The Bømlafjord Tunnel ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a subsea road tunnel under Bømlafjorden which connects the island of Føyno in Stord to the mainland at Dalshovda in Sveio , Norway . The tunnel is 7 @.@ 82 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 86 mi ) long and reaches 260 @.@ 4 m ( 854 ft ) below mean sea level . It carries three lanes of European Road E39 and is part of the Triangle Link , a fixed link which connects Sunnhordland to <unk> . Plans for the tunnel arose in the 1980s ; construction started in 1997 and the tunnel opened on 27 December 2000 . The tunnel was built using the drilling and blasting method , with two teams building from each end . The tunnel runs through an area composed mostly of gneiss , phyllite and greenstone . The tunnel is the longest subsea tunnel in Norway and was the second @-@ deepest in the world until 2008 . It is still ( 2013 ) the deepest point on the E @-@ road network . The tunnel was a toll road from the opening until 30 . April 2013 . In 2012 the tunnel had an average 4 @,@ 084 vehicles per day . 
 = = Planning = = 
 The background for the Triangle Link was the desire to have a fixed link between the islands of Stord and Bømlo . The first documented proposals were made in the 1960s and involved building a pontoon bridge across Stokksundet . Following the 1982 opening of the Vardø Tunnel — the first subsea tunnel in Norway — Engineer Finn <unk> <unk> proposed a fixed link between the two islands . It would have crossed Digernessundet on a suspension bridge and continued along a causeway and low bridge onwards to a 2 @.@ 2 @-@ kilometer @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) subsea tunnel under Spissøysundet and a low bridge over Gassasundet . In addition , a 7 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometer ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) long tunnel would have been built from Føyno to <unk> in Sveio . The company Johannes Sørlie launched an all @-@ tunnel proposal in 1985 , estimated to cost 700 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) and which would have resulted in 18 kilometers ( 11 mi ) of subsea tunnel connecting Bømlo , Stord and the mainland . An inter @-@ municipal committee was positive to the proposals , while Josef Martinsen , director of Hordaland Public Roads Administration , stated that the project was unrealistic . The limited company Ytre Sunnhordland Bru- og Tunnelselskap AS ( SBT ) was founded in October 1986 by the municipal authorities of Bømlo , Stord , Fitjar and Sveio , Hordaland County Municipality and five banks . 
 In December 1986 , the Public Roads Administration recommended a bridge . A report published by SBT in 1987 considered detailed plans for a subsea tunnel to the mainland , which was followed up by seismic surveys in the fjord . SBT changed its name to Sunnhordland Bru- og Tunnelselskap , and a majority of the board shifted towards being in favor of a fixed link . The Norwegian Coastal Administration stated that they would not allow a pontoon bridge , as it would interfere with ship traffic . On 26 June 1987 , SBT 's board decided to work towards getting permission to collect advanced tolls on the ferry services . On 16 September , they unanimously supported the triangular proposal , which was estimated to cost NOK 660 million . This was criticized by Hordaland Public Roads Administration , who stated that it would take longer time to plan , and thus complete , the Triangle Link . 
 From 1988 , environmental groups started opposing the Triangle Link . The most active was the local chapter of the Norwegian Society for the Conservation of Nature , who stated that the road would have a negative impact for local boat traffic to the recreational islands of Føyno and Nautøy . They therefore recommended that the municipalities select a pontoon bridge . Another opponent to the project was the Action Committee Against a Hasty Construction of the Triangle Link , who wanted to delay the decision until after the 1991 municipal elections to ensure that the municipal councils had backing in the public . Also Gisle Tjong , a local citizen , opposed the project , stating that the risk was too large and that it was uncertain how long the tolls would last . He argued that the tolls could just as well last 60 as 15 years . Instead , he wanted to use advanced tolls and fuel fees , place the income in the bank and then pay the whole fixed link with the saved @-@ up funds . Most of the opposition against the project was from Stord , while in Bømlo there was near consensus in favor of the project . The exception was in southern <unk> , where there was concerns that their ferry service to the mainland would be terminated , which would result in considerably longer driving time to Haugesund . Concerns were also raised regarding people with fear of tunnels and proposals were made to keep a ferry service for such people . 
 The Triangle Link was passed by the various municipal councils in February and March 1988 . Hordaland Public Roads Administration still supported a pontoon bridge , and stated that two and a half years of work on a master plan had been wasted . A new master plan for the Triangle Link was published in early 1989 . It recommended that the Langevåg – Buavåg Ferry , which connected to southern Bømlo , remain , but that the other four ferry services be terminated . During late 1989 , advance tolls on the ferries was approved by the municipal councils and the county council , who recommended that collection start from 1 July 1990 . However , the start date was not supported by the national government and the issue placed on hold . 
 In July 1992 , the master plan was passed by the Council of State . On 10 December 1992 , Parliament approved advanced payment of tolls on the ferry , which were made effective from 1 January 1993 . Ticket prices increased with between NOK 10 and 12 . This resulted in protests from the ferry employees who stated that they would have to collect the tolls which would remove their jobs ; Norwegian Seafarers ' Union representatives stated that they considered suing the state . Work on the development plan started in 1992 . It included safety and environmental improvements which increased the project 's cost by NOK 200 million , and it was made subject to consultative statements in May 1994 . A report on the Coastal Highway ( E39 ) was published in 1995 , which recommended that the Skjersholmane – Valevåg Ferry be removed . Following a dispute regarding the impact of the bridge landing on Stord , SBT proposed building a culvert on Digernes as a compromise to avoid a new plan which could have postponed the project several years . On 11 June 1996 , Parliament decided with 144 against 20 votes to build the <unk> Link . The original name proposed for the tunnel was <unk> ( " The Portal to Sunnhordland " ) , but this was changed to <unk> . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Geological sampling was undertaken by the Norwegian Geological Survey and <unk> , and included both core samples and reflection seismology . Late core samples showed that the tunnel would have to be located 30 meters ( 98 ft ) further down than originally planned to avoid deposits . The tunnel construction was awarded to two companies : the contract starting from Dalshovda in Sveio and was worked by the Public Roads Administration , while the tunneling from Føyno was worked by NCC . Both used the drilling and blasting method . NCC was awarded the contract after bidding NOK 175 million for the job . Construction from Sveio started on 16 September 1997 and from Føyno on 6 March 1998 . In all , 625 @,@ 000 cubic meters ( 22 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of earthwork was extracted . The earthwork from the Føyno side was transported by <unk> to <unk> and used to build the <unk> Bridge . The earthwork from the Sveio side was used to build roads and a golf course in the area . In average , the tunnel was built at a speed of 55 meters ( 180 ft ) per week , with the record being 96 @.@ 7 meters ( 317 ft ) . Between 30 and 40 people worked with the tunneling on each team . The lowest point was reached on 5 May 1999 and the breakthrough took place on 2 September 1999 , five months before schedule . Construction involved injection of 282 tonnes ( 278 long tons ; 311 short tons ) and spraying of 14 @,@ 900 cubic meters ( 530 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of gunite . 
 The tunnel was budgeted to cost NOK 496 million , but ended up costing NOK 487 million . It opened along with the Stord Bridge on 27 December 2000 . Six hours before the opening , the bottom of the tunnel was used for a wedding . The toll company held a course for people with fear of tunnels to master their fears , with 60 people participating . The official opening took place on 30 April 2001 . When it opened , it was the longest and second @-@ deepest subsea tunnel in Europe and Norway , after the <unk> Tunnel . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The Bømlafjord Tunnel is 7 @,@ 860 meters ( 25 @,@ 790 ft ) long and crosses Bømlafjorden as part of European Route E39 . To the southeast , the tunnel begins at Dalshovda in Sveio . It runs under Bømlafjord , then passes below the island of <unk> and continues under the fjord again before ending on the island of Føyno . The tunnel is 11 meters ( 36 ft ) wide and has three lanes . As the tunnel has a significant slope , two lanes runs uphill and one runs downhill . It has a height of 4 @.@ 7 meters ( 15 ft ) and has its deepest point at 260 @.@ 4 meters ( 854 ft ) below mean sea level . Safety measures include fire extinguishers , emergency telephones and break @-@ down pullovers every 250 meters ( 820 ft ) . There are turning points for trucks every 1 @,@ 500 meters ( 4 @,@ 900 ft ) and lights and barriers at the entrances to notify drivers if the tunnel is closed . It features radio coverage and a system to register the position and key information about all vehicles in the tunnel . All the emergency equipment is connected to the Public Roads Administrations central in Bergen . The tunnel has mobile telephone coverage . In 2011 , the tunnel had an average 3 @,@ 966 vehicles per day . 
 The Triangle Link is partially financed with tolls , with toll collection taking place at Føyno . It is constructed as a grade @-@ separated intersection , resulting in that any car passes through the plaza once , with cars driving along E39 drive straight ahead through the plaza , while cars to or from Bømlo need to use the interchange . The toll station uses the Autopass toll collection , which allows passage without stopping , in addition to manual collection . Passengers , pedestrians , bicycles , motorcyclists and mopeds are free . As of 2011 , the fees are NOK 85 for cars and NOK 270 for trucks . Frequent travelers can prepay for at least 40 passings to the toll company , and receive a 40 percent discount . It is estimated that the tunnel will be paid off and the tolls removed in 2012 or 2013 . 
 The tunnel runs through an area with complex and varied geology . It runs through two rock complexes , the Halsnøy Basement Rock on the Sveio side , and Hardangerfjord Cover Complex on the Stord side . Both were created during the creation of the Caledonian orogeny 500 million years ago . The Halsnøy Basement Rock consists of Precambrian rock with elements of gneiss of both sedimentary and magmatic origin . They range between granite gneiss to <unk> . In the area between the two complexes , there is some amount of gabbro . At the lowest point , the tunnel runs through a section of phyllite , which continues to be the dominant species until the tunnel reaches <unk> . Below the island the tunnel reaches a section of greenstone , before it higher up again runs through more phyllite . 
 = Battle on Snowshoes = 
 The 1758 Battle on Snowshoes occurred on March 13 , 1758 , during the French and Indian War . It was fought by members of British Ranger companies led by Robert Rogers against French troops and Indians allied to France . The battle took place near Lake George , now in northern New York , but then in the frontier area between the British province of New York and the French province of Canada . The battle was given its name because the British combatants were wearing snowshoes . 
 Rogers led a band of about 180 rangers and regulars out to scout French positions . The French commander at Fort Carillon had been alerted to their movement , and sent a force consisting mostly of Indians to meet them . In fierce fighting , the British troop was decimated , with more than 120 casualties . The French believed that Rogers was killed in this action , as he was forced to abandon his regimental jacket , which contained his commission papers , during his escape from the scene . 
 This battle gave rise to the tale that Rogers escaped capture by sliding 400 feet ( 120 m ) down a <unk> to the frozen surface of Lake George . That rock is now known as Rogers Rock or Rogers Slide . 
 = = Background = = 
 The French and Indian War broke out in 1754 between British and French colonists over territorial disputes along their colonial frontiers , and escalated the following year to include regular troops . By 1756 , the French had enjoyed successes in most of their frontier battles against the British . Their only notable failure occurred when the British stopped their southward advance from Lake Champlain in the 1755 Battle of Lake George . From bases at Fort St. Frédéric ( located at what is now Crown Point , New York ) and Fort Carillon ( known to the British as Fort Ticonderoga ) , the French and their Indian allies continued to scout and probe the British defenses on Lake George and the upper Hudson River . The British , who had fewer Indian allies , resorted to companies of rangers for their scouting and reconnaissance activities . The ranger companies were organized and directed by Robert Rogers , and eventually became known as Rogers ' Rangers . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Captain Rogers was sent on a reconnaissance mission from Fort Edward northwards toward Fort Carillon on March 10 , 1758 . Lieutenant Colonel William Haviland , the fort 's commander , had originally planned on 400 men taking part but reduced the number to 180 , even though he had reason to believe the French knew of the expedition . The French had captured a man from an earlier expedition by Israel Putnam 's Connecticut rangers and it was suspected that he had informed his captors of the British plans . Putnam 's reconnaissance revealed that there were an estimated 600 Indians encamped near Fort Carillon . 
 The expedition was composed mostly of men from Rogers ' ranger companies , but it also included a few volunteer soldiers from the 27th ( Inniskilling ) Regiment . On March 13 , they wore snowshoes as they marched through snow four feet deep , with a rivulet to their left and a steep mountain separating them from Lake George to their right . They had stopped for a three @-@ hour break when their advance guard spotted what Rogers reported as " ninety @-@ six , chiefly Indians " . 
 On March 12 , Captain Louis @-@ Philippe Le <unk> d ’ <unk> , the French commander at Fort Carillon , heard rumors from the encamped Indians that the British were nearing . He sent Ensign Durantaye with a company of 200 Nipissing Indians and about 20 Canadians in response to these reports , but they found nothing . The next day two Indian scouts reported that they had found tracks of an enemy party . Around noon on March 13 , Durantaye led 100 men ( again a mixed company of Indians and Canadians ) out of the fort . These were followed shortly after by 200 Indians under Ensign de Langy . 
 Although the two French groups joined forces , Durantaye 's company was about 100 yards ( 91 m ) ahead of Langy 's when they were spotted by Rogers ' men . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Rogers ’ men immediately set up an ambush . When Durantaye 's men came within range at 14 : 00 , the British opened fire , killing " above forty Indians " , according to Rogers . Durantaye 's force broke and retreated in disarray . Rogers and about half his men gave chase , critically forgetting to reload their muskets , while the others stopped to collect scalps . Langy 's men , alerted by the gunfire , set up their own ambush . When Rogers ' men arrived , the attack by Langy 's force killed or wounded an estimated 50 men . The Rangers fought bravely , considering they were outnumbered and their numbers were falling quickly . They made several successful attempts to prevent themselves from being flanked , but after an hour and a half of heavy fighting , their numbers were significantly reduced . The remnants of the British force then tried to escape the battle . Rogers and some of his men did get away , but one group of men surrendered , only to be killed and scalped when a scalp was discovered in a pocket of one of the men . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Rogers and his decimated company returned to Fort Edward on March 15 . Rogers himself was originally reported by the French to have been killed , but had actually survived . The report stemmed from the manner of Rogers ’ escape during which he discarded some of his belongings , including his regimental coat , which contained his military commission . This episode also gave rise to a local legend that Rogers escaped the battle by sliding 400 feet down the side of a hill to the frozen surface of Lake George . While there is no proof of this event , the <unk> he supposedly went down very quickly became known as Rogers ' Slide . 
 Reports of casualties , and of the numbers of forces involved , starkly differed in this battle . Rogers ' report of the event estimated the French @-@ Indian force at 700 , with one to two hundred casualties , and his accounts of the battle were doubted by a variety of commentators , as they were inconsistent with other accounts . A letter by Henry Pringle , written while held in captivity at Carillon , restored his reputation by clarifying the French advantage following the second ambush ; Rogers went on to rebuild his companies and serve in the Battle of Carillon in July 1758 . 
 = Galaxy Science Fiction = 
 Galaxy Science Fiction was an American digest @-@ size science fiction magazine , published from 1950 to 1980 . It was founded by an Italian company , World Editions , which was looking to break into the American market . World Editions hired as editor H. L. Gold , who rapidly made Galaxy the leading science fiction ( sf ) magazine of its time , focusing on stories about social issues rather than technology . 
 Gold published many notable stories during his tenure , including Ray Bradbury 's " The Fireman " , later expanded as Fahrenheit 451 ; Robert A. Heinlein 's The Puppet Masters ; and Alfred Bester 's The Demolished Man . In 1952 , the magazine was acquired by Robert Guinn , its printer . By the late 1950s , Frederik Pohl was helping Gold with most aspects of the magazine 's production . When Gold 's health worsened , Pohl took over as editor , starting officially at the end of 1961 , though he had been doing the majority of the production work for some time . 
 Under Pohl Galaxy had continued success , regularly publishing fiction by writers such as Cordwainer Smith , Jack Vance , Harlan Ellison , and Robert Silverberg . However , Pohl never won the annual Hugo Award for his stewardship of Galaxy , winning three Hugos instead for its sister magazine , If . In 1969 Guinn sold Galaxy to Universal Publishing and Distribution Corporation ( UPD ) and Pohl resigned , to be replaced by Ejler Jakobsson . Under Jakobsson the magazine declined in quality . It recovered under James Baen , who took over in mid @-@ 1974 , but when he left at the end of 1977 the deterioration resumed , and there were financial problems — writers were not paid on time and the schedule became erratic . By the end of the 1970s the gaps between issues were lengthening , and the title was finally sold to Galileo publisher Vincent McCaffrey , who brought out only a single issue in 1980 . A brief revival as a semi @-@ professional magazine followed in 1994 , edited by H. L. Gold 's son , E. J. Gold ; this lasted for eight bimonthly issues . 
 At its peak , Galaxy greatly influenced the science fiction field . It was regarded as one of the leading sf magazines almost from the start , and its influence did not wane until Pohl 's departure in 1969 . Gold brought a " sophisticated intellectual subtlety " to magazine science fiction according to Pohl , who added that " after Galaxy it was impossible to go on being naive . " SF historian David Kyle agrees , commenting that " of all the editors in and out of the post @-@ war scene , the most influential beyond any doubt was H. L. Gold " . Kyle suggests that the new direction Gold set " inevitably " led to the experimental New Wave , the defining science fiction literary movement of the 1960s . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The first science fiction magazine , Amazing Stories , appeared in 1926 . By the end of the 1930s , the genre was flourishing in the United States , but World War II and its attendant paper shortages led to the demise of several magazines . In the late 1940s , the market began to recover . From a low of eight active US magazines in 1946 , the field expanded to 20 just four years later . Galaxy 's appearance in 1950 was part of this boom . According to sf historian and critic Mike Ashley , its success was the main reason for a subsequent flood of new releases : 22 more science fiction magazines appeared by 1954 , when the market dipped again as a side effect of US Senate hearings into the putative connection between comic books and juvenile delinquency . 
 = = = Origins and 1950s = = = 
 H. L. Gold , Galaxy 's first editor , had worked at Standard Magazines in the early 1940s as an assistant editor , reading for Standard 's three science fiction pulps : Startling Stories , Thrilling Wonder , and Captain Future . With the advent of the war , Gold left publishing and went into the army , but in late 1949 he was approached by Vera Cerutti , who had once worked for him . Cerutti was now working for an Italian publisher , <unk> Mondiale , that had opened an office in New York as World Editions . She initially asked Gold for guidance on how to produce a magazine , which he provided . World Editions took a heavy loss on Fascination , its first attempt to launch a US magazine , and Cerutti returned to Gold asking for recommendations for new titles . Gold knew about The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction , a digest launched in the fall of 1949 , but felt that there was still room in the market for another serious science fiction magazine . He sent a prospectus to World Editions that included a proposal for a series of paperback sf novels as well as a periodical , and proposed paying three cents a word , an impressively high rate , given that most competing magazines were paying only one cent a word . World Editions agreed , hired Gold as the editor , and the first issue appeared in October 1950 . The novel series subsequently appeared as Galaxy Science Fiction Novels . 
 Gold initially suggested two titles for the magazine , If and Galaxy . Gold 's art director , Washington Irving van der Poel , mocked up multiple layouts and Gold invited hundreds of writers , editors , artists , and fans to view them and vote for their favorite ; the vote was strongly for Galaxy as the title . For the first issue , Gold obtained stories by several well @-@ known authors , including Isaac Asimov , Fritz Leiber , and Theodore Sturgeon , as well as part one of Time Quarry by Clifford D. Simak ( later published in book form as Time and Again ) . Along with an essay by Gold , Galaxy 's premiere issue introduced a book review column by anthologist Groff Conklin , which ran until 1955 , and a Willy Ley science column . Gold sought to implement high @-@ quality printing techniques , although the quality of the available paper was insufficient for the full benefits to be seen . 
 While other " new magazines — and many of the old — are dying of literary cirrhosis . The cause ? Poisoning due to decayed fiction " , Gold stated , Galaxy was profitable within five issues ; an " incredible " achievement , in his words . The outbreak of the Korean War led to paper shortages — Gold wrote in a 1951 editorial that " buying paper these days is like being mugged on a dark street " — that forced the magazine to find a new printer , Robert M. Guinn . The new paper was of even lower quality , a disappointment to Gold . That summer , disagreements within World Editions led to attempts to disrupt Galaxy 's distribution . According to Gold , the circulation director and the head of the American office stockpiled many issues instead of distributing them , and made sure that the ones that did get distributed went to areas of the United States , such as the South , where there was little or no audience for the magazine . The head of the French office of World Editions came to the United States to find out what the problem was , and recommended that the magazine be sold to the two Americans , for $ 3 @,@ 000 — a very low price . They tried to recruit Gold , but he contacted the Italian office , which rejected the sale and eventually agreed to sell Galaxy to the printer , Robert M. Guinn . It was only after the sale was complete that the sabotaged distribution came to light ; World Editions wanted to buy back the magazine , but Guinn quoted a price four times as high as he had paid . In Gold 's words , " he , Guinn , knew what he was buying , whereas World Editions hadn 't known what they were selling " . 
 Guinn 's new company was named Galaxy Publishing Corporation , and it took over beginning with the October 1951 issue . Gold remained as editor , but lost the assistance of staff at World Editions , relying instead on help from Jerome Bixby , Algis Budrys , Theodore Sturgeon , and Gold 's wife , Evelyn Paige . Science fiction author Frederik Pohl , then working as a literary agent , was also helpful in connecting writers with Gold . 
 By the late 1950s , the science fiction magazine boom was over , and the relatively low circulation of the magazines did not endear them to distributors , the middlemen who transported magazines from the publishers to the newsstands and other outlets . Gold changed the title from Galaxy Science Fiction to Galaxy Magazine with the September 1958 issue , commenting that the term science fiction " scares many people away from buying " . Galaxy 's circulation , at about 90 @,@ 000 , was the highest of the science fiction magazines , but Guinn decided to cut costs , and in 1959 raised the cover price and changed the magazine to a bimonthly schedule , while increasing the page count . Guinn also cut the rates paid to authors from three ( and occasionally four ) cents a word to one and a half cents a word . These changes saved Galaxy over $ 12 @,@ 000 a year . The result was a fall in circulation to about 80 @,@ 000 within two years , but this was sustainable because of the savings from the fiction budget . 
 In his December 1958 editorial , Gold described the changes as resulting in " a new magazine " with " half again as more [ pages than the 35 ¢ competition ] for only 15 ¢ more " . He explained the bimonthly schedule as necessary to maintain " Galaxy quality " : 
 We kid you not at all — really good science fiction is , from the editorial side of the desk , harder to come by than perfect diamonds . It has to be mined out of authors with patience and care and tact — and blasting powder , when nothing else will work . We can fill 196 pages every other month with really good science fiction . We can 't do it on a monthly schedule . No one can . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 Guinn acquired If , another science fiction magazine , in 1959 , and gave it to Gold to edit as well . The July 1959 issue of If was the first under Gold 's editorship . Galaxy 's shift to a bimonthly schedule had been intended to help reduce the workload on Gold , who was not in good health ; he was able to take on If as well because the two magazines alternated months of publication . Towards the end of the 1950s Frederik Pohl began to help Gold , occasionally to the extent of performing all the editorial duties , including writing the editorials and blurbs and working with the printer . Gold , who was agoraphobic , was making efforts at this time to leave his apartment , but in 1960 he was seriously injured in a taxi accident , and proved unable to continue as editor . Pohl took over at some point in early 1961 , though he was not listed on the masthead as editor until the December 1961 issue . 
 Pohl attempted to persuade Guinn to double the pay rate of one and a half cents a word back to the former level of three . Guinn refused , but Pohl was able to find enough material that he could purchase at a low rate to allow him to offer some authors three cents per word . The strategy was successful in improving circulation , and Guinn eventually acceded to the rate increase . 
 Pohl also tried hard to persuade Guinn and Sol Cohen , whom Guinn had hired to help with the publishing duties , to switch both Galaxy and If to monthly schedules . In late 1962 , they agreed , but soon changed their minds and decided to start a third science fiction magazine instead . This was Worlds of Tomorrow , which was launched in April 1963 and lasted until mid @-@ 1967 ( it was briefly revived in 1970 – 71 ) . Another companion magazine , International Science Fiction , was tried in late 1967 , but lasted only two issues ; it showcased stories translated from other languages , and sales were very weak . Finally , in 1968 Guinn launched Worlds of Fantasy , edited initially by Lester del Rey , Galaxy 's managing editor ; only four issues appeared . In the middle of 1968 , Galaxy was restored to a monthly schedule . 
 = = = 1970s and after = = = 
 In 1969 , Guinn sold Galaxy to Universal Publishing and Distribution Corporation ( UPD ) . Pohl was in Rio de Janeiro at a World Science Fiction Symposium when the sale went through ; he heard the news when he returned to the Galaxy office afterwards and within a few days decided to resign . He remained on the masthead as " editor emeritus " , a post invented to keep Pohl from moving to one of the other sf magazines , and went back to his writing career . His place was taken by Ejler Jakobsson , who was working in UPD 's book department . Lester del Rey stayed on as features editor , and Judy @-@ Lynn Benjamin took his place as managing editor . Jack Gaughan was made art editor . 
 Galaxy 's circulation had held relatively steady in the mid @-@ 1960s , ranging between 73 @,@ 000 and 78 @,@ 000 , but the UPD acquisition coincided with a precipitous drop — from 75 @,@ 300 for the year ended October 1968 , circulation fell to 51 @,@ 479 just one year later . Difficulties with distribution also cut into income , and Arnold Abramson , UPD 's owner , decided to cut costs and maximize profits . Galaxy went bimonthly in August 1970 , ending a two @-@ year spell of monthly scheduling ( though a couple of months had been missed ) . The page count , which had been cut from 196 to 160 when UPD bought it , was increased again , and the price was raised from 60 cents to 75 cents . A British edition began in May 1972 , published by Tandem Books , which was owned by UPD . The net effect of all these changes was a substantial increase in profitability . Circulation in 1972 also rose by about 6 @,@ 000 issues , though it is possible that this was solely due to the new British edition . 
 UPD began to have financial difficulties in the early 1970s , and when Judy @-@ Lynn del Rey ( formerly Judy @-@ Lynn Benjamin ) left in May 1973 to work at Ballantine Books , Jakobsson 's workload increased greatly . He resigned less than a year later , citing overwork and other issues , and was replaced by James Baen , who took over with the June 1974 issue after Pohl declined the post . Baen also took over the editorship of If , but rising paper costs forced the closure of If at the end of 1974 , and the title was merged with Galaxy . The magazine had returned to a monthly schedule in September 1973 , but it was only patchily adhered to , with at least a couple of issues missed every year except 1974 . Baen was successful at increasing circulation again , bringing it from 47 @,@ 789 when he took over to 81 @,@ 035 when he left . The magazine was profitable for UPD , but the financial pressure on the parent company took its toll and Baen left in late 1977 to work for Ace Books — the October issue was his last . 
 Baen was replaced by John J. Pierce , but the situation only worsened . Pierce resigned within a year : the company was in increasing debt , and his office assistant recalls that the office appeared inefficiently run , though he commented that Pierce " clearly loved what he did and knew what he was talking about " . Pierce 's replacement was Hank Stine , who took over in late 1978 , though because of Galaxy 's irregular schedule Pierce 's last issue was March – April 1979 . Stine managed to produce only two more issues , June – July 1979 and September – October 1979 , before UPD 's financial problems spelled the end . Rights to the title were transferred to a new company , Galaxy Magazine , Inc . , owned by Vincent McCaffrey , proprietor of Avenue Victor Hugo , a second @-@ hand book store in Boston ; UPD retained a ten percent interest in order to receive income from future sales to pay off their debts . Stine had compiled two more issues , but neither ever appeared ; McCaffrey , who had also launched a separate magazine , Galileo , had cash @-@ flow problems that prevented him from distributing the magazine as he had planned . One more issue did finally appear from McCaffrey , in July 1980 , in a large format ; it was edited by Floyd Kemske . A subsequent issue , to be dated October 1980 , was assembled , but never distributed . 
 The last few years of Galaxy 's life were marked by stories of unpaid contributors . John Varley , for example , reported that he was still owed money for his stories five years after they appeared . Submissions from well @-@ known writers fell away , and the lack of financial support from UPD meant that the pay rate was an unattractive one cent per word . Higher postal rates , higher paper costs , and continuing competition from the paperback science fiction market all added to the pressure on Galaxy . These problems were not resolved by the sale to McCaffrey , who did not even have enough money to pay for circulation postage , with the result that not every Galaxy subscriber received a copy of the final issue . Frederik Pohl places the blame for Galaxy 's demise on Arnie Abramson , who , Pohl contends , " simply did not perform [ the ] basic functions of a publisher " : paying the authors , ensuring subscribers received copies , and meeting other obligations . 
 In 1994 , the magazine reappeared briefly as a semi @-@ professional publication under the editorship of E. J. Gold , son of H. L. Gold . E. J. Gold produced eight issues on a regular bimonthly schedule , starting with the January – February 1994 issue , and ending with March – April 1995 . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Gold intended Galaxy to publish stories of sufficient literary quality to attract readers of the slick magazines , as well as those who came to Galaxy already familiar with genre science fiction . His editorial policy was broader than that of John W. Campbell , the editor of the leading magazine in the field , Astounding Science Fiction : Gold was interested in sociology , psychology , and other " soft " sciences , and was also willing to publish humorous and satirical stories . Gold managed to persuade the publisher to let him offer three to four cents a word , which exceeded the highest rates paid in the field at that time . In addition to the high rates , Galaxy was an attractive market for writers because Gold bought only first magazine rights , unlike the other leading magazines . Galaxy was quickly established as one of the three leading science fiction magazines , along with Campbell 's Astounding and The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction ( usually abbreviated to F & SF ) . Campbell had been enormously influential over the previous decade , but the appearance of Galaxy and F & SF , launched just a year before , marked the end of his dominance of the genre . 
 Gold believed that " science fiction should present possible developments based on present tendencies or trends , to answer in dramatic terms the unstated question : ' What would happen if — ? ' " An advertisement for the magazine in the first issue compared a science @-@ fiction story and a western . After showing that the latter used the same plot as the former " transplanted to some alien and impossible planet " , the advertisement stated " YOU <unk> NEVER <unk> IT IN <unk> ! " , promising " the finest science fiction . . . authentic , plausible , thoughtful . . . written by authors who do not automatically switch over from crime waves to Earth invasions " . The advertisement drew much attention , though James Blish commented that Galaxy did not always avoid printing the kind of fiction it parodied . 
 Gold disliked other magazines ' use of covers with what he described as " shapely female <unk> with bronze bras , embattled male <unk> clad in muscle , and frightful alien monsters in search of a human meal " . The cover for the first issue was by David Stone , depicting a scene from Simak 's Time Quarry . The image was muted , in contrast to the sensational art typically found on the covers of the sf pulps ; the intention was that Galaxy should look like an sf magazine , but one " that you were not embarrassed to hold " , in the words of Mike Ashley . The early artwork was generally unremarkable , though Ed Emshwiller 's humorous cover for the June 1951 issue , his first professional sale as an artist , was a positive sign . " Emsh " , as he was known to science fiction readers , soon became a regular contributor . The relatively expensive production processes that Gold had insisted on enabled more sophisticated internal artwork , which could be integrated with type in ways not possible with cheaper letterpress printing . 
 Gold hoped to print stories that were superior to what he described as " flakes of literary dandruff " about " thinking machines that go insane when asked to solve the problem of man 's survival ... humorless <unk> , hard @-@ lipped Space <unk> , <unk> heroines who are snowy pure " that Galaxy usually received . War and apocalyptic disaster was an especially common theme ; Gold reported that " Over 90 % of stories submitted still nag away at [ the subject ] ... If it weren 't so tiresome , it might be funny to see our transitory political rivalries carried into the remotest futures " . He told prospective authors , " To save their time and ours , here is a partial list of overworked ideas that should be strenuously avoided " : 
 Fictional warnings of nuclear and biological destruction , the post @-@ atomic world , reversion to barbarism , mutant children slain because they have only ten toes and fingers instead of twelve , absurdly planned and preposterously successful revolts against dictatorships , problems of survival wearily turned over to women , war between groups , nations , worlds and solar systems . 
 Flying Saucers , cops and robbers or cowboys and Indians in space , the duel between the good guy and the bad guy alone on an asteroid , the bright revelation that the characters we have been reading about are Adam and Eve or Jesus , the creation of a miniature universe in a laboratory by a scientist whose name turns out to be an anagram of Jehovah , the alien eater of life force in the Andes whose menu consists exclusively of pretty virgins . 
 " No day 's mail is free " of such submissions to Galaxy , Gold wrote , but sometimes " a find " like Edgar <unk> 's " Angel 's Egg " arrived ; Gold advised other authors , " Why not buck up and see the positive trends as well as the harrowing ones ? " and " who said writing is easy ? " He wrote in the 12th issue that the magazine had published about over 750 @,@ 000 words in about 60 stories , chosen from 3 @,@ 000 submissions totaling more than 25 million words , and that more than half of the stories would appear in anthologies . He reported that circulation had risen by 5 % each issue , and claimed that " according to the best available information , <unk> has several times as many subs as any other science fiction magazine ! " 
 In the first issue , Gold asked for reader feedback on what should be included in the magazine — letters , editorials , book reviews , or other features . The response was against a letter column , but the readers wanted editorials , and short book reviews with recommendations that would help them identify what books to buy , as opposed to in @-@ depth criticism . Gold was also concerned that harsh critical reviews would scare away new authors who might otherwise submit their work . Groff Conklin began a book review column , called " Galaxy 's Five Star Shelf " , in the first issue ; Floyd Gale took it over with the November 1955 issue — Gale was in fact Gold 's brother , using a slightly modified surname . The inaugural issue also included a competition for readers to explain UFOs in under 200 words , the first of many contests Gold would run . 
 The first six issues contained stories by well @-@ known authors , including some that became highly regarded such as Fritz Leiber 's " Coming Attraction " , Damon Knight 's " To Serve Man " , and Ray Bradbury 's " The Fireman " , later expanded as Fahrenheit 451 . Gold , however , considered these early issues exploratory , and some of the material by major names was clearly lesser work . With its second volume , beginning in April 1951 , Galaxy achieved consistently high quality , with virtually every issue featuring a story that would have a lasting reputation , including C. M. Kornbluth 's The Marching <unk> , Wyman Guin 's Beyond Bedlam , and Robert Heinlein 's The Puppet Masters , whose serialization overlapped volumes 2 and 3 . Early feedback from readers had been opposed to serialized novels , but here Gold did not follow their opinion , and Galaxy is remembered for featuring some very successful serials . A contemporary anthology of science fiction stories , E. F. Bleiler and T. E. <unk> 's The Best Science Fiction Stories : 1951 , commented in an editorial that Gold 's work " will succeed in placing science @-@ fiction on an equal basis with any other field of modern literature " . With a circulation of over 100 @,@ 000 in its second year , Galaxy surpassed Astounding . 
 = = = Mid- and late 1950s = = = 
 Gold maintained Galaxy 's high standards for most of the 1950s . Alfred Bester 's The Demolished Man — according to critic Peter Nicholls , " among the few genuine classics of genre sf " — was serialized in early 1952 . Pohl and Kornbluth 's The Space Merchants followed a few months later , serialized as Gravy Planet ; Brian Aldiss , in his critical genre study Trillion Year Spree , calls it " one of the most famous books in SF " . James Blish 's " Surface Tension " and Theodore Sturgeon 's " Baby is Three " , both widely acclaimed , also appeared in 1952 . Readers had expressed support for science articles , and in March 1952 , Willy Ley , who had contributed occasional essays since the first issue , began a column , " For Your Information " , in which he replied to readers ' scientific questions . Running uninterrupted until Ley 's death in 1969 , Frederik Pohl describes it as " the most popular single feature Galaxy ever had " . The Hugo Awards were inaugurated the following year : The Demolished Man won the first Hugo for Best Novel and Galaxy shared the first Hugo for Best Magazine with Astounding . 
 While Gold published a wide range of material , Galaxy became known in particular for irony and satire ; the work of authors able to adopt the wry style he favored , such as Knight and Robert Sheckley , appeared regularly in the magazine . In 1953 , with McCarthyism at its height , Gold refused to publish " The Liberation of Earth " , a story by William Tenn satirizing both the Russian and American sides in the Korean War . Tenn quotes Gold , an ex @-@ radical , as saying the idea made him " sweat green " , though the year before he had published Isaac Asimov 's " The Martian Way " , a thinly veiled anti @-@ McCarthy story . 
 L. Sprague de Camp commented that Gold " sets an extremely high standard of literary excellence for his writers " , and observed that he often demanded multiple revisions and rewrites . Gold was also infamous for making sweeping changes to the stories he printed . In meetings and in phone calls he became well known as a difficult editor whose determination to achieve perfection sometimes alienated his writers . He was unapologetic , declaring , " I worked hard with writers , and they didn 't always enjoy it " . The results were often very positive : some successful stories are said to have begun with an idea he provided to one of his authors . In the case of The Demolished Man , his involvement extended almost to the point of collaboration . Gold was agoraphobic , and rarely left his apartment , but writers often visited him , and he held regular parties and weekly poker games ; in addition to the members of the science fiction community , the avant @-@ garde composer John Cage often attended . 
 In March 1953 Gold announced a novel @-@ writing contest , but it failed to attract any usable submissions . He asked Pohl and Kornbluth if they would be willing to allow him to print Gladiator @-@ at @-@ Law , which they had just completed , under a pseudonym , so he could claim that the contest had found a new talent . They refused , but shortly afterwards Pohl and Lester del Rey agreed to let Gold take their recently completed novel Preferred Risk and publish it as the winner , under the pseudonym Edson McCann . Pohl and del Rey constructed a fake identity for McCann , but the news leaked out and Gold never ran another fiction competition . In July 1953 , he launched a companion magazine , Beyond Fantasy Fiction , dedicated to fantasy material , which Galaxy 's editorial policy did not favor . It lasted for ten bimonthly issues , with the final one appearing in January 1955 . After it failed , Gold opened Galaxy to more fantasy , publishing writers such as Cordwainer Smith . 
 The ABC radio series Tales of Tomorrow , which began in 1952 as an offshoot of the TV series of the same name , used stories from Galaxy ; the connection was announced at the start of each of its fifteen episodes . On April 24 , 1955 , another radio series , NBC 's X Minus One , started a much longer run of 125 episodes , lasting until January 1958 . From February 1956 onwards the scripts were adapted exclusively from stories in Galaxy , and from the April 1956 issue Galaxy ran advertisements for the series , which included work by Pohl , Sturgeon , and Philip K. Dick . 
 Through the 1950s , Galaxy 's contributors routinely dominated the Hugo ballots , but neither the magazine nor the fiction it published won many awards , despite what sf historians Marshall Tymn and Mike Ashley describe as its " deserved reputation for excellence " . After several years of being shut out of the Hugos , Galaxy published two works in 1958 that won the honor : Fritz Leiber 's novel The Big Time and Avram Davidson 's short story " Or All the Seas with Oysters " . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 When Pohl took over as editor in 1961 , he broadened the magazine 's scope , including more fantasy material . Regular contributors in the 1960s included Jack Vance , Larry Niven , Frank Herbert , Robert Silverberg , and Cordwainer Smith . Galaxy stories from this era that won awards include Vance 's The Dragon Masters and " The Last Castle " ; Clifford Simak 's Way Station , serialized as Here Gather the Stars ; Harlan Ellison 's " ' Repent , Harlequin , ' Said the <unk> " and " The Beast That <unk> Love at the Heart of the World " ; and Silverberg 's " <unk> " . Pohl never succeeded in winning a Hugo Award as editor of Galaxy , although he won the award three consecutive times from 1966 to 1968 as editor of If , Galaxy 's sister magazine , and in theory the junior of the two publications . 
 The quality of fiction in Galaxy had dipped towards the end of Gold 's editorship , and Pohl worked hard to restore the magazine 's high standards . Gold 's difficult editorial personality had driven away some of his contributors , but Pohl , who had worked as an agent in the 1950s , was a central figure in the sf community and was able to attract submissions from the star writers of his day . In the case of one of these stars , he offered an unusual arrangement : Robert Silverberg could write whatever he wished and Pohl promised that he would almost invariably buy it . Silverberg , who had been a high @-@ volume producer of competent but unremarkable science fiction , began writing more ambitious work as a result , much of which was published in Galaxy throughout the 1960s . 
 In February 1965 , Pohl brought in Algis Budrys as book reviewer , after a year in which no review column had appeared . Budrys 's insightful reviews drew much praise , and editor David Hartwell has ranked him as one of the best sf critics of his generation . 
 The difference between Pohl 's approach and Gold 's was apparent in the editorials Pohl wrote , which were informal , entertaining , and rooted in his deep familiarity with the genre . With Pohl at the helm , Galaxy moved back toward the knowledgeable science fiction fan , and away from the mainstream market that Gold had targeted . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 Ejler Jakobsson 's tenure began with a large backlog of stories that Pohl had acquired , but within a year or two substantial changes were apparent . In the early 1970s , Jakobsson attempted to update Galaxy 's image , adding a comic strip , " <unk> " , by Vaughn Bodé , for example . Theodore Sturgeon took over from Budrys as the regular book reviewer in January 1972 and held the post until mid @-@ 1975 . Jakobsson did not manage to give Galaxy a new and distinctive character : " <unk> " lasted only four issues , Sturgeon 's reviews were undistinguished , and many of the new authors he published have been , in the words of Mike Ashley , " mercifully unknown ever since " . The paper quality and printing quality also dropped , and early cover designs were very weak . Jakobsson initially printed guest editorials rather than writing his own ; when he took over the editorial page his work was unremarkable . However , he did manage to attract some of the new writers who were just becoming well known in the sf scene , including George R.R. Martin , Joe Haldeman , and Joanna Russ . Three novels published in Jakobsson 's Galaxy won awards : Isaac Asimov 's The Gods Themselves and Arthur C. Clarke 's Rendezvous with Rama each won both the Hugo and Nebula awards , in 1972 and 1973 respectively , and Robert Silverberg 's A Time of Changes won the Nebula in 1971 . Sturgeon 's short story " Slow Sculpture " won both the Hugo and the Nebula in 1970 . 
 A letter column was added at the end of 1971 ; this was the first time Galaxy had published reader 's letters . Galaxy 's long @-@ time science columnist , Willy Ley , died in 1969 , and was replaced by Donald Menzel . He was replaced in turn by Jerry Pournelle in April 1974 . 
 Jakobsson 's successor , James Baen , was able to publish some high @-@ quality fiction , including material by Roger Zelazny , John Varley , Larry Niven , and Pohl , whose novel , Gateway , won both the Hugo and Nebula awards . Baen raised the level of the magazine substantially , and Ashley refers to his editorship as Galaxy 's " Indian summer " . Under Baen the review columnist was Spider Robinson , who won a Locus Award in 1977 , primarily for his work in Galaxy . Baen also published a series of essays by authors discussing their own work . Apart from Gateway , Baen published only one award @-@ winning story : Ursula K. Le Guin 's " The Day Before the Revolution " , which appeared in August 1974 and won the Nebula . 
 Baen 's successors , Pierce , Stine , and Kemske , were unable to maintain his standard . Pohl remained loyal to the magazine , but the serialization of his novel Jem exemplified Galaxy 's growing problems . Due to the magazine 's increasingly erratic schedule , the serialization stretched from the last issue of 1978 into 1980 , well after it had appeared in book form . In November 1977 , Paul Walker took over the book column from Spider Robinson , and Jerry Pournelle left the science column at the end of 1978 . The artwork quality dropped to an amateurish level , and despite the appearance of a few successful stories and novels , such as C. J. <unk> 's The Faded Sun : <unk> , the overall quality was dramatically worse than it had been under Baen . Galaxy 's deterioration was largely due to the financial troubles of the publisher , Arnold Abramson , who reduced the pay rate ( at a time of high inflation ) to a penny a word . Even that low rate did not guarantee timely disbursement , and many writers stopped submitting because of Galaxy 's reputation for paying slowly , if at all . Costs were increasing for paper , postage , and production , and the paperback anthology market was booming , adding to the competition that Galaxy faced . Floyd Kemske 's only issue never received newsstand distribution , doomed by the financial troubles of the magazine 's publisher , Vincent McCaffrey . 
 = = = Cover layout and artwork = = = 
 Galaxy had a characteristic cover style in the 1950s with an inverted white " L " shape ( Greek gamma ) framing the cover art ; this style was copied by several magazines , including Authentic Science Fiction and Startling Stories . When Astounding followed suit in late 1951 , Gold commented sarcastically in an editorial that Galaxy " would like to know when we may have it [ the format ] back again " . The first variation came with the September 1956 issue , which widened the left hand strip of white to allow room to print story titles and author names . The December 1961 issue was the first to eliminate the strip on the left , and until July 1969 the magazine varied between this layout , the inverted " L " , and a version with no white at all , first used on the August 1965 issue . Another change visible in that issue is the reversal of the title coloring to white lettering on a block of red ; this was used from August 1963 to December 1965 . In August 1969 the title was enlarged to fill the width of the magazine ; this issue had the white inverted " L " , but it was the last one to do so till 1980 . After August 1969 the cover paintings spanned the entire cover , though with some minor variations in layout such as can be seen in the October 1976 issue . Then in September 1978 ( undated on the cover , but numbered vol . 39 no . 7 ) the original typeface for " Galaxy " was abandoned for the last few issues . The final issue , edited by Kemske , returned to the previous layout and typeface , although with a magazine twice the size of the original digest . When E. J. Gold revived Galaxy in 1994 , he restored the inverted " L " and employed a predominantly black @-@ and @-@ white look for the eight issues he published . 
 Notable artists who contributed regularly to Galaxy included Ed Emshwiller , who won several Hugo Awards for his work , Hugo nominee Wallace Wood , and Jack Gaughan , who won three Hugos in the late 1960s , partly for his work in Galaxy . Gaughan was commissioned by Pohl to provide the cover and interior art for Jack Vance 's The Dragon Masters in 1962 ; the resulting illustrations made Gaughan immediately famous in the science fiction field . In the 1950s and 1960s , Galaxy retained the original artwork sent in by its artists , though Emshwiller , much of whose best color work appeared there , was able to negotiate an exception to this rule , retaining the art for his portfolios . In 1972 much of this artwork — including both interior and cover illustrations — was sold off by Robert Guinn , who had kept it when he sold Galaxy to UPD in 1969 . 
 = = = Influence on the field = = = 
 Science fiction historian and critic Mike Ashley regards Galaxy 's success as the main reason for the subsequent boom in science fiction magazines , commenting that it " revolutionized the field overnight " . Under Gold Galaxy provided a market for social science fiction stories that might not have been accepted by Astounding and Fantasy & Science Fiction , the other leading magazines . Pohl regards Galaxy as the place where " the stunning new kinds of science fiction ... flowered , and changed everything in science fiction " . In his opinion , Gold 's innovation was to ask writers to consider not just new technology , but the subsequent impact of that technology on society . He adds , " What Galaxy brought to magazine science fiction was a kind of sophisticated intellectual subtlety . ... After Galaxy it was impossible to go on being naive . " Science fiction author Brian Stableford argues that Galaxy quickly usurped Astounding 's position as " pioneer of hardcore sf 's progress " because it " embraced and gleefully pursued a new series of challenges to moral orthodoxy . " Isaac Asimov , in his memoirs , recalled being deeply impressed by the first issue , adding that many fans , including himself , felt that Galaxy became the field 's leader almost immediately . In critic John Clute 's assessment , Galaxy indeed swiftly supplanted Astounding and remained the leading magazine in the field until Pohl resigned as editor in 1969 . 
 SF historian David Kyle ascribes Galaxy 's influence specifically to Gold , saying that " of all the editors in and out of the post @-@ war scene , the most influential beyond any doubt was H. L. Gold " and that the new direction he set led , " inevitably " , to the New Wave , the celebrated science fiction literary movement of the 1960s . Kyle 's assessment of Gold is echoed by writer Barry Malzberg , who calls Gold " perhaps the greatest editor in the history of all fields for the first half of his tenure " . SF authors and historians Brian Aldiss and David Wingrove summarize Galaxy 's history by saying that it lasted for " thirty mainly glorious years " : it " brought into the sunlight a number of excellent satirists , comedians and <unk> " and , through the influence of its reduced focus on technology , played an important role in attracting women to write science fiction . 
 = = Publication details = = 
 = = = Editors = = = 
 The list below , and the charts above , follow the mastheads in the magazines . However , because of Gold 's poor health , Pohl was acting as editor for some time before he officially took over the role at the end of 1961 . 
 H. L. Gold ( October 1950 – October 1961 ) 
 Frederik Pohl ( December 1961 – May 1969 ) 
 Ejler Jakobsson ( July 1969 – May 1974 ) 
 James Baen ( June 1974 – October 1977 ) 
 John J. Pierce ( November 1977 – March – April 1979 ) 
 Hank Stine ( June – July 1979 – September – October 1979 ) 
 Floyd Kemske ( Summer 1980 ) 
 = = = Overseas editions = = = 
 Galaxy had multiple foreign editions . This was in part because the original publisher , World Editions , had a European base , which Gold had planned to take advantage of when the magazine launched . Overseas editions included : 
 Argentina . Two magazines , Más Allá ( June 1953 – June 1957 ) and Geminis ( July 1965 – August 1965 ) , reprinted stories primarily from Galaxy , though they also published some original material and some stories reprinted from other sources . 
 Finland . <unk> <unk> ( August 1958 – December 1958 ) was a Finnish edition of Galaxy , edited by Mary A. <unk> and published by <unk> Oy . 
 France . There were two separate French editions of Galaxy , both titled Galaxie . The first ran from November 1953 to April 1959 ( a total of 65 issues ) , and was published by Editions <unk> , Paris . The first 11 issues were edited by Irina Orloff , the next 16 by Jacqueline Boissy , and the remainder by Jeannine <unk> . The stories were badly translated , and printed in shortened form . Poor sales led to the cancellation of this version . The second version ran for 158 issues , from May 1964 to August – September 1977 , and was also published by Editions <unk> . The editor was Alain <unk> for the first 67 issues , and Michel Demuth thereafter . This version , which contained original French stories as well as translated material from Galaxy , was much more successful and for a time outsold Fiction , the leading French science fiction magazine . From November 1974 , more French authors were included , but publication ceased three years later when sales fell . 
 Germany . Fifteen issues of a German version , titled <unk> , was released from March 1958 to May 1959 by <unk> Verlag , Munich . The editor was Lothar <unk> . Fourteen numbered paperbacks titled Galaxy appeared between 1965 and 1970 , published by Heyne Verlag , Munich . The editor was Walter <unk> , with Thomas <unk> as co @-@ editor for the last five issues . The contents were reprints from the American edition . 
 Italy . An Italian reprint edition titled Galaxy ran from June 1958 to May 1964 ; there were 70 physical issues , with two issues containing double numbers , so that the last issue was numbered 72 . The publisher was Editrice Due Mondi , Milan , for the first ten issues ; the remaining issues were published by Casa Editrice La Tribuna , Piacenza . The editors were R. Valente ( issues 1 – 26 / 27 ) , Mario Vitali ( 28 / 29 – 39 ) , and <unk> Pollini <unk> ( 40 – 72 ) . The magazine included some stories by Italian authors in addition to translated material . 
 Netherlands . Five issues , titled <unk> , appeared from October 1966 to February 1967 , from Vector , Dordrecht . The editor was Theo Kemp . The translations were of poor quality . 
 Norway . The Norwegian magazine Tempo @-@ <unk> , published by Greens Forlag , printed translations from US science fiction , mostly from Galaxy . It lasted for five issues , from November 1953 to March 1954 . The editor was Arne Ernst . 
 Sweden . A Swedish edition , titled Galaxy , appeared from September 1958 to June 1960 ( 19 issues ) ; the publisher is unknown , though it is known to be the same company that published the Swedish edition of Mad . This version , which included some original Swedish stories , was edited by Henrik Rabe . 
 UK . Several British editions of Galaxy were produced . From 1953 to 1962 Strato Publications published 94 numbered issues . The early issues were labeled vol . 3 no . 1 to no . 12 . With the 13th issue the " vol . 3 " was dropped . Until issue 72 ( February 1959 ) they were shortened versions of the US edition , with one or more stories or features being cut . From no . 72 Strato reprinted the full US issue with a different title page , and from issue 80 the US edition was used with a variant cover . In 1967 a British edition appeared from Gold Star Publications ; there were five bimonthly issues , identical to the US edition dated six months previously . The British issues were dated January – February 1967 through September – October 1967 ; the corresponding US issues were June , August , October , and December 1966 , and February 1967 . Universal @-@ Tandem Publishing Co Ltd published 25 issues of Galaxy in the UK ; the original US issues were May – June 1972 to January 1975 . These were re @-@ covered for UK distribution . The numbering was erratic : it ran 1 – 10 , then 11 , 11 , 12 , 12 , 12 , 14 , and finally 17 – 25 . 
 = = = Other bibliographic details = = = 
 The following table shows which issues appeared from which publisher . 
 The title changed multiple times , and was frequently inconsistently given between the cover , spine , indicia , and masthead . 
 Galaxy remained a digest @-@ sized magazine from the beginning until 1979 ; the very last issue was published in pulp format , as were the semi @-@ professional issues produced by E. J. Gold . The page count began at 160 ; it dropped to 144 in January 1955 , but went up to 192 in February 1959 . In July 1969 the count went back down to 160 ; it returned to 192 pages with the August – September 1970 issue and stayed there till May – June 1971 , when it dropped to 176 . From June 1974 to June – July 1979 it was back at 160 pages , and then went to 128 pages for the final digest issue , September – October 1979 . The single 1980 issue was 72 pages long . The eight issues published in the 1990s all had 96 pages , except the first , January – February 1994 , which had 56 pages . The initial price was 25 cents . Price changes were as follows : 35 cents from May 1958 ; 50 cents from February 1959 ; 60 cents from December 1964 ; 75 cents from August – September 1970 ; $ 1 @.@ 00 from April 1975 ; 79 cents for the August 1975 issue ; 95 cents from September 1975 ; $ 1 @.@ 00 from May 1976 ; $ 1 @.@ 25 from June 1977 , and $ 1 @.@ 50 for the final professional issue in 1980 . 
 = = = Derivative anthologies = = = 
 Several anthologies of stories from Galaxy have been published . The following list does not include reprint editions though in some cases these varied in contents , as for example with the UK editions of some of the early volumes . 
 = = Related publications = = 
 Two series of companion novels were issued by the publishers . The first series , Galaxy Science Fiction Novels , began in 1950 with Eric Frank Russell 's Sinister Barrier ; seven titles were released by World Editions , and a further twenty @-@ eight by Guinn 's Galaxy Publishing Corporation . The books were initially in digest format but this was changed to a standard paperback format for the last four titles . In 1959 the line was sold to Beacon Books , which produced another 11 volumes . Beacon specialized in softcore pornography , and changed the titles of most of the books they published to be more suggestive . The last title , Sin in Space ( originally Outpost Mars ) , by Cyril Judd ( a pseudonym for Cyril Kornbluth and Judith Merril ) appeared in 1961 . Two years later a second series , Galaxy <unk> , appeared ; each of these consisted of two short novels , both by the same author , published in a single volume . Only three were released ; the last , And My Fear Is Great / Baby Is Three by Theodore Sturgeon , appeared in 1964 . 
 = Howard Adelman = 
 Howard Adelman ( born January 7 , 1938 ) is a Canadian philosopher and former university professor . He retired as Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at York University in 2003 . Adelman was one of the founders of Rochdale College , as well as the founder and director of York 's Centre for Refugee Studies . He was editor of Refuge for ten years , and since his retirement he has received several honorary university and governmental appointments in Canada and abroad . Adelman was the recipient of numerous awards and grants , and presented the inaugural lecture in a series named in his honor at York University in 2008 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Howard Adelman was born January 7 , 1938 , in Toronto , Ontario . He earned a B.A. ( 1960 ) , M.A. ( 1963 ) , and Ph.D. ( 1971 ) in philosophy from the University of Toronto , and was a member of the faculty at York University in Toronto from 1966 until his retirement in 2003 . As a nineteen @-@ year @-@ old philosophy student , Adelman , was hired in 1958 by the Campus Co @-@ operative to meet a growing need for student housing at the University of Toronto . With Adelman 's advice , Campus Co @-@ op acquired additional properties and formed Co @-@ operative College Residences Inc . , a non @-@ profit offshoot . Later , while a Lecturer in Philosophy at the University of Toronto ( 1963 – 1964 ) and Assistant Professor at York University ( 1966 – 1970 ) , Adelman was one of the principal founders of Rochdale College , an experimental " free university " organized on the cooperative principle of its British namesake . After obtaining federal mortgages at well below market rates , Campus Co @-@ op incorporated Rochdale College in 1964 . An energetic and entrepreneurial spirit with boundless imagination and a playful sense of humor , at that time Adelman was prone to saying he " teaches at the University of Toronto and studies at Rochdale . " 
 Adelman was the founder and director of York 's Centre for Refugee Studies ( 1988 – 1993 ) and for ten years he was editor of Canada 's periodical on refugees , Refuge until 1993 . 
 = = = Service and recognition = = = 
 Adelman served in many university positions at York University , including acting dean of Atkinson College , two terms as director of the graduate program in philosophy , and chair of the Department of Philosophy at York University . He served as Vice @-@ Chair , York University Senate ( 1980 – 81 ) , and as its Chair ( 1981 – 82 ) . Adelman served as National Chair of Canadian Professors for Peace in the Middle East ( 1983 – 84 ) , and Director of the Refugee Documentation Project ( 1982 – 86 ) . 
 In 2008 Adelman was honored as the keynote speaker at the First Annual Howard Adelman Lecture in celebration of the Centre for Refugee Studies ’ 20th anniversary . Held during Refugee Rights Week in Toronto , Adelman reviewed recent research on refugees , suggesting it is probably more beneficial than detrimental to assist refugees . 
 = = = Post @-@ retirement = = = 
 After retiring in 2003 , Adelman was appointed visiting professor at the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton University in 2004 . In 2008 , Adelman is Senior Research Fellow at the Key Centre for Ethics , Law , Justice and Governance at Griffith University in Brisbane , Australia . He serves as the deputy convener of <unk> , a consortium of researchers on governance issues in Australia , and as research director of the International Consortium of Research on Governance of the Health Workforce . He is producer and host of a weekly television program , Israel Today , broadcast in Canada and parts of the United States . 
 = = Scholarship = = 
 The author , coauthor or editor of 23 scholarly books and over 100 articles and book chapters , in addition to numerous other papers , addresses , and professional reports , Adelman has written extensively on the Middle East , humanitarian intervention , membership rights , ethics , early warning and conflict management , refugee repatriation , policy and resettlement , including his contribution in 2000 to the Institutional Component of the Early Warning and Conflict Management System set up by <unk> ( Intergovernmental Authority on Development ) for the Horn of Africa . 
 Perhaps best known for his work in applied philosophy concerning refugees , immigration policy and genocide , Adelman published a major study entitled Early Warning and Conflict Management : Joint Evaluation of Emergency Assistance to Rwanda ( 1996 ) as part of the 5 volume study International Response to Conflict and Genocide : Lessons from the Rwanda Experience . In 1999 , he co @-@ edited The Path of a Genocide : The Rwanda Crisis from Uganda to Zaire , already regarded a classic on the subject . Adelman served as an associate editor for the Macmillan three @-@ volume Encyclopedia of Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity ( 2005 ) . These efforts earned international acclaim . 
 His earlier works included publications on social criticism and reform of universities , including The University Game , co @-@ edited with Dennis Lee ( 1968 ) , The Beds of <unk> ( 1970 ) , and The <unk> ( 1973 ) . 
 = = = Selected publications = = = 
 Military Intervention and Non @-@ Intervention in the Twenty @-@ First Century : An Australian Perspective , with Charles Sampford . 2009 . New York : Routledge . 
 Rites of Return , with Elazar Barkan . 2009 . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . 
 Protracted Displacement in Asia : No Place to Call Home . Aldershot , England ; Burlington , VT : Ashgate , 2008 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7546 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 “ Blaming the United Nations . ” 2008 . Journal of International Political Theory . 4 ( April ) : 9 – 33 
 Encyclopedia of Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity . 3 vols . Edited with Dinah Shelton . Detroit : Thomson / Gale , 2005 . ISBN 0 @-@ 02 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 War and Peace in Zaire @-@ Congo : Analyzing and Evaluating Intervention , 1996 – 1997 . With Govind C. Rao . Trenton , NJ : Africa World Press , 2004 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 130 @-@ 5 
 “ From Refugees to Forced Migration : The UNHCR and Human Security . 2001 . International Migration Review 35 ( Spring 2001 ) : 7 – 32 . 
 “ Rwanda Revisited : In Search for Lessons . ” 2000 . Journal of Genocide Research 2 : 431 – 444 . 
 " Preventing Genocide : The Case of Rwanda , " In Genocide : Essays Toward Understanding Early @-@ Warning and Prevention , Roger W. Smith , ed . Williamsburg : Virginia : Association of Genocide Scholars , 1999 . 
 The Path of a Genocide : The Rwanda Crisis from Uganda to Zaire . Edited with Astri Suhrke . New Brunswick , NJ : Transaction Publishers , 1999 . 
 " The Ethics of Intervention – Rwanda . " In Dilemmas of Intervention : Sovereignty vs. Responsibility . Richard H. <unk> and Michael Keren , eds . London : Frank Cass Publications , 1999 . 
 " Control and Prevention : Canadian Refugee Policy : The Case of Rwanda . " In Immigration and Refugee Policy : Canada and Europe . Howard Adelman , ed . Toronto : University of Toronto Press , 1998 . 
 " Difficulties in Early Warning : Networking and Conflict Management . " In Early Warning and Conflict Prevention : Limitations and Opportunities . Alfred van Staden and Klaas van <unk> , eds . The Hague : Kluwer Law International , 1998 . 
 Early Warning : Theory and Practice . Edited with Susan <unk> . New York : Columbia University Press On Line , 1998 . 
 " Early Warning and Prevention : The Case of Rwanda , " In Refugee Rights and Realities : Evolving International Concepts and Regimes . Frances Nicholson , ed . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1998 . 
 " Lamentations : The Death and Rebirth of the Civil Society or The Wisdom of the Alien Other in a Global Civilization . " In Devolution and Post @-@ Multiculturalism , Michael Lanphier , ed . Toronto : Artemis , 1998 . 
 Membership and Dismemberment : The Body Politic and Genocide in Rwanda . New York : Columbia University Press , Columbia International Affairs Online , 1998 . 
 " Modernity , Globalization , Refugees and Displacement . " In Refugees , Contemporary Perspectives on the Experience of Forced Migration , Alastair Ager , ed . New York : Cassell Publishers , 1998 . 
 " State Crime and Migration " In Migration and Crime , Alex P. Schmid , ed . Milan : <unk> , 1998 . 
 " Why Refugee Warriors Are Threats . " 1998 . Journal of Conflict Studies 18 ( Spring ) : 49 – 69 . 
 " The Failure to Prevent Genocide : The Case of Rwanda . " 1997 . Mediterranean Social Sciences Review 2 ( Winter ) : 41 – 65 . 
 " Of Human Bondage : Labour , Bondage and Freedom in the Phenomenology . " In Essays on Hegel 's Phenomenology of Spirit , Jon Stewart , ed . Albany : SUNY Press , 1997 . 
 " Preventing Massacre : The Case of Kibeho . " In The Rwanda Crisis : Healing and Protection Strategies , Sally <unk> , ed . Kensington , MD : Overview Press , 1997 . 
 Early Warning and Conflict Management , Volume 2 of The International Response to Conflict and Genocide : Lessons from the Rwanda Experience , edited with Astri Suhrke . Copenhagen : <unk> , 1996 . 
 " Early Warning and Response : Why the International Community Failed to Prevent the Genocide , " with Astri Suhrke . 1996 . Disasters : The Journal of Disaster Studies and Management 20 ( December ) . 
 " Indifference versus Sentiment . " 1996 . New Routes : A Journal of Peace Research and Action 1 : 11 – 30 . 
 Multiculturalism , Jews , and Identities in Canada . With John H. Simpson . Jerusalem : Magnes Press , 1996 . ISBN 965 @-@ 223 @-@ 920 @-@ 8 
 " The Right of Repatriation - Canadian Refugee Policy : The Case of Rwanda . " 1996 . International Migration Review 30 ( Spring ) , 289 – 309 . 
 " Canada , Quebec and Refugee Claimants . " In Is Quebec Nationalism Just : Perspectives from Anglophone Canada . Joseph <unk> , ed . McGill @-@ Queens University Press , 1995 . 
 Legitimate and Illegitimate Discrimination : New Issues in Migration . Geneva : UNESCO ; York Lanes Press , 1995 . 
 African Refugees : Development Aid and Repatriation . Edited with John Sorenson . Boulder : Westview Press , 1994 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8133 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 Canadian Immigration and Refugee Policy and Practice . Berlin : Edition <unk> , 1994 . ISBN 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ 170 @-@ 2 
 The Genesis of a Domestic Regime : The Case of Hungary . With Endre Sik and Geza <unk> . Toronto : York Lanes Press , 1994 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 237 @-@ 2 
 " Immigrants and Refugees : Between the Pre @-@ Modern and the Post @-@ Modern World . " 1994 . Jahrbuch für <unk> <unk> . Berlin : Edition <unk> , 133 – 156 . 
 Immigration and Refugee Policy : Australia and Canada Compared . 2 vols . Toronto : University of Toronto Press , 1994 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8020 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 ( v. 1 ) <unk> ( v. 2 ) 
 " Refugees : A Conceptual View of Current Research and Towards a Research Framework for the 1990s . " In Crossing Borders : Transmigration in Asia Pacific . Ong Jin Hui , Chan Kwok Bun and Chew Soon Beng , eds . Singapore : Prentice Hall ; Simon & Schuster , 1994 . 
 " What Can Europe Learn from Canada ? " 1994 . Migration : A European Journal of International Migration and Ethnic Relations 1 – 2 : 5 – 14 . 
 " The Ethics of Humanitarian Intervention : The Case of the Kurdish Refugees . " 1992 . Public Affairs Quarterly 6 : 61 – 88 . 
 " Humanitarian Intervention : The Case of the Kurds , " 1992 . International Journal of Refugee Law 4 : 4 – 38 . 
 Refugee Policy : Canada and the United States . Toronto : York University , Centre for Refugee Studies ; Staten Island , NY : Center for Migration Studies of New York , 1991 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 63 @-@ 5 
 Refuge or Asylum ? A Choice for Canada . With C. Michael Lanphier . Toronto : York Lanes Press , 1990 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 114 @-@ 7 
 The Indochinese Refugee Movement : The Canadian Experience . Toronto : Operation Lifeline , 1980 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 6 
 “ The physiology of the university . ” Higher Education 7 ( February ) : 87 – 93 , 1978 . 
 The <unk> . Toronto : New Press , 1973 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 694 @-@ 0 
 Rational Explanation in History . Ph.D. Thesis , University of Toronto . Ottawa : National Library of Canada . Canadian Theses on Microfilm , # <unk> . Public Archives of Canada , Central Microfilm Unit , 1972 . 
 The Beds of <unk> . Toronto : Praxis Press , 1969 . 
 The University Game , co @-@ edited with Dennis Lee . Toronto : House of Anansi Press , 1968 . 
 = Peter Penfold = 
 Peter Alfred Penfold , CMG , OBE , ( born 27 February 1944 ) is a retired British diplomat . His career began in 1963 , when he joined the Foreign Service as a clerical officer . Two years into his career , he was posted to the British embassy in Bonn , West Germany , and two years after that to Nigeria . From 1970 to 1972 , Penfold served as a " floater " in Latin America , filling in as necessary for staff at British missions in the region . He served in Mexico during the 1970 football world cup , and on St Vincent , where he was responsible for organising an evacuation after a volcanic eruption . After Latin America , Penfold briefly served in Canberra , before returning to London to take a post in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office ( FCO ) . He earned early promotion to second secretary in Addis Ababa , Ethiopia , where he was responsible for reporting on the Organisation of African Unity ( OAU ) and the Eritrean War of Independence and was still in the country during the revolution , in which the pro @-@ Western emperor was overthrown . After completing his tour in Ethiopia , Penfold served as information officer in Port of Spain and then as first secretary in the West Africa Department of the FCO . 
 Penfold 's next overseas posting was to Kampala , Uganda , as deputy high commissioner . There , he persuaded President Milton Obote to attend the queen 's birthday party for the first time . Two months later , Obote was overthrown in a coup , after which Penfold led an evacuation of foreign citizens to Kenya . The high commission remained open , and Penfold was still present six months later when a second coup took place . In 1987 , he again returned to the FCO , this time serving in the West Indian and Atlantic Department , and four years later , he was appointed Governor of the British Virgin Islands . The main issues of Penfold 's tenure were the establishment of the territory as an offshore financial centre and the smuggling of drugs through its waters until the sudden death of the chief minister . Penfold resolved the subsequent constitutional crisis by appointing the deputy chief minister as an interim replacement . Penfold 's term as governor expired in 1996 , after which he spent a year as a drugs adviser to the Caribbean before being appointed High Commissioner to Sierra Leone in 1997 . Six weeks into Penfold 's term , President Ahmad <unk> Kabbah was overthrown in a military coup and Penfold organised an evacuation of foreign citizens . 
 After a hotel housing the remaining foreign nationals was attacked , Penfold organised a further evacuation , which was conducted by an American warship . The ship transported the evacuees — including Penfold — to Conakry in neighbouring Guinea . While in Conakry , Penfold advised Kabbah on re @-@ establishing his government in exile , and leased a disused restaurant for the government 's headquarters . Kabbah was restored in February 1998 , but the role of the private military company Sandline International in assisting Kabbah created controversy in the United Kingdom , as its services were alleged to violate an arms embargo on Sierra Leone . After an HM Customs investigation , a parliamentary inquiry , and a select committee investigation , Penfold was reprimanded but allowed to return to his post . Later in the year , violence began to intensify again in Sierra Leone , and Penfold was ordered to evacuate foreign nationals ( the eight evacuation of his career and the second in Sierra Leone ) over Christmas 1998 . He requested an extension to his term as high commissioner , but the request was denied and he left Sierra Leone in April 2000 . He spent the last year of his career working for the Department for International Development and retired in 2001 . In retirement , Penfold has spoken on issues concerning Africa , particularly Sierra Leone , and has been critical of the FCO . His support of Kabbah , and his role in returning him to power in 1998 , earned Penfold folk hero status in Sierra Leone . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Penfold was born to Alfred and Florence ( née Green ) in 1944 and educated at Sutton Grammar School for Boys , where he stayed on until 19 . He left school with A @-@ levels in French , German , and geography , and took casual employment to earn money . Having a desire to make use of his language qualifications , he began applying for jobs at multi @-@ national companies . He applied to Her Majesty 's Civil Service and passed the civil service exam , but was keen to join the Foreign Service . He took and passed a second exam to join the Foreign Service , but had to enter at a lower grade than he would have held in the Civil Service . 
 = = Early career = = 
 = = = 1963 – 1984 : career beginnings = = = 
 Penfold 's diplomatic career began as a clerical officer at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office ( FCO ) in London in 1963 . In 1965 , two years into his career , Penfold was posted to the British embassy in Bonn , West Germany , where he served as a clerical officer until 1968 . At the end of his posting , he was sent to Kaduna , Nigeria , where he was one of only six staff . Penfold admitted that — had he been able to choose his posting — he would probably not have chosen Kaduna and may not have considered Africa , but the posting " started [ his ] love affair with Africa " . He spent two years in Kaduna as one of the three junior staff who , unlike the senior staff , had no diplomatic privilege . From 1970 to 1972 , Penfold was a Latin American " floater " — part of a pool of five staff who could be sent to assist diplomatic missions to provide support during busy times or to cover for staff leave . 
 Penfold 's first assignment as Latin American floater was in Mexico City , where he acted as vice consul during the football world cup while many of the diplomatic staff were in Guadalajara , where the English national team were based . After the conclusion of the world cup , Penfold was sent to Ecuador , where he was responsible for overseeing renovation work to the ambassador 's residence . He was in Ecuador for six months , after which he was sent to Uruguay to assist in the aftermath of the kidnapping of Ambassador Geoffrey Jackson . Six weeks later , he was ordered to Paraguay , where the British mission was staffed by a single diplomat , for whom Penfold would cover while they took leave . Penfold 's final posting as a " floater " was to St Vincent , which at the time relied on the United Kingdom for defence and foreign policy matters . Three weeks after his arrival , the volcano on the island erupted , and Penfold was responsible for co @-@ ordinating an evacuation by the Royal Navy . 
 Of his term as Latin American floater , Penfold stated that he found the variety of tasks he performed " valuable experience " for his later career . After Latin America , he was immediately sent to Canberra in 1972 , having been told that the passport officer there was dying . He arrived to find that there had been a misunderstanding regarding the passport officer 's health . He stayed to assist for three months before returning to London , where he became a desk officer in the Pacific and Dependent Territories Department of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office ( FCO ) . Working with the Overseas Development Administration , he was responsible for several small territories in the Pacific . During his tenure , Penfold turned down a job inside 10 Downing Street as part of a European Commission secretariat being set up by Prime Minister Ted Heath , believing the position to be inferior to the one he held . 
 = = = 1975 – 1987 : Ethiopia and Uganda = = = 
 In 1975 , while serving at the FCO , Penfold volunteered to learn a difficult language in the hope of advancing his career . After passing an aptitude test , he was assigned a professional language tutor and began learning Amharic — the official language of Ethiopia — and after six weeks of tuition , was sent to Gondar to continue learning the language by living in Ethiopia . Shortly after , he was posted to Addis Ababa as second secretary , because the British ambassador to Ethiopia , Sir Willie Morris , was keen to have an Amharic @-@ speaking second secretary . Penfold was responsible for monitoring and reporting on internal Ethiopian affairs and the Organisation of African Unity ( OAU ) , as the latter was based in Addis . As part of the role , Penfold was required to attend and report on meetings of the OAU , which took place all over Africa . On the instruction of Foreign Secretary David Owen , Penfold met with the leaders of the independence movement in Southern Rhodesia ( modern @-@ day Zimbabwe ) at an OAU conference in Gabon in 1977 . There he met separately with Bishop Muzorewa , Joshua Nkomo , and Robert Mugabe . Penfold believed Mugabe to be difficult to work with , but later stated that it should have been obvious that Mugabe would come to power in Zimbabwe and that the British government could have made a greater effort to work with him . 
 Penfold 's tenure in Ethiopia coincided with the Eritrean War of Independence , which Penfold was responsible for monitoring . To that end , he was required to covertly meet with Eritrean informants , sometimes smuggling them back to the British compound in the boot of his car , to keep up to date on the progress of the war . Penfold was also in the country during the Ethiopian Revolution , in which the pro @-@ Western Emperor Haile Selassie I was overthrown by a faction of the military — which became the Derg — sympathetic to the Soviet Union . He remained in Ethiopia until 1978 , when he was sent to Port of Spain as information officer , with responsibility for editing a magazine aimed at promoting British trade . Penfold returned to London in 1981 , serving as first secretary in the West Africa Department of the FCO . At the time , the FCO had two career " streams " — one for non @-@ graduates and a faster one for university graduates — and during his time in the West Africa Department , Penfold " bridged " into the faster stream . 
 After " bridging " , Penfold was promoted and posted to Kampala , Uganda , in 1984 as deputy high commissioner . He had attended an OAU conference in Uganda in the 1970s and was pleased to be posted there . Within a few weeks , the high commissioner took leave and Penfold became acting high commissioner . One of his first tasks was the 1985 high commission 's queen 's birthday party , which he postponed to allow President Milton Obote to attend — the first time Obote attended a national day . Two months after the birthday party , Penfold was still acting high commissioner when he was informed of an impending coup . He notified the American , French , and UN representatives , after which he instructed all the British staff to move into the high commissioner 's residence until the fighting was over . As shooting broke out on the outskirts of Kampala , Obote fled the country along with most of his ministers , leaving the country in chaos . The following day , Penfold travelled into the city centre with the American and UN representatives to determine who was in charge of the country and make contact with the new regime . He met a Ugandan Army major , to whom he expressed his concerns about the security situation and explained that foreign citizens would likely be evacuated , which happened three days later when Penfold led an evacuation by road to Kenya . Although most foreign citizens had left , Penfold kept the British High Commission open and all the staff remained . The Ugandan military began forming a government and attempted to include all tribes in the country , to which end Penfold assisted by meeting with Yoweri Museveni , leader of the National Resistance Army . Museveni refused to join the government and six months later led another coup and declared himself president . Penfold was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in 1986 . 
 = = = 1987 – 1997 : FCO and the British Virgin Islands = = = 
 Penfold returned to the FCO in 1987 , where he was appointed to a position in the West Indian and Atlantic Department , which was responsible for the Caribbean and South Atlantic . The department was divided between British Dependent Territories ( for which Penfold was responsible ) and independent nations . In the years before and during Penfold 's tenure , the British dependencies had been the subject of several diplomatic incidents and were causing problems for the British government , to whom the international community looked to resolve problems with its dependent territories . The FCO had struggled to find new governors for the territories since the winding @-@ up of the Colonial Service — which had historically provided most governors and many civil servants — in the 1960s . Thus , Penfold recommended in a policy paper that the Diplomatic Service be considered as a recruiting pool , and that governors be recruited earlier in their career rather than at the end . He also identified several posts which could be used for training potential governors , including the one he occupied and deputy governor posts such as that in Bermuda . 
 The government accepted Penfold 's recommendations , to the extent that he was appointed Governor of the British Virgin Islands in 1991 , which , at the age of 48 , made him the youngest serving governor of a British territory . The governor represents the monarch and the British government , as well as presiding over the cabinet , but is also required to swear an oath to the constitution of the territory , which Penfold believed complicated the governor 's role as a representative of the British government . Among Penfold 's duties as governor was the purchase of an aeroplane to assist in combating drug smuggling through the territory and assisting in establishing the British Virgin Islands as an offshore financial centre ; the number of registered companies in the Islands rose to 35 @,@ 000 ( more than double the population ) during Penfold 's tenure . As governor , Penfold became increasingly aware of growing resentment among the citizens of the British dependencies regarding their rights of entry and abode in the UK . He proposed that the territories be renamed " British overseas territories " , and that their citizens be given equal rights of entry and abode — proposals that were eventually accepted . At the end of Penfold 's term , a constitutional crisis arose after Chief Minister Hamilton <unk> <unk> died suddenly . The constitution of the territory contained no provision for the chief minister dying in office , and the death left the governing party without a majority in the assembly , so Penfold asked Deputy Chief Minister Ralph O 'Neal to become " Chief Minister ad interim " to provide political stability . Penfold was appointed a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George ( CMG ) for his service in the British Virgin Islands . 
 After he had completed his term as governor in 1996 , the FCO struggled to find a post for Penfold , so they appointed him to the newly created post of special drugs adviser to the Caribbean , in which he worked as part of a team of advisers from across the European Union assisting Caribbean governments in developing policies to combat the smuggling of illegal drugs . 
 = = Sierra Leone = = 
 = = = Military coup and first evacuation = = = 
 Although he enjoyed the posting as drugs adviser , Penfold was keen to go back to Africa . He applied for a post as high commissioner in Namibia , but the post was downgraded and the application fell through . Penfold was then offered a posting to Sierra Leone . Although it was a lower @-@ ranking post than the British Virgin Islands , Penfold was assured that taking the position would not adversely affect his career , so he accepted and , in March 1997 , was appointed High Commissioner to Sierra Leone . He later stated that he believed his previous experience in Africa , particularly in Uganda , stood him in good stead for the events of his posting to Sierra Leone . The country was in the middle of a bloody civil war in 1997 , and on 25 May — six weeks into Penfold 's tenure — President Ahmad <unk> Kabbah 's government was overthrown in a military coup . Although the coup itself did not come as a surprise , the timing caught the international community off @-@ guard . As in Uganda a decade earlier , Penfold gathered all the high commission staff and their families under one roof . 
 Kabbah was evacuated to Conakry in neighbouring Guinea almost as soon as fighting broke out , and the coup @-@ makers established the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council ( AFRC ) with Johnny Paul Koroma as its chairman . The following day , Penfold invited Koroma and several of his associates , along with representatives of Nigeria , the United States , and the UN , to a meeting at the British high commissioner 's residence . He found it remarkable that they all attended , but believed it epitomised the esteem in which the office of British high commissioner was held in Sierra Leone . At the meeting , Koroma agreed to open the country 's main airport temporarily the next day , which allowed Penfold to organise the evacuation of several <unk> of foreign nationals . The men agreed to reconvene the following day and the meetings continued throughout the week , though almost all diplomatic missions — including those of the UN and US — closed over the course of the week , leaving just the British and Nigerians in Freetown . In that time , Penfold believed he had persuaded the coup @-@ makers to stand down and allow Kabbah to return but , unbeknownst to the diplomats , the AFRC had invited the Revolutionary United Front ( RUF ) — the main rebel group in the civil war — to form a joint government in Freetown . 
 Days after the arrival of the RUF , on 2 June , rebels and soldiers attacked the Mammy Yoko hotel — where around 800 foreign citizens had gathered under the protection of Nigerian soldiers — in response to a Nigerian naval bombardment of Freetown . Penfold was able to see the firefight from the high commission building , and telephoned the Sierra Leonean defence headquarters to demand an end to the violence , threatening to request the deployment of US Marines from the USS Kearsarge , which was anchored offshore . The defence headquarters promptly ordered an end to the shooting , and the occupants of the hotel were evacuated to another nearby hotel for the night and then to the USS Kearsarge the next morning ( 3 June ) . In addition , Penfold and the remaining members of his staff ( most of the staff and all their families had already left ) were ordered to evacuate on the Kearsarge , despite Penfold 's objections . The Kearsarge sailed to Conakry , where Kabbah had been staying since the beginning of the coup . No country recognised the military junta , and the international community continued to recognise the exiled Kabbah government as the legitimate government of Sierra Leone . Kabbah re @-@ established his government in Conakry , basing it in a former Chinese restaurant leased by the British government through Penfold . There , Penfold advised Kabbah on keeping up the government 's presence on the international stage , such as by ensuring that a representative was sent to international meetings . He also continued to run the British diplomatic mission in Freetown ; the high commission continued to pay its local staff and began smuggling food and money into Sierra Leone . During the ten months in which the Kabbah government was exiled , Penfold — with funds from the British Department for International Development ( DfID ) — also assisted in the setting up of a covert radio station , which broadcast on behalf of the exiled government . 
 = = = Sandline affair = = = 
 From Conakry , Penfold also assisted Kabbah in negotiations with Sandline International — a private military company led by Tim Spicer , a former British Army officer — whom Kabbah intended to hire to lead a counter @-@ coup . Sandline had been contracted to provide assistance to the Nigerian @-@ led forces in Sierra Leone at a time when relations between the UK and Nigeria were poor , so Penfold used Sandline personnel to liaise with the Nigerians to provide intelligence for Kabbah and the British High Commission . In February 1998 , a coalition of Nigerian troops and local militia — assisted by Sandline — restored Kabbah to power , and Penfold was transported back to Freetown by a British warship . The role of Sandline , however , sparked a political controversy in the United Kingdom , as the company was accused of violating an international arms embargo on Sierra Leone . Penfold was ordered back to the UK , where he was investigated by HM Customs and Excise for allegedly assisting Spicer in violating the embargo . Customs dropped their investigation after deciding it was not in the public interest to prosecute anybody , but Foreign Secretary Robin Cook ordered a parliamentary inquiry into what the FCO knew about Sandline 's contract with Kabbah . Penfold received a reprimand for failing to report adequately on his dealings with Sandline , and the inquiry — led by Sir Thomas Legg — recommended better communication between the FCO and the high commissioner . 
 In Sierra Leone , Penfold was widely considered a hero for his role in restoring Kabbah . While he was giving evidence to the inquiry , 20 @,@ 000 people took part in a demonstration demanding his return to Sierra Leone , and upon his arrival at Lungi airport , he was appointed an honorary Paramount Chief — becoming only the third person to be granted the honour since Sierra Leone 's independence — and was greeted by large crowds . Shortly after his return , Penfold was again summoned back to London to face an investigation by the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Select Committee . He gave evidence in a televised session in which he stated his belief that the Sandline controversy was a peripheral issue and that the FCO should be focusing on supporting the newly restored Kabbah government . The committee 's report expressed concern about Penfold 's role with regard to Sandline , but believed he " acted as he thought was in the best interests of the United Kingdom and of Sierra Leone , and that he did not consider that his actions went beyond government policy " . Penfold stated after his retirement that he felt Sierra Leone became a " political football " in the UK and that , had the FCO 's focus not been distracted by the Sandline issue , later problems in Sierra Leone might have been avoided . 
 = = = Second evacuation , Lomé Accord , and replacement = = = 
 Towards the end of 1998 , the RUF began to re @-@ mobilise in northern Sierra Leone . As tensions escalated , the FCO ordered an evacuation of British citizens just before Christmas . Penfold believed the evacuation — the eighth of his career — was unnecessary and argued against it ; his objections were over @-@ ruled and he was ordered to evacuate his staff , though he was allowed to remain in Freetown with his military protection detail . The Royal Air Force evacuated approximately 35 people , but many British people chose to stay . Penfold travelled to Abidjan after Christmas for an international summit on Sierra Leone , but the FCO refused to allow him to return to Sierra Leone , so he again based himself in a hotel in Conakry . The RUF attacked Freetown on 6 January 1999 . After 10 days of fighting , the rebels were pushed back and Penfold was transported back to Sierra Leone by a British warship . He flew to Freetown for daily meetings with Kabbah , but was not allowed to move back into his residence and so temporarily lived on the ship . Later in 1999 , the Sierra Leone government entered into negotiations which resulted in the Lomé Peace Agreement . Penfold opposed power @-@ sharing with the RUF , and believed he was excluded from the talks in Lomé because of his views . The agreement did not hold , and violence again broke out in early 2000 . 
 Penfold 's term as high commissioner expired in April 2000 . He requested a British military adviser be sent to Sierra Leone , as well as an extension to his own term , both of which were denied . He left the country on 30 April and was succeeded by Alan Jones . After returning to the UK , he applied for multiple posts but was turned down for each . He was asked to take early retirement , but was keen to retire on his own terms . He eventually took a job as a conflict adviser to DfID , having developed what he described as " a very good relationship with ... [ the ] DfID " . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 In retirement , Penfold has been critical of the FCO 's attitude towards Africa , and has expressed the view that it does not give high enough priority to the continent . He stated in an interview that he felt the FCO was keen to develop experts in other areas , such as Europe and the Middle East , but " Africa is the place where anybody can do it so long as they have average intelligence " . Since retiring , he has taken on roles with various charities and other organisations focusing on Africa and Sierra Leone , including New Africa Analysis , the UK Association for Schools for the Blind , Sierra Leone ( which supports the Sir Milton <unk> School for the Blind in Freetown ) , and the Dorothy Springer Trust . He is considered a folk hero in Sierra Leone , and continues to speak on issues relating to Sierra Leone . He was vocal in his opposition to indictment of Samuel <unk> Norman — a pro @-@ Kabbah militia leader during the civil war — for war crimes by the Special Court for Sierra Leone , and to the special court itself . He described the special court as an " expensive and divisive piece of judicial machinery " which served little purpose following the deaths of most of the prominent defendants , and believed that its continuation " could undermine the fragile peace " in Sierra Leone . Penfold was granted the Freedom of the City of Freetown and given the honorary title of Paramount Chief for his role in Sierra Leone , and has written a book about his experiences in the country , Atrocities , Diamonds and Diplomacy ( ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 768 @-@ 2 ) . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Penfold met his first wife @-@ to @-@ be while serving on St Vincent as Latin American floater . He was planning his wedding at the end of his term in Latin America but was persuaded to postpone it due to the urgency with which he was required in Canberra , and the wedding eventually took place later in 1972 . The couple had three children , but his wife did not enjoy the overseas postings . They divorced in 1984 and Penfold travelled to Kampala alone . While in Uganda , Penfold met his second wife @-@ to @-@ be , Celia , who was working for the World Bank . They married while Penfold was Governor of the British Virgin Islands , making Penfold the first British governor to get married in @-@ post . Both Penfold and his wife consider themselves committed Christians , and Penfold has stated that , " as a Christian , I have felt more at home in Africa " . 
 = 0 @.@ 999 ... = 
 In mathematics , the repeating decimal 0 @.@ 999 … ( sometimes written with more or fewer 9s before the final ellipsis , for example as 0 @.@ 9 … , or in a variety of other variants such as 0 @.@ 9 , 0 . ( 9 ) , or <formula> ) denotes a real number that can be shown to be the number one . In other words , the symbols " 0 @.@ 999 … " and " 1 " represent the same number . Proofs of this equality have been formulated with varying degrees of mathematical rigor , taking into account preferred development of the real numbers , background assumptions , historical context , and target audience . 
 Every nonzero , terminating decimal ( with infinitely many trailing 0s ) has an equal twin representation with infinitely many trailing 9s ( for example , 8 @.@ 32 and 8 @.@ <unk> … ) . The terminating decimal representation is usually preferred , contributing to the misconception that it is the only representation . The same phenomenon occurs in all other bases ( with a given base 's largest digit ) or in any similar representation of the real numbers . 
 The equality of 0 @.@ 999 … and 1 is closely related to the absence of nonzero infinitesimals in the real number system , the most commonly used system in mathematical analysis . Some alternative number systems , such as the hyperreals , do contain nonzero infinitesimals . In most such number systems , the standard interpretation of the expression 0 @.@ 999 … makes it equal to 1 , but in some of these number systems , the symbol " 0 @.@ 999 … " admits other interpretations that contain infinitely many 9s while falling infinitesimally short of 1 . 
 The equality 0 @.@ 999 … = 1 has long been accepted by mathematicians and is part of general mathematical education . Nonetheless , some students find it sufficiently counterintuitive that they question or reject it . Such skepticism is common enough that the difficulty of convincing them of the validity of this identity has been the subject of several studies in mathematics education . 
 = = Algebraic proofs = = 
 Algebraic proofs showing that 0 @.@ 999 … represents the number 1 use concepts such as fractions , long division , and digit manipulation to build transformations preserving equality from 0 @.@ 999 … to 1 . However , these proofs are not rigorous as they do not include a careful analytic definition of 0 @.@ 999 … . 
 = = = Fractions and long division = = = 
 One reason that infinite decimals are a necessary extension of finite decimals is to represent fractions . Using long division , a simple division of integers like 1 ⁄ 9 becomes a recurring decimal , 0 @.@ 111 … , in which the digits repeat without end . This decimal yields a quick proof for 0 @.@ 999 … 
 = 1 . Multiplication of 9 times 1 produces 9 in each digit , so 9 × 0 @.@ 111 … equals 0 @.@ 999 … and 9 × 1 ⁄ 9 equals 1 , so 0 @.@ 999 … = 
 1 : 
 <formula> 
 This result is consistent with other ninth fractions , all of which have repeating decimals , such as 3 ⁄ 9 and 8 ⁄ 9 . If 0 @.@ 999 … is to be consistent , it must equal 9 ⁄ 9 = 1 . 
 <formula> 
 = = = Digit manipulation = = = 
 When a number in decimal notation is multiplied by 10 , the digits do not change but each digit moves one place to the left . Thus 10 × 0 @.@ 999 … equals 9 @.@ 999 … , which is 9 greater than the original number . To see this , consider that in subtracting 0 @.@ 999 … from 9 @.@ 999 … , each of the digits after the decimal separator cancels , i.e. the result is 9 − 9 = 0 for each such digit : 
 <formula> 
 = = = Discussion = = = 
 Although these proofs demonstrate that 0 @.@ 999 … 
 = 1 , the extent to which they explain the equation depends on the audience . In introductory arithmetic , such proofs help explain why 0 @.@ 999 … = 
 1 but 0 @.@ 333 … < 0 @.@ 34 . In introductory algebra , the proofs help explain why the general method of converting between fractions and repeating decimals works . But the proofs shed little light on the fundamental relationship between decimals and the numbers they represent , which underlies the question of how two different decimals can be said to be equal at all . 
 Once a representation scheme is defined , it can be used to justify the rules of decimal arithmetic used in the above proofs . Moreover , one can directly demonstrate that the decimals 0 @.@ 999 … and 1 @.@ 000 … both represent the same real number ; it is built into the definition . This is done below . 
 = = Analytic proofs = = 
 Since the question of 0 @.@ 999 … does not affect the formal development of mathematics , it can be postponed until one proves the standard theorems of real analysis . One requirement is to characterize real numbers that can be written in decimal notation , consisting of an optional sign , a finite sequence of one or more digits forming an integer part , a decimal separator , and a sequence of digits forming a fractional part . For the purpose of discussing 0 @.@ 999 … , the integer part can be summarized as b0 and one can neglect negatives , so a decimal expansion has the form 
 <formula> 
 It should be noted that the fraction part , unlike the integer part , is not limited to a finite number of digits . This is a positional notation , so for example the digit 5 in 500 contributes ten times as much as the 5 in 50 , and the 5 in 0 @.@ 05 contributes one tenth as much as the 5 in 0 @.@ 5 . 
 = = = Infinite series and sequences = = = 
 Perhaps the most common development of decimal expansions is to define them as sums of infinite series . In general : 
 <formula> 
 For 0 @.@ 999 … one can apply the convergence theorem concerning geometric series : 
 If <formula> then <formula> 
 Since 0 @.@ 999 … is such a sum with a common ratio r 
 = 1 ⁄ 10 , the theorem makes short work of the question : 
 <formula> 
 This proof ( actually , that 10 equals 9 @.@ 999 … ) appears as early as 1770 in Leonhard Euler 's Elements of Algebra . 
 The sum of a geometric series is itself a result even older than Euler . A typical 18th @-@ century derivation used a term @-@ by @-@ term manipulation similar to the algebraic proof given above , and as late as 1811 , Bonnycastle 's textbook An Introduction to Algebra uses such an argument for geometric series to justify the same maneuver on 0 @.@ 999 … A 19th @-@ century reaction against such liberal summation methods resulted in the definition that still dominates today : the sum of a series is defined to be the limit of the sequence of its partial sums . A corresponding proof of the theorem explicitly computes that sequence ; it can be found in any proof @-@ based introduction to calculus or analysis . 
 A sequence ( x0 , x1 , x2 , … ) has a limit x if the distance | x − xn | becomes arbitrarily small as n increases . The statement that 0 @.@ 999 … = 
 1 can itself be interpreted and proven as a limit : 
 <formula> 
 The first two equalities can be interpreted as symbol shorthand definitions . The remaining equalities can be proven . The last step , that 1 ⁄ <unk> → 0 as n → ∞ , is often justified by the Archimedean property of the real numbers . This limit @-@ based attitude towards 0 @.@ 999 … is often put in more evocative but less precise terms . For example , the 1846 textbook The University Arithmetic explains , " .999 + , continued to infinity = 1 , because every annexation of a 9 brings the value closer to 1 " ; the 1895 Arithmetic for Schools says , " … when a large number of 9s is taken , the difference between 1 and <unk> … becomes inconceivably small " . Such heuristics are often interpreted by students as implying that 0 @.@ 999 … itself is less than 1 . 
 = = = Nested intervals and least upper bounds = = = 
 The series definition above is a simple way to define the real number named by a decimal expansion . A complementary approach is tailored to the opposite process : for a given real number , define the decimal expansion ( s ) to name it . 
 If a real number x is known to lie in the closed interval [ 0 , 10 ] ( i.e. , it is greater than or equal to 0 and less than or equal to 10 ) , one can imagine dividing that interval into ten pieces that overlap only at their endpoints : [ 0 , 1 ] , [ 1 , 2 ] , [ 2 , 3 ] , and so on up to [ 9 , 10 ] . The number x must belong to one of these ; if it belongs to [ 2 , 3 ] then one records the digit " 2 " and subdivides that interval into [ 2 , 2 @.@ 1 ] , [ 2 @.@ 1 , 2 @.@ 2 ] , … , [ 2 @.@ 8 , 2 @.@ 9 ] , [ 2 @.@ 9 , 3 ] . Continuing this process yields an infinite sequence of nested intervals , labeled by an infinite sequence of digits b0 , b1 , b2 , b3 , … , and one writes 
 <formula> 
 In this formalism , the identities 1 
 = 0 @.@ 999 … and 1 = 
 1 @.@ 000 … reflect , respectively , the fact that 1 lies in both [ 0 , 1 ] and [ 1 , 2 ] , so one can choose either subinterval when finding its digits . To ensure that this notation does not abuse the " = " sign , one needs a way to reconstruct a unique real number for each decimal . This can be done with limits , but other constructions continue with the ordering theme . 
 One straightforward choice is the nested intervals theorem , which guarantees that given a sequence of nested , closed intervals whose lengths become arbitrarily small , the intervals contain exactly one real number in their intersection . So b0.b1b2b3 … is defined to be the unique number contained within all the intervals [ b0 , b0 + 1 ] , [ b0.b1 , b0.b1 + 0 @.@ 1 ] , and so on . 0 @.@ 999 … is then the unique real number that lies in all of the intervals [ 0 , 1 ] , [ 0 @.@ 9 , 1 ] , [ 0 @.@ 99 , 1 ] , and [ 0 @.@ 99 … 9 , 1 ] for every finite string of 9s . Since 1 is an element of each of these intervals , 0 @.@ 999 … 
 = 1 . 
 The Nested Intervals Theorem is usually founded upon a more fundamental characteristic of the real numbers : the existence of least upper bounds or <unk> . To directly exploit these objects , one may define b0.b1b2b3 … to be the least upper bound of the set of approximants { b0 , b0.b1 , <unk> , … } . One can then show that this definition ( or the nested intervals definition ) is consistent with the subdivision procedure , implying 0 @.@ 999 … = 
 1 again . Tom Apostol concludes , 
 The fact that a real number might have two different decimal representations is merely a reflection of the fact that two different sets of real numbers can have the same supremum . 
 = = Proofs from the construction of the real numbers = = 
 Some approaches explicitly define real numbers to be certain structures built upon the rational numbers , using axiomatic set theory . The natural numbers – 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , and so on – begin with 0 and continue upwards , so that every number has a successor . One can extend the natural numbers with their negatives to give all the integers , and to further extend to ratios , giving the rational numbers . These number systems are accompanied by the arithmetic of addition , subtraction , multiplication , and division . More subtly , they include ordering , so that one number can be compared to another and found to be less than , greater than , or equal to another number . 
 The step from rationals to reals is a major extension . There are at least two popular ways to achieve this step , both published in 1872 : Dedekind cuts and Cauchy sequences . Proofs that 0 @.@ 999 … = 1 which directly use these constructions are not found in textbooks on real analysis , where the modern trend for the last few decades has been to use an axiomatic analysis . Even when a construction is offered , it is usually applied towards proving the axioms of the real numbers , which then support the above proofs . However , several authors express the idea that starting with a construction is more logically appropriate , and the resulting proofs are more self @-@ contained . 
 = = = Dedekind cuts = = = 
 In the Dedekind cut approach , each real number x is defined as the infinite set of all rational numbers less than x . In particular , the real number 1 is the set of all rational numbers that are less than 1 . Every positive decimal expansion easily determines a Dedekind cut : the set of rational numbers which are less than some stage of the expansion . So the real number 0 @.@ 999 … is the set of rational numbers r such that r < 0 , or r < 0 @.@ 9 , or r < 0 @.@ 99 , or r is less than some other number of the form 
 <formula> 
 Every element of 0 @.@ 999 … is less than 1 , so it is an element of the real number 1 . Conversely , an element of 1 is a rational number 
 <formula> 
 which implies 
 <formula> 
 Since 0 @.@ 999 … and 1 contain the same rational numbers , they are the same set : 0 @.@ 999 … 
 = 1 . 
 The definition of real numbers as Dedekind cuts was first published by Richard Dedekind in 1872 . The above approach to assigning a real number to each decimal expansion is due to an expository paper titled " Is 0 @.@ 999 … = 
 1 ? " by Fred Richman in Mathematics Magazine , which is targeted at teachers of collegiate mathematics , especially at the junior / senior level , and their students . Richman notes that taking Dedekind cuts in any dense subset of the rational numbers yields the same results ; in particular , he uses decimal fractions , for which the proof is more immediate . He also notes that typically the definitions allow { x : x < 1 } to be a cut but not { x : x ≤ 1 } ( or vice versa ) " Why do that ? Precisely to rule out the existence of distinct numbers 0 @.@ 9 * and 1 . [ … ] So we see that in the traditional definition of the real numbers , the equation 0 @.@ 9 * = 1 is built in at the beginning . " A further modification of the procedure leads to a different structure where the two are not equal . Although it is consistent , many of the common rules of decimal arithmetic no longer hold , for example the fraction 1 ⁄ 3 has no representation ; see " Alternative number systems " below . 
 = = = Cauchy sequences = = = 
 Another approach is to define a real number as the limit of a Cauchy sequence of rational numbers . This construction of the real numbers uses the ordering of rationals less directly . First , the distance between x and y is defined as the absolute value | x − y | , where the absolute value | z | is defined as the maximum of z and − z , thus never negative . Then the reals are defined to be the sequences of rationals that have the Cauchy sequence property using this distance . That is , in the sequence ( x0 , x1 , x2 , … ) , a mapping from natural numbers to rationals , for any positive rational δ there is an N such that | <unk> − xn | ≤ δ for all m , n > N. ( The distance between terms becomes smaller than any positive rational . ) 
 If ( xn ) and ( yn ) are two Cauchy sequences , then they are defined to be equal as real numbers if the sequence ( xn − yn ) has the limit 0 . Truncations of the decimal number b0.b1b2b3 … generate a sequence of rationals which is Cauchy ; this is taken to define the real value of the number . Thus in this formalism the task is to show that the sequence of rational numbers 
 <formula> 
 has the limit 0 . Considering the nth term of the sequence , for n ∈ <unk> , it must therefore be shown that 
 <formula> 
 This limit is plain if one understands the definition of limit . So again 0 @.@ 999 … 
 = 1 . 
 The definition of real numbers as Cauchy sequences was first published separately by Eduard Heine and Georg Cantor , also in 1872 . The above approach to decimal expansions , including the proof that 0 @.@ 999 … = 
 1 , closely follows Griffiths & Hilton 's 1970 work A comprehensive textbook of classical mathematics : A contemporary interpretation . The book is written specifically to offer a second look at familiar concepts in a contemporary light . 
 = = = Infinite decimal representation = = = 
 Commonly in secondary schools ' mathematics education , the real numbers are constructed by defining a number using an integer followed by a radix point and an infinite sequence written out as a string to represent the fractional part of any given real number . In this construction , the set of any combination of integers and digits after the decimal point ( or radix point in non @-@ base 10 systems ) is the set of real numbers . This construction can too be rigorously shown to satisfy all of the real axioms after defining an equivalence relation over the set that defines 1 = eq 0 @.@ 999 … as well as for any other nonzero decimals with only finitely many nonzero terms in the decimal string with its trailing 9s version . With this construction of the reals , all proofs of the statement 1 = 0 @.@ 999 … can be viewed as implicitly assuming the equality when any operations are performed on the real numbers . 
 = = Generalizations = = 
 The result that 0 @.@ 999 … 
 = 1 generalizes readily in two ways . First , every nonzero number with a finite decimal notation ( equivalently , endless trailing 0s ) has a counterpart with trailing 9s . For example , 0 @.@ <unk> … equals 0 @.@ 25 , exactly as in the special case considered . These numbers are exactly the decimal fractions , and they are dense . 
 Second , a comparable theorem applies in each radix or base . For example , in base 2 ( the binary numeral system ) 0 @.@ 111 … equals 1 , and in base 3 ( the ternary numeral system ) 0 @.@ 222 … equals 1 . In general , any terminating base b expression has a counterpart with repeated trailing digits equal to b − 1 . Textbooks of real analysis are likely to skip the example of 0 @.@ 999 … and present one or both of these generalizations from the start . 
 Alternative representations of 1 also occur in non @-@ integer bases . For example , in the golden ratio base , the two standard representations are 1 @.@ 000 … and 0 @.@ <unk> … , and there are infinitely many more representations that include adjacent 1s . Generally , for almost all q between 1 and 2 , there are uncountably many base @-@ q expansions of 1 . On the other hand , there are still uncountably many q ( including all natural numbers greater than 1 ) for which there is only one base @-@ q expansion of 1 , other than the trivial 1 @.@ 000 … . This result was first obtained by Paul Erdős , Miklos Horváth , and István <unk> around 1990 . In 1998 Vilmos <unk> and Paola <unk> determined the smallest such base , the <unk> – <unk> constant q = 
 1 @.@ <unk> … . In this base , 1 
 = 0 @.@ <unk> … ; the digits are given by the <unk> – Morse sequence , which does not repeat . 
 A more far @-@ reaching generalization addresses the most general positional numeral systems . They too have multiple representations , and in some sense the difficulties are even worse . For example : 
 In the balanced ternary system , 1 ⁄ 2 = 
 0 @.@ 111 … 
 = 1 @.@ 111 … . 
 In the reverse factorial number system ( using bases 2 ! , 3 ! , 4 ! , … for positions after the decimal point ) , 1 = 
 1 @.@ 000 … = 0 @.@ 1234 … . 
 = = = Impossibility of unique representation = = = 
 That all these different number systems suffer from multiple representations for some real numbers can be attributed to a fundamental difference between the real numbers as an ordered set and collections of infinite strings of symbols , ordered <unk> . Indeed , the following two properties account for the difficulty : 
 If an interval of the real numbers is partitioned into two non @-@ empty parts L , R , such that every element of L is ( strictly ) less than every element of R , then either L contains a largest element or R contains a smallest element , but not both . 
 The collection of infinite strings of symbols taken from any finite " alphabet " , <unk> ordered , can be partitioned into two non @-@ empty parts L , R , such that every element of L is less than every element of R , while L contains a largest element and R contains a smallest element . Indeed , it suffices to take two finite prefixes ( initial substrings ) p1 , p2 of elements from the collection such that they differ only in their final symbol , for which symbol they have successive values , and take for L the set of all strings in the collection whose corresponding prefix is at most p1 , and for R the remainder , the strings in the collection whose corresponding prefix is at least p2 . Then L has a largest element , starting with p1 and choosing the largest available symbol in all following positions , while R has a smallest element obtained by following p2 by the smallest symbol in all positions . 
 The first point follows from basic properties of the real numbers : L has a supremum and R has an infimum , which are easily seen to be equal ; being a real number it either lies in R or in L , but not both since L and R are supposed to be disjoint . The second point generalizes the 0 @.@ 999 … / 1 @.@ 000 … pair obtained for p1 
 = " 0 " , p2 = 
 " 1 " . In fact one need not use the same alphabet for all positions ( so that for instance mixed radix systems can be included ) or consider the full collection of possible strings ; the only important points are that at each position a finite set of symbols ( which may even depend on the previous symbols ) can be chosen from ( this is needed to ensure maximal and minimal choices ) , and that making a valid choice for any position should result in a valid infinite string ( so one should not allow " 9 " in each position while forbidding an infinite succession of " 9 " s ) . Under these assumptions , the above argument shows that an order preserving map from the collection of strings to an interval of the real numbers cannot be a bijection : either some numbers do not correspond to any string , or some of them correspond to more than one string . 
 Marko <unk> has proven that for any positional system that names all the real numbers , the set of reals with multiple representations is always dense . He calls the proof " an instructive exercise in elementary point @-@ set topology " ; it involves viewing sets of positional values as Stone spaces and noticing that their real representations are given by continuous functions . 
 = = Applications = = 
 One application of 0 @.@ 999 … as a representation of 1 occurs in elementary number theory . In 1802 , H. Goodwin published an observation on the appearance of 9s in the repeating @-@ decimal representations of fractions whose denominators are certain prime numbers . Examples include : 
 1 ⁄ 7 
 = 0 @.@ <unk> … and 142 + 857 = 
 999 . 
 1 ⁄ 73 
 = 0 @.@ <unk> … and <unk> + <unk> = 
 9999 . 
 1 ⁄ 77 
 = 0 @.@ <unk> … and 012 + 987 = 
 999 . 
 E. <unk> proved a general result about such fractions , now called <unk> 's theorem , in 1836 . The publication was obscure , and it is unclear if his proof directly involved 0 @.@ 999 … , but at least one modern proof by W. G. Leavitt does . If it can be proved that a decimal of the form <unk> … is a positive integer , then it must be 0 @.@ 999 … , which is then the source of the 9s in the theorem . Investigations in this direction can motivate such concepts as greatest common divisors , modular arithmetic , Fermat primes , order of group elements , and quadratic reciprocity . 
 Returning to real analysis , the base @-@ 3 analogue 0 @.@ 222 … = 1 plays a key role in a characterization of one of the simplest fractals , the middle @-@ thirds Cantor set : 
 A point in the unit interval lies in the Cantor set if and only if it can be represented in ternary using only the digits 0 and 2 . 
 The nth digit of the representation reflects the position of the point in the nth stage of the construction . For example , the point 2 ⁄ 3 is given the usual representation of 0 @.@ 2 or 0 @.@ 2000 … , since it lies to the right of the first deletion and to the left of every deletion thereafter . The point 1 ⁄ 3 is represented not as 0 @.@ 1 but as 0 @.@ <unk> … , since it lies to the left of the first deletion and to the right of every deletion thereafter . 
 Repeating nines also turn up in yet another of Georg Cantor 's works . They must be taken into account to construct a valid proof , applying his 1891 diagonal argument to decimal expansions , of the <unk> of the unit interval . Such a proof needs to be able to declare certain pairs of real numbers to be different based on their decimal expansions , so one needs to avoid pairs like 0 @.@ 2 and 0 @.@ 1999 … A simple method represents all numbers with nonterminating expansions ; the opposite method rules out repeating nines . A variant that may be closer to Cantor 's original argument actually uses base 2 , and by turning base @-@ 3 expansions into base @-@ 2 expansions , one can prove the <unk> of the Cantor set as well . 
 = = Skepticism in education = = 
 Students of mathematics often reject the equality of 0 @.@ 999 … and 1 , for reasons ranging from their disparate appearance to deep misgivings over the limit concept and disagreements over the nature of infinitesimals . There are many common contributing factors to the confusion : 
 Students are often " mentally committed to the notion that a number can be represented in one and only one way by a decimal . " Seeing two manifestly different decimals representing the same number appears to be a paradox , which is amplified by the appearance of the seemingly well @-@ understood number 1 . 
 Some students interpret " 0 @.@ 999 … " ( or similar notation ) as a large but finite string of 9s , possibly with a variable , unspecified length . If they accept an infinite string of nines , they may still expect a last 9 " at infinity " . 
 Intuition and ambiguous teaching lead students to think of the limit of a sequence as a kind of infinite process rather than a fixed value , since a sequence need not reach its limit . Where students accept the difference between a sequence of numbers and its limit , they might read " 0 @.@ 999 … " as meaning the sequence rather than its limit . 
 These ideas are mistaken in the context of the standard real numbers , although some may be valid in other number systems , either invented for their general mathematical utility or as instructive counterexamples to better understand 0 @.@ 999 … 
 Many of these explanations were found by David Tall , who has studied characteristics of teaching and cognition that lead to some of the misunderstandings he has encountered in his college students . Interviewing his students to determine why the vast majority initially rejected the equality , he found that " students continued to conceive of 0 @.@ 999 … as a sequence of numbers getting closer and closer to 1 and not a fixed value , because ' you haven 't specified how many places there are ' or ' it is the nearest possible decimal below 1 ' " . 
 Of the elementary proofs , multiplying 0 @.@ 333 … 
 = 1 ⁄ 3 by 3 is apparently a successful strategy for convincing reluctant students that 0 @.@ 999 … = 
 1 . Still , when confronted with the conflict between their belief of the first equation and their disbelief of the second , some students either begin to disbelieve the first equation or simply become frustrated . Nor are more sophisticated methods foolproof : students who are fully capable of applying rigorous definitions may still fall back on intuitive images when they are surprised by a result in advanced mathematics , including 0 @.@ 999 … . For example , one real analysis student was able to prove that 0 @.@ 333 … 
 = 1 ⁄ 3 using a supremum definition , but then insisted that 0 @.@ 999 … < 1 based on her earlier understanding of long division . Others still are able to prove that 1 ⁄ 3 = 
 0 @.@ 333 … , but , upon being confronted by the fractional proof , insist that " logic " supersedes the mathematical calculations . 
 Joseph Mazur tells the tale of an otherwise brilliant calculus student of his who " challenged almost everything I said in class but never questioned his calculator , " and who had come to believe that nine digits are all one needs to do mathematics , including calculating the square root of 23 . The student remained uncomfortable with a limiting argument that 9 @.@ 99 … = 10 , calling it a " wildly imagined infinite growing process . " 
 As part of Ed Dubinsky 's <unk> theory of mathematical learning , he and his collaborators ( 2005 ) propose that students who conceive of 0 @.@ 999 … as a finite , indeterminate string with an infinitely small distance from 1 have " not yet constructed a complete process conception of the infinite decimal " . Other students who have a complete process conception of 0 @.@ 999 … may not yet be able to " encapsulate " that process into an " object conception " , like the object conception they have of 1 , and so they view the process 0 @.@ 999 … and the object 1 as incompatible . Dubinsky et al. also link this mental ability of encapsulation to viewing 1 ⁄ 3 as a number in its own right and to dealing with the set of natural numbers as a whole . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 With the rise of the Internet , debates about 0 @.@ 999 … have become commonplace on newsgroups and message boards , including many that nominally have little to do with mathematics . In the newsgroup <unk> , arguing over 0 @.@ 999 … is described as a " popular sport " , and it is one of the questions answered in its FAQ . The FAQ briefly covers 1 ⁄ 3 , multiplication by 10 , and limits , and it alludes to Cauchy sequences as well . 
 A 2003 edition of the general @-@ interest newspaper column The Straight Dope discusses 0 @.@ 999 … via 1 ⁄ 3 and limits , saying of misconceptions , 
 The lower primate in us still resists , saying : .999 ~ doesn 't really represent a number , then , but a process . To find a number we have to halt the process , at which point the .999 ~ = 1 thing falls apart . 
 Nonsense . 
 A Slate article reports that the concept of 0 @.@ 999 … is " hotly disputed on websites ranging from World of Warcraft message boards to Ayn Rand forums " . In the same vein , the question of 0 @.@ 999 … proved such a popular topic in the first seven years of Blizzard Entertainment 's Battle.net forums that the company issued a " press release " on April Fools ' Day 2004 that it is 1 : 
 We are very excited to close the book on this subject once and for all . We 've witnessed the heartache and concern over whether .999 ~ does or does not equal 1 , and we 're proud that the following proof finally and conclusively addresses the issue for our customers . 
 Two proofs are then offered , based on limits and multiplication by 10 . 
 0 @.@ 999 … features also in mathematical jokes , such as : 
 Q : How many mathematicians does it take to screw in a lightbulb ? 
 A : 0 @.@ <unk> … . 
 = = In alternative number systems = = 
 Although the real numbers form an extremely useful number system , the decision to interpret the notation " 0 @.@ 999 … " as naming a real number is ultimately a convention , and Timothy Gowers argues in Mathematics : A Very Short Introduction that the resulting identity 0 @.@ 999 … 
 = 1 is a convention as well : 
 However , it is by no means an arbitrary convention , because not adopting it forces one either to invent strange new objects or to abandon some of the familiar rules of arithmetic . 
 One can define other number systems using different rules or new objects ; in some such number systems , the above proofs would need to be reinterpreted and one might find that , in a given number system , 0 @.@ 999 … and 1 might not be identical . However , many number systems are extensions of — rather than independent alternatives to — the real number system , so 0 @.@ 999 … = 
 1 continues to hold . Even in such number systems , though , it is worthwhile to examine alternative number systems , not only for how 0 @.@ 999 … behaves ( if , indeed , a number expressed as " 0 @.@ 999 … " is both meaningful and unambiguous ) , but also for the behavior of related phenomena . If such phenomena differ from those in the real number system , then at least one of the assumptions built into the system must break down . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Some proofs that 0 @.@ 999 … 
 = 1 rely on the Archimedean property of the real numbers : that there are no nonzero infinitesimals . Specifically , the difference 1 − 0 @.@ 999 … must be smaller than any positive rational number , so it must be an infinitesimal ; but since the reals do not contain nonzero infinitesimals , the difference is therefore zero , and therefore the two values are the same . 
 However , there are mathematically coherent ordered algebraic structures , including various alternatives to the real numbers , which are non @-@ Archimedean . Non @-@ standard analysis provides a number system with a full array of infinitesimals ( and their inverses ) . A. H. <unk> developed a decimal expansion for hyperreal numbers in ( 0 , 1 ) ∗ . <unk> shows how to associate to each number a sequence of digits , 
 <formula> 
 indexed by the <unk> numbers . While he does not directly discuss 0 @.@ 999 … , he shows the real number 1 ⁄ 3 is represented by 0 @.@ 333 … ; … 333 … which is a consequence of the transfer principle . As a consequence the number 0 @.@ 999 … ; … 999 … = 
 1 . With this type of decimal representation , not every expansion represents a number . In particular " 0 @.@ 333 … ; … 000 … " and " 0 @.@ 999 … ; … 000 … " do not correspond to any number . 
 The standard definition of the number 0 @.@ 999 … is the limit of the sequence 0 @.@ 9 , 0 @.@ 99 , 0 @.@ 999 , … A different definition involves what Terry Tao refers to as <unk> , i.e. , the equivalence class [ ( 0 @.@ 9 , 0 @.@ 99 , 0 @.@ 999 , … ) ] of this sequence in the <unk> construction , which is a number that falls short of 1 by an infinitesimal amount . More generally , the hyperreal number <unk> = 0 @.@ 999 … ; … <unk> … , with last digit 9 at infinite <unk> rank H , satisfies a strict inequality <unk> < 1 . Accordingly , an alternative interpretation for " zero followed by infinitely many 9s " could be 
 <formula> 
 All such interpretations of " 0 @.@ 999 … " are infinitely close to 1 . Ian Stewart characterizes this interpretation as an " entirely reasonable " way to rigorously justify the intuition that " there 's a little bit missing " from 1 in 0 @.@ 999 … . Along with Katz & Katz , Robert Ely also questions the assumption that students ' ideas about 0 @.@ 999 … < 1 are erroneous intuitions about the real numbers , interpreting them rather as nonstandard intuitions that could be valuable in the learning of calculus . Jose <unk> in his book Infinity : An essay in metaphysics argues that some natural pre @-@ mathematical intuitions cannot be expressed if one is limited to an overly restrictive number system : 
 The intelligibility of the continuum has been found — many times over — to require that the domain of real numbers be enlarged to include infinitesimals . This enlarged domain may be styled the domain of continuum numbers . It will now be evident that .9999 … does not equal 1 but falls infinitesimally short of it . I think that .9999 … should indeed be admitted as a number … though not as a real number . 
 = = = Hackenbush = = = 
 Combinatorial game theory provides alternative reals as well , with infinite Blue @-@ Red Hackenbush as one particularly relevant example . In 1974 , Elwyn Berlekamp described a correspondence between Hackenbush strings and binary expansions of real numbers , motivated by the idea of data compression . For example , the value of the Hackenbush string <unk> … is 0 @.@ <unk> … 
 = 1 ⁄ 3 . However , the value of <unk> … ( corresponding to 0 @.@ 111 … 2 ) is infinitesimally less than 1 . The difference between the two is the surreal number 1 ⁄ ω , where ω is the first infinite ordinal ; the relevant game is <unk> … or 0 @.@ 000 … 2 . 
 This is in fact true of the binary expansions of many rational numbers , where the values of the numbers are equal but the corresponding binary tree paths are different . For example , 0 @.@ <unk> … 2 = 
 0 @.@ 11000 … 2 , which are both equal to 3 ⁄ 4 , but the first representation corresponds to the binary tree path <unk> … while the second corresponds to the different path <unk> … . 
 = = = Revisiting subtraction = = = 
 Another manner in which the proofs might be undermined is if 1 − 0 @.@ 999 … simply does not exist , because subtraction is not always possible . Mathematical structures with an addition operation but not a subtraction operation include commutative semigroups , commutative <unk> and <unk> . Richman considers two such systems , designed so that 0 @.@ 999 … < 1 . 
 First , Richman defines a nonnegative decimal number to be a literal decimal expansion . He defines the lexicographical order and an addition operation , noting that 0 @.@ 999 … < 1 simply because 0 < 1 in the ones place , but for any nonterminating x , one has 0 @.@ 999 … + x 
 = 1 + x . So one peculiarity of the decimal numbers is that addition cannot always be cancelled ; another is that no decimal number corresponds to 1 ⁄ 3 . After defining multiplication , the decimal numbers form a positive , totally ordered , commutative <unk> . 
 In the process of defining multiplication , Richman also defines another system he calls " cut D " , which is the set of Dedekind cuts of decimal fractions . Ordinarily this definition leads to the real numbers , but for a decimal fraction d he allows both the cut ( − ∞ , d ) and the " principal cut " ( − ∞ , d ] . The result is that the real numbers are " living uneasily together with " the decimal fractions . Again 0 @.@ 999 … < 1 . There are no positive infinitesimals in cut D , but there is " a sort of negative infinitesimal , " 0 − , which has no decimal expansion . He concludes that 0 @.@ 999 … = 
 1 + 0 − , while the equation " 0 @.@ 999 … + x = 1 " has no solution . 
 = = = p @-@ adic numbers = = = 
 When asked about 0 @.@ 999 … , novices often believe there should be a " final 9 , " believing 1 − 0 @.@ 999 … to be a positive number which they write as " 0 @.@ 000 … 1 " . Whether or not that makes sense , the intuitive goal is clear : adding a 1 to the final 9 in 0 @.@ 999 … would carry all the 9s into 0s and leave a 1 in the ones place . Among other reasons , this idea fails because there is no " final 9 " in 0 @.@ 999 … . However , there is a system that contains an infinite string of 9s including a last 9 . 
 The p @-@ adic numbers are an alternative number system of interest in number theory . Like the real numbers , the p @-@ adic numbers can be built from the rational numbers via Cauchy sequences ; the construction uses a different metric in which 0 is closer to p , and much closer to pn , than it is to 1 . The p @-@ adic numbers form a field for prime p and a ring for other p , including 10 . So arithmetic can be performed in the p @-@ adics , and there are no infinitesimals . 
 In the 10 @-@ adic numbers , the analogues of decimal expansions run to the left . The 10 @-@ adic expansion … 999 does have a last 9 , and it does not have a first 9 . One can add 1 to the ones place , and it leaves behind only 0s after carrying through : 1 + … 999 
 = … 000 = 
 0 , and so … 999 
 = − 1 . Another derivation uses a geometric series . The infinite series implied by " … 999 " does not converge in the real numbers , but it converges in the 10 @-@ adics , and so one can re @-@ use the familiar formula : 
 <formula> 
 ( Compare with the series above . ) A third derivation was invented by a seventh @-@ grader who was doubtful over her teacher 's limiting argument that 0 @.@ 999 … = 
 1 but was inspired to take the multiply @-@ by @-@ 10 proof above in the opposite direction : if x 
 = … 999 then 10x = 
 … 990 , so 10x 
 = x − 9 , hence x = 
 − 1 again . 
 As a final extension , since 0 @.@ 999 … 
 = 1 ( in the reals ) and … 999 = 
 − 1 ( in the 10 @-@ adics ) , then by " blind faith and unabashed juggling of symbols " one may add the two equations and arrive at … 999 @.@ 999 … = 0 . This equation does not make sense either as a 10 @-@ adic expansion or an ordinary decimal expansion , but it turns out to be meaningful and true if one develops a theory of " double @-@ decimals " with eventually repeating left ends to represent a familiar system : the real numbers . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The philosophy of ultrafinitism rejects as meaningless concepts dealing with infinite sets , such as the summation of infinitely many numbers <formula> corresponding to the positional values of the decimal digits in <formula> . In this approach to mathematics , only some particular ( fixed ) number of finite decimal digits are meaningful . Instead of " equality " , one has " approximate equality " , which is equality up to the number of decimal digits that one is permitted to compute . Doron <unk> , a proponent of this philosophy , calls the equality <formula> " not even wrong " , for this reason . Instead , he argues that there is an algorithm that can check that the sequence obtained by truncating the decimal expansion of 0 @.@ 999 ... is approximately equal to 1 within a specified error . Although Katz and Katz ( <unk> ) argue that ultrafinitism may capture the student intuition that 0 @.@ 999 ... ought to be less than 1 , the ideas of ultrafinitism do not enjoy widespread acceptance in the mathematical community , and the philosophy lacks a generally agreed @-@ upon formal mathematical foundation . 
 = = Related questions = = 
 Zeno 's paradoxes , particularly the paradox of the runner , are reminiscent of the apparent paradox that 0 @.@ 999 … and 1 are equal . The runner paradox can be mathematically modelled and then , like 0 @.@ 999 … , resolved using a geometric series . However , it is not clear if this mathematical treatment addresses the underlying metaphysical issues Zeno was exploring . 
 Division by zero occurs in some popular discussions of 0 @.@ 999 … , and it also stirs up contention . While most authors choose to define 0 @.@ 999 … , almost all modern treatments leave division by zero undefined , as it can be given no meaning in the standard real numbers . However , division by zero is defined in some other systems , such as complex analysis , where the extended complex plane , i.e. the Riemann sphere , has a " point at infinity " . Here , it makes sense to define 1 ⁄ 0 to be infinity ; and , in fact , the results are profound and applicable to many problems in engineering and physics . Some prominent mathematicians argued for such a definition long before either number system was developed . 
 Negative zero is another redundant feature of many ways of writing numbers . In number systems , such as the real numbers , where " 0 " denotes the additive identity and is neither positive nor negative , the usual interpretation of " − 0 " is that it should denote the additive inverse of 0 , which forces − 0 = 0 . Nonetheless , some scientific applications use separate positive and negative zeroes , as do some computing binary number systems ( for example integers stored in the sign and magnitude or ones ' complement formats , or floating point numbers as specified by the IEEE floating @-@ point standard ) . 
 = 1 ? from cut @-@ the @-@ knot 
 Why does 0 @.@ 9999 … = 
 1 ? 
 Proof of the equality based on arithmetic 
 David Tall 's research on mathematics cognition 
 What is so wrong with thinking of real numbers as infinite decimals ? 
 Theorem 0 @.@ 999 … on <unk> 
 = Phạm Ngọc Thảo = 
 Colonel Phạm Ngọc Thảo ( IPA : Hanoi : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ᷉ ɔ ] , Saigon : [ <unk> ̂ <unk> <unk> <unk> ᷉ ɔ ] ) , also known as Albert Thảo ( 1922 – 1965 ) , was a communist sleeper agent of the Viet Minh ( and , later , of the Vietnam People 's Army ) who infiltrated the Army of the Republic of Vietnam and also became a major provincial leader in South Vietnam . In 1962 , he was made overseer of Ngô Đình Nhu 's Strategic Hamlet Program in South Vietnam and deliberately forced it forward at an unsustainable speed , causing the production of poorly equipped and poorly defended villages and the growth of rural resentment toward the regime of President Ngô Đình Diệm , Nhu 's elder brother . In light of the failed " land reform " efforts in North Vietnam , the Hanoi government welcomed Thao 's efforts to undermine Diem . 
 During the First Indochina War , Thảo was a communist officer in the Vietminh and helped oversee various operations in the Mekong Delta in the far south , at one point commanding his future enemy Nguyễn Khánh , who briefly served the communist cause . After the French withdrawal and the partition of Vietnam , Thảo stayed in the south and made a show of renouncing communism . He became part of the military establishment in the anti @-@ communist southern regime and quickly rose through the ranks . Nominally Catholic , Thảo befriended Diệm 's elder brother , Archbishop Pierre Martin Ngô Đình Thục — the devoutly Roman Catholic Ngô family strongly favored co @-@ religionists and had great trust in Thảo , unaware that he was still loyal to the communists . He went on to serve as the chief of Bến Tre Province , and gained fame after the area — traditionally a communist stronghold — suddenly became peaceful and prosperous . Vietnamese and US officials , as well as journalists hostile to or supportive of Saigon , misinterpreted this as a testament to Thảo 's great ability , and he was promoted to a more powerful position where he could further his sabotage . Thảo and the communists in the local area had simply stopped fighting , so that the communists could quietly recuperate , while Thảo would appear to be very skillful and be given a more important job where he could do more damage . 
 Through intrigue , Thảo also helped destabilise and ultimately unseat two South Vietnamese regimes — Diem 's and the military junta of Khánh . As the Diệm regime began to unravel in 1963 , Thảo was one of the officers planning a coup . His plot was ultimately integrated into the successful plot and his activities promoted infighting which weakened the government and distracted the military from fighting the Viet Cong insurgency . Throughout 1964 and 1965 , as South Vietnam was struggling to establish a stable state after the ouster of Diệm , Thảo was involved in several intrigues and coup plots which diverted the government from implementing its programs . In 1965 , he went into hiding after a failed attempt to seize power from Khánh and was sentenced to death in absentia . Although this coup also failed , the subsequent chaos forced Khánh 's junta to collapse . Thảo died the same year he was forced into hiding ; it is believed that he was murdered after a bounty was placed on his head . After Vietnam was reunified at the end of the Vietnam War , the victorious communists claimed Thảo as one of their own and posthumously made him a one @-@ star general . 
 = = Early Vietminh years = = 
 Born Phạm Ngọc <unk> , Thảo was one of eleven children of a northern Vietnamese Roman Catholic family . At the time , Vietnam was a French colony . The family held French citizenship but opposed French colonialism . His father , an engineer , once headed an underground communist organisation in Paris , which assisted the Viet Minh 's anti @-@ French pro @-@ independence activities outside Vietnam . After attending French schools in Saigon , <unk> changed his name to Thảo and renounced his French citizenship . In his high school years at the Lycée Chasseloup @-@ Laubat , Thảo met Trương Như Tảng , who later became a high @-@ ranking member of the Viet Cong , a communist guerrilla organisation in South Vietnam . Tảng described Thảo as " my dearest friend " and recalled that they had " spent endless hours talking about everything under the sun . We were closer than brothers . " 
 Thảo spent his teenage years obsessed with his motorcycle . Despite being educated at an upper @-@ class school that served children of French colonial administrators and privileged Vietnamese — French was the medium of instruction and Gallic culture and history a major part of the curriculum — Thảo was attracted to nationalist politics . He participated in Hồ Chí Minh 's revolutionary campaigns for Vietnamese independence and joined the Vietminh . 
 In September 1945 , Hồ declared independence under the Democratic Republic of Vietnam ( DRV ) following the withdrawal of Imperial Japan , which had seized control of the country from France during the Second World War . At the time , there was a power vacuum , as both Japan and France had been decimated by the war . There was an outbreak of nationalist fervour in Vietnam ; Tảng and Thảo joined the Vanguard Youth , an impromptu independence militia . Tảng was assigned to be the leader of the local unit , but he left the movement soon after , leaving Thảo in command . During this period , Saigon was regularly engulfed in riots . 
 In 1946 , France attempted to reassert control over its colony and conventional military fighting broke out . Thảo served with the Vietminh in the Mekong Delta in the far south of Vietnam during the war against French rule from 1946 – 54 . He almost met his end before he had started ; he was apprehended by the local communists in Mỹ Tho , who saw his French @-@ style dress and mistook him for a colonial agent . They tied him up and chained him to a block of stone before throwing him into a river to drown . However , Thảo broke free of the weight and swam to safety . Thảo proceeded further south and deeper into the Mekong Delta to the town of Vĩnh Long , where he was again arrested by the local Vietminh . Just as Thảo was about to be executed by drowning , one of the communists realised he was a brother of one of their comrades . Thảo was released and rejoined his family , who lived in the region . 
 As a leader of the resistance , Thảo was allocated the responsibility of indoctrinating the 1947 batch of recruits with Vietminh ideology . One of Thảo 's students was his future enemy , South Vietnamese General and President Nguyễn Khánh . This group became the 410th Battalion and went on to fight near Cà Mau , the southernmost part of Vietnam . By 1949 , Thảo was in charge of the Vietminh espionage apparatus around Saigon and organised the guerrilla companies in the countryside . Thảo was also involved in procuring arms . Filipino traders brought arms into southern Vietnam in return for rice , shrimp , pork , gold and banknotes . Following the French defeat in 1954 at Điện Biên Phủ , Thảo helped evacuate communist fighters from South Vietnam and Cambodia in accordance with the terms of the Geneva Conference . Under these Accords , Vietnam was to be temporarily divided at the 17th parallel pending national elections to reunify the country in 1956 , and military personnel were to be evacuated to their respective sides of the border . In the meantime , Hồ Chí Minh 's Vietminh controlled the north under the DRV while the south was under the French @-@ sponsored State of Vietnam . 
 However , Thảo remained in the anti @-@ communist south when Vietnam was partitioned and made a show of renouncing communism . He became a schoolteacher and later worked in a bank , as well as the Department of Transport . He consistently refused to turn in the names of his former comrades , claiming that they were merely patriots fighting against the French and were not communists . At the same time , one of Thảo 's brothers had been appointed as North Vietnam 's ambassador to East Germany , having served as vice chairman of the Vietminh 's Resistance Committee for the South during the war against the French . In October 1955 , Prime Minister Diệm ousted Emperor Bảo Đại in a referendum to determine the form of government of the State of Vietnam . " Republic " received almost 99 % of the vote and " monarchy " received a little over 1 % . Diệm declared himself president of the newly proclaimed Republic of Vietnam . He scrapped the national elections , citing the fact that South Vietnam was not a signatory to the Accords of the Geneva Conference . 
 = = Undercover communist in the South Vietnamese army = = 
 The U.S.-backed Diệm was passionately anti @-@ communist . In 1957 , He initiated an " Anti @-@ Communist Denunciation Campaign " to root out Vietminh members and their sympathisers . Thousands of people were killed or jailed , and in time Diệm 's campaigns created more sympathy for the Vietminh . Before 1960 , various small @-@ scale pro @-@ Communist uprisings were taking place in the countryside . Thảo went on the run and hid in Vĩnh Long , worried that Diệm 's men were after him . In December 1960 , North Vietnam 's Politburo authorised the creation of the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam , popularly known as the Viet Cong . The Vietcong were dominated by communists , but portrayed itself as a nationalist militant organisation , stating its aim to be the " reunification of the fatherland " with the overthrow of the " disguised colonial regime of the U.S. imperialists and the dictatorial Ngo Dinh Diem administration " . The creation of the Vietcong marked an escalation in the scale and organisation of the insurgency that developed into the Vietnam War . 
 Thảo 's Catholic background helped him to avoid detection as a communist . He and his brother were the only members of the family who were not anti @-@ communist . The remainder of the relatives were followers of Diệm 's brother , Archbishop Thục , who had been Bishop of Vĩnh Long during the war against France . Thảo was known to have a face that revealed nothing of his inner feelings . Thục 's intervention helped Thảo rise in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam ( ARVN ) . Thục put Thảo in touch with Trần Kim Tuyến , who was in charge of intelligence operations under Diệm 's younger brother Nhu , who was the head of the secret police and controlled the ARVN Special Forces . Thảo began as a propagandist for various units of the army and for the secret Catholic Cần lao Party , whose system of informants and secret cells helped create the atmosphere of a police state and maintained the Ngô family 's grip on power . 
 Tảng believed that Thục " undoubtedly considered that Thảo 's Catholic and family loyalties were stronger and more durable than his youthful enthusiasm for revolution " . He felt that Thảo had tricked Thục into believing that he was no longer a communist , and that his inside knowledge would be useful to the Ngô family . Thảo started by training the Civil Guard . As a result of his family 's Catholic connections , Thảo rose steadily in the ARVN , since Diệm 's regime had always promoted officers primarily on religious preference and loyalty . Nhu sent him to Malaysia to study counterinsurgency techniques , and upon his return , Thảo became a vital part of Nhu 's efforts to purge the army of disloyal officers . As Thảo kept a close watch on those who commanded troops , lest they use their personnel in a coup , the leading officers were keen to maintain a good relationship with him , which increased his effectiveness as a spy . Thảo rose even further when the troops he commanded helped put down the November 1960 coup attempt against Diệm . Thảo assisted Khánh and Trần Thiện Khiêm to put down the revolt . All three were promoted , with the latter pair gaining the leadership of the ARVN and of the combined forces , respectively . This cemented the trio 's close ties . 
 Thảo was promoted to the post of chief of Bến Tre Province . He covertly worked with the cadres of Nguyễn Thị Định , a Vietcong leader who later became the highest ranking female communist in post @-@ war reunified Vietnam . The area was a traditional communist stronghold , and anti @-@ government attacks had increased in recent times , but it suddenly became peaceful when Thảo arrived . There were rumours that Thảo and the communists had decided to cease fighting for their mutual benefit ; the guerrillas could quietly strengthen themselves , while Thảo would appear to be successful and he would be promoted to a more powerful position where he could cause more damage to Diệm . The lack of fighting between Thảo 's forces and the Vietcong proved to beneficial to the communist cause . In a three @-@ month period in 1963 , the Vietcong were able to recruit 2 @,@ 000 men in Bến Tre and formed two more battalions . Thảo was praised by the Ngô family and U.S. military advisors , unaware of his ruse . He received another promotion , and with it , more influence and contacts among the officer corps . 
 The US ambassador , Elbridge Durbrow , described Bến Tre Province as an " agricultural showplace " and advised journalists to travel there to see Thảo 's successful administration . The influential American journalist Joe Alsop changed his plans so that he could spend more time in Bến Tre , saying that the province " particularly inspires hope " . In one operation by Thảo 's ARVN forces , American field journalists covering the battle saw their hours @-@ long attempt to box in a Vietcong battalion yield only one farmer who lived in a hut with antigovernment slogans . Despite this , the American journalists and Vietnamese officers remained unaware that Thảo was a double agent . In fact , the Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning journalist David Halberstam misinterpreted the lack of attacks in Bến Tre , while other provinces were being ravaged , as proof that Thảo was one of the few capable government officials in the Mekong Delta . Journalist Robert Shaplen wrote : " In all respects , Thao is one of the most remarkable Vietnamese around , being a conspiratorial revolutionary figure straight out of a Malraux novel and , at the same time , a highly sophisticated and astute man , whose talents , if only they were properly channeled , could profitably be used right now . " As Thảo was a former leader of the Vietminh , outsiders thought that his apparent success was due his first @-@ hand knowledge of communist tactics . During his period as the province chief , Thảo set up the Council of Elders , a consultative body of 20 – 200 men and women , who were allowed to criticise local officials . He advocated the creation of the Council of Patrons , a philanthropic body to raise money for community projects . 
 = = Strategic Hamlet Program = = 
 In 1962 , Nhu began work on the ambitious Strategic Hamlet Program , an attempt to build fortified villages that would be secure zones for rural Vietnamese . The objective was to lock the Vietcong out so that they could not operate among the villagers . Thảo supervised these efforts , and when told that the peasants resented being forcibly removed from their ancestral lands and put into forts that they were forced to build , he advised Nhu and Tuyến that it was imperative to build as many hamlets as fast as possible . This pleased the Vietcong , who felt that Thảo 's efforts were turning the rural populace against Saigon . Thảo specifically had villages built in areas that he knew had a strong Vietcong presence . This increased the number of communist sympathisers who were placed inside the hamlets and given identification cards . As a result , the Vietcong were able to more effectively penetrate the villages to access supplies and personnel . 
 Later in 1962 , United States Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara visited South Vietnam and was taken on an inspection tour of the country , accompanied by Diệm and Thảo . Perhaps because Thảo divulged the tour details to Vietcong guerrillas , each of McNamara 's stopovers was punctuated by bloody attacks on nearby ARVN installations . For example , when McNamara was in Bình Dương Province , five government soldiers were killed . As he flew from Đà Lạt north to Đà Nẵng near the Demilitarized Zone , he was greeted by a Vietcong bombing of a southbound troop train , which killed 27 and wounded 30 Civil Guard members . 
 = = The fall of Diệm = = 
 In 1963 , the Diệm regime began to lose its tight control over the country as civil unrest spread as a result of the Buddhist crisis . Large scale demonstrations by the Buddhist majority erupted in response to the government shootings of nine Buddhists in Huế who were protesting against a ban on the flying of the Buddhist flag during Vesak , the birthday of Gautama Buddha . With Diệm remaining intransigent in the face of Buddhist demands for religious equality , sections of society began calling for his removal from power . Thảo was part of the many plots that engulfed Saigon , destabilising the regime . Aiming for a 15 July coup , Tuyến consulted with Thảo regarding his plans , but Tuyến was too closely associated with Nhu to recruit the necessary military aid and he was subsequently exiled by Nhu . 
 Tuyen 's group ended up being led by Thảo but his initial coup plans were shelved when American CIA agent Lucien Conein instructed Thảo 's superior , General Khiêm , to stop the coup on the grounds that it was premature . Thảo 's motivation for involvement in the plotting is generally attributed to communist instructions for him to cause infighting within the ARVN whenever possible . He resumed plotting , intending to stage the coup on 24 October . He had recruited various infantry , marine and paratroop units for his scheme , totalling 3 @,@ 000 men . Thảo 's group did not carry out the coup after senior generals persuaded him to integrate his forces into their larger group , which was more likely to succeed . Thảo reasoned that aligning himself with a group of officers that were likely to successful would yield more influence in the resulting junta . The coup was successfully executed on 1 November 1963 under the leadership of Generals Dương Văn Minh and Trần Văn Đôn . 
 Thảo commanded around two dozen tanks , which formed a column in the streets surrounding the Presidential Palace at midnight , and helped launch the full @-@ scale attack at 03 : 30 on 2 November . The rebels eventually gained control of the building , and at daybreak Thảo 's forces stormed the palace , but found it empty ; Diệm and Nhu had escaped . A captured officer of the Presidential Guard revealed the brothers ' hiding place and under the orders of Khiêm , Thảo went after them . Khiêm ordered Thảo to ensure the brothers were not physically harmed . Thảo arrived at the house in Cholon where the brothers were purportedly hiding and phoned the rebels back at the palace . Diệm and Nhu were apparently listening in on an extension in another room and escaped . The brothers subsequently surrendered to an ARVN convoy led by General Mai Hữu Xuân at a nearby Catholic church and were executed en route to military headquarters despite being promised safe exile . 
 The US media 's links to Thảo have been the source of historical debate . The journalists ' reporting of Diệm 's authoritarian rule , military failures , and attacks on Buddhists shifted American public opinion and put pressure on Washington to withdraw support for the Ngô family and seek a change of leadership . William <unk> felt that the fall of Diệm was the biggest influence of the media on American foreign policy in over six decades . Thảo and Phạm Xuân <unk> had been the source of much of the media 's information . Conservative revisionist historians have accused the media of bringing down Diệm by publishing reports that , according to them , were based on false data disseminated by communist propagandists to unfairly malign Diệm 's rule , which they claim was effective and fair towards the Buddhist majority . 
 = = Participation in military junta = = 
 After the fall of the Diệm regime , Thảo was designated by the head of state Minh and the civilian Prime Minister Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ to create the nucleus of a group called the Council of Notables , and promote it to the <unk> which , as an interim body of prominent civilians , would advise the military junta before it handed over power to an elected legislature under civilian rule . The Council of 60 people , 58 men and 2 women , held its first meeting on 1 January 1964 in Saigon . The council was composed almost entirely of well @-@ known professionals and academics and , as such , was hardly representative of South Vietnamese society ; there were no delegates from the agricultural or labour sectors of the economy . It gained a reputation for being a forum of debate , rather than a means of enacting policy change and government programs for the populace . Thơ and Minh assigned Thảo with the task of encouraging a transition to democracy by facilitating the formation of a few political parties . This was ineffective , as many political parties with only a handful of members sprang up and squabbled . Within 45 days of the coup , 62 parties had formed but nothing meaningful resulted . In the end , these efforts proved to be irrelevant as Minh 's junta and the accompanying Council of Notables were overthrown before the end of the month . During this period , Thảo served as the head of military security and played a role in replacing Colonel Đỗ Khắc Mai with Nguyễn Cao Kỳ as the head of the Vietnam Air Force . In the aftermath of the coup , Vietcong attacks increased markedly amid infighting among the Saigon leadership , which Thảo had helped to stir up . 
 The generals sent Thảo to Fort Leavenworth in the United States for six months to learn conventional warfare tactics . He also spent a month in England before returning to Vietnam . By this time , Minh 's junta had been replaced in a 1964 January coup by Khánh . It is suspected that one of the generals ' motives for deploying Thảo overseas was his continual involvement in plotting . Khánh appointed Thảo as his press officer as well as an unofficial political adviser . 
 Later that same year , Khánh became involved in a power struggle with his deputy Khiêm as well as Minh , who had been retained as the titular head of state . Thảo was a close friend of Khiêm , so when Khánh prevailed in the power struggle , Khánh despatched Khiêm to Washington as the ambassador with Thảo was his press attaché . In August 1964 , Khánh 's leadership became increasingly troubled after he tried to augment his powers by declaring a state of emergency . This only provoked large @-@ scale protests and riots calling for an end to military rule , with Buddhist activists at the forefront . Fearful of losing power , Khánh began making concessions to the protesters and promised democracy in the near future , which encouraged more groups to demand changes , and Khánh demoted certain Catholic pro @-@ Diệm supporters . On 13 September , a Catholic @-@ dominated group led by Generals Lâm Văn Phát and Dương Văn Đức , both of whom had been demoted , moved troops into Saigon but then withdrew after it became obvious they did not have the numbers to remove Khánh . Khiêm and Thảo were implicated in helping to plot Phát and Đức 's attempted putsch ; both were sent abroad by Khánh . 
 = = 1965 attempted coup = = 
 In late December 1964 , Thảo was summoned back to Saigon by Khánh , who correctly suspected him and Khiêm of plotting together with Washington . Thảo suspected Khánh was attempting to have him killed , so he went underground upon returning to Saigon , and began plotting in earnest , having been threatened with being charged for desertion . He sheltered in a house belonging to a friend of Trương Như Tảng . The ruling junta appealed to Thảo in newspaper advertisements and broadcasts to follow orders to report , but he ignored them . In mid @-@ January 1965 , the regime called for him to report to his superiors in the ARVN , warning that he would be " considered guilty of abandoning his post with all the consequences of such a situation " if he failed to do so . 
 Due to his Catholic background , Thảo was able to recruit Diệm loyalists such as Phát . With Khánh 's grip on power shaky , an anonymous source said that Thảo was worried about how he would be treated if someone else took over : " Thao acted first , out of fear that if he did not , the other generals would overthrow Khanh and get rid of him as well . He knew that if the others overthrew Khanh his fate would be worse than Khanh 's . " During this time , Thảo kept in touch with elements of the CIA in an attempt to get American backing . Meanwhile , Khiêm had been putting pressure on Khánh for over two months by charging him and the Buddhists of seeking a " neutralist solution " and " negotiating with the communists " . At the same time , Khánh 's relationship with the Americans — particularly Ambassador and retired General Maxwell Taylor — had broken down over a series of policy disputes and personal arguments , and the Americans were trying to encourage Khánh 's colleagues to overthrow him so that more hawkish policies could be enacted . The other generals wanted to overthrow Khánh and were aware that Thảo — who was widely distrusted — was planning to make a move . They anticipated trouble in trying to keep their subordinates , who were becoming impatient with Khánh 's ongoing tenure , from joining Thảo . Between January and February , Thảo continued to finalize the details of his own counter @-@ coup , using the contacts he had cultivated over the past decades . 
 Phát and other pro @-@ Diệm officers opposed the Buddhist influence being exerted on Khánh . Thảo consulted Kỳ — who wanted to seize power for himself — before the plot , and exhorted him to join the coup , but the air force chief claimed that he was remaining neutral . Thảo thus believed Kỳ would not intervene against him , but Kỳ was strongly opposed to Thảo and Phát . American intelligence analysts had believed that General Don was involved in the coup with Phát and Thảo , but this was proven false when the action started . Eight months after the coup was over , Don told the American historian George McTurnan Kahin that he had been plotting with Thảo , who had planned for him to become Defense Minister and Chief of Staff of the military , but that the Đại Việt and Thảo 's Catholic civilian allies had insisted on installing Khiêm , a Catholic . A month before the coup , American intelligence analysts had believed that Thảo was planning to replace Khánh as commander @-@ in @-@ chief with Don . 
 Shortly before noon on 19 February , he used around fifty tanks , their crew and a mixture of infantry battalions to seize control of the military headquarters , the post office and the radio station of Saigon . He surrounded the home of General Khánh and Gia Long Palace , the residence of head of state Phan Khắc Sửu . The tanks were led by Colonel Dương Hiếu Nghĩa , a Catholic member of the Đại Việt . The country was still trying to find stability , with Phan Huy Quát being appointed prime minister just three days earlier . Khánh managed to escape and flee to Vũng Tàu . His plane lifted off from Tan Son Nhut Air Base , the country 's military headquarters , just as rebel tanks were rolling in , attempting to block the runway . Thảo 's men tried to capture the Saigon base of the Republic of Vietnam Navy , and its commander , Admiral Chung Tấn Cang , but were foiled , but they did capture a number of junta members at Tan Son Nhut . 
 Thảo made a radio announcement stating that the sole objective of his military operation was to get rid of Khánh , whom he described as a " dictator " . He said that he intended to recall Khiêm to Saigon to lead the Armed Forces Council in place of Khánh , but would retain the civilian cabinet that answered to the generals . In doing so , he caught Khiêm off guard , asleep in his Maryland home . When informed of what was happening , Khiêm sent a cable in which he pledged " total support " to the plot . The coup group made pro @-@ Diệm announcements , claiming then @-@ U.S. Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge , Jr . " was wrong in encouraging the coup against Diem rather than correcting mistakes " . 
 A Catholic rebel officer made a speech extolling Diệm , and mourning his loss . This gave the impression that the coup plotters wanted to roll back the country to a Diệm @-@ era position and punish those who had been involved in Diệm 's overthrow and execution . Thảo 's group also promised to aggressively fight the Vietcong and cooperate with the United States . Throughout the day , a series of anti @-@ Khánh speeches were broadcast on radio , and the rebels claimed to have the support of four divisions , something that was regarded as dubious . U.S. government analysts concluded that the rebellion was " primarily a move by die @-@ hard neo @-@ <unk> and Catholic military militants , disturbed at the rise of Buddhist influence , opposed to Gen. Khánh and — in a vague , ill @-@ thought @-@ out way — desirous of turning back the clock and undoing some of the results of the November 1963 ouster of Diem . " Among the civilians linked to Thảo 's plot were Catholic academics and a militant priest . 
 As Diệm had strongly discriminated along religious lines , the rebels ' commented caused a negative response among the Buddhist majority . The Buddhist activist monk Thich Tam Chau called on Buddhists to support the incumbent junta . The pro @-@ Diệm speeches also alarmed pro @-@ Buddhist and anti @-@ Diệm generals , such as Nguyễn Chánh Thi and Nguyễn Hữu Có , who had been part of the failed 1960 and successful 1963 coups against Diệm respectively . They thought that Thảo and Phat might seek revenge , driving many anti @-@ Diệm officers who may have otherwise been neutral or sympathetic to the coup , to swing more towards Khánh . 
 Although Taylor and US military commander General William Westmoreland wanted Khánh out , the pro @-@ Diệm political ideology expressed by Thảo 's supporters alienated them , as they feared that the coup plotters would destabilize and polarize the country if they took power . The Americans worried that Phat and Thảo could galvanize support for Khánh through their extreme views , which had the potential to provoke large @-@ scale sectarian divisions , playing into the hands of the communists and hindering wider American objectives . They were also worried by Thảo 's intention to remove Quát and the civilian government , whom he saw was " too susceptible to Buddhist <unk> " . The U.S. saw civilian participation in governance as a necessity . They worried that a Khánh victory would enhance his prestige , so they wanted to see some third force emerge and defeat both the Thảo and Khánh factions . Westmoreland and Taylor decided to work for the failure of both Thảo and Khánh , and helped organize US advisers for the purpose . 
 Phat was supposed to seize the Bien Hoa Air Base to prevent air force chief Kỳ from mobilising air power against them , but he failed to reach the airfield before Kỳ , who circled Tan Son Nhut and threatened to bomb the rebels . Most of the forces of the III and IV Corps surrounding the capital disliked both Khánh and the rebels , and took no action . However , as night came , senior military opinion began to turn against Thảo and Phát , although it was not clear at this stage whether the anti @-@ Thảo forces being organised and led by Thi were hostile to Khánh as well . 
 At 20 : 00 , Phát and Thảo met with Kỳ , and insisted that Khánh be removed from power . The coup collapsed when , between midnight and dawn , anti @-@ Thảo forces swept into the city from the south along with some components of the 7th Airborne Brigade loyal to Kỳ from Biên Hòa in the north . Whether the rebels were genuinely defeated by the overwhelming show of strength or whether a deal was struck with Kỳ to end the revolt in exchange for Khánh 's removal is disputed , although a large majority support the latter . According to the latter version , Phát and Thảo agreed to free the members of the Armed Forces Council that they had arrested and withdraw in exchange for Khánh 's complete removal from power . Possibly as a means of saving face , Phát and Thảo were given an appointment with the figurehead chief of state Sửu , who was under close control by the junta , to " order " him to sign a decree stripping Khánh of his military leadership , and organizing a meeting of the junta and Prime Minister Quát 's civilian cabinet . During the early morning , while the radio station was still in the hands of Thảo 's men , a message attributed to Sửu was read out ; it claimed that the chief of state had sacked Khánh . However , the authenticity of the announcement was put into doubt when loyalists took control of the station and Sửu spoke in person , claiming otherwise . There were no injuries or deaths in the coup . 
 Before fleeing , Thảo broadcast a premature message claiming the coup had been effective in removing Khánh , and the Armed Forces Council later adopted a vote of no confidence in Khánh later that day , and forced him into exile . Later in the morning , while on the run , Thảo made a broadcast using a military radio system to call for Khanh 's departure and defend his actions , which he described as being in the best interest of the nation . Phat and Thảo were stripped of their ranks , but nothing was initially done as far as prosecuting or sentencing them for their involvement in the coup . 
 = = In hiding , and death = = 
 While in hiding in Catholic villages , Thảo expressed his willingness to surrender and cooperate with Quát 's government , if he and approximately fifty officers involved in the coup were granted amnesty . He also offered to go into exile in the United States , where his family had moved when he was sent there for training in 1964 . In May 1965 , a military tribunal sentenced both Thảo and Phát to death in absentia . The death sentence was attributed to the influence of Thi , who had assigned hit squads to look for him . After the conclusion of the trial , it was announced that the Armed Forces Council would disband and give the civilians more control in running the government . Thi was believed to have agreed to the transfer of power to a civilian government in return for Thảo 's death . As a result , Thảo had little choice but to attempt to seize power in order to save himself and he and Thi began to manoeuvre against one another . 
 On 20 May , a half dozen officers and around forty civilians , most or all of whom were Catholic , were arrested on charges of attempting to assassinate Quát and kidnap Thi and Kỳ . Several of the arrested were known supporters of Thảo and believed to be abetting him in evading the authorities . Despite this , Thảo himself managed to escape , even as a US $ 30 @,@ 000 bounty was put on him by the junta . On 16 July 1965 , he was reported dead in unclear circumstances ; an official report claimed that he died of injuries while on a helicopter en route to Saigon , after being captured north of the city . However , it is generally assumed that he was murdered or tortured to death on the orders of some military officials . One report holds that a Catholic priest betrayed Thảo , while another claims General Nguyễn Văn Thiệu caught him . In his memoirs , Kỳ claimed Thảo had been captured by police in Saigon and " died in jail a few weeks later , probably from a beating " . After the Fall of Saigon in 1975 , a conspiracy theory emerged , maintaining that Thảo went underground and worked in counterintelligence for the communist Central Office of South Vietnam , helping to hunt down Vietcong cadres who had defected to Saigon . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although Thảo 's last plot failed , his activities in 1965 and the resultant infighting led to a series of internal purges within the ARVN . Amid the instability , the Vietcong made strong gains across the country throughout the year . In response to the deteriorating military situation , the Americans began to deploy combat troops to South Vietnam in large numbers . 
 Thảo was posthumously promoted by the ARVN to the rank of one – star general and awarded the title of Heroic war dead ( Vietnamese : <unk> sĩ ) . After the Fall of Saigon and the end of the Vietnam War , the communist government awarded him the same title and paid war pensions to his family , claiming him as one of their own . In 1981 , the communists had his body exhumed and reburied in the " Patriots ' cemetery " in Ho Chi Minh City ( previously Saigon ) . Tảng believed Thảo " was a man who throughout his life fought single @-@ mindedly for Vietnam 's independence " . Tảng , who later abandoned communism , said that Thảo " was a nationalist , not an ideologue " , and credited him with turning the military tide towards the communists by helping to bring down Diệm and fomenting chronic instability and infighting for 18 months . Hồ Chí Minh had reacted to Diệm 's death by saying " I can scarcely believe that the Americans would be so stupid " . A communist report written in March 1965 , soon after Thảo 's revolt had caused Khánh to depart , stated that " The balance of force ... has changed very rapidly in our favor . ... The bulk of the enemy 's armed forces ... have disintegrated , and what is left continues to disintegrate " . 
 = Wilsonville , Oregon = 
 Wilsonville is a city primarily in Clackamas County , Oregon , United States . A portion of the northern section of the city is in Washington County . Originally founded as Boones Landing due to the Boones Ferry which crossed the Willamette River at the location , the community became Wilsonville in 1880 . The city was incorporated in 1969 with a population of around 1 @,@ 000 . The population was 13 @,@ 991 at the 2000 census , and grew to 19 @,@ 509 at the 2010 census . Slightly more than 90 % of residents at the 2000 census were White , with Hispanics as the largest minority group . 
 Located within the Portland metropolitan area , the city also includes the planned community of Charbonneau on the south side of the river . The city is bisected by Interstate 5 and includes I @-@ 5 's Boone Bridge over the Willamette . Public transportation is provided by the city 's South Metro Area Regional Transit , which includes Wilsonville Station on the Westside Express Service operated by TriMet . Students in public schools attend schools in the West Linn @-@ Wilsonville and Canby school districts , including the only traditional high school , Wilsonville High School . Clackamas Community College and Pioneer Pacific College both have campuses in the city . 
 Wilsonville has a council @-@ manager form of government and operates its own library , public works , and parks department . Fire and police protection are contracted out to other regional government agencies . The city is home to several technology companies including Mentor Graphics , along with Stream Global Services , the largest employer in the city . Wilsonville contains many distribution and manufacturing buildings adjacent to Interstate 5 such as regional distribution facilities for Coca Cola and Rite Aid . Retail centers include Argyle Square on the north and the Town Center Shopping Center to the south . Media in Wilsonville consists of the Portland area broadcast stations , regional newspapers , and the local Wilsonville Spokesman newspaper . 
 = = History = = 
 Alphonso Boone , the grandson of Daniel Boone , settled in what would later become Wilsonville in 1846 and established the Boones Ferry across the Willamette River in 1847 . The ferry gave rise to the community of Boones Landing , which eventually grew into Wilsonville . Originally , the area was part of what became Yamhill County , but was transferred to the current Clackamas County in 1855 . The first post office was established in 1876 with the name , Boones Ferry . 
 Wilsonville became the name of the community on June 3 , 1880 , named after the first postmaster , Charles Wilson . That same year the first school , Wilsonville Grade School , was opened as a single @-@ room building . By 1890 , the railroad had reached town and the community contained depot , several hotels , a saloon , a tavern , a bank , and several other commercial establishments . In 1897 , the twelve school districts in the vicinity of Wilsonville up to Lake Oswego merged to create a single district . A railroad bridge was built across the river for the Oregon Electric Railway beginning in 1906 . The bridge was completed the next year and service from Wilsonville south to Salem began in 1908 . 
 A new Methodist church was built in the community in 1910 , which was used until 1988 and is still standing . Two years later , a new two @-@ room school replaced the old one @-@ room school , which in turn was replaced by a modern school in the mid 1900s , all on the same property . In 1939 , the wooden trestle part of the railroad bridge across the Willamette caught fire and burned . Boones Ferry was decommissioned after the Boone Bridge opened in 1954 carrying what was then the Baldock Freeway , and is today Interstate 5 . 
 In 1961 , the <unk> State Hospital mental hospital opened on the west side of the community . Gordon House , the only house in Oregon to be designed by architect Frank Lloyd Wright , was built in 1963 near what became Charbonneau and moved to the Oregon Garden in 2001 . Wilsonville was flooded in 1964 and the first fire station was built in 1966 . Wilsonville was incorporated as a city in 1969 with a population of about 1 @,@ 000 . In 1971 , the planned community of Charbonneau on the south side of the river was annexed into the city the year after development began . 
 Tektronix built a campus in the city beginning in 1973 , which was later sold to Xerox . The following year Wilsonville 's city hall relocated from <unk> House at what is now Boones Ferry Park to a trailer and the next year the first city manager was hired . A standalone post office was built in 1976 at Boones Ferry and Wilsonville roads , with city police protection added in 1979 . In 1980 , the city reached a population of 2 @,@ 920 , and in 1982 the library was opened . The next year , a new city hall was opened , replacing a trailer that had served as city hall since 1975 . 
 In 1988 , the city opened their first library building , which replaced the one @-@ room library located in space leased from the school district . The population grew to 7 @,@ 106 at the 1990 census , and in 1991 the Town Center Shopping Center along Wilsonville Road opened . Due to growth in the West Linn @-@ Wilsonville School District , the school board approved building a new high school to be located in Wilsonville in 1992 . 
 Author Walt Morey owned an estate in Wilsonville and after his death in 1992 , his widow sold the property to a developer . The housing development built on that property , Morey 's Landing , bears his name as does the children 's section of the Wilsonville Public Library . Walt Morey Park , a bear @-@ themed park located in Morey 's Landing , contains a life @-@ size 8 @-@ foot @-@ tall wooden statue of Morey 's most famous literary creation , Gentle Ben . 
 Living Enrichment Center , a New Thought Church with as many as 3 @,@ 000 members , was headquartered in Wilsonville from 1992 until 2004 . The church closed that year after problems that including money laundering by the church leaders led to the bankrupting of the church . 
 In 1995 , <unk> State Hospital was closed by the state of Oregon , and the site was then proposed as a location for what became the Coffee Creek Correctional Facility , which opened in 2001 at a different site to the north of the old hospital grounds . In protest of the construction of the prison , specifically the effect on property values , Larry Eaton began erecting school buses on his property . The former grounds of the state hospital are , as of 2009 , under development as Villebois , a primarily residential complex . Also in 1995 , Wilsonville High School opened as part of the West Linn @-@ Wilsonville School District , the first high school in the city 's history . In 1998 , lack of an adequate long @-@ term water supply forced the city to suspend adding any new developments to the city . A new water treatment plant on the Willamette River opened in 2002 to address this need . 
 The Wilsonville Public Library was expanded to nearly four times the size of the 7 @,@ 500 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 700 m2 ) 1988 building with an expansion finished in 2002 . Wilsonville Primary School was closed in June 2001 , and later sold with the property and turned into a shopping center , anchored by an <unk> supermarket . In September 2006 , Wilsonville opened a new $ 9 @.@ 9 million , two @-@ story brick and steel city hall after a controversy concerning its location led to unsuccessful attempts to recall several elected officials in the city , including the mayor . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Wilsonville is located on the southern edge of the Portland metropolitan area sitting at an elevation of 154 feet ( 47 m ) above sea level . Primarily in the southwestern part of Clackamas County , the northern section is in Washington County . It is located on the north side of the Willamette River around where Alphonse Boone established the Boones Ferry . Neighboring cities are Tualatin on the north , Sherwood to the northwest , and Canby and Aurora to the southeast . Newberg in Yamhill County is approximately 14 miles west along Wilsonville Road . The Willamette separates the majority of the city from Charbonneau , a planned community and neighborhood within the city limits , on the south . 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 7 @.@ 42 square miles ( 19 @.@ 22 km2 ) , of which , 7 @.@ 21 square miles ( 18 @.@ 67 km2 ) is land and 0 @.@ 21 square miles ( 0 @.@ 54 km2 ) is water . Waterways in addition to the Willamette River include Arrowhead Creek , Meridian Creek , Basalt Creek , Seely Ditch , Boeckman Creek , and Coffee Lake Creek . The Boeckman and Coffee Lake creeks account for 85 % of the runoff in Wilsonville . Coffee Lake Creek is on the west side of the city and includes Coffee Lake and the Coffee Lake Wetlands . The foothills of the Chehalem Mountains lie to the west of Wilsonville , with most land within the city on level ground . 
 Wilsonville divides the city into 16 neighborhood groups , designated A through P. Within each of these planning areas are individual neighborhoods , and occasionally a neighborhood spans several of these groups . For instance the Villebois development covers areas D through G. Individual neighborhoods include Charbonneau , Wilsonville Meadows , Canyon Creek North , Town Center , <unk> , Frog Pond , and Old Town to name a few . Wilsonville ’ s Old Town neighborhood , the oldest of the neighborhoods , is located south of Wilsonville Road along Boones Ferry Road adjacent to the landing of the old Boones Ferry and contains the original portions of the town . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Wilsonville , as part of the Willamette Valley , is within the Marine west coast climate zone . Summers in Wilsonville are generally warm , but temperatures year @-@ round are moderated by a marine influence from the Pacific Ocean . Wilsonville receives most of its precipitation during the mild to cool winter months , with the wettest period from November through March . July and August are the warmest months with an average high temperature of 81 ° F ( 27 ° C ) , while December is the coolest month with an average low of 34 ° F ( 1 ° C ) . December is also on average the wettest month with 6 @.@ 62 inches ( 168 mm ) . The highest recorded temperature , 105 ° F ( 41 ° C ) , has occurred on August 11 , 1981 ; August 13 , 1977 ; August 18 , 1977 ; and September 3 , 1988 . Wilsonville 's lowest ever recorded temperature was − 15 ° F ( − 26 ° C ) on December 23 , 1998 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The city has a significant population of families that use Wilsonville as a halfway point between jobs in different cities , mainly Salem and Portland . Wilsonville incorporated with an estimated 1 @,@ 000 residents in 1969 and grew to 2 @,@ 920 people at the 1980 Census , and to 7 @,@ 106 in 1990 . In 2000 , the census placed the population at 13 @,@ 991 , which rose to 19 @,@ 509 in 2010 . Of those counted , approximately 1 @,@ 500 are inmates at the Coffee Creek Correctional Facility that opened in the city in 2001 . 
 = = = 2010 census = = = 
 As of the census of 2010 , there were 19 @,@ 509 people , 7 @,@ 859 households , and 4 @,@ 658 families residing in the city . The population density was 2 @,@ 705 @.@ 8 inhabitants per square mile ( 1 @,@ 044 @.@ 7 / km2 ) . There were 8 @,@ 487 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 177 @.@ 1 per square mile ( 454 @.@ 5 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was 85 @.@ 3 % White , 1 @.@ 5 % African American , 1 @.@ 0 % Native American , 3 @.@ 8 % Asian , 0 @.@ 4 % Pacific Islander , 4 @.@ 8 % from other races , and 3 @.@ 2 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 12 @.@ 1 % of the population . 
 There were 7 @,@ 859 households of which 29 @.@ 9 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 45 @.@ 3 % were married couples living together , 10 @.@ 0 % had a female householder with no husband present , 4 @.@ 0 % had a male householder with no wife present , and 40 @.@ 7 % were non @-@ families . 32 @.@ 9 % of all households were made up of individuals and 11 @.@ 8 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 28 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 93 . 
 The median age in the city was 36 @.@ 2 years . 22 % of residents were under the age of 18 ; 8 @.@ 8 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 32 @.@ 2 % were from 25 to 44 ; 23 @.@ 8 % were from 45 to 64 ; and 13 @.@ 3 % were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was 46 @.@ 6 % male and 53 @.@ 4 % female . 
 = = = 2000 census = = = 
 As of the census of 2000 , there were 13 @,@ 991 people , 5 @,@ 937 households , and 3 @,@ 775 families residing in the city . The population density was 2 @,@ 085 @.@ 3 people per square mile ( 805 @.@ 1 / km ² ) . There were 6 @,@ 407 housing units at an average density of 954 @.@ 9 per square mile ( 368 @.@ 7 / km ² ) . The racial makeup of the city was 90 @.@ 5 % White , 2 @.@ 2 % Asian , 0 @.@ 7 % African American , 0 @.@ 7 % Native American , 0 @.@ 2 % Pacific Islander , 3 @.@ 2 % from other races , and 2 @.@ 7 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6 @.@ 9 % of the population . 
 There were 5 @,@ 937 households out of which 30 @.@ 4 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 51 @.@ 5 % were married couples living together , 8 @.@ 3 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 36 @.@ 4 % were non @-@ families . 28 @.@ 3 % of all households were made up of individuals and 9 @.@ 7 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 34 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 89 . Median home cost was $ 200 @,@ 972 in 2000 and had grown to $ 316 @,@ 400 by 2006 . 
 In the city the population was spread out with 24 @.@ 6 % under the age of 18 , 9 @.@ 4 % from 18 to 24 , 31 @.@ 4 % from 25 to 44 , 20 @.@ 2 % from 45 to 64 , and 14 @.@ 4 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 35 years . For every 100 females there were 94 @.@ 5 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 91 @.@ 7 males . 
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 52 @,@ 515 , and the median income for a family was $ 65 @,@ 172 . This income level is higher than the county , state , and national median income levels . Males had a median income of $ 43 @,@ 480 versus $ 28 @,@ 395 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 29 @,@ 786 . About 3 @.@ 0 % of families and 5 @.@ 6 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 3 @.@ 7 % of those under age 18 and 8 @.@ 2 % of those age 65 or over . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Wilsonville has often had more jobs in the city than residents due to its location along Interstate 5 . This location has led to the city becoming headquarters for several major local and national companies , as well as home to facilities of several national companies . Companies with their headquarters in the city include design software maker Mentor Graphics ; imaging systems manufacturer FLIR Systems ; and shoe retailer <unk> . G.I. Joe 's , a sporting goods and automotive parts retailer was based in Wilsonville until bankruptcy in 2009 , as was drugstore chain Thrifty <unk> until it was bought by Rite Aid in 1996 , and video rental retailer Movie Gallery and its subsidiary Hollywood Video were as well until bankruptcy in 2010 . 
 <unk> and printer manufacturer Xerox operates a large facility in Wilsonville , and is the city 's largest employer . The company acquired the color printing and imaging division of Tektronix corporation in 2000 . Xerox , Mentor Graphics , and FLIR are all adjacent to each other north of Boeckman Road along Parkway Avenue . Projector maker <unk> was headquartered in the city until December 2009 and was located next to FLIR . <unk> and Mentor were both founded by former employees of Tektronix . 
 Wilsonville is home to many other business located in industrial parks straddling Interstate 5 that are filled with manufacturing and distribution facilities . Xerox and Mentor Graphics are the city 's two largest employers as of 2006 , the only two to employ more than 1000 people . Other large employers in the city are Tyco Electronics ( Precision <unk> ) , Sysco , Rockwell Collins , and Rite Aid . Additionally , Coca @-@ Cola operates a bottling plant in the city . Nike had one of its U.S. distribution centers for footwear in Wilsonville until closing it in 2009 . 
 Retail in Wilsonville is concentrated mainly along Wilsonville Road near the Interstate 5 interchange . This includes the Town Center Shopping Center and related developments along Town Center Loop , which includes Fry 's Electronics , one of the largest employers in the city . Fred Meyer opened a 145 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 13 @,@ 500 m2 ) store along with space for 20 other businesses at their Old Town Square where Boones Ferry and Wilsonville roads meet . At the north end of town is the 42 @-@ acre ( 17 ha ) Argyle Square shopping center that opened in 2003 , which includes a Target store , Office Depot , and Costco as anchor tenants . South of the Willamette River , Charbonneau has a small commercial center with about 10 shops . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Media in Wilsonville consists of the 28 radio stations and 7 television stations broadcast in the Portland media market , regional newspapers such as The Oregonian , and the local paper , the Wilsonville Spokesman . The Spokesman is published once a week on Wednesdays and has a circulation of 3 @,@ 176 . There is a single movie theater operated by Regal Cinemas , which contains nine screens . The theater opened in 1996 and featured the first stadium style seating in the Northwest . 
 Wilsonville Public Library , founded in 1982 , is a member of Library Information Network of Clackamas County and had an annual circulation of 493 @,@ 000 in 2006 to 2007 . The library is located adjacent to Wilsonville Memorial Park , the largest and oldest of the city 's 12 parks . Memorial Park includes a water feature , athletic fields , and the Stein @-@ <unk> Barn used as meeting space , among other amenities . Town Center Park also has a water feature along with a visitor 's center operated by the Clackamas County and the Oregon Korean War Memorial . Other parks in the city are River Fox Park , Park at <unk> , Montebello Park , Hathaway Park , <unk> Park , Tranquil Park , Willamette River Water Treatment Plant Park , Willow Creek / Landover Park , Canyon Creek Park , and Boones Ferry Park located on the Willamette River at the landing for the defunct Boones Ferry . 
 The Wilsonville Community Center holds classes and community programs as well as community meeting space . Wilsonville holds an annual arts fair each May called the Wilsonville Festival of Arts . Another annual event , Wilsonville Celebration Days , started in 2000 and replaced Boones Ferry Days . A farmers ' market started in 2009 at the Villebois development , held on Sundays from May into October . Charbonneau Golf Club is the only golf course in the city , with Langdon Farms and <unk> just to the south and east respectively . Wilsonville also is along the Willamette Greenway series of open spaces and trails . Wilsonville is the setting for the 2008 film Wendy and Lucy . 
 = = Government = = 
 Wilsonville has a home rule charter and is a council @-@ manager governed municipality where the unelected city manager runs day @-@ to @-@ day operations . The current city manager is Bryan Cosgrove . The mayor and four @-@ person city council are elected to four @-@ year terms , with Tim Knapp as mayor ( term ends 2017 ) and council members of Julie Fitzgerald , Scott Starr , Charlotte Lehan and Susie Stevens . 
 Both fire protection and police protection are contracted to other area governmental agencies . Fire services are provided by Tualatin Valley Fire & Rescue , and that agency operates two fire stations in the city . Police service is contracted out to the Clackamas County Sheriff 's Office , with a lieutenant serving as the chief of police and officers using vehicles marked as Wilsonville Police . The city ’ s Parks and Recreation Department runs 12 parks , with Memorial Park the largest at 126 acres ( 51 ha ) . 
 Wilsonville also provides both its own water supply and wastewater treatment . The wastewater system was built in 1972 , while the water system was upgraded with a new treatment plant in 2002 . Water is drawn from the Willamette River from the Wilsonville Water Treatment Plant built at a cost of $ 46 million in conjunction with the Tualatin Valley Water District . Previously , the city used wells to provide drinking water , but those began to run dry in the late 1990s . The plant ’ s initial capacity was 15 million gallons per day , but can be expanded to 120 million gallons per day . Neighboring Sherwood will begin receiving water from the plant in 2012 . 
 The city has a single library branch , a 28 @,@ 677 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 664 @.@ 2 m2 ) building on Wilsonville Road . The majority of the city is within the West Linn @-@ Wilsonville School District , but the Charbonneau area is part of the Canby School District . Public transit is provided by the city through SMART , though TriMet has connections via buses at the northern limits of the city and with the Westside Express Service commuter rail . 
 At the federal level , Wilsonville is primarily within Oregon 's 5th congressional district , represented by Kurt Schrader , but the portions lying within Washington County are in the 1st district , represented by Suzanne <unk> . In the State Senate , the city is in District 13 , represented by Larry George . In the House , the city is represented by John Davis in House District 26 . In addition , Wilsonville lies within District 3 ( Carl <unk> ) of the Metro regional government . 
 = = Education = = 
 Most of Wilsonville is in the West Linn @-@ Wilsonville School District ( <unk> ) , however those portions south of the Willamette River are within the Canby School District . Areas just to the west lie within the Sherwood School District . Boeckman Creek and Boones Ferry primary schools serve K @-@ 5 students from Wilsonville in <unk> . Students in grades 6 – 8 attend Inza R. Wood Middle School , and high school students attend Wilsonville High School or the Arts and Technology High School ( <unk> ) . Neither the Canby or Sherwood districts operate schools within Wilsonville . 
 The city is also in the Clackamas Community College District and has a satellite campus on Town Center Loop . Opened in 1992 , the campus was originally known as the Oregon Advanced Technology Center . The private , for profit Pioneer Pacific College operates a campus , their main campus , in the city along Interstate 5 near the Boeckman Road overpass . 
 Boeckman Creek Primary School opened in 1990 and has 649 students , with a mascot of the Bobcats . Boones Ferry replaced the old Wilsonville Primary School in 2001 ; its 809 students make it the largest primary school in the district , and are known as the Dragonflies . Wood Middle School opened in 1980 and has 699 students , known as the Wolverines . Wilsonville High has been the home of the Wildcats since the 1 @,@ 002 @-@ student school opened in 1995 . The <unk> charter high school has 85 students , and opened in 2005 . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Interstate 5 runs north @-@ south through the middle of the city and crosses the Willamette River on the Boone Bridge . Wilsonville has two interchanges with the freeway north of the river , at Wilsonville Road on the south and where Boones Ferry Road meets <unk> Road on the north end of town . To the south of the river , the Charbonneau interchange crosses I @-@ 5 at the southern limit of the city . Boeckman Road is the only other street that crosses I @-@ 5 and links the western and eastern parts of Wilsonville . Wilsonville Road , 95th Avenue , Boones Ferry Road ( northern portion is Oregon Route 141 ) , Boeckman Road , Town Center Loop , French Prairie Drive , <unk> Road , Parkway Avenue , and Stafford Road are the main roads in the city . 
 Transit service was formerly provided by TriMet , but the city decided to " opt @-@ out " and now operates South Metro Area Regional Transit ( SMART ) . SMART has connections with Salem 's transit service , Canby 's transit service , and TriMet . The Westside Express Service ( WES ) , a commuter rail line to Beaverton , began operations in February 2009 . Wilsonville Station is the southern terminus of the nearly 15 @-@ mile ( 24 km ) line operated by TriMet , and the station is the hub for SMART services . 
 Freight rail service is provided by the Portland and Western Railroad over the same tracks as WES , with connections to BNSF Railway . These tracks run north @-@ south and cross the Willamette over the Portland and Western Railroad Bridge . The city does not have an airport , with Aurora State Airport to the south as the closest public field and Portland International Airport 17 miles north as the closest commercial airport . Although located along the river , there are not any port facilities , though there is a marina located on the <unk> ( south side ) of the Willamette . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 The city has been home to a variety of notable people ranging from politicians to athletes and authors . Famous politicians to call Wilsonville home include former governor George Law Curry , Congresswoman Edith Green , federal judge James M. Burns , and former mayor and state representative Jerry <unk> . Athletes of note have included football player Derek Devine , professional golfer Brian Henninger , and baseball player and manager Del Baker . Those prominent in the legal field are Gordon Sloan , and R. William Riggs . Others include children 's author Walt Morey , ferryman Alphonso Boone , businessman Tom <unk> , and baseball coach Mel Krause , and actor Frank Cady . 
 = = Sister city = = 
 Wilsonville has one sister city relationship . The city established a relationship with Kitakata , in the Fukushima province in Japan in 1988 . Kitakata in the northern part of Honshū has an estimated population of around 55 @,@ 000 . Then Wilsonville Mayor Jerry <unk> visited Japan in 1994 to attend a ceremony honoring Kitakata 's 40th birthday . The mayor of Kitakata visited Wilsonville in 2008 to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the relationship . 
 = John Baker White ( West Virginia politician ) = 
 John Baker White DSO ( August 24 , 1868 – June 2 , 1944 ) was an American lawyer , military officer , and Democratic politician in the U.S. state of West Virginia . White served as a Captain in the West Virginia National Guard during the Spanish – American War and as a Lieutenant Colonel in the United States Army Judge Advocate General 's Corps during World War I. White was a member of the City Council and Board of Affairs of Charleston , West Virginia from 1907 to 1911 , and frequently served as the city 's mayor pro tempore . He was later appointed a member of the West Virginia Board of Control , where he served as the board 's treasurer , secretary , and president at various times . 
 White was a member of the White political family of Virginia and West Virginia and was the son of Hampshire County Clerk of Court and West Virginia Fish Commission President Christian Streit White ( 1839 – 1917 ) and the grandson of Hampshire County Clerk of Court John Baker White ( 1794 – 1862 ) . White was a nephew of West Virginia Attorney General Robert White ( 1833 – 1915 ) . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 John Baker White was born on August 24 , 1868 , in Romney , West Virginia . He was the only child of Hampshire County Clerk of Court Christian Streit White ( 1839 – 1917 ) with his first wife Elizabeth " Bessie " Jane Schultze White ( 1837 – 1869 ) and the eldest of his father 's five children . He was a grandson of Hampshire County Clerk of Court John Baker White ( 1794 – 1862 ) , for whom White was named , and a great @-@ grandson of the prominent Virginia judge Robert White ( 1759 – 1831 ) . His uncle Robert White ( 1833 – 1915 ) served as Attorney General of West Virginia . Through his descent from Robert White and Reverend Christian Streit , White was eligible for and attained membership in the Society of the Cincinnati and Sons of the American Revolution . 
 White received an English education in both the local public schools and at his father 's residence in Romney . White further supplemented his education with " broadened courses of reading and private study " . Beginning at the age of 13 , White attended school from 9 a.m. until 4 p.m. and worked on his family 's farm before and after school , and during holidays . At the age of 16 , White left his schooling to work on the farm and in his father 's county court clerk office while studying privately at home . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 White departed his home in Romney for Charleston , West Virginia , where he was entirely dependent upon himself and his own resources . There , White commenced his career in public service in 1886 when he began serving as a messenger in the office of West Virginia Secretary of State Henry S. Walker . He received successive promotions within the Secretary of State 's office beginning with clerk , then to stationery clerk , and finally to chief clerk of the office during the latter part of Walker 's term in office . White was retained as the chief clerk of the office by Walker 's successor , William A. <unk> . White was affiliated with the Secretary of State 's office for seven years . He continued to fulfill that position until March 8 , 1893 , when he was appointed to serve as the private secretary to West Virginia Governor William A. MacCorkle . As a representative of Governor MacCorkle , White traveled across the state to high profile events , such as the June 1895 strikes at the Crozier Works on Elkhorn Creek in McDowell County , to urge calm and to provide the governor with situational awareness on the strike . White performed as Governor MacCorkle 's private secretary for four years until the end of his administration 's term in 1897 . 
 During the West Virginia general elections of 1892 and 1896 , White was recognized for his leadership efforts in support of the campaigns of Democratic candidates . 
 = = Law career = = 
 While he was employed at the West Virginia State Capitol , White began studying jurisprudence with legal <unk> . He undertook his study of jurisprudence in the law firm of Chilton , MacCorkle and Chilton in Charleston . White was admitted to the bar in 1897 and afterward established a law practice in Charleston . White 's practice began arguing cases in county , state , and federal level courts within West Virginia . On December 19 , 1901 , the West Virginia Secretary of State office issued a charter authorizing $ 100 @,@ 000 in capital stock for the incorporation of Midland Railway , of which White was a corporator with one subscribed share of $ 100 . 
 = = Military career = = 
 In 1888 , White volunteered his service in the West Virginia National Guard , where he entered service with the rank of Private . White was gradually promoted and served in the West Virginia National Guard 's 2nd Battalion , 2nd West Virginia Infantry Regiment . White and his regiment were dispatched to the scenes of several strikes throughout West Virginia , where he performed as " a special representative " of the governor . 
 = = = Spanish – American War = = = 
 At the onset of the Spanish – American War and shortly after his admission to the bar in 1898 , White again volunteered for service with the West Virginia National Guard and served throughout the duration of the war . He received his commission from West Virginia Governor George W. Atkinson as Captain in command of Company B of the 1st West Virginia Infantry Regiment in the United States Volunteers . During his service in the Spanish – American War , White received a promotion to the rank of Major . After a year of serving with his regiment in the war , White received an honorable discharge and vacated the West Virginia National Guard following ten years of service in the guard as a military officer . According to Governor Atkinson in his Bench and Bar of West Virginia ( 1919 ) , White " served faithfully and efficiently until the close of the war " . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Following the entry of the United States into World War I in 1917 , White tendered his legal services to the United States Army and served in the Judge Advocate General 's Corps . White had previously attempted to enter the service of the United States Army through its various training schools to serve in World War I , but he had been rebuffed each time due to his advanced age of 49 . On December 6 , 1917 , White received " special permission " from United States President Woodrow Wilson to serve in the Army 's Judge Advocate General 's Corps with the rank of Major . Upon receiving his commission , White was ordered to London where he served as Assistant Judge Advocate General for United States Armed Forces personnel serving in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland . White continued to carry out his duties in London until June 1919 when his base section there was closed and he was transferred to the United States military 's general headquarters in France . 
 From France , White deployed to the 3rd Infantry Division occupation headquarters in Koblenz , Germany , along the Rhine where he served as the division 's Judge Advocate General . While serving in that position in Koblenz , White was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel in April 1919 . He continued to serve as the Judge Advocate General for the 3rd Infantry Division until September 1919 , and shortly thereafter White was discharged from the United States Army and subsequently transferred to the United States Army Reserve . 
 For his service to the Allies in World War I , White was created a Companion of the Distinguished Service Order by George V on behalf of the British Empire . Following his relief from active military service in Europe , White embarked upon a global journey that consisted of Egypt , Palestine , India , Burma , the Malay Peninsula , Java , China , Japan , and the Philippines . He returned to the United States in June 1920 and soon thereafter resumed his law practice in Charleston . 
 = = Later political career = = 
 Following his service in the Spanish – American War , White ran for election as a Democrat and won a seat on the Charleston City Council . White also concurrently fulfilled a four @-@ year term from 1907 to 1911 as a member of the Charleston Board of Affairs during the period in which Charleston was organized under a commission form of government . While serving on the Board of Affairs , he frequently performed duties as the city 's mayor pro tempore . Around 1931 , White became a member of the West Virginia Board of Control and was serving as the board 's treasurer by 1932 . White later served as the board 's president for two years . In 1939 , Governor Homer A. Holt reappointed White to serve another term on the West Virginia Board of Control ending on June 30 , 1941 . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 On August 22 , 1939 , White married Mary Ann Williamson near Malvern in Chester County , Pennsylvania . Williamson was a native of Berkeley County , West Virginia , but resided in Athens , West Virginia , at the time of her marriage . Williamson was a graduate of Shepherd College in Shepherdstown , of Concord College in Athens , and of the University of Kentucky in Lexington . She had been a member of the faculty at Marshall College in Huntington since 1934 . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 In his later years , White and his wife resided in St. Petersburg , Florida during the winter season . White died of heart failure on June 2 , 1944 at 1 p.m. at the age of 75 at his summer camp near Rupert , Greenbrier County , West Virginia . The medical certification of White 's death stated the cause of his heart failure was due to age and overexertion . White 's funeral was held in Charleston , and he was interred in the White family burial plot at Indian Mound Cemetery in Romney . At the time of his death , White was residing at 610 ½ Capitol Street in Charleston . 
 = = Affiliations and community service = = 
 White was a practicing Mason and Knights Templar affiliated with Royal Arch Masonry and the Thirty @-@ second Degree Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of Freemasonry . In addition to the Society of the Cincinnati and the Sons of the American Revolution , White was also a member of the Military Order of Foreign Wars , United Spanish War Veterans , American Legion , and the Shriners . 
 White was also an inaugural stockholder and member in the Henry G. Davis Club , named for United States Senator from West Virginia Henry G. Davis , which received its charter on May 31 , 1906 . The Henry G. Davis Club was founded " for the study of political economy and the science of self @-@ government ; for the education of the young men of the State of West Virginia in these sciences and the promulgation of such information , literature and statistics as will in the judgment of its directors be best suited for such purposes " . White also served on the Entertainment Committee for the West Virginia Homecoming Week in Point Pleasant which took place October 7 – 10 , 1909 , to celebrate the Battle of Point Pleasant and the unveiling of the monument to that battle . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In his Bench and Bar of West Virginia ( 1919 ) , Atkinson remarked of White 's service in Charleston city government : " His chief aim was to render a service that would advance the interests of the people , without showing favors to any class or classes of the citizens of Charleston . His service in that high office marked him as a man of high honor , firmness and probity . " Atkinson remarked further of White : " Such men are rarely found in this or any other portion of this wide world which we inhabit . " 
 In 1940 , the four @-@ story " Boys Dormitory " at Concord College ( presently known as Concord University ) in Athens , West Virginia , was renamed " John Baker White Hall " in honor of White , who was then serving as Secretary of the West Virginia Board of Control . White Hall was demolished in 2004 for the construction of Concord University 's Rahall Technology Center . 
 = Golden Retriever ( song ) = 
 " Golden Retriever " is a song by Super Furry Animals . It was the first single to be issued from the album Phantom Power and reached number 13 on the UK Singles Chart on its release in July 2003 . The song is about the relationship between singer Gruff Rhys 's girlfriend 's two dogs and was written in the same key , with the same guitar tuning and around the same time as several other songs from Phantom Power . 
 Critical reaction to the track was generally positive with many reviewers commenting on its " catchiness " and " glam rock " style . A Jake & Jim directed music video was produced to accompany the song 's release as a single featuring the band dressed as yetis . A Killa Kela remix of " Golden Retriever " appears on the album Phantom Phorce and the DVD release of Phantom Power . 
 = = Recording and themes = = 
 " Golden Retriever " is about " the relationship between [ Gruff Rhys 's ] girlfriend 's two dogs - a male and a female " . Rhys has stated that the " road sign and driving theory vocabulary " that he had to absorb when he passed his driving test a few years before he wrote " Golden Retriever " found its way into the songs lyrics which are a parody of the blues . The song shares the same key , D major , the same guitar tuning , D @-@ A @-@ D @-@ D @-@ A @-@ D , and was written around the same time as several other songs from Phantom Power including the " Father Father " instrumentals , " Hello Sunshine " , " Cityscape Skybaby " and " Out of Control " . " Golden Retriever " was recorded at the Super Furry Animals ' own studio in Cardiff along with the rest of Phantom Power . 
 = = Musical structure = = 
 " Golden Retriever " is 2 minutes 28 seconds long and is in the key of D major . The track begins with a descending riff on acoustic guitar before the band joins on 2 seconds with an electric guitar playing a three note riff ( D , F and G ) through a fuzz pedal . The first verse follows on 9 seconds with Gruff Rhys singing about meeting The Devil at a roundabout . The first chorus enters at 24 seconds with Rhys being joined by falsetto harmony backing vocals and a distorted electric guitar playing chords rather than single notes . A breakdown verse follows , leading into the extended second chorus which features shouted backing vocals chanting the song 's title . The outro begins at 1 minute 55 seconds , with lead guitar lines and heavy drums , featuring flanging , bringing the track to a climax . 
 = = = Alternative version = = = 
 A Killa Kela remix of " Golden Retriever " is included on the DVD version of Phantom Power and the album Phantom Phorce . Largely dispensing with the track 's instrumental backing ( apart from distant bass and occasional acoustic guitar ) the remix features Kela 's beatboxing alongside Rhys 's lead vocal and follows the arrangement of the original . The track is 2 minutes 33 seconds long and ends with a brief clip of the band 's road manager , in the guise of ' Kurt Stern ' , lamenting the fact that this " perfect rocking track " is simply about a dog . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Critical reaction to " Golden Retriever " was generally positive and many reviewers commented on the track 's glam rock style — PopMatters described the track as " a fun blast of glam rock " , the NME called it " an irresistibly catchy ... glam stomper " , and The Guardian stated that the " unhinged glammy romp " cannot be faulted . The track was also described as being a parody of Robert Johnson type blues by Entertainment Weekly and a " brilliantly catchy anthem " by Angry Ape . Several critics noted the " goofy " and " silly " nature of the song , with comparisons made between " Golden Retriever " and both the Doctor Who theme music and The KLF 's " <unk> ' the <unk> " . Some criticism was leveled at the song for being " too Radio 1 friendly " and for simply being " more of the same " from the band . In a 2006 feature on the Super Furry Animals ' back catalogue Incendiary Magazine went as far as to call the track " hogwash " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Jake & Jim and grew from an idea the band had to record a video in Iceland at the start of 2003 which didn 't come off . The video begins with a close up of a cardboard box featuring a logo of two apples with the title ' Golden ' . The band is shown playing along to " Golden Retriever " inside the box with Gruff Rhys wearing a red sports visor . Bassist Guto Pryce and keyboardist Cian Ciaran are both sat on <unk> with guitars on their laps which they are not playing . As the chorus begins the band transform into yetis and all begin playing " Golden Retriever " , several members headbanging in time with the track . The group wear their regular clothes for the second verse before the yeti costumes reappear for the second chorus . As the video ends the camera zooms out to show a Golden Retriever approach the box in an alleyway . The Super Furries raise their hands in the air and look up at the dog who then urinates on the box and runs away . 
 In an interview with BBC Manchester , drummer Dafydd Ieuan stated that , although he finds the video fun to watch , it was hard work to make because the yeti costumes were very heavy and incredibly hot . The band took the suits on tour with them but only wore them for " the last two minutes " of concerts because they were so warm . The video appears on the DVD release of the band 's greatest hits album Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 . 
 = = Single track listing = = 
 All songs by Super Furry Animals . 
 Digipak CD ( <unk> ) , 7 " ( <unk> ) 
 " Golden Retriever " – 2 : 28 
 " Summer Snow " – 2 : 30 
 " Blue Fruit " – 4 : 43 
 DVD ( <unk> ) 
 " Golden Retriever ( Video ) " – 2 : 28 
 " Summer Snow " – 2 : 30 
 " Blue Fruit " – 4 : 43 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Gruff Rhys – vocals 
 Huw Bunford – guitar 
 Guto Pryce – bass guitar 
 Cian Ciaran – keyboards 
 Dafydd Ieuan – drums 
 Rachel Thomas – backing vocals 
 = = Singles chart positions = = 
 = Simon Wiesenthal = 
 Simon Wiesenthal ( 31 December 1908 – 20 September 2005 ) was an Austrian Nazi hunter and writer . He was a Jewish Austrian Holocaust survivor who became famous after World War II for his work as a Nazi hunter . 
 He studied architecture and was living in Lviv ( Lwów ) at the outbreak of World War II . After being forced to work as a slave labourer in Nazi concentration camps such as Janowska , <unk> , and Mauthausen during the war , Wiesenthal dedicated most of his life to tracking down and gathering information on fugitive Nazi war criminals so that they could be brought to trial . In 1947 he co @-@ founded the Jewish Historical Documentation Center in Linz , Austria , where he and others gathered information for future war crime trials and aided refugees in their search for lost relatives . He opened the Jewish Documentation Center in Vienna in 1961 and continued to try to locate missing Nazi war criminals . He played a small role in locating Adolf Eichmann , who was captured in Buenos Aires in 1960 , and worked closely with the Austrian justice ministry to prepare a dossier on Franz Stangl , who was sentenced to life imprisonment in 1971 . 
 In the 1970s and 1980s , Wiesenthal was involved in two high @-@ profile events involving Austrian politicians . Shortly after Bruno Kreisky was inaugurated as Austrian chancellor in April 1970 , Wiesenthal pointed out to the press that four of his new cabinet appointees had been members of the Nazi Party . Kreisky , angry , called Wiesenthal a " Jewish fascist " , likened his organisation to the Mafia , and accused him of collaborating with the Nazis . Wiesenthal successfully sued for libel , the suit ending in 1989 . In 1986 , Wiesenthal was involved in the case of Kurt Waldheim , whose Nazi past was revealed in the lead @-@ up to the 1986 Austrian presidential elections . Wiesenthal , embarrassed that he had previously cleared Waldheim of any wrongdoing , suffered much negative publicity as a result of this event . 
 With a reputation as a storyteller , Wiesenthal was the author of several memoirs containing tales that are only loosely based on actual events . In particular , he exaggerated his role in the capture of Eichmann in 1960 . Wiesenthal died in his sleep at age 96 in Vienna on 20 September 2005 and was buried in the city of Herzliya in Israel . The Simon Wiesenthal Center , located in Los Angeles , is named in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wiesenthal was born at 11 : 30 pm on 31 December 1908 , in <unk> , Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria ( then part of Austria @-@ Hungary , now <unk> Oblast , in Ukraine ) . His father , Asher Wiesenthal , was a wholesaler who had emigrated from the Russian Empire in 1905 to escape the frequent pogroms , violent campaigns against Jews . A reservist in the Austro @-@ Hungarian Army , Asher was called to active duty in 1914 at the start of World War I. He died in combat on the Eastern Front in 1915 . The remainder of the family — Simon , his younger brother Hillel , and his mother Rosa — fled to Vienna as the Russian army took control of Galicia . The two boys attended a German @-@ language Jewish school . The family returned to Buczacz in 1917 after the Russians retreated . The area changed hands several more times before the war ended in November 1918 . 
 Wiesenthal and his brother attended high school at the Humanistic Gymnasium in <unk> , where classes were taught in Polish . There Simon met his future wife , Cyla Müller , whom he would marry in 1936 . Hillel fell and broke his back in 1923 and died the following year . Rosa remarried in 1926 and moved to <unk> with her new husband , <unk> Halperin , who owned a tile factory there . Wiesenthal remained in Buczacz , living with the Müller family , until he graduated from high school — on his second attempt — in 1928 . 
 With an interest in art and drawing , Wiesenthal chose to study architecture . His first choice was to attend the Lwów Polytechnic ( Polish : <unk> <unk> ) , but he was turned away because the school 's Jewish quota had already been filled . He instead enrolled at the Czech Technical University in Prague , where he studied from 1928 until 1932 . He was apprenticed as a building engineer through 1934 and 1935 , spending most of that period in Odessa . He married Cyla in 1936 when he returned to Galicia . 
 Sources give differing reports of what happened next . Wiesenthal 's autobiographies contradict each other on many points ; he also over @-@ dramatised and mythologised events . One version has Wiesenthal opening an architectural office and finally being admitted to the Lwów Polytechnic for an advanced degree . He designed a tuberculosis sanitorium , along with some residential buildings during the course of his studies and was active in a student Zionist organisation . He wrote for the Omnibus , a satirical student newspaper , and graduated in 1939 . Author Guy Walters states that Wiesenthal 's earliest autobiography does not mention studies at Lwów . Walters quotes a curriculum vitae Wiesenthal prepared after World War II as stating he worked as a supervisor at a factory until 1939 and then worked as a mechanic in a different factory until the Nazis invaded in 1941 . Wiesenthal 's 1961 book Ich <unk> Eichmann ( " I Hunted Eichmann " ) states that he worked in Odessa as an engineer from 1940 to 1941 . Walters says that there is no record of Wiesenthal attending the university at Lwów , and that he does not appear in the Katalog <unk> i <unk> ( Catalogue of Architects and Builders ) for the appropriate period . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In Europe , World War II began in September 1939 with the Nazi invasion of Poland . As a result of the partitioning of Poland under the Molotov @-@ Ribbentrop Pact between Germany and the Soviet Union , the city of Lwów ( now Lviv ) was annexed by the Soviets and renamed Lvov . Wiesenthal 's stepfather , still living in Dolina , was arrested as a capitalist ; he later died in a Soviet prison . Wiesenthal 's mother came to live with Wiesenthal and Cyla in Lvov . He bribed an official to prevent his own deportation under Clause 11 , a rule that prevented all Jewish professionals and intellectuals from living within 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) of the city , which was under Soviet occupation until the Germans invaded in June 1941 . 
 By mid @-@ July Wiesenthal and other Jewish residents had to register to do forced labour . Within six months , in November 1941 the Nazis had set up the Lwów Ghetto using Jewish forced labour . All Jews had to give up their homes and move there , a process completed in the following months . Several thousand Jews were murdered in Lvov by Ukrainian nationals and German Einsatzgruppen in June and July 1941 . In his autobiographies , Wiesenthal tells how he was arrested on 6 July , but saved from execution by his former foreman , a man named Bodnar , who was now a member of the Ukrainian Auxiliary Police . There are several versions of the story , which may be apocryphal . 
 In late 1941 , Wiesenthal and his wife were transferred to Janowska concentration camp and forced to work at the Eastern Railway Repair Works . He painted swastikas and other inscriptions on captured Soviet railway engines , and Cyla was put to work polishing the brass and nickel . In exchange for providing details about the railways , Wiesenthal obtained false identity papers for his wife from a member of the Armia Krajowa , a Polish underground organisation . She travelled to Warsaw , where she was put to work in a German radio factory . She spent time in two different labour camps as well . Conditions were harsh and her health was permanently damaged , but she survived the war . The couple was reunited in 1945 , and their daughter <unk> was born the following year . 
 Every few weeks , the Nazis staged a roundup in the Lvov ghetto of people unable to work . These roundups typically took place while the able @-@ bodied were absent doing forced labour . In one such deportation , Wiesenthal 's mother and other elderly Jewish women were transported by freight train to Belzec extermination camp and killed in August 1942 . Around the same time , a Ukrainian policeman shot Cyla 's mother to death on the front porch of her home in Buczacz while she was being evicted . Cyla and Simon Wiesenthal lost 89 relatives during the Holocaust . 
 Forced labourers for the Eastern Railway were eventually kept in a separate closed camp , where conditions were a little better than at the main camp at Janowska . Wiesenthal prepared architectural drawings for Adolf Kohlrautz , the senior inspector , who submitted them under his own name . To obtain contracts , construction companies paid bribes to Kohlrautz , who shared some of the money with Wiesenthal . He was able to pass along further information about the railroads to the underground and occasionally left the compound to obtain supplies , even clandestinely obtaining weapons for the Armia Krajowa and two pistols for himself , which he took along when he escaped in autumn 1943 . 
 According to Wiesenthal , on 20 April 1943 , Second Lieutenant Gustav <unk> , second in command at the Janowska camp , decided to shoot 54 Jewish intellectuals in celebration of Hitler 's 54th birthday . Unable to find enough such people still alive at Janowska , <unk> ordered a roundup of prisoners from the satellite camps . Wiesenthal and two other inmates were taken from the Eastern Railway camp to the execution site , a trench 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) deep and 1 @,@ 500 feet ( 460 m ) long at a nearby sandpit . The men were stripped and led through " the Hose " , a six- or seven @-@ foot wide barbed wire corridor to the execution ground . The victims were shot and their bodies allowed to fall into the pit . Wiesenthal , waiting to be shot , heard someone called out his name . He was returned alive to the camp ; Kohlrautz had convinced his superiors that Wiesenthal was the best man available to paint a giant poster in honour of Hitler 's birthday . 
 On 2 October 1943 , according to Wiesenthal , Kohlrautz warned him that the camp and its prisoners were about to be liquidated . Kohlrautz gave Wiesenthal and fellow prisoner Arthur Scheiman passes to go to town , accompanied by a Ukrainian guard , to buy stationery . The two men escaped out the back of the shop while their guard waited at the front counter . 
 Wiesenthal did not mention either of these events — or Kohlrautz 's part in them — when testifying to American investigators in May 1945 , or in an affidavit he made in August 1954 about his wartime persecutions , and researcher Guy Walters questions their authenticity . Wiesenthal variously reported that Kohlrautz was killed on the Soviet Front in 1944 or in the Battle of Berlin on 19 April 1945 . 
 After several days in hiding , Scheiman rejoined his wife , and Wiesenthal was taken by members of the underground to the nearby village of <unk> , where he remained until the end of 1943 . Soon afterwards the Janowska camp was liquidated ; this made it unsafe to hide in the nearby countryside , so Wiesenthal returned to Lvov , where he spent three days hiding in a closet at the Scheiman 's apartment . He next moved to the apartment of Paulina Busch , for whom he had previously forged an identity card . He was arrested there , hiding under the floorboards , on 13 June 1944 and taken back to the remains of the camp at Janowska . Wiesenthal tried but failed to commit suicide to avoid being interrogated about his connections with the underground . In the end there was no time for interrogations , as Soviet forces were advancing into the area . SS @-@ <unk> Friedrich <unk> , the new camp commandant , rounded up the remaining prisoners and transported them to Przemyśl , 135 miles ( 217 km ) west of Lvov , where he put them to work building fortifications . By September <unk> and his men were reassigned to the front , and Wiesenthal and the other surviving captives were sent to the Kraków @-@ Płaszów concentration camp . 
 By October the inmates were evacuated to Gross @-@ Rosen concentration camp , where inmates were suffering from severe overcrowding and a shortage of food . Wiesenthal 's big toe on his right foot had to be amputated after a rock fell on it while he was working in the quarry . He was still ill in January when the advancing Soviets forced yet another evacuation , this time on foot , to Chemnitz . Using a broom handle for a walking stick , he was one of the few who survived the march . From Chemnitz the prisoners were taken in open freight cars to Buchenwald , and a few days later by truck to Mauthausen concentration camp , arriving in mid @-@ February 1945 . Over half the prisoners did not survive the journey . Wiesenthal was placed in a death block for the mortally ill , where he survived on 200 calories a day until the camp was liberated by the Americans on 5 May 1945 . Wiesenthal weighed 41 kilograms ( 90 lb ) when he was liberated . 
 = = Nazi hunter = = 
 Within three weeks of the liberation of Mauthausen , Wiesenthal had prepared a list of around a hundred names of suspected Nazi war criminals — mostly guards , camp commandants , and members of the Gestapo — and presented it to a War Crimes office of the American Counterintelligence Corps at Mauthausen . He worked as an interpreter , accompanying officers who were carrying out arrests , though he was still very frail . When Austria was partitioned in July 1945 , Mauthausen fell into the Soviet @-@ occupied zone , so the American War Crimes Office was moved to Linz . Wiesenthal went with them , and was housed in a displaced persons camp . He served as vice @-@ chairman of the area 's Jewish Central Committee , an organisation that attempted to arrange basic care for Jewish refugees and tried to help people gather information about their missing family members . 
 Wiesenthal worked for the American Office of Strategic Services for a year , and continued to collect information on both victims and perpetrators of the Holocaust . He assisted the <unk> , an underground organisation that smuggled Jewish survivors into the British Mandate for Palestine . Wiesenthal helped arrange for forged papers , food supplies , transportation , and so on . In February 1947 , he and 30 other volunteers founded the Jewish Historical Documentation Center in Linz to gather information for future war crimes trials . They collected 3 @,@ 289 depositions from concentration camp survivors still living in Europe . However , as the US and the Soviet Union lost interest in conducting further trials , a similar group headed by Tuviah Friedman in Vienna closed its office in 1952 , and Wiesenthal 's closed in 1954 . Almost all of the documentation collected at both centres was forwarded to the Yad Vashem archives in Israel . Wiesenthal , employed full @-@ time by two Jewish welfare agencies , continued his work with refugees . As it became clear that the former Allies were no longer interested in pursuing the work of bringing Nazi war criminals to justice , Wiesenthal persisted , believing the survivors were obligated to take on the task . His work became a way to memorialise and remember all the people that had been lost . He told biographer Alan Levy in 1974 : 
 When the Germans first came to my city in Galicia , half the population was Jewish : one hundred fifty thousand Jews . When the Germans were gone , five hundred were alive . ... Many times I was thinking that everything in life has a price , so to stay alive must also have a price . And my price was always that , if I lived , I must be deputy for many people who are not alive . 
 = = = Adolf Eichmann = = = 
 Though most of the Jews still alive in Linz after the war had emigrated , Wiesenthal decided to stay on , partly because the family of Adolf Eichmann lived a few blocks away from him . Eichmann had been in charge of the transportation and deportation of Jews in the Nazi Final Solution to the Jewish Question : a plan , finalised at the Wannsee Conference — at which Eichmann took the minutes — to exterminate all the Jews in Europe . After the war , Eichmann hid in Austria using forged identity papers until 1950 , when he left via Italy and moved to Argentina under an assumed name . Hoping to obtain information on Eichmann 's whereabouts , Wiesenthal continuously monitored the remaining members of the immediate family in Linz until they vanished in 1952 . 
 Wiesenthal learned from a letter shown to him in 1953 that Eichmann had been seen in Buenos Aires , and he passed along that information to the Israeli consulate in Vienna in 1954 . Fritz Bauer , prosecutor @-@ general of the state of Hesse in West Germany , received independent confirmation of Eichmann 's whereabouts in 1957 , but German agents were unable to find him until late 1959 . When Eichmann 's father died in 1960 , Wiesenthal made arrangements for private detectives to surreptitiously photograph members of the family , as Eichmann 's brother Otto was said to bear a strong family resemblance and there were no current photos of the fugitive . He provided these photographs to Mossad agents on 18 February . Zvi Aharoni , one of the Mossad agents responsible for Eichmann 's capture in Buenos Aires on 11 May 1960 , said the photos were useful in confirming Eichmann 's identity . On 23 May Israeli Prime Minister David Ben @-@ Gurion announced Eichmann was under arrest and in Israel . The next day Wiesenthal , while he was being interviewed by reporters , received a congratulatory telegram from Yad Vashem . He immediately became a minor celebrity , and began work on a book about his experiences . Ich <unk> Eichmann : <unk> ( I Chased Eichmann : A True Story ) was published six weeks before the trial opened in spring 1961 . Wiesenthal helped the prosecution prepare their case and attended a portion of the trial . Eichmann was sentenced to death and was hanged on 1 June 1962 . 
 Meanwhile , both of Wiesenthal 's employers terminated his services in 1960 , as there were too few refugees left in the city to justify the expense . Wiesenthal opened a new documentation centre in Vienna in 1961 . He became a Mossad operative , for which he received the equivalent of several hundred dollars per month . He maintained files on hundreds of suspected Nazi war criminals and located many , about six of whom were arrested as a result of his activities . Successes included locating and bringing to trial Erich <unk> , responsible for the deportation of Jews from the Netherlands , and Franz <unk> , the commandant of the Vilna Ghetto . In 1963 Wiesenthal read in the newspaper that Karl Silberbauer , the man who had arrested famed diarist Anne Frank , had been located ; he was serving on the police force in Vienna . Wiesenthal 's publicity campaign led to Silberbauer being temporarily suspended from the force , but he was never prosecuted for arresting the Frank family . 
 In spite of Wiesenthal 's protests , in late 1963 his centre in Vienna was taken over by a local community group , so he immediately set up a new independent office , funded using donations and his stipend from the Mossad . As the 20 @-@ year statute of limitations for German war crimes was about to expire , Wiesenthal began lobbying to have it extended or removed entirely . In March 1965 the Bundestag deferred the matter for five years , effectively extending the expiration date . Similar action was taken by the Austrian government . But as time went on , it became more difficult to obtain prosecutions . Witnesses grew older and were less likely to be able to offer valuable testimony . Funding for trials was inadequate , as the governments of Austria and Germany became less interested in obtaining convictions for wartime events , preferring to forget the Nazi past . 
 = = = Franz Stangl = = = 
 Franz Stangl was a supervisor at the <unk> Euthanasia Centre , part of Action T4 , an early Nazi euthanasia programme that was responsible for the deaths of over 70 @,@ 000 mentally ill or physically deformed people in Germany . In February 1942 , he was commander at the Sobibor extermination camp and in August of the same year he was transferred to Treblinka . During his time at these camps , he oversaw the deaths of nearly 900 @,@ 000 people . While in U.S. detention for two years , he remained unidentified as a war criminal because so few witnesses had survived Sobibor and Treblinka that authorities never realised who he was . He escaped while on a roadwork detail in Linz in May 1948 . After he made his way to Rome , the Caritas relief agency provided him with a Red Cross passport and a boat ticket to Syria . His family joined him there a year later and they emigrated to Brazil in 1951 . 
 It was probably Stangl 's brother @-@ in law who informed Wiesenthal of Stangl 's whereabouts in 1964 . Concerned that Stangl would be warned and escape , Wiesenthal quietly prepared a dossier with the assistance of Austrian Minister of Justice Hans <unk> . Stangl was arrested outside his home in São Paulo on 28 February 1967 and was extradited to Germany on 22 June . A month later Wiesenthal 's book The Murderers Among Us was released . Wiesenthal 's publishers advertised that he had been responsible for locating over 800 Nazis , a claim that had no basis in fact but was nonetheless repeated by reputable newspapers such as the New York Times . Stangl was sentenced to life in prison and died of heart failure in June 1971 , having confessed his guilt to biographer Gitta Sereny the previous day . 
 = = = Hermine Braunsteiner = = = 
 Known as " the Mare of Majdanek " , Hermine Braunsteiner was a guard who served at Majdanek and Ravensbrück concentration camps . A cruel and sadistic woman , she earned her nickname for her propensity to kick her victims to death . She served a three @-@ year sentence in Austria for her activities in Ravensbrück , but had not yet been charged for any of her crimes at Majdanek when she emigrated to the United States in 1959 . She became an American citizen in 1963 . 
 Wiesenthal was first told about Braunsteiner in early 1964 via a chance encounter in Tel Aviv with someone who had seen her performing selections at Majdanek — deciding who was to be assigned to slave labour and who was to immediately be killed in the gas chambers . When he returned to Vienna he had an operative visit one of her relatives to clandestinely collect information . Wiesenthal soon traced Braunsteiner 's whereabouts to Queens , New York , so he notified the Israeli police and the New York Times . In spite of Wiesenthal 's efforts to expedite the matter , Braunsteiner was not extradited to Germany until 1973 . Her trial was part of a joint indictment with nine other defendants accused of killing 250 @,@ 000 people at Majdanek . She was sentenced to life imprisonment in 1981 and died in 1999 . 
 = = = Josef Mengele = = = 
 Josef Mengele was a medical officer assigned to Auschwitz concentration camp from 1943 until the end of the war . As well as making most of the selections of inmates as they arrived by train from all over Europe , he performed unscientific and usually deadly experiments on the inmates . He left the camp in January 1945 as the Red Army approached and was briefly in American custody in Weiden in der <unk> , but was released . He took work as a farm hand in rural Germany , remaining until 1949 , when he decided to flee the country ; he acquired a Red Cross passport and left for Argentina ; he set up a business in Buenos Aires in 1951 . Acting on information received from Wiesenthal , West German authorities tried to extradite Mengele in 1960 , but he could not be found ; he had in fact moved to Paraguay in 1958 . He moved to Brazil in 1961 and lived there until his death in 1979 . 
 Wiesenthal claimed to have information that placed Mengele in several locations : on the Greek island of <unk> in 1960 , Cairo in 1961 , in Spain in 1971 , and in Paraguay in 1978 , the latter eighteen years after he had left . In 1982 , he offered a reward of $ 100 @,@ 000 for Mengele 's capture and insisted as late as 1985 — six years after Mengele 's death — that he was still alive . The Mengele family admitted to authorities in 1985 that he had died in 1979 ; the body was exhumed and its identity was confirmed . Earlier that year Wiesenthal had served as one of the judges at a mock trial of Mengele , held in Jerusalem . 
 = = = Simon Wiesenthal Center = = = 
 The Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles was founded in 1977 by Rabbi Marvin Hier using large donations from philanthropists Samuel <unk> and Joseph <unk> . Hier 's organisation paid Wiesenthal an honorarium for the right to use his name . The center helped with the campaign to remove the statute of limitations on Nazi crimes and continues the hunt for suspected Nazi war criminals , but today its primary activities include Holocaust remembrance , education , and fighting antisemitism . The center 's Holocaust museum , the largest in the United States , opened in 1993 . Moriah Films , the center 's media division , has won two Academy Awards , including one for the documentary Genocide ( 1982 ) . Wiesenthal was not always happy with the way the center was run . He thought the museum was not dignified enough and that he should have a larger say in the overall operations . He even wrote to the Board of Directors requesting Hier 's removal , but in the end had to be content with being a figurehead . 
 = = Austrian politics and later life = = 
 = = = Bruno Kreisky = = = 
 Shortly after Bruno Kreisky was inaugurated as Austrian chancellor in April 1970 , Wiesenthal pointed out to the press that four of his new cabinet appointees had been members of the Nazi Party . In an address in June , Kreisky 's Minister of Education and Culture Leopold Gratz characterised Wiesenthal 's Documentation Centre of the Association of Jewish Victims of the Nazi Regime as a private spy ring , invading the privacy of innocent parties . In an interview a week later , Kreisky himself described Wiesenthal as a " Jewish fascist " , a remark he later denied making . Wiesenthal discovered that he would be unable to sue , because under Austrian law Kreisky was protected by parliamentary immunity . 
 When his re @-@ election in 1975 seemed unsure , Kreisky proposed that his Social Democratic Party should form a coalition with the Freedom Party , headed by Friedrich Peter . Wiesenthal was in possession of information proving that Peter had been a member of the 1 SS Infantry Brigade , a unit that had exterminated over 13 @,@ 000 Jewish civilians in Ukraine in 1941 – 42 . He decided not to reveal this information to the press until after the election , but forwarded his dossier to President Rudolf <unk> . Peter denied having participated in , or having knowledge of , any atrocities . In the end , Kreisky 's party won a clear majority and did not form the coalition . 
 In a press conference a short time after the election and Wiesenthal 's revelations , Kreisky said Wiesenthal used " the methods of a quasi @-@ political Mafia . " Wiesenthal filed a libel lawsuit ( although Kreisky had the power to declare immunity if he so chose ) , and when Kreisky later accused Wiesenthal of being an agent of the Gestapo , working with the Judenrat in Lvov , these accusations were incorporated into the lawsuit as well . The suit was decided in Wiesenthal 's favour in 1989 , but after Kreisky 's death nine months later his heirs refused to pay . When the relevant archives were later opened for research , no evidence was found that Wiesenthal had been a collaborator . 
 = = = Kurt Waldheim = = = 
 When Kurt Waldheim was named secretary @-@ general of the United Nations in 1971 , Wiesenthal reported — without checking very thoroughly — that there was no evidence that he had a Nazi past . This analysis had been supported by the opinions of the American Counterintelligence Corps and Office of Strategic Services when they examined his records right after the war . However , Waldheim 's 1985 autobiography did not include his war service following his recuperation from a 1941 injury . When he returned to active duty in 1942 , he was posted to Yugoslavia and Greece , and had knowledge of murders of civilians that took place in those locations during his service there . The Austrian news magazine <unk> published a story in March 1986 — during his campaign for the presidency of Austria — that Waldheim had been a member of the Sturmabteilung ( SA ) . The New York Times soon reported that Waldheim had failed to reveal all of the facts about his war service . Wiesenthal , embarrassed , attempted to help Waldheim defend himself . The World Jewish Congress investigated the issue , but the Israeli attorney general concluded that their material was insufficient evidence for a conviction . Waldheim was elected president in July 1986 . A panel of historians tasked with investigating the case issued a report eighteen months later . They concluded that , while there was no evidence that Waldheim had committed atrocities , he must have known they were occurring , yet did nothing . Wiesenthal unsuccessfully demanded that Waldheim resign . The World Jewish Congress successfully lobbied to have Waldheim barred from entering the United States . 
 = = = Nobel Peace Prize nomination = = = 
 Wiesenthal was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1985 , the fortieth anniversary of the end of the war . Rumour had it that the Nobel Committee would give the prize to a Holocaust @-@ related candidate . Fellow Holocaust survivor and author Elie Wiesel , also nominated , began a campaign in hopes of winning the prize , travelling to France , Ethiopia and Oslo for speaking tours and humanitarian work . Rabbi Hier of the Wiesenthal Center urged Wiesenthal to lobby for the prize as well , but other than delivering a lecture in Oslo , Wiesenthal did little to promote his candidacy . When Wiesel was awarded the 1986 prize , Wiesenthal claimed the World Jewish Congress must have influenced the Committee 's decision , a claim the WJC denied . Biographer Tom Segev speculates that the loss may have been because of the negative publicity over the Waldheim affair . 
