 Packer estimates more than 200 <unk> are killed each year by lions , crocodiles , elephants , hippos , and snakes , and that the numbers could be double that amount , with lions thought to kill at least 70 of those . Packer has documented that between 1990 and 2004 , lions attacked 815 people in Tanzania , killing 563 . Packer and <unk> are among the few conservationists who believe western conservation efforts must take account of these matters not just because of ethical concerns about human life , but also for the long term success of conservation efforts and lion preservation . 
 A man @-@ eating lion was killed by game scouts in Southern Tanzania in April 2004 . It is believed to have killed and eaten at least 35 people in a series of incidents covering several villages in the Rufiji Delta coastal region . Dr Rolf D. <unk> , the <unk> wildlife programme coordinator , commented that it was likely that the lion preyed on humans because it had a large abscess underneath a molar that was cracked in several places . He further commented that " This lion probably experienced a lot of pain , particularly when it was chewing . " <unk> is the German development cooperation agency and has been working with the Tanzanian government on wildlife conservation for nearly two decades . As in other cases this lion was large , lacked a mane , and had a tooth problem . 
 The " All @-@ Africa " record of man @-@ eating generally is considered to be not Tsavo , but incidents in the early 1930s through the late 1940s in what was then Tanganyika ( now Tanzania ) . George Rushby , game warden and professional hunter , eventually dispatched the pride , which over three generations is thought to have killed and eaten 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 000 people in what is now <unk> district . 
 = = = Reproduction and life cycle = = = 
 Most lionesses will have reproduced by the time they are four years of age . Lions do not mate at any specific time of year , and the females are polyestrous . As with other cats ' penises , the male lion 's penis has spines that point backward . During withdrawal of the penis , the spines rake the walls of the female 's vagina , which may cause ovulation . A lioness may mate with more than one male when she is in heat . 
 The average gestation period is around 110 days , the female giving birth to a litter of one to four cubs in a secluded den ( which may be a thicket , a reed @-@ bed , a cave , or some other sheltered area ) usually away from the rest of the pride . She will often hunt by herself while the cubs are still helpless , staying relatively close to the thicket or den where the cubs are kept . The cubs themselves are born blind – their eyes do not open until roughly a week after birth . They weigh 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 1 kg ( 2 @.@ 6 – 4 @.@ 6 lb ) at birth and are almost helpless , beginning to crawl a day or two after birth and walking around three weeks of age . The lioness moves her cubs to a new den site several times a month , carrying them one by one by the nape of the neck , to prevent scent from building up at a single den site and thus avoiding the attention of predators that may harm the cubs . 
 Usually , the mother does not integrate herself and her cubs back into the pride until the cubs are six to eight weeks old . Sometimes this introduction to pride life occurs earlier , however , particularly if other lionesses have given birth at about the same time . For instance , lionesses in a pride often synchronise their reproductive cycles so that they cooperate in the raising and suckling of the young ( once the cubs are past the initial stage of isolation with their mother ) , who suckle indiscriminately from any or all of the nursing females in the pride . In addition to greater protection , the synchronization of births also has an advantage in that the cubs end up being roughly the same size , and thus have an equal chance of survival . If one lioness gives birth to a litter of cubs a couple of months after another lioness , for instance , then the younger cubs , being much smaller than their older brethren , usually are dominated by larger cubs at mealtimes – consequently , death by starvation is more common among the younger cubs . 
 In addition to starvation , cubs also face many other dangers , such as predation by jackals , hyenas , leopards , martial eagles , and snakes . Even buffaloes , should they catch the scent of lion cubs , often stampede toward the thicket or den where they are being kept , doing their best to trample the cubs to death while warding off the lioness . Furthermore , when one or more new males oust the previous male ( s ) associated with a pride , the conqueror ( s ) often kill any existing young cubs , perhaps because females do not become fertile and receptive until their cubs mature or die . All in all , as many as 80 % of the cubs will die before the age of two . 
 When first introduced to the rest of the pride , the cubs initially lack confidence when confronted with adult lions other than their mother . They soon begin to immerse themselves in the pride life , however , playing among themselves or attempting to initiate play with the adults . Lionesses with cubs of their own are more likely to be tolerant of another lioness 's cubs than lionesses without cubs . The tolerance of the male lions toward the cubs varies – sometimes , a male will patiently let the cubs play with his tail or his mane , whereas another may snarl and bat the cubs away . 
 Weaning occurs after six to seven months . Male lions reach maturity at about 3 years of age and , at 4 – 5 years of age , are capable of challenging and displacing the adult male ( s ) associated with another pride . They begin to age and weaken between 10 and 15 years of age at the latest , if they have not already been critically injured while defending the pride ( once ousted from a pride by rival males , male lions rarely manage a second take @-@ over ) . This leaves a short window for their own offspring to be born and mature . If they are able to procreate as soon as they take over a pride , potentially , they may have more offspring reaching maturity before they also are displaced . A lioness often will attempt to defend her cubs fiercely from a usurping male , but such actions are rarely successful . He usually kills all of the existing cubs who are less than two years old . A lioness is weaker and much lighter than a male ; success is more likely when a group of three or four mothers within a pride join forces against one male . 
 Contrary to popular belief , it is not only males that are ousted from their pride to become nomads , although most females certainly do remain with their birth pride . However , when the pride becomes too large , the next generation of female cubs may be forced to leave to eke out their own territory . Furthermore , when a new male lion takes over the pride , subadult lions , both male and female , may be evicted . Life is harsh for a female nomad . Nomadic lionesses rarely manage to raise their cubs to maturity , without the protection of other pride members . 
 Canadian researcher Bruce <unk> reports that both males and females may interact <unk> . Lions are shown to be involved in group homosexual and courtship activities . Male lions will also head rub and roll around with each other before simulating sex together . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 Although adult lions have no natural predators , evidence suggests that the majority die violently from humans or other lions . Lions often inflict serious injuries on each other , either members of different prides encountering each other in territorial disputes , or members of the same pride fighting at a kill . Crippled lions and lion cubs may fall victim to hyenas , leopards , or be trampled by buffalo or elephants , and careless lions may be maimed when hunting prey . 
 Various species of tick commonly infest the ears , neck and groin regions of most lions . Adult forms of several species of the tapeworm genus Taenia have been isolated from intestines , the lions having ingested larval forms from antelope meat . Lions in the Ngorongoro Crater were afflicted by an outbreak of stable fly ( <unk> <unk> ) in 1962 ; this resulted in lions becoming covered in bloody bare patches and emaciated . Lions sought unsuccessfully to evade the biting flies by climbing trees or crawling into hyena burrows ; many perished or emigrated as the population dropped from 70 to 15 individuals . A more recent outbreak in 2001 killed six lions . Lions , especially in captivity , are vulnerable to the canine distemper virus ( CDV ) , feline immunodeficiency virus ( FIV ) , and feline infectious peritonitis ( FIP ) . CDV is spread through domestic dogs and other carnivores ; a 1994 outbreak in Serengeti National Park resulted in many lions developing neurological symptoms such as seizures . During the outbreak , several lions died from pneumonia and encephalitis . FIV , which is similar to HIV while not known to adversely affect lions , is worrisome enough in its effect in domestic cats that the Species Survival Plan recommends systematic testing in captive lions . It occurs with high to endemic frequency in several wild lion populations , but is mostly absent from Asiatic and Namibian lions . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 When resting , lion socialisation occurs through a number of behaviours , and the animal 's expressive movements are highly developed . The most common peaceful tactile gestures are head rubbing and social licking , which have been compared with grooming in primates . Head rubbing – nuzzling one 's forehead , face and neck against another lion – appears to be a form of greeting , as it is seen often after an animal has been apart from others , or after a fight or confrontation . Males tend to rub other males , while cubs and females rub females . Social licking often occurs in tandem with head rubbing ; it is generally mutual and the recipient appears to express pleasure . The head and neck are the most common parts of the body licked , which may have arisen out of utility , as a lion cannot lick these areas individually . 
 Lions have an array of facial expressions and body postures that serve as visual gestures . Their repertoire of vocalizations is also large ; variations in intensity and pitch , rather than discrete signals , appear central to communication . Lion sounds include snarling , hissing , coughing , <unk> , <unk> , and roaring . Lions tend to roar in a very characteristic manner , starting with a few deep , long roars that trail off into a series of shorter ones . They most often roar at night ; the sound , which can be heard from a distance of 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) , is used to advertise the animal 's presence . Lions have the loudest roar of any big cat . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 In Africa , lions can be found in savanna grasslands with scattered Acacia trees , which serve as shade ; their habitat in India is a mixture of dry savanna forest and very dry deciduous scrub forest . The habitat of lions originally spanned the southern parts of Eurasia , ranging from Greece to India , and most of Africa except the central rainforest @-@ zone and the Sahara desert . Herodotus reported that lions had been common in Greece in 480 BC ; they attacked the baggage camels of the Persian king Xerxes on his march through the country . Aristotle considered them rare by 300 BC . By 100 AD they were extirpated . A population of Asiatic lions survived until the tenth century in the Caucasus , their last European outpost . 
 The species was eradicated from Palestine by the Middle Ages and from most of the rest of Asia after the arrival of readily available firearms in the eighteenth century . Between the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries , they became extinct in North Africa and Southwest Asia . By the late nineteenth century , the lion had disappeared from Turkey and most of northern India , while the last sighting of a live Asiatic lion in Iran was in 1941 ( between Shiraz and <unk> , Fars Province ) , although the corpse of a lioness was found on the banks of the Karun river , Khūzestān Province in 1944 . There are no subsequent reliable reports from Iran . The subspecies now survives only in and around the Gir Forest of northwestern India . Approximately 500 lions live in the area of the 1 @,@ 412 km2 ( 545 sq mi ) sanctuary in the state of Gujarat , which covers most of the forest . Their numbers have increased from 180 to 523 animals mainly because the natural prey species have recovered . 
 = = Population and conservation status = = 
 Most lions now live in eastern and southern Africa , and their numbers there are rapidly decreasing , with an estimated 30 – 50 % decline per 20 years in the late half of the twentieth century . Estimates of the African lion population range between 16 @,@ 500 and 47 @,@ 000 living in the wild in 2002 – 2004 , down from early 1990s estimates that ranged as high as 100 @,@ 000 and perhaps 400 @,@ 000 in 1950 . Primary causes of the decline include disease and human interference . Habitat loss and conflicts with humans are considered the most significant threats to the species . The remaining populations are often geographically isolated from one another , which can lead to inbreeding , and consequently , reduced genetic diversity . Therefore , the lion is considered a vulnerable species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature , while the Asiatic subspecies is endangered . The lion population in the region of West Africa is isolated from lion populations of Central Africa , with little or no exchange of breeding individuals . The number of mature individuals in West Africa is estimated by two separate recent surveys at 850 – 1 @,@ 160 ( 2002 / 2004 ) . There is disagreement over the size of the largest individual population in West Africa : the estimates range from 100 to 400 lions in Burkina Faso 's Arly @-@ Singou ecosystem . Another population in northwestern Africa is found in Waza National Park , where approximately 14 – 21 animals persist . 
 Conservation of both African and Asian lions has required the setup and maintenance of national parks and game reserves ; among the best known are Etosha National Park in Namibia , Serengeti National Park in Tanzania , and Kruger National Park in eastern South Africa . The Ewaso Lions Project protects lions in the Samburu National Reserve , Buffalo Springs National Reserve and Shaba National Reserve of the Ewaso Ng 'iro ecosystem in Northern Kenya . Outside these areas , the issues arising from lions ' interaction with livestock and people usually results in the elimination of the lions . In India , the last refuge of the Asiatic lion is the 1 @,@ 412 km2 ( 545 sq mi ) Gir Forest National Park in western India , which had approximately 180 lions in 1974 and about 400 in 2010 . As in Africa , numerous human habitations are close by with the resultant problems between lions , livestock , locals and wildlife officials . The Asiatic Lion Reintroduction Project plans to establish a second independent population of Asiatic lions at the Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh . It is important to start a second population to serve as a gene pool for the last surviving Asiatic lions and to help develop and maintain genetic diversity enabling the species to survive . 
 The former popularity of the Barbary lion as a zoo animal has meant that scattered lions in captivity are likely to be descended from Barbary lion stock . This includes lions at Port Lympne Wild Animal Park in Kent , England that are descended from animals owned by the King of Morocco . Another eleven animals believed to be Barbary lions were found in Addis Ababa zoo , descendants of animals owned by Emperor Haile Selassie . <unk> International , in collaboration with Oxford University , launched their ambitious International Barbary Lion Project with the aim of identifying and breeding Barbary lions in captivity for eventual reintroduction into a national park in the Atlas Mountains of Morocco . 
 Following the discovery of the decline of lion population in Africa , several coordinated efforts involving lion conservation have been organised in an attempt to stem this decline . Lions are one species included in the Species Survival Plan , a coordinated attempt by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums to increase its chances of survival . The plan was originally started in 1982 for the Asiatic lion , but was suspended when it was found that most Asiatic lions in North American zoos were not genetically pure , having been hybridised with African lions . The African lion plan started in 1993 , focusing especially on the South African subspecies , although there are difficulties in assessing the genetic diversity of captive lions , since most individuals are of unknown origin , making maintenance of genetic diversity a problem . 
 In 2015 , a population of lions that was previously believed extirpated was filmed in the <unk> National Park , Ethiopia , close to the Sudanese border . This population may possibly number up to 200 animals . 
 = = = In captivity = = = 
 Lions are part of a group of exotic animals that are the core of zoo exhibits since the late eighteenth century ; members of this group are invariably large vertebrates and include elephants , rhinoceroses , hippopotamuses , large primates , and other big cats ; zoos sought to gather as many of these species as possible . Although many modern zoos are more selective about their exhibits , there are more than 1 @,@ 000 African and 100 Asiatic lions in zoos and wildlife parks around the world . They are considered an ambassador species and are kept for tourism , education and conservation purposes . Lions can reach an age of over 20 years in captivity ; Apollo , a resident lion of Honolulu Zoo in Honolulu , Hawaii , died at age 22 in August 2007 . His two sisters , born in 1986 , were still alive in August 2007 . Breeding programs need to note origins to avoid breeding different subspecies and thus reducing conservation value . However , several Asiatic @-@ African lion crosses have been bred . 
 At the ancient Egyptian cities of <unk> and Per @-@ Bast were temples to the lioness goddesses of Egypt , Sekhmet and Bast and at <unk> there was a temple to the son of the deity , <unk> the lion prince , where live lions were kept and allowed to roam within his temple . The Greeks called the city Leontopolis , the " City of Lions " and documented that practice . Lions were kept and bred by Assyrian kings as early as 850 BC , and Alexander the Great was said to have been presented with tame lions by the <unk> of northern India . Later in Roman times , lions were kept by emperors to take part in the gladiator arenas or for executions ( see <unk> , damnatio ad <unk> , and <unk> ) . Roman notables , including Sulla , Pompey , and Julius Caesar , often ordered the mass slaughter of hundreds of lions at a time . In the East , lions were tamed by Indian princes , and Marco Polo reported that Kublai Khan kept lions inside . The first European " zoos " spread among noble and royal families in the thirteenth century , and until the seventeenth century were called <unk> ; at that time , they came to be called menageries , an extension of the cabinet of curiosities . They spread from France and Italy during the Renaissance to the rest of Europe . In England , although the seraglio tradition was less developed , lions were kept at the Tower of London in a seraglio established by King John in the thirteenth century , probably stocked with animals from an earlier menagerie started in 1125 by Henry I at his hunting lodge in Woodstock , near Oxford ; where lions had been stocked according to William of Malmesbury . 
 <unk> served as expressions of the nobility 's power and wealth . Animals such as big cats and elephants , in particular , symbolised power , and would be pitted in fights against each other or domesticated animals . By extension , menageries and <unk> served as demonstrations of the dominance of humanity over nature . Consequently , the defeat of such natural " lords " by a cow in 1682 astonished the spectators , and the flight of an elephant before a rhinoceros drew jeers . Such fights would slowly fade out in the seventeenth century with the spread of the menagerie and their appropriation by the commoners . The tradition of keeping big cats as pets would last into the nineteenth century , at which time it was seen as highly eccentric . 
 The presence of lions at the Tower of London was intermittent , being restocked when a monarch or his consort , such as Margaret of Anjou the wife of Henry VI , either sought or were given animals . Records indicate they were kept in poor conditions there in the seventeenth century , in contrast to more open conditions in Florence at the time . The menagerie was open to the public by the eighteenth century ; admission was a sum of three half @-@ pence or the supply of a cat or dog for feeding to the lions . A rival menagerie at the Exeter Exchange also exhibited lions until the early nineteenth century . The Tower menagerie was closed down by William IV , and animals transferred to the London Zoo , which opened its gates to the public on 27 April 1828 . 
 The wild animals trade flourished alongside improved colonial trade of the nineteenth century . Lions were considered fairly common and inexpensive . Although they would barter higher than tigers , they were less costly than larger , or more difficult to transport animals such as the giraffe and hippopotamus , and much less than giant pandas . Like other animals , lions were seen as little more than a natural , boundless commodity that was mercilessly exploited with terrible losses in capture and transportation . The widely reproduced imagery of the heroic hunter chasing lions would dominate a large part of the century . Explorers and hunters exploited a popular Manichean division of animals into " good " and " evil " to add thrilling value to their adventures , casting themselves as heroic figures . This resulted in big cats , always suspected of being man @-@ eaters , representing " both the fear of nature and the satisfaction of having overcome it . " 
 Lions were kept in cramped and squalid conditions at London Zoo until a larger lion house with roomier cages was built in the 1870s . Further changes took place in the early twentieth century , when Carl Hagenbeck designed enclosures more closely resembling a natural habitat , with concrete ' rocks ' , more open space and a moat instead of bars . He designed lion enclosures for both Melbourne Zoo and Sydney 's Taronga Zoo , among others , in the early twentieth century . Though his designs were popular , the old bars and cage enclosures prevailed until the 1960s in many zoos . In the later decades of the twentieth century , larger , more natural enclosures and the use of wire mesh or laminated glass instead of lowered dens allowed visitors to come closer than ever to the animals , with some attractions even placing the den on ground higher than visitors , such as the Cat Forest / Lion Overlook of Oklahoma City Zoological Park . Lions are now housed in much larger naturalistic areas ; modern recommended guidelines more closely approximate conditions in the wild with closer attention to the lions ' needs , highlighting the need for dens in separate areas , elevated positions in both sun and shade where lions can sit and adequate ground cover and drainage as well as sufficient space to roam . There have also been instances where a lion was kept by a private individual , such as the lioness Elsa , who was raised by George Adamson and his wife Joy Adamson and came to develop a strong bond with them , particularly the latter . The lioness later achieved fame , her life being documented in a series of books and films . 
 = = = Baiting and taming = = = 
 Lion @-@ baiting is a blood sport involving the baiting of lions in combat with other animals , usually dogs . Records of it exist in ancient times through until the seventeenth century . It was finally banned in Vienna by 1800 and England in 1835 . 
 Lion taming refers to the practice of taming lions for entertainment , either as part of an established circus or as an individual act , such as Siegfried & Roy . The term is also often used for the taming and display of other big cats such as tigers , leopards , and cougars . The practice was pioneered in the first half of the nineteenth century by Frenchman Henri Martin and American Isaac Van Amburgh who both toured widely , and whose techniques were copied by a number of followers . Van Amburgh performed before Queen Victoria in 1838 when he toured Great Britain . Martin composed a pantomime titled Les Lions de Mysore ( " the lions of Mysore " ) , an idea that Amburgh quickly borrowed . These acts eclipsed equestrianism acts as the central display of circus shows , but truly entered public consciousness in the early twentieth century with cinema . In demonstrating the superiority of human over animal , lion taming served a purpose similar to animal fights of previous centuries . The ultimate proof of a tamer 's dominance and control over a lion is demonstrated by placing his head in the lion 's mouth . The now iconic lion tamer 's chair was possibly first used by American Clyde Beatty ( 1903 – 1965 ) . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 The lion has been an icon for humanity for thousands of years , appearing in cultures across Europe , Asia , and Africa . Despite incidents of attacks on humans , lions have enjoyed a positive depiction in culture as strong and noble . A common depiction is their representation as " king of the jungle " or " king of beasts " ; hence , the lion has been a popular symbol of royalty and stateliness , as well as a symbol of bravery ; it is featured in several fables of the sixth century BC Greek storyteller Aesop . 
 Representations of lions date back to the early Upper Paleolithic . The lioness @-@ headed ivory carving from <unk> cave in the Swabian Alb in southwestern Germany , dubbed <unk> ( lion @-@ human ) in German . The sculpture has been determined to be at least 32 @,@ 000 years old from the Aurignacian culture , but it may date to as early as 40 @,@ 000 years ago . The sculpture has been interpreted as anthropomorphic , giving human characteristics to an animal , however , it also may represent a deity . Two lions were depicted mating in the Chamber of Felines in 15 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old Paleolithic cave paintings in the Lascaux caves . Cave lions also are depicted in the Chauvet Cave , discovered in 1994 ; this has been dated at 32 @,@ 000 years of age , though it may be of similar or younger age to Lascaux . 
 In Africa , cultural views of the lion have varied by region . In some cultures , the lion symbolises power and royalty and some powerful rulers had the word " lion " in their nickname . For example , <unk> of the Mali Empire ( c . 1235 – c . 1600 ) was given the name " Lion of Mali " . <unk> , the legendary founder of the <unk> kingdom ( 1287 – 1855 ) , is said to have been raised by lions and returned to his people part @-@ lion to unite them using the knowledge he learned from the beasts . In much of West Africa , to be compared to a lion was considered to be one of the greatest compliments . The social hierarchies of their societies where connected to the animal kingdom and the lion represented the top class . In parts of West and East Africa , the lion is associated with healing and is seen as the link between the seers and the supernatural . In other East African traditions , the lion is the symbol of laziness . In many folktales , lions are portrayed as having low intelligence and are easily tricked by other animals . 
 Ancient Egypt venerated the lioness ( the fierce hunter ) as their war deities and among those in the Egyptian pantheon are , Bast , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Sekhmet , Tefnut , and the Sphinx ; The Nemean lion was symbolic in Ancient Greece and Rome , represented as the constellation and zodiac sign Leo , and described in mythology , where its skin was borne by the hero Heracles . 
 The lion was a prominent symbol in ancient Mesopotamia ( from Sumer up to Assyrian and Babylonian times ) , where it was strongly associated with kingship . The classic Babylonian lion motif , found as a statue , carved or painted on walls , is often referred to as the striding lion of Babylon . It is in Babylon that the biblical Daniel is said to have been delivered from the lion 's den . 
 In the Talmud , <unk> <unk> , Rabbi Joshua ben Hananiah tells Emperor Hadrian about the giant lion of the forest of Bei <unk> called the Tigris , a lion so huge that the space between its ears measures 9 cubits . The emperor asks the rabbi to call forth this lion . He reluctantly agrees . At a distance of 400 parasangs from Rome it roars , and all pregnant women miscarry and all the walls of Rome fall down . Then it comes to 300 parasangs and roars , and all the front teeth and molars of Roman men fall out , and even the emperor himself falls from his throne . He begs the rabbi to send it back . The rabbi prays and it returns to its place . 
 In the Puranic texts of Hinduism , Narasimha ( " man @-@ lion " ) a half @-@ lion , half @-@ man incarnation or ( avatar ) of Vishnu , is worshipped by his devotees and saved the child devotee Prahlada from his father , the evil demon king Hiranyakashipu ; Vishnu takes the form of half @-@ man / half @-@ lion , in Narasimha , having a human torso and lower body , but with a lion @-@ like face and claws . Singh is an ancient Indian vedic name meaning " lion " ( Asiatic lion ) , dating back over 2000 years to ancient India . It was originally only used by Rajputs a Hindu Kshatriya or military caste in India . After the birth of the Khalsa brotherhood in 1699 , the Sikhs also adopted the name " Singh " due to the wishes of Guru Gobind Singh . Along with millions of Hindu Rajputs today , it is also used by over 20 million Sikhs worldwide . Found famously on numerous flags and coats of arms all across Asia and Europe , the Asiatic lions also stand firm on the National Emblem of India . Farther south on the Indian subcontinent , the Asiatic lion is symbolic for the Sinhalese , Sri Lanka 's ethnic majority ; the term derived from the Indo @-@ Aryan Sinhala , meaning the " lion people " or " people with lion blood " , while a sword @-@ wielding lion is the central figure on the national flag of Sri Lanka . 
 The Asiatic lion is a common motif in Chinese art . They were first used in art during the late Spring and Autumn Period ( fifth or sixth century BC ) , and became much more popular during the Han Dynasty ( 206 BC – AD 220 ) , when imperial guardian lions started to be placed in front of imperial palaces for protection . Because lions have never been native to China , early depictions were somewhat unrealistic ; after the introduction of Buddhist art to China in the Tang Dynasty ( after the sixth century AD ) , lions usually were wingless , with shorter , thicker bodies , and curly manes . The lion dance is a form of traditional dance in Chinese culture in which performers mimic a lion 's movements in a lion costume , often with musical accompaniment from cymbals , drums , and gongs . They are performed at Chinese New Year , the August Moon Festival and other celebratory occasions for good luck . 
 The island nation of Singapore derives its name from the Malay words <unk> ( lion ) and <unk> ( city / fortress ) , which in turn is from the Tamil @-@ Sanskrit <unk> ் <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> pura , which is cognate to the Greek <unk> , <unk> . According to the Malay Annals , this name was given by a fourteenth @-@ century Sumatran Malay prince Sang Nila Utama , who , on alighting the island after a thunderstorm , spotted an auspicious beast on shore that appeared to be a lion . 
 The name of the nomadic <unk> people , inhabiting parts of Sudan , Egypt , and Eritrea , is made up of <unk> ' lion ' and ( n ) <unk> ' clan ' . Other variants are <unk> <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ( children of lioness ) . 
 " Lion " was the nickname of several medieval warrior rulers with a reputation for bravery , such as the English King Richard the Lionheart , Henry the Lion , ( German : Heinrich der <unk> ) , Duke of Saxony , William the Lion , King of Scotland , and Robert III of Flanders nicknamed " The Lion of Flanders " — a major Flemish national icon up to the present . Lions are frequently depicted on coats of arms , either as a device on shields themselves , or as supporters , but the lioness is much more infrequent . The formal language of heraldry , called blazon , employs French terms to describe the images precisely . Such descriptions specified whether lions or other creatures were " rampant " or " passant " , that is whether they were rearing or crouching . The lion is used as a symbol of sporting teams , from national association football teams such as England , Scotland and Singapore to famous clubs such as the Detroit Lions of the NFL , Chelsea and Aston Villa of the English Premier League , ( and the Premiership itself ) , Eintracht Braunschweig of the Bundesliga , and to a host of smaller clubs around the world . 
 Lions continue to be featured in modern literature , from the messianic Aslan in The Lion , the Witch and the Wardrobe and following books from The Chronicles of Narnia series written by C. S. Lewis , to the comedic Cowardly Lion in The Wonderful Wizard of Oz . The advent of moving pictures saw the continued presence of lion symbolism ; one of the most iconic and widely recognised lions is Leo the Lion , which has been the mascot for Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) studios since the 1920s . The 1960s saw the appearance of what is possibly the most famous lioness , the Kenyan animal Elsa in the movie Born Free , based on the true @-@ life book of the same title . The lion 's role as king of the beasts has been used in cartoons , such as the 1994 Disney animated feature film The Lion King . 
 = = Heraldic depictions = = 
 = Idlewild South = 
 Idlewild South is the second studio album by American Southern rock band the Allman Brothers Band . Produced by Tom Dowd , the album was released on September 23 , 1970 , in the United States by Atco Records and Capricorn Records . 
 Following the release of their 1969 debut , the Allman Brothers Band toured the United States extensively to promote the album , which had little commercial success . Their performances , however , did create positive word of mouth exposure that extended to more famous musicians , such as Eric Clapton , who invited group leader Duane Allman to contribute to his 1970 album Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs . 
 As a result of the band 's relentless touring schedule , Idlewild South was recorded gradually over a period of five months in various cities , including New York , Miami , and Macon , Georgia , the band 's home . Tom Dowd had previously been sought to record the group 's debut but had been unavailable . The material presented on Idlewild South was written during this period and tested out on the road at shows . The album 's title comes from the band 's nickname for a rustic cabin the band rented out and used for rehearsals , as well as parties . Idlewild South contains two of the band 's best @-@ known songs , " Midnight Rider " ( later a hit for various artists ) and " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " , which became one of the band 's famous concert numbers . 
 The album was released in September 1970 but again failed to achieve significant success . Sales began to grow , however , due to over 300 shows the band put on in 1970 , setting the stage for their artistic and commercial breakthrough with 1971 's live follow @-@ up album , At Fillmore East . 
 = = Background = = 
 By August 1969 , the Allman Brothers had recorded their self @-@ titled debut , which was released that November . The record received a poor commercial response , selling less than 35 @,@ 000 copies upon initial release . Executives suggested to the band 's manager and Capricorn president , Phil Walden , that he relocate the band to New York or Los Angeles to increase their exposure . " They wanted us to act " like a rock band " and we just told them to " fuck themselves , " remembered Trucks . For their part , the members of the band remained optimistic , electing to stay in the South . " Everyone told us we 'd fall by the wayside down there , " said Gregg Allman , but the collaboration between the band and Capricorn Records " transformed Macon from this sleepy little town into a very hip , wild , and crazy place filled with bikers and rockers . " In March 1970 , Oakley 's wife rented a large Victorian home on 2321 Vineville Avenue in Macon , which they dubbed " the Big House " . 
 Idlewild South was the band 's first effort with Dowd , known for his work with Cream and John Coltrane . Dowd first heard the band rehearsing while visiting Capricorn Sound Studios in Macon , asking their name and remarking to Walden , " Get them the hell out of there and give them to me in the studio . They don 't need to rehearse ; they 're ready to record " . Dowd was initially scheduled to work with the band on their debut but was called away at the last minute . Initially , the band had asked friend and colleague Johnny Sandlin to produce the album , but as recording inched closer , it became obvious they wanted him to co @-@ produce with Dowd . In one of their first sessions , Sandlin was giving suggestions and acting as a co @-@ producer , though no one had informed Dowd ; Sandlin was embarrassed and did not return to the studio . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The band moved to Criteria Studios in Miami , where Dowd felt more comfortable producing albums ; he viewed the then @-@ new Capricorn studio as still a work @-@ in @-@ progress and unfit to record in . The band was constantly on the road while Idlewild South was developed , leading to a fractured recording process completed in fits and stops . They reconvened with Dowd during short breaks from shows . In addition , group leader Duane Allman still received invitations to play as a session musician elsewhere ; on the " rare instances when [ the band ] could return to Macon for a short break " , Allman would hit the road for New York , Miami , or Muscle Shoals to contribute to other artists ' sessions . On days that the band would be available , manager Walden phoned Dowd to inform him ; he would often catch their show and spend the rest of the night in the studio . After nearly half a year and over three different recording studios , production wrapped up by July 1970 . 
 Instead of using multitrack recording ( which was quickly gaining popularity ) , the Allman Brothers Band opted to cut most of Idlewild South live , with all of the musicians performing together . On rare occasions would they go back to overdub sections that weren 't up to standard . " The idea is that part of the thing of the Allman Brothers is the spontaneity — the elasticity . The parts and tempos vary in a way that only they are sensitive to " , said Dowd . Duane often left a song alone for more work and testing out on the road . " They would record maybe five songs . Then they might say , ' I don 't think that song was good enough , ' or , ' I don 't think that song was ready to record , " , remembered Dowd . Joel Dorn , predominantly a jazz producer for Atlantic , stepped in to produce one song on the album , " Please Call Home " . ( More songs were recorded , but only " Please Call Home " was released ) . The band were in New York at the time and Dowd was unavailable . 
 Following the recording process , Duane was invited to join Eric Clapton and his new group Derek & the Dominos on the recording of their debut album , Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs . Clapton later formally invited Allman to join the group , but he reluctantly declined , expressing loyalty to the members of the Allman Brothers and musical concept that had birthed it . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Revival " initially took shape as an instrumental , with lyrics as an afterthought . " An instrumental has to be real catchy and when you succeed it 's very satisfying because you have transcended words and communicated with emotion , " said Betts . The song takes on a decidedly gospel flair midway through , accentuated by " old @-@ fashioned church @-@ like hand clapping . " The Gregg Allman @-@ penned " Don 't Keep Me Wonderin ' " follows , featuring Duane on slide guitar and Oakley 's friend Thom Doucette on harmonica . " Midnight Rider " developed quickly and featured lyrics contributed by roadie Robert Payne , who threw out a suggestion to Gregg Allman while together at their equipment warehouse . Unable to gain a key to the nearby Capricorn Sound Studios , the duo broke in and recorded a quick demo with Twiggs Lyndon on bass and Johanson on congas . Duane eventually laid down acoustic guitar tracks for both " Revival " and " Midnight Rider " , as he was quicker to record and more technically savvy due to his session work in Muscle Shoals . 
 " In Memory of Elizabeth Reed " was inspired by a woman Betts was involved with in Macon , the girlfriend of musician Boz Scaggs . " She was Hispanic and somewhat dark and mysterious — and she really used it to her advantage and played it to the hilt , " said Betts . To cloak her identity , the song is named after a headstone Betts saw at the Rose Hill Cemetery , where band members often ventured in their early days to relax and write songs . Considerable legend developed about the song 's genesis , much fueled by a put @-@ on interview Duane Allman gave Rolling Stone . The song is Betts ' first composition recorded by the band . " Hoochie Coochie Man " was the band 's rearrangement of a Muddy Waters tune culled from bassist Berry Oakley and Betts ' days performing the number in their earlier band the Second Coming . Featuring Oakley in his only studio vocal , it is nearly twice as fast as Waters ' original . " Please Call Home " was cut in New York with jazz producer Joel Dorn in two takes , with Johanson switching from brushes to a mallet on the second , final take . " Leave My Blues at Home " contains hints of funk and an extended fade out of the band 's signature twin lead guitars . " 
 = = Title = = 
 The album 's title came from the band 's nickname for a $ 165 @-@ a @-@ month cabin it rented on a lake outside of Macon early in its days there , the busy comings and goings at which reminded them of New York City 's Idlewild Airport . Idlewild South was the home of rehearsals and parties , and was " where the brotherhood came to pass , " according to roadie Kim Payne ; " There was a pact made out there around a campfire — all for one and one for all . ... Everybody believed [ in the band ] 100 percent . " Much of the material presented on the album originated at the cabin . 
 Scott Boyer spoke on the cabin 's history in the 2008 book <unk> : The Duane Allman Story : 
 It was like a hunting cabin . The back of the house had a porch that was built out over a manmade lake that was maybe five or six acres . It was a cabin made out of old pinewood , and it had been there for a long time . ... The Allman Brothers used it as a rehearsal facility — that and a place to go maybe to consume a little something that wasn 't quite legal . There were parties out there . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Idlewild South was issued by Atco and Capricorn Records on September 23 , 1970 , less than a year after the band 's debut album . It sold only " marginally better , in spite of the band 's growing national reputation , and included songs that would become staples of its repertoire — and eventually of rock radio . " While the album did help boost the band 's popularity , the Allman Brothers ' name really grew in fame due to their live performances . Walden doubted the band 's future , worrying whether they would ever catch on , but word of mouth spread due to the band 's relentless touring schedule , and crowds got larger . 
 Rolling Stone 's Ed <unk> wrote that Idlewild South " augurs well for the Allmans ' future , " calling it " a big step forward from the Allmans ' first " but considered the second side of the LP a disappointment . Robert Christgau at The Village Voice gave the album a " B + " and considered it a companion piece to Duane Allman 's work on Layla , noting that " a lot of people think that Duane Allman is already a ranking titan of the electric guitar . " A retrospective five @-@ star review from Bruce Eder at Allmusic deemed it " the best studio album in the group 's history , electric blues with an acoustic texture , virtuoso lead , slide , and organ playing , and a killer selection of songs . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Rolling Stone listed it among the most " groundbreaking " albums in 2014 , covering its impact on Southern rock : " On their second album , the Allman Brothers transmogrified from mere blues @-@ rockers to an assemblage creating an entirely new kind of Southern music . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Gregg Allman , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All credits adapted from liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = Anglesey Central Railway = 
 The Anglesey Central Railway ( Welsh : Lein Amlwch , Amlwch Line ) was a 17 @.@ 5 miles ( 28 @.@ 2 km ) long standard @-@ gauge railway in Anglesey , Wales , connecting the port of Amlwch and the county town of Llangefni with the North Wales Coast Line at Gaerwen . Built as an independent railway , the railway opened in portions from 1864 to 1867 . Due to financial troubles the railway was sold to the London and North Western Railway in 1876 , who invested significantly in the infrastructure . Operation continued under various companies during the 20th century , but passenger services were withdrawn in 1964 as part of the Beeching Axe . Industrial freight services continued until 1993 . 
 The railway 's tracks have been left in situ , and local groups have demonstrated an interest in restoring services ( possibly as a heritage railway ) . The sustainable transport charity Sustrans has proposed to use the route as a cycle path . The Welsh Assembly Government , in partnership with Network Rail , commissioned a feasibility study into the reopening of the line , which started in early 2011 . 
 = = Route = = 
 The railway branches off westbound from the North Wales Coast Line at Gaerwen , and turns north @-@ east to descend into Malltraeth Marsh ( Welsh : <unk> <unk> ) , passing below Thomas Telford 's A5 and the A55 just before Holland Arms station at Pentre <unk> . The Red Wharf Bay branch ( now removed ) left the line here , as the Amlwch line continues north @-@ west , crossing the River Cefni and approaching Llangefni . 
 North of Llangefni , the railway follows the course of the River Cefni in The Dingle ( Nant Y Pandy ) . Having followed the river through the narrow valley , over bridges and through cuttings , the railway crosses Llyn Cefni , the island 's second largest reservoir . 
 The railway continues north @-@ west over easier terrain towards Llangwyllog and Llanerchymedd , where it turns north , running to the west of Llyn Alaw toward Rhosgoch . It then turns north @-@ east around Parys Mountain before reaching Amlwch . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early days = = = 
 The railways arrived on Anglesey with the construction of the Chester and Holyhead Railway , of which the section from Llanfairpwll to Holyhead opened in 1848 , two years before the Britannia Bridge was finished . The Chester and Holyhead railway surveyed a branch to Llangefni in 1852 , but chose not to proceed . George Stephenson notably reported that the line was not worth building . 
 The idea of a local railway was still of interest to the people of Anglesey . A public meeting was held in Llangefni on 5 July 1858 , to popularise the idea of building a railway leaving the main line at Gaerwen , running north to Amlwch , west to Cemaes Bay , then south through <unk> to rejoin the main line at Valley . This ambitious scheme did not gain enough support to proceed , although some landowners offered to exchange land for shares . 
 Proposals changed into a railway from Gaerwen to Amlwch , with another meeting in Llangefni , on 1 August 1861 . David Davies and his partner Ezra Roberts offered to build the line at a cost of £ 6 @,@ 000 per mile , complete except for rolling stock , or for £ 5 @,@ 000 per mile , with the company to purchase the land and meet " preliminary and parliamentary expenses " . This proposal won favour with the fledgling company , but it was not taken up . The London and North Western Railway ( LNWR ) ( who had taken over the Chester and Holyhead Railway ) were approached in 1862 . The LNWR were not interested , so the railway was financed independently . 
 = = = 1863 – 1876 : Independent operation = = = 
 The Anglesey Central Railway Act 1863 ( 26 & 27 Vict. <unk> ) founded the company , with capital of £ 120 @,@ 000 . The chairman was William Bulkeley Hughes , MP for Caernarfon and local railway prospector . The ceremonial first sod was cut on 11 September 1863 , with construction starting the following year by the contractors Dickson and Russell . With the line approaching Llangefni later in October 1864 , LNWR engineers were authorised to build the main line junction at Gaerwen , at the Anglesey Central Railway 's expense . 
 The line opened for freight as far as Llangefni on 16 December 1864 . A special train carried the directors and friends from Bangor to a temporary station in Llangefni in 37 minutes . A banquet was held at the Bull Hotel for 100 guests , with celebrations continuing that evening in Bangor . The line was surveyed by Captain Rich on behalf of the Board of Trade in February , and they approved the line for passenger traffic on 8 March 1865 . Passenger services started four days later , with an engine and carriages loaned by the LNWR . In the six months to December 1865 , the railway carried 18 @,@ 839 passengers and 3 @,@ 866 tons of freight ( 3 @,@ 928 t ) , excluding livestock . 
 Further construction of the line was limited by a lack of funds . Russell asked the LNWR to adopt the line in August 1865 , to no avail . An Act of 1866 gave permission to raise a further £ 20 @,@ 000 , with loans of £ 6 @,@ 600 . After raising this capital , the line was opened to Llanerchymedd in 1866 , with the temporary station at Llangefni replaced by a permanent structure half a mile further on . Captain Rich , when surveying the line , noted that the curves and gradients were severe , and recommended that the line be worked at moderate speed . He also noted the lack of turntables , and the company 's intention to use Fairlie engines on the line . 
 The 1866 Act also gave the Anglesey Central Railway ( ACR ) the right to authorise Dickson to lease or work the line , or to lease or sell the line to the LNWR . Dickson did indeed undertake to operate services . He requested permission from the LNWR to run services through to Bangor , but they refused , and passengers had to continue to change at Gaerwen . The act authorised a branch from Rhosgoch to Cemaes , but this was not built . The Fairlie engine Mountaineer was in use on the line in April 1866 , but by October 1867 it was in use on the Neath and Brecon Railway , of which Dickson was also the contractor and whose traffic he was working . The Neath and Brecon 's 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 Miers also operated on the ACR , under the name Anglesea . Neither of those engines was considered successful . 
 = = = = The railway reaches Amlwch = = = = 
 The final section to Amlwch was surveyed by the now Major Rich in January 1867 . After remedial work , it opened to passengers throughout on 3 June 1867 , although the first freight train to Amlwch was on 10 September 1866 , according to Amlwch 's first stationmaster , Mr O. Dew . 
 The line had been built single track throughout , with the only run @-@ around loop provided at Amlwch , meaning that trains could not pass each other . To ensure safe working , the Staff and Ticket system was used in three sections : Gaerwen @-@ Llangefni , Llangefni @-@ Llanerchymedd , and Llanerchymedd @-@ Amlwch , using A and B configured staffs alternately . No turntable was built , as the intended Fairlie engines would not require one . When the LNWR provided engines , they used tank engines where possible , rather than an engine with a tender . 
 Mona Mine , operating the copper works at Parys Mountain , switched from exporting ore by sea to by railway in 1865 , two years before it reached Amlwch . Delivery prices per ton of ore were 25 shillings to London , 20 shillings to Birmingham , and 14 shillings and 2 pence to Liverpool , when carried from Gaerwen ( by the LNWR ) . Carriage from Llangefni ( then the terminus of the ACR ) cost 2 shillings and sixpence more . 
 The mines soon became uneconomic to operate and closed in 1871 . Livestock , artificial fertiliser , and farm produce made up the majority of the remaining freight traffic . 
 = = = = Financial troubles = = = = 
 Dickson , who was operating all services on the railway , failed financially in September 1867 . William Dew , secretary of the company , writing in April of that year stated that " the affairs of the railway are in such a critical and pressing state " . The ACR turned once again to the LNWR , asking them to work the line . These negotiations failed , but the LNWR did agree to lend an engine and carriages once again . T. L. Kettle suggested to the chairperson in 1870 that sale to the LNWR would be desirable , on account of the company 's debts . The financial situation restricted the company 's ambitions : 
 As regards the line to Port of Amlwch , nothing ought to be done till there is certainty by guarantee or otherwise of sufficient traffic to pay a proper interest on the capital to be expended in making it . 
 On 16 December 1875 , as a result of legal action by independent locomotive manufacturers , an injunction was issued restricting the LNWR " from manufacturing locomotive engines or other rolling stock for sale or hire on other than their own railway " . In January 1876 the LNWR informed the ACR that they could no longer lend the engine in use , as a result of the recent court case . Three choices were suggested by the LNWR : that the line be bought outright , that a proper working arrangement be made , or that the ACR " might buy the engine and carriages now on the line " . The ACR were not in a position to buy the stock , and made arrangements for the sale of the railway . 
 = = = 1876 – 1923 : London and North Western Railway = = = 
 After a decade of operating as an independent company , the line was transferred to the London and North Western Railway in 1876 , for £ 80 @,@ 000 . This was enacted by the Anglesey Central Railway ( Transfer ) Act of 1876 ( 39 & 40 Vict. cap <unk> ) , and the LNWR assumed control of the line on 1 July 1876 . 
 A survey conducted by the LNWR found that the bridges and culverts were in a fair condition , but the stations were dirty . Fences were decayed , rails needed replacing , some sleepers were rotten , and the ballast was soft and shaley . The LNWR addressed these problems over the coming years . 
 A short passing loop was built at Llangefni station in 1877 for engines to run round , but at only 40 yards ( 37 m ) long it was not of much use for allowing passenger trains to pass each other . A refuge siding was built for freight trains at Llanerchymedd in 1878 , along with an engine shed in Amlwch . In 1882 , new station buildings replaced the basic wooden sheds at Holland Arms , Llangwyllog and Rhosgoch , as well as development of the junction at Gaerwen into a full double junction , and a second signal cabin built there . An extended Amlwch station received a canopy by 1884 . The staff and ticket system was supplemented with block working in 1886 , and was replaced with the electric staff system in 1894 . 
 The timetable for January 1883 shows a variety of passenger , goods and mixed trains , giving five passenger services down to Amlwch , and six up . The first train of the morning , departing Bangor at 04 : 20 , and the 19 : 35 from Amlwch also carried mail to and from the island . The majority of trains still terminated at Gaerwen . As Llangefni held a livestock market on a Thursday , an extra service from Bangor to Llangefni on Thursdays was introduced by the 1896 timetable . 
 = = = = 1877 accident = = = = 
 In the early morning of 29 November 1877 , heavy rain caused the dam of the <unk> mill near Llanerchymedd to breach , and the surge of water washed away the wooden <unk> bridge over the Afon Alaw . The first train of the day was driven by William Taylor , with fireman John Saunders and railway inspector John Davies also on the footplate . The train also included two coal trucks , a passenger coach , and a guard 's van , with Edward Hughes serving as the guard . The whole train went over the side of the bridge into the river . Edward Hughes dragged himself out , and was taken to the nearest farm . John Davies was scalded to death , and Taylor and Saunders were found injured , and could not be freed until mid @-@ day . John Saunders later died from his injuries . 
 Robert Williams , one of the Anglesey Central Railway 's first drivers , noted that he had been instructed to drive the morning train , but that he slept late , and William Taylor replaced him at short notice . The bridge was later rebuilt in stone , and is known to this day as Pont <unk> ( Accident Bridge ) . 
 = = = = Red Wharf Bay branch = = = = 
 The LNWR obtained powers to build a branch from Holland Arms to Red Wharf Bay in 1899 and 1900 . The line was opened to Pentraeth in 1908 , and reached Red Wharf Bay in 1909 . The Gaerwen @-@ Llangefni staff section was replaced with Gaerwen @-@ Holland Arms and Holland Arms @-@ Llangefni sections , but the single line to Red Wharf Bay was operated as one section . 
 The <unk> introduced to serve this branch also operated on the Amlwch line : when not running to Red Wharf Bay the motor train would operate between Llangefni and Gaerwen while the main branch train was on the round trip from Llangefni to Amlwch and back . 
 = = = = Passing loop at Llangwyllog = = = = 
 The lack of a passing loop suitable for passenger trains on the Amlwch line meant that trains could only operate every two hours . Coordinating this limited timetable with the main line services through Gaerwen was difficult , and passengers could face a long wait on occasions . To make the branch line workings more flexible , a passing loop was proposed for Llangwyllog in March 1914 . The work was completed for the summer timetables . This required introducing a new working section , and Llangwyllog became a staff station . As the new section was in the middle of a line , a third type of staff was required ( a C configuration ) ; one of only a few sections on the LNWR that did not use a type A or B staff . 
 In 1916 , the passing loop was used by one pair of passenger trains in the evening , with an extra down train ( toward Amlwch ) making seven down and six up trains per day . The railmotor train 's services had grown to 24 single trips between Gaerwen / Holland Arms and Llangefni / Red Wharf Bay . The continuing shortages of World War I meant that in January 1917 many passenger services were to be cut to give more resources to the war effort . The railways were slow to recover from the wartime hardships , and in 1921 there were six passenger trains to and from Amlwch , and only 18 single trips by the motor train . 
 = = = 1923 – 1946 : London , Midland and Scottish Railway = = = 
 In 1923 Britain 's numerous railway companies were grouped into the " Big Four " , and the LNWR 's assets became part of the London , Midland and Scottish Railway ( LMS ) . 
 Holland Arms ' functionality as a staff station was only useful for the Red Wharf Bay branch , but a signalman was still required for all Amlwch services . In about 1925 , LMS introduced a switching @-@ out system that could turn the Gaerwen @-@ Holland Arms and Holland Arms @-@ Llangefni sections into one long section . This was of particular advantage in early mornings and evenings , when the only services were on the Amlwch line . 
 The July 1924 timetable showed eight passenger trains each way between Amlwch and Gaerwen , with the Red Wharf Bay railmotor operating to Llangefni three times a day . The extra Thursday service to Llangefni for the market was still included . By the summer of 1929 , there were eight trains from Gaerwen to Amlwch , and seven in the other direction . One train to and from Amlwch no longer ran Thursdays , replaced with a second two return trip to Llangefni , operated by the railmotor . The loop at Llangwyllog now saw three pairs of passenger trains passing on weekdays , while the daily freight train would be shunted into sidings at Llangefni and Llanerchymedd to make way . Motor train services were back up to 24 single trips a day , including the Red Wharf Bay services . 
 The Great Depression brought a number of cutbacks to Anglesey 's railways . The withdrawal of passenger services on the Red Wharf Bay branch in September 1930 affected the Amlwch line , as the motor train that operated the extra Gaerwen – Llangefni services was withdrawn . Amlwch 's engine shed was closed on 14 September 1931 , with all trains being worked from Bangor . As the economy recovered , the number of Gaerwen – Amlwch services was increased . The summer of 1938 saw ten down and eight up trains for passengers , with eleven each way on Saturdays . 
 = = = 1946 – 1993 : British Railways / British Rail = = = 
 A dam was built across the Cefni river north of Llangefni in the late 1940s to increase the water supply available to the island . The new reservoir , Llyn Cefni , crossed the railway 's trackbed , and a bridge was built to support it . A second reservoir , Llyn Alaw , was formed adjacent to the railway north of Llanerchymedd in the 1960s , but did not interfere with the line 's alignment . 
 Passenger numbers at Holland Arms station had fallen since the end of passenger services on the Red Wharf Bay branch . The branch was closed to all traffic in 1950 , and Holland Arms closed on 4 August 1952 . 
 Under British Rail , many passenger services on the Amlwch branch operated through to Bangor , removing the need to change trains at Gaerwen . An early three @-@ coach British United Traction ( A.E.C. ) diesel multiple unit train was trialled on the line in May 1953 . The train was economical in fuel use , and did not require a fireman , but train passengers and crew complained at the very rough ride - rattling windows a particular complaint . As part of British Rail 's Modernisation Plan , Derby Lightweight DMUs were introduced three years later . A 1956 brochure advertised day return tickets from Bangor to Amlwch for <unk> , or Llangefni for 11d . Steam engines continued to be used for freight trains , and for extra workings such as Saturday trains . Steam returned for all passenger trains in the summers of 1963 and 1964 due to a shortage of DMUs . 
 A bromine extraction plant was opened in Amlwch in 1953 by Associated Ethyl ( soon renamed Associated Octel , and later part of the Great Lakes Chemical Corporation ) . Chlorine produced at a plant in Ellesmere Port was brought by rail to Amlwch , which was used to extract bromine from sea water . The resulting ethylene dibromide was taken from Amlwch by rail as well . The company built a light railway through the town to Amlwch station , and a marshalling yard for exchanging freight wagons . 
 = = = = Run down and closure = = = = 
 The line stopped carrying passengers on 5 December 1964 , as part of the rationalisation known as the Beeching Axe . All stations were closed , and all goods yards , passing loops and sidings removed , except the marshalling yard for the Octel freight . Octel 's freight traffic totaled 70 @,@ 000 tons annually , and the railway was kept in order to serve this traffic . Local freight services ceased , and the electric ticket system was withdrawn . Only one train was permitted to be on the branch at a time , but this was sufficient for Octel 's requirements . The double junction at Gaerwen was also remodelled . Once the freight trains were being worked by diesel locomotives , arrangements were made for the British Rail engines to operate all the way to the plant . 
 Amlwch station was demolished when the adjacent road was rebuilt . A nearby warehouse now houses a visitor centre with a model railway and exhibitions . Llanerchymedd station became property of the local council , and is currently in a dilapidated condition . Other stations passed into private ownership . 
 A spur was built near Rhosgoch to facilitate the building of an oil tank farm in the 1970s . This was built to receive oil from tankers moored offshore in the deep waters off Amlwch , before it was pumped to the Stanlow Refinery in Cheshire . The site was decommissioned after a short life , but the short spur remains . 
 A Class 31 locomotive , number <unk> , was named ' Amlwch Freighter ' / ' <unk> <unk> Amlwch ' in September 1986 at the Associated Octel plant . At this point , 33 years after the opening of the Octel plant at Amlwch , 2 million tonnes of traffic had been conveyed from their freight terminal . A scale model was produced by Lima with this nameplate affixed . The name was removed in March 1990 and transferred to the Class 47 locomotive <unk> , which was renumbered <unk> for a period , retaining the name . This locomotive was later rebuilt as a Class 57 , and renamed ' The Hood ' by its new operator , Virgin Trains . 
 A few special passenger services were subsequently operated , notably in 1969 , 1983 and 1992 / 93 . In 1993 , Octel 's daily freight traffic was transferred to road haulage , for safety reasons , and traffic thus ceased on the line . The Octel plant closed in 2003 , and has since been demolished . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 The ACR hired rolling stock from the LNWR for their inaugural services . When Dickson was operating the line from 1866 to 1868 , he used the following engines : 
 From 1868 , the LNWR provided rolling stock again , until their acquisition of the line in 1876 . The following types of engine have been noted as being used on the line since : 
 Diesel engines were used for the Octel freight after British Rail 's withdrawal of steam engines . A <unk> website notes Class 24 , Class 40 , and Class 47 as having been used for the freight services , as well as the 1983 special passenger services . The 1992 specials used Class 101 DMU units , and the 1993 special used Class 20 and Class 37 engines . 
 = = Preservation and redevelopment attempts = = 
 The continuation of Octel Freight Traffic until 1993 ensured that not only was the trackbed kept whole , but the majority of the rail infrastructure was still in situ . As such , the Amlwch line was well suited to preservation as a heritage railway , or see a return of mainline services . The continued role of Llangefni as an administrative and commercial centre led British Rail and Gwynedd County Council to consider restoring passenger services between Llangefni and Bangor in the late 1980s , but the idea was turned down . 
 = = = Isle of Anglesey Railways Ltd = = = 
 After a public meeting in Amlwch to gauge local support , Isle of Anglesey Railways Ltd ( IoAR ) was established in 1991 with the aim of restoring passenger services to the line . Special trains ran from Bangor to a temporary station at Amlwch on the Spring and August bank holidays of 1992 , and the 125th anniversary of the line 's opening ( a total of eight return trips ) . Pathfinder Tours subsequently ran an excursion from York to Llandudno and Amlwch in October 1993 . The project 's viability was discussed with the Welsh Development Agency and Anglesey District Council , followed by negotiations in July 1993 with Railfreight Distribution to purchase the line . Octel offered a portion of its private railway for the building of a new station at Amlwch . IoAR initially hoped to start passenger services between Amlwch and Llangefni as early as 1994 . 
 The privatisation of British Rail in the mid @-@ 1990s disrupted this process . The post @-@ privatisation owner Railtrack 's asking price of £ 300 @,@ 000 in 1996 required seeking grants from the European Commission . With no traffic or maintenance , the line started to become overgrown . In the meantime , Sustrans proposed the railway should be converted into a cycle route , similar to the <unk> <unk> cycle route which follows the path of the former <unk> Railway from Caernarfon to Afon Wen . In 1998 – 99 surveys of the railway bridges showed their condition to be " better than expected " . A petition of 7 @,@ 000 signatures was presented to Anglesey County Council in January 1999 , calling for better cycling facilities on the island , and particularly a cycle path from Amlwch to Gaerwen . Support for the railway option was demonstrated by a charter train named the Lein Amlwch Venturer , hauled by <unk> King Edward I , which ran from Crewe to Gaerwen junction on Saturday 23 January . 
 Anglesey County Council was planning to buy the track in support of the railway in 2000 , but was later reported as having withdrawn its support for IoAR in May 2001 . Five months later Railtrack was placed in administration , and ownership of Britain 's railways ( including the Amlwch line ) was transferred to Network Rail in October 2002 . 
 = = = Cycle route = = = 
 Tourism Partnership North Wales 's 2003 report was supportive of the possibility of implementing both a heritage railway and cycle route side by side . Anglesey County Council was considering both options again according to a 2005 report . The Managing Director of Anglesey County Council wrote a letter of support in principle to Anglesey Central Railway ( 2006 ) Ltd in January 2006 , however councillors voted in favour of a " cycle , walking and bridle path route " in March 2007 , contributing £ 5 @,@ 000 toward a feasibility study days before ACR ( 2006 ) Ltd were told that the lease of the railway from Network Rail had been approved . The Council voted in favour of a cycle route motion in October 2007 , and Network Rail informed ACR ( 2006 ) Ltd that the lease was on hold due to the council 's reversal of policy . The motion 's proposer stated that " high @-@ level negotiations " were taking place between Network Rail and cycle route advocates . A potential compromise was identified as using the Amlwch @-@ Llanerchymedd portion as a cycle route , and the Llanerchymedd @-@ Gaerwen portion as a railway . The General Secretary of ACR ( 2006 ) Ltd noted in early 2008 that until a lease is agreed , ACR ( 2006 ) Ltd cannot conduct any work on the line . Network Rail 's business plans from 2005 to 2007 made reference to proposals for the sale or lease of the line , but the 2008 business plan made no such reference , simply showing the line as non @-@ operational . 
 = = = Change of direction = = = 
 Local council elections were held in May 2008 , resulting in a change of leadership at Anglesey County Council . The County Council 's Economic Development Representative expressed his desire to see the railway line reopened at a meeting of Llangefni Town Council in November 2008 , an opinion echoed by a number of the town councillors . 80 % of correspondence to the Holyhead and Anglesey Mail on the topic during 2008 was in support of the railway proposal . 
 = = = 2009 status = = = 
 The line remains property of Network Rail , with Anglesey County Council a statutory <unk> on the future use of the route . The track is in a poor state of repair , with gorse bushes and small saplings growing between the tracks in some locations . Network Rail officially designated the branch " out of use " for operational purposes in January 2009 , after consultation with English Welsh & Scottish , who favoured its restoration to a working railway with the opportunity for freight traffic . 
 Sustrans announced renewed plans for a cycle route along 16 miles ( 26 km ) of the line ( the majority of its length ) on 5 March 2009 , along with a belief that the route can be used for both a cycle path and heritage railway . Planning applications are to be developed in cooperation with ACR Ltd , Anglesey County Council and Network Rail . 
 = = Reopening = = 
 In 2009 the Welsh Assembly Government asked Network Rail to conduct feasibility studies on two former track stretches in Wales , one of those being the line from Bangor to Llangefni . Councillor Clive McGregor was optimistic this could provide an economic stimulus for Anglesey , along with further proposals to extend passenger traffic between Llangefni and Amlwch . In 2011 Network Rail began work on gathering evidence for its study , beginning with cutting away vegetation on track sections to examine the condition of rails and track bedding . Its report was expected to be published in 2012 , before any business cases to reopen the lines could be developed . 
 The study , which started in January 2011 , began by assessing the condition of the line between Gaerwen and Llangefni . The track , bridges , associated earthworks , and the station at Llangefni were examined by engineers in order to decide whether they are still fit for purpose , or will need to be updated . With the alignment having succumbed to heavy encroachment from vegetation , an environmental report will have to be drawn up to decrease the potential damage that could be caused to wildlife . Mike Gallop , coordinating the project on behalf of Network Rail , warned that bringing back trains to the line would be " tough " . 
 The remainder of the line , between Llangefni and Amlwch , looks set to be preserved as a heritage railway , with Network Rail giving licence to Anglesey Central Railway Limited to begin clearing the overgrown line north of Llangefni . ACR started to clear vegetation from the line in Llangefni before Christmas 2012 . ACR Limited 's support group Lein Amlwch have also opened a small shop , cafe and heritage centre in Llanerchymedd 's station building which will be open during the summer months . 
 = George Bellew = 
 Sir George Rothe Bellew , KCB , KCVO , KStJ , FSA ( 13 December 1899 – 6 February 1993 ) , styled The Honourable after 1935 , was a long @-@ serving herald at the College of Arms in London . Educated at the University of Oxford , he was appointed Portcullis Pursuivant in 1922 . Having been Somerset Herald for 24 years , he was promoted to the office of Garter Principal King of Arms in 1950 , the highest heraldic office in England and Wales . He served in that capacity until his resignation in 1961 . As Garter , Bellew oversaw the funeral of George VI , proclaimed the late King 's daughter , Elizabeth II , as Queen and took a leading role in the organisation of her Coronation in 1953 . After his retirement , Bellew was Secretary of the Order of the Garter ( until 1974 ) and Knight Principal of the Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor ( until 1962 ) . He lived for many years at Dower House in Old Windsor , Berkshire , but later moved to Farnham and died in 1993 , aged 93 . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life and heraldic career before 1950 = = = 
 Born in Dublin , Ireland , on 13 December 1899 , Bellew was the son of the Hon. Richard Eustace Bellew by his second wife Gwendoline Marie Josephine , elder daughter of William Reginald Joseph Fitzherbert Herbert Huddleston of <unk> . His father was the younger son of the second Baron Bellew . Bellew 's elder brother , Edward Henry , inherited the barony ; because their father had died before inheriting the title , Bellew and his other siblings took the style of the son of a baron by a Royal Warrant of Precedence in 1935 . The same year , he married Ursula Kennard Cull ( died 1994 ) , eldest daughter of Anders Eric <unk> Cull ( died 1968 ) , a merchant banker and founder of Cull & Co . , of Warfield House , Berkshire , and had one son , Richard George Bellew ( born 1936 ) . 
 Following schooling at Wellington College , Bellew went up to Christ Church , Oxford . He arrived at the College of Arms in 1922 , when he was appointed Portcullis Pursuivant . After four years in that capacity , he was promoted to the office of Somerset Herald and went on to serve as the College ’ s registrar from 1935 to 1946 . His heraldic career was interrupted by World War II , when Bellew rose to the rank of Squadron Leader in the Royal Air Force Volunteer Reserve and was mentioned in despatches . Having spent 24 years as Somerset Herald , he succeeded Sir Algar Howard as Garter Principal King of Arms in 1950 , the highest position in the College of Arms and the leading herald in England and Wales . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 As Garter , Bellew was tasked with overseeing the State Funeral of George VI in 1952 , but many of the details had been prepared in advance . Along with officially proclaiming the King ’ s successor , Elizabeth II , he was also effectively the senior assistant to the Earl Marshal in organising the new Queen ’ s Coronation , a complex and demanding operation . He advocated ( in opposition to most of the Coronation Executive Committee ) the broadcast of the service on television and designed the heraldic statues which guarded Westminster Abbey ’ s doors during the ceremony — a " notable success " , according to The Independent . A Knight Bachelor since 1950 , he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order in 1953 in recognition for his service during the Coronation . 
 Bellew 's <unk> also witnessed changes to the fabric of the College of Arms . Although it had survived the Blitz , structural problems with the roof and brickwork forced the heralds to decide between leaving the College 's buildings on Queen Victoria Street or attempting expensive repairs . In 1954 , they approached the Ministry of Works to ask for financial assistance in the building work ; the Ministry agreed to cover half the cost . A successful public appeal for the remaining funds followed and the restoration work carried out . The College of Arms Trust was established in 1956 to oversee funds for the building 's maintenance . 
 Garter is ex officio the officer of arms of the Order of the Garter , England 's senior Order of Chivalry . The post of Secretary of the Order had been created in the early 20th century and had been held by courtiers since then , not always in friendly relations with other officers . In 1952 , Bellew and most of the chapter came to an agreement that a herald be appointed to the post ; after appealing to Sir Alan Lascelles , the Sovereign 's Private Secretary , the Queen agreed and Anthony Wagner was given the position . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Having served as Garter for 11 years , Bellew retired in 1961 and was succeeded by Anthony Wagner , then Richmond Herald . He then served as Secretary of the Order of the Garter until 1974 , which included responsibility for the Orders ' finances , and received a third knighthood when he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath . He was a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries and Knight of the Order of St John . Having been Knight Principal of the Imperial Society of Knights Bachelor from 1957 to 1962 , he was its Deputy Knight Principal from then until 1971 . In the aftermath of World War II , he and his wife purchased Woodside Dower House in Old Windsor , Berkshire ; then a ruin , he took a keen interest in renovating it and hosting parties there . While Secretary of the Order of the Garter , he entertained friends and colleagues at the house after the order 's annual service in June . In later years , he lived at The Grange in Farnham and died on 6 February 1993 . 
 = = Legacy and appraisal = = 
 Bellew 's successor as Garter , Sir Anthony Wagner , referred to him in his 1988 memoirs ; he wrote that Bellew seemed " in early years a temperamental , combative Irishman not easy to live with though always possessed of great feeling for ceremonial and heraldic design and a skillful pen and pencil . In later years I have found him ever more charming " . According to The Independent , Bellew enjoyed creating colourful grants of arms , drew inspiration from medieval heraldry and allowed multi @-@ coloured wreaths to be used and adorned with badges for the first time in English heraldry . As Garter , he managed the financial affairs of the College well , maintaining " a firm hand on the tiller " , and , when faced with the task of organising the Coronation , his knowledge of tradition was complemented by his eye for design : " At heart he was a designer , an artist and a perfectionist in all things " , remarks his obituary in The Times . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Bellew , Sir George Rothe ( n.d. ) . St. George 's Chapel , Windsor and the History of the Most Noble Order of the Garter . London : Pitkin <unk> . OCLC <unk> 
 — ( 1960 ) . The Story of Salisbury Hall . W. J. Goldsmith . OCLC <unk> 
 — ( 1971 ) . Britain 's Kings and Queens . London : Pitkin <unk> . ISBN <unk> . OCLC <unk> 
 = = Likenesses = = 
 Sir George Rothe Bellew by Cecil Beaton , bromide print on white card mount , 1953 73 / 8 in . × 71 / 2 in . ( 186 mm × 191 mm ) . Held in the Photographs Collection at the National Portrait Gallery ( given by Cecil Beaton , 1968 ) . 
 = St. Michael 's Golden @-@ Domed Monastery = 
 St. Michael 's Golden @-@ Domed Monastery ( Ukrainian : <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> ’ kyi <unk> <unk> ) is a functioning monastery in Kiev , the capital of Ukraine . The monastery is located on the right bank of the Dnieper River on the edge of a bluff northeast of the Saint Sophia Cathedral . The site is located in the historic administrative Uppertown and overlooks the city 's historical commercial and merchant quarter , the Podil neighbourhood . 
 Originally built in the Middle Ages by Sviatopolk II Iziaslavych , the monastery comprises the Cathedral itself , the Refectory of St. John the Divine , built in 1713 , the Economic Gates , constructed in 1760 and the monastery 's bell tower , which was added c . 1716 – 1719 . The exterior of the structure was rebuilt in the Ukrainian Baroque style in the 18th century while the interior remained in its original Byzantine style . The original cathedral was demolished by the Soviet authorities in the 1930s , but was reconstructed and opened in 1999 following Ukrainian independence in 1991 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 11th to 19th centuries = = = 
 Some scholars do not believe that Prince Iziaslav <unk> , whose Christian name was Demetrius , first built the Saint Demetrius 's Monastery and Church in the Uppertown of Kiev near Saint Sophia Cathedral in the 1050s . Half a century later , his son , Sviatopolk II Iziaslavych , is recorded as commissioning a monastery church ( 1108 – 1113 ) dedicated to his own patron saint , Michael the Archangel . One reason for building the church may have been Svyatopolk 's recent victory over the nomadic <unk> , as Michael the Archangel was considered a patron of warriors and victories . In 1906 , a medieval hoard of silver and gold jewellery was discovered in a metal casket on <unk> Street ( Street of the Three Saints ) , opposite the gates of St. Michael 's Golden @-@ Domed Monastery . Gold jewellery from the hoard is now in the Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York while the silver jewellery and two ingots are in the British Museum , London . The hoard is dated to the 11th @-@ 12th centuries and was probably hidden at the time of the Tartar invasions and the Sack of Kiev in 1240 . 
 The monastery was regarded as a family cloister of Svyatopolk 's family ; it was there that members of Svyatopolk 's family were buried . ( This is in contrast to the <unk> Monastery patronized by his rival , Vladimir Monomakh ) . The cathedral domes were probably the first in Kievan Rus to be gilded , a practice that became regular with the passage of time and acquired for the monastery the nickname of " golden @-@ domed " or " golden @-@ roofed " , depending on the translation . 
 During the Mongol invasion in 1240 , the monastery is believed to have been damaged seriously . The Mongols damaged the cathedral and removed its gold @-@ plated domes . The cloister subsequently fell into disrepair and there is no documentation of it for the following two and a half centuries . By 1496 , the monastery had been revived and its name was changed from St. Demetrius ' Monastery to St. Michael 's after the cathedral church built by Sviatopolk II . After numerous restorations and enlargements during the sixteenth century , it gradually became one of the most popular and wealthiest monasteries in Ukraine . In 1620 , <unk> <unk> made it the residence of the renewed Orthodox metropolitan of Kiev , and in 1633 , Isaya <unk> was named a supervisor of the monastery . 
 The monastery enjoyed the patronage of hetmans and other benefactors throughout the years . The chief magnet for pilgrims were the relics of Saint Barbara , alleged to have been brought to Kiev from Constantinople in 1108 by Sviatopolk II Iziaslavych 's wife and kept in a silver reliquary donated by Hetman Ivan Mazepa . Although most of the monastery grounds were secularized in the late eighteenth century , as many as 240 monks resided there in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . The monastery served as the residence of the bishop of Chernigov after 1800 . A precentor 's school was located on the monastery grounds ; many prominent composers , such as Kyrylo Stetsenko and <unk> <unk> , either studied or taught at the school . 
 In 1870 , about 100 @,@ 000 pilgrims paid tribute to St. Barbara at St. Michael 's Monastery . Before the Russian Revolution in 1917 , rings manufactured and blessed at St. Michael 's Monastery , known as St. Barbara 's rings , were very popular among the citizens of Kiev . They usually served as good luck charms and , according to popular beliefs , occasionally protected against witchcraft but were also effective against serious illnesses and sudden death . These beliefs reference the facts that the Monastery was not affected by the plague epidemics in 1710 and 1770 and cholera epidemics of the nineteenth century . 
 = = = Demolition of the cathedral and belltower = = = 
 During the first half of the 1930s , various Soviet publications questioned the known historical facts regarding the age of the Cathedral . The publications stressed that the medieval building had undergone major reconstructions and that little of the original Byzantine @-@ style cathedral was preserved . This wave of questioning led to the demolition of the monastery and its replacement with a new administrative centre for the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic ( previously located in the city of Kharkiv ) . Before its demolition ( June 8 – July 9 , 1934 ) , the structure was carefully studied by T.M. <unk> and K. <unk> from the recently purged and re @-@ organized Institute of Material Culture of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences . On the basis of their survey , the cathedral was declared to belong primarily to the Ukrainian Baroque style , rather than to the twelfth century as was previously thought , and thus did not merit preservation due to its lack of historical and artistic value . This conclusion backed up the Soviet authorities ' plans to demolish the entire monastery . Local historians , archaeologists , and architects agreed to the monastery 's demolition , although reluctantly . Only one professor , Mykola <unk> , refused to sign the demolition act ; he later died in a Soviet prison . 
 On June 26 , 1934 , work began on the removal of the twelfth century Byzantine mosaics . It was conducted by the Mosaic Section of the Leningrad Academy of Fine Arts . Specialists were forced to work in haste on account of the impending demolition and were thus unable to complete the entire project . Despite the care and attention shown during the removal of the mosaics from the cathedral 's walls , the relocated mosaics cannot be relied upon as being absolutely authentic . 
 The remaining mosaics , covering an area of 45 square metres ( 485 sq ft ) , were partitioned between the State Hermitage Museum , the Tretyakov Gallery , and the State Russian Museum . The other remaining mosaics were installed on the second floor of the Saint Sophia Cathedral , where they were not on display for tourists . Those items that remained in Kiev were seized by the Nazis during World War II and taken to Germany . After the war ended , they fell into American hands and were later returned to Moscow . 
 During the spring of 1935 , the golden domes of the monastery were pulled down . The cathedral 's silver royal gates , Mazepa 's reliquary ( weighing two <unk> of silver ) and other valuables were sold abroad or simply destroyed . Master <unk> 's five @-@ tier iconostasis was removed ( and later destroyed ) from the cathedral as well . St. Barbara 's relics were transferred to the Church of the Tithes and upon that church 's demolition , to the St Volodymyr 's Cathedral in 1961 . 
 During the spring @-@ summer period of 1936 , the shell of the cathedral and belltower were blown up with dynamite . The monastery 's Economic Gate ( <unk> Brama ) and the monastic walls were also destroyed . After the demolition , a thorough search for valuables was carried out by the NKVD on the site . The resulting empty plot was joined with <unk> Square , renamed <unk> Square ( Governmental Square ) and was designated as the new city center and parade grounds . Soviet authorities then commissioned a competition how to best fill the empty plot ; most architects , including <unk> <unk> , suggested a huge Lenin statue . The square itself was planned as a rectangle with huge governmental buildings on the perimeter . Four pillars were planned with statues of workers , peasants and revolutionaries with flags standing on them . Some architects suggested to demolish the statue of Bohdan Khmelnytsky in front of the Saint Sophia Cathedral and the Cathedral itself . 
 The only building completed on the former monastery grounds before World War II currently houses the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . The construction of the second building ( " the capital center " ) , planned to be built on the site where the Cathedral had once stood , was delayed in the spring of 1938 as the authorities were not satisfied with the submitted design . This building failed to materialize . Some time after demolition , the site where the former cathedral used to be located was transformed into a sport complex , including tennis and volleyball courts . The Refectory ( <unk> ) of St. John the Divine was used for changing rooms . 
 = = = Preservation and reconstruction = = = 
 In August 1963 , the preserved refectory of the demolished monastery without its Baroque cupola was designated a monument of architecture of the Ukrainian SSR . In 1973 , the Kiev City Council established several " archaeological preservation zones " within the city ; these included the territory surrounding the monastery . However , the vacant site of the demolished cathedral was excluded from the proposed Historic @-@ Archaeological Park @-@ Museum , The Ancient Kiev , developed by architect A. M. <unk> and consultants M. V. <unk> and P. P. <unk> . 
 During the 1970s , Ukrainian architects I. Melnyk , A. <unk> , V. <unk> , and engineer A. <unk> worked out a plan of reconstruction of the St. Michael 's Monastery . However , these plans were only considered after the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 . 
 After Ukraine regained independence in 1991 , the demolition of the monastery was deemed a crime and voices started to be heard calling for the monastery 's full @-@ scale reconstruction as an important part of the cultural heritage of the Ukrainian people . These plans were approved and carried out in 1997 – 1998 , whereupon the cathedral and belltower were transferred to the Ukrainian Orthodox Church - Kiev Patriarchate . Yuriy <unk> , the chief archaeologist for the site , said that more than 260 valuable ancient artifacts were recovered during excavations of the site before reconstruction . In addition , a portion of the ancient cathedral , still intact , was uncovered ; this today makes up a part of the current cathedral 's crypt . 
 With support of the Kiev city authorities , architect @-@ restorer Y. <unk> and others restored the western part of the stone walls . The belltower was restored next and became an observation platform . Instead of the original chiming clock , a new electronic one with hands and a set of chimes ( a total of 40 ) was installed from which today the melodies of famous Ukrainian composers can be heard . The Cathedral was reconstructed last and decorated with a set of wooden baroque icons , copies of former mosaics and frescoes , and new works of art by Ukrainian artists . 
 The newly rebuilt St. Michael 's Golden @-@ Domed Cathedral was officially opened on May 30 , 1999 . However , interior decorations , mosaics , and frescoes were not completed until May 28 , 2000 . The side chapels were consecrated to SS . Barbara and Catherine in 2001 . During the following four years , 18 out of 29 mosaics and other objets d 'art from the original cathedral were returned from Moscow after years of tedious discussion between Ukrainian and Russian authorities . However , by the end of 2006 , the remaining frescoes of the monastery are going to be transferred from the Hermitage Museum in Saint Petersburg to Kiev . They are placed in a special preserve that is owned by the municipality rather than the church body . 
 = = = Historic pictures = = = 
 = = Featured landmarks = = 
 = = = St. Michael Golden @-@ Domed Cathedral = = = 
 The religious architecture of St. Michael 's Golden @-@ Domed Monastery incorporates elements that have evolved from styles prevalent during Byzantine and Baroque periods . The St. Michael 's Golden @-@ Domed Cathedral ( Ukrainian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is the monastery 's main church , built in 1108 – 1113 at the behest of Sviatopolk II Iziaslavych . The cathedral was the largest of three churches of St. Demetrius Monastery . 
 The ancient cathedral was modeled on the Assumption Cathedral of the Kiev Monastery of the Caves . It used the Greek cross plan prevalent during the time of the Kievan Rus , six pillars , and three apses . A miniature church , likely a baptistery , adjoined the cathedral from the south . There was also a tower with a staircase leading to the choir loft ; it was incorporated into the northern part of the narthex rather than protruding from the main block as was common at the time . It is likely that the cathedral had a single dome , although two smaller domes might have topped the tower and baptistery . The interior decoration was lavish as its high @-@ quality shimmering mosaics , probably the finest in Kievan Rus , still testify . 
 When the medieval churches of Kiev were rebuilt in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries in the Ukrainian Baroque style , the cathedral was enlarged and renovated dramatically . By 1746 , it had acquired a new baroque exterior , while maintaining its original Byzantine interior . Six domes were added to the original single dome , but the added pressure on the walls was counteracted by the construction of buttresses . The remaining medieval walls , characterised by alternative layers of limestone and flat brick , were covered with stucco . Ivan <unk> @-@ <unk> was responsible for window surrounds and stucco ornamentation . 
 Inside the church , an intricate five @-@ tier icon screen funded by Hetman Pavlo <unk> and executed by <unk> <unk> from Chernigov was installed in 1718 . During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , almost all of the original Byzantine mosaics and frescoes on the interior walls were painted over . Some restoration work on the mosaics and frescoes that remained unpainted was carried out towards the end of the nineteenth century . However , there were no major and serious investigations of the walls done , so it is possible that medieval frescoes or mosaics were preserved under the newer coats of plaster . 
 = = = Refectory of St. John the Divine = = = 
 The refectory of the monastery is a rectangular brick building which contains a dining hall for the brethren as well as several kitchens and pantries . The Church of John the Theologian adjoins it from the east . The outside is segmented by pilasters and displays window surrounds reminiscent of traditional Eastern Orthodox church architecture . The refectory was erected in 1713 , taking the place of the original wooden refectory . Its interior was overhauled in 1827 and 1837 and the restoration work was undertaken from 1976 to 1981 . 
 = Mana Ashida = 
 Mana Ashida ( <unk> <unk> , Ashida Mana , born 23 June 2004 ) is a Japanese child actress , <unk> and singer . Ashida 's first appearance was in Asahi Broadcasting Corporation 's ABC Short Movie 2 , though she rose to prominence after acting in the television drama Mother . She became the youngest lead star in Japanese drama history when she starred in Sayonara Bokutachi no Youchien . She was the youngest lead actress in a television serial drama by appearing in the serial drama Marumo no Okite in the spring of 2011 . She also appeared in Japanese films such as Confessions and Usagi Drop . 
 Ashida and her co @-@ actor Fuku Suzuki sang the 2011 hit song " Maru Maru Mori Mori " , the theme song for the television drama Marumo no Okite . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Ashida made her debut appearance in Asahi Broadcasting Corporation 's ABC Short Movie 2 . <unk> in 2009 . Her first film was the live @-@ action film adaptation of the manga Hanbun no Tsuki ga Noboru Sora in 2010 . In the same year , she starred in the film Confessions , as Manami <unk> . She also appeared in the film Ghost : In Your Arms Again , a Japanese remake of the 1990 film Ghost . For her role in this film , she became one of the winners of the " Rookie of the Year " Award at the 34th Japan Academy Awards . 
 In addition to acting , Ashida did voice @-@ over roles for foreign films released in Japan . She voiced Agnes in the Japanese version of the film Despicable Me , and she was the voice of the young Fang Deng in the Japanese release of Aftershock . 
 = = = Late 2010 – early 2011 : Rise to popularity = = = 
 Ashida rose to prominence after appearing in the award @-@ winning television drama Mother , as Reina <unk> , a young child abused by her mother . She won awards such as the Best Supporting Actress at the 14th Nikkan Sports Drama Grand Prix and the Special Award at the 4th Tokyo Drama Awards for her role . At the age of 6 , Ashida became the youngest lead actress in a Japanese television drama in the special television drama @-@ cum @-@ movie Sayonara Bokutachi no Youchien in 2011 . In the spring drama season , she became the youngest actress in a drama series when she starred in the television drama Marumo no Okite . She co @-@ starred in this series with the then @-@ 6 years old actor Fuku Suzuki . The series received a viewership rating of 23 @.@ 9 % for its last episode , and an average rating of 15 @.@ 48 % for its entire run . 
 She made her singing debut with Suzuki . They sang Marumo no Okite 's theme song , " Maru – Maru – Mori @-@ Mori ! ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> ! ) " , under the temporary group name of Kaoru to Tomoki , <unk> Mook ( <unk> 、 <unk> , Kaoru to Tomoki , tama ni <unk> ) . This song , recorded into a single , was released on 25 May 2011 by Universal Music and debuted third on the Oricon charts , which made the duo the youngest group in history to achieve a top @-@ 10 position on the Oricon charts . The previous record was set by the group <unk> ( <unk> ) in 2006 . They also participated in the summer edition of the FNS Music Festival , which was broadcast on 6 August 2011 on the Fuji Television network . On 14 August 2011 , Ashida appeared in the NHK music television program Music Japan with Suzuki , actress Nozomi Ohashi and actor <unk> Kato . It was the first time all three appeared in the same show , in its segment entitled " MJ Summer Holidays : Children 's Special " . 
 In early 2011 , Ashida appeared in several Japanese films , including Inu to Anata no Monogatari , and Hankyū Densha . 
 = = = Late 2011 : Solo music and variety host debut = = = 
 Ashida co @-@ starred with actor Kenichi Matsuyama in the manga adaptation Usagi Drop . She played the main character Rin , and was widely praised for her performance . The film 's director , Sabu , praised her , saying that her laughter " was always echoing throughout the set , creating a peaceful atmosphere inside the set " . The Japan Times reviewer Mark Schilling said that she " seamlessly accomplishes her evolution from forlorn waif to perky if unusually perceptive kid , while effortlessly charming everyone . " . Mana Ashida won the " Best Newcomer " award at the 54th Blue Ribbon Awards . She was the youngest person to receive this award , beating the 1983 record set by actress Tomoyo Harada . 
 In October 2011 , Ashida began co @-@ hosting the NTV variety and talk show <unk> no <unk> with the show 's long @-@ time hosts , Masami <unk> and Asako Ito . This made her the youngest regular host of a talk or variety show . 
 On 15 September 2011 , it was announced that Ashida would make her solo music debut with Universal Music . She released her first single with them in October 2011 , and her debut album in late 2011 . The album contained songs that " Mama ( Mana 's mother ) wants Mana @-@ chan to sing " . Her official profile on Universal Music 's website was unveiled during the announcement . The single , a lively dance piece with a cheerful rhythm and similar to Maru – Maru – Mori @-@ Mori ! , was entitled " <unk> Nichiyōbi : Gyu Gyu Good Day ! " ( <unk> ～ Gyu Gyu <unk> ！ ～ ) . The single was released in Japan on 26 October 2011 , and was used in a commercial for Seven & I Holdings Co . It debuted at the 4th position on the Oricon weekly charts . This made Mana Ashida the youngest solo artist to rank in the Oricon weekly <unk> charts at 7 years and 4 months old , breaking the previous record of 13 years old set by Kumiko Goto in 1987 . 
 Ashida 's debut album , entitled Happy Smile ! , was released in Japan on 23 November 2011 . It debuted at the 8th position on the Oricon weekly charts , making Mana Ashida the youngest artist , at 7 years 5 months old , to have an album in the top 10 position . She beat the previous record of 13 years and 8 months set in 1974 by Canadian singer Rene <unk> . 
 Ashida and Suzuki became the youngest participants on the annual Kōhaku Uta Gassen singing competition by participating in its 62nd edition . 
 = = = 2012 – present = = = 
 Ashida voiced the female lead character of Annie in the Japanese anime film adaptation of the Magic Tree House series in the first role in a 2012 film . She performed the theme song of the anime series Jewelpet Kira ☆ Deco ! . The song , entitled " Zutto Zutto <unk> " , was also used in the 2012 anime film Jewelpet the Movie : Sweets Dance Princess . Ashida also appeared in the film , as Princess Mana . The song was released as a single on 16 May 2012 , and reached number 17 on the Oricon Weekly Singles Charts . 
 Ashida starred as Miu Kinoshita , the daughter of a single father who suffered from juvenile Alzheimer 's disease , in Fuji Television 's summer drama series Beautiful Rain . She also sang its theme song , entitled " Ame ni Negai o " . Written by singer Yumi Matsutoya , Ame ni Negai o was the first drama theme song Mana performed solo . The single was released in Japan on 1 August 2012 . 
 On 27 December 2012 , she held her first solo concert at the <unk> Shinagawa General Citizen Hall in Tokyo . Ashida made her Hollywood debut playing the role of young Mako Mori in the 2013 film Pacific Rim . She auditioned for the role in October 2011 , when she reportedly impressed the judges with her rich expressiveness . 
 In 2014 , Ashida starred in the television series Ashita , Mama ga Inai as Post , a child abandoned at birth at a baby hatch . Her performance in this television series was highly regarded , with 50 @.@ 8 <unk> of viewers expressing high satisfaction with her performance in a survey carried out by Oricon . In 2015 , she starred in Rugged ! as a 10 @-@ year @-@ old company president in her first lead role in a NHK television drama . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ashida was born on 23 June 2004 in Nishinomiya , Hyogo Prefecture . She is commonly nicknamed Mana @-@ chan , which is a combination of her given name and the Japanese honorific used when addressing children ( <unk> ) . Ashida revealed that she is a fan of K @-@ pop group Kara . She has said that she was " hooked on cycling a unicycle " , and she reads over 60 books per month . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Hanbun no Tsuki ga Noboru Sora ( 2010 ) as Mirai Natsume 
 Confessions ( 2010 ) as Manami <unk> 
 Ghost : In Your Arms Again ( 2010 ) as the child ghost 
 Despicable Me ( 2010 ) as the voice of Agnes in the Japanese version of the film 
 Inu to Anata no Monogatari ( 2011 ) as Mana 
 Hankyū Densha ( 2011 ) as Ami Hagiwara 
 Aftershock ( 2010 ) as the Japanese voice of young Fang Deng in the film 's Japan release . 
 Usagi Drop ( 2011 ) as Rin Kaga 
 Magic Tree House ( 2012 ) as the voice of Annie . 
 Liar Game : Saisei ( 2012 ) as cool Alice 
 Jewelpet the Movie : Sweets Dance Princess ( 2012 ) as Princess Mana 
 <unk> no Shiro ( 2012 ) as Chidori 
 Pacific Rim ( 2013 ) as Mako Mori in her childhood 
 Despicable Me 2 ( 2013 ) as the voice of Agnes in the Japanese version of the film 
 <unk> ( 2013 ) as Toyo Shibata in her childhood 
 <unk> ( 2014 ) as Kotoko <unk> 
 The Peanuts Movie ( 2015 ) as the voice of the Little Red @-@ Haired Girl in the Japanese version of the film . 
 = = = Television dramas = = = 
 ABC Short Movie 2 : <unk> ( 2009 , ABC ) 
 <unk> ! <unk> ( 2009 , WOWOW ) 
 <unk> <unk> ! ! ( 2010 , TBS , episode 3 ) 
 Mother ( 14 April – 23 June 2010 , NTV ) – Reina <unk> ( Tsugumi ) 
 Toilet no Kamisama ( 5 January 2011 , MBS , based on Kana <unk> 's song " Toilet no Kamisama " ) – Kana <unk> ( childhood ) 
 Gō ( 2011 , NHK ) – Chacha ( Childhood ) , Sen 
 Sayonara Bokutachi no Youchien ( 30 March 2011 , NTV ) – Kanna Yamazaki 
 Marumo no Okite ( 24 April – 3 July 2011 , CX ) – Kaoru Sasakura 
 <unk> no <unk> e ( 10 July 2011 , CX , episode 1 ) – Kaoru Sasakura ( guest ) 
 Kono Sekai no <unk> ni ( 5 August 2011 , NTV ) – Chizuru Hojo 
 <unk> ni Atta <unk> <unk> ( 2011 Summer Season Special ) ( 3 September 2011 , CX ) 
 Marumo no Okite Special ( 9 October 2011 , CX ) – Kaoru Sasakura 
 <unk> <unk> ( 16 October – 18 December 2011 , TBS ) – Haruka <unk> . 
 Alice in Liar Game ( 5 – 8 March 2012 , CX , Spinoff of Liar Game : Saisei film ) – Alice . 
 Beautiful Rain ( 1 July 2012 , CX ) – Miu Kinoshita 
 Ashita , Mama ga Inai ( 15 January 2014 - 12 March 2014 , NTV ) – Post 
 Gin <unk> ( 10 April 2014 - 5 June 2014 , NHK ) - <unk> Maho ( childhood ) 
 Hana @-@ chan no <unk> Soup ( 30 August 2014 , NTV ) - Hana <unk> 
 Rugged ! ( 21 February 2015 - 28 February 2015 , NHK ) - Noa Fukami 
 Our House ( 17 April 2016- , CX ) - Sakurako Ban 
 = = = Variety = = = 
 <unk> ( 1 October 2011 – 31 March 2012 , NTV ) – co @-@ host with <unk> Masami and Ito Asako 
 Music Japan ( 14 August 2011 , NHK ) 
 62nd Kōhaku Uta Gassen ( 31 December 2011 , NHK ) 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Ni no Kuni : <unk> <unk> no <unk> ( 2011 ) as voice of the Mysterious Girl ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 Happy Smile ! ( Universal Music , 23 November 2011 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 34th Japan Academy Awards : Rookie Of The Year for Ghost : In Your Arms Again 
 4th Tokyo Drama Awards : Special Award for Mother 
 65th The Television Drama Academy Awards : Best Newcomer for Mother 
 14th Nikkan Sports Drama Grand Prix : Best Supporting Actress for Mother 
 = = = 2011 = = = 
 2011 Tokyo Drama Awards : Best Performance by an Actress for Marumo no Okite and Sayonara Bokutachi no Youchien 
 53rd Japan Record Award : Special Award for Maru Maru Mori Mori ! 
 54th Blue Ribbon Awards : Best Newcomer for Hankyū Densha and Usagi Drop 
 = John McFall ( athlete ) = 
 John McFall ( born 25 April 1981 ) is a Cardiff @-@ based British Paralympic sprinter . In 2000 , when he was 19 years old , his right leg was amputated above the knee following a serious motorcycle accident . He took up running again after being fitted with a prosthesis , and participated in his first race in 2004 . The following year , he was selected to represent Great Britain at the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) European Championships , and took the bronze medal in the 200 metres ( sport class T42 ) . 
 In the 100 @-@ metre sprint , McFall subsequently won silver medals at the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) World Championships in 2006 and the Visa Paralympic World Cup in 2007 . On 6 July 2007 , he was placed third at the Meeting Gaz de France in Paris , part of the ÅF Golden League ; and achieved his personal best time ( as at 30 May 2008 ) in the 100 metres of 12 @.@ 70 seconds by winning silver at the Bayer International Track and Field Competition in Leverkusen on 10 August of that year . In his other main event , the 200 metres , he achieved a bronze in the 2006 IPC World Championships , and a gold at the 2007 Visa Paralympic World Cup with a competition record time of 26 @.@ 84 seconds . In September 2007 , McFall was champion in both the 100 metres and 200 metres at the International Wheelchair and Amputee Sports Federation ( IWAS ) World Wheelchair and Amputee Games . He was ranked first in the world in 2007 for the 200 metres , and second for the 100 metres . 
 McFall , who has been called one of the fastest men in the world over 100 metres and 200 metres in the class of above @-@ the @-@ knee amputees , competed for Great Britain in the 100 metres ( T42 ) at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , winning the bronze in a time of 13 @.@ 08 seconds . 
 = = Early years and education = = 
 John McFall was born on 25 April 1981 in <unk> , Surrey , in England . Between 1994 and 1997 he attended school at Millfield in Street , Somerset , where as a teenager he was a runner and hockey player . In August 2000 while on a gap @-@ year trip to Ko Samui , Thailand , after his A @-@ levels , he was involved in a serious motorcycle accident . While riding a moped , he went round a corner too quickly and skidded . He put out his leg to stop the motorcycle from falling over , and smashed his knee . The motorcycle then fell on him , resulting in the chain severing major blood vessels in his leg . He was flown to a hospital in Bangkok , but as he had damaged his lower right leg too severely , it had to be amputated above the knee after three days . Upon returning to the UK , he spent about seven weeks undergoing rehabilitation at Queen Mary 's Hospital in Roehampton , London . 
 McFall spent the next year at home , during which he took up mountain biking and climbing and worked as a fitness instructor at his local leisure centre . He also started running in the summer of 2003 as soon as he had his prosthesis fitted : " I love that sound of air rushing past your ears and the freedom of it . I missed that and I wanted to get that back . " After taking up his place at Swansea University to pursue a Bachelor of Science ( B.Sc. ) in sport and exercise science , he practised on the university 's running track and also trained with a local running club , the Swansea Harriers Athletic Club . However , he found running difficult and uncomfortable as his prosthesis was not designed for the purpose , and frequently got damaged . Upon making inquiries at the Federation of Disability Sport Wales ( <unk> ) , he was introduced to carbon @-@ fibre running " blades " . He graduated from university with an upper second @-@ class honours degree in summer 2004 , taking part in his first race at the Disability Sports Events ( DSE ) Championships in the UK the same year . 
 In September 2004 McFall embarked on postgraduate studies in sport and exercise science at the University of Wales Institute , Cardiff ( <unk> ) , subsequently graduating with a Master of Science ( M.Sc. ) . He took pre @-@ medical examinations in 2008 , and plans to retire from athletics after his 2009 season to train as a doctor . 
 = = Athletics career = = 
 With his sprinting prosthesis , McFall began training with an ex @-@ Paralympian . In early 2005 former Welsh international athlete Darrell Maynard took over as his coach and he began training with an able @-@ bodied squad . He was selected to represent Great Britain at the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) European Championships which took place in August 2005 in Espoo , Finland , a decision that greatly surprised him as he had not achieved the qualifying standard in races that summer . In the Championships , his first international competition , he took the bronze medal in the 200 metres and came fourth in the 100 @-@ metre race , having competed in sport class T42 ( single amputation above the knee ) . McFall was subsequently placed on a funding programme , enabling him to become a full @-@ time athlete . 
 At the end of January 2006 , two weeks before the Sparkassen Cup in Stuttgart , Germany , McFall 's car was stolen from the car park of the Welsh Institute of Sport where he worked part @-@ time and trained . His customized running prosthesis worth £ 3 @,@ 000 was in the boot . Following his appeal for the return of the prosthesis , he received a telephone call from two youths who said they " might be able to recover the lost leg " but asked " What is it worth ? " Infuriated , McFall refused to pay anything and asked the youths whether they had considered what being an amputee was like . After McFall agreed to take no further action against them , the youths anonymously returned the prosthesis to the Institute a week later . McFall went on to achieve a personal best of 8 @.@ 55 seconds in the 60 metres race , and 28 @.@ 21 seconds in the 200 metres on 4 February . 
 His next major races were in September 2006 at the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) World Championships , where he was awarded a silver medal in the 100 metres and a bronze in the 200 metres . The following year , on 13 May 2007 , McFall struck gold and achieved a competition record time of 26 @.@ 84 seconds in the 200 metres in his début at the Visa Paralympic World Cup in Manchester , England ; he also garnered a silver in the 100 metres . Subsequently , on 6 July 2007 , he was placed third at the Meeting Gaz de France in Paris , part of the ÅF Golden League . 
 McFall achieved his personal best time ( as at 30 May 2008 ) in the 100 metres of 12 @.@ 70 seconds by winning silver at the Bayer International Track and Field Competition in Leverkusen , Germany , on 10 August 2007 . Later that year he was champion in both the 100 metres and 200 metres at the International Wheelchair and Amputee Sports Federation ( IWAS ) World Wheelchair and Amputee Games in Chinese Taipei held from 9 to 19 September 2007 . In 2007 , he was ranked first in the world for the 200 metres , and second for the 100 metres . 
 McFall , who has been called " one of the fastest men in the world over 100m and 200m in the class of above @-@ the @-@ knee amputees " , made his Paralympic début for Great Britain in the 100 metres ( T42 ) at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing . After a false start , he took the bronze medal in 13 @.@ 08 seconds behind Canada 's Earle Connor ( 12 @.@ 32 seconds ) and Germany 's Heinrich <unk> ( 12 @.@ 98 seconds ) . Despite McFall 's plans to retire from athletics after his 2009 season to study medicine , he has not ruled out competing at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London . He has said , " It would be nice to do 2012 . I 'm interested in cycling and rowing , and I won 't qualify as a doctor till 2013 , so it wouldn 't be impossible . We 'll see . It 's that constant striving for excellence , the hunger to do more . " 
 Although McFall was born in England , he lives in Cardiff and competes professionally for Wales . He has said , " Wales has been very good to me and I want to put something back . So I 'm very proud to run for Wales . " According to him , his motorcycle accident " has been , in some ways , the best thing that ever happened to me . It 's given me a focus , a drive , every day is a new challenge . ... I always had a list of goals and aspirations which didn 't change after my accident – they just changed direction . Losing my leg has changed my life , but it hasn 't changed who I am . " 
 = = Medals = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Following the 2008 Paralympic Games , McFall returned to the UK from Beijing overland via the Trans @-@ Siberian Railway . He travelled from China to Mongolia and Russia , across Russia to the Ukraine , then to Hungary , Croatia and the Dalmatian coast . From there he took a ferry to Italy to meet his girlfriend in Rome . They then travelled by train across Italy and Austria , eventually returning to the UK around the middle of November 2008 . McFall hopes one day to take up his childhood plans of studying medicine , running across the Sahara Desert , crossing the Atlantic Ocean by rowboat , and obtaining a free @-@ fall parachute licence . 
 In his free time , McFall enjoys playing the guitar . 
 = HMS Prince of Wales ( 1902 ) = 
 HMS Prince of Wales was a Formidable @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . She was one of two ships of the <unk> or Queen sub @-@ class . Shortly after completion the ship was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet and then to the Atlantic in 1909 and Home Fleets three year later . Prince of Wales often served as a flagship during her career . 
 The ship was assigned to the Channel Fleet after the beginning of the First World War in August 1914 and ferried Royal Marines to Belgium that same month . In early 1915 , she was ordered to the Mediterranean to support Allied forces in the Dardanelles Campaign , but Prince of Wales only remained there briefly before she ordered to the Adriatic reinforce Italian forces there in case of an attack by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . The ship was ordered home in early 1917 and reduced to reserve upon her arrival . Prince of Wales served as an accommodation ship until she was listed for sale in late 1919 . The ship was sold for scrap in mid @-@ 1920 and broken up thereafter . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Director of Naval Construction , Sir William White , proposed a further pair of Formidables to round out a tactical squadron of eight ships for the 1900 Naval Programme . After some hesitation , the Admiralty agreed , despite the on @-@ going construction of the smaller and faster Duncan class . A controversy engendered by Rear @-@ Admiral Lord Charles Beresford , second @-@ in @-@ command of the Mediterranean Fleet , about the retention of obsolete ironclads in the fleet in mid @-@ 1900 was largely responsible for the decision . The two ships were virtually identical to the preceding London sub @-@ class of the Formidables and are generally considered part of the Formidable or London class , but the difference in the distribution of their 12 @-@ pounder ( 3 inches ( 76 mm ) ) guns , their lower displacement , and their later construction than the Duncans lead some authors to view them as constituting a Queen class separate from the Formidable and London classes . 
 Prince of Wales had an overall length of 431 feet 9 inches ( 131 @.@ 6 m ) , a beam of 75 feet ( 22 @.@ 9 m ) , and a mean draught of 27 feet 3 inches ( 8 @.@ 3 m ) at deep load . She displaced 14 @,@ 140 long tons ( 14 @,@ 370 t ) at normal load and 15 @,@ 380 long tons ( 15 @,@ 630 t ) at deep load , some 550 long tons ( 559 t ) lighter than the last of the <unk> , HMS Venerable . At deep load the ship had a metacentric height of 4 @.@ 27 feet ( 1 @.@ 30 m ) . Prince of Wales had a complement of 747 officers and ratings when she was completed in 1904 . 
 The ship was powered by two 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller , which produced a total of 15 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 000 kW ) , using steam provided by 20 Belleville boilers with economizers . The boilers had a working pressure of 300 psi ( 2 @,@ 068 kPa ; 21 kgf / cm2 ) . She was the last British battleship built with Belleville boilers as they had proven problematic and uneconomical in earlier ships . The Formidables were designed to reach a speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) and Prince of Wales slightly exceeded this on her sea trials on 8 February 1908 , reaching 18 @.@ 57 knots ( 34 @.@ 39 km / h ; 21 @.@ 37 mph ) . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 950 long tons ( 1 @,@ 981 t ) of coal , enough to steam 5 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 000 km ; 6 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament and armour = = = 
 The Formidable @-@ class ships ' main armament consisted of four breech @-@ loading ( BL ) BL 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Mk IX guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . Each gun was provided with 80 rounds . The guns had a maximum range of 15 @,@ 150 yards ( 13 @,@ 850 m ) with their 850 @-@ pound ( 390 kg ) shells . Their secondary armament consisted of a dozen BL 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Mk VII guns on single mounts positioned in casemates amidships , six on each broadside . Eight of these were mounted on the main deck and the remainder on the upper deck ; the main @-@ deck guns were difficult to work in heavy weather . 200 rounds per gun were carried by the ship . They had a maximum range of approximately 12 @,@ 200 yards ( 11 @,@ 200 m ) with their 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) shells . Fourteen quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 12 @-@ pounder ( 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) ) 12 @-@ cwt guns were fitted for defence against torpedo boats . Four of these were on the main deck , one pair at each end of the ship and the remaining ten on the upper deck . Prince of Wales also carried four 3 @-@ pounder ( 1 @.@ 9 in ( 47 mm ) ) Hotchkiss guns , two in each fighting top and one on each turret roof . The ship was fitted with four submerged 18 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes , two on each broadside abreast the barbettes . 
 The Formidables ' armour scheme was similar to that of the <unk> , although , unlike in the earlier ships , the waterline armour belt of Krupp cemented armour extended the length of the ship . The 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) thick portion was 238 feet ( 72 @.@ 5 m ) long and ran from just aft of the forward barbette to a point abreast the aft barbette , and had a total height of 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) of which 10 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) was above water and the remainder below water at normal load . The thickness of the forward belt armour reduced in 7 – 5 – 3 @-@ inch ( 178 – 127 – 76 mm ) steps to the 2 @-@ inch ( 51 mm ) stem and there was a 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) belt running from the aft barbette to the stern . A 9 – 10 @-@ inch ( 229 – 254 mm ) bulkhead extended obliquely from the aft end of the main belt to the rear face of the aft barbette . 
 The gun turrets were protected by Krupp armour , 8 inches ( 203 mm ) on their faces and 10 inches on their backs , with roofs 2 to 3 inches thick . The Krupp armour of the barbettes was 12 inches thick above the main deck , but 10 inches on the face and sides and 6 inches on the rear below it . The casemates were protected by 6 inches of Krupp armour . The thicknesses of the mild steel decks ranged from 1 to 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 25 to 64 mm ) . The walls of the forward conning tower were 10 inches of Harvey armour with a 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) roof and the aft conning tower had three inches of nickel steel . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Prince of Wales , named after the title conferred upon the eldest son of the monarch , was the fifth ship of her name to serve in the Royal Navy . The ship was laid down at Chatham Dockyard on 20 March 1901 , the first keel plate laid by Lady Wharton , wife of Rear @-@ Admiral Sir William Wharton , Hydrographer to the Admiralty . She was launched by the Princess of Wales ( later Queen Mary ) on 25 March 1902 , in the presence of the Prince of Wales ( later King George V ) , for whom the ship was named . Upon completion in March 1904 , HMS Prince of Wales immediately went into reserve at Chatham Dockyard . The ship commissioned there on 18 May for service with the Mediterranean Fleet . While in the Mediterranean , she collided with the merchant steamer SS <unk> off Oran , French North Africa , on 29 July 1905 , <unk> 's anchor being pushed through her main deck plating . On 16 April 1906 , Prince of Wales had an engine @-@ room explosion during which three men were killed and four injured . On 28 May , she ended her first Mediterranean tour by paying off for a refit at Portsmouth Dockyard that lasted from June to November . On 8 September , the ship again commissioned for Mediterranean Fleet service . She became the flagship of the second @-@ in @-@ command of the fleet in August 1907 , and underwent another refit at Malta in 1908 . 
 Prince of Wales transferred to the Atlantic Fleet as flagship of the fleet 's commander in February 1909 and was damaged by an explosion in one of her <unk> on 2 July . In December 1910 , Rear @-@ Admiral John Jellicoe , later commander of the Grand Fleet and First Sea Lord , hoisted his flag in Prince of Wales . The ship underwent a refit at Gibraltar in February – May 1911 before she was transferred to the Home Fleets on 13 May 1912 . Initially Prince of Wales became flagship of the 3rd Battle Squadron of the First Fleet , but then reverted to a private ship in the squadron on 13 May . The ship later became the flagship of the second @-@ in @-@ command of the Second Fleet , at <unk> and part of the 5th Battle Squadron . By 18 February 1913 , she was serving as the flagship for the second @-@ in @-@ command of the 5th Battle Squadron . On 2 June 1913 , she was accidentally rammed by the submarine HMS <unk> while participating in exercises , but suffered no damage . By 18 May 1914 , Prince of Wales had relieved her sister ship , Queen , as flagship of the 5th Battle Squadron . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 When World War I broke out in August 1914 , the squadron was assigned to the newly reconstituted Channel Fleet on 7 November and based at Portland , from which it patrolled the English Channel . Prince of Wales was now the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral Bernard Currey and the first task of the squadron was to protect the transfer of the British Expeditionary Force over the English Channel to France . They patrolled the eastern end of the Channel while the 7th and 8th Battle Squadrons covered the cruiser squadron at the western entrance . The Germans made no significant effort to interfere with the traffic in the Channel and the 5th BS was allowed to return to Portland after the bulk of the BEF was across on 23 August . Several days later , the squadron ferried the Portsmouth Marine Battalion to Ostend , Belgium . On 14 November , the squadron transferred to Sheerness to guard against a possible German invasion of the United Kingdom , but it transferred back to Portland on 30 December 1914 . 
 On 19 March 1915 , Prince of Wales was ordered to the Dardanelles to participate in the Dardanelles Campaign . She departed Portland on 20 March 1915 and was assigned to the British 5th Squadron of the Allied Fleet off the Dardanelles , where she arrived on 29 March . Prince of Wales supported the landings of the 3rd Brigade , Australian Army , at Gaba Tepe and Anzac Cove on 25 April . Her time at the Dardanelles was destined to be short as the Anglo @-@ French @-@ Italian Naval Convention of 10 May required that the British furnish a squadron of four battleships to reinforce the Italian Navy against the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy after Italy declared war on Austria @-@ Hungary . Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , the Italian naval chief of staff , believed that the threat from Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines and naval mines in the narrow waters of the Adriatic was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way . He therefore kept his most modern battleships , plus the British ones , at Taranto to blockade the Austro @-@ Hungarians in the Adriatic Sea . 
 On 22 May , Prince of Wales , along with the battleships Implacable , London , and Queen , was transferred to the Adriatic to form the 2nd Detached Squadron and Prince of Wales arrived at her new base on 27 May . The ship became the flagship of the squadron in March 1916 . She ended her flagship duties in June 1916 , when she went to Gibraltar for a refit and then returned to the Adriatic . 
 In February 1917 , Prince of Wales was ordered to return to the United Kingdom . On her voyage home , she called at Gibraltar from 28 February 1917 to 10 March 1917 and arrived at Devonport Dockyard later in March . She was placed in reserve on arrival and used as an accommodation ship . Prince of Wales was placed on the disposal list on 10 November 1919 , and was sold for scrap to T. W. Ward and Company on 12 April 1920 . The ship arrived at Milford Haven , Wales , to be broken up in June 1920 . 
 = The Day We Died = 
 " The Day We Died " is the third season finale of the Fox science fiction drama television series Fringe . It is the season 's 22nd episode and the series ' 65th episode overall . The finale follows the aftermath of Peter Bishop entering and activating the doomsday device , events which took place in the previous episode . He finds himself 15 years in the future ; though the device has destroyed the parallel universe , his universe is nevertheless gradually disintegrating . Peter comes to realize the background of the doomsday device and wakes up in 2011 . After getting the two universes to agree to work together , he inexplicably disappears . 
 The episode 's teleplay was co @-@ written by Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman , while Pinkner and Wyman co @-@ wrote the story with consulting producer Akiva Goldsman . Executive producer Joe Chappelle served as director . The writers wrote the script without knowing if the series was going to be renewed for a fourth season ; Fox 's renewal announcement came in late March , but no changes were made to the storyline . They designed the episode as a set @-@ up for the following season , equating it to a book chapter that " propels " the reader forward . Unlike previous season finales , " The Day We Died " was one hour long and was linked to the previous two episodes in one continuous story arc . " The Day We Died " featured one @-@ time guest actors Brad Dourif and Emily Meade . 
 " The Day We Died " aired on May 6 , 2011 in the United States to an estimated 3 @.@ 0 million viewers , though this number almost doubled once time @-@ shifted views were taken into account . While its 1 @.@ 4 ratings share among adults 18 to 49 was an eight percent decrease from the previous episode , it helped Fox tie for first place that night . Reviews of the episode have been generally positive , with many critics writing that Peter 's disappearance was a good direction for the series . Multiple reviewers ranked it as one of the best episodes of the television season , including The Futon Critic and <unk> The cast were also receptive to the episode , and actor John Noble submitted his performance for consideration at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 From the previous episode , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) has stepped into the doomsday device to attempt to stop it after Walternate ( John Noble ) had activated the version in the parallel universe . He regains consciousness in the future , after a singularity appears near the One World Trade Center . 
 In 2026 , the prime universe is suffering from the same singularities that have already destroyed the parallel universe , as a result of the two universes being inextricably linked together . Though the Fringe Division that developed in this universe has been able to use amber to contain these vortices , a group called the " End of Dayers " , led by a man named Moreau ( Brad Dourif ) , attempts to breach the fabric of reality at soft spots and create more vortices . After one such incident at a theater , Peter and Olivia ( Anna Torv ) , now married , along with Astrid ( Jasika Nicole ) and Ella ( Emily Meade ) , Olivia 's niece and now a rookie Fringe agent , find an unactivated container that they believe the End of Dayers used to trigger the breach . Fringe is unable to determine how the container works , and Peter convinces Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) , now a senator , to allow him to release his father Walter ( Noble ) , currently in maximum security prison as punishment for activating the doomsday device , to help identify its workings . 
 After tearfully reuniting with his son and new daughter @-@ in @-@ law , Walter discovers the device uses a unique radioactive signature that they can track . The strongest source points to a used campground , where Peter discovers a key . He recognizes the key as from Walter 's old home near Reiden Lake and travels there alone , and finds his biological father , Walternate , present . Walternate admits to being behind the End of Dayers group , as his revenge for Peter activating the doomsday device and destroying the parallel world that was his home . Walternate promises that Peter will face the same pain and suffering he has faced since crossing to the prime universe on a mission of mercy , one piece at a time . Peter realizes that Walternate is implying a threat to Olivia , and finds that Walternate was speaking to him remotely through a holographic simulation . In Central Park , where Moreau has set off another breach to expose an existing wormhole , Olivia is helping to cordon off the breach when Walternate approaches and shoots her . Peter and the rest of Fringe division struggle with her death at her funeral . 
 Walter continues to study the Central Park wormhole and discovers that it links to the past , approximately 250 million years ago . He comes to realize a temporal paradox ( a Bootstrap paradox ) : he will have sent the doomsday device piece by piece into the past , effectively becoming the " First People " mythos , and convinces Peter that they can influence Peter in the past by having him experience the end of days himself and make a different decision when he enters the machine . 
 Peter suddenly wakes up to find himself in the machine in 2011 , only one minute since he entered it , and Olivia waiting by his side ; concurrently , in the parallel universe , Walternate attempts to convince Fauxlivia to help stop the machine . Peter recalls the memories from the future , and uses the machine to merge the machine rooms from both universes into one thus creating a bridge . While Olivia and Walter and their doppelgangers stare each other down , Peter convinces the two sides to work together to try to repair the damage to save both universes , then suddenly disappears . The Olivias and Walters cautiously agree that they need to put aside their differences to save both worlds , apparently unaware of Peter 's disappearance . Outside on Liberty Island in the prime universe , the Observers watch as September ( Michael Cerveris ) notes to December ( Eugene Lipinski ) that Peter has already been forgotten by his friends , his purpose having been served , and explains that Peter now never existed . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Despite the show not yet being officially renewed for a fourth season , Fringe began casting in mid @-@ March for a " green FBI agent ... to come aboard for the finale and possibly recur next year " , as reported by E ! Online . TVLine 's Michael Ausiello announced later in the month that actress Emily Meade has been cast for the role , describing her character as " a wide @-@ eyed and eager rookie who ’ s ready to face all of the challenges in front of her " , and that she would make her first appearance in the finale . In the months leading up to the finale , Wyman responded to reports the character would be recurring by calling her casting more of a " safety net " ; much like Seth Gabel 's casting , he did not want to commit himself to her character yet , saying , " We always protect ourselves by saying that because you never know " . The actress was later revealed to be playing a grown up version of Olivia 's niece , Ella . 
 Another casting call for the finale was released , as the show began looking for a " well @-@ known male Japanese actor in his late 40s to late 50s who speaks English " to appear as a new character called " Moreau " . Despite the casting call 's description , they later cast American actor Brad Dourif for the part . On whether Dourif would be returning , executive producer J.H. Wyman commented in a May 2011 interview , " Brad is such a fantastic actor . We are keeping our options open " . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Co @-@ showrunners Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman co @-@ wrote the episode 's teleplay , while Pinkner , Wyman , and consulting producer Akiva Goldsman co @-@ wrote the story . Executive producer Joe Chappelle served as director . A full season renewal of Fringe was announced on March 24 , 2011 . They had written the finale without knowing if there would be another season , but decided not to make any changes to the script even after hearing of its renewal . Pinkner explained that " we wrote the episode , perhaps foolishly , assuming that we would be on for Season 4 . We never for one second entertained that it would be the end of the series . So therefore , we didn 't have to change a word ! " In an interview with the New York Post , Pinkner warned that events in the finale will " unfurl in a very unexpected way for the characters and the audience " . He also commented that the finale " hopefully will make you sort of revisit and look at everything that 's happened all year through a fresh pair of glasses " . 
 Pinkner stated in another interview that it " will be as much as anything about setting up next season , " and Wyman agreed , writing " It ’ s like when you read a great novel and you finish a chapter , you ’ re like , ' Oh my gosh , something happened that ’ s going to propel me forward ! ' That ’ s something we desire to emulate . " In March 2011 , Pinkner confirmed with TVLine that unlike previous Fringe season finales , the third season 's finale would not be two hours long . He did however note that " the last three episodes will be linked in one continuous story arc . " 
 The cast was receptive to the finale storyline . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , actor John Noble noted he liked how the story ultimately ended with having the two Walters " perhaps negotiate a truce and put their minds together " through a " very inventive intervention by Peter , who basically took control of destiny and forced his two fathers to look each other in the eye , as if telling them : Sort it out , gentlemen . ' " He later noted , " We finish [ the finale ] in a very dramatic place . " Joshua Jackson praised the role @-@ reversal of his character with Walter 's , " You had Peter wracked with guilt over the circumstances tied to the decision he made [ to activate The First People 's so @-@ called " doomsday " machine ] and clinging to hope that there might be some way out . I can ’ t have made a cosmically bad decision ! There must be some way to put this right ! Which is fascinating , because that ’ s basically been Walter for as long as we ’ ve known him . So I loved how Peter ceases to be so stubborn when it comes to Walter , comes to understand him and even begins to see things the way he does . " 
 The finale contained a new , grey credit sequence that was meant to reflect the new timeline . It contained new scientific words such as " Thought Extraction " and " Dual Maternity " , as well as " Water " and " Hope " . Wyman explained their reasoning for the change , " [ The credits ] weren ’ t so much pertinent to the finale but for the introduction of the future of the show . In the past , we used words in the credit sequence as signposts for the episode . But this is a new paradigm . " 
 After the finale aired , Pinkner stated in an interview that " one of the things we love to play with is the notion of choice versus fate / synchronicity . Clearly , what Peter did at the end of that episode is that he fundamentally changed the future . Our team is [ now ] on a separate path . It is unlikely that we ’ ll get to that specific outcome in 2026 . But are events like what happened in Detroit inevitable in any version of the future ? TBD . " 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Leading up to the episode 's broadcast , Fox released a promotional trailer that recapped relevant scenes and previewed events in the finale . Fox had previously produced similar trailers for " Entrada " , " Marionette " , and " Bloodline " , three episodes from earlier in the season . As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " The Day We Died " , with the intention of having " students learn about reverse engineering and disassembling devices . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The finale first aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 6 , 2011 . It was watched by an estimated 3 @.@ 0 million viewers . It scored a 1 @.@ 2 / 4 ratings share among viewers 18 – 49 , an 8 percent decrease from the previous week 's episode . The finale and its lead @-@ in , Kitchen Nightmares , did however help Fox tie for first place in that demographic with ABC and CBS . The rating for this episode almost doubled when DVR time shifted viewing was taken into account . Because of its comparatively low live ratings , SFScope columnist Sarah Stegall speculated that only " the core of the core audience " watched the episode , as " no outsiders could have possibly <unk> what went on in that 45 minutes . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Day We Died " has generally received positive reviews from television critics . Sam McPherson from TV Overmind graded the finale with an A , writing " From a show known for its <unk> episodes came the most <unk> episode of all . ' The Day We Died ' ... not only reinvigorated the show 's fantastic ( but inevitably aging ) premise , but gave the show a breath of life that has me waiting -- no , begging -- for the show 's fourth season . " Though he wouldn 't call the finale the best Fringe episode yet , McPherson referred to the season as the best of the three and " probably the best season of television that 's aired in recent years " . Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker lauded the finale , commenting in his review 's conclusion " Consider about the whole arc of this season and tell me this wasn ’ t one of the most moving , thrilling , funny , inspiring chunks of television you ’ ve watched . The performances by Noble , Torv , and Jackson were extraordinarily adroit , never showy or merely clever . I was so glad that , by season ’ s end , Jackson / Peter had once again taken center @-@ stage — a central importance — to a season that , by the nature of its design , needed to concentrate a lot on Walter ( s ) and Olivia ( s ) . " 
 IGN 's regular Fringe reviewer Ramsey Isler rated the episode 8 / 10 . He compared the plot to Lost , remarking " Apparently one thoroughly confusing and unnecessarily convoluted TV series wasn 't enough ... But hey , I understand why J.J. and his Fringe collaborators ... might have done this . They had kind of written themselves into a corner where one of the universes had to go , and they couldn 't stretch that storyline out forever . A restart like this is a good way to allow themselves room to write something new , even if it may require some clever thinking to explain themselves out of this situation adequately . " Isler had trouble rating the finale , noting that he had to see how the events are explained in the fourth season before he can make a complete judgment . 
 Noel Murray from The A.V. Club graded the finale with a B + ; he praised the writers " for once again introducing a new world that feels fully formed , with its own rich backstory that they could choose to explore if they have the time and the inclination . " Murray concluded his review , " It may be that Fringe has bitten off more than it can chew here , and the storytelling is about to get hopelessly convoluted , as it often does once time @-@ travel enters the picture . But for now , I ’ m going to enjoy living with and thinking over what I ’ ve seen so far . And I ’ m going to trust that no matter how crazy Fringe 's fourth season gets , the writers are going to keep bringing everything back to less mind @-@ bending questions " . Some reviewers questioned the logic of Peter having never existed , though others expressed their trust in the writers ' ability to make it work . 
 The Futon Critic and TV.com staff highlighted " The Day We Died " as one of the best television episodes of the 2010 – 11 United States network television schedule . Likewise , Give Me My Remote contributor Marisa Rothman ranked " The Day We Died " one of the best episodes of the year , explaining " Between Walter 's eventual reunion with his loved ones and Olivia 's tragic demise , few episodes were as heartbreaking as ' The Day We Died ' ... not to mention , no episode shocked me as much with a plot twist . ( I literally bolted up in my seat when Peter vanished into thin air after creating a bridge between the universes . ) " Entertainment Weekly included the episode 's ending in their list of television 's best cliffhangers of 2011 , and later named it the sixteenth best episode of the series . Time gave " The Day We Died " an honorable mention on their list of the best episodes of the season . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 At the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards , John Noble submitted " The Day We Died " , along with " Entrada " and " The Firefly " , for consideration in the Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series category , but did not receive a nomination . At the 2012 Golden Reel Awards , " The Day We Died " received nominations in the categories " Best Sound Editing : Short Form Sound Effects and Foley in Television " and " Best Sound Editing : Short Form Sound Effects and Foley in Television " from the Motion Picture Sound Editors . It lost in both categories , the former to the Raising Hope episode " Prodigy " , the latter to the pilot episode of the HBO television series Game of Thrones . 
 = Did You Hear What Happened to Charlotte King ? = 
 " Did You Hear What Happened to Charlotte King ? " is the seventh episode of the fourth season of the American television medical drama , Private Practice , and the show 's 61st episode overall . Written by Shonda Rhimes and directed by Allison <unk> @-@ Brown , the episode was originally broadcast on ABC in the United States on November 4 , 2010 . Private Practice centers on a group of young doctors working in a private medical practice , and this episode deals with the immediate aftermath of Charlotte King 's ( KaDee Strickland ) rape . 
 The episode , written in collaboration with the Rape , Abuse & Incest National Network ( RAINN ) , revolved around Strickland 's character to accurately represent recovery from rape . Nicholas Brendon guest @-@ starred as Lee McHenry , and Blue <unk> also appeared as detective Joe Price . " Did You Hear What Happened to Charlotte King ? " earned the series , Rhimes and Strickland several awards and nominations and was well received by critics , with Strickland 's character and performance praised . The initial broadcast was viewed by 10 @.@ 18 million people , received a 3 @.@ 9 / 11 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and had the fifth @-@ highest number of viewers that night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode opens with St. Ambrose Hospital chief of staff Charlotte King ( KaDee Strickland ) hiding in a supply closet after being raped in her office . Alternative @-@ medicine specialist Dr. Pete Wilder ( Tim Daly ) finds and examines her , diagnosing a broken wrist , eye socket and nose and a deep arm laceration and admitting her to the hospital . King lies to Wilder , telling him that she was injured in a mugging . Wilder calls the police ; King attempts to contact her boyfriend , Dr. Cooper Freedman ( Paul Adelstein ) , but cannot reach him because he is out drinking with Dr. Amelia Shepherd ( Caterina Scorsone ) and Dr. Sam Bennett ( Taye Diggs ) . At the police station psychiatrist Sheldon Wallace ( Brian Benben ) interrogates Lee McHenry ( Nicholas Brendon ) , who was found with blood on his clothes . After nurses photograph King 's injuries , Dr. Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) realizes that King was raped and offers her a rape kit . During her pelvic examination , King refuses the rape kit and tells Montgomery not to tell anyone else about the rape . Freedman arrives with Shepherd and Bennett , and is surprised at the extent of King 's injuries . During the CT scan , King and Shepherd bond over their shared drug addiction when King refuses pain medication . Shepherd admits drinking alcohol again , and King offers to take her to Alcoholics Anonymous meetings . Shepherd sutures King 's wounds , which causes King great pain ; Freedman feels powerless , unable to protect her . 
 Interviewed by Wallace , McHenry admits being angry after discovering his girlfriend 's infidelity but denies that the blood on his clothing is hers . Montgomery tries to convince King to report her rape ; King refuses , telling Montgomery that she does not understand what it is like to be raped . Wilder uses alternative medicine to help King deal with her pain . Psychiatrist Violet Turner ( Amy Brenneman ) refuses to talk to King about the rape because of similarities to the fetal abduction she experienced a year earlier , and wonders if everyone in the practice is cursed . Bennett wants to go home and rest , which angers Montgomery . King attempts to compose a memorandum saying that she was attacked on the hospital grounds , but Freedman suggests that another member of the staff do it for her ; she shouts at Freedman when he calls her a victim . After the argument , Freedman goes to King 's office and weeps when he sees the aftermath of her assault . McHenry admits raping a woman , assaulting Wallace before he is pulled away by the police . In the ambulance bay , Bennett expresses his confusion about Montgomery 's mood swings and suspects that she is hiding something from him ; Montgomery asks him to promise never to leave her alone . After Freedman helps her dress , King says that she loves him and wants to go home . McHenry is held by the police for assaulting a police officer during his arrest and Wallace during his interrogation , but detective Joe Price says that McHenry cannot be charged with rape until charges are filed against him . The episode ends with King walking out of the hospital with Freedman 's help ; flashbacks of the rape reveal that McHenry was the rapist . 
 = = Production = = 
 The 43 @-@ minute episode was written by Shonda Rhimes and directed by Allison <unk> @-@ Brown . <unk> A. Khatib edited the music , and Gregory Van Horn was its production designer . Johann Sebastian Bach 's Prelude and Fugue in C was played during the opening sequence . Rhimes wrote the episode in collaboration with the Rape , Abuse & Incest National Network ( RAINN ) to ensure that King 's recovery was presented as accurately as possible . She later called it one of her favorites from the series and said , " I feel like I changed as a writer writing that episode . " 
 Approached by Rhimes about the episode , Strickland agreed to the storyline on the conditions that " it not go away quickly " and would significantly impact the character . She liked the script , describing it as " humanizing the victims and just really creating a legitimate experience for the audience in a way that you may not see on network television " . In addition to communicating with RAINN representatives , the actress visited the Rape Treatment Center at UCLA Medical Center in Santa Monica and saw a young girl being admitted , which shaped her performance . Strickland also researched reactions to sexual assault by survivors , their friends and families . The decision to portray King 's resistance to reporting her rape was reached after consultation with the hospital . Strickland defended the choice , calling it a " very important part of Charlotte King 's story " and a " very realistic response " . Most of the episode focused on King 's psychological response to the rape . According to Strickland , 
 " The nature of that kind of attack is so shocking to a person 's system a lot of times that how they respond in those first moments afterwards , it could go six ways to Sunday . For Charlotte , because of the type of person she is , very in control , very direct , very together , I think it really turns her world upside down , and I think she doesn ’ t really know how to even comprehend what has happened to her or how to process it . " 
 The actress described the filming of the rape as easier than the scenes depicting its aftermath , which she called " psychologically ... [ and ] ... physically hard " . Strickland and Brendon agreed on a safeword when they filmed the rape , due to its brutality . The scene affected Strickland to the extent that she " fe [ <unk> ] trigger [ ed ] " when she went to the set on which the rape was shot . The actress called the filming process " intense " and " truthful " , but " by no means is any of that even comparable to anything that women and men have had experience with " . Brendon was cast against type as McHenry , King 's rapist , since he is primarily known as the comedic Xander Harris in Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Strickland said that Brendon 's character was not " crazy " or " deranged " , because perpetrators of rape are " people who are around us all the time " ; she called Brendon 's acceptance of the role " brave " . 
 According to Strickland , every character in the episode was affected by King 's rape . She praised Adelstein 's performance , saying that he provided a " nuanced portrayal of the sexual assault victim 's partner " . Adelstein called his character " a conscious 21st @-@ century male " in his interactions with King . According to Strickland , Montgomery 's decision to use the rape kit on King without her knowledge would be a major storyline in the future and Turner would become " very adamant about getting help " for King after learning about the rape since the characters had had similar traumatic experiences . A behind @-@ the @-@ scenes feature about the episode and others involving King 's rape , " An Inside Look : The Violation of Charlotte King " , was included on the fourth @-@ season DVD and Blu @-@ ray releases . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast = = = 
 " Did You Hear What Happened to Charlotte King ? " was originally broadcast on November 4 , 2010 in the United States on the ABC network . The episode was viewed by a total of 10 @.@ 18 million people , 44 percent more than the previous episode . Although it was the fifth @-@ highest @-@ rated show that night ( behind CBS 's The Big Bang Theory , $ h * ! My Dad Says , CSI and The Mentalist ) , its 3 @.@ 9 / 11 Nielsen rating topped the 10 : 00 Eastern time slot for the rating and share percentages of the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode was aired with a message encouraging viewer discretion , due to its violence . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Critical response was largely positive , with a TV Guide writer ranking " Did You Hear What Happened to Charlotte King ? " one of 2010 's top 25 television episodes . According to the reviewer , when Freedman first saw King 's injuries " it was like we weren 't even watching TV anymore " . The review praised Strickland 's performance , predicting an Emmy nomination . A TVLine post listed Strickland as one of the Emmy Awards ' 21 biggest snubs , and called her performance a " tour de force " . TV Fanatic 's Steve Marsi liked the episode , saying that its pacing and Strickland 's performance immersed the audience despite the subject matter 's being " extremely difficult to digest " . E ! News ' Kristin dos Santos also praised Strickland 's portrayal of King , writing that she " definitely needs to be in the running " for an Emmy nomination , and Winston Mize of SpoilerTV wrote that Strickland was " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> awards " . 
 <unk> of Blogcritics called the episode " disturbing , intense , tragic , and moving " , with the rape handled delicately and responsibly . E ! ' s Jennifer Arrow described the rape scene as " the most realistic depiction of rape in media history " and " harrowing to watch " and noted Brendon 's casting as the " evil crazy guy " in contrast with his previous performance as Xander Harris , " the funny guy from Buffy the Vampire Slayer who mastered the Snoopy dance " . Alec Stern of The Michigan Daily cited the episode as an example of the show 's improved quality , and The Futon Critic 's Brian Ford Sullivan included it in his list of 50 best episodes of 2010 . SpoilerTV 's Winston Mize called the episode one of Rhimes ' best shows , praising it for avoiding a preachy or excessively @-@ dramatic take on rape . 
 Its depiction of King 's rape and its aftermath was compared to similar storylines on other shows . E 's Jennifer Arrow called it part of the " rape @-@ on @-@ TV trend " , linking King 's rape with those of Gemma Teller Morrow of FX 's crime drama Sons of Anarchy and Naomi Clark of the CW teen drama 90210 . According to Arrow , all three characters were " strong , no @-@ nonsense ladies who generally dominate their environments " and did not report their rape . She asked if each show 's decision for the victim not to report the rape was part of a larger cultural belief that " trusts in women who keep their silence " . TV Fanatic 's Steve Marsi called the episode reminiscent of Law & Order : Special Victims Unit in its presentation of events in real time and emphasis on character reactions . The Michigan Daily 's Alec Stern called sexual assault " a crutch Shonda Rhimes has turned to in all three of her series " , writing that the development of King 's character was superior to the storyline of Mellie Grant 's rape on the ABC drama Scandal . 
 = = = Awards and impact = = = 
 The episode was cited at the 2011 Television Academy Honors for exemplifying " Television with a Conscience " . The Academy of Television Arts & Sciences called it a " poignant " episode , which " master [ ed ] the gut @-@ wrenching crime of sexual assault " . Private Practice received the award in 2010 for its approach to physician @-@ assisted suicide in the second @-@ season episode , " Nothing to Fear " , and a drama @-@ series Women 's Image Network Award at the 13th annual WIN awards . " Did You Hear What Happened to Charlotte King ? " was a finalist for the Sentinel for Health Award for Primetime Drama ( Major Storyline ) for its representation of rape , losing to the Parenthood episode " Qualities and Difficulties " ( which focused on Asperger syndrome ) . The show was nominated for the PRISM Award for Drama Series Multi @-@ Episode Storyline ( Mental Health ) for " Did You Hear What Happened to Charlotte King ? " and the following episodes , " What Happens Next " and " Can 't Find My Way Back Home " , losing to the first two seasons of Parenthood . 
 Rhimes and Strickland received a RAINN Hope Award in recognition of " their efforts in educating the public about sexual assault prevention " . Strickland said that she considered submitting the episode or later episodes , " Can 't Find My Way Home " or " Blind Love , " for consideration at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards , but she did not receive a nomination . The actress received the Female Performance in a Drama Series Multi @-@ Episode Storyline award at the 2011 PRISM Awards . Rhimes received the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Writing in a Dramatic Series at the 2011 NAACP Awards for her work on the episode . 
 After its broadcast , RAINN had a " 500 @-@ percent increase in service requests " ( which temporarily crashed its website ) . Strickland participated in a public service announcement to increase awareness of rape and sexual abuse , and said that she had received many emails from survivors of sexual assault . After her work on the episode , RAINN called the actress a " vocal advocate for using DNA evidence in solving rape cases " . 
 = James Clerk Maxwell = 
 James Clerk Maxwell FRS FRSE ( 13 June 1831 – 5 November 1879 ) was a Scottish scientist in the field of mathematical physics . His most notable achievement was to formulate the classical theory of electromagnetic radiation , bringing together for the first time electricity , magnetism , and light as manifestations of the same phenomenon . Maxwell 's equations for electromagnetism have been called the " second great unification in physics " after the first one realised by Isaac Newton . 
 With the publication of A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field in 1865 , Maxwell demonstrated that electric and magnetic fields travel through space as waves moving at the speed of light . Maxwell proposed that light is an undulation in the same medium that is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena . The unification of light and electrical phenomena led to the prediction of the existence of radio waves . 
 Maxwell helped develop the Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution , a statistical means of describing aspects of the kinetic theory of gases . He is also known for presenting the first durable colour photograph in 1861 and for his foundational work on analysing the rigidity of rod @-@ and @-@ joint frameworks ( trusses ) like those in many bridges . 
 His discoveries helped usher in the era of modern physics , laying the foundation for such fields as special relativity and quantum mechanics . Many physicists regard Maxwell as the 19th @-@ century scientist having the greatest influence on 20th @-@ century physics . His contributions to the science are considered by many to be of the same magnitude as those of Isaac Newton and Albert Einstein . In the millennium poll — a survey of the 100 most prominent physicists — Maxwell was voted the third greatest physicist of all time , behind only Newton and Einstein . On the centenary of Maxwell 's birthday , Einstein described Maxwell 's work as the " most profound and the most fruitful that physics has experienced since the time of Newton " . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life , 1831 – 39 = = = 
 James Clerk Maxwell was born on 13 June 1831 at 14 India Street , Edinburgh , to John Clerk Maxwell of Middlebie , an advocate , and Frances Cay daughter of Robert <unk> Cay and sister of John Cay . His father was a man of comfortable means of the Clerk family of Penicuik , holders of the baronetcy of Clerk of Penicuik . His father 's brother was the 6th Baronet . He had been born " John Clerk " , adding the surname Maxwell to his own after he inherited ( as an infant in 1793 ) the Middlebie country estate near <unk> , Kirkcudbrightshire , from connections to the Maxwell family , themselves members of the peerage . James was the first cousin of the artist Jemima Blackburn and cousin ( the son of his mother 's brother ) of the civil engineer William Dyce Cay . They were close friends and Cay acted as his best man when Maxwell married . 
 Maxwell 's parents met and married when they were well into their thirties ; his mother was nearly 40 when he was born . They had had one earlier child , a daughter named Elizabeth , who died in infancy . 
 When Maxwell was young his family moved to Glenlair House , which his parents had built on the 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 610 ha ) Middlebie estate . All indications suggest that Maxwell had maintained an unquenchable curiosity from an early age . By the age of three , everything that moved , shone , or made a noise drew the question : " what 's the go o ' that ? " In a passage added to a letter from his father to his sister @-@ in @-@ law Jane Cay in 1834 , his mother described this innate sense of inquisitiveness : 
 He is a very happy man , and has improved much since the weather got moderate ; he has great work with doors , locks , keys , etc . , and " show me how it doos " is never out of his mouth . He also investigates the hidden course of streams and bell @-@ wires , the way the water gets from the pond through the wall .... 
 = = = Education , 1839 – 47 = = = 
 Recognising the potential of the young boy , Maxwell 's mother Frances took responsibility for James 's early education , which in the Victorian era was largely the job of the woman of the house . At eight he could recite long passages of Milton and the whole of the 119th psalm ( 176 verses ) . Indeed , his knowledge of scripture was already very detailed ; he could give chapter and verse for almost any quotation from the psalms . His mother was taken ill with abdominal cancer and , after an unsuccessful operation , died in December 1839 when he was eight years old . James 's education was then overseen by his father and his father 's sister @-@ in @-@ law Jane , both of whom played pivotal roles in his life . His formal schooling began unsuccessfully under the guidance of a sixteen @-@ year @-@ old hired tutor . Little is known about the young man John hired to instruct his son , except that he treated the younger boy harshly , chiding him for being slow and wayward . John dismissed the tutor in November 1841 and , after considerable thought , sent James to the prestigious Edinburgh Academy . He lodged during term times at the house of his aunt Isabella . During this time his passion for drawing was encouraged by his older cousin Jemima . 
 The ten @-@ year @-@ old Maxwell , having been raised in isolation on his father 's countryside estate , did not fit in well at school . The first year had been full , obliging him to join the second year with classmates a year his senior . His mannerisms and Galloway accent struck the other boys as rustic . Having arrived on his first day of school wearing a pair of homemade shoes and a tunic , he earned the unkind nickname of " <unk> " . He never seemed to resent the epithet , bearing it without complaint for many years . Social isolation at the Academy ended when he met Lewis Campbell and Peter Guthrie Tait , two boys of a similar age who were to become notable scholars later in life . They remained lifelong friends . 
 Maxwell was fascinated by geometry at an early age , rediscovering the regular polyhedra before he received any formal instruction . Despite winning the school 's scripture biography prize in his second year , his academic work remained unnoticed until , at the age of 13 , he won the school 's mathematical medal and first prize for both English and poetry . 
 Maxwell 's interests ranged far beyond the school syllabus and he did not pay particular attention to examination performance . He wrote his first scientific paper at the age of 14 . In it he described a mechanical means of drawing mathematical curves with a piece of twine , and the properties of ellipses , Cartesian ovals , and related curves with more than two foci . His work Oval Curves was presented to the Royal Society of Edinburgh by James Forbes , a professor of natural philosophy at Edinburgh University , but Maxwell was deemed too young to present the work himself . The work was not entirely original , since René Descartes had also examined the properties of such multifocal ellipses in the seventeenth century , but he had simplified their construction . 
 = = = University of Edinburgh , 1847 – 50 = = = 
 Maxwell left the Academy in 1847 at age 16 and began attending classes at the University of Edinburgh . He had the opportunity to attend the University of Cambridge , but decided , after his first term , to complete the full course of his undergraduate studies at Edinburgh . The academic staff of Edinburgh University included some highly regarded names ; his first year tutors included Sir William Hamilton , who lectured him on logic and metaphysics , Philip Kelland on mathematics , and James Forbes on natural philosophy . He did not find his classes at Edinburgh University very demanding , and was therefore able to immerse himself in private study during free time at the university and particularly when back home at Glenlair . There he would experiment with improvised chemical , electric , and magnetic apparatus , but his chief concerns regarded the properties of polarised light . He constructed shaped blocks of gelatine , subjected them to various stresses , and with a pair of polarising prisms given to him by William Nicol , viewed the coloured fringes that had developed within the jelly . Through this practice he discovered <unk> , which is a means of determining the stress distribution within physical structures . 
 At age 18 , Maxwell contributed two papers for the Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh . One of these , On the Equilibrium of Elastic Solids , laid the foundation for an important discovery later in his life , which was the temporary double refraction produced in viscous liquids by shear stress . His other paper was Rolling Curves and , just as with the paper Oval Curves that he had written at the Edinburgh Academy , he was again considered too young to stand at the rostrum to present it himself . The paper was delivered to the Royal Society by his tutor Kelland instead . 
 = = = University of Cambridge , 1850 – 56 = = = 
 In October 1850 , already an accomplished mathematician , Maxwell left Scotland for the University of Cambridge . He initially attended Peterhouse , but before the end of his first term transferred to Trinity , where he believed it would be easier to obtain a fellowship . At Trinity he was elected to the elite secret society known as the Cambridge Apostles . Maxwell 's intellectual understanding of his Christian faith and of science grew rapidly during his Cambridge years . He joined the " Apostles " , an exclusive debating society of the intellectual elite , where through his essays he sought to work out this understanding . 
 Now my great plan , which was conceived of old , ... is to let nothing be wilfully left unexamined . Nothing is to be holy ground consecrated to Stationary Faith , whether positive or negative . All fallow land is to be ploughed up and a regular system of rotation followed . ... Never hide anything , be it weed or no , nor seem to wish it hidden . ... Again I assert the Right of Trespass on any plot of Holy Ground which any man has set apart . ... Now I am convinced that no one but a Christian can actually purge his land of these holy spots . ... I do not say that no Christians have enclosed places of this sort . Many have a great deal , and every one has some . But there are extensive and important tracts in the territory of the <unk> , the <unk> , the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and the rest , which are openly and solemnly <unk> . ... " 
 Christianity — that is , the religion of the Bible — is the only scheme or form of belief which disavows any possessions on such a tenure . Here alone all is free . You may fly to the ends of the world and find no God but the Author of Salvation . You may search the Scriptures and not find a text to stop you in your explorations . ... 
 The Old Testament and the Mosaic Law and Judaism are commonly supposed to be " <unk> " by the orthodox . Sceptics pretend to have read them , and have found certain witty objections ... which too many of the orthodox unread admit , and shut up the subject as haunted . But a Candle is coming to drive out all Ghosts and <unk> . Let us follow the light . ' ' 
 The extent to which Maxwell " ploughed up " his Christian beliefs and put them to the intellectual test , can be judged only incompletely from his writings . But there is plenty of evidence , especially from his undergraduate days , that he did deeply examine his faith . Certainly , his knowledge of the Bible was remarkable , so his confidence in the Scriptures was not based on ignorance . 
 In the summer of his third year , Maxwell spent some time at the Suffolk home of the Rev C.B. Tayler , the uncle of a class @-@ mate , <unk> Tayler . The love of God shown by the family impressed Maxwell , particularly after he was nursed back from ill health by the minister and his wife . 
 On his return to Cambridge , Maxwell writes to his recent host a chatty and affectionate letter including the following testimony , 
 ... I have the capacity of being more wicked than any example that man could set me , and ... if I escape , it is only by God 's grace helping me to get rid of myself , partially in science , more completely in society , — but not perfectly except by committing myself to God ... 
 In November 1851 , Maxwell studied under William Hopkins , whose success in nurturing mathematical genius had earned him the nickname of " senior wrangler @-@ maker " . 
 In 1854 , Maxwell graduated from Trinity with a degree in mathematics . He scored second highest in the final examination , coming behind Edward Routh and earning himself the title of Second Wrangler . He was later declared equal with Routh in the more exacting ordeal of the Smith 's Prize examination . Immediately after earning his degree , Maxwell read his paper On the Transformation of Surfaces by Bending to the Cambridge Philosophical Society . This is one of the few purely mathematical papers he had written , demonstrating Maxwell 's growing stature as a mathematician . Maxwell decided to remain at Trinity after graduating and applied for a fellowship , which was a process that he could expect to take a couple of years . Buoyed by his success as a research student , he would be free , apart from some tutoring and examining duties , to pursue scientific interests at his own leisure . 
 The nature and perception of colour was one such interest which he had begun at Edinburgh University while he was a student of Forbes . With the coloured spinning tops invented by Forbes , Maxwell was able to demonstrate that white light would result from a mixture of red , green , and blue light . His paper Experiments on Colour laid out the principles of colour combination and was presented to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in March 1855 . Maxwell was this time able to deliver it himself . 
 Maxwell was made a fellow of Trinity on 10 October 1855 , sooner than was the norm , and was asked to prepare lectures on hydrostatics and optics and to set examination papers . The following February he was urged by Forbes to apply for the newly vacant Chair of Natural Philosophy at Marischal College , Aberdeen . His father assisted him in the task of preparing the necessary references , but died on 2 April at Glenlair before either knew the result of Maxwell 's candidacy . Maxwell accepted the professorship at Aberdeen , leaving Cambridge in November 1856 . 
 = = = Marischal College , Aberdeen , 1856 – 60 = = = 
 The 25 @-@ year @-@ old Maxwell was a good fifteen years younger than any other professor at Marischal . He engaged himself with his new responsibilities as head of a department , devising the syllabus and preparing lectures . He committed himself to lecturing 15 hours a week , including a weekly pro bono lecture to the local working men 's college . He lived in Aberdeen during the six months of the academic year and spent the summers at Glenlair , which he had inherited from his father . 
 He focused his attention on a problem that had eluded scientists for two hundred years : the nature of Saturn 's rings . It was unknown how they could remain stable without breaking up , drifting away or crashing into Saturn . The problem took on a particular resonance at that time because St John 's College , Cambridge had chosen it as the topic for the 1857 Adams Prize . Maxwell devoted two years to studying the problem , proving that a regular solid ring could not be stable , while a fluid ring would be forced by wave action to break up into blobs . Since neither was observed , Maxwell concluded that the rings must be composed of numerous small particles he called " brick @-@ bats " , each independently orbiting Saturn . Maxwell was awarded the £ 130 Adams Prize in 1859 for his essay On the stability of the motion of Saturn 's rings ; he was the only entrant to have made enough headway to submit an entry . His work was so detailed and convincing that when George Biddell Airy read it he commented " It is one of the most remarkable applications of mathematics to physics that I have ever seen . " It was considered the final word on the issue until direct observations by the Voyager flybys of the 1980s confirmed Maxwell 's prediction . 
 In 1857 Maxwell befriended the Reverend Daniel Dewar , who was then the Principal of Marischal . Through him Maxwell met Dewar 's daughter , Katherine Mary Dewar . They were engaged in February 1858 and married in Aberdeen on 2 June 1858 . On the marriage record , Maxwell is listed as Professor of Natural Philosophy in Marischal College , Aberdeen . Seven years Maxwell 's senior , comparatively little is known of Katherine , although it is known that she helped in his lab and worked on experiments in viscosity . Maxwell 's biographer and friend , Lewis Campbell , adopted an uncharacteristic reticence on the subject of Katherine , though describing their married life as " one of unexampled devotion " . 
 In 1860 Marischal College merged with the neighbouring King 's College to form the University of Aberdeen . There was no room for two professors of Natural Philosophy , so Maxwell , despite his scientific reputation , found himself laid off . He was unsuccessful in applying for Forbes 's recently vacated chair at Edinburgh , the post instead going to Tait . Maxwell was granted the Chair of Natural Philosophy at King 's College , London , instead . After recovering from a near @-@ fatal bout of smallpox in 1860 , Maxwell moved to London with his wife . 
 = = = King 's College , London , 1860 – 65 = = = 
 Maxwell 's time at King 's was probably the most productive of his career . He was awarded the Royal Society 's Rumford Medal in 1860 for his work on colour and was later elected to the Society in 1861 . This period of his life would see him display the world 's first light @-@ fast colour photograph , further develop his ideas on the viscosity of gases , and propose a system of defining physical quantities — now known as dimensional analysis . Maxwell would often attend lectures at the Royal Institution , where he came into regular contact with Michael Faraday . The relationship between the two men could not be described as being close , because Faraday was 40 years Maxwell 's senior and showed signs of senility . They nevertheless maintained a strong respect for each other 's talents . 
 This time is especially noteworthy for the advances Maxwell made in the fields of electricity and magnetism . He examined the nature of both electric and magnetic fields in his two @-@ part paper On physical lines of force , which was published in 1861 . In it he provided a conceptual model for electromagnetic induction , consisting of tiny spinning cells of magnetic flux . Two more parts were later added to and published in that same paper in early 1862 . In the first additional part he discussed the nature of electrostatics and displacement current . In the second additional part , he dealt with the rotation of the plane of the polarisation of light in a magnetic field , a phenomenon that had been discovered by Faraday and is now known as the Faraday effect . 
 = = = Later years , 1865 – 1879 = = = 
 In 1865 Maxwell resigned the chair at King 's College , London , and returned to Glenlair with Katherine . In his paper On reciprocal figures , frames and diagrams of forces ( 1870 ) he discussed the rigidity of various designs of lattice . He wrote the textbook Theory of Heat ( 1871 ) and the treatise Matter and Motion ( 1876 ) . Maxwell was also the first to make explicit use of dimensional analysis , in 1871 . 
 In 1871 he became the first Cavendish Professor of Physics at Cambridge . Maxwell was put in charge of the development of the Cavendish Laboratory , supervising every step in the progress of the building and of the purchase of the collection of apparatus . One of Maxwell 's last great contributions to science was the editing ( with copious original notes ) of the research of Henry Cavendish , from which it appeared that Cavendish researched , amongst other things , such questions as the density of the Earth and the composition of water . 
 Maxwell died in Cambridge of abdominal cancer on 5 November 1879 at the age of 48 . His mother had died at the same age of the same type of cancer . The minister who regularly visited him in his last weeks was astonished at his lucidity and the immense power and scope of his memory , but comments more particularly , 
 ... his illness drew out the whole heart and soul and spirit of the man : his firm and <unk> faith in the Incarnation and all its results ; in the full sufficiency of the Atonement ; in the work of the Holy Spirit . He had gauged and <unk> all the schemes and systems of philosophy , and had found them utterly empty and unsatisfying — " unworkable " was his own word about them — and he turned with simple faith to the Gospel of the Saviour . 
 As death approached Maxwell told a Cambridge colleague 
 I have been thinking how very gently I have always been dealt with . I have never had a violent shove all my life . The only desire which I can have is like David to serve my own generation by the will of God , and then fall asleep . 
 Maxwell is buried at Parton Kirk , near Castle Douglas in Galloway close to where he grew up . The extended biography The Life of James Clerk Maxwell , by his former <unk> and lifelong friend Professor Lewis Campbell , was published in 1882 . His collected works were issued in two volumes by the Cambridge University Press in 1890 . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 As a great lover of Scottish poetry , Maxwell memorised poems and wrote his own . The best known is Rigid Body Sings , closely based on " Comin ' Through the Rye " by Robert Burns , which he apparently used to sing while accompanying himself on a guitar . It has the opening lines 
 Gin a body meet a body 
 Flyin ' through the air . 
 Gin a body hit a body , 
 Will it fly ? And where ? 
 A collection of his poems was published by his friend Lewis Campbell in 1882 . Descriptions of Maxwell remark upon his remarkable intellectual qualities being matched by social awkwardness . 
 Maxwell was an evangelical Presbyterian and in his later years became an Elder of the Church of Scotland . Maxwell 's religious beliefs and related activities have been the focus of a number of papers . Attending both Church of Scotland ( his father 's denomination ) and Episcopalian ( his mother 's denomination ) services as a child , Maxwell later underwent an evangelical conversion in April 1853 . One facet of this conversion may have aligned him with an antipositivist position . 
 = = Scientific legacy = = 
 = = = Electromagnetism = = = 
 Maxwell had studied and commented on electricity and magnetism as early as 1855 when his paper On Faraday 's lines of force was read to the Cambridge Philosophical Society . The paper presented a simplified model of Faraday 's work and how the two phenomena were related . He reduced all of the current knowledge into a linked set of differential equations with 20 equations in 20 variables . This work was later published as On Physical Lines of Force in March 1861 . 
 Around 1862 , while lecturing at King 's College , Maxwell calculated that the speed of propagation of an electromagnetic field is approximately that of the speed of light . He considered this to be more than just a coincidence , commenting , " We can scarcely avoid the conclusion that light consists in the transverse undulations of the same medium which is the cause of electric and magnetic phenomena . " 
 Working on the problem further , Maxwell showed that the equations predict the existence of waves of oscillating electric and magnetic fields that travel through empty space at a speed that could be predicted from simple electrical experiments ; using the data available at the time , Maxwell obtained a velocity of 310 @,@ 740 @,@ 000 metres per second ( 1 @.@ <unk> × 109 ft / s ) . In his 1864 paper A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field , Maxwell wrote , " The agreement of the results seems to show that light and magnetism are affections of the same substance , and that light is an electromagnetic disturbance propagated through the field according to electromagnetic laws " . 
 His famous equations , in their modern form of four partial differential equations , first appeared in fully developed form in his textbook A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism in 1873 . Most of this work was done by Maxwell at Glenlair during the period between holding his London post and his taking up the Cavendish chair . Maxwell expressed electromagnetism in the algebra of quaternions and made the electromagnetic potential the centrepiece of his theory . In 1881 Oliver Heaviside replaced Maxwell 's electromagnetic potential field by ' force fields ' as the centrepiece of electromagnetic theory . Heaviside reduced the complexity of Maxwell 's theory down to four differential equations , known now collectively as Maxwell 's Laws or Maxwell 's equations . According to Heaviside , the electromagnetic potential field was arbitrary and needed to be " murdered " . The use of scalar and vector potentials is now standard in the solution of Maxwell 's equations . 
 A few years later there was a debate between Heaviside and Peter Guthrie Tait about the relative merits of vector analysis and quaternions . The result was the realisation that there was no need for the greater physical insights provided by quaternions if the theory was purely local , and vector analysis became commonplace . Maxwell was proven correct , and his quantitative connection between light and electromagnetism is considered one of the great accomplishments of 19th century mathematical physics . 
 Maxwell also introduced the concept of the electromagnetic field in comparison to force lines that Faraday described . By understanding the propagation of electromagnetism as a field emitted by active particles , Maxwell could advance his work on light . At that time , Maxwell believed that the propagation of light required a medium for the waves , dubbed the luminiferous aether . Over time , the existence of such a medium , permeating all space and yet apparently undetectable by mechanical means , proved impossible to reconcile with experiments such as the Michelson – Morley experiment . Moreover , it seemed to require an absolute frame of reference in which the equations were valid , with the distasteful result that the equations changed form for a moving observer . These difficulties inspired Albert Einstein to formulate the theory of special relativity ; in the process Einstein dispensed with the requirement of a stationary luminiferous aether . 
 = = = Colour vision = = = 
 As most physicists of the time , Maxwell had a strong interest in psychology . He was particularly interested , following the steps of Isaac Newton and Thomas Young , in the study of colour vision . From 1855 to 1872 , he published at intervals a series of investigations concerning the perception of colour , colour @-@ blindness , and colour theory , and was awarded the Rumford Medal for On the Theory of Colour Vision . 
 Isaac Newton had demonstrated , using prisms , that white lights , such as sunlight , are composed of a number of monochromatic components which could then be recombined into white light . Newton also showed that an orange paint made of yellow and red could look exactly like a monochromatic orange light , although being composed of two monochromatic yellow and red lights . Hence the paradox that puzzled physicists of the time : two complex lights ( composed of more than one monochromatic light ) could look alike but be physically different , called <unk> . Thomas Young later proposed that this paradox could be explained by colours being perceived through a limited number of channels in the eyes , which he proposed to be threefold , the trichromatic color theory . Maxwell used the recently developed Linear algebra to prove Young 's theory . Any monochromatic light stimulating three receptors should be able to be equally stimulated by a set of three different monochromatic lights ( in fact , by any set of three different lights ) . He demonstrated that to be the case , inventing color matching experiments and <unk> . 
 Maxwell was also interested in applying his theory of color perception , namely in colour photography . Stemming directly from his psychological work on colour perception : if a sum of any three lights could reproduce any perceivable colour , then colour photographs could be produced with a set of three colored filters . In the course of his 1855 paper , Maxwell proposed that , if three black @-@ and @-@ white photographs of a scene were taken through red , green and blue filters and transparent prints of the images were projected onto a screen using three projectors equipped with similar filters , when superimposed on the screen the result would be perceived by the human eye as a complete reproduction of all the colours in the scene . 
 During an 1861 Royal Institution lecture on colour theory , Maxwell presented the world 's first demonstration of colour photography by this principle of three @-@ colour analysis and synthesis . Thomas Sutton , inventor of the single @-@ lens reflex camera , took the picture . He photographed a tartan ribbon three times , through red , green , and blue filters , also making a fourth photograph through a yellow filter , which , according to Maxwell 's account , was not used in the demonstration . Because Sutton 's photographic plates were insensitive to red and barely sensitive to green , the results of this pioneering experiment were far from perfect . It was remarked in the published account of the lecture that " if the red and green images had been as fully photographed as the blue , " it " would have been a truly @-@ coloured image of the riband . By finding photographic materials more sensitive to the less <unk> rays , the representation of the colours of objects might be greatly improved . " Researchers in 1961 concluded that the seemingly impossible partial success of the red @-@ filtered exposure was due to ultraviolet light , which is strongly reflected by some red dyes , not entirely blocked by the red filter used , and within the range of sensitivity of the wet collodion process Sutton employed . 
 = = = Kinetic theory and thermodynamics = = = 
 Maxwell also investigated the kinetic theory of gases . Originating with Daniel Bernoulli , this theory was advanced by the successive labours of John <unk> , John James Waterston , James Joule , and particularly Rudolf Clausius , to such an extent as to put its general accuracy beyond a doubt ; but it received enormous development from Maxwell , who in this field appeared as an experimenter ( on the laws of gaseous friction ) as well as a mathematician . 
 Between 1859 and 1866 , he developed the theory of the distributions of velocities in particles of a gas , work later generalised by Ludwig Boltzmann . The formula , called the Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution , gives the fraction of gas molecules moving at a specified velocity at any given temperature . In the kinetic theory , temperatures and heat involve only molecular movement . This approach generalised the previously established laws of thermodynamics and explained existing observations and experiments in a better way than had been achieved previously . Maxwell 's work on thermodynamics led him to devise the thought experiment that came to be known as Maxwell 's demon , where the second law of thermodynamics is violated by an imaginary being capable of sorting particles by energy . 
 In 1871 he established Maxwell 's thermodynamic relations , which are statements of equality among the second derivatives of the thermodynamic potentials with respect to different thermodynamic variables . In 1874 , he constructed a plaster thermodynamic visualisation as a way of exploring phase transitions , based on the American scientist Josiah Willard Gibbs 's graphical thermodynamics papers . 
 = = = Control theory = = = 
 Maxwell published a paper On governors in the Proceedings of Royal Society , vol . 16 ( 1867 – 1868 ) . This paper is considered a central paper of the early days of control theory . Here " governors " refers to the governor or the centrifugal governor used to regulate steam engines . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 His name is honoured in several ways : 
 The maxwell ( <unk> ) , a compound derived CGS unit measuring magnetic flux 
 IEEE Maxwell Award 
 Maxwell Montes , a mountain range on Venus 
 The Maxwell Gap in the Rings of Saturn 
 The James Clerk Maxwell Telescope , the largest submillimetre @-@ wavelength astronomical telescope in the world , with a diameter of 15 metres ( 49 ft ) 
 The James Clerk Maxwell Building of the University of Edinburgh , housing the schools of mathematics , physics and meteorology 
 The James Clerk Maxwell building at the Waterloo campus of King 's College London , a chair in Physics , and a society for undergraduate physicists are named after him at the university . 
 The James Clerk Maxwell Centre of the Edinburgh Academy 
 The Maxwell Centre at the University of Cambridge , dedicated to academia @-@ industry interactions in Physical Sciences and Technology . 
 A statue on Edinburgh 's George Street 
 GPU manufacturer Nvidia has named the architecture of its GeForce 900 series after Maxwell 
 A proposed sculpture called the Star of Caledonia is to pay tribute to James Clerk Maxwell 
 <unk> software for electromagnetic analysis , named Maxwell 
 = = Publications = = 
 Maxwell , James Clerk ( 1873 ) , A treatise on electricity and magnetism Vol I , Oxford : Clarendon Press 
 Maxwell , James Clerk ( 1873 ) , A treatise on electricity and magnetism Vol II , Oxford : Clarendon Press 
 Maxwell , James Clerk ( 1881 ) , An Elementary treatise on electricity , Oxford : Clarendon Press 
 Maxwell , James Clerk ( 1890 ) , The scientific papers of James Clerk Maxwell Vol I , Dover Publication 
 Maxwell , James Clerk ( 1890 ) , The scientific papers of James Clerk Maxwell Vol II , Cambridge , University Press 
 Maxwell , James Clerk ( 1908 ) , Theory of heat , Longmans Green Co . 
 Three of Maxwell 's contributions to Encyclopædia Britannica appeared in the Ninth Edition ( 1878 ) : Atom , [ 1 ] Attraction , [ 2 ] , and Ether [ 3 ] ; and three in the Eleventh Edition ( 1911 ) : Capillary Action , [ 4 ] Diagram , [ 5 ] and Faraday , Michael [ 6 ] . 
 = Ontario Highway 127 = 
 King 's Highway 127 , commonly referred to as Highway 127 , is a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . The route begins in Maynooth , connecting Highway 62 north of Bancroft with Highway 60 in the township of South Algonquin , east of Whitney and Algonquin Provincial Park . The entire route is patrolled by the Ontario Provincial Police ( OPP ) . 
 Highway 127 was designated in late 1955 , generally following the same route as today , with the exception of the northern terminus . During the early 1960s , a new road was constructed east of Whitney , bypassing the old highway for several kilometres . By 1963 , the bypass was complete and Highway 127 was rerouted onto it . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 127 is a remote connector highway that lies east of Algonquin Park , the oldest provincial park in Ontario and one of the most frequented camping grounds in the world . It connects the northern end of Highway 62 in Maynooth with Highway 60 east of Whitney . The only community Highway 127 passes through is Lake St. Peter . It passes through large swaths of undeveloped forest on its 39 km ( 24 mi ) journey , and is rather remote ; aside from the towns at the northern and southern terminii , the only named community on Highway 127 is Lake St. Peter . 
 Like most routes which pass through the Canadian Shield , Highway 127 travels through rock cuts and muskeg @-@ ridden terrain in the midst of dense coniferous forests . There is little agricultural activity along the route . Within Maynooth , Highway 127 serves nearly three times as many vehicles as the rest of the route ; while a daily average of 1800 vehicles use Highway 127 in Maynooth , only 650 travel the length of the route . As with other provincial highways in Ontario , Highway 127 is patrolled by the OPP . 
 = = History = = 
 Highway 127 was first designated in 1955 along an existing road between Maynooth and Whitney . The section within the Hastings County was designated on October 19 and the section within Nipissing District on November 16 . The highway was 44 @.@ 3 km ( 27 @.@ 5 mi ) long when it was designated . It was paved as far north as Lake St. Peter , after which it was a gravel road . Over the next several years , the highway was paved north towards Whitney . In the early 1960s , it was decided to bypass to the east of the northernmost section of the highway . Construction began in 1961 and was completed by 1963 , cutting 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) off the length of the route . Aside from minor realignments , the route of Highway 127 has not changed since then . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 127 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Stanley Bruce = 
 Stanley Melbourne Bruce , 1st Viscount Bruce of Melbourne , CH , MC , PC , FRS ( 15 April 1883 – 25 August 1967 ) was the eighth Prime Minister of Australia ( 1923 – 29 ) . Bruce made wide @-@ ranging reforms and mounted a comprehensive nation @-@ building program in government , but his controversial handling of industrial relations led to his dramatic defeat at the polls in 1929 . He later pursued a long and influential diplomatic career as High Commissioner to the United Kingdom , at the League of Nations and as Chairman of the Food and Agriculture Organization Council . 
 Born into a wealthy Melbourne family , Bruce studied at the University of Cambridge and spent his early life tending to the importing and exporting business of his late father . He served on the front lines of the Gallipoli Campaign in World War I and returned to Australia wounded in 1917 , becoming a spokesperson for government recruitment efforts . He gained the attention of the Nationalist Party and Prime Minister Billy Hughes , who encouraged a political career . He was elected to parliament in 1918 , becoming treasurer in 1921 and then prime minister in 1923 . 
 In office Bruce pursued an energetic and diverse agenda . He comprehensively overhauled federal government administration and oversaw its transfer to the new capital city of Canberra . He implemented many reforms to the Australian federal system that strengthened the role of the Commonwealth . He established the Commonwealth Peace Officers and Council for Scientific and Industrial Research , the forerunners of the Australian Federal Police and the CSIRO . His " men , money and markets " scheme was an ambitious attempt to rapidly expand Australia 's population and economic potential through massive government investment and closer ties with Great Britain and the rest of the British Empire . However , his endeavours to overhaul Australia 's industrial relations system brought his government into frequent conflict with the labour movement , and his radical proposal to abolish Commonwealth arbitration in 1929 prompted members of his own party to cross the floor to defeat the government . In the resounding loss at the subsequent election the Prime Minister lost his seat , an event unprecedented in Australia and one that would not occur again until 2007 . 
 Although he returned to parliament in 1931 , Bruce 's service in the Lyons Government was brief . Instead he pursued an international career , accepting appointment as High Commissioner to the United Kingdom in 1933 . Bruce became an influential figure in British government circles and at the League of Nations , emerging as a tireless advocate for international cooperation on economic and social problems , especially those facing the developing world . Particularly passionate on improving global nutrition , Bruce was one of the key figures in the establishment of the Food and Agriculture Organization , serving as the first chairman of its governing council from 1946 to 1951 . He was elevated to the peerage in 1947 and became the first Australian to sit in the House of Lords , as well as the first Chancellor of the Australian National University . Although his diplomatic career went largely unnoticed in Australia , he continued throughout his life in London to vociferously advocate for Australian interests ( particularly during World War II ) and asked that his remains be returned to Canberra when he died in 1967 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stanley Melbourne Bruce was born on 15 April 1883 in St Kilda , Victoria , a suburb of Melbourne , and was the youngest of five children . His father , John Munro Bruce , was of Ulster Scottish descent and had emigrated from Ireland to Australia in 1858 at the age of 18 . His mother , Mary Ann Henderson , was Irish and had married her cousin John after emigrating to Australia in 1872 at the age of 24 . John Bruce was a talented businessman with " a flair for buying and selling " , which would secure him a partnership in an established Melbourne importing firm that became known as Paterson , Laing and Bruce in 1868 . As his wealth grew , John became increasingly influential in colonial Victoria 's social and political life . An avid golfer , he was one of the founders of the Royal Melbourne Golf Club . He was prominent in the liberal protectionist political movement within the state , and an early supporter of future prime minister Alfred Deakin . John 's success ensured that Bruce , his sister Mary and brothers Ernest , William and Robert were born into affluence . Shortly after Bruce 's birth the family relocated to the stately <unk> manor in Toorak . However , John was an aloof and remote figure in the lives of his children , as Bruce later recounted . Despite their family 's Presbyterian faith , Bruce was sent to Melbourne Church of England Grammar School ( now Melbourne Grammar School ) and subsequently Bruce would come to identify principally as Anglican . Bruce was an average student but extremely active in the sporting life of the school and captain of its football team , and then of the school itself in 1901 . 
 The economic depression of the 1880s and 1890s hit the Bruce family fortunes hard . John Bruce lost much of his fortune in the Victorian bank collapse of 1894 and incurred large debts to buy out his partners in the importing business in 1897 . The family suffered a great deal more tragedy over the coming decades . Stanley 's brother William committed suicide in 1899 , shortly after seeking treatment for mental illness . Just two years later John Bruce took his own life during a business trip to Paris ; he had suffered from depression as a result of the great pressures on his business and finances . His sister Mary endured a long illness before succumbing in 1908 , and his mother died too in 1912 . Finally , Bruce 's beloved brother Ernest shot himself in 1919 , suffering from physical and mental injuries sustained during his military service in World War I. 
 In the aftermath of his father 's death in 1901 , the family fortunes were at a low ebb and Bruce went into the family business after leaving high school . The young Bruce was ambitious and determined to get an education . With loaned money , he moved to the United Kingdom with his mother and sister and enrolled in Trinity Hall , Cambridge in 1902 . He was a popular if average student , heavily involved in the athletic life of the college , including as a member of the Cambridge rowing crew that won the Boat Race in 1904 . Rowing remained one of his great passions , and he continued to coach crews ( including several for the Henley Royal Regatta ) and write on the subject for much of his life . Ernest Bruce had remained in Australia to take charge of the family 's business interests . In 1906 , he lobbied the directors of the company to have his brother Stanley take over the chairmanship of Paterson , Laing and Bruce , and was ultimately successful . Despite being just 23 , he proved an able chairman , and with Stanley in London managing the exporting and financial interests , and Ernest managing the importation and sales operations in Melbourne , the financial fortunes of the business and the family rapidly recovered . During these years , Bruce also trained and worked as a solicitor and then as a barrister in the London with the firm of Ashurst , Morris , Crisp & Co . His work for the firm took him to Mexico in 1908 and Colombia in 1912 , which fostered an interest in international affairs . 
 By 1912 Bruce was a wealthy businessman and successful barrister , and it was in this year Ethel Dunlop Anderson traveled to England and was reacquainted with Bruce , whom she had known as a child . Aged 32 , Ethel was of similar Scottish @-@ Irish ancestry and hailed from a prominent squatter family of Victoria . She shared many of Bruce 's interests , especially golf , and his political outlook . They married in July 1913 in a quiet ceremony . Theirs was a close @-@ knit relationship – they would have many acquaintances but a small circle of close friends , and their relationship was one of mutual devotion . But the death of all but one member of his immediate family in just over a decade , and the fact that the Bruces would bear no children of their own , deeply affected Bruce and he " was left with a sense of insecurity and melancholy " for much of his life . 
 = = Military service , 1914 – 18 = = 
 Bruce returned briefly to Australia in 1914 , swapping positions within the company with his brother Ernest . World War I broke out in August of that year . Bruce and his brothers sought to enlist in defence of the Empire , but all three of them would choose to serve in the British Army rather than the Australian Imperial Force . It was easier to obtain officer commissions in the British Army and the family had a close association with ( and for many of them , long periods of residency in ) Great Britain . Bruce enlisted and received a commission as lieutenant on 7 February 1915 and was attached to the 2nd Battalion , Royal Fusiliers in Egypt , which was then assigned to the British 29th Division . The 29th subsequently joined operations in Turkey along with Australian and New Zealand Army Corps ( ANZAC ) troops that year under Sir Ian Hamilton , commander of the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force ( MEF ) . First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill had devised a strategy of capturing the Dardanelles from Turkey to allow naval access to Allied Russia . However allied naval forces were unable to secure passage through the narrow straits , and the MEF under Hamilton devised a plan to wrest control through amphibious landings . This was the beginning of the now infamous Gallipoli Campaign . 
 Bruce 's regiment landed at Cape Helles in mid @-@ 1915 , where he fully distinguished himself in the construction of trenches and as an able commander . His battalion suffered heavy casualties over the coming months , and Bruce himself was wounded on 3 June by a shot to the arm , though it was this injury that spared him from a major assault by his battalion on 4 June in which many of his peers perished . He later reflected that he must have been kept on earth for some purpose . He returned to the front lines and his division moved to the new front at Suvla Bay , where it was involved in particularly heavy fighting and sustained trench warfare throughout August and September . Bruce received the Military Cross and the Croix de Guerre for his service during these months , and rose to the rank of captain on 5 August . He was wounded again on 26 September , this time by a shot to the knee , which left him crippled for several years and forced him to return to England to recuperate , while the rest of his regiment were transferred to France after the abandonment of the Gallipoli campaign . 
 Although it had been the agreement before the war that Ernest would stay and manage Paterson , Laing and Bruce while his brothers were serving , Ernest Bruce decided to enlist in the British Army in 1915 . Hence , in September 1916 Bruce sought to resign his commission and return to Australia to resume management of the family business . The War Office refused his request but granted him leave to return to Australia while recuperating from his injuries . As a decorated soldier on crutches with a gift for public speaking , he was enlisted to become a spokesperson for government recruitment in Australia . His success and popularity in this role brought the attention of the Nationalist League and then Prime Minister Billy Hughes , who lobbied the British government on his behalf and succeeded in convincing the War Office to allow Bruce to relinquish his commission in June 1917 . 
 Having served with many of his countrymen he returned to Australia with a renewed sense of pride and mission in the country of his birth . But having borne witness to the catastrophic loss of life in the Gallipoli Campaign and the death of most of his army comrades , as well as having suffered through the loss of most of his family , at age 34 Bruce was imbued with " a driving ambition to make something of a life which providence had spared " . 
 = = Member for Flinders , 1918 – 23 = = 
 Bruce 's popularity as a speaker for government recruitment efforts also earned him the attention of the National Union of Victoria , an influential group of the Melbourne elite who provided much of the financing for the Nationalist Party of Australia . As Sir William Irvine had recently resigned from parliament to become Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Victoria , there was to be a by @-@ election for his seat of Flinders in 1918 , which the National Union asked Bruce to stand for . The Nationalist preselection for the seat attracted many candidates , and Sir Edward Mitchell , one of Australia 's leading constitutional lawyers , was presumed to be the front runner . Mitchell proved to be a disappointing speaker , and Bruce won pre @-@ selection with the help of the National Union . A deal arranged by acting Prime Minister William Watt prevented the newly formed Country Party from challenging Bruce in this partly rural seat , which stretched from Dandenong out into the rural areas south and east of Melbourne . In the by @-@ election of 11 May , Bruce easily defeated his Labor opponent Gordon Holmes . 
 Speaking to the delegates in Dandenong , Bruce summed up his political philosophy : 
 A plain soldier and business man . I am no politician , nor have I any desire to be one . In the course of my commercial career it has been my fate to have had much experience of politicians and their ways . What I have seen in the course of that experience has given me little respect either for the professional politician or his methods . I am desirous of seeing this country governed in the ways of clear common sense and good sound business principles , and I think that desire of mine is heartily share by the vast majority of the population . 
 Bruce 's early years in parliament were unremarkable and his energies were primarily focused on the affairs of Paterson , Laing and Bruce . However , he began to attract the attention of his parliamentary colleagues over the matter of the Commonwealth Shipping Line ( CSL ) in 1921 . Nationalist Prime Minister Billy Hughes , now a peace @-@ time leader , had declined in popularity within the party due to his left @-@ wing domestic policies . The CSL had been created by the Hughes government as a state @-@ owned concern to ship Australian goods during World War I when British and domestic commercial shipping were unavailable . However its post @-@ war existence was extensively criticised by Bruce as inappropriate and inefficient , and many of his economically conservative colleagues agreed . Bruce also distinguished himself as one of Australia 's two representatives to the League of Nations in 1921 in Geneva , at which he passionately advocated for disarmament and greater international cooperation , despite his general scepticism with regards to the League 's mission and potential for success . Returning from Europe in October 1921 , he was invited by Prime Minister Billy Hughes to join his government as Minister for Trade and Customs . Bruce was not interested – he was the head of one of Australia 's largest importing houses and thus had a serious conflict of interest with the portfolio , as well as being very busy running the affairs of that business . But he countered by stating that he might feel obliged to accept if the position of Treasurer was offered , knowing that it had already been promised to Walter Massy @-@ Greene . To Bruce 's surprise , Hughes agreed , although Massy Greene was to remain the number two in the government and Minister of Defence . Although he had only been in parliament for three years , his business background was highly desirable to Hughes , who was facing growing criticism from the pro @-@ business wing of the party , who had become increasingly suspicious of Hughes and his interventionist approach to the economy . Influential party figures such as Senator George Pearce and the National Union has also identified Bruce as their preferred choice for the treasury . 
 Bruce and Hughes clashed in both style and ideology . Bruce found Hughes ' management of the government capricious and chaotic , and felt little was accomplished in Cabinet or in party meetings so long as Hughes headed them . But he served as a strong counterweight to the domineering Hughes , resisting several of his more expensive proposals or acting as the voice of reason to talk Hughes down from several of his more outlandish ideas . His tenure would ultimately be short , presiding over just one budget in 1922 , which was conservative and tax @-@ cutting . The Opposition criticised the budget for its failure to limit rising government spending and indebtedness . The budget included many concessions to rural interests and the recently formed Country Party , which appeared as a major threat to Nationalist Party dominance going into the 1922 elections in December . Yet Bruce endeared himself to many of his colleagues with his amiable personal style , his forceful voice in Cabinet against Hughes , and his conservative views , which were more in line with the majority of the party . 
 = = Prime Minister , 1923 – 29 = = 
 The Nationalists lost eleven seats and their majority in the House of Representatives in the election of 1922 . Only three of these seats were picked up by the Labor Party though , and Labor still lacked the numbers to form government in their own right . Rather , a breakaway anti @-@ Hughes Liberal Party took five government seats , while the Country Party increased their number to 14 and now held the balance of power . The only politically realistic option for the Nationalists to stay in office was to come to an agreement with the Country Party . However , Country Party leader Earle Page refused to support a Nationalist government with Hughes as prime minister , and negotiations throughout January and February failed to break the impasse . Rather than risk being defeated in the legislature , which might have resulted in the Governor @-@ General asking Labor to form government , Hughes surprised his colleagues by announcing his intention to resign on 2 February . With deputy leader Walter Massy @-@ Greene having lost his seat at the 1922 election , Hughes now sent for Bruce to take over as leader of the party . After some reluctance , Bruce finally agreed , although Hughes later regretted the decision and became one of the new prime minister 's most outspoken detractors . 
 Bruce moved quickly to secure a working majority for his government . He convinced Hughes ' long time political ally George Pearce to join his ministry and shored up the support of the other former National Labor members of the Nationalist Party whom had walked out of the Labor Party with Hughes in 1916 . He appointed William Watt as Speaker of the House , effectively removing one of his key opponents from the benches , a tactical manoeuvre that became common in Australian politics thereafter . But his most lasting political achievement was the negotiation of what became known as the Coalition – an arrangement of electoral and political cooperation between the Nationalists ( and their successors ) and the Country Party . Although differing greatly in character and background , the orderly and diplomatic Bruce forged a strong working relationship with the intelligent but irascible Country Party leader Page . Bruce had to pay a very high price for this relationship , however . As part of the Coalition agreement , the Country Party received five seats in a Cabinet of 11 . Page also became Treasurer and ranked second in the Cabinet . The Nationalists also made major concessions on rural development and taxation policy – compromises that stirred some resentment among some members of Bruce 's party . Page , who would serve as Treasurer and de facto Deputy Prime Minister throughout Bruce 's tenure , would become a great admirer of Bruce , stating , " He was a leader who impressed his colleagues with his sincerity and his capacity , and earned their loyalty as the reward for his wisdom and integrity . " 
 Bruce 's appointment as prime minister marked an important turning point in Australian political history . He was the first prime minister who had not been involved in the movement for Federation , who had not been a member of a colonial or state parliament , and who had not been a member of the original 1901 federal parliament . He was , in addition , the first prime minister to head a cabinet consisting entirely of Australian @-@ born ministers . Yet Bruce himself was frequently caricatured in public as " an Englishman who happened to have been born in Australia " . He drove a Rolls @-@ Royce , wore white spats , and was often seen as distant and lacking the common touch : characteristics that did little to personally endear him to the Australian public . 
 = = = " Men , money and markets " = = = 
 In 1923 Australia was prosperous by comparison with other developed nations of the period , having quickly rebounded economically after World War I. Unemployment and inflation were relatively low by international standards , and Commonwealth revenues had grown significantly since Australia became a federation . Australia was a vast and richly resourced country with fewer than six million inhabitants , and Bruce made it his government 's priority to develop Australia 's economy . In his first speech to the House of Representatives as prime minister , he outlined a comprehensive vision for Australia that centred on economic development , reform of the federal system , increased Commonwealth powers over industrial relations , a greater voice for Australia within the British Empire and the establishment of a national capital . He summarised this vision as a program of " men , money and markets " . 
 According to Bruce , men were needed to allow Australia 's extensive resources to be developed . In 1923 , much of Australia 's land was virtually unoccupied , and Bruce believed Australia had the potential to be one of the most fertile and productive nations in the world , which could sustain populations upward of 100 million over time – more than 16 times the population of his time . Despite dissenting voices from scientists , who noted that poor climate , soils and water availability were significant barriers to large populations , the Bruce @-@ Page government enacted policies to encourage large numbers of British to migrate to Australia . Under the auspices of the new Development and Migration Commission , £ 34 million in loans took place over the decade starting in 1924 to facilitate immigrant settlement through improvements to rural infrastructure , land access , and subsidising immigrant journeys ( " passages " ) . Estimates as high as half a million British immigrants over ten years were predicted at the start of the policy , whereas just over 200 @,@ 000 travelled to Australia during that time period . Bruce 's settlement plan rested on rural growth . Migrants were often selected on the basis of their willingness to work on the land ; state and Commonwealth governments concentrated their investment on rural development and encouraged returned servicemen to take up farms on the periphery of settled areas . Despite this , a majority of these migrants settled in urban areas , as Australia 's rural areas were far more remote and difficult to work ( than for example England 's ) and many of those taking advantage of the assistance scheme were urban workers or family and friends of those already settled . Immigration from outside Great Britain and her dominions was considered unpalatable – the Bruce government upheld the White Australia policy by placing strong restrictions on immigration from other areas , notwithstanding its population growth targets . 
 Money was borrowed from Britain to fund the state 's programs and at an unprecedented rate . Over £ 230 million was extended in loans from the City of London to state and Commonwealth treasuries during the 1920s . A further £ 140 million arrived through private investment . Bruce 's plan for Australian economic development needed a much stronger role for the Commonwealth government than had been traditionally accepted . Both he and Page were " conspicuously national rather than federal in their outlook " and sought major changes to federal @-@ state relations in order implement their development policy . 
 Increasingly our problems are becoming national in character ... Our financial resources are curtailed and there is an immediate repercussion throughout the Commonwealth . All our problems are common problems . None can be prosperous unless all are prospering . I am more convinced that we have to look at all our problems with the eyes of a nation and not as individuals . Where a great problem confronts a State it may be solved by the cooperation of the Commonwealth for the benefit of the States , and the benefit and advancement of the whole of Australia . 
 The Bruce – Page plan of May 1923 put in motion efforts to coordinate state @-@ federal operations in several areas , particularly infrastructure and rural development schemes . The Main Roads Development Act of 1923 was one of the first and most important legislative accomplishments in this vein . The act leveraged Section 96 of the Constitution to grant financial assistance to the states by employing it to fund road construction and maintenance according to the plans of the federal transportation portfolio – in effect allowing the Commonwealth to operate directly in what was constitutionality the exclusive domain of the state governments . The Act would provide a precedent for many types of " special purpose payments " that became a common feature of Australian federal fiscal relations . Despite some major successes , Bruce was more frequently frustrated by a lack of progress in many key areas of intergovernmental cooperation . The states could not be induced to standardise electrical power schemes , nor unify on track gauges , nor national health insurance despite years of work and solid arguments in favour . 
 Although men and money had been secured , the markets component of the Bruce plan was never fully realised . At the 1923 Imperial Economic Conference , Bruce lobbied consistently for the Conservative government of Stanley Baldwin to make changes to Great Britain 's trading arrangements to give preference to dominion products over imports from other nations . He argued for Empire @-@ wide economic trading arrangements that filled domestic demands by production from member states before seeking supplemental imports from other countries and empires . Baldwin and the Conservatives attempted to introduce such a scheme in Britain ; however , the British public feared higher prices for basic products ( particularly food ) , and this fear was a factor in the Conservative government 's defeat in the election of December 1923 . Baldwin 's successor Ramsay MacDonald repudiated the plan , much to Bruce 's chagrin , and attempts to revive negotiations foundered as economic conditions worsened throughout the decade . World agricultural prices stalled in the mid @-@ 1920s as European and American agricultural production recovered to pre @-@ war levels , and Australian exports were crowded out of markets as the decade progressed . 
 In 1927 , Earle Page handed down the first budget in deficit for the coalition government , and Bruce recognised that Australia 's economic position was deteriorating . Federal and state debt that year totalled just over £ 1 billion , of which £ 305 million were war debts and the rest had been spent on development that had failed had deliver high returns . Nearly half of the total debt was owed to overseas lenders , principally those in London . Economic growth was slow , and far lower than the levels hoped . Exports and revenues were falling behind government needs , and investors had begun to express alarm at Australia 's level of debt . Bruce persisted with his plans and believed that growing Australian exports were the key to rectifying the problems , thus justifying further investment and encouragement of population growth . The government did act to try to manage the debt problem . By the mid @-@ 1920s , states were borrowing at unsustainable rates to fund their own programs to compensate for dwindling revenues . In response , Bruce proposed that the responsibility for all government debts , Commonwealth and state , and the authority to acquire new debt , should be handed over to a National Loan Council in which all states would have one vote and the Commonwealth would have two votes and the casting vote . He also moved to abolish per capita payments to the states , to be replaced by a funding formula tied more to financial need . These two changes formed the Financial Agreement of 1927 , the provisions of which were approved by referendum in 1928 . These changes would prove to be amongst the most significant in Australian constitutional history , as the states had now lost much of their financial independence . Faced with severe financial pressures and an increasing reliance upon Commonwealth transfer payments , after some resistance the states consented , although vertical fiscal imbalance between the states and the Commonwealth continued to be an enduring feature of Australian federal relations . 
 = = = <unk> government = = = 
 Bruce set about applying his business principles to his cabinet , putting his experience as both a corporate manager and rowing coach to use in a cabinet system that was orderly and practical . He implemented a formal system whereby a proper agenda for cabinet meetings would be formulated , and the minister responsible for each item would circulate papers to bring other members up to speed on the issue . His decision @-@ making procedures ensured that his colleagues were informed and actively participated in decisions – or if they disagreed , gave leave for cabinet members to absent themselves from meetings to preserve cabinet solidarity . In this respect Bruce earned the quick respect and approval of his colleagues , and in many respects came to dominate cabinet through his industriousness and <unk> . Cabinet minister George Pearce would later conclude that Bruce was the best of the prime ministers that he served or opposed in his 38 @-@ year parliamentary career . 
 Bruce also greatly strengthened the research and information @-@ gathering capacity of the executive , and sought to make decisions and policy on the basis of the best available evidence and information . A record 22 Royal Commissions reported to the Bruce government , as well as scores of other inquiries and research projects undertaken by the Commonwealth in a wide range of areas , particularly on economic , industrial and agricultural matters . Recognising that investment in science was essential to expanding the opportunities for agricultural and economic development in Australia , Bruce established the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research ( CSIR ) , now known as the CSIRO . He established the Bureau of Economic Research in 1929 and for the first time economists were regularly employed to advise the government on what had been until then exclusively political issues . By the time he left office , he had put in place extensive structures to provide information to the prime minister and the executive branch on most major areas of policy , a major development in the professional capacity of the Australian prime minister . 
 Under Bruce the Australian government also moved to its new permanent home in the planned federal city of Canberra . Plans for a new federal capital had been circulated since the time of Federation , and a site on the Molonglo River was selected in 1913 . Design and construction had proceeded slowly due to World War I as well as funding and management problems . Bruce was a committed advocate of the new capital , however , stating : " For the purposes of Federation it was essential that there should be some central point of nationhood , suitable to Australia as a nation ... and sooner or later there would have to be a national capital , overriding State boundaries and State prejudices . " This came to pass on 9 May 1927 when the Federal Parliament moved to its new premises in Canberra ; Bruce had moved himself and his wife to The Lodge a few days earlier . At the Federal Parliament 's opening ceremony , Bruce decided that voices of the clerks of the House of Representatives and the Senate were too heavily accented , and determined that he would personally welcome the Duke of York and co @-@ open the new building – a move that was criticised by several parliamentarians . The business of transferring government and cabinet operations to the new capital proceeded slowly over 1927 and 1928 . This was an administrative task that occupied a significant proportion of the government 's time in those years , with many departments only very gradually transferring from Melbourne , much to Bruce 's consternation . 
 = = = Imperial overtures = = = 
 Loyal to the concept of the British Empire , Bruce envisaged strengthening it through mutual economic development , greater political cooperation , and common policies on defence , trade and foreign affairs . His first trip abroad as prime minister was for the 1923 Imperial Conference in London . Bruce put forward a wide range of proposals for stronger cooperation between Great Britain and her dominions in a wide range of areas , particularly in the areas of trade , defence and the formulation of a common foreign policy . He particularly desired a greater role for the dominions in imperial affairs , including a collective decision @-@ making body for common questions of defence and foreign affairs . He took exception to a lack of involvement in foreign policy decisions made by Britain that would have significant ramifications for Australia . In 1922 , in what became known as the Chanak Crisis , British brinkmanship over Turkey 's aggressive manoeuvres to redefine its border with Greece had escalated to the point where the British cabinet had threatened war against Turkey . This threat included military participation of dominions in an intervention , though no dominion government had been informed of the developments in Turkey . Although a diplomatic end to the crisis was eventually found , dominion leaders were angered at having almost been committed to a military conflict without any consultation . 
 Bruce pushed for greater consultation and voice for the dominions , and succeeded in having Richard Casey appointed as a permanent political liaison in London who would have access to British government decisions and act as a conduit between Westminster and Melbourne . He also successfully lobbied for the creation of a Dominion Office separated out from the Colonial Office to acknowledge the different state of affairs that now existed in the Empire . However , while fellow dominions generally agreed that the imperial system should be modified , not all shared his vision for closer collaboration and strong ties . Canada and the Union of South Africa were instead seeking greater independence from London , and there was little enthusiasm for many of Bruce 's more ambitious plans for inter @-@ empire trade and policy cooperation . 
 Despite Australia 's greater representation in London after 1923 , Bruce 's hope for collective imperial decision @-@ making was dashed once more with the British decision to recognise the Soviet Union in 1924 . This act dismayed the fervently anti @-@ communist Bruce , who disagreed with the decision ideologically and on the grounds that once again the dominions had not been consulted . Ultimately , though , the differences between Britain 's and her dominions ' opinions on the matter were too great to be reconciled . Instead , Britain signed the General Treaty with the Soviet Union only on her own behalf , marking the first major split between Britain and Australia on a matter of foreign policy . Despite its applicability solely to European security arrangements , Bruce had criticised Britain 's signing of the Locarno Treaties in 1925 without dominion consultation ; though the eventual treaty was not binding on the dominions . 
 The 1926 Imperial Conference confirmed that Britain and her dominions were rapidly diverging in interests and that greater independence – not greater cooperation – was the most practical solution . Bruce recognised the empire had reached a turning point , but despite his optimism for a reinvigorated imperial system , there was little interest from other governments . His plan for greater economic and defensive cooperation was discussed , as well as a revival of imperial preference in trading arrangements , but such ideas were now politically unpalatable in Britain and failed to develop . His attitudes were almost the opposite of those held by the leaders of Canada , South Africa and the Irish Free State . As Prime Minister Baldwin remarked at the conference , " If you , Mr Bruce , would use the word ' Empire ' a bit less and you Mr McGilligan would use it a bit more , then we would make better progress . " Ultimately proposals for greater independence won out , and 1926 Imperial Conference recognised through the Balfour Declaration that dominions were essentially independent entities that freely associated as the British Commonwealth of Nations , though after much negotiation it stopped short of using the terms nation or state . Governors @-@ General were redefined as representatives only of the British monarch , not the British government , and were obliged now to act only on the advice of their respective dominion governments . These changes were both symbolically and practically significant in the transformation of the dominions from colonies to independent nations . Bruce had mixed feelings about these developments ; on the one hand he believed that the Empire was still a strong and vital international organization playing a positive role in international affairs , but on the other hand he was disappointed that other member nations did not share his vision or commitment to maintaining its integrity and unity . Bruce did have some successes at the conference , however , expanding the work of the Imperial Economic Committee and increasing inter @-@ empire cooperation in technical and scientific areas . 
 = = = Industrial relations = = = 
 Strikes and industrial unrest were frequent in the aftermath of World War I , arising from discontent over poor conditions and the rise of militant labour organizations like the Communist Party of Australia and the Industrial Workers of the World . The problems were made worse in Australia due to the overlapping system of industrial courts that had evolved since Federation . Although federal arbitration was intended for industrial disputes that impacted upon multiple states or federal employees , courts had through several judgments greatly expanded the potential jurisdiction of federal arbitration , and the system had developed into a duality with both state and federal tribunals weighing into a wide range of industrial disputes . This was exploited by both unions and employers , who pursued matters in the courts they felt most likely to be favourable and switched between different jurisdictions to arrive at the best combination of state and federal conditions . Protracted disputes arose as employers and employees pursued disputes in different courts or refused to recognise the rulings of one in favour of the other . Billy Hughes and several of his predecessors had sought resolution to the problem through greater Commonwealth powers , but all referendums to expand Commonwealth industrial powers had failed at the ballot box . 
 Bruce 's attitudes towards industrial relations were varied , and he was initially unsympathetic to either employer or employee complaints , believing the best resolutions to be those brokered between businesses and their employees . He frequently called upon both sides to embrace a spirit of cooperation . The situation became acute when waterfront workers led by the Seamen 's Union went on strike in 1925 . This had severe and immediate effect on the Australian economy , reliant as it was on sea transportation for its imports and exports , a situation the Prime Minister recognised as untenable . With the union disregarding Commonwealth rulings on the dispute , Bruce rushed through the Navigation Act and the Immigration Act . The first allowed British and foreign shipping not working under Australian industrial awards to operate in Australian waters ( although British vessels working in Australia would soon initiate a strike of their own ) . The second allowed the Commonwealth to deport any foreign @-@ born person whom a special tribunal found guilty of " disrupting the industrial life of the community " . Key foreign @-@ born strike leaders were immediately targeted for deportation , but New South Wales Premier Jack Lang refused to allow state police to serve summonses on two leading union leaders . Bruce responded with the Peace Officers Act , which re @-@ established a Commonwealth police force . 
 These heavy @-@ handed tactics drew outrage from the Labor Party , which challenged the Prime Minister to seek approval from the people . This Bruce did , and the elections of 1925 were Australia 's first " red scare " election . He campaigned for industrial peace and an increased Commonwealth role in securing it , but also denounced " foreign agitators " and " class war " in appealing for law and order on the waterfront . He openly challenged pre @-@ existing federal arrangements , stating on the campaign trail that Australia " should now consider whether that great historic instrument , the Constitution , meets the needs of to @-@ day in the light of the developments which have taken place " . The campaign was a success and the Bruce government was easily re @-@ elected , increasing by 11 seats its majority over a disheartened ALP , whose leader Matthew Charlton was in poor health . 
 " My government was returned to power on a clear issue and with a definite mission ... to introduce measures for the preservation of industrial peace " , Bruce declared during his second term , and called a referendum to amend the Australian Constitution and bring industrial relations under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Commonwealth . Attempts to amend the constitution for this purpose had been rejected narrowly in 1911 , 1913 and 1919 , but against a background of ongoing industrial strife , Bruce made clear the problems of mixed jurisdiction , confusing dual @-@ awards , and insufficient regulatory and enforcement powers at the Commonwealth level . Controversially , he also formulated an " essential services " question to be put at the same time , giving the government the power to protect the public from any " actual or probable disruption to essential services " . These proposals drew hostile reception from many quarters – even from future conservative prime minister Robert Menzies – and both the Australian Labor Party and conservative groups were divided in opinion on the amendments , with the ALP eventually taking no fixed position on the questions . But by September the issue had drawn so much controversy and ill @-@ feeling that it was no surprise for many commentators that the proposals failed to attract sufficient popular support to overcome the high bar for constitutional change . 
 The problems of industrial unrest continued to flare up , and the waterfront remained a flashpoint . In a review of the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Act in 1928 , Bruce required industrial courts to consider the economic effects of its awards in addition to the welfare of worker . Immediate problems followed when a new award for waterside workers in 1928 worsened conditions for workers on economic grounds . New industrial action led by the Waterfront Workers Federation broke out . In Melbourne these turned to riots , claiming casualties and at least one fatality . Reviving the " red scare " pitch for the 1928 election campaign , Bruce pushed the Transport Workers Act through parliament in response , which gave the executive unprecedented regulatory power in industrial relations . All waterfront workers now required federal licenses , or " dog collars " as they were derisively known , to work . The act allowed the Commonwealth government to effectively control who worked on the docks and nearly destroyed the Waterfront Workers Federation , earning the government deep unpopularity among organised labour . 
 At the 1928 election Bruce 's government was returned to power , but it now had a majority of just nine – a fragile result , given the growing propensity for Nationalist member defections . Most of the Nationalists ' parliamentary gains from 1925 had been wiped out . James Scullin had assumed the leadership of the ALP earlier in the year , upon the retirement of Charlton , and the party was invigorated as a consequence . Bruce was undeterred , though , and became convinced that unless costs of production for industry in Australia could be lowered and industrial peace secured , Australia was heading towards a major economic crisis . This doctrine was the basis of his appeals to the public for the next year and a half . 
 = = = Maritime industries crisis = = = 
 As early as 1927 economic indicators were signalling the onset of a recession in Australia . By 1929 , the evidence was unavoidable that recession was becoming depression as a resulting of rapidly deteriorating international conditions . In that year , prices for Australian exports fell by nearly a third and GDP had fallen by 10 % , with no attendant fall in the cost of living . Australia 's debt now stood at £ 631 million – the interest payments on which were equivalent to nearly half of Australia 's export receipts , a situation difficult to sustain even in a positive economic climate . Investors and banks recognised the risk and Australia 's credit access was rapidly drying up . Bruce 's grand economic development plans had increased the national debt significantly yet had delivered only marginal economic expansion in the short term . 
 To make matters worse for the government , industrial unrest was a persisting problem , particularly in the economically key states of New South Wales and Victoria . The opposition had become more potent as well : Scullin was widely recognised as one of the parliament 's most gifted and articulate members ; even his opponents respected his personal probity . Scullin forecast that the Australian economy was highly vulnerable given its indebtedness , and was on a course for severe depression if government finances were not turned around dramatically . 
 Furthermore , the Prime Minister 's own party was breaking down underneath him . There had been no official party platform yet agreed to , and individual members had a wide degree of latitude to determine the issues they ran on , leading to frequent government defections on legislation . The government 's existing nine @-@ seat majority shrank during 1928 and 1929 over various issues , as a result of by @-@ elections , and several leading figures who had previously worked with Bruce became increasingly sharp critics of him . Hughes and Edward Mann were two of the government 's most ardent opponents in 1929 . 
 Worsening economic conditions had put further pressure on industrial relations , with unemployment rising and employers seeking to cut costs . Strikes of sugar mill workers in 1927 , waterside workers in 1928 , and then transport and timber industry workers in 1929 continued to disrupt economic operations . The worst came with ongoing disputes between miners and mine owners on the coalfields of New South Wales had culminated in riots and lockouts in 1929 , and intervention by the Bruce government failed to produce a settlement . Notably , in March 1929 Newcastle @-@ based mine owner John Brown locked out workers from his mines at Pelaw Main and Richmond Main to try to force acceptance of lower wages . Attorney @-@ General John Latham pursued legal action against Brown for illegally using coercive industrial tactics , but Bruce intervened to stop the prosecution , believing the case to be doubtful and that dropping it would give the government a chance to negotiate an end to the dispute . The mine @-@ owners refused to accede to government @-@ brokered negotiations anyway , and the government was seen to have been siding with rich businesses and applying double standards , undermining Bruce 's own credibility as an impartial leader and law @-@ and @-@ order prime minister . 
 Bruce and the conservatives in parliament became increasingly convinced that " economic deterioration [ was ] the product , rather than the possible cause , of worsening industrial relations . " Exasperated , the Prime Minister made a dramatic move and presented an ultimatum to the Australian state governments : either they should voluntarily hand their powers of industrial regulation to the federal government , or the federal government would divest itself of its industrial powers and dismantle federal arbitration . The announcement came as a major shock to all sides of politics , not least the members of Bruce 's own cabinet , most of whom had not been informed of the dramatic change in policy until the day it was announced to the states . Bruce calculated that the states would not give up their powers , and thus the move was one designed to sanction the end of Commonwealth arbitration . For Bruce , the only inconceivable outcome now was that the status quo of dual jurisdiction remained unchanged . The opposition to the proposal , which the Prime Minister introduced to the parliament as the Maritime Industries Bill , was swift and fierce . In 1929 over 150 unions and 700 @,@ 000 workers were covered by Commonwealth awards over a wide range of industries – although there was dissatisfaction in the coal and timber sectors , most were happy with their arrangements and feared worse pay and conditions if moved back to state awards . He defended his actions as being necessary to create certainty and end the duplication that had caused so many problems in recent years . 
 Other government decisions in 1929 had attracted controversy as well . Page handed down his last budget on 22 August , which hinted at the burgeoning debt crisis and introduced a new tax on entertainment and theatres to help cover the deficit . The tax was very unpopular with the public , and the entertainment industry mounted a vocal campaign to stop it . Bruce , supported by the Brigden Report of 1929 , also raised concern that protective tariffs were too high and were in need of reform – a position controversial with the powerful protected industries . 
 The second reading of the Maritime Industries Bill passed by only four votes , with Hughes , Edward Mann and George Maxwell voting against the government . Hughes moved an amendment to the bill that stipulated it should only take effect after being approved by the people at a referendum or general election . Bruce ruled out any referendum , stating that the amendment would constitute a vote of confidence in his government and urged his party to vote it down . Nationalist MP Walter Marks and Independent MP William McWilliams joined the opposition , giving the opposition a one @-@ vote majority . Bruce and his supporters now lobbied the Speaker , Sir Littleton Groom to make a deliberative vote in committee to tie the numbers , leaving the Committee chairman James Bayley with the casting ( and presumably pro @-@ government ) vote . Groom refused , citing long @-@ standing Westminster ( though not Australian ) parliamentary tradition of the speaker 's impartiality . Groom 's bitterness at having been dismissed by Bruce from the job of Attorney @-@ General in 1925 had a significant bearing on his later decision . 
 A snap election was called , with Bruce taking his case to the people that dramatic action on industrial relations was needed . Opposition Leader Scullin forcefully attacked the government , blaming the Prime Minister for an industrial environment that was adversarial and punitive , stressing that Commonwealth arbitration had safeguarded many rights of workers and was completely workable with conciliation and proper consultation . Scullin also criticised the government for the growing debt problem and economic malaise , which for some years he had predicted would lead to a major economic crisis . 
 In the event , the government was soundly defeated on 12 October , losing more than half its seats in parliament . To add to his humiliation , Bruce was defeated in his own seat of Flinders by Labor challenger Jack Holloway . On paper , there was no indication that Bruce was in any danger of losing his seat ; he held Flinders with a reasonably safe majority of 10 @.@ 7 percent in 1928 . However , on the second count Holloway picked up enough preferences from an independent Liberal candidate to give him the victory . Bruce was the first sitting prime minister to lose his own seat , a feat which would not be repeated until 2007 . He was measured in defeat however , stating , " The people have said they do not want my services , and I am going into the banishment to which they have sent me . " 
 = = Return to government , 1929 – 33 = = 
 Bruce returned to England after his defeat to holiday and attend to his business . Sir John Latham , took over as leader of the Nationalists . With the stock market crash in 1929 and the onset of the Great Depression in Australia , Bruce commented to his colleagues that their defeat was probably fortunate . But he ardently defended his government 's record , maintaining that the economic crisis was inevitable and that his own policies were justified attempts to try to strengthen the Australian economy . It was this defence that he mounted in April 1931 when he announced he would return to politics and seek to regain his seat of Flinders at the next election . By now the Nationalists had regrouped as the United Australia Party ( UAP ) under Joseph Lyons , who had defected with several others from the embattled Scullin government . 
 In November 1931 the Scullin government was defeated in parliament over its controversial Premiers ' Plan , catching Bruce by surprise as he was in England attending to Paterson , Laing and Bruce affairs when a new election was called . The Scullin government was subsequently defeated in a landslide , losing a then @-@ record 32 seats ; the two Labor factions were cut down to only 18 seats between them . With Holloway having abandoned Flinders to run in the much friendlier Melbourne Ports , Bruce was returned in absentia to his old seat , regaining it with a swing of 18 @.@ 5 percent . He was appointed assistant treasurer in the new Lyons Government , Lyons having taken the treasury portfolio personally . Lyons leaned heavily on Bruce and Latham in his first six months of government , though Bruce had by now set his sights on international affairs rather than the domestic crisis . 
 Bruce led the Australian delegation to the 1932 Imperial Economic Conference in Ottawa . He redoubled his efforts to improve Australian economic prospects with the empire , and the conference agreed to a limited form of his long @-@ sought imperial preference scheme that would give Australia greater access and competitiveness in imperial markets over five years , an achievement for which Bruce received much praise from the Lyons government . The closer trading arrangements of the Ottawa Agreements would set the pattern for Australian @-@ British trade relations until Britain 's entry in the European Common Market in 1973 . 
 After the success of the Imperial Economic Conference , Lyons appointed Bruce to London as Resident Minister in the United Kingdom – it was to remain his and Ethel 's home for the rest of their lives . His first task in London was to renegotiate the terms of Australia 's burgeoning government debts , the repayment of which was crippling Depression @-@ era Australia . Over two years , he negotiated with the Westminster Bank and the British Government for loan conversions worth £ 84 million , which saved Australia millions of pounds in interest over several years and along with the Ottawa Agreements were significant in helping alleviate the Australian government 's budgetary difficulties . Bruce was asked at several points during the 1930s to return to Australia by UAP backers and other political figures , who hoped that he could replace Lyons as prime minister . He himself had questioned Lyons ' health and capacity to execute the role effectively , but he showed little interest in returning . In 1938 and 1939 Bruce was approached by senior UAP figures and Lyons himself to return to Australia and assume the leadership of the government , which was struggling under the ailing Lyons , but he either flatly declined or set conditions for his return ( such as an all @-@ party government behind him ) that were impossible to meet . 
 = = High Commissioner to the United Kingdom , 1933 – 45 = = 
 In September 1933 , Bruce was appointed by Lyons to replace the ailing Sir Granville Ryrie as High Commissioner to the United Kingdom , giving him ambassadorial rank . He formally resigned from parliament on 7 October 1933 . Bruce would excel in the new post , becoming a trusted confidant among Conservative politicians and a familiar face in British government circles , which led to him at one point considering entering British politics formally . Bruce was particularly close to Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin , with whom he frequently consulted , and was notably influential in pressing for Edward VIII 's abdication in 1936 . His importance and power in London was due in part to the free rein that Lyons gave him – a rarity in the history of the position . Combined with the turmoil and frequent ministerial changes within the Commonwealth Department of External Affairs , Bruce was generally credited as Australia 's most influential and credible international representative during his posting , often determining matters of foreign policy in his own right . 
 = = = League of Nations = = = 
 Bruce represented Australia at the League of Nations and successfully lobbied for Australia to participate as a member of the League Council from 1933 to 1936 . He opposed action against Japan following the invasion of Manchuria in 1933 , concerned as to Australia 's trading relationship with Japan and the potential future threat it posed to peace in the Pacific . He also attempted to steer the League away from sanctioning member nations , believing it yet lacked the military or economic sway to do so effectively and feared the breakdown of the League – a prospect that loomed after Germany and Japan departed the body in 1933 . During the Abyssinia Crisis , Bruce again counselled against partial sanctions , believing them the worst option as they would not stop the Ethiopian invasion and yet would alienate Italy – then a potential ally against a rearming Nazi Germany . He further argued for much greater rearmament efforts in the United Kingdom and France to provide greater military capacity to enforce future decisions by the League . Bruce assumed the presidency of the League of Nations Council in 1936 at the height of the crisis and after the failure of the Hoare – Laval Pact between France , Italy and Britain , but further attempts to forestall the invasion failed . He presided as League Council President during the Rhineland Crisis , although once again attempts to respond to fascist aggression failed . Although this did not shake his conviction in the potential of the League , he saw it doomed to failure without fundamental reforms to its structure and system of sanctions . He was nominated by Turkey to chair the 1936 Montreux Conference , which was far more successful in negotiating international agreement on passage through the Turkish Straits – an issue of particular relevance to Bruce as a veteran of the Gallipoli campaign . Despite the turmoil of his presidency , the League historian F.B. Walters would later describe Bruce as " the best , perhaps , of the many first @-@ rate chairmen who presided over the Council , Conferences , or Committees of the League " . 
 By 1937 Bruce 's attention had shifted to social and economic cooperation , which he believed had far greater potential for success and was of greater importance to humanity at large . He had taken a leading role in promoting agriculture , nutrition and economic cooperation through the League of Nations , working intensively with Frank McDougall and John Boyd Orr throughout the decade . In 1937 he presented a plan of " economic appeasement " , which built on this work and aimed to ease international tensions by reviving international trade and improving living standards in Europe through better working conditions , lower food prices , rural credits and housing assistance . Barriers to trade would gradually be reduced while European nations still recovering from the depression would be reintegrated into the international economy . In doing so he made a firm link between international trade and international peace , believing it key to unlocking world economic potential . Foreshadowing the logic of the Marshall Plan , Bruce argued that unrelieved economic and social hardship threatened to push other nations towards fascism or communism . 
 I feel very strongly that it will be impossible to find a solution to the political problems of Europe and remove the present nightmare conditions unless something is done to improve the economic position ... it is vital for the prestige and future wellbeing of the League that it should afford active leadership towards bringing about economic appeasement . 
 The plan was supported by Secretary @-@ General Joseph Louis Anne <unk> , who like Bruce recognised that the League was rapidly becoming moribund and that a major change of direction was needed , although neither was successful in convincing key states in contributing to the plan . Critically , new British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain could not be convinced by Bruce to invest further into the development of the League , and the body began to lose its political impetus as war loomed . He would continue to press for League reform in the lead up to the war . The Bruce committee to advise on League reform was formed in 1939 in the aftermath of the partition of Czechoslovakia by Nazi Germany and the apparent failure of Chamberlain 's appeasement policy . This committee , which met in July and August 1939 , proposed a significant expansion of Bruce 's earlier ideas to the League , bringing a wide range of economic and social programs under its purview as a means of fostering international cooperation . Their work , however , would be rendered moot by the outbreak of World War II . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 In the events leading up to World War II , Bruce and Lyons had been supporters of the British under Chamberlain and the policy of appeasement exercised with regards to the reoccupation of the Rhineland , the Anschluss and the Munich Crisis . Even during the " phoney war " , Bruce continued to advocate the implementation of a more durable international system to enforce peace through mutual disarmament , the expansion of transnational trade , and global organizations capable of addressing the pressing social and economic questions that he felt were the recurrent causes of international conflict . He had become a close confidant of senior Conservative Party figures Anthony Eden and Neville Chamberlain in this period , and was strident in advancing the opinion of Australia ( and the dominions more broadly ) that negotiation and compromise with Nazi Germany was preferable to war . Bruce actively participated in the negotiations for the Munich Agreement . When Lyons died in April 1939 , Earle Page and Richard Casey personally appealed for Bruce to return to Australia and take over once more as prime minister at the head of the UAP . Bruce demurred , however , and made it the condition of his return that he be allowed to sit in parliament as an independent and lead an all @-@ party unity government . Such conditions were politically impossible to meet , and Robert Menzies was elected as the new leader of the UAP . 
 Britain 's declaration of war against Germany on 3 September 1939 was followed within hours by Australia 's Prime Minister Menzies stating that because of Britain 's declaration Australia too was now at war with Germany . Winston Churchill 's accession as British Prime Minister in May 1940 brought Bruce into frequent conflict with the British government . Churchill saw the dominions as still semi @-@ dependent colonies who were at London 's command whereas Bruce saw the Empire as a kind of international partnership and the dominions as rightful parties to the decision @-@ making process . Britain 's preoccupation with the European theatre alarmed Australian politicians , given the tenuous position of Far Eastern possessions and the looming possibility of Japanese invasion . After a string of defeats in the Far East , particularly the Fall of Singapore , the Australian government was finally successful in having Bruce accredited to the British War Cabinet and Pacific War Council as an Australian ( and dominion ) representative . However , Bruce soon became embroiled in the disputes over Churchill 's autocratic leadership style and his lack of consultation with the cabinet over war decisions . He was regularly left out of cabinet communique or not invited to meetings , much to his displeasure . With the fear of Japanese invasion mounting in Australia throughout 1942 , Bruce directly confronted Churchill on a number of occasions over Far East policy and the continuing lack of consultation with Australia and his own cabinet . Churchill usually responded by rebuffing him or pointedly excluding him further from government business . Although outwardly relenting in the face of pressure exerted by the dominions for representation in war decisions , Churchill routinely marginalised or ignored that representation . Bruce persisted in this difficult arrangement until May 1944 when he became completely disillusioned and resigned , choosing other forums in which to represent Australia in London . In spite of his tempestuous relationship with Churchill , Bruce was held in high regard by many cabinet members , particularly future prime ministers Clement Attlee and Anthony Eden , and his dogged determination to advance dominion interests during the war years earned him high praise from John Curtin and the other dominion prime ministers . 
 = = Food and Agriculture Organization , 1946 – 51 = = 
 By the war 's end in 1945 , Bruce had become tired of the High Commission posting and hinted to Curtin 's successor Ben Chifley that he would not object to being replaced in the position . In the last years of the war he had envisaged a post @-@ war order based on a continuing alliance of the four powers – the United States , the British Empire , the Soviet Union and China – that could evolve into a new international body with a similar function as the League of Nations , but with a stronger role and authority in international matters . Bruce had rejoined Frank McDougall and John Boyd Orr in these years in reviving their proposals for international cooperation on nutrition and agriculture . He wrote and made representations at all levels on the subject , and became a leading voice once more advocating the creation of an international body to examine social and economic questions , much as he had done during his years with the League of Nations . The efforts of McDougall , Bruce and Orr finally paid off when their work came to the attention of Eleanor Roosevelt , and subsequently the American government , and their proposals would find expression at the Food and Agriculture Conference that Franklin Roosevelt convened in Hot Springs , Virginia , in May 1943 . This conference agreed to the establishment of the Food and Agriculture Organization ( FAO ) , which became an associated institution with the United Nations when it was established formally in October 1945 . 
 As the war in Europe drew to a close and the United Nations Charter was promulgated in June 1945 , Bruce 's name was among those being considered to become the first Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations , with American Secretary of State Dean Acheson and British Foreign Minister Anthony Eden actively supporting his candidacy . Bruce , however , was now 62 and indicated that he felt himself too old for the position , instead preferring a less demanding role considering economic and social questions . In 1946 he assumed the chairmanship of the FAO Preparatory Commission on World Food Proposals , which had the mission of establishing a " world food board " to coordinate international policy on nutrition and develop a system to eliminate global agricultural shortages . He proposed many international schemes as part of this work , particularly a world food reserve and special pricing mechanisms to reallocate and release food to where it was most needed in times of need . Bruce 's Commission also placed a high emphasis on agricultural modernization , international development aid , commodity agreements and price stability to help starving developing nations in its findings presented in 1947 . The proposals were never adopted , as the costs and challenges to national sovereignty proved too difficult to overcome politically . 
 Undeterred , Bruce was elected Chairman of the newly formed FAO Council in November 1947 , working once more with John Boyd Orr , now Secretary @-@ General of the FAO . Acute shortages of cereals and livestock were rampant following severe droughts in Europe , and the international food supply system was under serious strain after the devastation of the war . Bruce and the council worked in these years to distribute fertiliser and agricultural machinery , as well as improve nutrition , especially in less developed nations . More than two @-@ thirds of the world was undernourished in 1949 and Bruce felt it imperative for the Council to bring these stark facts to the developed nations . A landmark agreement on technical aid between the FAO and the United Nations was reached in November 1949 , and the FAO received the funding and logistical capacity to act on the food shortage crisis and the problems of poor nutrition in the developing world . Bruce and the FAO were successful in these years in supporting the recovery of world agricultural output . By 1951 this had exceeded pre @-@ war levels , and general levels of nutrition were rising internationally , but by the time Bruce stepped down in that year neither had improved fast enough to keep pace with the post @-@ war population boom . The Council faced major obstacles in supporting the improvement of conditions in the developing world as governments there began diverting resources to arms programs as independence , post @-@ colonial and Cold War conflicts multiplied . Frustrated by continuing world conflict and the lack of commitment from the developed world to support the lofty but very difficult aims of the FAO , both Bruce and Orr resigned from the FAO disappointed by its modest gains and insufficient powers to alleviate world food problems . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Bruce occupied a range of positions in his later years , sharing his time between the United Kingdom and Australia . He had been Chairman of the Finance Corporation of Industry since 1946 and continued in the role until 1957 , providing finance to projects of benefit to the British national economy . Bruce helped establish the program in Australia in 1954 and on a Commonwealth basis in 1956 . He became the first Chancellor of the newly established Australian National University in 1952 , and took an active interest in its development , especially as a research centre for the study of Asia and the Pacific . Bruce concluded that Australia 's position in the world had changed as a result of World War II , commenting : 
 [ Australia ] has become a bridgehead between East and West . It is now vital that Australia should understand the problems of the East , that she should do whatever is in her power to alleviate those problems , and that she should interpret the nature of those problems to the rest of the world . 
 The residential college Bruce Hall was named in his honour , and he remained active in the life of the university until his retirement from the position in 1961 . Bruce sat as director on many corporate boards in retirement , notably the National Bank of Australia , P & O and the National Mutual Life Association . In 1947 he became the first Australian to sit in the House of Lords ( Sir John Forrest had been granted a peerage but died before it could be invested ) . 
 Having been elevated to the peerage as Viscount Bruce of Melbourne by long @-@ time colleague Clement Attlee , he would be an active participant in the chamber , attending regularly right up until his death . Bruce used it as a platform to continue to campaign on international and national social and economic questions , and to promote recognition and representation for Australia within the Commonwealth , though by this time Australian and British interests were becoming increasingly far apart , and the British Empire was rapidly disintegrating . He also continued to lobby the British government in these years to increase its commitment to third world development and the FAO . An avid golfer his whole life , Bruce became the first Australian captain of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews in 1954 . He also continued to coach rowing at Cambridge University sporadically , and frequently appeared at public events both in Australia and in England . 
 He was a freemason . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Bruce remained active and in good health right through his retirement despite the gradual onset of deafness , but the death of his wife Ethel in March 1967 took a deep toll on him . He died on 25 August 1967 at the age of 84 . He was the last surviving member of Billy Hughes ' Cabinet . His memorial service was held at St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields and was widely attended , including by representatives of the Royal Family . His ashes were scattered over Lake Burley Griffin in Canberra . The Canberra suburb of Bruce , and the electoral Division of Bruce based in south @-@ east Melbourne , were both named for him after his death . 
 Despite his many accomplishments both at home and abroad , Bruce 's post @-@ prime ministerial career was not well known in Australia , and most still harboured memories of his harsh anti @-@ union legislation and his government 's landslide defeat in 1929 . His public persona was one of an aloof man , too English for Australia in style and bearing . Upon his death in 1967 , The Age of his hometown Melbourne remarked that " for most Australians , he is little more than a shadow . " Bruce spent much of his life and career in the United Kingdom , the country that conversely held him in high regard , but never forgot his Australian roots and for much of his career was a tireless advocate for its interests . In contrast to his image as a member of the British aristocratic elite , he spent much of his later career working for solutions to the problems facing the world 's poorest . 
 Bruce was high @-@ minded and ambitious in setting an agenda – as prime minister he pursued complex and aspiring schemes of economic , social and administrative development , including grandiose solutions to the problem of industrial relations and an egalitarian reworking of the British Empire . In his diplomatic career he pursued better treatment for the Commonwealth and programs through the League of Nations and United Nations that would address world questions of pressing social and economic concern , culminating in his most ambitious work to eliminate world hunger through the Food and Agriculture Organization . The Australian government even nominated Bruce for the Nobel Peace Prize in recognition for these efforts . Yet his schemes frequently bordered on the idealistic , and he was frequently disappointed at the limited degree to which he could practically implement his ideas . As Bruce himself would concede in later life , he was overly ambitious by nature and " forever buying into things that aren 't really my concern " . But despite his lack of public recognition in Australia , peers and historians have long recognised the abiding impact Bruce had both as prime minister and internationalist , leading his successor as Chancellor of the Australian National University Sir John Cockcroft to conclude in 1962 that Bruce was " probably the outstanding Australian of our time " . The Melbourne Sun agreed with the assessment , stating upon his death that Bruce was " probably the least remembered but the most extraordinary of our Prime Ministers " . 
 = Blast Corps = 
 Blast Corps is a 1997 action video game for the Nintendo 64 in which the player uses vehicles to destroy buildings in the path of a runaway nuclear missile carrier . In the game 's 57 levels , the player solves puzzles by transferring between vehicles to move objects and bridge gaps . It was developed by Rare , published by Nintendo , and released in March 1997 in Japan and North America . A wider release followed at the end of that year . 
 The game was among Rare 's first for the Nintendo 64 . Its development team ranged between four and seven members , many of whom were recent graduates . The team sought to find gameplay to fit Rare co @-@ founder Chris Stamper 's idea for a building destruction game . The puzzle game mechanics were inspired by those of Donkey Kong ( 1994 ) . 
 Blast Corps was released to universal acclaim and received Metacritic 's second highest Nintendo 64 ratings of 1997 . The game sold one million copies — lower than the team 's expectations — and received several editor 's choice awards . Reviewers highly praised its originality , variety , and graphics , but some critiqued its controls and repetition . Reviewers of Rare 's 2015 Rare Replay retrospective compilation noted Blast Corps as a standout title . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Blast Corps is a single @-@ player action video game . The player controls vehicles to destroy buildings , farms , and other structures in the path of a runaway nuclear missile carrier . The player fails if the carrier collides with an object . The eight demolition vehicles vary in the way they clear structures : the bulldozer rams , the dump truck drifts , the lightweight buggy crashes from higher ground , the tricycle shoots missiles , another truck presses outwards from its sides , and robot mechs tumble and stomp from the land and the air . The player must transfer between vehicles and other machinery to solve puzzles . Objectives include transporting timed explosive crates and bridging gaps . The game 's puzzles increase in difficulty as the player progresses through its 57 levels . 
 The world is portrayed from a three @-@ quarters overhead view . The player can adjust the game 's viewable perspective with zoom and horizontal panning functions . Pop @-@ up hints will guide the player in the early stages of the game , and other characters audibly encourage the player as each level wears on . The cheery soundtrack increases in tempo as the level 's timer runs low . After completing a level , the player can return to explore without a time limit . By finding secrets and activating lights throughout the level , the player raises their score and final medal ranking . There are also secret levels hidden throughout the game , where the player completes objectives against the clock . The player can compete against a ghost copy of their previous path through a level . There are no settings to change the game 's difficulty , and the game saves to both the game cartridge itself and external storage . 
 = = Development = = 
 Blast Corps was among Rare 's first games for the Nintendo 64 and led a run of seven critically acclaimed Rare titles for the console . The game 's production began in early 1996 . The development team consisted of four recent graduates , though it expanded at times to seven concurrent staff . Martin Wakeley became the game 's lead designer . He credited the team 's small size for their easy progression from planning to market . Rare founder Chris Stamper was the impetus for the project . He had wanted to make a game about destroying buildings for years prior to Blast Corps 's development . The team worked to fit his idea to a gameplay concept and devised a " Constantly Moving Object " conceit that would give the levels a time limit . This idea became the nuclear missile carrier . 
 Retro Gamer credited Wakeley for Blast Corps 's idiosyncratic ideas and humor in light of the game 's serious premise . For instance , the Mario Kart 64 " power slide " drift mechanics inspired that of Blast Corps 's dump truck . Wakeley championed the drift controls against the rest of the team , who found them aggravating . The game 's lead artist , Ricky Berwick , had developed the vehicle concepts without consideration for their in @-@ game function , and the vehicles were only later retrofitted to the gameplay . One of the robot vehicles was designed without an arm because the developers had run out of computer memory to store the data and liked the look anyway . Wakeley determined the game 's high score " goal medal " objectives , in which players would attempt to better a set completion time on each level . Blast Corps 's Japanese and American quality assurance teams later competed to push the levels to their limits , which resulted in the game 's platinum level objectives . Wakeley described these platinum challenges as " just insane " and said he could only finish four himself . 
 Wakeley saw Blast Corps as a puzzle game at its core . He was influenced by the 1994 Donkey Kong , in which the player begins each level with all the tools they need to finish but must learn how to use them . Wakeley said this was Blast Corp 's core game mechanic . He was also inspired by the Super Mario 64 demo at the 1995 Space World , which introduced him to the 3D analog stick and spurred him achieve something similar . The team 's technical accomplishments included character and environment models composed completely of polygons and the absence of distance fog to obscure the draw distance . 
 Nintendo published Blast Corps for their Nintendo 64 . It was originally titled Blast <unk> in its 1995 <unk> preview , a name it retained for its Japanese release . ( The team had considered other titles , including " Heavy Duty Heroes " , " Blast Radius " , and " Power <unk> " . ) Blast Corps was first released in Japan on March 21 , 1997 , and in North America three days later . Its European and Australian release followed on December 22 . The game had been in production for just over a year . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received " universal acclaim " , according to video game review aggregator Metacritic , and " unanimous critical success " , according to Retro Gamer . Reviewers highly praised the novelty and variety of Blast Corps 's gameplay . Peer Schneider ( IGN ) , in particular , lauded the game 's originality in an industry hesitant to take risks . 
 Reviewers struggled to master the game 's controls . Schneider ( IGN ) overcame his initial concerns to appreciate the complexity of the controls and the differences between the vehicles . He considered the locked camera view restrictive when compared to the unrestricted 3D camera in the game 's contemporaries . Schneider thought the game should have been longer , with fewer bonus levels and more main missions , though he did appreciate the pacing , design , and difficulty of the included levels . EGM similarly found the bonus stages mediocre . One of their reviewers went further and thought the whole game was repetitive , as did Computer and Video Games . The latter , though , praised Blast Corps 's level design and difficulty progression . Crispin of Electronic Gaming Monthly ( EGM ) wrote that the game 's best feature was its " palpable sense of suspense " as the carrier advanced on resistant buildings . 
 Critics praised the game 's graphics and sound . Schneider ( IGN ) found the game unpretentious in comparison to video game trends of photorealistic rendering and cartoonish art . He likened the slick vehicle animations and metallic elements to Micro Machines and Rare 's R.C. Pro @-@ Am . He felt that Blast Corps 's explosions were not as robust as those in Turok : Dinosaur Hunter . Schneider praised the game 's texture maps , which made the night scenes and houses look realistic , and the canyons breathtaking . He also liked the detail in the vehicles ' skid marks and gradual building disintegration . He wrote that the game 's 3D programming was errorless , and was particularly pleased about the game 's lack of fog , usually used to cover developer limitations . EGM echoed Schneider 's praise of the deep landscapes , which the magazine called " incredible " . Scott McCall ( AllGame ) praised the game 's realistic polygonal models and technical prowess , and Steve Polak ( The Weekend Australian ) wrote that Blast Corps showcased the console 's graphics capabilities . Schneider ( IGN ) described the soundtrack as between " 70s pop , disaster movie score , and Country Bear Jamboree " . He praised the range of engine , tire screeching , and crashing sound effects . Reviewers disliked the country music tracks with jaw harp , though IGN thought it was a matter of taste . 
 IGN wrote that Blast Corps exemplified qualities of enjoyable Nintendo Entertainment System and arcade games , while EGM considered the game unlike all others . Retro Gamer wrote that the game 's combination of puzzles and continuous destruction made the game so unique as to defy genre classification . The magazine described the gameplay concept of returning to explore without a time limit as " a stroke of genius " . Retro Gamer thought of Blast Corps as a 3D successor to " nail @-@ biting reaction games " such as Loco @-@ Motion . Computer and Video Games agreed with a reader that Blast Corps was part of a " Destroy " subgenre including games like Desert Strike , Return Fire , and Body Harvest , and Matt Fox of The Video Games Guide put the game in a lineage with Highway Encounter and Lunar Jetman . Schneider ( IGN ) said Blast Corps was on par with the quality of Shigeru Miyamoto games and an excellent display of Rare 's potential . 
 Blast Corps sold one million copies , which was fewer than Rare had expected . The game was most successful in Japan . Metacritic ranked the title among the top ten games released in 1997 . It remained Metacritic 's highest ranked 1997 Nintendo 64 game after GoldenEye 007 . Blast Corps was selected as Electronic Gaming Monthly 's May 1997 Game of the Month and an IGN Editors ' Choice . Four of six Nintendo Power reviewers recommended the game . Nintendo Power 's 1997 staff survey listed Blast Corps in the bottom half of the magazine 's top 100 games of all time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Wakeley , the game 's designer , considered making a sequel as an action combat game , but thought the concepts behind Blast Corps had been fully exhausted . After praising the game in a 2010 Rare retrospective feature , Retro Gamer 's writers craved a sequel . The magazine said the title was proof of the company 's inventiveness . Steve Ellis , who was a programmer at Rare , thought Blast Corps to be among the company 's most underrated games , and though its physics were now dated , he continued to find the game fun enough to revisit regularly . Blast Corps is included in Rare Replay , a compilation of 30 Rare titles , released on the Xbox One on August 4 , 2015 . The release 's bonus features included behind @-@ the @-@ scenes interviews with Blast Corps 's developers . Blast Corps was a standout favorite among Rare Replay reviewers . 
 Rare 's Blast Corps began a run of seven highly lauded and respected Nintendo 64 games , including GoldenEye 007 , Banjo @-@ Kazooie , Perfect Dark , and Jet Force Gemini . Retro Gamer wrote that Rare had doubled the number of classic Nintendo 64 games and was an important alliance for Nintendo . Microsoft acquired Rare in 2002 for a record price of $ 377 million . The industry had changed , Blast Corps designer Martin Wakeley reflected a decade after the game 's 1997 release . In 2009 , Wakeley said , a studio would rarely entrust the scope of a project like Blast Corps to a team of four recent graduates . 
 = King Island emu = 
 The King Island emu ( Dromaius novaehollandiae minor ) is an extinct subspecies of emu that was endemic to King Island , which is situated in the Bass Strait between mainland Australia and Tasmania . Its closest relative may be the extinct Tasmanian emu ( D. n. diemenensis ) , as they belonged to a single population until less than 14 @,@ 000 years ago , when Tasmania and King Island were still connected . The small size of the King Island emu may be an example of insular dwarfism . 
 The King Island emu was the smallest of all emus , and had darker plumage than the mainland emu . It was black and brown , and had naked blue skin on the neck , and its chicks were striped like those on the mainland . The subspecies was distinct from the likewise diminutive Kangaroo Island emu ( D. baudinianus ) in a number of osteological details , including size . The behaviour of the King Island emu probably did not differ much from that of the mainland emu . The birds gathered in flocks to forage and during breeding time . They fed on berries , grass and seaweed . They ran swiftly , and could defend themselves by kicking . The nest was shallow , and consisted of dead leaves and moss . Seven to nine eggs were laid , which were incubated by both parents . 
 Europeans discovered the King Island emu in 1802 during early expeditions to the island , and most of what is known about the bird in life comes from an interview French naturalist François Péron conducted with a sealer there , as well as depictions by artist Charles Alexandre Lesueur . They had arrived on King Island in 1802 with Nicolas Baudin 's expedition , and in 1804 several live and stuffed King and Kangaroo Island emus were sent to France . The two live King Island specimens were kept in the Jardin des Plantes , and the remains of these and the other birds are scattered throughout various museums in Europe today . The logbooks of the expedition did not specify from which island each captured bird originated , or even that they were taxonomically distinct , so their status remained unclear until more than a century later . Hunting pressure and fires started by early settlers on King Island likely drove the wild population to extinction by 1805 . The two captive specimens in Paris both died in 1822 and are believed to have been the last of their kind . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 There was long confusion regarding the taxonomic status and geographic origin of the small island emu taxa from King Island and Kangaroo Island , since specimens of both populations were transported to France as part of the same French expedition to Australia in the early 1800s . The logbooks of the expedition failed to clearly state where and when the small emu individuals were collected , and this has resulted in a plethora of scientific names subsequently being coined for either bird , many on questionable grounds , and the idea that all specimens had originated from Kangaroo Island . Furthermore , in 1914 , L. Brasil argued the expedition did not encounter emus on King Island , because the weather had been too bad for them to leave their camp . The French also referred to both emus and cassowaries as " <unk> " at the time , which has led to further confusion . 
 Louis Jean Pierre Vieillot coined the binomial Dromaius ater in 1817 . In 1906 , Walter Baldwin Spencer coined the name Dromaius minor based on some Pleistocene subfossil bones and eggshells found on King Island the same year , believing they were the first physical evidence of an emu from there . William Vincent Legge also coined a name for these remains , Dromaius <unk> , but at a later date . In his 1907 book Extinct Birds , Walter Rothschild stated that Vieillot 's description actually referred to the mainland emu , and that the name D. ater was therefore invalid . Believing the skin in Muséum national d 'Histoire naturelle of Paris was from Kangaroo Island , he made it the type specimen of his new species Dromaius <unk> , named after the French naturalist François Péron , who is the main source of information about the bird in life . 
 The Australian amateur ornithologist Gregory Mathews coined further names in the early 1910s , including a new genus name , Peronista , as he believed the King and Kangaroo Island birds were generically distinct from the mainland emu . Later writers claimed that the subfossil remains found on King and Kangaroo Islands were not <unk> different , and that they therefore belonged to the same taxon . In 1959 , the French ornithologist Christian Jouanin proposed that none of the skins were actually from Kangaroo Island , after inspecting expedition and museum documents . In 1990 , Jouanin and Jean @-@ Christophe <unk> used environmental forensics to demonstrate that the mounted skin in Paris came from King Island , and that at least one live bird had been brought from each island . All scientific names given to the Kangaroo Island emu were therefore based on specimens from King Island or were otherwise invalid , leaving it nameless . More recent finds of subfossil material and subsequent studies on King and Kangaroo Island emu , notably by Shane A. Parker in 1984 , confirmed their separate geographic origin and distinct morphology . Parker named the Kangaroo Island bird Dromaius baudinianus , after Nicolas Baudin , the leader of the French expedition . The name Dromaius ater was kept for the King Island emu . 
 There are few morphological differences that distinguish the extinct insular emus from the mainland emu besides their size , but all three taxa were most often considered distinct species . A 2011 genetic study of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA , which was extracted from five subfossil King Island emu bones , showed that its genetic variation fell within that of the extant mainland emus . It was therefore interpreted as conspecific with the emus of the Australian mainland , and was reclassified as a subspecies of Dromaius novaehollandiae , D. n. ater . Other animals present on King Island are also considered as subspecies of their mainland or Tasmanian counterparts rather than distinct species . The authors suggested that further studies using different methods might be able to find features that distinguish the taxa . In its 2013 edition , The Howard and Moore Complete Checklist of the Birds of the World emended the trinomial name of the King Island emu to D. n. minor , based on Spencer 's D. minor , on the ground that Vieillot 's D. ater was originally meant for the mainland emu . This rationale was accepted by the IOC World Bird List , which used D. n. minor thereafter . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 During the Late Quaternary period ( 0 @.@ 7 million years ago ) , small emus lived on a number of offshore islands of mainland Australia . In addition to the King Island emu , these included taxa found on Kangaroo Island ( D. baudinianus ) and Tasmania ( D. n. diemenensis ) , all of which are now extinct . The smallest taxon , the King Island emu , was confined to a small island situated in the Bass Strait between Tasmania and Victoria , approximately 100 km ( 62 mi ) from both coasts . King Island was once part of the land bridge which connected Tasmania and mainland Australia , but rising sea levels following the last glacial maximum eventually isolated the island . As a result of phenotypic plasticity the King Island emu population possibly underwent a process of insular dwarfism . 
 According to the authors of the 2011 genetic study , the close relation between the King Island and mainland emus indicates that the former population was isolated from the latter relatively recently , due to sea level changes in the Bass Strait , as opposed to a founding emu lineage that diverged from the mainland emu far earlier and had subsequently gone extinct on the mainland . Models of sea level change indicate that Tasmania , including King Island , was isolated from the Australian mainland around 14 @,@ 000 years ago . Up to several thousand years later King Island was then separated from Tasmania . This scenario would suggest that a population ancestral to both the King Island and Tasmanian emu was initially isolated from the mainland taxon , after which the King Island and Tasmanian populations were separated . This in turn indicates that the likewise extinct Tasmanian emu is probably as closely related to the mainland emu as is the King Island emu , with both the King Island and Tasmanian emu being more closely related to each other . Fossil emu taxa show an average size between that of the King Island emu and mainland emu . Hence , mainland emus can be regarded as a large or gigantic form . 
 = = Description = = 
 The King Island emu was the smallest emu taxon , and was about half the size of the mainland birds . It was about 87 cm ( 34 in ) tall . According to François Péron 's interview with a local sealer , the largest specimens were up to 137 cm ( 4 @.@ 5 ft ) in length , and the heaviest weighed 20 to 23 kg ( 45 to 50 lb ) . It had a darker plumage , with extensive black feathers on the neck and head , and blackish feathers on the body , where it was also mixed with brown . The bill and feet were blackish , and the naked skin on the side of the neck was blue . The 2011 genetic study did not find genes commonly associated with melanism in birds , but proposed the dark colouration could be due to alternative genetic or non @-@ genetic factors . Péron stated there was little difference between the sexes , but that the male was perhaps brighter in colouration and slightly larger . The juveniles were grey , while the chicks were striped like other emus . There were no seasonal variations in plumage . Since the female mainland emus are on average larger than the males , and can turn brighter during the mating season , contrary to the norm in other bird species , some of these observations may have been based on erroneous conventional wisdom . 
 Subfossil remains of the King Island emu show that the tibia was about 330 mm ( 13 in ) long , and the femur was 180 mm ( 7 in ) long . The pelvis was 280 mm ( 11 in ) long , 64 mm ( 2 @.@ 5 in ) wide at the front , and 86 mm ( 3 in ) wide at the back . The tarsometatarsus averaged 232 mm ( 9 in ) in length . In males , the tibiotarsus averaged 261 mm ( 10 in ) , whereas it averaged 301 mm ( 12 in ) in females . In contrast , the same bones measured 269 mm ( 10 @.@ 5 in ) and 305 mm ( 12 in ) in the Kangaroo Island emu . Apart from being smaller , the King Island emu differed <unk> from the Kangaroo Island emu in the <unk> foramen of the tarsometatarsus usually being fully or partially abridged . The outer trochlea was more incurved towards the middle trochlea in the Kangaroo Island bird , whereas they were parallel in the King Island emu . 
 The King Island emu and the mainland emu show few morphological differences other than their significant difference in size . Mathews stated that the legs and bill were shorter than those of the mainland emu , yet the toes were nearly of equal length , and therefore proportionally longer . The tarsus of the King Island emu was also three times longer than the culmen , whereas it was four times longer in the mainland emu . Additional traits that supposedly distinguish this bird from the mainland emu have previously been suggested to be the distal foramen of the tarsometatarsus , and the contour of the cranium . However , the distal foramen is known to be variable in the mainland emu showing particular diversity between juvenile and adult forms and is therefore taxonomically insignificant . The same is true of the contour of the cranium , which is more dome @-@ shaped in the King Island emu , a feature that is also seen in juvenile mainland emus . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Péron 's interview describes some aspects of the behaviour of the King Island emu . He writes that the bird was generally solitary but gathered in flocks of ten to twenty at breeding time , then wandered off in pairs . They ate berries , grass and seaweed , and foraged mainly during morning and evening . They were swift runners , but were apparently slower than the mainland birds , due to being fat . They swam well , but only did so when necessary . They reportedly liked the shade of lagoons and the shoreline , rather than open areas . They used a claw on each wing for scratching themselves . If unable to flee from the hunting dogs of the sealers , they would defend themselves by kicking , which could inflict a great deal of harm . 
 Captain Matthew Flinders did not encounter emus when he visited King Island in 1802 , but his naturalist , Robert Brown , examined their dung and noted they had chiefly fed on the berries of <unk> juniperina . An account by English ornithologist John Latham about the " Van Diemen 's cassowary " may also refer to the King Island emu , based on the small size described . In addition to a physical description , he stated that they gathered in groups of 70 to 80 individuals in a given location while foraging , behaviour that was exploited by hunters . 
 Péron stated that the nest was usually situated near water and on the ground under the shade of a bush . It was constructed of sticks and lined with dead leaves and moss ; it was oval in shape and not very deep . He claimed that seven to nine eggs were laid always on 25 and 26 July , but the selective advantage of this breeding synchronisation is unknown . The female incubated the eggs , but the male apparently developed a brood patch , which indicates it contributed as well . The non @-@ incubating parent also stayed by the nest , and the chicks left the nest two to three days after hatching . The eggs were preyed upon by snakes , rats , and quolls . Péron gave the incubation period as five or six weeks , but since the mainland emu incubates for 50 to 56 days , this may be too short . He stated a mother emu would defend its young from crows with its beak , but this is now known to be strictly male behaviour . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The emus of King Island were first recorded by Europeans when a party from the ship Lady Nelson , led by John Murray , visited the island in January 1802 . The bird was sporadically mentioned by travellers henceforward , but not in detail . Captain Nicolas Baudin visited King Island later in 1802 , during an 1800 – 04 French expedition to map the coast of Australia . Two ships , Le Naturaliste and Le Géographe , were part of the expedition , which also brought along naturalists who described the local wildlife . François Péron , a naturalist who was part of Baudin 's expedition , visited King Island and was the last person to record descriptions of the King Island emu from the wild . At one point , Péron and some of his companions became stranded due to storms and took refuge with some seal hunters . They were served emu meat , which Péron described in favourable terms as tasting halfway " between that of the turkey @-@ cock and that of the young pig " . 
 Péron did not report seeing any emus on the island himself , which might explain why he described them as being the size of mainland birds . Instead , most of what is known about the King Island emu today stems from a 33 @-@ point questionnaire that he used to interview a local English sealer , Daniel Cooper , about the bird . In accordance with a request by the authorities for the expedition to bring back useful plants and animals , Péron asked if the emus could be bred and fattened in captivity , and received a variety of cooking recipes . Péron 's questionnaire remained unpublished until 1899 , and very little was therefore known about the bird in life until then . 
 = = = Transported specimens = = = 
 Several emu specimens belonging to the different subspecies were sent to France , both live and dead , as part of the expedition . Some of these exist in European museums today . Le Naturaliste brought one live specimen and one skin of the mainland emu to France in June 1803 . Le Géographe collected emus from both King and Kangaroo Island , and at least two live King Island individuals , assumed to be a male and female by some sources , were taken to France in March 1804 . This ship also brought skins of five juveniles collected from different islands . Two of these skins , of which the provenance is unknown , are presently kept in Paris and Turin ; the rest are lost . In addition to rats , cockroaches , and other inconveniences aboard the ships , the emus were <unk> by the rough weather which caused the ships to shake violently ; some died as a result , while others had to be force fed so they did not starve to death . In all , Le Géographe brought 73 live animals of various species back to France . 
 The two individuals brought to France were first kept in captivity in the menagerie of Empress Josephine , and were moved to the Jardin des Plantes after a year . The " female " died in April 1822 , and its skin is now mounted in the Muséum national d 'Histoire naturelle of Paris . The " male " died in May 1822 , and is preserved as a skeleton in the same museum . A feather of the Paris skin was given to the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery , the only confirmed feather belonging to this subspecies currently in Australia . The Paris skin contains several bones , but not the pelvis , which is an indicator of sex , so the supposed female identity is unconfirmed . Péron noted that the small emus brought to France were distinct from those of the mainland , but not that they were distinct from each other , or which island each had come from , so their provenance was unknown for more than a century later . 
 There is also a skeleton in Museo di Storia Naturale di Firenze , which it obtained from France in 1833 , but was mislabelled as a cassowary until correctly identified by Italian zoologist Enrico Hillyer Giglioli in 1900 . Several elements of this skeleton are missing , and some have been replaced with wooden copies . Its right metatarsus was damaged during life and had healed incorrectly . It was thought to be a male , but is now known to be a composite of two individuals . A fourth specimen was thought to be kept in the Liverpool Museum , but it may simply be a juvenile mainland emu . Apart from the King Island emu specimens brought to France , a few are also known to have been brought to mainland Australia in 1803 , but their fate is unknown . 
 = = = Contemporary depictions = = = 
 Péron 's 1807 , three @-@ volume account of the expedition , Voyage de <unk> aux <unk> Australes , contains an illustration ( plate 36 ) of " <unk> " by Charles @-@ Alexandre Lesueur , who was the resident artist during Baudin 's voyage . The caption states the birds shown are from " Ile Decrès " , the French name for Kangaroo Island , but there is confusion over what is actually depicted . The two adult birds are labelled as a male and female of the same species , surrounded by juveniles . The family @-@ group shown is improbable , since breeding pairs of the mainland Emu split up once the male begins incubating the eggs . Lesueur 's preparatory sketches also indicate these may have been drawn after the captive birds in Jardin des Plantes , and not wild ones , which would have been harder to observe for extended periods . 
 The Australian museum curator , Stephanie <unk> , has instead proposed that the larger , light @-@ ruffed " male " was actually drawn after a captive Kangaroo Island emu , that the smaller , dark " female " is a captive King Island emu , that the scenario is fictitious , and the sexes of the birds indeterminable . They may instead only have been assumed to be male and female of the same species due to their difference in size . A crooked claw on the " male " has also been interpreted as evidence that it had lived in captivity , and it may also indicate that the depicted specimen is identical to the Kangaroo Island emu skeleton in Paris , which has a deformed toe . The juvenile on the right may have been based on the Paris skin of an approximately five @-@ month @-@ old King Island emu specimen , which may in turn be the individual that died on board le <unk> during rough weather , and was presumably stuffed there by Lesueur himself . The chicks may instead simply have been based on those of mainland emus , as none are known to have been collected . 
 = = = Extinction = = = 
 The exact cause for the extinction of the King Island emu is unknown . Soon after the bird was discovered , sealers settled on the island because of the abundance of elephant seals . Péron 's interview with Daniel Cooper suggested that they likely contributed to the demise of the bird by hunting it , and perhaps by starting fires . Péron described how dogs were purpose @-@ trained to hunt down the emus ; Cooper even claimed to have killed no fewer than 300 emus himself . Cooper had been on the island for six months , which suggests he killed 50 birds a month . His group of sealers consisted of eleven men as well as his wife , and they alone may have killed 3 @,@ 600 emus by the time Péron visited them . 
 Péron explained that the sealers consumed an enormous quantity of meat , and that their dogs killed several animals each day . He also observed such hunting dogs being released on Kangaroo Island , and mused that they might wipe out the entire population of kangaroos there in some years , but he did not express the same sentiment about the emus of King Island . Natural fires may also have played a role . It is probable that the two captive birds in France , which died in 1822 , outlived their wild fellows on King Island , and were therefore the last of their kind . Though Péron stated King Island " swarmed " with emus in 1802 , they may have become extinct in the wild as early as 1805 . 
 In 1967 , when the King Island emu was still thought to be only known from prehistoric remains , James Greenway questioned whether they could have been exterminated by a few natives , and speculated that fires started by prehistoric men or lightning may have been responsible . At this time , the mainland emu was also threatened by overhunting , and Greenway cautioned that it could end up sharing the fate of its island relatives if no measures were taken in time . 
 = Chris Dodd presidential campaign , 2008 = 
 The Chris Dodd presidential campaign of 2008 was launched on January 11 , 2007 and ended on January 3 , 2008 after a sixth @-@ place finish in the Iowa caucuses . Dodd , the Senior Senator from Connecticut , sought the nomination of the Democratic Party for President of the United States . <unk> his campaign in the strategically important states of Iowa and New Hampshire , he tried to bring forth a platform of change . Dodd 's performance in the opinion polls varied , but in the financial sphere , he had secured some notable and influential endorsements who had sufficiently funded his campaign . 
 Dodd tried to follow in the pattern of New Englanders who have entered the race for the Democratic nomination and won , including John Kerry , Michael Dukakis , and John F. Kennedy . If elected , Dodd would have become the second Roman Catholic president ( after Kennedy ) and the second Connecticut @-@ born president ( after George W. Bush ) . He would have been the first Senator to win the presidency while in office since Kennedy was elected in 1960 ( that honor ultimately went to Barack Obama ) . After his withdrawal from the race , Dodd went on to endorse the eventual winner Barack Obama , and retired from the Senate in 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 During his years in the House and Senate , Chris Dodd built a long record of political positions on important issues to the nation . He was in favor of ending the Iraq War and redeploying American from the nation . He repeatedly voted against further funding of the war . To combat global warming , he proposed a carbon tax to reduce carbon emissions , and declared that the United States " must take a ' strategic pause ' " before signing any new free trade agreement . 
 Domestically , Dodd proposed mandatory community service for all high school students , and fought to improve child care and health care , and worked to stop predatory lending by credit card companies . He also introduced legislation to enact a Federal Shield law and worked to defeat legislation permitting warrantless surveillance . 
 Chris Dodd had told the Associated Press in April 2006 that he was considering running , and by May 22 he had met with key backers , including congresswoman Rosa DeLauro , and had assembled a team to prepare a potential 2008 campaign . In June 2006 , he held his first major fundraiser , stunning Beltway commentators by raising over $ 1 million in one night . Dodd attended a Florida Democratic convention in July 2006 to garner further support . He hired former John Kerry campaign manager Jim Jordan in December of that year . Two months later , Dodd told the head of the New Hampshire Democratic Party at the Rainbow Cafe that he was not " going to do the exploratory thing " but instead " plunge right in " to the race . 
 = = On the campaign trail = = 
 = = = January 2007 = = = 
 Chris Dodd entered the race on January 11 , 2007 after making his announcement on the Imus in the Morning show . He cited his qualifications of experience and background as the strengths needed to lead the nation as President . A critic of the Iraq War , Dodd stated that his candidacy " ... isn 't just [ about ] Iraq -- there are problems here at home that are huge . " He decided not to file with the FEC under an exploratory committee but instead filed as a full @-@ fledged candidate . He began campaigning in the state of South Carolina on January 15 , 2007 and hit the trails to New Hampshire on January 20 . 
 = = = February 2007 = = = 
 In February , Dodd turned his attention fully to the early primary states of Iowa and New Hampshire . When asked by the Associated Press on the campaign trail if his campaigning really made a difference in changing public perceptions , he replied , " There is enough time yet to change this [ public perceptions ] , because there are places like Iowa and New Hampshire that give candidates like myself a chance to be heard . " Dodd 's strategy was to speak to voters in restaurants , homes , and small @-@ town diners , although political analysts wondered whether such methods were out @-@ of @-@ date . But he maintained that " chatting in a living room face to face is still a very important feature of campaigning here . I don 't think you can come in here and do sort of a wholesale political operation from 35 @,@ 000 feet ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) with a pit stop here and there and a media campaign behind you . " At the end of February , Dodd differentiated himself from his Democratic counterparts by stating his support for the Bush administration 's willingness to hold joint talks with Iran and Syria and by stating that as president he would avoid talking with Iran as long as Mahmoud Ahmadinejad remained as president . On the trail , he referred to Ahmadinejad as a " thug " . 
 = = = March 2007 = = = 
 Before Dodd hit the campaign trail for March after a round of campaigning in February , he made a visit to The Daily Show with Jon Stewart , a well @-@ worn path laid by candidates trying to reach a younger audience . The campaign set up a web page before the March 13 interview . Liberal bloggers praised the behind the scenes look at the campaign as innovative and creative . A posting on the Comedy Central show 's blog read : " This was a fascinating look behind the scenes of the show even for us , and a surprisingly cool thing for a Presidential candidate to do . Senator Dodd , we salute both your commitment to fiscal responsibility and your web @-@ savvy . " After the visit Dodd campaigned in New Hampshire and Nevada finishing the month at a forums in Las Vegas and Washington , D.C. At the Las Vegas Forum , he discussed health care with the other Democratic candidates and voiced his support for a system of Universal Health Care . As March came to a close the campaign revealed their fundraising total for the First Quarter . Dodd raised $ 4 @,@ 043 @,@ 757 in this quarter , spend $ 1 @,@ 313 @,@ 239 and had $ 7 @,@ 482 @,@ 467 cash on hand . 
 = = = April 2007 = = = 
 In April , Dodd campaigned in New Hampshire , Iowa , and returned to South Carolina . While on the trail Dodd participated in a virtual town hall sponsored by the website <unk> When he was asked the question " ... what is the best and fastest way to get out of Iraq ? " he answered , " We ought to start redeploying this evening ... We ought to begin immediately . I would not wait any longer . " Continuing on the trail , Dodd sponsored what was called by the Washington Post , the " most radical plan " to combat global warming . It included a corporate carbon tax to be levied on corporations to reduce carbon emissions . The plan is part of a larger energy platform of the campaign . 
 On April 26 , Dodd participated in the first of many Democratic presidential debates . His campaign has been critical of how little time their candidate has been allotted to speak at the debates , and its website introduced a " Talk Clock " demonstrating this disparity . 
 At the end of the month , Dodd set his sights on the state with the most convention votes , California by attending events in Sacramento and San Diego . 
 = = = May 2007 = = = 
 Early in May , Dodd continued to campaign in California for a few days but later shifted back to the strategically important states of Iowa and New Hampshire for the rest of the month . On May 15 the campaign released its first ad , which detailed his plan for ending the war in Iraq . In the ad , Dodd also criticized his fellow Democratic candidates by stating , " We can 't simply wait for a new president . We should have the conviction to stand up to this one , " In Washington , Dodd was exposed to debate on the Iraq War Spending Bill and new videos from al @-@ Qaeda 's second in command Ayman al @-@ Zawahiri . Back on the campaign trail he talked about how he would deal with foreign issues particularly in regards to the situation in Iraq , " I 'm not going to let my foreign policy be decided by Mr. al @-@ Zawahiri . Obviously , he 's playing his game here . He 'd probably like to see us stay down there , bogged down , at the costs we 're increasing here , the loss of lives , not to mention the isolation of the United States . " When Presidential candidate John Edwards released an ad criticizing Congress ' failure to end the Iraq War , Dodd took it personal and shot back at Edwards stating , " " With all due respect , we could have used John 's vote here in the Senate on these issues here . " He concluded the May campaign by attending House parties in three cities in New Hampshire . . 
