 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The whiskery shark is an active and highly specialized predator , feeding almost exclusively on octopuses . Other cephalopods , bony fishes , small rock lobsters , spoon worms , and seagrass have also been found amongst its stomach contents . A known parasite of this species is the tapeworm <unk> <unk> . 
 Like other houndsharks , the whiskery shark is viviparous ; the developing embryos are sustained by yolk and probably also maternally produced histotroph . Males can mate every year , while females have a biennial reproductive cycle . Mating takes place in August and September ; females store sperm until late January to early April of the following year , when the ova are ready to be ovulated into the uterus . After a 7 – 9 month long gestation period , litters of 4 – 28 ( average 19 ) pups are born between August and October . The litter size increases with the size of the female . The newborns measure 22 – 27 cm ( 8 @.@ 7 – 10 @.@ 6 in ) long . 
 Juvenile whiskery sharks are rarely caught by commercial fishers , suggesting that nursery areas may be found in deeper water or other unfished habitats . Pups double to triple in size in the first 15 – 17 months of life , and continue to grow rapidly until they are 3 – 4 years old . Sexual maturity is attained at a length of 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 3 m ( 3 @.@ 6 – 4 @.@ 3 ft ) for both sexes , corresponding to around five years of age for males and seven years of age for females . Mature sharks exhibit negligible growth rates , perhaps due to resources being diverted towards reproduction . The maximum lifespan is estimated to be 15 years . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Harmless to humans , the whiskery shark is fished commercially for its meat , which is sold fresh . It is one of the shark species marketed as " flake " . Along with the dusky shark ( Carcharhinus obscurus ) and the gummy shark ( Mustelus antarcticus ) , it is targeted by a shark fishery operating off Western Australia , currently managed as the Western Australian Joint Authority Southern Demersal <unk> and Demersal <unk> Fishery ( <unk> ) . The fishery began in the 1940s with a small number of demersal longline vessels , though the whiskery shark was not caught in substantial numbers until the 1970s , with the introduction of monofilament gillnets , hydraulic net haulers , and additional vessels . Catches peaked in the early 1980s , when 400 – 600 tons were taken annually . Overfishing reduced the population to < 30 % of pre @-@ exploitation levels by the mid @-@ 1980s , prompting the Western Australian government to enact a management plan that stabilized the population at 25 – 30 % of pre @-@ exploitation levels . 
 In 1995 , the management advisory committee for the Western Australian shark fishery recommended that the whiskery shark stock be rebuilt to 40 % of pre @-@ exploitation levels by the 2010 / 11 season , through a series of fishing effort reductions . Although this target was not met because the effort reductions were not completed until 2000 / 01 , preliminary catch per unit effort ( CPUE ) data indicate that the population is increasing . In 2004 / 05 , this species made up 12 % ( 153 tons ) of the fishery by weight . The whiskery shark is also a minor catch of the Southern Shark Fishery ( SSF ) , which does not threaten the species overall . Since its population is stable and regularly monitored , and the fisheries that affect it are well @-@ managed , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Least Concern . 
 = George H. Steuart ( brigadier general ) = 
 George Hume Steuart ( August 24 , 1828 – November 22 , 1903 ) was a planter in Maryland and an American military officer ; he served thirteen years in the United States Army before resigning his commission at the start of the American Civil War . He joined the Confederacy and rose to the rank of brigadier general in the Army of Northern Virginia . Nicknamed " Maryland " to avoid verbal confusion with Virginia cavalryman J.E.B. Stuart , Steuart unsuccessfully promoted the secession of Maryland before and during the conflict . He began the war as a captain of the 1st Maryland Infantry , CSA , and was promoted to colonel after the First Battle of Manassas . 
 In 1862 he became brigadier general . After a brief cavalry command he was reassigned to infantry . Wounded at Cross Keys , Steuart was out of the war for almost a year while recovering from a shoulder injury . He was reassigned to Lee 's army shortly before the Battle of Gettysburg . Steuart was captured at the Battle of Spotsylvania Court House , and exchanged in the summer of 1864 . He held a command in the Army of Northern Virginia for the remainder of the war . Steuart was among the officers with Robert E. Lee when he surrendered to Ulysses S. Grant at Appomattox Court House . 
 Steuart spent the rest of a long life operating a plantation in Anne Arundel County , Maryland . In the late nineteenth century , he joined the United Confederate Veterans and became commander of the Maryland division . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 George Hume Steuart was born on August 24 , 1828 into a family of Scots ancestry in Baltimore . The eldest of nine children , he was raised at his family 's estate in West Baltimore , known as Maryland Square , located near the present @-@ day intersection of Baltimore and Monroe Streets . The Steuart family were wealthy plantation owners and strong supporters of slavery , which they depended on for labor . 
 The <unk> shared a long tradition of military service . He was the son of Major General George H. Steuart , of Anne Arundel County , Maryland , who served in the War of 1812 , and with whom he is often confused . Baltimore residents referred to the father and son as " The Old General " and " The Young General . " The elder Steuart inherited approximately 2 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 km2 ) of land in around 1842 , including a farm at Mount Steuart , and around 150 slaves , a high number in the Upper South . 
 Steuart was the grandson of Dr. James Steuart , a physician who served in the American Revolutionary War , and the great @-@ grandson of Dr. George H. Steuart , a physician who emigrated to Maryland from Perthshire , Scotland , in 1721 , and was lieutenant colonel of the Horse Militia under Governor Horatio Sharpe . 
 = = Early military career = = 
 Steuart attended the United States Military Academy between July 1 , 1844 and July 1 , 1848 , graduating 37th in the class of 1848 , aged nineteen . Steuart was assigned as 2nd lieutenant to the 2nd Dragoons , a regiment of cavalry that served in the frontier fighting Indians . He served in the Jefferson Barracks , Missouri , in 1848 , carried out frontier duty at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , in 1849 , and participated in an expedition to the Rocky Mountains in 1849 . He actively participated in the US Army 's Cheyenne expedition of 1856 , the Utah War against the Mormons in 1857 – 1858 , and the Comanche expedition of 1860 . 
 He married Maria H. Kinzie on January 14 , 1858 . The couple had met in Kansas and , once married , lived at Fort Leavenworth , although they were separated for long periods while Steuart was on campaign duty and stationed at distant frontier posts . They had two daughters , Marie ( born 1860 ) and Ann ( born 1864 ) . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 Even though Maryland did not secede from the Union , Steuart 's loyalty lay with the South , as did that of his father . He commanded one of the Baltimore city militias during the riot of April 1861 , following which Federal troops occupied Baltimore , an incident which was arguably the first armed confrontation of the Civil War . 
 Steuart resigned his captain 's commission on April 16 , 1861 and soon entered the service of the Confederate army as a cavalry captain . He and his father were determined to do their utmost to prevent Union soldiers from occupying Maryland . On April 22 Steuart wrote to Charles Howard , President of the Board of Baltimore Police : 
 " If the Massachusetts troops are on the march [ to Annapolis ] I shall be in motion very early tomorrow morning to pay my respects to them " . 
 However , events did not move in their favor and , in a letter to his father , Steuart wrote : 
 " I found nothing but disgust in my observations along the route and in the place I came to – a large majority of the population are insane on the one idea of loyalty to the Union and the legislature is so diminished and unreliable that I rejoiced to hear that they intended to adjourn ... it seems that we are doomed to be trodden on by these troops who have taken military possession of our State , and seem determined to commit all the outrages of an invading army . " 
 Steuart 's efforts to persuade Maryland to secede from the Union were in vain . On April 29 , the Maryland Legislature voted 53 – 13 against <unk> and the state was swiftly occupied by Union soldiers to prevent any reconsideration . Steuart 's decision to resign his commission and join the rebels would soon cost his family dear . The Steuart mansion at Maryland Square was confiscated by the Union Army and Jarvis Hospital was erected on the estate , to care for Federal wounded . However , Steuart was welcomed by the Confederacy as " one of Maryland 's most gifted sons " , and it was hoped by Southerners that other Marylanders would follow his example . 
 = = = First Bull Run = = = 
 Steuart soon became lieutenant colonel of the newly formed 1st Maryland Infantry , serving under Colonel Arnold Elzey , and fought with distinction at the First Battle of Bull Run , taking part in the charge that routed the Union army . Very soon after he was promoted to colonel , and assumed command of the regiment , succeeding Elzey , who was promoted to brigadier general . He soon began to acquire a reputation as a strict disciplinarian and gained the admiration of his men , though he was initially unpopular as a result . Steuart was said to have ordered his men to sweep the bare dirt inside their bivouacs and , rather more eccentrically , was prone to sneaking through the lines past unwitting sentries , in order to test their vigilance . On one occasion this plan backfired , as Steuart was pummeled and beaten by a sentry who later claimed not to have recognized the general . Eventually however , Steuart 's " rigid system of discipline quietly and quickly conduced to the health and morale of this splendid command . " According to Major W W Goldsborough , who served in Steuart 's Maryland Infantry at Gettysburg : " ... it was not only his love for a clean camp , but a desire to promote the health and comfort of his men that made him unyielding in the enforcement of sanitary rules . You might influence him in some things , but never in this " . George Wilson Booth , a young officer in Steuart 's command at Harper 's Ferry in 1861 , recalled in his memoirs : " The Regiment , under his master hand , soon gave evidence of the soldierly qualities which made it the pride of the army and placed the fame of Maryland in the very foreground of the Southern States " . Other historians have been less kind , seeing Steuart as a " tough and nasty martinet " and as a " cruel disciplinarian " , suggesting that such " old army " discipline was not the best way to mould and lead what was essentially a citizen army . 
 = = = Shenandoah Campaign and the First Battle of Winchester = = = 
 Steuart was promoted to brigadier general on March 6 , 1862 , commanding a brigade in Major General Richard S. Ewell 's division during Stonewall Jackson 's Shenandoah Valley campaign . On May 24 Jackson gave Steuart command of two cavalry regiments , the 2nd and 6th Virginia Cavalry regiments . At the First Battle of Winchester , on May 25 , 1862 , Jackson 's army was victorious , and the defeated Federal infantry retreated in confusion . The conditions were now perfect for the cavalry to complete the victory , but no cavalry units could be found to press home the advantage . Jackson complained : " never was there such a chance for cavalry ! Oh that my cavalry were in place ! " The exhausted infantry were forced forward again , while Lieutenant Sandie Pendleton of Jackson 's staff was sent to find Steuart . 
 Pendleton eventually found Steuart and gave him the order to pursue Banks ' retreating army but the general delayed , wasting valuable time on a point of military etiquette . He declined to obey the order until it came through General Ewell , his immediate divisional commander . The proper channels had not been followed . A frustrated Pendleton then rode two miles to find Ewell , who duly gave the order , but " seemed surprised that General Steuart had not gone on immediately " . 
 Steuart eventually gave chase and overtook the advance of the Confederate infantry , picking up many prisoners , but , as a result of the delay , the Confederate cavalry did not overtake the Federal army until it was , in the words of Jackson 's report , " beyond the reach of successful pursuit " . Jackson continued : " There is good reason for believing that had the cavalry played its part in this pursuit , but a small portion of Banks ' army would have made its escape to the Potomac " . 
 It remains unclear precisely why Steuart was reluctant to pursue Banks ' defeated army more vigorously , and contemporary records shed little light on the matter . It may be that his thirteen years ' training as a cavalry officer led him to obey orders to the letter , with little or no room for personal initiative or variation from strict due process . No charges were brought against him however , despite Jackson 's reputation as a stern disciplinarian . It is possible that Jackson 's leniency had to do with the strong desire of the Confederacy to recruit Marylanders to the Southern cause , and the need to avoid offending Marylanders who might be tempted to join Lee 's army . 
 Soon after Winchester , on June 2 , Steuart was involved in an unfortunate incident in which the 2nd Virginia Cavalry was mistakenly fired on by the 27th Virginia Infantry . Colonels Thomas Flournoy and Thomas T. Munford went to General Ewell and requested that their regiments , the 6th and 2nd Virginia Cavalry , be transferred to the command of Turner Ashby , recently promoted to Brigadier General . Ewell agreed , and went to Jackson for final approval . Jackson gave his consent , and for the remainder of the war Steuart would serve as an infantry commander . 
 = = = Battle of Cross Keys = = = 
 At the Battle of Cross Keys ( June 8 , 1862 ) , Steuart commanded the 1st Maryland Infantry , which was attacked by , and successfully fought off , a much larger Federal force . However , Steuart was severely injured in the shoulder by grape shot , and had to be carried from the battlefield . A ball from a canister shot had struck him in the shoulder and broken his collarbone , causing a " ghastly wound " . The injury did not heal well , and did not begin to improve at all until the ball was removed under surgery in August . It would prevent him from returning to the field for almost an entire year , until May 1863 . 
 = = = Gettysburg Campaign and the advance into Maryland = = = 
 Upon his recuperation and return to the army , Steuart was assigned by Gen. Robert E. Lee to command the Third Brigade , a force of around 2 @,@ 200 men , in Major General Edward " Allegheny " Johnson 's division , in the Army of Northern Virginia . The brigade 's former commander , Brigadier General Raleigh Colston , had been relieved of his command by Lee , who was disappointed by his performance at the Battle of Chancellorsville . The brigade consisted of the following regiments : the 2nd Maryland ( successor to the disbanded 1st Maryland ) , the 1st and 3rd North Carolina , and the 10th , 23rd , and 37th Virginia . Rivalries between the various state regiments had been a recurring problem in the brigade and Lee hoped that Steuart , as an " old army " hand , would be able to knit them together effectively . In addition , by this stage in the war Lee was desperately short of experienced senior commanders . However , Steuart had only been in command for a month when the Gettysburg Campaign got under way . 
 In June 1863 Lee 's army advanced north into Maryland , taking the war into Union territory for the second time . Steuart is said to have jumped down from his horse , kissed his native soil and stood on his head in jubilation . According to one of his aides : " We loved Maryland , we felt that she was in bondage against her will , and we burned with desire to have a part in liberating her " . Quartermaster John Howard recalled that Steuart performed " seventeen double somersaults " all the while whistling Maryland , My Maryland . Such celebrations would prove short lived , as Steuart 's brigade was soon to be severely damaged at the Battle of Gettysburg ( July 1 – 3 , 1863 ) . At first however , Lee 's advance north went well . At the Second Battle of Winchester ( June 13 – 15 , 1863 ) Steuart fought with Johnson 's division , helping to bring about a Confederate victory , during which his brigade took around 1 @,@ 000 prisoners and suffered comparatively small losses of 9 killed , 34 wounded . 
 = = = Battle of Gettysburg = = = 
 The Battle of Gettysburg ( July 1 – 3 , 1863 ) was to prove a turning point in the war , and the end of Lee 's advance . Steuart 's men arrived at Gettysburg " exhausted and <unk> ... a little before dusk " on the evening of July 1 , following a 130 @-@ mile ( 210 km ) march from Sharpsburg , " many of them barefooted " . Steuart 's men attacked the Union line on the night of July 2 , gaining ground between the lower Culp 's Hill and the stone wall near Spangler 's Spring . But fresh Federal reinforcements blocked his further advance , and no further ground was gained . During the night a large number quantity of Union artillery was wheeled into place , the sound of which caused the optimistic Steuart to hope that the enemy was retreating in its wagons . 
 The morning of July 3 revealed the full scale of the Union defenses , as enemy artillery opened fire at a distance of 500 yards with a " terrific and galling fire " , followed by a ferocious assault on Steuart 's position . The result was a " terrible slaughter " of the Third Brigade , which fought for many hours without relief , exhausting their ammunition , but successfully holding their position . Then , late on the morning of July 3 , Johnson ordered a bayonet charge against the well @-@ fortified enemy lines , " confident of their ability to sweep him away and take the whole Union line in reverse " . Steuart was appalled , and was strongly critical of the attack , but direct orders could not be disobeyed , and Steuart gave the order to " Left face " and " file right " , sending his men into heavy enfilading fire . Steuart 's Third Brigade advanced against the Union breastworks and attempted several times to wrest control of Culp 's Hill , a vital part of the Union Army defensive line . The result was a " <unk> " , as the Second Maryland and the Third North Carolina regiments courageously charged a well @-@ defended position strongly held by three brigades , a few reaching within twenty paces of the enemy lines . So severe were the casualties among his men that Steuart is said to have broken down and wept , wringing his hands and crying " my poor boys " . Overall , the failed attack on Culp 's Hill cost Johnson 's division almost 2 @,@ 000 men , of which 700 were accounted for by Steuart 's brigade alone — far more than any other brigade in the division . At Hagerstown , on the 8th July , out of a pre @-@ battle strength of 2 @,@ 200 , just 1 @,@ 200 men reported for duty . The casualty rate among the Second Maryland and Third North Carolina was between one half and two @-@ thirds , in the space of just ten hours . 
 Even though Steuart had fought bravely under extremely difficult conditions , neither he nor any other officer was cited by Johnson in his report . Gettysburg marked the high @-@ water mark of the Confederacy ; thereafter Lee 's army would retreat until its final surrender to General Grant at Appomattox Court House . 
 = = = Battle of Payne 's Farm = = = 
 During the winter of 1863 Steuart 's Marylanders again saw action , at the Battle of Mine Run , also known as the battle of Payne 's Farm . On November 27 Steuart 's brigade was among the first to be attacked by Union soldiers , and Johnson himself rode to Steuart 's aid , bringing reinforcements . Steuart , bringing up the Confederate rear , halted his brigade and swiftly formed a line of battle in the road , to repel the Union attack . Confused fighting followed during which the Confederates fell back taking heavy losses , but prevented a Union breakthrough . Steuart himself was wounded for the second time , sustaining an injury to his arm . According to a historical marker which commemorates the engagement , Steuart 's " boldness against a vastly superior force ... helped to stall the advance of the entire Union army " . 
 = = = Battle of the Wilderness = = = 
 In the summer of 1864 , Steuart saw severe action during the Battle of the Wilderness ( May 5 – 7 , 1864 ) . Steuart led his North Carolina infantry against two New York regiments , causing Union losses of almost 600 men . During the battle his brother , Lieutenant William James Steuart , was severely wounded in the hip , and was sent to Guinea station , a hospital for officers in Richmond , Virginia . There , on 21 May 1864 , he died of his injuries . A friend of the family at the University of Virginia wrote to their bereaved father : 
 " You will not charge me , I trust , with intruding on the sacredness of your grief , if I cannot help giving expression to my deep , heartfelt sympathy with your great sorrow . You have sacrificed so much for the righteous cause already , that I know you will present this last and most precious offering also with the fortitude of your character and the submission of a Christian . Still , I know how valuable this son of yours had been to your interests , how dear to your heart , and I cannot tell you , with what deep and sincere grief I heard of your terrible loss . " 
 = = = Disaster at Spotsylvania = = = 
 Soon afterward , at the Battle of Spotsylvania Court House ( May 8 – 21 , 1864 ) , Steuart was himself captured , along with much of his brigade , during the brutal fighting for the " Mule Shoe " salient . The Mule Shoe salient formed a bulge in the Confederate lines , a strategic portion of vital high ground but one which was vulnerable to attack on three sides . During the night of May 11 , Confederate commanders withdrew most of the artillery pieces from the salient , convinced that Grant 's next attack would fall elsewhere . Steuart , to his credit , was alert to enemy preparations and sent a message to Johnson advising him of an imminent enemy attack and requesting the return of the artillery . 
 Unfortunately , shortly before dawn on May 12 , Union forces comprising three full divisions ( Major General Winfield S. Hancock 's II Corps ) attacked the Mule Shoe through heavy fog , taking the Confederate forces by surprise . Exhaustion , inadequate food , lack of artillery support , and wet powder from the night 's rain contributed to the collapse of the Confederate position as the Union forces swarmed out of the mist , overwhelming Steuart 's men and effectively putting an end to the Virginia Brigade . Confederate muskets would not fire due to damp powder , and apart from two remaining artillery pieces , the Southerners were effectively without firearms . During the thick of the fierce hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting that followed , Steuart was forced to surrender to Colonel James A. Beaver of the 148th Pennsylvania Infantry . Beaver asked Steuart " Where is your sword , sir ? " , to which the general replied , with considerable sarcasm , " Well , <unk> , you all waked us up so early this <unk> ' that I didn 't have time to get it on . " Steuart was brought to General Hancock , who had seen Steuart 's wife Maria in Washington before the battle and wished to give her news of her husband . He extended his hand , asking " how are you , Steuart ? " But Steuart refused to shake Hancock 's hand ; although the two men had been friends before the war , they were now enemies . Steuart said : " Considering the circumstance , General , I refuse to take your hand " , to which Hancock is said to have replied , " And under any other circumstance , General , I would have refused to offer it . " After this episode , an offended Hancock then left Steuart to march to the Union rear with the other prisoners . 
 After the battle , Steuart was sent as a prisoner of war to Charleston , South Carolina , and was later imprisoned at Hilton Head , where he and other officers were placed under the fire of Confederate artillery . The fighting at Spotsylvania was to prove the end of his brigade . Johnson 's division , 6 @,@ 800 strong at the start of the battle , was now so severely reduced in size that barely one brigade could be formed . On May 14 the brigades of Walker , Jones , and Steuart were consolidated into one small brigade under the command of Colonel Terry of the 4th Virginia Infantry . 
 = = = Petersburg , Appomattox and the end of the war = = = 
 Steuart was exchanged later in the summer of 1864 , returning to command a brigade in the Army of Northern Virginia , in the division of Major General George Pickett . Steuart 's brigade consisted of the 9th , 14th , 38th , 53rd and 57th Virginia regiments , and served in the trenches north of the James River during the Siege of Petersburg ( June 9 , 1864 – March 25 , 1865 ) . By this stage of the war , Confederate supplies had dwindled to the point where Lee 's army began to go hungry , and the theft of food became a serious problem . Steuart was forced to send armed guards to the supply depot at Petersburg in order to ensure that his men 's packages were not stolen by looters . 
 He continued to lead his brigade in Pickett 's division during the Appomattox Campaign ( March 29 – April 9 , 1865 ) , at the Battle of Five Forks ( April 1 , 1865 ) , and at Sayler 's Creek ( April 6 , 1865 ) , the last two battles marking the effective end of Confederate resistance . During Five Forks General Pickett had been distracted by a shad bake , and Steuart was left in command of the infantry , as it bore the brunt of a huge Union assault , with General Sheridan leading around 30 @,@ 000 men against Pickett 's 10 @,@ 000 . The consequences were even more disastrous than at Spotsylvania the previous year , with at least 5 @,@ 000 men falling prisoner to Sheridan 's forces . The end of Confederate resistance was now just days away . At Sayler 's Creek Lee 's starving and exhausted army finally fell apart . Upon seeing the survivors streaming along the road , Lee exclaimed in front of Maj. Gen. William Mahone , " My God , has the army dissolved ? " to which he replied , " No , General , here are troops ready to do their duty . " 
 Steuart continued fighting until the end , finally surrendering with Lee to General Ulysses S. Grant at Appomattox Court House on April 9 , 1865 , one of 22 brigadiers out of Lee 's original 146 . According to one Maryland veteran , " no @-@ one in the war gave more completely and conscientiously every faculty , every energy that was in him to the Southern cause " . 
 = = = After the war = = = 
 After the war 's end , Steuart returned to Maryland , and swore an oath of loyalty to the Union . He farmed at Mount Steuart , a farmhouse on a hillside near the South River , south of Edgewater , . and served as commander of the Maryland division of the United Confederate Veterans . He died on 22 November 1903 at the age of 75 at South River , Maryland , of an ulcer . He is buried in Green Mount Cemetery in Baltimore with his wife Maria , who died three years later , in 1906 . He was survived by his two daughters , Marie and Ann . Perhaps not surprisingly , as Maryland had remained in the Union throughout the war , there is no monument to Steuart in his home state . However , the Steuart Hill area of Baltimore recalls his family 's long association with the city . 
 = Dayton Project = 
 The Dayton Project was a research and development project that was part of the larger Manhattan Project to build the first atomic bombs . Work took place at several sites in and around Dayton , Ohio . Those working on the project were ultimately responsible for creating the polonium @-@ based modulated neutron initiators which were used to begin the chain reactions in the atomic bombs . The Dayton Project ran from 1943 to 1949 , when Mound Laboratories were completed and the work moved there . 
 The Dayton Project began in 1943 when Monsanto 's Charles Allen Thomas was recruited by the Manhattan Project in the role of coordinating the plutonium purification and production work being carried out at various sites . Scientists at the Los Alamos Laboratory calculated that a plutonium bomb would require an internal neutron initiator . The best @-@ known neutron sources used radioactive polonium and beryllium , so Thomas undertook to produce polonium at Monsanto 's laboratories in Dayton , Ohio . 
 The Dayton Project developed techniques for extracting polonium @-@ 210 from the lead dioxide ore in which it occurs naturally , and from bismuth targets that had been bombarded by neutrons in a nuclear reactor . Ultimately , polonium @-@ based neutron initiators were used in both the gun @-@ type Little Boy and the implosion @-@ type Fat Man used in the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki respectively . The fact that polonium was used as an initiator was classified until the 1960s , but George Koval , a technician with the Manhattan Project 's Special Engineering Detachment , penetrated the Dayton Project as a spy for the Soviet Union . 
 = = Background = = 
 In December 1942 , during World War II , Charles Allen Thomas , a chemist and director of research at Monsanto in St. Louis , joined the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) as the deputy chief of its Division 8 , which was responsible for propellants , explosives and the like . Early in 1943 , he travelled to the East with Richard Tolman , a member of the NDRC , and James B. Conant , the president of Harvard University and the chairman of the NDRC , to witness a demonstration of a new underwater explosive . Conant and Tolman took the opportunity to quietly investigate Thomas 's background . He was then invited to a meeting in Washington D.C. , with Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , the director of the wartime Manhattan Project responsible for building an atomic bomb . When he got there , Thomas found Conant was also present . 
 Groves and Conant were hoping to harness Thomas 's industrial expertise for the benefit of the project . They offered him a post as a deputy to Robert Oppenheimer , the director of the Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico , but he did not wish to move his family or give up his responsibilities at Monsanto . Instead he accepted the role of coordinating the plutonium purification and production work being carried out at Los Alamos , the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago , Radiation laboratory in Berkeley , and Ames Laboratory in Iowa . Chemistry and metallurgy at Los Alamos would be led by the youthful Joseph W. Kennedy . 
 At Los Alamos , physicist Robert Serber proposed that instead of relying on spontaneous fission , the chain reaction inside the atomic bomb should be triggered by a neutron initiator . The best @-@ known neutron sources were radium @-@ beryllium and polonium @-@ beryllium . The latter was chosen as it had a 140 @-@ day half life , which made it intense enough to be useful but not long @-@ lived enough to be stockpiled . Thomas took charge of the development of techniques to industrially refine polonium for use with beryllium in the " urchin " initiators . This effort became the Dayton Project . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Thomas brought in key personnel from Monsanto 's Thomas and Hochwalt Laboratories in Dayton , Ohio , including Caroll Hochwalt , James Lum and Nicholas <unk> . Thomas became Director of the Dayton Project , with Hochwalt as Assistant Project Director and Lum as Laboratory Director . They decided that about twelve chemists would be required , and Lum set about recruiting professors , graduate students and industrial chemists from universities and laboratories in the area . The first of these recruits commenced in August 1943 , but few had any experience with radiochemistry . Numbers increased from 46 full @-@ time employees at the end of 1943 to 101 at the end of 1944 , 201 at the end of 1945 , and 334 at the end of 1946 , including members of the Army 's Special Engineer Detachment . 
 = = Locations = = 
 Office space was initially found in the Monsanto offices at 1515 Nicholas Rd , which became known as Unit I. A laboratory site was found at 1601 W. First St. that had originally been constructed to house the <unk> Seminary . It was a three storey brick building built in 1879 , and owned by the Dayton Board of Education , which used it as a warehouse . Monsanto leased the site on 15 October 1943 , and began converting it into a laboratory known as Unit III . New heating and lighting was installed , windows were replaced , new flooring was laid , and some rooms were re @-@ plastered . A pair of guard houses known as buildings J and K were added , as was a chemical storage shed known as building F , and a wire fence . Laboratory activities were transferred there from Unit I on 25 September . In May 1945 , five additional temporary buildings were constructed on land leased from the Board of Education that housed offices , a cafeteria , locker rooms , a physics laboratory and a laundry . A new guardhouse was also built . To this was added two portable buildings in 1946 . 
 By 1944 , space was running short , and Monsanto began negotiations to acquire the Runnymede Playhouse in the wealthy residential Dayton suburb of Oakwood . Built in 1927 , the Playhouse was a leisure facility that included an outdoor swimming pool , a ballroom , a squash court , a tennis court with a cork floor and a stage for community theater . It had showers with Italian marble and a one and a half storey garage . The estate was owned by the Talbott Realty Company , which was controlled by Thomas 's wife 's family . The <unk> were among the heirs of the Delco company , which was by then a part of General Motors . This fortune had come in large part from profits made during World War I on airplanes that never flew . 
 The Oakwood City Council wanted the Playhouse as a community center . Thomas appeared before the council and assured them that it would not be damaged , although he could not disclose what he was intending to use it for . When Talbott Realty proved reluctant to sell , the United States Army Corps of Engineers condemned the property , which became Unit IV on 15 February 1944 . Remodeling began on 17 March and the Production Group began moving in on 1 June . Three guard houses were added , along with a wire fence . Changes to the site were minimized in order to make it easier to restore later . Because it was located in residential area , efforts were also made to minimize noise and other disruptions . 
 In May 1945 , Monsanto rented three floors of a warehouse at 601 East Third Street from General Electric . Initially it was used to receive and store equipment used by the Project . Later the fourth floor was used as office space , and a laboratory was established on the fifth floor where studies were carried out on the effects of polonium on laboratory animals . Analysis of bioassay samples was carried out here so as to minimize the danger of polonium contamination of the samples . 
 = = Research = = 
 Polonium also occurs naturally in various ores , and the lead dioxide residues from the refinery in Port Hope , Ontario , left over after the removal of uranium and radium from the natural ore were known to contain polonium . It was estimated that this lead dioxide contained 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 3 milligrams ( 0 @.@ 0031 to 0 @.@ <unk> gr ) of polonium per ton . A curie of polonium weighs 0 @.@ <unk> milligrams ( 0 @.@ <unk> gr ) . The first 7 @,@ 250 pounds ( 3 @,@ 290 kg ) of radioactive lead dioxide were delivered to the Dayton Project on 10 November 1943 . The first 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) batch was processed by 8 December , which made 30 microcuries ( 1 @.@ 1 MBq ) of polonium available for experiments a week later . 
 Three processes were investigated for extracting the polonium from the ore . J. H. Dillon of the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company had patented a process in which the lead oxide was dissolved in hydrochloric acid : 
 PbO 
 2 + 4 HCl → <unk> 
 2 + Cl 
 2 + 2H 
 2O 
 The polonium could then be deposited on copper or nickel sheets . This required large @-@ scale glass lined equipment not available in Dayton , but available at the Monsanto B plant in Monsanto , Illinois . After small @-@ scale tests at Unit III revealed that the process was practical , some three tons of lead dioxide were sent to the B plant , and 2 @.@ 50 curies ( 93 GBq ) were recovered . Getting the polonium off the copper and nickel sheets proved more problematic . 
 A second method attempted was a kiln process . The idea was to simply roast the lead dioxide and vaporize the polonium . The problem was that lead dioxide slagged at 700 ° C ( 1 @,@ 292 ° F ) , which was too low for the process to work . So the Project tried using lead orthophosphate , which slagged at 900 ° C ( 1 @,@ 650 ° F ) . This was made by mixing the lead dioxide with phosphoric acid . Experiments showed that the polonium vaporized well when the lead orthophosphate was heated to 750 ° C ( 1 @,@ 380 ° F ) for four hours . Unfortunately , the process then ran into problems with dust and other foreign matter , and presented problems of contamination of the personnel and equipment involved . 
 The third method involved dissolving the lead dioxide in a mixture of concentrated nitric acid and hydrogen peroxide : 
 PbO 
 2 + <unk> 
 3 + H 
 2O 
 2 → Pb ( NO 
 3 ) 
 2 + O 
 2 + 2H 
 2O 
 This proved to be the best way to separate the polonium from the lead dioxide , although there were problems with the precipitation of various contaminants , including iron and aluminum . Although about 35 tons of lead dioxide were treated with nitric acid , and about 40 curies ( 1 @.@ 5 TBq ) of polonium were produced , the process did not proceed beyond the pilot stage because a better source of polonium became available . 
 = = Production = = 
 Polonium could be produced by neutron irradiation of bismuth . In 1943 the only polonium produced in this manner was in cyclotrons , but the Manhattan Project 's development of nuclear reactors offered the prospect of producing large amounts of polonium in this manner : 
 209 
 83Bi + n → 210 
 83Bi → 210 
 <unk> + β 
 A metric ton of bismuth irradiated in the Manhattan Project 's X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor in Oak Ridge , Tennessee , contained 32 to 83 curies ( 1 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 1 TBq ) of polonium , a vast improvement over the yields from Port Hope 's lead dioxide . Starting in June 1945 , the Dayton Project began receiving bismuth irradiated in the more powerful reactors at the Hanford Site in Washington , which now became the major source of supply , and by the end of 1946 Hanford was shipping material that contained up to 13 @,@ 200 curies ( 0 @.@ 49 PBq ) per metric ton of bismuth . This was much more dangerous to handle , but by then safe handling procedures had been developed . 
 Bismuth was purchased from the American Smelting and Refining Company of the highest purity that it could produce . It was sent to Hanford , where it was put in aluminum cans , and placed inside a reactor for 100 days . The canned slugs then shipped to Unit IV , where they were bathed in hydrochloric acid , which dissolved the aluminum . This formed an aluminum chloride solution that was disposed of , as it was highly radioactive due to iron and copper in the aluminum alloy . The bismuth slugs were then dissolved in aqua regia . This was too weak for electroplating the polonium , so the nitric acid was removed , and then the polonium deposited on bismuth by adding powdered bismuth . This resulted in a 100 @-@ 1 concentration . This could then be repeated by dissolving in aqua regia again to achieve a 1000 @-@ 1 concentration . This was again dissolved , and the polonium electroplated on platinum foils . The main problem with the process was that it required glass @-@ lined containers due to the aqua regia , and mechanisms for safe handling of the radioactive material . The Dayton Project explored alternative purification methods that were found to be workable , but less efficient or safe . 
 The first consignment of polonium left for Los Alamos on 15 March 1944 in a lead @-@ lined suitcase carried by a military courier . Regular shipments were made thereafter . Initiator testing at Los Alamos required more polonium than anticipated , and in December 1944 , Oppenheimer was forced to ask Thomas if he could ship 20 curies ( 0 @.@ 74 TBq ) per month . The Dayton Project was able to do so . In February 1945 , Thomas agreed to increase shipments to 100 curies ( 3 @.@ 7 TBq ) per month by June , and 500 per month by December . 
 = = Assay = = 
 Dayton Project employees were not allowed to eat or smoke in processing areas , and had to scrub their hands before leaving these areas . They also had to shower at the end of each day 's work , and were subjected to weekly urine tests . Employees with elevated levels of polonium were not allowed in the processing areas . Working with polonium without spreading contamination proved to be almost impossible . Fortunately , it was not a bone @-@ seeker like radium or plutonium , and was readily excreted in urine . Detection methods had already been developed , making it easy to track . One employee at Unit IV contaminated her hair . Combined with a practice of putting bobby pins in her mouth , this resulted in her having the highest urine count at the site . 
 = = Espionage = = 
 Zhorzh Abramovich " George " Koval was drafted into the US Army in 1943 , and was inducted into the Manhattan Project 's Special Engineering Detachment . He was initially assigned to Oak Ridge , where his job as a health physics officer gave him access to much of the plant . He began passing secrets relating to the production of polonium at Oak Ridge to his GRU handler codenamed " Clyde " . In 1945 Koval was transferred to Dayton . Again his job as a health physics officer gave him wide access to the secret installation . In 2007 Russian President Vladimir Putin posthumously awarded Koval a gold star making him a hero of the Russian Federation for his work as the GRU spy " Delmar " . Russian officials stated that the initiator for their Joe @-@ 1 bomb had been " prepared to the recipe provided by Delmar " . The fact that polonium was used as an initiator remained classified until the 1960s . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 After Leonard Schiff calculated that theoretically an initiator could improve the efficiency of a gun @-@ type nuclear weapon , Oppenheimer gave approval on 15 March 1945 for initiators to be included in the Little Boy design . Testing was carried out to ensure that the initiators were rugged enough to handle being transported in an airplane and being accidentally dropped . Eventually , about forty initiators were despatched to Tinian , where four were inserted into the bomb that was used in the bombing of Hiroshima . 
 The initiator used in the implosion design of the Fat Man bomb that was dropped on Nagasaki was coded named " urchin " . In order to increase the efficiency of the explosion , the initiator had to emit a large number of neutrons in a few microseconds while the plutonium core was fully compressed . At the heart of the urchin was a solid beryllium sphere 0 @.@ 4 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 16 in ) in diameter . This was gold plated and coated with 20 curies ( 0 @.@ 74 TBq ) of polonium . The gold kept the alpha particles from the polonium from striking the beryllium . This fitted inside two beryllium hemispheres with 15 parallel grooves cut into its inner surface . These grooves converted the shock wave of the implosion into jets that shattered the spheres and caused the beryllium and polonium to mix and emit neutrons . The hemispheres were nickel @-@ plated and the outer surface was coated in gold and 30 curies ( 1 @.@ 1 TBq ) of polonium . The 2 @.@ 0 @-@ centimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) initiator , which was hot to touch , fitted neatly inside the 0 @.@ 8 @-@ inch ( 20 mm ) hole in the center of the plutonium pit . 
 = = Cost = = 
 The total cost of the Dayton Project up to the end of 1946 was $ 3 @,@ 666 @,@ 507 ( $ 44 @.@ 5 million in today 's dollars ) . 
 = = Post war = = 
 = = = Mound Laboratories = = = 
 By 1945 , the Dayton Project has assumed such importance that the Manhattan Project decided to make it into a permanent facility . The original intention was to move operations to Oak Ridge , but it was decided that a site near Dayton was preferable . Few of the scientific and technical staff wanted to move to Tennessee , and there were concerns about the dangers of polonium contamination at a plutonium processing site . A search for a suitable site began in early 1946 , and one was found in Miamisburg , Ohio , about 12 miles ( 19 km ) from Dayton . The 178 @-@ acre ( 72 ha ) site was adjacent to a state park containing a large prehistoric Indian burial mound , which gave the Mound Laboratories its name . 
 Monsanto commenced construction of what was referred to as Unit V in May 1946 , using the firm of <unk> and Vallet of Detroit as architects , while the plant was built by the Maxon Construction of Dayton . The design called for an underground complex that could withstand a direct hit from a 2 @,@ 000 pounds ( 910 kg ) bomb , with protection against biological and chemical weapons , at a cost of $ 17 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 . 
 Responsibility for nuclear weapons production was transferred from the Manhattan Project to the Atomic Energy Commission in 1947 , but work continued on the Mound Laboratories . The first building was completed in May 1948 , and polonium processing commenced at the Mound Laboratories in February 1949 . Altogether , 14 major buildings were constructed with a total floor space of 366 @,@ 000 square feet ( 34 @,@ 000 m2 ) at a cost of $ 25 @.@ 5 million . Due to fear of attack or sabotage , the former Scioto Laboratory Complex in Marion , Ohio , was acquired by the Atomic Energy Commission in 1948 . It was maintained as a cold standby site until 1953 , when it was decided that it was no longer needed , and was closed . 
 = = = Site cleanup = = = 
 Unit I continued to be used by Monsanto as an administrative facility until the 1980s , when it was demolished , and the land was sold in 1992 . Unit III , the former <unk> Theological Seminary , was decontaminated in 1950 and returned to the Dayton Board of Education . The original seminary building was subsequently demolished , but several structures remain from the Dayton Project . The site was listed on the National Register of Historical Places on 10 May 2006 . Unit IV , the former Runnymede Playhouse , was deemed too contaminated , so the building was demolished in February 1950 . Even the cobblestones in the driveway were ripped up and taken away , along with 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) of earth from under the house . The excavation was filled in , and the site was returned to the Talbott family , who were paid $ 138 @,@ 000 in compensation . The Dayton Warehouse was decontaminated in 1950 and returned to its owners . 
 In 1996 , the Department of Energy , which had succeeded the Atomic Energy Commission , decided that since the Dayton sites already had been decontaminated , they did not warrant inclusion in the Army Corps of Engineers ' Formerly Utilized Sites Remedial Action Program ( FUSRAP ) . However , the local community in Dayton were concerned that the cleanup did not meet 21st century environmental standards . The state of Ohio therefore asked United States Congress to have the Army Corps of Engineers conduct a review . This was carried out in 2004 and 2005 . The review concluded that no radioactive contaminants were found that would warrant inclusion in FUSRAP . 
 = Coexist ( album ) = 
 Coexist is the second studio album by English indie pop band the xx . After a break from touring for their 2009 debut album xx , the band members began to write songs individually before they recorded Coexist from November 2011 to May 2012 . For the album , the xx drew on personal experiences for their songwriting , while their music was influenced by the electronic dance scene that occurred when they had been away on tour . The album was produced by the band 's Jamie xx , who had pursued electronic dance on other projects and developed as a DJ prior to the album . 
 Coexist features a minimalist musical style with spatial arrangements , loose song structure , little dynamism , and experimentation with tension . Its songs are characterised by sparse elements such as simple chord progression , keyboard ostinatos , and fading motifs , while Jamie xx 's production incorporates both programmed beats and live percussion instruments . Coexist touches on themes of heartbreak , loneliness , and intimacy . The lyrics , written by guitarist Romy Madley Croft and bassist Oliver Sim , address a failing relationship and changes in a romance with inner monologues and simple metaphors . 
 When Coexist was released on 5 September 2012 by Young Turks , it received generally positive reviews from critics and debuted at number one on the United Kingdom 's Official Albums Chart , selling 58 @,@ 266 copies in its first week there . It also charted in the top 10 in several other countries and was promoted with four singles , including " Angels " and " Chained " . During June to December 2012 , the xx toured in support of the album throughout Europe and North America . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2009 , the xx released their debut album xx to critical acclaim . It was certified platinum in the United Kingdom and also sold 350 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . It showcased their characteristically moody , R & B and post @-@ dubstep @-@ influenced indie pop style and lyrical themes of loneliness , lust , and love . After the departure of group member Baria Qureshi , the xx exclusively played live concerts throughout 2010 , including several high @-@ profile summer music festivals , and garnered a growing fanbase . The band 's popularity grew further when their songs featured in television shows and commercials , and they were also covered and sampled by well @-@ known recording artists . In 2010 , xx won the Mercury Prize , an annual music prize awarded for the best album from the UK and Ireland . 
 Following an exhausting tour , the xx went on a break . The band 's producer and percussionist Jamie xx pursued electronic dance styles on other musical projects , creating remixes for Radiohead , Adele , and Florence and the Machine . He also collaborated on Gil Scott @-@ Heron 's 2011 album We 're New Here , and produced Drake 's 2012 song " Take Care " . The latter exemplified and helped popularise the xx 's sound as well . A novice to DJing when starting out with the xx , he subsequently learned its technical aspects and developed a grasp on controlling the crowd through unexpected silences and drops during his live sets . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 In 2011 , the xx opened their own recording studio in London and began writing songs for Coexist during the summer . Each member — guitarist Romy Madley Croft , bassist Oliver Sim , and Jamie xx — wrote music individually and recorded snippets using GarageBand or their phones . Both Croft and Sim drew on personal experiences and wrote more direct lyrics than on xx to express complex emotions . Sim said of his songwriting for Coexist , " I found myself being a lot less ' moons and stars ' and being a lot more literal . " Croft felt more expectations from listeners than when the band debuted and consequently turned to more personal songwriting for Coexist : 
 They wrote , recorded , and emailed music back and forth to each other before working together in a rehearsal space in East London . When he first read them , Jamie xx found Croft and Sim 's lyrics to be " purposely ambiguous so people can relate to them " , saying in an interview for Uncut , " I mean … if I listen carefully , I do know about their lives intimately so I can guess what they ’ re about . But they don ’ t even tell each other what they ’ re singing about . " 
 The xx started recording Coexist in November 2011 , and used a photography studio in North London to record the songs they had put together . They later used the rehearsal space in East London to practice playing the songs live . They recorded for six months in London and intended to finish before their scheduled music festival appearances for 2012 . The xx 's direction for the album was partly inspired by the electronic dance scene that occurred while they toured for xx , as well as the live DJ sets of Jamie xx , who was mostly listening to dark Chicago house music at the time . According to him , " We left [ to tour ] when we were 17 and we missed out on that chunk of our lives when everyone else was partying . " However , he insisted that " we 're not looking to make people dance . " They were also influenced by pop @-@ reggae band UB40 , folk act White <unk> , and neo soul artist Van Hunt , all of whom they listened to while recording Coexist . Croft viewed the music as a continuation of their debut , " developed , but [ not ] like completely a world away " . 
 Rather than expand on their debut 's sound , the xx wanted to minimise the songs they recorded for Coexist and mute certain elements during its production . Croft felt that this would help make the music more playable live instead of having to reproduce multiple vocal or guitar elements that were tracked onto a song . Jamie xx , who produced and mixed Coexist , wanted to keep his production simple and create an emotive , electronic sound . He used Logic Pro recording software , a Space Echo effects unit , preamplifiers , and <unk> on occasion , as well as both synthesised steelpan sounds and live percussion instruments . To engineer the album , he put together a mixing desk from pieces of other desks and left doors open during the recording to let sounds from outside the studio bleed into the mix . The xx finished recording Coexist in May 2012 . 
 = = Music and production = = 
 The songs on Coexist , which Edna Gundersen of USA Today categorized as indie pop , eschew melodic structure for minimalist dynamics and sparse sounds . John Calvert of Fact asserts that it is " a far more meditative album " for deviating from its predecessor 's " tight , brisk pop songs " , " nuanced [ guitar ] interplay " , and " light dynamics " . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times comments that songs " unfold ... beginning as pointillist sketches and ending up as huge , blurry color blocks . " Reflecting the band 's electronic dance influences , Coexist features atmospheric , dance @-@ orientated song structures , <unk> traditional verse @-@ chorus form , and incorporates influences from dubstep and rave music . Drowned in Sound 's Hayden Woolley writes that the music features " watercolour textures and rhythms that seem to lock @-@ in to the ebbing pulse and cadences of the body . " Rory Gibb of The Quietus believes that Coexist is neither a " pop " nor " downtempo dance record " , but occupies " a hazy space between the two " and is an attempt at " post @-@ Burial pop " . Simon Price of The Independent asserts that " rather than clubland , Coexist owes a debt to comedown / chillout culture " . 
 The songs are characterized by droning harmonies , simple chord progression , keyboard ostinatos , ringing guitar , resounding reverb , slight bass grooves , and programmed beats . Sim plays counterpoint melodies on his bass , while Croft plays angular figures , sketchy musical patterns , and melodies developed from two @-@ note intervals ; Price likens Croft 's use of the guitar to playing a harp . Jamie xx 's production is largely responsible for the music 's lowest frequency sounds and incorporates both four on the floor and 2 @-@ step beats , subtle BPM changes , heartbeat @-@ like drum machine rhythms , strings , and live percussion such as timpani , snare drums , and <unk> . The latter instrument is played in arpeggio and exhibits Jamaican music influences . Critic Will Hermes views Jamie xx as a more prominent contributor on Coexist than on xx and comments that " the beats and musical backdrops are more varied and command more attention . " 
 The songs are also spatially arranged and experiment with tension , including listeners ' expectations for a hook to unfold , a dance beat to develop , and a time signature to change . Elements such as drum beats , vocals , and guitar motifs fade to silence throughout the songs . Kitty Empire of The Observer comments that " no pattern here hangs around for more than a couple of bars , and rarely in multiples of four . " Stephen Thompson of NPR comments on the music 's lack of dynamism , writing that the band " lets its songs billow out softly and quietly , with only achingly pretty guitar lines to lessen the tension . " Michael Hann of The Guardian writes that the album refines the band 's " already skeletal frame " and that most of its songs are " defined as much by space as by sound " , adding that the music 's " gaps bring greater emphasis " to guitar , piano , and vocal elements . Melissa Locker of Time comments that " each sound , be it instrument or voice , is given ample room to exist and to soar . " 
 = = Lyrics and themes = = 
 Coexist deals with themes of heartbreak , loneliness , and intimacy . Croft and Sim share lead vocals , which occasionally overlap in call and response interplay and slow crescendos . Sim , who cites Sade as an influence , has more assured vocals , while Croft sings in a shyer style and exhibits catches in her voice . The lyrics focus on a failing relationship and changes in a romance . Will Ryan of Beats Per Minute writes that they follow " the back @-@ and @-@ forth complexities of a fractured relationship that ... explores a wilderness of residual feelings left over after said relationship has collapsed . " Garry Mulholland of Uncut interprets the album to be " the story of a relationship broken by the protagonists ' tendency to love too much while being unable to express their need to each other . " Eric Sundermann of The A.V. Club views that the album 's songs " all focus on different stages of romantic love , from infatuation to frustration to all the other stuff that falls in between . " Kevin Liedel of Slant Magazine felt that the songs follow @-@ up on the " lovebirds " from the xx 's debut album , " now separated and devastated ... mus [ ing ] on what went wrong " . Puja Patel of Spin remarks that the band 's " fantastical , elemental star @-@ crossed @-@ lover talk has been replaced by evocations of a harder , more aggressively worked @-@ at love " . Most of the songs have single @-@ word titles that evoke long sentiments . 
 The xx 's lyrics on Coexist feature broader diction than on xx and employ simple metaphors of light and darkness , and distance and time . They often express emotional stress , yearning , and passive @-@ aggressive attitudes . Some songs feature a lyrical conceit of an emotionally elusive lover as an apparition or an illusion . Croft and Sim avoid traditional duet lyrics about declarations of love , instead employing inner monologues to depict the same situation from two different perspectives . Eric Sundermann asserts that , rather than " simply " being " declarations " , the songs serve as " the thought process of how to deal with interpersonal struggles . " Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph perceives " intimate conversations between forlorn lovers " and an " almost sacred eroticism in Croft and Sim 's whispery vocals . " Drowned in Sound 's Hayden Woolley views that the album shares xx 's " fragility " , " quiet gravitas " , and " heavy words " , but is " an intensely wind @-@ torn and wounded album that cuts even deeper than its predecessor . " Music journalist Luke Turner calls its subject matter more " turbulent , sensual and fun " than on xx and states , " of course not necessarily a sexual or romantic one , the feel of this second record is far more earthy , sticky , complicated , like the tension of the second or third encounters after a one night stand . " 
 = = Songs = = 
 " Angels " opens Coexist with a restrained style and soft @-@ spoken verses about the idea of being in love . Croft 's lyrics compare the premature end of an relationship to " dreaming of angels , and leaving without them " , and touch on the private knowledge that is acquired through intimacy . " Chained " experiments with musical buildup and subtle flourishes , and muffled 2 @-@ step beats . Its lyrics lament a couple 's distance from each other . On " Fiction " , Sim 's emotive lyrics recount romantic illusions such as " last night the world was beneath us " , but eventually lead to a catharsis . " Try " has oscillating guitar lines , sluggish snare drums , and looped synthesizers . Jamie xx experimented with unconventional electronic elements when producing the song . John Calvert of Fact asserts that it is a stark " conflation of urban and indie music " , noting its " <unk> [ sic ] synths and rumble @-@ bass ( think ' Drop It Like It 's Hot ' ) passing under tremolo guitar . " On " Try " , the narrators attempt to evoke feelings of hope and functionality to each other . 
 " Reunion " is a noirish ballad that features reactive emotions by the narrators . Jamie xx approached its recording as he would remixing a song , working with a demo of bass , guitar , and vocal parts at his own studio and incorporating house and techno elements . Midway , " Reunion " develops a refrain of " did I ... see you ... see me ... in a new light ? " , and pulsating steel drums lead to a somber , rhythmic dance section . Its pulsating beat transitions into " Sunset " , a song about the pain shared by estranged ex @-@ lovers . The song 's muted beat adds tension to the narrative , which Calvert interprets to be " the couple 's final farewell – the beat serves to denote the passing of time . " " Sunset " also has a subtle UK garage beat , funky house elements , and was inspired by the music from Jamie xx 's DJing gigs ; Croft cited it as " an example of the idea of a kind of song we 're all really into , which is heartbreaking dance music " . Consequence of Sound 's Harley Brown views that " Reunion " and " Sunset " make up a congruous mix at " the heart of the album " , as " Jamie xx indie @-@ streams these house varieties ... slowing down and alienating beats from their context so they ’ re even more universal , unobscured by their dance floor origins . 
 " Missing " features a melancholic mood and experiments with echoing vocal effects . The song 's lyrics express inner turmoil and deal with themes of separation and isolation . Sim sings lead over Croft 's echoed background wails , and vice versa , amid solemn keyboard flourishes . Sim originally wrote the song on the band 's tour bus near the end of their tour , but underwent several changes before being one of the last songs recorded for the album . " Tides " opens solely with Croft and Sim 's vocals , and features fading musical elements , including lock @-@ step percussion , minor strings , an isolated guitar line , and a wavy bassline . Croft and Sim trade lines expressing resignation as their respective partner " leav [ es ] with the tide " , comparing the ebb and flow of a relationship to that of tides . 
 The album 's subsequent songs focus on separation , with lyrics written in past tense . " Unfold " comprises individual notes and pauses , and incorporates tension in its off @-@ beat composition , while its percussion increases in tempo before the accompanying instrumentation follows suit . It features deep house beats , resounding guitar harmonics , rhythmic hi @-@ hat , and a dominant breakbeat . Croft describes " Unfold " as a " gentle reverie " and " quite an emotional one . " On " Swept Away " , she and Sim express fragile declarations of love . They originally wrote the song as a ballad before Jamie xx reworked it with a Roland TR @-@ 909 drum machine . " Our Song " features a rewinding guitar sample , looped feedback , and pulsating percussion buildup . It is about the love shared in a friendship ; Croft and Sim wrote it to address each other and the band itself : " We 've never done that before ; we 're always addressing the songs outward . It 's about the function of love and the love of friends . It 's important . " 
 = = Title and packaging = = 
 The album 's title was inspired by their idea for the cover artwork , which depicts an iridescent oil spill in the shape of an " X " , a variation on the band 's white @-@ on @-@ black " X " logo . Croft compared the mixture of oil and water to her holistic view of the band , saying in an interview for Grantland : 
 When they informed them of the title , their record label 's American office e @-@ mailed them about there being a " Coexist " bumper sticker . Croft said that " I know it has that connection , but it felt like the right word . It 's cool , I guess ? It 's a nice message ? Everybody getting along ? " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Coexist was released worldwide by Young Turks . In May 2012 , the xx played three intimate shows in London , where they previewed material from the album . They also performed on the Mini Stage of the San Miguel Primavera Sound festival in Barcelona , Spain , on 31 May . On 17 July , " Angels " was released as the album 's lead single . It charted at number 46 in Australia and at number 38 in Belgium . The second single , " Chained " , was released on 7 August . On 28 September , the xx performed the song , along with " Sunset " , on Later ... with Jools Holland . A remix of the song was released as a single to iTunes on 11 March 2013 . " Sunset " was later serviced to American modern rock radio on 28 January 2013 . 
 To test if the xx could replicate their debut album 's viral success , Young Turks ' parent label XL Recordings approached technology companies and agreed to a deal with Microsoft to create a visualisation that could track sharing of the album 's stream . The xx collaborated with designers from Internet Explorer and <unk> on the project . It was designed to show lines on a global map as Coexist is shared and was inspired by media artist Aaron <unk> 's visualisation of flight patterns in the US . The album 's stream was posted on a host site upon its release and shared with a fan in London through Facebook . The stream 's host site crashed within 24 hours after the stream had been shared with millions of users . It subsequently reached social news site Reddit , where fans campaigned to share the album to every country possible . Label executive Adam Farrell of Beggars Group , Young Turks ' distributor , cited it as " one of the most significant album premieres we 've ever done " . 
 Coexist debuted at number one on the Official Albums Chart with first @-@ week sales of 58 @,@ 266 copies in the United Kingdom , becoming the band 's first number @-@ one album on the chart . The album fell to number four in its second week , selling 22 @,@ 005 copies . On 14 September 2012 , the album was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry , denoting shipments in excess of 100 @,@ 000 copies in the UK . Coexist also debuted at number one on record charts in Belgium , New Zealand , Portugal , and Switzerland . In the United States , it debuted at number five on the Billboard 200 with 73 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week . The album debuted at number two on the Canadian Albums Chart , selling 10 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . 
 In June 2012 , the xx embarked on a 25 @-@ date , international summer tour . The tour lasted into September and featured performances at several music festivals , including Primavera Sound , Rock Werchter , Sziget Festival , Lowlands , Bestival , and Electric Picnic . On 23 July , they debuted " Swept Away " , " Sunset " , and " Reunion " at the Music Box in Los Angeles . Unlike the band 's last tour , Jamie xx added live percussion instruments to his repertoire . In December , the xx played a five @-@ date tour in the United Kingdom — Brighton Dome on 6 December , O2 Academy Newcastle on 11 December , Wolverhampton Civic Hall on 12 December , Colston Hall on 14 December , and Brixton Academy on 16 December . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Coexist received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 79 , based on 46 reviews . Garry Mulholland of Uncut dubbed it a " masterpiece " , while Rolling Stone magazine 's Jody Rosen hailed the xx as " masters of restraint " . In his review for the Chicago Tribune , Greg Kot felt that the album " functions as a near @-@ perfect mood piece " and , " because there are so few elements in each song , " each sound " makes a bigger impact . " Neil <unk> of The Daily Telegraph praised Jamie xx for " somehow widening and deepening the sound without intruding " , while Puja Patel of Spin magazine credited him for " both stretching and magnifying the gritty beauty of his vocalists " . Simon Price gave Coexist five stars in his review for The Independent and found their take on the duet concept highly engaging and emotional . In his review for MSN Music , Robert Christgau complimented their preoccupation with " young love " and stated , " these scrupulously abstract verses capture its obsessive doubts and fragile <unk> with delicacy and tenderness . " Michael Alan Goldberg of The Village Voice called the album " gorgeous " and said that the music is like a " haiku instead of sonnet ; Hemingway rather than Fitzgerald , with meaning and emotion lurking beneath the surface . " 
 In a less enthusiastic review for The New York Times , Jon Caramanica said that Coexist suffers from a difficult second half on what is otherwise " as insular and micro as ambitious pop music can be ... a wonderful experiment in the power of absence . " Kevin Liedel from Slant Magazine was more critical and called it " a collection of richly crafted but idling songs in desperate need of some muscle . " Arnold Pan from PopMatters found it monotonous and " an exercise in delayed gratification . " Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times panned the band 's lyrics as " one @-@ dimensional planes floating through the group 's oft @-@ glorious 3 @-@ D spaces . " Pitchfork Media 's Mark Richardson felt that it is occasionally " a little rickety " and remarked that , " if generally successful on its own terms , Coexist also serves to remind us why exactly the debut was so brilliant . " 
 Several critics and publications ranked Coexist as one of 2012 's best albums in their year @-@ end , top @-@ ten lists , including Kitty Empire of The Observer , The Austin Chronicle , Les Inrockuptibles , State magazine , and The Guardian , whose staff voted it eighth . It was named the 14th best album of the year by both NME magazine and Robert Christgau in his list for The Barnes & Noble Review . However , the magazine XLR8R ranked the album number seven on their list of the most overrated releases of the year , feeling that the trio 's dark and minimal sound on the record was not as exciting as on their debut LP . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Romy Madley Croft and Oliver Sim , except where noted . All music composed by Croft , Sim and Jamie Smith . 
 " Chained " contains a sample of " Lilies of the Nile " as performed by The Crusaders . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 The xx 
 Romy Madley Croft – guitar , vocals , keyboards ( track 2 ) ; art direction 
 Oliver Sim – bass , vocals , synthesiser ( track 3 ) 
 Jamie xx – beats , engineering , mixing , MPC , production , piano ( tracks 3 , 10 ) ; organ ( tracks 4 , 5 ) ; <unk> ( track 5 ) 
 The xx – design 
 Additional personnel 
 Sarah Chapman – strings ( track 8 ) 
 Charlotte <unk> – strings ( track 8 ) 
 David Evans – photography 
 Phil Lee – art direction , design 
 Rodaidh McDonald – mixing 
 Mandy Parnell – mastering 
 Ivo <unk> – strings ( track 8 ) 
 James Underwood – strings ( track 8 ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Ajax 5 – 1 Liverpool ( 1966 ) = 
 Ajax 5 – 1 Liverpool was a football match between Ajax and Liverpool on 7 December 1966 at the Olympic Stadium in Amsterdam , Netherlands . It was the first leg of a second round tie in the 1966 – 67 European Cup . The match was given the Dutch title " De <unk> " ( Dutch pronunciation : [ də <unk> <unk> ̯ t ] ; " The Fog Match " ) as it was played in dense fog . 
 Ajax were competing in the European Cup for the third time , they had qualified as winners of the 1965 – 66 Eredivisie . They were drawn against Turkish team Beşiktaş in the first round , who they beat 4 – 1 over two @-@ legs . This was Liverpool 's second appearance in the European Cup , they had reached the semi @-@ finals during the 1964 – 65 season losing to eventual winners Internazionale in the semi @-@ finals . Their opponents in the first round were Petrolul Ploiești of Romania , whom they beat 2 – 0 in a play @-@ off match after the two @-@ leg tie resulted in a 3 – 3 scoreline . 
 Watched by a crowd of 55 @,@ 722 , Ajax took the lead in the third minute when Cees de Wolf scored . They extended their lead in the 17th minute courtesy of a Johan Cruyff goal . Two more goals scored by forward Klaas Nuninga meant Ajax had a 4 – 0 lead at half @-@ time . Liverpool responded late in the game when defender Chris Lawler scored in the 89th minute ; however , Ajax scored a minute later through Henk Groot to win the match 5 – 1 . The spectators could not really see much of the match due to the fog 's density and at times could only tell by the celebration of the team when a goal was scored . 
 A 2 – 2 draw in the second leg meant that Ajax progressed to the quarter @-@ finals courtesy of a 7 – 3 aggregate victory . They would lose to Czech side Dukla Prague 3 – 2 over two legs . The match marked the emergence of Ajax in European football , two seasons later they reached the final , but lost 4 – 1 to Milan . They would go on to win the European Cup three consecutive times in the early 1970s . The match represents Liverpool 's record defeat in European competition . 
 = = Background = = 
 Both teams had qualified for the European Cup by winning their respective national league championships . Ajax won the 1965 – 66 Eredivisie , finishing seven points ahead of second @-@ placed Feyenoord . Liverpool qualified by winning the 1965 – 66 Football League First Division , six points ahead of second @-@ placed Leeds United . 
 Ajax faced Turkish team Beşiktaş in the first round of the European Cup . They won the first leg 2 – 0 at the Olympic Stadium , courtesy of goals from Piet Keizer and Bennie Muller . The second leg in Turkey finished 2 – 1 to Ajax , with goals from Keizer and <unk> Swart . Ajax won the tie 4 – 1 on aggregate to progress to the second round . Liverpool were drawn against Romanian team Petrolul Ploiești in the first round , and won the first leg at their home ground Anfield , courtesy of goals from Ian St. John and Ian Callaghan . Petrolul Ploiești won the second leg 3 – 1 in Romania to level the tie at 3 – 3 after the two matches . The tie would be decided by a play @-@ off match , which Liverpool 2 – 0 to progress to the second round . 
 Ajax had little success in European competition prior to their meeting with Liverpool . They had qualified for the European Cup Winners ' Cup twice during the 1960 – 61 and 1961 – 62 seasons , but did not progress past the first round either time . Liverpool had only participated in European competition during the previous two season , but they had more success than Ajax . Their first season of competition in 1964 – 65 they reached the semi @-@ finals of the European Cup , losing to eventual winners Internazionale . The following season they reached the final of the European Cup Winners ' Cup , however , they lost 2 – 1 against German team Borussia Dortmund . 
 Liverpool were among the favourites to win the competition while Ajax were virtually unknown outside of the Netherlands . Liverpool manager Bill Shankly had made a scouting trip to watch Ajax before the match and witnessing them lose to lowly opposition returned confident Liverpool would progress . A few of Liverpool 's players , including striker Roger Hunt , were part of England 's victorious World Cup campaign in 1966 . Ajax were coming out of a poor period , after they had finished in 13th place in the 1964 – 65 Eredivisie , while the Netherlands national team had yet to make an impression on the international stage . The board of Ajax decided to hire <unk> Michels . He changed the team 's formation to a 4 – 2 – 4 , with an emphasis on passing and possession of the ball . The team showed improvement , winning the Eredivisie in his first season in charge . 
 = = Match = = 
 Ajax normally played their home matches at the De Meer Stadion . However , as demand for tickets to watch the match was high , it was switched to the higher @-@ capacity Olympic Stadium . Amsterdam suffered from heavy fog in the 24 hours before the match was due to start , and with the fog not abating before kick @-@ off , it was debated whether to go ahead with the match . One option was to postpone the match , which Liverpool manager Bill Shankly favoured . He was less keen on the match being replayed the next day as Liverpool were scheduled to face Manchester United in the next few days . The referee Antonio <unk> decided to go ahead with the match , despite visibility reportedly being down to 50 yards ( 46 m ) . 
 = = = First half = = = 
 Ajax opened the scoring in the third minute when Cees de Wolf , who was making his debut for Ajax , scored . A throw @-@ in by Cruyff was headed into the air , Liverpool goalkeeper Tommy Lawrence came to collect the ball . Realising he could not reach it , he moved back towards his goal , but de Wolf <unk> defender Chris Lawler to head the ball into the Liverpool goal . The conditions were so poor , that the crowd celebrated in stages . Those closest to the goal celebrated immediately , while those at the other end of the stadium reacted to these celebrations . Liverpool striker Hunt had a chance to score in the 12th minute , but his shot was saved by Ajax goalkeeper Gerrit Bals . Following the goal Ajax continued to attack , midfielder <unk> Swart ran past three Liverpool players before passing the ball to Klaas Nuninga , whose shot was saved by Liverpool goalkeeper Lawrence . However , Lawrence dropped the ball near Johan Cruyff , who scored to give Ajax a 2 – 0 lead . 
 The conditions were so bad that when Liverpool coach Bob Paisley came onto the pitch to attend to an injured player , Shankly entered as well . He managed to give instructions to his players before he was spotted by the officials and ordered off the field . Ajax player Wim <unk> was carried off with a damaged ankle midway through the first half . He returned to the pitch , but suffered from a limp . Ajax extended their lead in the 39th minute . Liverpool defender Tommy Smith fouled Cruyff outside the Liverpool penalty area . The subsequent free @-@ kick taken by Frits <unk> was not cleared by the Liverpool defence and the ball rebounded to Nuninga , who scored to give Ajax a 3 – 0 lead . The conditions did not only affect the Liverpool players . Towards the end of the first half , the referee blew his whistle . Swart , assuming that he had signalled half @-@ time began to walk off the pitch , was stopped by a steward who pointed out that the match was still ongoing . He re @-@ entered the pitch , received the ball and crossed the ball for Nuninga , who scored to make it 4 – 0 . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 Liverpool came out in the second half determined to atone for their first @-@ half performance . They forced Ajax into their own half of the pitch for majority of the second half but were unable to make their advantage count . Smith had a chance to score 25 yards ( 23 m ) from the Ajax goal , but his shot was saved by Bals . Defender Ron Yeats also had <unk> to score in the 61st minute , but his header was stopped by Bals . A minute later Smith was cautioned for a foul on Nuninga and Ajax 's Bennie Muller was also booked in the 70th minute . 
 Liverpool had another chance to score in the 73rd minute , but Geoff Strong 's shot following a corner went over the crossbar . Ajax extended their lead towards the end of the half when they counter @-@ attacked and scored courtesy of Groot . Liverpool managed to score in the last minute through Lawler , but they were unable to score any further goals and lost the match 5 – 1 . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the first leg , Shankly was adamant that Liverpool would still progress : " This tie is by no means over yet . We will win easily . We will smash in at least seven goals . This was ridiculous . Ajax played defensive football on their own ground . We never play well against defensive teams . " Such was the shock at the result that Shankly 's claim was taken seriously . The defeat convinced Shankly that adopting Ajax 's patient , passing style was the key to success in Europe . The defeat is still Liverpool 's record defeat in European competition . Michels was worried that Liverpool might adopt aggressive tactics in the second leg : " Our fear is that Liverpool may try to eliminate us through rough play . They showed some of this rough play in the first leg and they will play even harder in front of their own supporters " . He also admitted that his side had some luck in the first leg but was adamant they would progress : " There are not many great players in this Liverpool side , but they are all fighters . I agree we had some luck in Amsterdam , but I am sure we will go through . " 
 Liverpool had early chances in the second leg with midfielder Peter Thompson and defender Geoff Strong hitting the frame of the goal . The first half finished goalless , but Ajax opened the scoring in the 49th minute when Cruyff scored . Liverpool striker Hunt equalised a few minutes later , but Liverpool conceded again when Cruyff scored a second goal . Hunt scored towards the end of the match , but they were unable to beat Ajax and the match finished 2 – 2 . They progressed to the quarter @-@ finals courtesy of a 7 – 3 aggregate victory . During the early stages of the match , there was a crush on the Spion Kop . As fans struggled to see the match due to a low @-@ hanging haze , people at the back pressed forward for a better view . This resulted in supporters at the front being swept off their feet and spilling onto the pitch . Over 200 people were injured , with 31 taken to hospital . 
 Michels stated that the victory was proof that Ajax could match teams in Europe : " The Liverpool game was for me an important moment to be acknowledged and recognised internationally . Not only the first game , because that could have been an accident – with the weather conditions etc . No , the performance we achieved in Liverpool under bad circumstances – I 've never seen such a hectic situation . We drew that game 2 – 2 and never really had problems . For me , it was the proof that we were at the international level . " 
 Ajax were drawn against Dukla Prague of Czechoslovakia in the quarter @-@ finals . The first leg finished 1 – 1 in the Netherlands , but Ajax lost the second leg 2 – 1 at the Stadion <unk> in Prague . Thus , they lost the tie 3 – 2 on aggregate . Following the match , Michels decided to reshape his team . He moved defender Tommy <unk> into midfield and sold his captain Frits <unk> , who had scored an own goal in the second leg , to rivals PSV Eindhoven , signing Velibor <unk> from Partizan Belgrade as his replacement . The changes had the desired effect as Ajax won the Eredivisie four times between 1966 and 1970 . They also reached the final of the 1968 – 69 European Cup , but lost 4 – 1 to Italian team Milan . The team 's style , known as Total Football , would come to fruition in the 1970s as Ajax won three consecutive European Cups from 1971 to 1973 . Total Football was also implemented by the Netherlands national football team , who reached the final of the FIFA World Cup in 1974 and 1978 , losing on both occasions . 
 = Hey You ! = 
 " Hey You ! " is a song recorded by American rock band No Doubt . It was released as the seventh and final single from their third studio album Tragic Kingdom ( 1995 ) . The single was released as a CD single in the Netherlands on February 23 , 1998 . It is the final single to feature content from original keyboardist Eric Stefani , who left the group in 1995 due to creative issues . 
 Musically , it incorporates several genres , including ska punk and psychedelic rock , with its lyrics portraying " a cynical view of marriage " . The track received mixed to positive reviews from music critics , with one calling it a " filler " and others naming it a " standout track " . Since the song was only released in the Netherlands , it only charted there , peaking at number fifty @-@ one on the Single Top 100 . A music video using footage from a live performance was directed by Sophie Muller and released alongside the CD single . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Studio sessions for " Hey You ! " took place during the production process of its parent album , Tragic Kingdom ( 1995 ) . Unlike their previous two studio albums , Tragic Kingdom 's production was handled by outsider Matthew Wilder , to which member Eric Stefani disliked . Although seven of the album 's fourteen tracks were written by Eric , he left the band shortly before its release , leaving the rest of the band to finish the songs . 
 The CD single was released exclusively in the Netherlands and included two tracks : the album version of " Hey You ! " , plus a live version that was recorded on June 1 , 1997 , at The Pond in Anaheim , California . The artwork of the release is the same used for the fifth single from Tragic Kingdom , " Happy Now ? " . 
 = = Composition and promotion = = 
 " Hey You ! " was written by Gwen Stefani and Kanal , with its production being handled by Matthew Wilder . The single is produced in D major , with Stefani 's vocals ranging from A3 – C5 , layered with the use of a piano and guitars . It is a psychedelic rock and alternative rock track , with a genre similar to No Doubt 's signature ska punk style . Its lyrics detail a " cynical " female protagonist hoping to get married . Kenneth Partridge , who wrote for both Billboard and The A.V. Club , stated that it has " a neo @-@ psychedelic ' 60s vibe that wouldn 't have sounded out of place on a Bangles record " . He went on to discuss the lyrics as " a jaded Gwen gives some tough love to a girl dreaming of a white wedding " in the lines " You 're just like my Ken and Barbie doll / Your name will never change " . Mike Boehm , writing for the Los Angeles Times , stated that the " canny <unk> of Stefani 's multitracked voice provide a poppy lift " while Dumont , Kanal , and Young " keep slickness at bay " . 
 An accompanying music video for " Hey You ! " was never created , but a video using footage from Live in the Tragic Kingdom ( 1997 ) was released alongside the CD single . In the entirety of the video and performance , Stefani " dances and bounces and sings " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Hey You ! " received mixed to positive reviews upon its release . A critic from The Diamondback enjoyed the single , calling it " dreamy " , stating that " songs such as these showcase the band 's versatility and Stefani 's sensuality as a performer " . Mike Boehm of the Los Angeles Times cited the song as an " example of the band 's improved craft " and claimed that it " help [ s ] carry the album 's thematic current " of " enthusiastic music " . Kenneth Partridge of Billboard panned the track , calling it " a candidate for most skippable " on the album . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Since " Hey You ! " was only released in the Netherlands , it was only eligible to chart there . On March 21 , 1998 , the single debuted at number eighty on the Single Top 100 chart , before peaking at number fifty @-@ one . For the week ending May 2 , 1998 , the song dropped off from its previous position of sixty @-@ five , lasting a total of six weeks on the chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from the Tragic Kingdom liner notes . 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Delaware Route 8 = 
 Delaware Route 8 ( DE 8 ) is a state highway located in Kent County in the U.S. state of Delaware . It runs from Maryland Route 454 ( MD 454 ) at the Maryland border in Marydel east to an intersection with DE 9 north of Little Creek . The route passes through rural areas of western Kent County before heading through Delaware 's capital , Dover , on Forrest Avenue and Division Street . East of Dover , the road passes through more rural areas . DE 8 intersects DE 44 in Pearsons Corner , DE 15 , U.S. Route 13 Alternate ( US 13 Alt . ) , US 13 in Dover , and DE 1 at a partial interchange east of Dover . The road was built as a state highway west of Dover by 1924 and east of Dover by 1931 . The DE 8 designation was given to the road by 1936 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 8 begins at the Maryland border in Marydel , where the road continues into Marydel , Maryland as MD 454 . From the state line , the route heads southeast on two @-@ lane undivided <unk> Road , passing a few homes and businesses . The road leaves Marydel and curves northeast through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes . In Pearsons Corner , DE 8 intersects the eastern terminus of DE 44 , where the name changes to Forrest Avenue and it turns to the east . This area of Kent County is home to many Amish families and businesses . 
 DE 8 crosses into Dover , where it passes to the north of Dover High School before it widens from a two @-@ lane country road to a five @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane . The road runs past homes and businesses in the western part of Dover , intersecting DE 15 . The name changes to Forest Street and the route continues east onto Division Street at the point Forest Street splits to the southeast to lead to <unk> Street and downtown Dover , narrowing to a two @-@ lane road . DE 8 crosses Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line and continues past a mix of homes and businesses to the north of downtown area . The road crosses US 13 Alt. and passes to the south of Wesley College before intersecting State Street . The road crosses the St. Jones River and heads between industrial areas to the north and residential neighborhoods to the south . 
 DE 8 intersects US 13 in a commercial area and the name changes to North Little Creek Road as it continues through the residential eastern part of Dover . The route heads through less dense areas of homes with some farmland and at the eastern edge of the city , it features a partial interchange with the DE 1 freeway , providing access to and from the north . After this interchange , the road leaves Dover and continues east through open agricultural areas . DE 8 reaches its eastern terminus at an intersection with DE 9 just north of the town of Little Creek . 
 The section of the route between DE 1 east of Dover and DE 9 north of Little Creek is designated as a spur of the Delaware 's Bayshore Byway , a Delaware Byway . DE 8 has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 19 @,@ 408 vehicles at the intersection with Forest Street to a low of 894 vehicles at the Little Creek border near the eastern terminus . The portion of DE 8 between DE 44 and DE 15 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what is now DE 8 existed as an unimproved county road . The route was completed as a state highway between the Maryland border in Marydel and Dover by 1924 . By 1925 , the road was proposed as a state highway between Dover and Little Creek . This state highway was completed by 1931 . DE 8 was assigned to its current alignment between the Maryland border in Marydel and DE 9 north of Little Creek by 1936 . 
 On September 5 , 2002 , a partial interchange opened at the DE 1 toll road in Dover , utilizing existing emergency vehicle ramps . This interchange was included in the initial plans for the highway but was dropped due to low traffic volumes . As part of building the interchange , DelDOT purchased development rights to adjacent land parcels in order to prevent additional development in the area of the interchange . In 2012 , the Interdenominational Ministerial Alliance pushed for the city of Dover to rename the Division Street portion of DE 8 to Martin Luther King , Jr . Boulevard after civil rights leader Martin Luther King , Jr . However , local merchants opposed the renaming . The Dover city council instead voted to rename Court Street , Duke of York Street , and William Penn Street near Delaware Legislative Hall to Martin Luther King , Jr . Boulevard . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Kent County . 
 = Spacewar ( video game ) = 
 Spacewar ( stylized Spacewar ! ) is a space combat video game developed in 1962 as one of the first games created in the early history of video games . It was initially designed by Steve Russell , in collaboration with Martin Graetz and Wayne Wiitanen , and programmed by Russell with assistance from others including Bob Saunders and Steve Piner for the newly installed Digital Equipment Corporation PDP @-@ 1 minicomputer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . After its initial creation , Spacewar was expanded further by other students and employees of universities in the area , including Dan Edwards and Peter Samson . It was also spread to many of the few dozen , primarily academic , installations of the PDP @-@ 1 computer , making Spacewar the first known video game to be played at multiple computer installations . 
 The monochrome game features two spaceships , " the needle " and " the wedge " , engaged in a dogfight while maneuvering in the gravity well of a star . Both ships are controlled by human players . Each ship has limited fuel for maneuvering and a limited number of torpedoes , and the ships follow Newtonian physics , remaining in motion even when the player is not accelerating . Ships are destroyed when hit with a torpedo or colliding with the star , though flying near the star can provide a gravity assist to the player . At any time , the player can engage a hyperspace feature to move to a new , random location on the screen , though each use has an increasing chance of destroying the ship instead . The game was initially controlled with switches on the PDP @-@ 1 , though Alan Kotok and Bob Saunders built an early gamepad to reduce the difficulty and awkwardness of controlling the game . 
 Spacewar was extremely popular in the small programming community in the 1960s and was widely ported to other computer systems at the time . It has also been recreated in more modern programming languages for PDP @-@ 1 emulators . It directly inspired many other electronic games , such as the first commercial arcade games Galaxy Game and Computer Space ( 1971 ) , and later games such as Asteroids ( 1979 ) . In 2007 , Spacewar was named to a list of the ten most important video games of all time , which formed the start of the game canon at the Library of Congress . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the 1950s , various computer games were created in the context of academic computer and programming research and for demonstrations of computing power , especially after the introduction later in the decade of smaller and faster computers on which programs could be created and run in real time as opposed to being executed in batches . A few programs , however , while used to showcase the power of the computer they ran on were also intended as entertainment products ; these were generally created by undergraduate and graduate students and university employees , such as at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ( MIT ) where they were allowed on occasion to develop programs for the TX @-@ 0 experimental computer . These interactive graphical games were created by a community of programmers , many of them students and university employees affiliated with the Tech Model Railroad Club ( TMRC ) led by Alan Kotok , Peter Samson , and Bob Saunders . The games included Tic @-@ Tac @-@ Toe , which used a light pen to play a simple game of noughts and crosses against the computer , and Mouse in the Maze , which used a light pen to set up a maze of walls for a virtual mouse to traverse . 
 In the fall of 1961 , a Digital Equipment Corporation ( DEC ) PDP @-@ 1 minicomputer was installed in the " kludge room " of the MIT Electrical Engineering Department to complement the older TX @-@ 0 , and even before its arrival a group of students and university employees had been brainstorming ideas for programs that would demonstrate the new computer 's capabilities in a compelling way . Three of them — Steve Russell , then an employee at Harvard University and a former research assistant at MIT ; Martin Graetz , a research assistant and former student at MIT ; and Wayne Wiitanen , a research assistant at Harvard and former employee and student at MIT — referring to their collaboration as the " Hingham Institute " as Graetz and Wiitanen were living in a tenement building on Hingham Street in Cambridge , Massachusetts , came up with the idea for Spacewar . " We had this brand new PDP @-@ 1 " , Steve Russell told Rolling Stone in a 1972 interview . " Somebody had built some little pattern @-@ generating programs which made interesting patterns like a kaleidoscope . Not a very good demonstration . Here was this display that could do all sorts of good things ! So we started talking about it , figuring what would be interesting displays . We decided that probably you could make a two @-@ dimensional maneuvering sort of thing , and decided that naturally the obvious thing to do was spaceships . " 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay of Spacewar involves two monochrome spaceships called " the needle " and " the wedge " , each controlled by a player , attempting to shoot one another while maneuvering on a two @-@ dimensional plane in the gravity well of a star , set against the backdrop of a starfield . The ships fire torpedoes , which are not affected by the gravitational pull of the star . The ships have a limited number of torpedoes and a limited supply of fuel , which is used when the player fires his thrusters . Torpedoes are fired one at a time by flipping a toggle switch on the computer or pressing a button on the control pad , and there is a cooldown period between launches . The ships follow Newtonian physics , remaining in motion even when the player is not accelerating , though the ships can rotate at a constant rate without inertia . 
 Each player controls one of the ships and must attempt to shoot down the other ship while avoiding a collision with the star . Flying near the star can provide a gravity assist to the player at the risk of misjudging the trajectory and falling into the star . If a ship moves past one edge of the screen , it reappears on the other side in a wraparound effect . A hyperspace feature , or " panic button " , can be used as a last @-@ ditch means to evade enemy torpedoes by moving the player 's ship to another location on the screen after disappearing for a few seconds , but the reentry from hyperspace occurs at a random location , and there is an increasing probability of the ship exploding with each use . 
 Player controls include clockwise and counterclockwise rotation , forward thrust , firing torpedoes , and hyperspace . Initially these were controlled using the front @-@ panel test switches on the PDP @-@ 1 minicomputer , with four switches for each player , but these proved to be awkward to use and wore out quickly under normal gameplay , as well as causing players to accidentally flip the computer 's control and power switches . The location of the switches also left one player off to one side of the CRT display due to the limited space in front of the computer , which left them at a disadvantage . To alleviate these problems , Kotok and Saunders created a detached control device , essentially an early gamepad . The gamepad had a switch for turning left or right , another for forward thrust or hyperspace , and a torpedo launch button . The button was silent , so that the opposing player would not have a warning that the player was attempting to fire a torpedo during a cooldown period . 
 = = Development = = 
 In the fall of 1961 while brainstorming ideas for a program for the PDP @-@ 1 , Russell had just finished reading the <unk> series by E. E. " Doc " Smith and thought the stories would make a good basis for the program . " His heroes had a strong tendency to get pursued by the villain across the galaxy and have to invent their way out of their problem while they were being pursued . That sort of action was the thing that suggested Spacewar . He had some very glowing descriptions of spaceship encounters and space fleet maneuvers . " Other influences cited by fellow programmer Martin Graetz include E.E. Smith 's Skylark novels and Japanese pulp fiction tokusatsu movies . 
 For the first few months after its installation , the PDP @-@ 1 programming community at MIT focused on simpler programs to work out how to create software for the computer . The community had heard of the Spacewar concept , however , and understood that Russell would spearhead the development of it . When members of the community began to feel the time was right to start work on the game , Russell , nicknamed " Slug " because of his tendency to procrastinate , began providing various excuses as to why he could not start programming the game . One of these was the lack of a trigonometric function routine needed to calculate the trajectories of the spacecraft . This prompted Alan Kotok of TMRC to call DEC , who informed him that they had such a routine already written . Kotok drove to DEC to pick up a tape containing the code , slammed it down in front of Russell , and asked what other excuses he had . Russell , later explaining that " I looked around and I didn 't find an excuse , so I had to settle down and do some figuring , " started writing the code in December 1961 . The game was developed to meet three precepts Russell , Graetz , and Wiitanen had developed for creating a program that functioned equally well as an entertainment experience for the players and as a demonstration for spectators : to use as much of the computer 's resources as possible , to be consistently interesting and therefore have every run be different , and to be entertaining and therefore a game . It took Russell , with assistance from the other programmers — including Bob Saunders and Steve Piner , but not including Wiitanen , who had been called up by the United States Army Reserve — about 200 man @-@ hours to write the first version of Spacewar , around six weeks to develop the basic game . 
 Russell had a program with a movable dot by January 1962 , and an early operational game with rotatable spaceships by February . The two spaceships were designed to evoke the curvy spaceship from Buck Rogers stories and the PGM @-@ 11 Redstone rocket . That early version also contained a randomly generated background starfield , initially added by Russell because a blank background made it difficult to tell the relative motion of the two spaceships at slow speeds . The programming community in the area , including the Hingham Institute and the TMRC , had developed what was later termed the " hacker ethic " , whereby all programs were freely shared and modified by other programmers in a collaborative environment without concern for ownership or copyright , which led to a group effort to elaborate on Russell 's initial Spacewar game . Consequently , since the inaccuracy and lack of realism in the starfield annoyed TMRC member Peter Samson , he wrote a program based on real star charts that scrolled slowly through the night sky , including every star in a band between 22 @.@ 5 ° N and 22 @.@ 5 ° S down to the fifth magnitude , displayed at their relative brightness . The program was called " Expensive Planetarium " — referring to the high price of the PDP @-@ 1 computer compared to an analog planetarium , as part of the series of " expensive " programs like Expensive Typewriter — and was quickly incorporated into the game in March by Russell , who served as the <unk> of the primary version of the game . 
 The initial version of the game also did not include the central star gravity well or the hyperspace feature ; they were written by MIT graduate student and TMRC member Dan Edwards and Graetz respectively to add elements of strategy to what initially was a shooter game of pure reflexes . The initial version of the hyperspace function was limited to three jumps , but carried no risk save possibly re @-@ entering the game in a dangerous position ; later versions removed the limit but added the increasing risk of destroying the ship instead of moving it . Additionally during this development period , Kotok and Saunders created the gamepads for the game . The game was a multiplayer @-@ only game because the computer had no resources left over to handle controlling the other ship . Similarly , other proposed additions to the game such as a more refined explosion display upon the destruction of a spaceship and having the torpedoes also be affected by gravity had to be abandoned as there were not enough computer resources to handle them while smoothly running the game . With the added features and changes , Spacewar was essentially complete by late April 1962 , and Russell and the other programmers shifted focus from developing the game to preparing to show it off to others such as at the MIT Science Open House in May . The group added a time limit , as well as a larger , second screen for viewers at the demonstration , and that same month Graetz presented a paper about the game , " <unk> ! Real @-@ Time Capability of the PDP @-@ 1 " , at the first meeting of the Digital Equipment Computer Users ' Society . The demonstration was a success , and the game proved very popular at MIT ; the laboratory that hosted the PDP @-@ 1 soon banned play except during lunch and after working hours . 
 Beginning in the summer of 1962 and continuing over the next few years , members of the PDP @-@ 1 programming community at MIT , including Russell and the other Hingham Institute members , began to spread out to other schools and employers such as Stanford University and DEC , and as they did they spread the game to other universities and institutions with a PDP @-@ 1 computer . As a result , Spacewar was perhaps the first video game to be available outside a single research institute . Over the next decade , programmers at these other institutions began coding their own variants , including features such as allowing more ships and players at once , replacing the hyperspace feature with a cloaking device , space mines , and even a first @-@ person perspective version played on two screens that simulates each pilot 's view out of the cockpit . Some of these Spacewar installations also replicated Kotok and Saunders ' gamepad . According to a second @-@ hand account heard by Russell while working at DEC , Spacewar was reportedly used as a smoke test by DEC technicians on new PDP @-@ 1 systems before shipping because it was the only available program that exercised every aspect of the hardware . Although the game was widespread for the era , it was still very limited in its direct reach : the PDP @-@ 1 was priced at US $ 120 @,@ 000 and only 55 were ever sold , most without a monitor and many of the remainder to secure military locations or research labs with no free computer time , which prevented the original Spacewar from reaching beyond a narrow , academic audience . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Spacewar was extremely popular in the small programming community in the 1960s and was widely recreated on other minicomputer and mainframe computers of the time before migrating to early microcomputer systems in the 1970s . Early computer scientist Alan Kay noted in 1972 that " the game of Spacewar blossoms spontaneously wherever there is a graphics display connected to a computer , " and Graetz recalled in 1981 that as the game initially spread it could be found on " just about any research computer that had a programmable CRT " . The majority of this spread took place several years after the initial development of the game ; while there are early anecdotes of players and game variants at a handful of locations , primarily near MIT and Stanford , it was only after 1967 that computers hooked up to monitors or terminals capable of playing Spacewar began to proliferate , allowing the game began to reach a wider audience and influence later video game designers — by 1971 , it is estimated that there were over 1000 computers with monitors , rather than a few dozen . It is around this time that the majority of the game variants were created for various computer systems , such as later PDP systems , and in 1972 the game was well @-@ known enough in the programming community that Rolling Stone sponsored the " <unk> ! Olympics " , possibly the first video game tournament . 
 In the early 1970s , Spacewar migrated from large computer systems to a commercial setting as it formed the basis for the first two coin @-@ operated video games . While playing Spacewar at Stanford sometime between 1966 and 1969 , college student Hugh Tuck remarked that a coin @-@ operated version of the game would be very successful . While the high price of a minicomputer prevented such a game from being feasible then , in 1971 Tuck and Bill Pitts created a prototype coin @-@ operated computer game , Galaxy Game , with a US $ 20 @,@ 000 PDP @-@ 11 . Around the same time , a second prototype coin @-@ operated game based on Spacewar , Computer Space , was developed by Nolan Bushnell and Ted Dabney , which would become the first commercially @-@ sold arcade video game and the first widely @-@ available video game of any kind . Though Tuck felt that Computer Space was a poor imitation of Spacewar and his game a superior adaptation , many players believed both of the games to be upgraded variants of Spacewar . 
 Byte magazine published an assembly language version of Spacewar in 1977 that ran on the Altair 8800 and other Intel 8080 @-@ based microcomputers using an oscilloscope as the graphical display and a lookup table for orbits , as well as a three @-@ dimensional variant in 1979 written in Tiny BASIC . More modern recreations of the game for computers have been made as well . An emulated version of the original game , based on the original source code made publicly available by Martin Graetz and running in a JavaScript PDP @-@ 1 emulator , was made available to play on the internet in 2012 . The only working PDP @-@ 1s that are known to exist are kept in the Computer History Museum in Mountain View , California , where demonstrations of the machine are held , which include playing Spacewar . 
 In addition to Galaxy Game and Computer Space , numerous other games have been directly inspired by Spacewar . These include <unk> ( 1974 , PLATO network computers ) , Space Wars ( 1977 , arcade ) , and Space War ( 1978 , Atari 2600 ) . Additionally , in Asteroids ( 1979 ) , designer Ed Logg used elements from Spacewar , namely the hyperspace button and the shape of the player 's ship . Products as late as the 1990 computer game Star Control drew direct inspiration from Spacewar . Russell has been quoted as saying that the aspect of the game that he was most pleased with was the number of other programmers it inspired to write their own games without feeling restricted to using Russell 's own code or design . 
 On March 12 , 2007 , The New York Times reported that Spacewar was named to a list of the ten most important video games of all time , the so @-@ called game canon , which were proposed to be archived in the Library of Congress . The Library of Congress took up this video game preservation proposal , and began with the games from this list . 
 = Victoria Cross ( Canada ) = 
 The Victoria Cross ( French : Croix de Victoria ) , created in 1993 , is a military decoration and the highest award within the Canadian honours system , taking precedence over all other orders , decorations , and medals . It is awarded by either the Canadian monarch or his or her viceregal representative , the Governor General of Canada , to any member of the Canadian Forces or allies serving under or with Canadian military command for extraordinary valour and devotion to duty while facing hostile forces . Whereas in many other Commonwealth countries the relevant version of the Victoria Cross can only be awarded for actions against the enemy in a wartime setting , the Canadian government has a broader definition of the term enemy , and so the Victoria Cross can be awarded for action against armed mutineers , pirates , or other such hostile forces without war being officially declared . Recipients are entitled to use the post @-@ nominal letters VC ( for both English and French ) and also to receive an annuity of C $ 3 @,@ 000 . The decoration has not been awarded since its inception . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The original Victoria Cross was created via a Royal Warrant issued on 29 January 1856 with the royal sign @-@ manual of Queen Victoria , and was intended to recognize demonstrations of gallantry during the Crimean War , regardless of either a man 's social status or his record of service . Initially , the Victoria Cross could not be conferred on colonial troops , until Major Charles Heaphy received the medal for his actions under British command in 1864 , after which the Victoria Cross was made available to all " local forces under imperial command . " The cross could also not be awarded posthumously until the policy was reversed in 1902 . 
 Until 1972 , 81 members of the Canadian military ( including those from Newfoundland ) and 13 Canadians serving in British units had been awarded the Victoria Cross . After that date , however , the Canadian honours system was overhauled , and the Victoria Cross was eliminated from the official list of honours , instigating a decades @-@ long debate on whether or not to reinstate the decoration . The prime minister at the time , Pierre Trudeau , regularly dodged questions about the Victoria Cross , stating that " only Canadians should receive Canadian decorations . " It was his successor , Brian Mulroney , who set up in 1987 a committee to look into the creation of a Canadian Victoria Cross as part of a new series of military honours . Although the committee did not recommend the Victoria Cross — names such as the Canada Cross and the Cross of Military Valour were put forward — the creation of an Australian Victoria Cross in 1991 and pressure from The Globe and Mail and advocacy groups , such as the Monarchist League of Canada and the Royal Canadian Legion , forced the plans to be amended ; in 1991 , a private member 's bill received all @-@ party support in the House of Commons , following which the Victoria Cross , along with other Canadian military valour decorations , were on 31 December 1992 formally requested by Mulroney . The request was approved with the issue of letters patent by Queen Elizabeth II on 2 February of the following year , thereby ceasing Canadian dependence on the British honours system . 
 = = Criteria = = 
 The Victoria Cross is awarded for " the most conspicuous bravery , a daring or pre @-@ eminent act of valour or self @-@ sacrifice or extreme devotion to duty , in the presence of the enemy " at any point after 1 January 1993 , may be presented posthumously , and , like its British counterpart , may be revoked . The main distinction between the Victoria Cross and the Cross of Valour is the specific reference to " the enemy " , which the Canadian government has defined as a force hostile towards the Canadian Crown , including armed mutineers , rebels , rioters , and pirates , meaning that the Queen @-@ in @-@ Council does not officially have to declare war to give acknowledgement of the existence of a hostile force that fits the official description . Thus , a Canadian serving as part of a peacekeeping operation is eligible to be awarded the Victoria Cross if the service member fulfils the above criteria . 
 In the case of a gallant and daring act having been performed by a squadron , ship 's company , or detached body of individuals ( such as a security detachment ) in which all persons were deemed equally brave and deserving of the Victoria Cross , a ballot is to be drawn ; the commissioned and non @-@ commissioned officers each select one of their own , and the private soldiers or seamen select from amongst themselves two individuals . 
 = = Conferment = = 
 The process of awarding the Victoria Cross may take place in two ways : One is through a recommendation by the Decorations and Commendations Advisory Committee , which is a part of the Department of National Defence and has six members , one appointed by the governor general and the rest by the chief of the Defence Staff . Alternatively , a field commander can submit a name for consideration , though permission must be obtained from the governor general before the award can be presented . Recipients are entitled to receive an annuity from the federal Canadian Crown ; per the Canadian gallantry awards order issued in January 2005 , members of the Canadian Forces or those who joined the British forces while domiciled in Canada or Newfoundland prior to 31 March 1949 , after receiving the Victoria Cross , be granted C $ 3 @,@ 000 each year . Previously , Canadians who were posthumously awarded the British Victoria Cross were given special headstones at their burial sites in Commonwealth War Graves and other cemeteries . 
 To date , no Canadian Victoria Cross has been conferred ; Smokey Smith , who died in 2005 , was the last Canadian recipient of the then pan @-@ Commonwealth Victoria Cross , receiving it from King George VI in 1945 . Prior to Queen Elizabeth II 's re @-@ dedication of the Vimy Memorial on 7 April 2007 , there was speculation she would present a Canadian Victoria Cross to her then @-@ prime minister , Stephen Harper , offering it in recognition of the gallantry of the Unknown Soldier , as representative of all Canadian forces casualties of combat . The proposal was met with a mixed response from members of the Royal Canadian Legion and Canadian Forces , detractors feeling that the Unknown Soldier should not be elevated above his other fallen comrades . It had also been agreed at the time of the Unknown Soldier 's repatriation that no award or decoration would be bestowed on the remains . No decision was taken about the awarding of the Canadian Victoria Cross to the Canadian Unknown Soldier . 
 Near the end of Canada 's role in the Afghanistan War , concerns were raised about the stringency of the criteria that needed to be met to receive the Victoria Cross . Other countries with a Victoria Cross had awarded it numerous times since the end of the Second World War , some members of the Australian , New Zealand , and British armed forces receiving the decoration for their actions during the Afghan and Iraq wars of the 2000s . Members of the Canadian Armed Forces questioned why some actions by Canadians were deemed worthy only of the Star of Military Valour ; citations for individuals who 'd received the imperial Victoria Cross during the First World War were very similar to those for Canadians who were presented with the Star of Military Valour during the war in Afghanistan . This led then Chief of the Defence Staff , Walter Natynczyk , to create a special committee to review the matter . The Department of National Defence 's Directorate of Honours and Recognition explained concepts of war had changed since the mid @-@ 20th century and Canada had also developed a more elaborate honours system . 
 = = Appearance and display = = 
 The design of the Canadian medal is derived from that of the British original , which was the creation of Albert , Prince Consort , royal consort to Queen Victoria . Canada 's Victoria Cross is thus a cross pattée with straight arms , 38 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) across in each direction , and made out of bronze coloured alloy , the obverse bearing a lion crowned and statant guardant , similar to that which forms the crest of the Royal Arms of Canada , standing upon a representation of St. Edward 's Crown , which itself rests above a semi @-@ circular scroll . On the reverse is a raised circle for engraving the date of the act of gallantry along with the name , rank , and unit of the recipient . The medal is suspended from a link forming the letter V attached to a bar adorned on the front with laurel leaves , and on the reverse with the name , rank , and unit of the medal 's recipient , all cast in the same metal as the medal , while the ribbon , also 38 mm wide , is solid crimson in colour . Cathy <unk> @-@ Sabourin , Fraser Herald of the Canadian Heraldic Authority , and Bruce W. Beatty , however , made certain modifications for the Canadian Victoria Cross , the most notable being the inclusion of Canadian flora as decoration and the alteration of the inscription on the scroll from FOR VALOUR to the Latin translation , PRO VALORE , so as to accommodate Canada 's two official languages . In 2008 , Citizens for a Canadian Republic 's leader , Tom Freda , publicly objected to the decoration 's name and appearance , with what he saw as its " objectionable colonial symbolism , " royal iconography , and a shape offensive to Muslims and Jews . 
 With Canada at war for the first time since its version of the Victoria Cross was created , preparations for a physical cast of the medal were initiated in 2006 , when a committee called the Victoria Cross Production Planning Group was formed under the leadership of the Chancellery of Honours at Rideau Hall . It originally consisted of representatives from the Department of National Defence , Veterans Affairs Canada , and the Office of the Secretary to the Governor General of Canada , and the group later expanded to include individuals from the Department of Canadian Heritage , Natural Resources Canada , and the Royal Canadian Mint , with assistance provided by the Queen and the British Ministry of Defence . Following their research and deliberations , the first Victoria Cross decoration was struck in 2007 , as confirmed by Deputy Herald Chancellor Emmanuelle Sajous , and the medal was officially released to the public on 16 May 2008 by Governor General Michaëlle Jean at Rideau Hall . It was one of 20 cast , each of which is composed of three groupings of metals : that of a Russian cannon captured at the siege of Sevastopol ( 1854 – 1855 ) , donated by Queen Elizabeth II ; a Confederation Medal , created to mark Canada 's confederation in 1867 ; and a selection of metals from each of Canada 's regions . These were cast , rather than struck , continuing the tradition started in the United Kingdom when it was found the metal alloy was too brittle for striking , and finished at the Royal Canadian Mint . The first two were sent to Buckingham Palace for addition to the British Royal Collection and other specimens were kept as part of the Crown Collection at Rideau Hall , as well as at the Department of National Defence , Library and Archives Canada , and the Canadian War Museum . 
 As the apex of the Canadian system of honours , the Victoria Cross is to be worn before all other Canadian decorations and insignia of orders , including the Order of Merit and the Order of Canada . It is worn as a medal , suspended from a medal bar on the left chest , unless protocol calls for a ribbon bar , which consists of a crimson ribbon with a miniature bronze Victoria Cross at its centre . Should an individual receive multiple awards of the Victoria Cross , additional bronze medal bars are added to the ribbon and further miniatures are placed evenly on the ribbon bar , reflecting the number of crosses the wearer has earned . 
 = The Tale of Jemima Puddle @-@ Duck = 
 The Tale of Jemima Puddle @-@ Duck is a children 's book written and illustrated by Beatrix Potter . It was first published by Frederick Warne & Co. in July 1908 . Potter composed the book at Hill Top , a working farm in the Lake District she bought in 1905 . Following the purchase , her works began to focus on country and village life , incorporating large casts of animal characters and sinister villains . Jemima Puddle @-@ Duck was the first of her books set wholly at the farm with background illustrations based on the farm buildings and yard , and nearby locales . 
 Jemima is a domestic duck of the Aylesbury breed , whose eggs are routinely confiscated by the farmer 's wife because she believes Jemima a poor sitter . Jemima searches for a place away from the farm where she can hatch her eggs without human interference , and naively confides her woes to a suave fox who invites her to nest in a shed at his home . Jemima accepts his invitation , little realising her danger : the fox plans to kill and roast her . Kep , a collie on the farm , discovers Jemima 's whereabouts and rescues her just in time . Potter indicated the tale was a revision of " Little Red Riding Hood " with Jemima , the fox , and the dog parallels to the fairy tale 's heroine , wolf , and woodcutter . Jemima , Kep , the farmer 's wife and her two children were all modelled on real world individuals at Potter 's Hill Top farm . 
 The book was hugely popular . Spinoff merchandise included a soft Jemima doll in bonnet and shawl , a Jemima painting book in 1925 , and illustrated fabric placemats hand @-@ fashioned by Potter and distributed to friends . Critically , the book is considered one of Potter 's best . In 1971 , the tale became a segment in the Royal Ballet film , The Tales of Beatrix Potter , and , in 1993 , it was telecast as an episode on the animated BBC anthology series , The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The tale begins in a farmyard which is home to a duck called Jemima Puddle @-@ duck . She wants to hatch her own eggs , but the farmer 's wife believes ducks make poor sitters and routinely confiscates their eggs to allow the hens to incubate them . Jemima tries to hide her eggs , but they are always found and carried away . She sets off along the road in poke bonnet and shawl to find a safe place away from the farm to lay her eggs . 
 At the top of a hill , she spies a distant wood , flies to it , and waddles about until she discovers an appropriate nesting place among the <unk> . However , a charming gentleman with " black prick ears and sandy @-@ coloured whiskers " persuades her to nest in a shed at his home . Jemima is led to his " tumble @-@ down shed " ( which is curiously filled with feathers ) , and makes herself a nest with little ado . 
 Jemima lays her eggs , and the fox suggests a dinner party to mark the event . He asks her to collect the traditional herbs used in stuffing a duck , telling her the seasonings will be used for an omelette . Jemima sets about her errand , but the farm collie , Kep , meets her as she carries onions from the farm kitchen and asks her what she is doing and where she keeps going . She reveals her errand , Kep sees through the fox 's plan at once , and finds out from Jemima where the fox lives . 
 With the help of two fox @-@ hound puppies who are out at walk at the farm , Kep rescues Jemima and the " foxy @-@ whiskered gentleman " ( Mr. Tod ) is chased away and seen again in The Tale of Mr. Tod . However , the hungry fox @-@ hounds eat Jemima 's eggs . Jemima is escorted back to the farm in tears over her lost eggs , but , in time , lays more eggs and successfully hatches four ducklings . 
 = = Scholarly commentaries = = 
 The Tale of Jemima Puddle @-@ Duck is a tale of pursuit and prey . The theme runs through several of Potter 's tales : Mr. McGregor pursues Peter Rabbit , <unk> lies in wait for the mice in the tailor 's shop , and the trout attempts to devour Jeremy Fisher . Potter was following the pattern of fairy tales by dwelling on the theme of pursuit and prey , and often pointed out that the tale of Jemima was a retelling of " Little Red Riding Hood " . Perrault 's tale ends with the death of the heroine , but Potter understood children will not tolerate tragedy . The prey in her books survive for better or worse ( Peter returns home for a dose of chamomile tea , for example ) and , though Jemima loses her eggs to her hungry rescuers , she lives to return to the farm to raise a brood of ducklings . 
 The tale shows Potter at her best in depicting the life of the farm and the village of Near Sawrey , but the tale becomes one of something more than just local color and interest . The archetypical tale upon which Jemima is based – the foolish and naive are rescued from destruction by the loyal and dependable – is transformed in Potter 's hands to one in which self @-@ preservation and shrewdness become admirable virtues . Graham Greene thought the sandy @-@ whiskered gentleman a character of ominous gloom and suggested Potter had suffered some sort of mental breakdown , but it is more likely she was simply coming to terms with life on a farm . Wild animals invade the precincts of the domesticated ones , and death is part of farming . 
 The victor in the tale is the farmer 's wife : she regains her errant duck and is rid of the predatory fox . Ostensibly , she confiscates Jemima 's eggs believing Jemima will abandon them , but the eggs are not confiscated for the well @-@ being of Jemima and her kin but for the well @-@ being of the farmer 's wife and her family : the eggs ( or the ducks hatched from them ) will end up on their dinner table . In this respect , the farmer 's wife is a predator like the fox , but the fox is condemned for his predation . Human values are at the top of the tale 's hierarchy . Potter argues for the well @-@ ordered home and the practicalities of farm life over the fantasy lives of animals . It was the modus vivendi Potter was to incorporate in her own life as she devoted more of her thoughts and hours to the business of farming and less to tales of fantasy animals . 
 Like many fairy tales , Jemima Puddle @-@ Duck belongs in a remote , but not @-@ too @-@ distant , past . Jemima 's shawl reflects the typical farm dress of the Lake District at the time of the tale 's composition , but the poke bonnet does not , and the fox 's long tail coat and exquisite manners also suggest another time . Jemima is a more interesting character when humanised with the clothing ; without it , she is just a farmyard duck . As Potter pointed out , the tale is a revision of a fairy tale and belongs in the indefinite period of " once upon a time " . 
 The story is one of Potter 's more ominous and is fraught with tension . Jemima is a headstrong innocent distracted by her overwhelming desire to nest , and thus unable to penetrate the fox 's designs and comprehend her dangerous situation . The tension rises in increments from the mysterious feather @-@ filled shed ( the place of slaughter ) , to the fox 's plan for an omelette ( of Jemima 's eggs ) , to the ultimate horror and crowning irony , Jemima 's errand to fetch the herbs that will be used to season herself . 
 The fox is the first male villain in Potter 's work , saving Samuel Whiskers in The Roly Poly Pudding , the companion piece to Jemima , and , like all villains in Potter , the " gentleman with sandy whiskers " presents a false social front that conceals his bestial nature . He dresses and behaves as a country gentleman of leisure , idling with a newspaper and living off the labor of others by luring their fowl to his feather @-@ filled shed . Potter had little tolerance for indolence and lack of industry , but , as a country woman , she knew foxes were clever and managed to escape more times than they were caught . From the first encounter between Jemima and the fox , the reader realises the fox is more clever than Jemima and is forced to extend him a grudging admiration . 
 = = Background = = 
 Helen Beatrix Potter was born on July 28 , 1866 to barrister Rupert William Potter and his wife Helen ( Leech ) Potter in London . She was educated by governesses and tutors , and passed a quiet childhood reading , painting , drawing , visiting museums and art exhibitions , and tending a nursery menagerie of small animals . Her interests in the natural world and country life were nurtured with holidays in Scotland , the Lake District , and Camfield Place , the Hertfordshire home of her paternal grandparents . 
 Potter 's adolescence was as quiet as her childhood . She grew into a spinsterish young woman whose parents groomed her to be a permanent resident and housekeeper in their home . She continued to paint and draw , and experienced her first professional artistic success in 1890 when she sold six designs of humanised animals to a greeting card publisher . She hoped to lead a useful life independent of her parents , and tentatively considered a career in mycology , but the all @-@ male scientific community regarded her as an amateur and she abandoned fungi . 
 Potter had maintained contact with her last governess Annie Carter Moore and had grown fond of her children . Through the 1890s , she sent illustrated story letters to the children . Mrs. Moore recognised the literary and artistic value of the letters and urged her former charge to publish . Potter liked the suggestion , and , in 1900 , revised a tale she had written for five @-@ year @-@ old Noel Moore in 1893 , and fashioned a dummy book of it in imitation of Helen Bannerman 's 1899 bestseller The Story of Little Black Sambo . Unable to find a buyer for the tale , she published it for family and friends at her own expense in December 1901 . 
 Frederick Warne & Co. had once rejected the tale but , eager to compete in the booming small format children 's book market , reconsidered and accepted the " bunny book " ( as the firm called it ) following the recommendation of their prominent children 's book artist L. Leslie Brooke . Potter agreed to colour her pen and ink illustrations , chose the then @-@ new Hentschel three @-@ colour process for reproducing her watercolours , and on October 2 , 1902 The Tale of Peter Rabbit was released . 
 Potter continued to publish with Warnes . Early in July 1905 she bought Hill Top , a working farm of 34 acres ( 14 ha ) at Sawrey in the Lake District with profits from her books and a small legacy from an aunt . On August 25 , 1905 Potter 's editor and fiancé , Norman Warne died suddenly and unexpectedly . Potter became deeply depressed and was ill for many weeks , but rallied to complete the last few tales she had planned and discussed with Warne . 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1900 Beatrix Potter revised a tale about a humanised rabbit she had written in 1893 , worked up a dummy book in imitation of the small format bestseller Little Black Sambo ( 1899 ) , and , after multiple rejections from London publishers , privately published her tale in December 1901 . Frederick Warne & Co. was eager to compete in the burgeoning and lucrative small format children 's book market , and accepted the " bunny book " ( as the firm called it ) after their prominent children 's book artist L. Leslie Brooke gave it his enthusiastic endorsement . Potter agreed to colour her pen and ink illustrations , chose the then @-@ new Hentschel three @-@ colour process for reproducing her watercolours , and in October 1902 The Tale of Peter Rabbit was released . 
 In the next few years , Potter published books similar in concept , style , or format to Peter Rabbit : The Tailor of Gloucester and The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin in 1903 , and the tales of Benjamin Bunny and Two Bad Mice in 1904 . In August 1905 , sales profits and a small legacy from an aunt enabled Potter to buy Hill Top , a working farm of 34 acres and 36 perches ( 13 @.@ 85 ha ) in the Lake District . In the years immediately following its purchase , she produced tales and illustrations inspired by the farm , its woodland surroundings , and nearby villages . Potter worked on sketches for Jemima Puddle @-@ Duck during the winter of 1907 while recuperating from respiratory infections . She accompanied her parents on a holiday to Sidmouth in April 1908 , and continued to work on Jemima Puddle @-@ Duck . Potter 's cousin Caroline Hutton Clark was at Hill Top during the composition of Jemima Puddle @-@ Duck and joined Potter as she searched the farmstead for a suitable place in which to situate Jemima 's nest for the illustrations . Kep was a real dog , and Mrs. Clark was given one of Kep 's sons . She later described the puppy as " the dearest and cleverest dog I ever had . " 
 Two versions of the opening paragraph were written . The slightly cynical , " What a gratifying thing it is in these days to meet with a female devoted to family life " was revised to read , " What a funny sight it is to see a brood of ducklings with a hen . " The tale is complicated with irony ( the feather @-@ filled shed and the herbs for roasting a duck ) and the co @-@ existence of two time sequences or two different points of view : Kep 's as he seeks the assistance of the fox @-@ hounds in rescuing Jemima , and the sandy @-@ whiskered gentleman 's as he waits nervously for Jemima to return with the herbs . 
 The " farmyard tale " was dedicated to Betsy and Ralph Cannon , the children of Potter 's farm manager , John Cannon . The children appear in one of the illustrations collecting Jemima 's eggs from the rhubarb patch , and their mother is depicted in the opening picture feeding the barnyard fowl . Jemima was based upon a real world duck at Hill Top Farm who evaded Mrs. Cannon and her children in their attempts to locate her eggs before she mismanaged their incubation . Mrs. Cannon believed ducks made poor sitters , and routinely confiscated the ducks ' eggs to allow the hens to incubate them . Potter may have taken inspiration from a drawing in her father 's 1853 sketchbook of a flying duck wearing a bonnet . Potter almost certainly chose the name " Jemima " in honour of Jemima Blackburn , an ornithological painter and illustrator whose Birds from Nature she had received as a gift on her tenth birthday and whom she met in 1891 . 
 The illustrations depict the new barn and outbuildings at Hill Top , the wrought @-@ iron gate Potter installed at the kitchen garden , the rhubarb patch , the entrance porch at the farmhouse , the exterior of the Tower Bank Arms in the village , and imagined aerial views of the countryside around Near Sawrey . In 1940 , Potter remarked upon the illustration of Jemima rushing downhill with her bonnet and shawl askew , " That is what I used to look like to the Sawrey people . I rushed about quacking industriously . " 
 The Tale of Jemima Puddle @-@ Duck was published in July 1908 after heated discussions with publisher Harold Warne about the dialogues and cover illustration . The book was an immediate success . 
 In later years , Ernest Aris would blatantly plagiarise not only the Peter Rabbit character in his The Treasure Seekers but Jemima in his Mrs. Beak Duck . Potter was restrained when alerted to the imitations : she praised his technical artistry but chastised him for a lack of originality . At the time , her eyesight was deteriorating and her days were heavily invested in operating her farm ; her restraint with Aris may be attributed to her desire to enlist him as a collaborator . 
 = = Similarities to " Little Red Riding Hood " = = 
 Potter indicated Jemima was a revision of " Little Red Riding Hood " , and the similarities between the two are numerous : Jemima and her eggs are substitutes for Red Riding Hood and her grandmother ; the farmer 's wife and Jemima 's sister @-@ in @-@ law Rebeccah are substitutes for Red Riding Hood 's mother ; the fox and the wolf both conceal their bestial natures beneath the polite behaviour of gentlemen , and the dogs are substitutes for the woodcutters . Both tales touch upon physical appetite , temptation , and foolish behaviour . 
 Though the tale has a happy ending , tearful Jemima is led back to the farm in public humiliation after losing her eggs to her hungry rescuers . She is allowed to hatch a brood on the farm , but it only produces four ducklings . Potter 's revision of " Little Red Riding Hood " more nearly resembles Perrault 's tragic tale than the happily @-@ ever @-@ after Grimm version where the heroine is rescued by woodcutters . The author knew her young audience would sympathise with the unhatched ducklings and would not tolerate having Jemima , a mother figure , suffer a bloody end in the fox 's shed . The loss of the eggs is sad for the reader , but Potter ended the tale as happily as possible – not only for her audience but for the sake of the real world children of her farm manager , Ralph and Betsy Cannon , to whom the tale was dedicated . Jemima is punished for her headstrong foolishness and must relinquish her hope of finding a nesting spot away from the farm , but the punishment is mitigated when she is allowed to hatch one brood herself . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 Jemima Puddle @-@ Duck was popular , almost as popular as Peter Rabbit , and became the subject of ancillary merchandise . She is depicted in one of the four well known endpapers of the Potter books , and was featured on a Christmas card for the Invalid Children 's Aid Association . She became the principal character in an unpublished painting book describing the livestock at Hill Top , and appeared in Peter Rabbit 's Painting Book and Tom Kitten 's Painting Book before being given her own painting book , Jemima Puddle @-@ Duck 's Painting Book in 1925 , composed grudgingly in response to public demand for yet another book . 
 Potter waited for ducklings to hatch at the farm to be used as models for the painting book , but in the end , the eggs were rotten . The instructions in Jemima 's painting book were similar to those in Tom Kitten 's painting book , but the kittens with crayons in Tom 's book accompanying the instructions were replaced by six ducklings splashing about in paint water for the similar page in Jemima 's book . In the original tale , Jemima 's eggs are eaten by her rescuers but in the painting book , a new design was executed for " They took Jemima home " ; in the painting book , Kep and the fox hound puppies lead Jemima away from her broken but uneaten eggs . The same theme was depicted on Crabtree & Evelyn chocolate Easter eggs . 
 The painting book displays Potter 's willingness to exploit the commercial possibilities of her characters and tales . The purchaser was alerted to the existence of other Potter books on the inside front cover and directed to a list of books on the back cover . Other merchandise included sets of linen or silk placemats painted by Potter for friends with an abridged text and 12 of the illustrations . In 1910 , Potter patented a design for a soft toy duck based on her model of Jemima in a Paisley handkerchief shawl and bonnet . A soft Jemima doll was manufactured by J. I. Farnell of Acton . 
 = Awaiting on You All = 
 " Awaiting on You All " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released on his 1970 triple album , All Things Must Pass . Along with the single " My Sweet Lord " , it is among the more overtly religious compositions on All Things Must Pass , and the recording typifies co @-@ producer Phil Spector 's influence on the album , due to his liberal use of reverberation and other Wall of Sound production techniques . Harrison recorded the track in London backed by musicians such as Eric Clapton , Bobby Whitlock , Klaus Voormann , Jim Gordon and Jim Price – many of whom he had toured with , as Delaney & Bonnie and Friends , in December 1969 , while still officially a member of the Beatles . Musically , the composition reflects Harrison 's embracing of the gospel music genre , following his production of fellow Apple Records artists Billy Preston and Doris Troy . 
 In his lyrics to " Awaiting on You All " , Harrison espouses a direct relationship with God over adherence to the tenets of organised religion . Influenced by both his association with London @-@ based Hare Krishna devotees , known as the Radha Krishna Temple , and the Vedanta @-@ inspired teachings of Swami Vivekananda , Harrison sings of chanting God 's name as a means to cleanse and liberate oneself from the impurities of the material world . While acknowledging the validity of all faiths , in essence , his song words explicitly criticise the Pope and the perceived materialism of the Catholic Church – a verse that EMI and Capitol Records continue to omit from the album 's lyrics . He also questions the validity of John Lennon and Yoko Ono 's 1969 campaign for world peace , reflecting a divergence of philosophies between Harrison and his former bandmate after their shared interest in Hindu spirituality in 1967 – 68 . 
 Several commentators have identified " Awaiting on You All " as one of the highlights of All Things Must Pass ; author and critic Richard Williams likens it to the Spector @-@ produced " River Deep – Mountain High " , by Ike & Tina Turner . The track is featured in the books 1001 Songs You Must Hear Before You Die by Robert Dimery and 1001 Songs by Toby Creswell . A similarly well @-@ regarded live version , with backing from a large band including Clapton , Ringo Starr , Preston and Jim Keltner , was released on the 1971 album The Concert for Bangladesh and appeared in the 1972 film of the same name . Harrison 's posthumous compilation Early Takes : Volume 1 ( 2012 ) includes a demo version of the song , recorded early in the 1970 sessions for All Things Must Pass . 
 = = Background = = 
 In his book While My Guitar Gently Weeps , Simon Leng describes George Harrison 's musical projects outside the Beatles during 1969 – 70 – such as producing American gospel and soul artists Billy Preston and Doris Troy , and touring with Delaney & Bonnie and Friends – as the completion of " a musical @-@ philosophical circle " , which resulted in his post @-@ Beatles solo album All Things Must Pass ( 1970 ) . Among the songs on that triple album , " My Sweet Lord " and " Awaiting on You All " each reflect Harrison 's immersion in Krishna Consciousness , via his association with the UK branch of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness ( ISKCON ) , known as the Radha Krishna Temple . An ISKCON devotee since 1970 , author Joshua Greene writes of All Things Must Pass providing an " intimately detailed account of a spiritual journey " , which had begun with Harrison 's embracing of Hinduism while in India in September – October 1966 . 
 Having long disavowed the Catholic faith of his upbringing , from 1966 Harrison was inspired by the teachings of Indian yogi Swami Vivekananda . The latter 's contention that " Each soul is potentially divine , the goal is to manifest that divinity " particularly resonated with Harrison in its contrast to the doctrine of the Catholic Church . By 1967 , Harrison 's religious awakening had progressed to include Gaudiya Vaishnava chanting , a form of meditation that he shared with his Beatles bandmate John Lennon and would go on to espouse in " Awaiting on You All " . Further to Vivekananda 's assertion , chanting the Hare Krishna or other Sanskrit @-@ worded mantras has , author Gary Tillery writes , " the ability to send spiritual energy through the body , leading to the enlightenment of the person chanting " . 
 Whereas Lennon 's interest in spiritual matters waned following the Beatles ' visit to India in 1968 , Harrison 's involvement with the Radha Krishna Temple led to him producing two hit singles by the devotees over 1969 – 70 , " Hare Krishna Mantra " and " Govinda " . While Lennon and his partner , Yoko Ono , undertook a highly publicised campaign for world peace during 1969 , Harrison believed that all human suffering could be averted if individuals focused on addressing their own imperfections rather than , as he put it , " trying to fix everybody else up like the Lone Ranger " . This divergence in philosophy also formed part of Harrison 's subject matter for " Awaiting on You All " , a song that , Greene writes , " projected his message to the world " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 In an October 1974 radio interview with Alan Freeman , Harrison recalled writing " Awaiting on You All " while preparing to go to bed , and mentioned it as a composition that had come easily to him . In his autobiography , I , Me , Mine , Harrison states that his inspiration for the song was " Japa Yoga meditation " , whereby mantras are sung and counted out on prayer beads . Musically , the composition has elements of gospel and rock music ; Leng describes it as " gospel @-@ drenched " and cites Harrison 's production of " Sing One for the Lord " , which Preston recorded with the Edwin Hawkins Singers in early 1970 , as a " catalyst " for the new composition . The song opens with a descending guitar riff , later repeated after each chorus , which ends on the melody 's root chord of B major . 
 In his lyrics to " Awaiting on You All " , Harrison conveys the importance of experiencing spirituality directly , while rejecting organised religion as well as political and intellectual substitutes . Author Ian Inglis writes that the lyrics recognise the merit in all faiths , as Harrison sings that the key to any religion is to " open up your heart " . The choruses proclaim that individual freedom from the physical or material world can be attained through " chanting the names of the Lord " , implying that there is a single deity who happens to be called by different names depending on the faith . 
 The song 's three verses provide a list of items or concepts that are unnecessary to this realisation . The opening lines – " You don 't need no love @-@ in / You don 't need no bed pan " – serve as a criticism of Lennon and Ono 's bed @-@ ins and other forms of peace activism during 1969 . While Inglis views these words as indicative of a possible rift in Harrison 's relationship with Lennon , Leng identifies the " tongue @-@ lashing for John and Yoko " as the singer dismissing " all political @-@ cum @-@ intellectual musings " . Harrison then uses what Christian theologian Dale Allison terms " the language of pollution " to describe the problems afflicting the world , and offers a method by which to cleanse oneself spiritually . 
 In verse two , Harrison sings of the futility of passports and travel for those searching to " see Jesus " , since an open heart will reveal that Christ is " right there " . Allison remarks on the song expressing Harrison 's " syncretistic view of Jesus " , a view he shared with Lennon , and cites comments that Harrison later made to Radha Krishna Temple co @-@ founder Mukunda Goswami , that Christ was " an absolute yogi " yet modern @-@ day Christian teachers misrepresent him and " [ let ] him down very badly " . 
 In the song 's final verse , Harrison states that churches , temples , religious texts and the rosary beads associated with Catholic worship are no substitute for a direct relationship with God . These symbols of organised religion " meant searching in the wrong places " , Tillery writes , when in keeping with Vivekananda 's philosophy , " the spark of the divine is within us all . Every person is therefore the child of God ... " AllMusic critic Lindsay Planer comments on Harrison 's " observation of [ religious ] repression " in the lines " We 've been kept down so long / Someone 's thinking that we 're all green . " 
 Harrison 's most scathing criticism is directed at the Pope , in the lines : " While the Pope owns 51 % of General Motors / And the stock exchange is the only thing he 's qualified to quote us . " Contrasting this statement with Harrison 's song @-@ wide message that God " waits on us to wake up and open our hearts " , Allison concludes : " whereas the Lord is about the business of helping human beings to wake up , the Pope is about the business of business . " 
 In his book No Sympathy for the Devil , Dave Ware Stowe writes of the effect of " Awaiting on You All " on Evangelical Christian sensibilities : " this was dangerous stuff . Harrison 's lyrics exemplified what many in the Jesus Movement considered a lure and snare of the devil . No doubt the song was spiritually resonant , even reverent , but it leaves the all @-@ important object of veneration vague . " 
 While identifying a similar ISKCON @-@ inspired theme in Harrison 's 1973 song " The Lord Loves the One ( That Loves the Lord ) " , Allison discusses " Awaiting on You All " as a precedent for further statements by Harrison against organised religion , particularly Catholicism . Among these , Harrison parodied the Last Supper in his inner @-@ gatefold artwork for Living in the Material World ( 1973 ) , dressed as a Catholic priest and again mocking the " perceived materialism and violence of the Roman church " , according to Allison . In addition , in his role as film producer , Harrison supported Monty Python 's controversial parodying of the biblical story of Christ in Life of Brian ( 1979 ) , about which he said : " Actually , [ the film ] was upholding Him and knocking all the idiotic stuff that goes on around religion . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Phil Spector 's involvement = = = 
 Harrison and American producer Phil Spector began discussing the possibility of Harrison recording a solo album of songs in early 1970 , after they had worked together on Lennon 's Plastic Ono Band single " Instant Karma ! " Before then , to show his support for Spector 's comeback from self @-@ imposed retirement , Harrison had supplied a written endorsement of the producer 's work on the Ike & Tina Turner album River Deep – Mountain High , when A & M Records issued the three @-@ year @-@ old recordings in 1969 . Long a fan of Spector 's sound , Harrison praised River Deep – Mountain High with the words : " a perfect record from start to finish . You couldn 't improve on it . " 
 Beatles biographer Peter Doggett suggests that Harrison had intended to make an entire album of devotional songs but , with that not being " an appropriate dish to set before Phil Spector " , Harrison chose to delay starting work on All Things Must Pass and instead continued his activities with the Radha Krishna Temple . It was only after Paul McCartney 's departure from the Beatles , and the band 's break @-@ up , that Harrison finally began sessions for his solo album – in late May 1970 , at Abbey Road Studios in London . Noting Spector 's application of his signature Wall of Sound production on " Awaiting on You All " , Inglis writes that , but for Harrison 's lyrics , the song " could be mistaken for the instrumental track of a song by the Ronettes " , one of Spector 's girl @-@ group protégés during the 1960s . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 The line @-@ up of musicians on the basic track included Harrison and Eric Clapton , on electric guitars ; bassists Klaus Voormann and Carl Radle , one of whom plays six @-@ string bass ; and drummer Jim Gordon , who formed Derek and the Dominos with Clapton and Radle during the sessions . In addition , Bobby Whitlock , the fourth member of the Dominos – all of whom were formerly part of Delaney & Bonnie and Friends – recalls playing Hammond organ on the song . Authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter note the presence of a piano part on the recording as well . 
 In his 2010 autobiography , Whitlock writes of Lennon and Ono visiting the studio during the All Things Must Pass sessions , during which Lennon " got his socks blown off " by the music Harrison was recording . The Hare Krishna devotees regularly attended the sessions also ; Spector later cited their presence as an example of how Harrison inspired tolerance in non @-@ believers , since the Temple devotees could be " the biggest pain in the necks in the world " , according to Spector . Among the many unreleased songs from the All Things Must Pass sessions , Harrison recorded his all @-@ Sanskrit composition " Gopala Krishna " , which Leng describes as " a rocking companion to ' Awaiting on You All ' " . 
 Madinger and Easter view " Awaiting on You All " as one of the more " heavily <unk> " productions on All Things Must Pass , due to Spector 's liberal use of echo and other Wall of Sound techniques . Among the extensive overdubs on the basic track , Harrison added what Leng terms a " virtual guitar orchestra " of harmonised slide guitar parts , and former Delaney & Bonnie musicians Jim Price and Bobby Keys supplied horns . Whitlock and Clapton sang backing vocals with Harrison , credited on the album as " the George O 'Hara @-@ Smith Singers " . 
 The recording also features prominent percussion such as tambourine and maracas . While the precise line @-@ up on many of the songs on All Things Must Pass continues to invite conjecture , Badfinger drummer Mike Gibbins has said that Spector nicknamed him " Mr Tambourine Man " due to his role on that instrument throughout the sessions , and that he and future Yes drummer Alan White played most of the percussion parts on the album , " switch [ ing ] on tambourine , sticks , bells , maracas ... whatever was needed " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Apple Records released All Things Must Pass on 27 November 1970 , with " Awaiting on You All " sequenced as the penultimate track on side three , in the original LP format , preceding the album 's title song . Of the 23 tracks released on All Things Must Pass , it was one of the few overtly religious songs . Concerned at the potential offensiveness of the lyrics , EMI omitted verse three of " Awaiting on You All " from the lyric sheet . Madinger and Easter write that the lyrical content of this verse " probably shot down any chances of it being the hit single it could otherwise have been " . 
 Issued during a period when rock music was increasingly reflecting spiritual themes , All This Must Pass was a major commercial success , outselling releases that year by Harrison 's former bandmates , and topping albums charts throughout the world . Describing the impact of the album , with reference to " Awaiting on You All " ' s exhortation to " chant the names of the Lord " , author Nicholas Schaffner wrote of Harrison being " rewarded with a Number One single all over the world " with " My Sweet Lord " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On release , Rolling Stone critic Ben Gerson described " Awaiting on You All " as " a Lesley Gore rave @-@ up in which George manages to rhyme ' visas ' with ' Jesus ' " . While he considered that lyrics such as " You 've been polluted so long " " carry an air of sanctimoniousness and moral superiority which is offensive " , Gerson added : " Remarkably , he vindicates these lapses . " Writing for the same magazine 30 years later , Anthony DeCurtis opined that " the heart of All Things Must Pass resides in its songs of spiritual acceptance " , and grouped " Awaiting on You All " with " My Sweet Lord " and " All Things Must Pass " as Harrison compositions that " capture the sweet satisfactions of faith " . In his 1970 review for the NME , Alan Smith described " Awaiting on You All " as " a rapid fire thumper with good chord progressions " and " one of the better tracks " on the album . AllMusic critic Richie Unterberger views " Awaiting on You All " as a highlight of a collection on which " nearly every song is excellent " , while author and critic Bob Woffinden lists it with " My Sweet Lord " , " Isn 't It a Pity " and " What Is Life " as " all excellent songs " . 
 In his book Phil Spector : Out of His Head , Richard Williams writes that , unlike Lennon and McCartney on their 1970 solo albums , " Harrison concentrated on pure joyous melodies – the kind of songs that had made the group so loved " , and he says of " Awaiting on You All " : " Spector repaid Harrison for his benediction on the Ike and Tina Turner album cover by turning it into a virtual remake of ' River Deep – Mountain High ' . " Mark Ribowsky , another Spector biographer , writes of the producer 's contribution to this and other songs on All Things Must Pass : " Phil 's rhythmically pounding basses and drum feels sutured George 's sentimentality with cheerful energy and made Indian asceticism into dance music . " Simon Leng describes " Awaiting on You All " as a " hot gospel stomper " and " the most successful example of Spector 's work on the album " . Writing for NME Originals in 2005 , Adrian Thrills named " Awaiting on You All " and " Wah @-@ Wah " as examples of " a tendency to over @-@ egg the mix " on the otherwise " magnificent " All Things Must Pass , adding : " it is hard to think of another big rock album on which the tambourine is shaken quite so relentlessly . " 
 In his AllMusic article on the song , Lindsay Planer views it as " somewhat of a sacred rocker " with " ample lead guitar " , and comments that Harrison 's lyrics " cleverly [ draw ] upon an array of disparate imagery to convey a conversely simple spiritual revelation " . Harrison biographer Alan Clayson considers the track " more uplifting " than " My Sweet Lord " and remarks on the aptness of Harrison 's subject matter in 1970 – 71 , when religious texts such as the Bible , the Koran and ISKCON 's Chant and Be Happy " now had discreet places on hip bookshelves " . Former Mojo editor Mat Snow describes the song as " glorious white gospel " , in which Harrison " rejects the Catholicism of his Liverpool upbringing " . 
 " Awaiting on You All " has featured in the music reference books 1001 Songs You Must Hear Before You Die by Robert Dimery and 1001 Songs by Australian critic Toby Creswell . The latter describes the combination of Harrison 's " tasteful " guitar parts and the " galloping " rhythm section as " sublime and divine " . In Dimery 's book , contributor Bruno MacDonald writes of the track : " ' Awaiting on You All ' has a timeless exuberance that even Beatles @-@ haters should experience . " 
 = = Live version = = 
 " Awaiting on You All " was one of the songs Harrison played at the Concert for Bangladesh , held at Madison Square Garden , New York , on 1 August 1971 . Featuring backing from a band including Clapton , Voormann , Ringo Starr , Billy Preston , Jim Keltner and Jim Horn , Harrison performed the song at both the afternoon and the evening shows . The latter performance was included on the Concert for Bangladesh live album , which Spector again co @-@ produced , and in the film of the concert . Joshua Greene comments on there being a " logical chronology " to the first three songs in Harrison 's setlist for this second show : " starting with ' Wah Wah , ' which declared his independence from the Beatles ; followed by ' My Sweet Lord , ' which celebrated his internal discovery of God and spirit ; and then ' Awaiting on You All ' " . 
 Writing in Rolling Stone , Jon Landau compared the less @-@ polished performance of " Awaiting on You All " with the studio version 's " perfect production " and concluded : " it is exhilarating to hear his voice clearly singing the song for the first time , likewise the excellent guitar . " In his album review for Melody Maker , Williams wrote of Harrison 's opening trio of songs : " <unk> , they 're as good as the originals , and in some ways even better , because they combine the power of the arrangements for horns and rhythm with a sense of joy that comes only in live performance . The two drummers ( Ringo and Jim Keltner ) are just breathtaking on ' Awaiting ' ... " Planer also compliments what he calls " the tag @-@ team percussion " of Starr and Keltner , which " <unk> [ es ] through the heart of the performance " . 
 = = Reissue and other versions = = 
 In February 2001 , during his extensive promotion for the 30th anniversary reissue of All Things Must Pass , Harrison named " Awaiting on You All " among his three favourite tracks on the album . The electronic press kit accompanying the release included a scene where Harrison plays back the song at his Friar Park studio and isolates certain parts of the recording in turn , such as the backing vocals and slide guitars . In the CD booklet , Harrison 's liner notes conclude with a thank @-@ you to " the amazing Mr. Phil Spector " and the acknowledgement : " He helped me so much to get this record made . In his company I came to realise the true value of the Hare Krishna Mantra . " The Pope @-@ related lyrics in " Awaiting on You All " were again omitted from the booklet ; they similarly do not appear on the lyric sheet supplied with the 2014 Apple Years reissue . 
 Part of the 2001 playback scene was included in Martin Scorsese 's documentary George Harrison : Living in the Material World , and an early take from the 1970 sessions appeared on the bonus disc accompanying that film 's DVD release in late 2011 . This demo version , which Harrison introduces as " Awaiting for You All " , was included on the compilation Early Takes : Volume 1 ( 2012 ) . Referring to Harrison 's stated regret at the amount of echo Spector used on All Things Must Pass , compilation producer Giles Martin says of the song 's sparse arrangement on Early Takes : " I think this is really cool , it 's got a good basic band groove , I think of it as George breaking down a wall of sound . " 
 In 1971 , Detroit band Silver Hawk released a cover version of " Awaiting on You All " as a single , which peaked at number 108 on Billboard magazine 's Bubbling Under listings . In Canada , Silver Hawk 's single climbed to number 49 on the RPM Top 100 . A cover " worth mentioning " , according to Planer , is a version recorded by pedal steel guitarist Joe Goldmark , released on the 1997 tribute album <unk> ' the Beatles . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 According to authors Simon Leng and Bruce Spizer , the line @-@ up of musicians on " Awaiting on You All " is as follows : 
 George Harrison – vocals , electric guitar , slide guitars , backing vocals 
 Eric Clapton – electric guitar , backing vocals 
 Bobby Whitlock – organ , backing vocals 
 Klaus Voormann – bass 
 Carl Radle – bass 
 Jim Gordon – drums 
 Jim Price – trumpet , trombone , horn arrangement 
 Bobby Keys – saxophones 
 Mike Gibbins – tambourine 
 uncredited – piano 
 uncredited – maracas 
 = Patio 29 = 
 Patio 29 is a common grave in Santiago General Cemetery in Chile , where political prisoners , especially those who " disappeared " during the 1973 Chilean coup d 'état , were buried anonymously . The mass grave , the largest of Augusto Pinochet 's military government , was used for unannounced and unmarked burials in the 1970s until an anonymous tip alerted the public to its usage . With the return of democracy to Chile in 1991 , an exhumation effort through 2006 recovered 126 bodies in 105 graves and identified three @-@ quarters of the victims . A 2005 DNA test later reported widespread identification errors and a new identification database began in 2007 . Exhumation authorities report that the site has been fully exhumed , which families of the victims contest . 
 The burial grounds became Chile 's first cemetery to be designated a protected national monument in 2006 . The site serves as a symbol for the human rights movement and the 1973 coup 's disappeared . As such , Patio 29 became part of the Bachelet government 's " symbolic reparation " program . Annual marches against the coup end at the site . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1973 a military coup overthrew the socialist Chilean government and replaced it with a military dictatorship headed by Augusto Pinochet , the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Chilean Army . The military rule was characterized by systematic suppression of all political dissidence . The worst violence occurred within the first three months of the coup , with the number of suspected dissidents killed or " disappeared " reaching several thousand . 
 In 1979 , the Vicariate of Solidarity , the Catholic Church 's human rights office , received information regarding illegal burials of six victims from Paine , Chile in a section of Santiago 's main cemetery , known as Patio 29 ; this led to a court investigation which revealed that Patio 29 had been used to anonymously bury the unmarked bodies of executed political prisoners between 1970 and 1980 , especially those kidnapped during the 1973 coup . 
 In 1981 , Santiago 's military prosecutor prohibited the unmarked bodies from being incinerated or removed , though <unk> and <unk> wrote in Memory and the Impact of Political Transformation in Public Space that the military government dug up and hid hundreds of these bodies in 1982 . Following the end of military rule and return of democracy to Chile in 1990 , investigation of human rights violations became a top priority . Though a 1978 amnesty decree prevented prosecution for pre @-@ 1978 offenses , the new Aylwin government sought disclosure of the truth and recompense for the victim 's families and appointed a National Commission for Truth and Reconciliation . The commission 's February 1991 Rettig Report named victims disappeared shortly after the coup , executed by gunshot , and presumed to be buried in Patio 29 . Patio 29 was the largest of about twelve Pinochet era mass graves identified and searched . 
 In September 1991 , two judges on cases by the Vicariate and family of disappeared leftist leader Bautista van Schouwen issued court orders to begin research projects to exhume and identify the graves . The majority of the 105 bodies recovered in 1991 appeared to have been shot and beaten . Some were missing limbs or were bound with wire . The victims were as young as 13 years old , and some coffins contained multiple bodies . Pinochet , who remained commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Chilean army during the 1991 exhumation , explained that bodies were stacked to save space ( " What great economizing ! " ) , and later apologized after public outcry . This comment embarrassed Pinochet 's followers and " reactivated cultural revulsion and human rights sensibilities " . In Reckoning with Pinochet , Stern wrote that the 1991 exhumation led the public to view Pinochet soldiers on trial as criminals . The Santiago Catholic Church 's <unk> records were matched with autopsy records to identify and return the bodily remains to living relatives . 
 As of 2006 , 126 bodies were found , of which 96 were identified by the Medical Legal Institute in 1998 . Authorities reported that all bodies in Patio 29 had been exhumed by 2006 , though some families of the victims disagreed . More than 1000 of the disappeared from this period have not been found . Skepticism about the matches ' veracity emerged in 2003 , and the institute 's own DNA testing in 2005 revealed a project rife with mistakes and exaggerated certainty : 48 bodies were wrongly identified and 37 more were doubted . The Medical Legal Institute created a new DNA database in May 2007 . Three bodies were positively identified in late 2009 . 
 Chile 's National Monuments Council declared Patio 29 a National Monument on 13 July 2006 at the request of a group of Chamber of Deputies legislators . The Council chose the site for its proof of the Pinochet military government 's elaborate procedures used to conceal the disappeared 's bodies and their identities . At the ceremony , Patio 29 was described as a symbol of the country 's painful history and an educational place for human rights . As a national monument , the site will be conserved and maintained by government funds unless ordered otherwise by the courts . It is the first cemetery to become a national monument in Chile . 
 In 2008 , the National Monuments Council ran an architectural contest to revitalize Patio 29 , and chose a project that would create a music plaza with seven copper columns linking Víctor Jara 's tomb with Patio 29 . The memorial is made of 3 @,@ 032 precast concrete bricks . 
 = = Description = = 
 Patio 29 is a common grave in Santiago General Cemetery where the victims of mutilation , torture , and execution under the Pinochet military government were buried . Augusto Pinochet came to power in the 1973 Chilean coup d 'état , where he led the army that attacked the presidential palace and overthrew President Salvador Allende . The military junta replaced constitutional rule for 17 years , under which thousands of Chileans were detained and tortured . The Patio 29 cemetery section is bordered by Mexico Avenue to the north , O 'Higgins Avenue to the east , <unk> Street to the south , and <unk> Street to the west . Though the cemetery changed its section numbering in 1987 , the section is still known as Patio 29 . The section has 105 graves , though many contained more than one person . The plots remain marked by their original rusted iron cross headstones with burial dates and " NN " for " no name " . Most of the dates fall within the last four months of 1973 . The site has not been reused for burials . <unk> Víctor Jara , a prominent casualty of Pinochet 's 1973 coup d 'état , lies in a crypt across from Patio 29 . 
 The Memorial for the Disappeared at the cemetery 's metro entrance and Víctor Jara 's tomb near Patio 29 together form a ten @-@ minute " popular route " walk through the cemetery for tourists , as opposed to the " patrimonial route " past the graves of Chilean political leaders . A sign at the Patio 29 memorial describes the site as " an emblematic place of the human rights violations that took place between 1973 and 1990 as it was used to cover up the bodies and identities of the detained disappeared and politically executed during the military regime " . The annual protests against the 11 September 1973 coup start at the then @-@ besieged La Moneda presidential palace and conclude here in the General Cemetery . 
 = = Cultural influence = = 
 The exhumations at Patio 29 led to two documentaries : Patio 29 : Histories of Silence , and Fernando ha <unk> , which told the story of recovering Fernando Olivares Mori 's body from the plot , his burial , and an interview with his wife after the DNA @-@ based doubts were posited . In a review of Patio 29 Tras la Cruz de Fierro , <unk> <unk> placed the book alongside an international human rights trend towards " memorialization " , Southern Cone writings about " monuments , memorials , and ' <unk> de memoria ' [ places of memory ] " , and interest in reconciling their divided societies . In keeping with this symbolism , Patio 29 became part of the Bachelet government 's " symbolic reparation " program . 
 = Fire in My Heart = 
 " Fire in My Heart " is the tenth single by Welsh rock band the Super Furry Animals . It was the second single to be taken from the group 's 1999 album Guerrilla , and reached number 25 in the UK Singles Chart after its release on 9 August 1999 . The track , originally titled " Heartburn " , has been described by the band 's singer Gruff Rhys as a country and western song with lyrics that offer " soul advice " . 
 Critical reaction to " Fire in My Heart " was generally positive with the NME stating that it confirmed the band 's position as the best British singles band in " ages and ages " and placing the track at number 25 in their singles of the year chart for 1999 . The music video for the song was directed by Jake & Jim and shows Super Furry Animals waiting to leave the planet Mars , having played a concert there . 
 = = Themes and recording = = 
 " Fire in My Heart " was originally called " Heartburn " , a name which the group 's singer Gruff Rhys felt was more poignant and gave the song " a twist " , but other members of the band were not happy with the title so the name was changed . Rhys has described the track as a country and western song which was written with absolute sincerity despite featuring clichéd lyrics . The song is " soul advice " and is about " all kinds of people in your life " . The track was recorded in the middle of 1998 at Real World Studios , Box , Wiltshire , along with the rest of Guerrilla , and was produced by the Super Furry Animals . B @-@ side " The Matter of Time " was considered for inclusion on Guerrilla , but the band felt the album would be too self @-@ indulgent if the song were added to the record 's track listing . The group instead opted to include the " stupid " song " The Teacher " , a decision which Rhys has called a decisive moment in the creation of the record . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Fire in My Heart " is 2 minutes and 45 seconds long and is in the key of E major . The song begins with Gruff Rhys singing the first verse backed only by finger picked acoustic guitar . Rhys 's vocals are joined by sparse drums , a synthesizer , organ and harmony backing vocals in the second verse which immediately follows the first at 31 seconds . The drums become louder during the third and final verse which leads into a bridge that begins after 1 minute and 31 seconds . During the bridge Rhys sings the lines " Oh the monkey puzzle tree has some questions for the watchdogs of the profane , and I ask , is it sad that I 'm driving myself mad as this fire in my heart turns blue " . A key change to F ♯ major follows for the final verse , with Rhys repeating the line " I 've got a fire in my heart for you " backed by multiple harmony vocals . The song ends with a coda during which Rhys elongates the word " you " over the chords A ♯ minor , A , G ♯ minor and F ♯ . 
 = = Release and critical reception = = 
 " Fire in My Heart " was released on CD , cassette and 7 " on 9 August 1999 , and reached number 25 in the UK Singles Chart . The track was included on the band 's ' greatest hits ' compilation album Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 , issued in 2004 . 
 The Melody Maker called the track a " lovely song , a real scarf @-@ waver " , although the magazine expressed disappointment that " Fire in My Heart " did not see the band " howling at the moon in their more deep @-@ throated manner " . American model Caprice – in the role of guest reviewer for the Melody Maker – likened the song to the music of Carole King and Rickie Lee Jones and said that the track is " just about the words " and is an example of the sort of music that " never goes out of fashion " . The NME described the song as a " bizarre psychedelic @-@ folk @-@ gospel record " and said that it confirmed the band 's position as the best British singles band " in ages and ages " . The magazine later placed the track at number 35 in their singles of the year chart for 1999 . Yahoo ! Music called the track a heartbreaking song of " staggering genius " . Mojo described " Fire in My Heart " as " trad @-@ sounding " four chord folk , while Pitchfork stated that the track was a song of " country <unk> " . The BBC called " Fire in My Heart " an " idiosyncratic love song " . The song was placed at number 17 in the 1999 Festive Fifty on John Peel 's BBC Radio 1 show . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Music video = = 
 A promotional music video was produced to accompany the release of " Fire in My Heart " as a single . The video was directed by Jake & Jim , who also directed the video for the group 's subsequent single " Do or Die " , and shows the Super Furry Animals waiting to leave Mars having played a concert on the planet . The video begins with Gruff Rhys standing alone on the Martian soil , singing along to the song . A silver , computer generated , spaceship is seen landing behind Rhys . Around one minute into the track the camera pans back to reveal the rest of the Super Furry Animals sitting down to the left of Rhys . Guitarist Huw Bunford is sat on the floor playing an acoustic guitar while the rest of the group are sat on three metal seats which are connected together . Two aliens are seen walking from the spacecraft towards the band while drummer Dafydd Ieuan pours some of the Martian sand through his hands . When the aliens arrive , one of them , with a bald head , sunglasses and pointy ears , places his left hand on Rhys 's right shoulder . Rhys turns around and looks at the other alien who has one eye in the centre of a large round face and is wearing a blue hoodie . The alien smiles at Rhys who then turns around and looks up to see the Earth in the sky above . Ieuan and keyboardist Cian Ciaran are also shown looking at the Earth before the camera moves behind them to reveal hundreds of aliens stood in front of several minaret @-@ like towers , waving at the group . The band are shown picking up a suitcase and guitar before walking towards the spaceship as the song finishes . The aliens were designed by regular Super Furry Animals collaborator Pete Fowler , who acted as " creative advisor " for the video . According to Rhys the aliens were animated by the same special effects team that worked on Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace . Rhys has stated that he considers his performance in the video to be " wooden " as he was forced to take painkillers during the shoot due to a " stiff neck " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by Super Furry Animals . 
 CD ( <unk> ) , MC ( <unk> ) , 7 " ( <unk> ) 
 " Fire in My Heart " – 2 : 45 
 " The Matter of Time " – 5 : 47 
 " Mrs Spector " – 3 : 01 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following people contributed to " Fire in my Heart " : 
 Gruff Rhys – vocals 
 Huw Bunford – guitar 
 Guto Pryce – bass guitar 
 Cian Ciaran – keyboards 
 Dafydd Ieuan – drums 
 = = Singles chart positions = = 
 = Mississippi Highway 444 = 
 Mississippi Highway 444 ( MS 444 ) is a short highway in western Mississippi . Its western terminus is at MS 1 , and travels eastward through six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) of farmland . The route enters Duncan , and ends at U.S. Route 61 ( US 61 ) and US 278 , its eastern terminus . MS 444 was designated in 1958 , and became paved two years later . 
 = = Route description = = 
 All of the road is located in northern Bolivar County . In 2012 , Mississippi Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) calculated as many as 750 vehicles traveling west of US 61 / US 278 , and as few as 330 vehicles traveling east of MS 1 . MS 444 is not included as a part of the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a network of highways identified as being most important for the economy , mobility and defense of the nation . MS 444 is legally defined in Mississippi Code § 65 @-@ 3 @-@ 3 . MS 444 is maintained by MDOT . 
 MS 444 starts at a T @-@ intersection with MS 1 and travels eastward . The route travels through farmland in a straight line . MS 444 intersects Caston Road , a dirt road that also leads to Duncan . MS 444 continues east , intersecting minor dirt roads . East of Yates Road , the road enters a small area of trees , before re @-@ entering to more farmland . The route curves slightly to the southeast about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) later , at Sandy Ridge Road . MS 444 soon crosses the <unk> River , and enters into Duncan . Near the center of Duncan , the route intersects the old alignment of US 61 . The road continues east and ends at a T @-@ intersection with US 61 . 
 = = History = = 
 MS 444 was designated in 1958 , as an unpaved road from MS 1 to US 61 . The route became paved by 1960 . In 1967 , US 61 was rerouted to its east , no longer passing through Duncan . By 1999 , US 278 was designated , concurrent with US 61 through MS 444 's eastern terminus . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Bolivar County . 
 = Nordhordland Bridge = 
 The Nordhordland Bridge ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a combined cable @-@ stayed and pontoon bridge which crosses Salhusfjorden between <unk> and Flatøy in Hordaland , Norway . It is 1 @,@ 614 meters ( 5 @,@ 295 ft ) long , of which the pontoon section is 1 @,@ 246 meters ( 4 @,@ 088 ft ) long . The cable @-@ stayed section consists of a single 99 @-@ meter ( 325 ft ) tall H @-@ pylon which has a length of 368 meters ( 1 @,@ 207 ft ) and a main span of 172 meters ( 564 ft ) . This allows for a clearance of 32 meters ( 105 ft ) . 
 The floating section is a steel box girder bridge with ten pontoons , which because of the fjord 's depth are not laterally anchored . The roadway sits on an orthotropic deck . The pontoons and the cable @-@ stayed bridge are built in concrete , with the main span being supported with 48 cables . The fjord end of the main span is supported by a 30 @-@ meter ( 98 ft ) deep foundation , where the two bridges meet . From there and for 414 meters ( 1 @,@ 358 ft ) , the <unk> has a 5 @.@ 7 percent gradient on a viaduct anchored to the pontoon bridge . 
 The bridge carries two lanes of European Route E39 , also called the Coastal Highway , and one pedestrian and bicycle path , and connects the district of Nordhordland to Bergen . Plans for a bridge had existed since the 1960s , and after the decision to construct the bridge was passed by the Parliament of Norway in 1989 , construction started in 1991 . Total costs , including auxiliary roads , was NOK 910 million . Part of the contract payment was subject to a court case which the contractors lost . The bridge opened on 22 September 1994 , and remained a toll road until 31 December 2005 . In 2014 , it had an average daily traffic of 16 @,@ 580 vehicles . There are plans to reinstate a toll on the bridge from 2013 to finance other road projects . The bridge is the second @-@ longest in Norway , and the second pontoon bridge in Norway . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The bridge consists of three sections , a cable @-@ stayed bridge , a pontoon bridge and a viaduct which connects the two . The cable @-@ stayed bridge consists of a 99 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ( 326 ft ) tall H @-@ pylon with a foundation at <unk> on the mainland of Bergen . It supports a 172 @-@ meter ( 564 ft ) main span , with the other end being fixed in a foundation 30 @-@ meter ( 98 ft ) below mean sea level , which is anchored in the ridge <unk> . The whole cable @-@ stayed bridge is 369 meters ( 1 @,@ 211 ft ) long , with a 190 @-@ meter ( 620 ft ) long viaduct , supported by six pairs of pillars . The cable @-@ stayed bridge allows for a sailing channel which is 32 meters ( 105 ft ) tall and 50 meters ( 160 ft ) wide . The main span is built in lightweight <unk> concrete , while the viaduct and pylon is built with conventional <unk> concrete . Inside the pylons is a 1 @.@ 6 by 2 @.@ 0 meters ( 5 ft 3 in by 6 ft 7 in ) hollow area . 
 The bridge has 48 cables , 12 on each side of the pylon on each side of the roadway . The distance between the cables is 12 @.@ 00 meters ( 39 @.@ 37 ft ) on the main span , and 9 @.@ 33 meters ( 30 @.@ 6 ft ) on the viaduct . Combined , the cables are 4 @,@ 432 meters ( 14 @,@ 541 ft ) long ; each cable consists of 67 to 230 twined cables , each with a 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 28 in ) diameter . The cables have a weight of between 1 @.@ 5 and 14 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 1 @.@ 5 and 14 @.@ 3 long tons ; 1 @.@ 7 and 16 @.@ 0 short tons ) each , and they have a capacity of between 1 @,@ 960 and 7 @,@ 910 kilonewtons ( 440 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 780 @,@ 000 lbf ) . They can be tightened at the connection with the <unk> . 
 The floating section consists of a steel box girder placed on top of ten floating pontoons . The pontoon section is anchored only at both ends , on the underwater foundation at <unk> and on Flatøy . It is fastened using flexible plate connections fastened by bolts and cables under tension . These are flexible around the horizontal axis at right angles towards the axis of the bridge , allowing for deformation caused by the tide . The fastening on Flatøy consists of a massive concrete block 22 by 20 meters ( 72 by 66 ft ) long and 14 @.@ 5 meters ( 48 ft ) tall which was poured into a blast @-@ out foundation pit in bedrock . Vertical pretension rock anchors have also been installed , with 12 at <unk> and 14 at Flatøy , giving 42 and 44 <unk> ( 9 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 and 9 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 lbf ) of support , although they were only built to increase the safety factor . 
 There are ten lightweight concrete pontoons , with 113 @.@ 25 @-@ meter ( 371 @.@ 6 ft ) spans between them . The pontoons are between 7 @.@ 0 and 8 @.@ 6 meters ( 23 @.@ 0 and 28 @.@ 2 ft ) in height . The draught varies between 4 @.@ 3 to 5 @.@ 6 meters ( 14 to 18 ft ) . Each pontoon consists of nine watertight cells which are partially filled with ballast for trim . The cells are dimensioned so two adjacent cells can fill with water without endangering the bridge . 
 The roadway lies on top of an orthotropic deck on a steel box girder , which is 15 @.@ 9 meters ( 52 ft ) wide , 5 @.@ 50 meters ( 18 @.@ 0 ft ) tall and 1 @,@ 246 meters ( 4 @,@ 088 ft ) long . The steel box girder weighs 14 @,@ 150 tonnes ( 13 @,@ 930 long tons ; 15 @,@ 600 short tons ) , of which 3 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 3 @,@ 000 long tons ; 3 @,@ 300 short tons ) is high @-@ strength low @-@ alloy steel . The girder has an octagonal shape and is made with 14 @-@ to @-@ 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 55 to 0 @.@ 79 in ) thick steel plates . They are longitudinally stiffened by trapezoidal stiffeners supported by cross frames at most every 4 @.@ 5 meters ( 15 ft ) . Two full bulkheads have been used for every pontoon pilaster , made from welded steel plates 8 to 50 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 31 to 1 @.@ 97 in ) thick . External brackets built into the bulkheads transfer the support forces to the pontoons . The girder was built in sections of 21 , 36 , and 42 meters ( 69 , 118 , and 138 ft ) , which were subsequently welded together into 11 modules with a skew angle of 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 3 degrees . The girder has a constant cross @-@ section throughout the length , except at the anchoring points to the pontoons . The section from the land anchoring to the first pontoon is subject to the most stress , and is made with steel with a higher yield point . The inside of the girder has two dehumidifiers which ensure that it does not rust . The clearance under the girder is 5 @.@ 5 meters ( 18 ft ) . 
 The two bridges are connected with a 414 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 1 @,@ 360 ft ) long steel viaduct , which runs on top of the floating bridge , bringing the road from 11 @.@ 0 to 34 @.@ 4 meters ( 36 @.@ 1 to 112 @.@ 9 ft ) above mean sea level . The viaduct weighs 1 @,@ 600 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 600 long tons ; 1 @,@ 800 short tons ) and has a gradient of 5 @.@ 7 degrees . It consists of spans between 18 and 33 meters ( 59 and 108 ft ) , with the roadway also built as an orthotropic deck with 12 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) thick plates . Overall , the construction of the bridge used 24 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 24 @,@ 000 long tons ; 26 @,@ 000 short tons ) of concrete , of which 10 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 9 @,@ 800 long tons ; 11 @,@ 000 short tons ) in the pontoons . The bridge was coated with 40 @,@ 000 litres ( 8 @,@ 800 imp gal ; 11 @,@ 000 US gal ) of paint . 
 The bridge is monitored by 132 sensors , including sensors on hatches to the pontoons , on doors to the steel box girder , for corrosion , strain gauges on the girder and on flexible elements , and weather information . On the cable @-@ stayed section , the bridge is marked with navigation lights , as well as the center of the sailing area having a <unk> . The bridge is the second @-@ longest bridge in Norway , behind the Drammen Bridge . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 Ship services in Nordhordland started in 1866 , and in 1923 the first car was purchased . A car ferry service between <unk> in Lindås and <unk> in Åsane on the mainland was established on 7 July 1936 . A plan was launched whereby all traffic from Nordhordland would be collected in one place and transported across Salhusfjorden to Åsane . By moving the ferry quay from <unk> to Knarvik , the length of the ferry service could be reduced . However , the fares would be kept the same and the extra revenue used to finance a bridge from Flatøy to Lindås . This allowed the Alversund Bridge to open in 1958 , and the ferry service from Flatøy and Meland to move to Knarvik . The proposal to cross Salhusfjorden was launched during the planning of the Alversund Bridge . Cost estimates were made based on the Golden Gate Bridge in the United States , but it proved too expensive for a suspension bridge crossing between <unk> and Salhus . 
 In 1962 , the issue was brought up again , this time as a pontoon bridge . The depth and steepness of the fjord would make it impossible to fasten the bridge to the sea bottom . However , a method without lateral anchorage had been developed for the Hobart Bridge in Australia . Another alternative was launched in 1963 , involving a submerged floating tunnel through the fjord . It was estimated to cost between NOK 19 @.@ 5 and 26 million . Norwegian expatriate Leif J. Sverdrup , co @-@ founder of Sverdrup & Parcel of the United States , inspected the fjord in 1965 and was later hired to plan the bridge in cooperation with Oslo @-@ based civil engineering consultants <unk> . Municipal engineers started measuring currents in 1966 . <unk> and Sverdrup & Parcel recommended a pontoon bridge with a movable section to allow passage of ship traffic . In 1967 , a new proposal was launched , in which a seaway tunnel would be blasted out in the rock on the Bergen side . 
 The Alversund Bridge was a toll bridge which was paying for the debt accumulated in its construction . By 1968 , the debt would be paid off , but the Norwegian Public Roads Administration launched a plan whereby the tolls would continue to be collected and used to finance a bridge across Salhusfjorden . This was opposed by a group of locals , who brought the issue to the courts , claiming it to be illegal , as a bridge would never be built . Both Oslo District Court and Eidsivating Court of Appeal concluded that the tolls were legal , and the issue was rejected by the Supreme Court . Protests were also raised against the use of a pontoon bridge , as it would limit the vessel size and thus the commercial development in the inner parts of the fjord . 
 In the 1970s , National Road 1 ( today part of E39 ) was established through Knarvik towards Sognefjorden , resulting in upgrades to the roads in Nordhordland , and making the crossing one of the main routes from the north . At the same time , it was decided to establish a refinery at <unk> in Lindås . In 1971 , details about the suspension bridge were again discussed , with three different proposals with the main span of between 1 @,@ 090 and 1 @,@ 210 meters ( 3 @,@ 580 and 3 @,@ 970 ft ) with 160 @-@ meter ( 520 ft ) tall pylons . There were protests from the Salhus area , as the suspension bridge would have resulted in the demolishing of part of the residential area . 
 In 1972 , discussion started with the plans to connect Meland , Flatøy and <unk> with bridges . This was passed by the Parliament of Norway in May 1975 , and consisted of the <unk> Bridge between Flatøy and Meland , which opened in November 1978 . The <unk> Bridge opened on 1 April 1982 and connected Flatøy to Lindås and Knarvik , thus also connecting Meland and Lindås . Both bridges were partially financed with tolls . The plans for a pontoon bridge were presented to the Standing Committee on Transport and Communications on 31 March 1981 . They supported the choice of a pontoon bridge . The decision to construct the bridge was taken by parliament on 9 December 1987 , but they demanded that a larger ship channel be constructed . 
 Detailed planning started in March 1990 , and at first two technical methods for constructing the pontoon bridge were considered : a continuous concrete floating caisson between the abutments , and a steel version incorporating a truss bridge carrying concrete pontoons . However , they were both rejected in favor of a concrete or steel box section borne on concrete pontoons . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Design of the bridge was awarded to Aas @-@ Jakobsen and Det Norske Veritas , the former who also performed dynamic analysis and structural engineering . Architects were <unk> – Sundt – <unk> , Lund & <unk> , and Lund & <unk> . An H pylon was chosen instead of an A pylon both because it was more functional , and would be more aesthetic in conjunction with the other bridges in the area , particularly three suspension bridges . 
 The technology for the bridge was based on recent technology for pontoon bridges combined with Norwegian offshore technology . Among the technologies initially considered , but later ruled out , was that used in the Homer M. Hadley Memorial Bridge and the Hood Canal Bridge in the United States . Instead , an orthotropic deck was chosen , such as the <unk> Bridge had used . The choice of a box girder bridge and the orthotropic deck were chosen because it gave the lower material use . Conventional pontoon bridges have lateral anchorage systems which fasten the bridge to the seabed . The technique had previously been used down to 140 meters ( 460 ft ) , but Salhusfjorden is 500 meters ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) deep , making the method prohibitively expensive . The choice of a cable @-@ stayed section allowed reduced traffic hazards in storms , a reduction in corrosion on the bridge deck , and improved passage of water beneath the bridge in support of wildlife . 
 The contract for construction of the pontoon bridge was awarded in August 1991 to a consortium , <unk> Salhus Bru , which consisted of Norwegian Contractors , Aker Entreprenør , Veidekke and Kværner Eureka . The components were built in Moss and Fredrikstad and then shipped to <unk> , a branch of <unk> which was suitable to connect the parts . There were problems welding the high @-@ strength low @-@ alloy steel , which resulted in the work being halted for several days before an agreement was reached between the contractor and the Public Roads Administration . On 26 January 1994 , the steel frame which would be used to fasten the pontoon bridge to the cable @-@ stayed bridge , came adrift during transport in Skagerrak , and was severely damaged , causing a delay in the project . As the bridge had the longest laterally unsupported span in the world , the construction was watched by many international delegations . 
 The construction of the tunnel also involved other investments in road infrastructure . This included 5 @.@ 7 kilometers ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) of new highways , 4 @.@ 2 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 6 mi ) of local roads , and the 785 @-@ meter ( 2 @,@ 575 ft ) long <unk> Tunnel just south of the bridge . A grade @-@ separated crossing was built on both sides of the bridge . The intersection on Flatøy was also built as a bus interchange , and became the terminus of many bus routes in Nordhordland . Express buses would from there run directly to the city center of Bergen . 
 The bridge project cost NOK 910 million , of which NOK 513 was for the pontoon bridge , NOK 81 million was for the cable @-@ stayed bridge , NOK 25 million was used for the waterway , NOK 115 million was used on planning , and NOK 176 million was used on auxiliary roads and the tunnel . The bridge was financed with NOK 41 million in state grants , NOK 139 million from tolls paid in advance , and NOK 730 million in debt which would be repaid by the tolls . Interest during construction cost NOK 138 million . The construction involved 1 @,@ 150 @,@ 000 man @-@ hours . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The use of high @-@ strength steel caused problems as it was necessary to heat the steel to 150 ° C ( 302 ° F ) before and after welding , and Kværner had problems finding an adequate process during late 1992 . In January 1993 , an appropriate process had been found , although experimentation with various methods continued for another six months . Kværner felt that the Public Roads Administration should bear the extra costs , demanding NOK 108 million in compensation , but the administration denied this , resulting in a lawsuit . On 26 January 1996 , Nordhordland District Court supported the administration , but gave the plaintiff partial support , claiming the administration should take part of the costs through improper choice of material . The Public Roads Administration was sentenced to pay NOK 34 million to Kværner . Both sides appealed to Gulating Court of Appeal , which on 18 February 1998 refuted all of Kværner 's claim regarding the steel boxes , and sentenced the administration to pay NOK 7 @.@ 5 million . In addition , Kværner had to pay the administration NOK 19 @.@ 5 million in penalties for overrunning the contract date . However , the court 's decision was not unanimous . The plaintiff appealed to case to the Supreme Court , who unanimously confirmed the ruling of Gulating Court of Appeal . In addition , the plaintiff was sentenced to pay the defendants legal costs of NOK 910 @,@ 000 . 
 The bridge was officially opened by King Harald V on 22 September 1994 . It was the second pontoon bridge in Norway , after the <unk> Bridge which opened in 1992 . The last tolls were collected on 31 December 2005 . In 2008 , there were 19 @,@ 700 travelers on the bridge each day , 14 percent of which used public transport . In 2009 , the bridge had an average daily traffic ( ADT ) of 14 @,@ 698 vehicles , up from <unk> in 2000 . Following the removal of the tolls , the ADT increased from <unk> in 2005 to <unk> in 2006 . In 2010 , the bridge was one of twelve finalists in Teknisk Ukeblad 's competition for the most beautiful bridge in Norway . In December 2010 , Bergen City Council approved the Nordhordland Package , which would result in NOK 3 @.@ 8 billion being used on road investments in Åsane and Nordhordland . Two @-@ thirds of the financing is to come from tolls , which will involve reinstalling a toll plaza on the bridge . The tolls will first be set to NOK 20 for five years , and then after the completion of the first stage , the toll will be NOK 40 for fifteen years . The toll plaza is scheduled to reopen in 2013 . Among the projects is a new four @-@ lane Nyborg Tunnel which will shorten the distance of E39 from the bridge with the motorway at Nyborg in Bergen . 
 = Ode to Psyche = 
 " Ode to Psyche " is a poem by John Keats written in spring 1819 . The poem is the first of his 1819 odes , which include " Ode on a Grecian Urn " and " Ode to a Nightingale " . " Ode to Psyche " is an experiment in the ode genre , and Keats 's attempt at an expanded version of the sonnet format that describes a dramatic scene . The poem serves as an important departure from Keats 's early poems , which frequently describe an escape into the pleasant realms of one 's imagination . Keats uses the imagination to show the narrator 's intent to resurrect Psyche and reincarnate himself into Eros ( love ) . Keats attempts this by dedicating an " untrodden region " of his mind to the worship of the neglected goddess . 
 = = Background = = 
 Keats was never a professional writer . Instead , he supported himself with a small income that he earned as a surgeon for Guy 's Hospital . At the age of 23 , Keats left the hospital , losing his source of income , in order to devote himself to writing poetry . He lived with Charles Brown , a friend who collected Keats 's poetry while supporting him , during spring 1819 and composed poetry . The early products of this effort included La Belle Dame sans Merci and " Ode to Psyche " , the first of a series of odes that he would write that year . It is uncertain as to when the poem was actually completed , but Keats sent the poem to his brother on 3 May 1819 with an attached letter saying , " The following poem , the last I have written , is the first and only one with which I have taken even moderate pains ; I have , for the most part , dashed off my lines in a hurry ; this one I have done leisurely ; I think it reads the more richly for it , and it will I hope encourage me to write other things in even a more peaceable and healthy spirit . " 
 Keats was exposed to a few sources of the Psyche myth . His contemporary sources for the myth included Lempriere 's Classical Dictionary and Mary Tighe 's Psyche , an 1805 work that Keats read as a child and returned to in 1818 . Keats wrote to his brother George , just a few months before writing " Ode to Psyche " , to say that he was no longer delighted by Tighe 's writing . Dissatisfied , he turned to Apuleius 's Golden Ass , translated by William Adlington in 1566 , and read through the earlier version of the Cupid and Psyche myth . After reading the work and realizing that the myth was established during the twilight of Roman mythology , Keats wrote to George : " You must recollect that Psyche was not embodied as a goddess before the time of Apuleius the Platonist who lived after the Augustan age , and consequently the Goddess was never worshipped or sacrificed to with any of the ancient fervour — and perhaps never thought of in the old religion — I am more orthodox than to let a heathen Goddess be so neglected . " 
 = = Structure = = 
 " Ode to Psyche " , Keats 's 67 line ode , was the first of his major odes of 1819 . As such , the poem is an experiment in the ode structure that he was to then rely on for his next five odes . Although Keats spent time considering the language of the poem , the choice of wording and phrasing is below that found within his later works , including Hyperion or the odes that followed . " Ode to Psyche " is important because it is Keats 's first attempt at an altered sonnet form that would include longer more lines and would end with a message or truth . Also , he did not want the poem to be based simply around that message , so he incorporated narrative elements , such as plot and characters , along with a preface to the poem . Of these additions , the use of a preface was discontinued in his next odes along with the removal of details that describe setting within the poems ; they would only be implied within later odes . 
 H. W. Garrod , in his analysis of Keats 's sonnet form , believes that Keats took various aspects of sonnet forms and incorporated only those that he thought would benefit his poetry . In particular , Keats relies on Petrarch 's sonnet structure and the " pouncing rhymes " that are found within Petrarch 's octave stanzas . However , M. R. Ridley disputes that Keats favours Petrarch and claims that the odes incorporate a Shakespearean rhyme scheme . Regardless of which sonnet structure was favoured over the other , Keats wanted to avoid the downsides of both forms . " Ode to Psyche " begins with an altered Shakespearean rhyme scheme of <unk> . The use of rhyme does not continue throughout the poem , and the lines that follow are divided into different groups : a quatrain , couplets , and a line on its own . These are then followed by a series of twelve lines that are modelled after the Shakespearean sonnet form , but lack the final couplet . The next lines are of two quatrains , with cddc rhyme , followed by two lines that repeat the previous rhymes , and then a final quatrain , with efef rhyme . 
 = = Poem = = 
 The poem does not describe the plot of the original Cupid and Psyche myth : according to Harold Bloom , the poem " has little to do with the accepted myth " . In the original myth , Aphrodite punishes Psyche , a well admired girl , by having Cupid use his power to make her fall in love . Cupid , instead , falls in love with her , but he could only be with her in the cover of darkness in order to disguise his identity . Curious , she uses a light to reveal Cupid 's identity , but he flees from her presence . Psyche begins to search after Cupid , and Aphrodite forces her to perform various tasks before she could be united with her love . After nearly dying from one of the tasks , Cupid asks Zeus to transform Psyche into a goddess so the two can be together . 
 The action of " Ode to Psyche " begins with a narrator witnessing two individuals embracing . The narrator immediately recognizes Cupid and is astonished when he recognizes Psyche : 
 I wandered in a forest thoughtlessly , 
 And , on the sudden , fainting with surprise , 
 Saw two fair creatures , couched side by side 
 In deepest grass , beneath the whisp 'ring roof 
 Of leaves and trembled blossoms , where there ran 
 A <unk> , scarce espied : 
 * * * * * 
 The winged boy I knew ; 
 But who wast thou , O happy , happy dove ? 
 His Psyche true ! ( lines 7 – 12 , 21 – 23 ) 
 The third stanza describes how Psyche , though a newer Goddess , is better than the other deities . However , she is neglected while the others were worshipped : 
 O latest born and loveliest vision far 
 Of all Olympus ' faded hierarchy ! 
 Fairer than Phoebe 's sapphire @-@ <unk> star , 
 Or Vesper , amorous glow @-@ worm of the sky ; 
 Fairer than these , though temple thou hast none , 
 Nor altar heaped with flowers ; 
 Nor virgin @-@ choir to make delicious moan 
 Upon the midnight hours ; ( lines 24 – 31 ) 
 The previous list of what Psyche lacks in terms of religious worship only describes external symbols of worship . In the fourth stanza , the narrator emphasizes the internal when he describes how he is inspired by Psyche : 
 O brightest ! though too late for antique vows , 
 Too , too late for the fond believing lyre , 
 When holy were the haunted forest boughs , 
 Holy the air , the water , and the fire ; 
 Yet even in these days so far retired 
 From happy pieties , thy lucent fans , 
 <unk> among the faint Olympians , 
 I see , and sing , by my own eyes inspired . ( lines 36 – 43 ) 
 The narrator , inspired by young goddess , becomes her priest . His imagination allows him to join with both the natural and supernatural elements of Psyche , and his form of worship is within himself while " Ode to Psyche " the poem serves as a song in praise of the goddess . The narrator becomes the prophet for Psyche and says in the final stanza : 
 Yes , I will be thy priest , and build a fane 
 In some untrodden region of my mind , 
 Where branched thoughts , new grown with pleasant pain , 
 Instead of pines shall murmur in the wind : ( lines 50 – 53 ) 
 In the conclusion of the poem , the narrator metaphorically says that he will expand his consciousness , which would allow him to better understand both the good and the bad of the world . This will allow the narrator to attain a new sense of inspiration while providing Psyche with a sanctuary : 
 And in the midst of this wide quietness 
 A rosy sanctuary will I dress 
 With the wreathed trellis of a working brain , 
 With buds , and bells , and stars without a name , 
 With all the gardener Fancy e 'er could feign , 
 Who breeding flowers , will never breed the same : 
 And there shall be for thee all soft delight 
 That shadowy thought can win , 
 A bright torch , and a casement ope at night , 
 To let the warm Love in ! ( lines 58 – 67 ) 
 = = Theme = = 
 The moment that Cupid and Psyche are revealed is an example of " Keatsian intensity " as they are neither in a state of separation nor are they united ; they exist in a state somewhere in between in a similar manner to the figures depicted in Keats 's " Ode on a Grecian Urn " . The narrator 's ability to witness the union is unique to Keats 's version of the Psyche myth because the lovers in the original story were covered in darkness . However , the narrator questions if he was able to see them at all or if he was dreaming . This inability of the narrator to know if he was awake is a theme that appears in many of Keats 's odes that followed , including " Ode on Indolence " , " Ode on a Grecian Urn " , and " Ode to a Nightingale " . Regardless of the narrator 's state of consciousness , he is able to relate himself to Cupid as he believes himself to be in love with Psyche , representing the mind . 
 Part of the problem within " Ode to Psyche " is in the narrator 's claim that Psyche was neglected since she became a goddess later than the other Greco @-@ Roman deities . As such , the narrator serves as a prophetic figure who is devoted to the soul . Worship towards the soul is through use of the imagination , an idea that shows the influence of William Wordsworth upon the poem 's themes . In particular , the lines are reminiscent of the description of inspiration and the muse within Wordsworth 's " The Recluse . " To serve Psyche , the narrator of " Ode to Psyche " seeks to worship her by thoroughly exploring the regions of his mind . However , the temple dedicated to the goddess within his mind does not yet exist . 
 This reveals that there is a struggle between the acceptance of imaginative experience that exists only within a small part of the mind . This struggle , according to Walter Evert , has " no relevance to the world of external action and perhaps no truth to offer even the visionary dreamer himself . " However Anthony Hecht looks at the problem in a different way and believes that there must be a connection between the external and internal worlds for the narrator to even face the problem . Regardless , the narrator never states that this worship of Psyche or embracing the imagination would aid mankind , but the poem does rejoice in exercising the imagination . 
 In addition to the theme of dedicating one 's self to the mind , the theme of reception plays heavily upon the poem 's presentation ; Andrew Bennett states that the poem , like all poems , is " ' heard ' both by itself ( and therefore not heard ) and by an audience that reads the poem and ' hears ' it differently " . Bennett implies that the word " wrung " in line one contains a double entendre as it also alludes to the " ringing in the ears " involved with active listening . The poem 's treatment of the reader as a third @-@ party to the conversation between the narrator and the goddess exemplifies the narrative question common among many of Keats 's odes and leads Bennett to question how exactly the reader should regard his place within the poem , or outside of it . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Responding to the poem , Keats 's friend Leigh Hunt declared that " When Mr Keats errs in his poetry , it is from the ill management of the good things , <unk> of ideas . Once or twice , he does so in a taste positively bad , like Marino or Cowley , as in a line in his ' Ode to Psyche ' ... but it is once or twice only , in his present volume . " 
 Robert Bridges , turn of the 19th @-@ century literary critic , wrote " for the sake of the last section ( l . 50 to end ) , tho ' this is open to the objection that the imagery is work 'd up to outface the idea — which is characteristic of Keats ' manner . Yet the extreme beauty quenches every dissatisfaction . The beginning of this ode is not so good , and the middle part is midway in excellence . " Later , T. S. Eliot thought very highly of Keats 's work and wrote " The Odes — especially perhaps the Ode to Psyche — are enough for his reputation . " 
 Kennet Allott , in defending against any possible harsh criticism of " Ode to Psyche " , argues that the poem " is the Cinderella of Keats 's great odes , but it is hard to see why it should be so neglected , and at least two poets imply that the conventional treatment of the poem is shabby and undeserved " . Allott then cites Bridges and Eliot as views that he sympathizes with , and he believes that the poem " is neither <unk> nor the best of odes , but to me it illustrates better than any other Keats 's possession of poetic power in conjunction with what was for him an unusual artistic detachment , besides being a remarkable poem in its own right . This may be another way of saying that it is the most architectural of the odes , as it is certainly the one that culminates most dramatically . " 
 Walter Jackson Bate states that the poem has " always puzzled readers [ ... ] But finding the poem so elusive , we return to it only after we know the others far better . If we had hope to use them as keys , we discover they do not quite fit the lock . Meanwhile they have given us a standard hard to equal . Hence we either feel a disappointment about the ' Ode to Psyche ' or else , remembering the care Keats supposedly gave it , we once more put the poem aside for future consideration . " However , he also states that " The modern , respectful attitude toward this ode is deserved . But the itch for novelty has encouraged a few critics to suggest that the poem , in some dark but fundamental way , has more to it as a whole than do the later odes . " 
 To Harold Bloom , the last lines of Keats 's ode " rivals any as an epitome of the myth @-@ making faculty " . He elaborates further on this when he writes , " The poem Ode to Psyche is unique , and also central , for its art is a natural growth out of nature , based as it is upon a very particular act of consciousness , which Keats arrests in all its concreteness . " 
 = Local Ad = 
 " Local Ad " is the ninth episode of the fourth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's sixty @-@ second episode overall . The episode was written by B. J. Novak , who also acts in the show as Ryan Howard , and directed by Jason Reitman . It originally aired in the United States on October 25 , 2007 on NBC . 
 After a video team is brought to the office to create a commercial for the company , Michael decides that the employees of the Scranton branch of Dunder Mifflin can create a better commercial . While the majority of the staff work on the commercial , Dwight , still depressed from his break @-@ up with Angela , instead chooses to play a computer game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) learns that the Scranton branch 's participation in a Dunder Mifflin television commercial is limited to five seconds of the staff waving at the camera , he dismisses the advertising consultants sent to the branch , and convinces the company 's corporate headquarters to consider an alternative version that he will produce himself . 
 Michael asks Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) to design an animated logo , and she works all night on it . Phyllis Vance 's ( Phyllis Smith ) mission to enlist visiting author Sue Grafton to appear in the ad is unsuccessful . Headed by Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) , a group of employees write and perform a jingle for the commercial , which Michael ultimately rejects . Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) , meanwhile , struggles throughout the day to recall the product name from an advertising jingle that contains the lyrics " Gimme a break . Gimme a break . Break me off a piece of that ... " 
 Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) has largely removed himself to the online virtual world of Second Life . Dwight has created an avatar named Dwight Shelford , also a paper salesman , patterned after his once @-@ perfect real life . He now uses Second Life as an escape from his real @-@ life troubles , even going as far as creating a virtual Second Life , called Second Second Life . Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) , on the other hand , has created an avatar named Jim <unk> , a guitar @-@ playing Philadelphia sportswriter , and enters Second Life in order to spy on Dwight . 
 Dwight has also reluctantly become Andy 's confidante regarding his relationship with Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) , Dwight 's former girlfriend . Dwight 's spirits are lifted when he learns that , during a makeout session with Andy , Angela cried , " Oh , D ! " . Though , Andy is oblivious to the fact that Angela was referring to Dwight . 
 After the corporate headquarters rejects Michael 's ad , the office employees gather at Poor Richard 's Pub to watch the professionally filmed commercial , which Michael refers to as " the world premiere of corporate <unk> . " After the commercial , Jim plays Michael 's version of the ad on the bar 's television set . Over the theme from Chariots of Fire , as Michael narrates " trite catchphrases " , a sheet of paper is depicted making a journey around the world , carrying a variety of messages meaningful to the recipients ; as Pam 's animated whirling sheets of paper coalesce into the company logo to end the ad , the employees as well as the other patrons of the bar show their approval . 
 The episode ends with Andy doing an interview , still trying to recall the product name from the jingle . On the basis that it has to rhyme , he incorrectly concludes that it promotes Fancy Feast cat food . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Local Ad " was the seventh episode of the series written by B. J. Novak , who also acts in the show as Ryan Howard , and the first episode of the series directed by Jason Reitman , who directed the films Juno and Thank You for Smoking . When speaking about his directorial experience with The Office , Reitman stated that " Anyhow , the whole experience was awesome . They ’ re all geniuses over there . I didn ’ t have to contribute much at the end of the day because they ’ re all so on their game . " He also stated that " Weird moment of production design surprise - There 's a three ring binder on Creed 's desk with the logo from the Academy of Tobacco Studies that we created for [ Thank You For ] Smoking . I have no idea how it got there and neither does he . " B.J. Novak 's brother Jesse , a musician , contributed in writing the song that some of the characters sing in the episode . 
 The Second Life scenes in " Local Ad " were produced by Clear Ink of Berkeley , CA , using existing locations within Second Life as well as virtual sets created for the episode . In a study made by IAG Research , the appearance of Second Life in " Local Ad " was rated eighth in the top ten most effective product placements of 2007 . The Office was the only non @-@ reality show to make the list , and Second Life was the only product on the list that did not pay for its placement . In a deleted scene , Toby has an idea for the ad : film it in slow @-@ motion so that it will stand out when the viewer uses his TiVo or other DVR to speed past it . The staff loves the idea , but Michael hates it and won 't consider it , even though Toby reveals he formerly worked in advertising for three years . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Local Ad " received a 5 @.@ 2 Nielsen rating and an 8 % Share . The episode was watched by an estimate audience of 8 @.@ 98 million viewers and achieved a 4 @.@ 7 / 11 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic . This means that 4 @.@ 1 percent of all people aged 18 – 49 viewed the episode , and eleven percent of all people watching television at the time viewed the episode . 
 " Local Ad " received generally favorable reviews from critics . Travis Fickett of IGN gave the episode a favorable review , saying " This episode is a prime example of how The Office is able to do broad comedy while at the same time treating its characters as real people . " Fickett went on to praise the acting of Rainn Wilson as a depressed Dwight , as well as the story 's twist . Fickett stated that " A great twist here is that we think we 're watching Michael pilot a sinking ship as usual , but in fact - the ad is quite good . There 's some clever stuff in there , albeit some of it not exactly professional in its production , but Michael doesn 't do such a bad job . " Like Fickett , Christine Fenno of Entertainment Weekly gave the episode a favorable review . Fenno said that " The premise of this episode , ' Local Ad ' — the Scranton staffers shoot a commercial — was strong , and allowed almost every ensemble member to shine . " Fenno also praised the acting work of Ed Helms as Andy , as well as Steve Carell as Michael . Oscar Dahl , a Senior Writer for BuddyTV , praised the episode , but also felt that the episode 's thirty @-@ minute length created a stark contrast to the previous four episodes ' hour @-@ long run , saying " tonight 's episode felt short . Really short . " 
 For his work on this episode , B. J. Novak was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay – Episodic Comedy , but ultimately failed to win , losing to another episode of The Office , " The Job . " 
 = Edward III of England = 
 Edward III ( 13 November 1312 – 21 June 1377 ) was King of England from 25 January 1327 until his death ; he is noted for his military success and for restoring royal authority after the disastrous and unorthodox reign of his father , Edward II . Edward III transformed the Kingdom of England into one of the most formidable military powers in Europe . His long reign of fifty years was the second longest in medieval England and saw vital developments in legislation and government — in particular the evolution of the English parliament — as well as the ravages of the Black Death . 
 Edward was crowned at age fourteen after his father was deposed by his mother and her lover Roger Mortimer . At age seventeen he led a successful coup against Mortimer , the de facto ruler of the country , and began his personal reign . After a successful campaign in Scotland he declared himself rightful heir to the French throne in 1337 but his claim was denied due to the Salic law . This started what would become known as the Hundred Years ' War . Following some initial setbacks the war went exceptionally well for England ; victories at Crécy and Poitiers led to the highly favourable Treaty of Brétigny . Edward 's later years , however , were marked by international failure and domestic strife , largely as a result of his inactivity and poor health . 
 Edward III was a temperamental man but capable of unusual clemency . He was in many ways a conventional king whose main interest was warfare . Admired in his own time and for centuries after , Edward was denounced as an irresponsible adventurer by later Whig historians such as William Stubbs . This view has been challenged recently and modern historians credit him with some significant achievements . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Edward was born at Windsor Castle on 13 November 1312 , and was often referred to as Edward of Windsor in his early years . The reign of his father , Edward II , was a particularly problematic period of English history . One source of contention was the king 's inactivity , and repeated failure , in the ongoing war with Scotland . Another controversial issue was the king 's exclusive patronage of a small group of royal favourites . The birth of a male heir in 1312 temporarily improved Edward II 's position in relation to the baronial opposition . To bolster further the independent prestige of the young prince , the king had him created Earl of Chester at only twelve days of age . 
 In 1325 , Edward II was faced with a demand from the French king , Charles IV , to perform homage for the English Duchy of Aquitaine . Edward was reluctant to leave the country , as discontent was once again brewing domestically , particularly over his relationship with the favourite Hugh Despenser the Younger . Instead , he had his son Edward created Duke of Aquitaine in his place and sent him to France to perform the homage . The young Edward was accompanied by his mother Isabella , who was the sister of King Charles , and was meant to negotiate a peace treaty with the French . While in France , however , Isabella conspired with the exiled Roger Mortimer to have the king Edward deposed . To build up diplomatic and military support for the venture , Isabella had Prince Edward engaged to the twelve @-@ year @-@ old Philippa of Hainault . An invasion of England was launched and Edward II 's forces deserted him completely . The king was forced to relinquish the throne to his son on 25 January 1327 . The new king was crowned as Edward III on 1 February 1327 . 
 It was not long before the new reign also met with other problems caused by the central position at court of Roger Mortimer , who was now the de facto ruler of England . Mortimer used his power to acquire noble estates and titles , and his unpopularity grew with the humiliating defeat by the Scots at the Battle of Stanhope Park and the ensuing Treaty of Edinburgh – Northampton , signed with the Scots in 1328 . Also the young king came into conflict with his guardian . Mortimer knew his position in relation to the king was precarious and subjected Edward to disrespect . The tension increased after Edward and Philippa , who had married at York Minster on 24 January 1328 , had a son on 15 June 1330 . Eventually , Edward decided to take direct action against Mortimer . Aided by his close companion William Montagu and a small number of other trusted men , Edward took Mortimer by surprise at Nottingham Castle on 19 October 1330 . Mortimer was executed and Edward III 's personal reign began . 
 = = Early reign = = 
 Edward III was not content with the peace agreement made in his name , but the renewal of the war with Scotland originated in private , rather than royal initiative . A group of English magnates known as The Disinherited , who had lost land in Scotland by the peace accord , staged an invasion of Scotland and won a great victory at the Battle of Dupplin Moor in 1332 . They attempted to install Edward Balliol as king of Scotland in David II 's place , but Balliol was soon expelled and was forced to seek the help of Edward III . The English king responded by laying siege to the important border town of Berwick and defeated a large relieving army at the Battle of Halidon Hill . Edward reinstated Balliol on the throne and received a substantial amount of land in southern Scotland . These victories proved hard to sustain , however , as forces loyal to David II gradually regained control of the country . In 1338 , Edward was forced to agree to a truce with the Scots . 
 One reason for the change of strategy towards Scotland was a growing concern for the relationship between England and France . As long as Scotland and France were in an alliance , the English were faced with the prospect of fighting a war on two fronts . The French carried out raids on English coastal towns , leading to rumours in England of a full @-@ scale French invasion . In 1337 , Philip VI confiscated the English king 's duchy of Aquitaine and the county of Ponthieu . Instead of seeking a peaceful resolution to the conflict by paying homage to the French king , the way his father had done , Edward responded by laying claim to the French crown as the grandson of Philip IV . The French , however , invoked the Salic law of succession and rejected his claim . Instead , they upheld the rights of Philip IV 's nephew , King Philip VI ( an agnatic descendant of the House of France ) , thereby setting the stage for the Hundred Years ' War ( see family tree below ) . In the early stages of the war , Edward 's strategy was to build alliances with other Continental princes . In 1338 , Louis IV named Edward vicar @-@ general of the Holy Roman Empire and promised his support . As late as 1373 , the Anglo @-@ Portuguese Treaty of 1373 established an Anglo @-@ Portuguese Alliance . These measures , however , produced few results ; the only major military victory in this phase of the war was the English naval victory at Sluys on 24 June 1340 , which secured English control of the Channel . 
 Meanwhile , the fiscal pressure on the kingdom caused by Edward 's expensive alliances led to discontent at home . The regency council at home was frustrated by the mounting national debt , while the king and his commanders on the Continent were angered by the failure of the government in England to provide sufficient funds . To deal with the situation , Edward himself returned to England , arriving in London unannounced on 30 November 1340 . Finding the affairs of the realm in disorder , he purged the royal administration of a great number of ministers and judges . These measures did not bring domestic stability , however , and a stand @-@ off ensued between the king and John de Stratford , Archbishop of Canterbury , during which Stratford 's relatives Robert Stratford Bishop of Chichester and Henry de Stratford were temporarily stripped of title and imprisoned respectively . Stratford claimed that Edward had violated the laws of the land by arresting royal officers . A certain level of conciliation was reached at the parliament of April 1341 . Here Edward was forced to accept severe limitations to his financial and administrative freedom , in return for a grant of taxation . Yet in October the same year , the king repudiated this statute and Archbishop Stratford was politically ostracised . The extraordinary circumstances of the April parliament had forced the king into submission , but under normal circumstances the powers of the king in medieval England were virtually unlimited , a fact that Edward was able to exploit . 
 Historian Nicholas Rodger called Edward III 's claim to be the " Sovereign of the Seas " into question , arguing there was hardly any Royal Navy before the reign of Henry V ( 1413 – 22 ) . Although Rodger may have made this claim , the reality was that King John had already developed a royal fleet of galleys and had attempted to establish an administration for these ships and ones which were arrested ( privately owned ships pulled into royal / national service ) . Henry III , his successor , continued this work . Notwithstanding the fact that he , along with his predecessor , had hoped to develop a strong and efficient naval administration , their endeavours produced one that was informal and mostly ad hoc . A formal naval administration emerged during Edward 's reign which was composed of lay administrators and headed by William de <unk> , Matthew de Torksey , and John de <unk> successively with them being titled , Clerk of the King 's Ships . Sir Robert de <unk> was the last to fill this position during Edward III 's reign and would have the longest tenure in this position . It was during his tenure that Edward 's naval administration would become a base for what evolved during the reigns of successors such as Henry VIII of England 's Council of Marine and Navy Board and Charles I of England 's Board of Admiralty . Rodger also argues that for much of the fourteenth century , the French had the upper hand , apart from Sluys in 1340 and , perhaps , off Winchelsea in 1350 . Yet , the French never invaded England and France 's King John II died in captivity in England . There was a need for an English navy to play a role in this and to handle other matters , such as the insurrection of the Anglo @-@ Irish lords and acts of piracy . 
 = = Fortunes of war = = 
 By the early 1340s , it was clear that Edward 's policy of alliances was too costly , and yielded too few results . The following years saw more direct involvement by English armies , including in the Breton War of Succession , but these interventions also proved fruitless at first . A major change came in July 1346 , when Edward staged a major offensive , sailing for Normandy with a force of 15 @,@ 000 men . His army sacked the city of Caen , and marched across northern France , to meet up with English forces in Flanders . It was not Edward 's initial intention to engage the French army , but at Crécy , just north of the Somme , he found favourable terrain and decided to fight an army led by Philip VI . On 26 August , the English army defeated a far larger French army in the Battle of Crécy . Shortly after this , on 17 October , an English army defeated and captured King David II of Scotland at the Battle of Neville 's Cross . With his northern borders secured , Edward felt free to continue his major offensive against France , laying siege to the town of Calais . The operation was the greatest English venture of the Hundred Years ' War , involving an army of 35 @,@ 000 men . The siege started on 4 September 1346 , and lasted until the town surrendered on 3 August 1347 . 
 After the fall of Calais , factors outside of Edward 's control forced him to wind down the war effort . In 1348 , the Black Death struck England with full force , killing a third or more of the country 's population . This loss of manpower led to a shortage of farm labour , and a corresponding rise in wages . The great landowners struggled with the shortage of manpower and the resulting inflation in labour cost . To curb the rise in wages , the king and parliament responded with the Ordinance of Labourers in 1349 , followed by the Statute of Labourers in 1351 . These attempts to regulate wages could not succeed in the long run , but in the short term they were enforced with great vigour . All in all , the plague did not lead to a full @-@ scale breakdown of government and society , and recovery was remarkably swift . This was to a large extent thanks to the competent leadership of royal administrators such as Treasurer William Edington and Chief Justice William de <unk> . 
 It was not until the mid @-@ 1350s that military operations on the Continent were resumed on a large scale . In 1356 , Edward 's eldest son , Edward , the Black Prince , won an important victory in the Battle of Poitiers . The greatly outnumbered English forces not only routed the French , but captured the French king , John II and his youngest son , Philip . After a succession of victories , the English held great possessions in France , the French king was in English custody , and the French central government had almost totally collapsed . There has been a historical debate as to whether Edward 's claim to the French crown originally was genuine , or if it was simply a political ploy meant to put pressure on the French government . Regardless of the original intent , the stated claim now seemed to be within reach . Yet a campaign in 1359 , meant to complete the undertaking , was inconclusive . In 1360 , therefore , Edward accepted the Treaty of Brétigny , whereby he renounced his claims to the French throne , but secured his extended French possessions in full sovereignty . 
 = = Later reign = = 
 While Edward 's early reign had been energetic and successful , his later years were marked by inertia , military failure and political strife . The day @-@ to @-@ day affairs of the state had less appeal to Edward than military campaigning , so during the 1360s Edward increasingly relied on the help of his subordinates , in particular William Wykeham . A relative upstart , Wykeham was made Keeper of the Privy Seal in 1363 and Chancellor in 1367 , though due to political difficulties connected with his inexperience , the Parliament forced him to resign the chancellorship in 1371 . Compounding Edward 's difficulties were the deaths of his most trusted men , some from the 1361 – 62 recurrence of the plague . William Montague , Earl of Salisbury , Edward 's companion in the 1330 coup , died as early as 1344 . William de Clinton , who had also been with the king at Nottingham , died in 1354 . One of the earls created in 1337 , William de Bohun , Earl of Northampton , died in 1360 , and the next year Henry of Grosmont , perhaps the greatest of Edward 's captains , succumbed to what was probably plague . Their deaths left the majority of the magnates younger and more naturally aligned to the princes than to the king himself . 
 Increasingly , Edward began to rely on his sons for the leadership of military operations . The king 's second son , Lionel of Antwerp , attempted to subdue by force the largely autonomous Anglo @-@ Irish lords in Ireland . The venture failed , and the only lasting mark he left were the suppressive Statutes of Kilkenny in 1366 . In France , meanwhile , the decade following the Treaty of Brétigny was one of relative tranquillity , but on 8 April 1364 John II died in captivity in England , after unsuccessfully trying to raise his own ransom at home . He was followed by the vigorous Charles V , who enlisted the help of the capable Constable Bertrand du <unk> . In 1369 , the French war started anew , and Edward 's younger son John of Gaunt was given the responsibility of a military campaign . The effort failed , and with the Treaty of Bruges in 1375 , the great English possessions in France were reduced to only the coastal towns of Calais , Bordeaux , and Bayonne . 
 Military failure abroad , and the associated fiscal pressure of constant campaigns , led to political discontent at home . The problems came to a head in the parliament of 1376 , the so @-@ called Good Parliament . The parliament was called to grant taxation , but the House of Commons took the opportunity to address specific grievances . In particular , criticism was directed at some of the king 's closest advisors . Chamberlain William Latimer and Steward of the Household John Neville were dismissed from their positions . Edward 's mistress , Alice Perrers , who was seen to hold far too much power over the ageing king , was banished from court . Yet the real adversary of the Commons , supported by powerful men such as Wykeham and Edmund de Mortimer , Earl of March , was John of Gaunt . Both the king and the Black Prince were by this time incapacitated by illness , leaving Gaunt in virtual control of government . Gaunt was forced to give in to the demands of parliament , but at its next convocation , in 1377 , most of the achievements of the Good Parliament were reversed . 
 Edward himself , however , did not have much to do with any of this ; after around 1375 he played a limited role in the government of the realm . Around 29 September 1376 he fell ill with a large abscess . After a brief period of recovery in February 1377 , the king died of a stroke at Sheen on 21 June . He was succeeded by his ten @-@ year @-@ old grandson , King Richard II , son of the Black Prince , since the Black Prince himself had died on 8 June 1376 . 
 = = Achievements of the reign = = 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 The middle years of Edward 's reign were a period of significant legislative activity . Perhaps the best @-@ known piece of legislation was the Statute of Labourers of 1351 , which addressed the labour shortage problem caused by the Black Death . The statute fixed wages at their pre @-@ plague level and checked peasant mobility by asserting that lords had first claim on their men 's services . In spite of concerted efforts to uphold the statute , it eventually failed due to competition among landowners for labour . The law has been described as an attempt " to legislate against the law of supply and demand " , which made it doomed to fail . Nevertheless , the labour shortage had created a community of interest between the smaller landowners of the House of Commons and the greater landowners of the House of Lords . The resulting measures angered the peasants , leading to the Peasants ' Revolt of 1381 . 
 The reign of Edward III coincided with the so @-@ called Babylonian Captivity of the papacy at Avignon . During the wars with France , opposition emerged in England against perceived injustices by a papacy largely controlled by the French crown . Papal taxation of the English Church was suspected to be financing the nation 's enemies , while the practice of provisions – the Pope providing benefices for clerics – caused resentment in the English population . The statutes of <unk> and <unk> , of 1350 and 1353 respectively , aimed to amend this by banning papal benefices , as well as limiting the power of the papal court over English subjects . The statutes did not , however , sever the ties between the king and the Pope , who were equally dependent upon each other . 
 Other legislation of importance includes the Treason Act of 1351 . It was precisely the harmony of the reign that allowed a consensus on the definition of this controversial crime . Yet the most significant legal reform was probably that concerning the Justices of the Peace . This institution began before the reign of Edward III but , by 1350 , the justices had been given the power not only to investigate crimes and make arrests , but also to try cases , including those of felony . With this , an enduring fixture in the administration of local English justice had been created . 
 = = = Parliament and taxation = = = 
 Parliament as a representative institution was already well established by the time of Edward III , but the reign was nevertheless central to its development . During this period , membership in the English baronage , formerly a somewhat indistinct group , became restricted to those who received a personal summons to parliament . This happened as parliament gradually developed into a bicameral institution , composed of a House of Lords and a House of Commons . Yet it was not in the upper , but in the lower house that the greatest changes took place , with the expanding political role of the Commons . Informative is the Good Parliament , where the Commons for the first time – albeit with noble support – were responsible for precipitating a political crisis . In the process , both the procedure of impeachment and the office of the Speaker were created . Even though the political gains were of only temporary duration , this parliament represented a watershed in English political history . 
 The political influence of the Commons originally lay in their right to grant taxes . The financial demands of the Hundred Years ' War were enormous , and the king and his ministers tried different methods of covering the expenses . The king had a steady income from crown lands , and could also take up substantial loans from Italian and domestic financiers . To finance warfare on Edward III 's scale , however , the king had to resort to taxation of his subjects . Taxation took two primary forms : levy and customs . The levy was a grant of a proportion of all moveable property , normally a tenth for towns and a fifteenth for farmland . This could produce large sums of money , but each such levy had to be approved by parliament , and the king had to prove the necessity . The customs therefore provided a welcome supplement , as a steady and reliable source of income . An " ancient duty " on the export of wool had existed since 1275 . Edward I had tried to introduce an additional duty on wool , but this unpopular <unk> , or " unjust exaction " , was soon abandoned . Then , from 1336 onwards , a series of schemes aimed at increasing royal revenues from wool export were introduced . After some initial problems and discontent , it was agreed through the Ordinance of the Staple of 1353 that the new customs should be approved by parliament , though in reality they became permanent . 
 Through the steady taxation of Edward III 's reign , parliament – and in particular the Commons – gained political influence . A consensus emerged that in order for a tax to be just , the king had to prove its necessity , it had to be granted by the community of the realm , and it had to be to the benefit of that community . In addition to imposing taxes , parliament would also present petitions for redress of grievances to the king , most often concerning misgovernment by royal officials . This way the system was beneficial for both parties . Through this process the commons , and the community they represented , became increasingly politically aware , and the foundation was laid for the particular English brand of constitutional monarchy . 
 = = = Chivalry and national identity = = = 
 Central to Edward III 's policy was reliance on the higher nobility for purposes of war and administration . While his father had regularly been in conflict with a great portion of his peerage , Edward III successfully created a spirit of camaraderie between himself and his greatest subjects . Both Edward I and Edward II had been limited in their policy towards the nobility , allowing the creation of few new peerages during the sixty years preceding Edward III 's reign . The young king reversed this trend when , in 1337 , as a preparation for the imminent war , he created six new earls on the same day . At the same time , Edward expanded the ranks of the peerage upwards , by introducing the new title of duke for close relatives of the king . Furthermore , Edward bolstered the sense of community within this group by the creation of the Order of the Garter , probably in 1348 . A plan from 1344 to revive the Round Table of King Arthur never came to fruition , but the new order carried connotations from this legend by the circular shape of the garter . Polydore Vergil tells of how the young Joan of Kent , Countess of Salisbury – allegedly the king 's favourite at the time – accidentally dropped her garter at a ball at Calais . King Edward responded to the ensuing ridicule of the crowd by tying the garter around his own knee with the words <unk> soit qui mal y pense – shame on him who thinks ill of it . 
 This reinforcement of the aristocracy must be seen in conjunction with the war in France , as must the emerging sense of national identity . Just as the war with Scotland had done , the fear of a French invasion helped strengthen a sense of national unity , and nationalise the aristocracy that had been largely Anglo @-@ Norman since the Norman conquest . Since the time of Edward I , popular myth suggested that the French planned to extinguish the English language , and as his grandfather had done , Edward III made the most of this scare . As a result , the English language experienced a strong revival ; in 1362 , a Statute of Pleading ordered the English language to be used in law courts , and the year after , Parliament was for the first time opened in English . At the same time , the vernacular saw a revival as a literary language , through the works of William Langland , John Gower and especially The Canterbury Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer . Yet the extent of this Anglicisation must not be exaggerated . The statute of 1362 was in fact written in the French language and had little immediate effect , and parliament was opened in that language as late as 1377 . The Order of the Garter , though a distinctly English institution , included also foreign members such as John IV , Duke of Brittany and Sir Robert of Namur . Edward III – himself bilingual – viewed himself as legitimate king of both England and France , and could not show preferential treatment for one part of his domains over another . 
 = = Assessment and character = = 
 Edward III enjoyed unprecedented popularity in his own lifetime , and even the troubles of his later reign were never blamed directly on the king himself . Edward 's contemporary Jean Froissart wrote in his Chronicles that " His like had not been seen since the days of King Arthur " . This view persisted for a while but , with time , the image of the king changed . The Whig historians of a later age preferred constitutional reform to foreign conquest and discredited Edward for ignoring his responsibilities to his own nation . In the words of Bishop Stubbs : 
 Edward III was not a statesman , though he possessed some qualifications which might have made him a successful one . He was a warrior ; ambitious , unscrupulous , selfish , extravagant and ostentatious . His obligations as a king sat very lightly on him . He felt himself bound by no special duty , either to maintain the theory of royal supremacy or to follow a policy which would benefit his people . Like Richard I , he valued England primarily as a source of supplies . 
 — William Stubbs , The Constitutional History of England 
 Influential as Stubbs was , it was long before this view was challenged . In a 1960 article , titled " Edward III and the Historians " , May McKisack pointed out the teleological nature of Stubbs ' judgement . A medieval king could not be expected to work towards the future ideal of a parliamentary monarchy ; rather his role was a pragmatic one — to maintain order and solve problems as they arose . At this , Edward III excelled . Edward had also been accused of endowing his younger sons too liberally and thereby promoting dynastic strife culminating in the Wars of the Roses . This claim was rejected by K.B. McFarlane , who argued that this was not only the common policy of the age , but also the best . Later biographers of the king such as Mark Ormrod and Ian Mortimer have followed this historiographical trend . However , the older negative view has not completely disappeared ; as recently as 2001 , Norman Cantor described Edward III as an " avaricious and sadistic thug " and a " destructive and merciless force . " 
 From what is known of Edward 's character , he could be impulsive and temperamental , as was seen by his actions against Stratford and the ministers in 1340 / 41 . At the same time , he was well known for his clemency ; Mortimer 's grandson was not only absolved , but came to play an important part in the French wars , and was eventually made a Knight of the Garter . Both in his religious views and his interests , Edward was a conventional man . His favourite pursuit was the art of war and , in this , he conformed to the medieval notion of good kingship . As a warrior he was so successful that one modern military historian has described him as the greatest general in English history . He seems to have been unusually devoted to his wife , Queen Philippa . Much has been made of Edward 's sexual licentiousness , but there is no evidence of any infidelity on the king 's part before Alice Perrers became his lover , and by that time the queen was already terminally ill . This devotion extended to the rest of the family as well ; in contrast to so many of his predecessors , Edward never experienced opposition from any of his five adult sons . 
 = = Issue = = 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = = Relationship to French monarchs = = = 
 Edward 's claim on the French throne was based on his descent from King Philip IV of France , through his mother Isabella . 
 = Peter Martyr Vermigli = 
 Peter Martyr Vermigli ( 8 September 1499 – 12 November 1562 ) was an Italian @-@ born Reformed theologian . His early work as a reformer in Catholic Italy and decision to flee for Protestant northern Europe influenced many other Italians to convert and flee as well . In England , he influenced the Edwardian Reformation , including the Eucharistic service of the 1552 Book of Common Prayer . He was considered an authority on the Eucharist among the Reformed churches , and engaged in controversies on the subject by writing treatises . Vermigli 's Loci Communes , a compilation of excerpts from his biblical commentaries organized by the topics of systematic theology , became a standard Reformed theological textbook . 
 Born in Florence , Vermigli entered a religious order and was appointed to influential posts as abbot and prior . He came in contact with leaders of the Italian spirituali reform movement and read Protestant theologians such as Martin Bucer and Ulrich Zwingli . Through reading these works and studying the Bible and the church fathers , he came to accept Protestant beliefs about salvation and the Eucharist . To satisfy his conscience and avoid persecution by the Roman Inquisition , he fled Italy for Protestant northern Europe . He ultimately arrived in Strasbourg where he taught on the Old Testament of the Bible under Bucer . English reformer Thomas Cranmer invited him to take an influential post at Oxford University where he continued to teach on the Bible . He also defended his Eucharistic beliefs against Catholic proponents of transubstantiation in a public disputation . Vermigli was forced to leave England on the accession of the Catholic Queen Mary . As a Marian exile he returned to Strasbourg and his former teaching position . Vermigli 's beliefs regarding the Eucharist and predestination clashed with those of leading Lutherans in Strasbourg , so he transferred to Reformed Zürich where he taught until his death in 1562 . 
 Vermigli 's best @-@ known theological contribution was defending the Reformed doctrine of the Eucharist against Catholics and Lutherans . Contrary to the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation , Vermigli did not believe that the bread and wine are changed into Christ 's body and blood . He also disagreed with the Lutheran view that Christ 's body is ubiquitous and so physically present at the Eucharist . Instead , Vermigli taught that Christ remains in Heaven even though he is offered to those who partake of the Eucharist and received by believers . Vermigli is also notable for developing a strong doctrine of double predestination independently of John Calvin . Vermigli believed that God 's will includes his choice to condemn all who are not chosen for salvation . His belief is similar but not identical to Calvin 's . Vermigli 's political theology was important in the Elizabethan religious settlement ; he provided theological justification for Royal Supremacy , the doctrine that the king of a territory , rather than any ecclesiastical authority , rules the church . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life ( 1499 – 1525 ) = = = 
 Vermigli was born in Florence , Italy , on 8 September 1499 to Stefano di Antonio Vermigli , a wealthy shoemaker , and Maria <unk> . He was christened Piero Mariano the following day . He was the eldest of three children ; his sister <unk> Antonio was born in 1501 and his brother Antonio Lorenzo Romulo was born in 1504 . His mother taught him Latin before enrolling him in a school for children of noble Florentines . She died in 1511 , when Piero was twelve . Vermigli was attracted to the Catholic priesthood from an early age . In 1514 he became a novice at the Badia <unk> , a monastery of the Canons Regular of the Lateran . The Lateran Canons were one of several institutions born out of a fifteenth @-@ century religious reform movement . They emphasized strict discipline and moved from house to house rather than remaining in one place . They also sought to provide leadership in urban areas . Peter 's sister followed him into the monastic life , becoming a nun the same year . 
 On completing his novitiate in 1518 , Vermigli took the name Peter Martyr after the thirteenth @-@ century Dominican Saint Peter of Verona . The Lateran Congregation had recently decided that promising young ordinands should be sent to the monastery of Saint John of <unk> in Padua to study Aristotle , so Vermigli was sent there . The University of Padua , with which Saint John of <unk> was loosely affiliated , was a very prestigious institution at the time . At Padua , Vermigli received a thorough training in <unk> scholasticism and an appreciation for Augustine and Christian humanism . Vermigli was determined to read Aristotle in his original language despite the lack of Greek teachers , so he taught himself . He also made the acquaintance of prominent reform @-@ minded theologians Pietro Bembo , Reginald Pole , and Marcantonio Flaminio . 
 = = = Early Italian ministry ( 1525 – 36 ) = = = 
 Vermigli was ordained in 1525 and probably received his Doctor of Divinity around that time . The chapter @-@ general of the Congregation elected him to the office of public preacher in 1526 . His first series of sermons was in Brescia later that year . He then preached for three years , travelling around northern and central Italy . Unlike the practice of other preaching orders which usually only preached at Lent and Advent , the Augustinians preached year @-@ round . He also gave lectures on the Bible as well as Homer in Lateran Congregation houses . 
 In 1530 Vermigli was appointed vicar of the monastery at San Giovanni in Monte , Bologna . There he learned Hebrew from a local Jewish doctor so he could read the Old Testament scriptures in their original language . It was uncommon but not unheard of for clergy to learn Hebrew , even among those who sought deeper biblical study . In 1533 the chapter @-@ general elected Vermigli abbot of the two Lateran monasteries in Spoleto . At this post he was also responsible for two convents . The discipline in the monastic houses in Vermigli 's care had been lax before his arrival , and they had become a source of scandal in Spoleto . There was also a history of power struggle between the Bishop of Spoleto , Francesco <unk> , and the <unk> abbacy , to the point that the bishop had excommunicated Vermigli 's predecessor , only to be overturned by Rome . Vermigli brought order to his houses and mended the relationship with the bishop . 
 The chapter @-@ general re @-@ elected Vermigli to the <unk> abbacy in 1534 and again in 1535 , but he was not elected to lead any house the following year . He may have been identified as a promising reformer who could help with reform efforts in higher places . Vermigli was in contact with the Catholic leaders working on the <unk> de <unk> ecclesia , an internal report on potential reforms of the Church commissioned by Pope Paul III . He may have even travelled to Rome to assist in writing it . 
 = = = First controversial preaching and ministry in Lucca ( 1537 – 41 ) = = = 
 The Congregation elected Vermigli abbot of the monastery at San Pietro ad Aram , Naples in 1537 . There he became acquainted with Juan de Valdés , a leader of the spirituali movement . Valdés introduced Vermigli to the writings of Protestant reformers . Toward the end of his time in Naples , he read Martin Bucer 's commentaries on the Gospels and the Psalms , and Zwingli 's De vera et <unk> <unk> . Reading these works was an act of ecclesiastical defiance , but not an uncommon one in reformist circles . Vermigli seems to have slowly moved in a Protestant direction primarily through study of the Bible and the Church fathers , especially Augustine . He probably read Protestant literature critically ; it was common for those in reform @-@ minded circles to do so while remaining in the Catholic Church . Vermigli embraced the Protestant doctrine of justification by faith alone during this time , and he had probably rejected the traditional Catholic view of the sacraments . Vermigli also seems to have influenced Valdés . Scholars believe that Valdés 's strong doctrine of double predestination , that God has chosen some people for salvation and others for damnation , was learned from Vermigli . Vermigli in turn had acquired it from his study of Gregory of Rimini at Padua . 
 Vermigli 's move away from orthodox Catholic belief became apparent in 1539 when he preached on 1 Corinthians 3 : 9 – 17 , a passage commonly used as proof of the doctrine of purgatory . Vermigli did not take this view in his preaching , though he did not openly deny the existence of purgatory . Gaetano da <unk> , an opponent of the spirituali , reported his suspicions of Vermigli to the Spanish viceroy of Naples Don Pedro de Toledo , who prohibited Vermigli 's preaching . The prohibition was removed on Vermigli 's appeal to Rome , with which he received some help from powerful friends he had made in Padua , such as Cardinals Pole and Bembo . Despite this controversy , Vermigli continued to rise in the Lateran Congregation . He was made one of four visitors by the chapter @-@ general in 1540 . The visitors assisted the rector general by inspecting the Congregation 's religious houses . 
 In 1541 the Congregation elected Vermigli to the important post of prior of Basilica of San Frediano in Lucca . The prior at San Frediano exercised some episcopal authority over half the city , as well as control of the Lateran 's religious houses . As at his earlier post in Spoleto , the monks of the San Frediano monastery as well as the clergy of Lucca were known for moral laxity , which led to an openness to the new Lutheran religion there . Vermigli saw his task as one of education as well as moral correction . He set up a college based on humanist principles of education and modeled on the newly founded St John 's College , Cambridge , and Corpus Christi College , Oxford . Instruction was in Greek , Latin , and Hebrew . Among the professors were the humanists Immanuel Tremellius , Paolo <unk> , Celio <unk> <unk> , and Girolamo Zanchi , all of whom would later convert to Protestantism . The Congregation recognized Vermigli 's work by appointing him to a disciplinary commission of seven canons in May 1542 . 
 = = = Flight from Italy and first Strasbourg professorship ( 1542 – 47 ) = = = 
 Vermigli was widely respected and very cautious . He was able to continue his reform efforts in Lucca without any suspicion of unorthodox views despite a papal meeting there with the Emperor in 1541 . His eventual downfall was caused by two of his followers , one of whom openly questioned papal authority and another who celebrated a Protestant form of the Eucharist . The reconstitution of the Roman Inquisition in 1542 may have been in part a response to fear that Lucca and other cities would defect from the Catholic Church . The authorities of the Republic of Lucca began to fear that their political independence from the Holy Roman Empire was at stake if their city continued to be viewed as a Protestant haven . Bans on Protestant books heretofore ignored were enforced , religious feasts which had been dropped were reinstated , and religious processions were scheduled to assure Rome of Lucca 's loyalty . 
 Vermigli was summoned to a Chapter Extraordinary of the Lateran Congregation , and his friends warned him that he had powerful adversaries . These increasingly foreboding events contributed to his decision to ignore the summons and flee , but he was finally persuaded by his conscience against the Masses he was bound to perform . Vermigli fled Lucca for Pisa on 12 August 1542 by horse with three of his canons . There he celebrated a Protestant form of the Eucharist for the first time . When he stopped in Florence , staying in Badia <unk> where he had entered religious life , Vermigli learned that Bernardino Ochino had arrived there . Vermigli convinced Ochino , a popular preacher with Protestant leanings , to flee Italy as well . On 25 August Vermigli travelled to Zürich by way of Ferrara and Verona . 
 Once Vermigli arrived in Zürich he was questioned regarding his theological views by several Protestant leaders including Heinrich Bullinger , Konrad <unk> , and Rudolph <unk> . They eventually determined that he could be allowed to teach Protestant theology , but there was no position vacant for him to fill there or in Basel , where he went next . In a letter to his former congregation in Lucca , he explained his motives for leaving and also expressed discouragement at not being able to find a post . Basler humanist Bonifacius <unk> assisted him with money , and reformer Oswald <unk> recommended him to Martin Bucer in Strasbourg , with whose writings Vermigli was already familiar . Vermigli moved to Strasbourg and became a close personal friend and ally of Bucer , who granted him the chair of Old Testament at the Senior School , succeeding Wolfgang Capito . He began by lecturing on the minor prophets , followed by Lamentations , Genesis , Exodus , and Leviticus . Vermigli was delighted to be able to teach from the original @-@ language text of the Old Testament , as many of his students could read Hebrew . He was well @-@ liked by his students and fellow scholars . Vermigli was known for precision , simplicity , and clarity of speech in contrast to Bucer 's propensity for digressions which sometimes left his students lost . 
 Two of Vermigli 's former colleagues in Lucca — <unk> and Tremellius — would join him in Strasbourg . In 1544 he was elected canon of St. Thomas Church , Strasbourg . In 1545 Vermigli married his first wife , Catherine Dammartin , a former nun from Metz . Catherine knew no Italian , and Peter very little German , so it is assumed that they conversed in Latin . 
 = = = England ( 1547 – 53 ) = = = 
 Edward VI acceded to the English throne in 1547 and the Protestant reformers there hoped to take the opportunity to more thoroughly reform the Church of England . Archbishop Thomas Cranmer invited Vermigli and Ochino to assist in the effort . In addition , the victory of Catholic Holy Roman Emperor Charles V in the Schmalkaldic War and the resulting Augsburg Interim led to a hostile environment for Protestants in Germany . Vermigli accepted the invitation in November and sailed with Ochino to England . In 1548 , he replaced Richard Smyth , becoming the second Regius Professor of Divinity at Oxford . This was a very influential post at a university which had been slow to accept reform . 
 On arriving in Oxford , Vermigli began lecturing on 1 Corinthians , denouncing Catholic doctrines of purgatory , clerical celibacy , and lenten fasting . He then spoke against the Catholic doctrine of the Eucharist , the most sensitive area of disagreement between Protestants and Catholics in England at the time . Conservative faculty , led by Smyth , challenged Vermigli to defend his views in a formal disputation . Smyth fled to St Andrews and finally to Leuven before the disputation could be held , so three Catholic divines , William Tresham , William <unk> and Morgan Phillips , stepped forward to take his place . The disputation was held in 1549 before Richard Cox , the University Chancellor and a firm Protestant . It focused on the doctrine of transubstantiation , with Vermigli 's opponents arguing for it and him against . Chancellor Cox made it obvious that he considered Vermigli to have the better argument , but did not formally declare a winner . The disputation put Vermigli at the forefront of debates over the nature of the Eucharist . 
 In 1549 , a series of uprisings known as the Prayer Book Rebellion forced Vermigli to leave Oxford and take up residence at Lambeth Palace with Cranmer . The rebellion involved conservative opposition to a vernacular liturgy , which was imposed with the Book of Common Prayer at Pentecost in 1549 . Rioters in the streets of Oxford threatened Vermigli with death . At Lambeth , Vermigli assisted Cranmer by helping write sermons against the rebellion . After some time he returned to Oxford , where he was made first canon of Christ Church in January 1551 . Vermigli , the first married priest at Oxford , caused controversy by bringing his wife into his rooms overlooking Fish Street at the Great Quadrangle . His windows were smashed several times until he moved to a location in the cloisters , where he built a fortified stone study . 
 Vermigli became deeply involved in English church politics . In 1550 , he and Martin Bucer provided recommendations to Cranmer for additional changes to the Book of Common Prayer 's Eucharistic liturgy . Vermigli supported the church 's position in the <unk> controversy , over whether bishop John Hooper should be forced to wear a surplice . Vermigli agreed with Hooper 's desire to rid the church of elaborate garments , but he did not believe they were strictly prohibited . He advised Hooper to respect the authority of his superiors . Vermigli was probably instrumental in convincing Hooper to drop his opposition in February 1551 . In October 1551 he participated in a commission to rewrite the canon law of England . In the Winter he assisted in the writing of a draft set of such laws , which was published by John Foxe as <unk> legum <unk> in 1552 . 
 King Edward died in 1553 , followed by the accession of Mary I of England , who opposed the Protestant reformers . Vermigli was placed under house arrest for six months , and his Catholic opponents at Oxford would likely have had him executed , as Cranmer eventually was in 1556 . Despite this risk , he agreed to a public disputation with Cranmer against the new Catholic establishment , but this never came to fruition because Cranmer was imprisoned . Vermigli was able to receive permission from the Privy Council to leave England , and was advised by Cranmer to do so . 
 Vermigli 's wife , Catherine , had become well known in Oxford for her piety and ministry to expectant mothers . She also enjoyed carving faces into plum stones . She had died childless in the February before Vermigli left . Soon after Vermigli 's departure , Cardinal Pole had her disinterred and thrown on a dungheap . Following the accession of Protestant Queen Elizabeth in 1558 , she was re @-@ interred with the relics of Saint <unk> in Christ Church Cathedral . 
 = = = Strasbourg and Zürich ( 1553 – 62 ) = = = 
 Vermigli arrived in Strasbourg in October 1553 , where he was restored to his position at the Senior School and began lecturing on Judges as well as Aristotle 's Nicomachean Ethics . Vermigli often gathered with other Marian exiles for study and prayer in his home . His lectures on Judges often addressed the political issues relevant for the exiles , such as the right to resist a tyrant . Since Vermigli 's departure and the death of Bucer in 1551 , Lutheranism had gained influence in Strasbourg under the leadership of Johann Marbach . Vermigli had been asked to sign both the Augsburg Confession and the Wittenberg Concord as a condition of being reinstalled as professor . He was willing to sign the Augsburg Confession , but not the Concordat , which affirmed a bodily presence of Christ in the Eucharist . He was retained and reappointed anyway , but controversy over the Eucharist as well as Vermigli 's strong doctrine of double predestination continued with the Lutherans . Another professor in Strasbourg , Girolamo Zanchi , who had converted to Protestantism while under Vermigli in Lucca , shared Vermigli 's convictions regarding the Eucharist and predestination . Zanchi and Vermigli became friends and allies . Vermigli 's increasing alienation from the Lutheran establishment led him in 1556 to accept an offer from Heinrich Bullinger to teach at the Carolinum school in Zürich . John Jewel , a fellow Marian exile , came along with him . 
 In Zürich , Vermigli succeeded Konrad <unk> as the chair of Hebrew , a position he would hold until his death . He married his second wife , Catarina <unk> of Brescia , Italy , in 1559 . Vermigli was able to share his teaching duties with fellow <unk> Theodore Bibliander , allowing him time to study and prepare the notes from his previous lectures for publication . He began lecturing on the books of Samuel and Kings . While in Zürich , Vermigli declined invitations to desirable positions in Geneva , Heidelberg , and England . 
 Vermigli 's Eucharistic views were accepted in Zürich , but he ran into controversy over his doctrine of double predestination . Similarly to John Calvin , Vermigli believed that in some way God wills the damnation of those not chosen for salvation . Vermigli attempted to avoid confrontation over the issue , but Bibliander began to openly attack him in 1557 , at one point allegedly challenging him to a duel with a double @-@ edged axe . Bibliander held the Erasmian view that God only <unk> that those who believe in him will be saved , not the salvation of any individual . Reformed theologians during this time held a variety of beliefs about predestination , and Bullinger 's position is ambiguous , but they agreed that God <unk> and unconditionally chooses whom to save . They believed salvation is not based on any characteristic of a person , including their faith . Bullinger and the Zürich church did not necessarily agree with Vermigli 's double <unk> view , but Bibliander 's view was deemed unallowable . He was dismissed in 1560 , in part to assure other Reformed churches of the Zürich church 's orthodoxy . Vermigli was involved in <unk> controversy again when Zanchi , who had remained in Strasbourg when Vermigli left for Zürich , was accused of heretical teachings on the Eucharist and predestination by the Lutheran Johann Marbach . Vermigli was selected to write the official judgement of the Zürich church on the matter in a statement signed by Bullinger and other leaders December 1561 . His affirmation of a strong doctrine of predestination represented the opinion of the Zürich church as a whole . 
 Vermigli attended the abortive Colloquy at Poissy in the Summer of 1561 with Theodore Beza , a conference held in France with the intention of reconciling Catholics and Protestants . He was able to converse with queen mother of France Catherine de 'Medici in her native Italian . He contributed a speech on the Eucharist , arguing that Jesus ' words " this is my body " at the Last Supper were figurative rather than literal . Vermigli 's health was already declining when he succumbed to an epidemic fever in 1562 . He died 12 November 1562 in his Zürich home , attended by physician Conrad Gesner . He was buried in the <unk> cathedral , where his successor Josias <unk> gave a funeral oration , which was published and is an important source for Vermigli 's later biographies . Vermigli had had two children by his second wife , Caterina , while he was alive , but they did not survive infancy . Four months after his death she bore him a daughter , Maria . 
 = = Works = = 
 Vermigli is best known for the Loci Communes ( Latin for " commonplaces " ) , a collection of the topical discussions scattered throughout his biblical commentaries . The Loci Communes was compiled by Huguenot minister Robert Masson and first published in 1576 , fourteen years after Vermigli 's death . Vermigli had apparently expressed a desire to have such a book published , and it was urged along by the suggestion of Theodore Beza . Masson followed the pattern of John Calvin 's Institutes of the Christian Religion to organize it . Fifteen editions of the Loci Communes between 1576 and 1656 spread Vermigli 's influence among Reformed Protestants . Anthony Marten translated the Loci Communes into English in 1583 , adding to it considerably . 
 Vermigli published commentaries on I Corinthians ( 1551 ) , Romans ( 1558 ) , and Judges ( 1561 ) during his lifetime . He was criticized by his colleagues in Strasbourg for withholding his lectures on books of the Bible for years rather than sending them to be published . Calling his lecture notes on Genesis , Exodus , Leviticus and the Minor Prophets " brief and hasty annotations " , he found it difficult to find time to prepare them for publication . His colleagues edited and published some of his remaining works on the Bible after his death : prayers on the Psalms ( 1564 ) and commentaries on Kings ( 1566 ) , Genesis ( 1569 ) , and Lamentations ( 1629 ) . Vermigli followed the humanist emphasis on seeking the original meaning of scripture , as opposed to the often fanciful and arbitrary allegorical readings of the medieval exegetical tradition . He occasionally adopted an allegorical reading to interpret the Old Testament as having to do with Christ <unk> , but he did not utilize the quadriga method of medieval biblical interpretation , where each passage has four levels of meaning . Vermigli 's command of Hebrew , as well as his knowledge of rabbinic literature , surpassed that of most of his contemporaries , including Calvin , Luther , and Zwingli . 
 Vermigli published an account of his disputation with Oxford Catholics over the Eucharist in 1549 , along with a treatise further explaining his position . The disputation largely dealt with the doctrine of transubstantiation , which Vermigli strongly opposed , but the treatise was able to put forward Vermigli 's own Eucharistic theology . Vermigli 's Eucharistic views , as expressed in the disputation and treatise , were influential in the changes to the Book of Common Prayer of 1552 . Vermigli weighed in again on Eucharistic controversy in England in 1559 . His Defense Against Gardiner was in reply to Stephen Gardiner 's 1552 and 1554 <unk> <unk> , itself a reply to the late Thomas Cranmer 's work . At 821 folio pages , it was the longest work on the subject published during the Reformation period . 
 Vermigli 's Eucharistic polemical writing was initially directed against Catholics , but beginning in 1557 he began to involve himself in debates with Lutherans . Many Lutherans during this time argued that Christ 's body and blood were physically present in the Eucharist because they are ubiquitous , or everywhere . In 1561 , Johannes Brenz published a work defending such a view , and Vermigli 's friends convinced him to write a response . The result , the Dialogue on the Two Natures in Christ , was a written in the form of a dialogue between <unk> ( " Boundary Setter " ) , a defender of the Reformed doctrine that Christ 's body is physically located in Heaven , and <unk> ( " Everywhere " ) , whose speeches are largely taken directly from Brenz 's work . Brenz published a response in 1562 , to which <unk> began to prepare a rebuttal , but he died before he was able to complete it . 
 = = Theology = = 
 Vermigli was primarily a teacher of scripture rather than a systematic theologian , but his lasting influence is mostly associated with his doctrine of the Eucharist . This can be explained by the close relationship he saw between exegesis of scripture and theological reflection . Vermigli 's method of biblical commentary , similar to that of Martin Bucer , was to include extended discussions of doctrinal topics treated by the biblical texts . Like other Protestants , he believed scripture alone held supreme authority in establishing truth . Nevertheless , he was familiar with the church fathers to a higher degree than many of his contemporaries , and he constantly referred to them . He saw value in the fathers because they had discovered insights into the scriptures that he might not have found , and because many of his Catholic opponents placed great weight on arguments from patristic authority . Often , though , he used the fathers as support for interpretations he had already reached on his own and was not concerned when his interpretation had no patristic precedent . 
 Vermigli is best known for his polemics against the Catholic doctrine of transubstantiation and for the Reformed doctrine of " sacramental presence " . He argued that transubstantiation , the belief that the substance of bread and wine are changed into Christ 's body and blood , was not based on any argument from scripture . He also argued on the basis of Chalcedonian Christology , that because Christ retained his divine nature when he became man ( the divine nature was added to the human nature rather than his human nature being changed ) , the substance of the bread and wine remain the same rather than being changed into the substance of Christ 's body and blood . Finally , he used the analogy of the believer 's union with Christ against the idea of transubstantiation . Because the believer retains their human nature even though God has joined them with Christ , it follows that the Eucharistic elements do not need to be transformed to be Christ 's body . Instead of the substance of the elements changing into Christ 's flesh , Vermigli emphasized the action of the sacrament as an instrument through which Christ is offered to the <unk> . He also disagreed with the Anabaptist belief that the Eucharist is simply symbolic or figurative , a view called <unk> or tropism . 
 Vermigli did not see predestination as central to his theological system , but it became associated with him because of controversies in which he became entangled . Vermigli developed his doctrine independently of John Calvin , and before Calvin published it in his 1559 Institutes of the Christian Religion . Vermigli saw God as sovereign over every event , and believed that all things , including evil , were used by him to accomplish his will . Nevertheless , Vermigli did not hold that humans are compelled to good or evil actions . Vermigli held that God had chosen some people for salvation on the basis of grace or unmerited favor alone , with no consideration for any good or evil characteristics , a view referred to as " unconditional election " . Vermigli also believed that God passed over the <unk> , those who were not elected to salvation . He saw this as included in the will of God , but different in character from the decision to choose the elect for salvation . Because all people have fallen into sin , the <unk> will of God treats them as by @-@ nature fallen and deserving of damnation . Vermigli 's formulation of reprobation as within God 's decree while distinct from his saving election was slightly different from Calvin 's . Calvin saw predestination to salvation and reprobation as two sides of a single decree . Vermigli 's doctrine was to prove more influential in the Reformed confessions . 
 Vermigli 's biblical writings frequently address political matters . He followed the Aristotelian view that political authority is instituted to promote virtue , and that this includes religion as the chief virtue . Vermigli defended the standard English Protestant doctrine of Royal Supremacy , that kings , so long as they obey God , have the right to rule the church in their land , while Christ is the only head of the universal church . He denied the idea that the pope or any other ecclesiastical authority could exercise authority over a civil ruler such as the king , an important issue at the time given the conflicts between the pope and Henry VIII at the beginning of the English Reformation . While Vermigli charged the civil magistrate with enforcing religious duties , he followed Augustine 's distinction in the City of God between the spiritual sphere ( in Vermigli 's words the " inward motions of the mind " ) and the " outward discipline " of society . The civil magistrate 's authority is only on external matters rather than inward and spiritual religious devotion . Vermigli 's theological justification for Royal Supremacy was used by the framers of the 1559 Elizabethan Settlement , the imposition of Protestant worship based on the Book of Common Prayer as the state religion . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Vermigli 's leadership in Lucca left it arguably the most thoroughly Protestant city in Italy . The Inquisition led many of these Protestants to flee , creating a significant population of Protestant refugees in Geneva . Several important leaders in the Reformation can also be tied to Vermigli 's work in Lucca , including Girolamo Zanchi and Bernardino Ochino . 
 Scholars have increasingly recognized the importance of figures other than John Calvin and Huldrych Zwingli in the early formation of the Reformed tradition . Richard Muller , a chief authority on the development of this movement , has argued that Vermigli , Wolfgang Musculus , and Heinrich Bullinger were as influential if not more influential than Calvin on the development of Reformed theology in the sixteenth century . Vermigli was a transitional figure between the Reformation period of and the period known as Reformed orthodoxy . In the Reformed orthodox period , the theology first articulated by Reformation figures was codified and systematized . Theologians increasingly resorted to the methods of scholastic theology and the tradition of <unk> . Vermigli was the first of the Reformed scholastic theologians , and he influenced later scholastics Theodore Beza and Girolamo Zanchi . 
 Vermigli had a profound influence on the English Reformation through his relationship with Thomas Cranmer . Before his contact with Vermigli , Cranmer held Lutheran Eucharistic views . Vermigli seems to have convinced Cranmer to adopt a Reformed view , which changed the course of the English Reformation since Cranmer was primarily responsible for revisions to the Book of Common Prayer and writing the Forty @-@ two Articles . Vermigli had a direct role in the modifications of the Book of Common Prayer of 1552 . He is also believed to have contributed to , if not written , the article on predestination found in the Forty @-@ two Articles of Religion of 1553 . In Elizabethan Oxford and Cambridge , Vermigli 's theology was arguably more influential than that of Calvin . His political theology in particular shaped the Elizabethan religious settlement and his authority was constantly invoked in the controversies of this period . 
 Various of Vermigli 's writings were printed about 110 times between 1550 and 1650 . The 1562 Loci Communes became a standard textbook in Reformed theological education . He was popular especially with English readers of theology in the seventeenth century . John Milton probably consulted his commentary on Genesis when writing Paradise Lost . The English edition of the Loci Communes was brought to the Massachusetts Bay Colony where it was an important textbook at Harvard College . More of Vermigli 's works were found in the libraries of seventeenth @-@ century Harvard divinity students than those of Calvin . Vermigli 's works were highly regarded by New England Puritan theologians such as John Cotton and Cotton Mather . 
 = Northallerton = 
 Northallerton / <unk> / is a market town and civil parish in the Hambleton district of North Yorkshire , England . It lies in the Vale of Mowbray and at the northern end of the Vale of York . It has a population of 15 @,@ 741 according to the 2001 census . It has served as the county town of the North Riding of Yorkshire and since 1974 , of North Yorkshire . The population of Northallerton was 16 @,@ 832 in 2011 . 
 There has been a settlement at Northallerton since Roman times , however its growth in importance began in the 11th century when King William II gifted land to the Bishop of Durham . Under the Bishop 's authority Northallerton became an important centre for religious affairs . It was also a focus for much conflict in subsequent years between the English and the Scots , most notably the Battle of the Standard , nearby in 1138 , which saw losses of as many as 12 @,@ 000 men . 
 In later years trade and transport became more important . The surrounding area was discovered to have large phosphorus reserves which brought industry to Northallerton due to the easy trade routes . Lying on the main route between Edinburgh and London it became an important stopping point for coaches travelling the route , eventually superseded by the growth of the railways in the 19th century . Lying in the centre of a large rural area Northallerton was established as a market town in 1200 by Royal Charter , and there is still a market in the town today . 
 It continues to be a major retail centre for the local area today . As the administrative centre for Hambleton district and the county of North Yorkshire , the councils , and several other associated public sector organisations have their headquarters in the town . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and early history = = = 
 Due to the proximity of the Roman road , entrenchments and relics it seems that the earliest settlement at Northallerton was some form of Roman military station . There is evidence that the Romans had a signal station on Castle Hills just to the west of the town as part of the imperial Roman postal system and a path connecting Hadrian 's Wall with Eboracum ( York ) ran through what is now the neighbouring village of Brompton . 
 The first church was set up by St Paulinus of York on the site of the present All Saints Parish Church sometime in the early 7th century . It was made from wood and nothing survives of it . In 855 a stone church was built on the same site , fragments of stone have been found during restoration work which provide strong evidence of this Saxon church . 
 It was then believed that a Saxon town known as Alvertune developed . In Pierre de <unk> 's history of King Alfred he writes that in 865 it was the site of a number of battles between King <unk> and his brother Alfred and five Danish kings and a similar number of earls . Later , in the 10th century , Danes settled at Romanby and Brompton . A fine example of English <unk> from the period , the Brompton <unk> , can be found in Brompton Parish Church . 
 In the Domesday Survey , Norman scribes named the settlement Alvertune , <unk> and <unk> and there is a reference to the Alvertune <unk> , an area almost identical to the Allertonshire wapentake of the North Riding , which was named after the town . 
 The origin of the town 's name is uncertain , though it is believed that the name derives from a derivation of the name <unk> , <unk> translates as the farm belonging to <unk> or even of King Alfred . Alternatively it may be referring to the Alder trees which grew nearby . The prefix of North was added in the 12th century to differentiate from the parish of Allerton <unk> , 25 miles ( 40 kilometres ) to the south . 
 Its position on a major route way brought death and destruction to the town on many occasions . In 1069 , in an attempt to quell rebellion in the north , the area between the Ouse and the Tyne was laid to waste by the armies of William the Conqueror . The town of Northallerton was almost totally destroyed or depopulated . Just a few years later it is described in the Domesday Book as ' modo est in manu regis et <unk> est ( put down as waste ) . In 1318 , the town was destroyed again by the Scots , under Sir James Douglas following the Capture of Berwick upon Tweed . 
 = = = Battle of the Standard = = = 
 On 22 August 1138 , English forces repelled a Scottish army on Cowton Moor in Brompton parish , around 2 mi ( 3 km ) north of the town . This was the first major battle between the Scots and the English since the Norman conquest and one of the two major battles in the civil war between King Stephen and Empress Matilda . The English forces were summoned by Archbishop Thurstan of York , who had gathered local militia and baronial armies from Yorkshire and the North Midlands . They arrayed themselves round a chariot with a ship 's mast carrying the consecrated banners of St Peter of York , St John of Beverley , St Wilfrid of Ripon and St Cuthbert of Durham , it was this standard @-@ bearing chariot that gave the battle its name . The Scottish army was led by King David I of Scotland . 
 King David had entered England in support of his niece , Empress Matilda , who was viewed as the rightful heiress to the English throne usurped by King Stephen . With Stephen fighting rebel barons in the south , the Scottish armies had already taken Cumberland and Northumberland , the city of Carlisle and the royal castle at Bamburgh . Finding the English in a defensive position on a hill , David elected to force a battle counting on his superior numbers , 16 @,@ 000 Scots against 10 @,@ 000 Englishmen . Repeated attacks by native Scots failed against the onslaught from the English archers , with losses of up to 12 @,@ 000 Scots . A subsequent attack by mounted knights met initial success but fell back due to lack of infantry support . The battle ended when David 's reserve deserted , forcing him to retreat . The English elected not to pursue , and despite their great losses the Scots were able to regroup in sufficient number to besiege and capture Wark Castle . 
 The victory by the English ensured the safety of Northern England . 
 = = = Religious importance = = = 
 Shortly after his accession William Rufus gave the town , with the lands adjacent , to the see of Durham , and , under the patronage of the bishops of that diocese , it grew in importance , and became an episcopal residence . In 1130 a castle was built on the west side of the town adjacent to North Beck by Bishop Rufus and was expanded in 1142 after William <unk> seized the Bishopric of Durham in 1141 . The castle was further expanded in 1173 by Hugh Pudsey and garrisoned by a group of Flemish soldiers , an act which enraged King Henry II who ordered that it be razed to the ground in 1177 . A more substantial fortified palace surrounded by a moat was built on the same site in 1199 replacing the traditional motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle . The palace became an important administrative centre for the bishops ' lands in Yorkshire and served as a major residence for the bishops and their staff . The palace lay on the main road from York to Durham and was a regular stopping place for royalty and other dignitaries . The palace fell into ruin by 1658 and the site is now a cemetery . 
 A Carmelite priory was founded in 1354 , but was demolished soon after the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1538 . The site passed to various people and was used for arable farming before a workhouse was built on the site in 1857 , subsequently the Friarage Hospital which takes its name from the friary was built . Following development of the site in 2006 , archaeologists uncovered the remains of eight monks along with other artefacts . 
 = = = A centre for trade and transport = = = 
 It became the market centre for the area and also drew traders from further afield to its four annual fairs ( now reduced to two ) . Cattle drovers bringing cattle , horses and sheep from Northumbria and Scotland regularly came to the town . The original cattle market was by the church , but sheep were sold on High Street until the early part of the 20th century . With the arrival of the railway the mart was built close to the station , but this later closed and today the cattle market is held in Applegarth Court . 
 In the golden age of coaching , Northallerton had four coaching inns along High Street serving passengers and horses using several routes to the north . With the arrival of the railway in 1841 the town maintained its importance as a communications centre . The line from London to Edinburgh via York and Newcastle passed through the town ( as indeed it still does ) , as did the line linking the industrial West Riding with the port and steel town of Middlesbrough . It is now served by Northallerton railway station . 
 = = = Ripon Railway = = = 
 The line from Northallerton railway station along Ripon Line was closed to passengers on 6 March 1967 and to goods on 5 September 1969 as part of the wider Beeching Axe , despite a vigorous campaign by local campaigners , including the ( nearby city of Ripon ) city 's MP . Today much of the route of the line through the city ( Ripon ) is now a relief road and although the former station still stands , it is now surrounded by a new housing development . The issue remains a significant one in local politics and there are movements wanting to restore the line . Reports suggest the reopening of a line between Ripon and Harrogate railway station would be economically viable , costing £ 40 million and could initially attract 1 @,@ 200 passengers a day , rising to 2 @,@ 700 . Campaigners call on MPs to restore Ripon railway link . 
 = = = Legal history = = = 
 A house of correction opened in 1783 on East Road - it became HM Prison Northallerton , which served ( at different times ) as an adult prison , a Young Offender Institution , and a military prison . The prison closed 2013 . 
 The Quarter Sessions for the area were held in the town from the 17th century in various buildings including the Tollbooth , the Guild Hall and Vine House , but eventually a courthouse was built in East Road in 1875 as part of the prison complex . This later moved to the town 's Racecourse Lane , and remains the area 's magistrates ' court . 
 When the Poor Law union system was introduced , a workhouse was established in the town to serve the three parishes in the area . This building is now part of the Friarage Hospital . When in 1856 the North Riding Constabulary was founded , one of the last county forces to be formed , Northallerton was selected as its headquarters , operating initially from premises in East Road . 
 The earliest records pertaining to Northallerton School ( formerly Northallerton Grammar School ) date from 1323 . Parts of the old school building can be seen adjacent to All Saints ' Church near the north end of High Street . A famous old boy of the school was John Radcliffe ( 1652 – 1714 ) , founder of Oxford 's John Radcliffe Hospital and physician to William of Orange . 
 = = = Present day = = = 
 Today Northallerton 's main commercial function is a mixture of light industry , commerce and agricultural services , such as the regular livestock auction market and the production of high @-@ grade manure . 
 The headquarters of North Yorkshire County Council ( County Hall ) and Hambleton District Council ( the Civic Centre ) are both located in Northallerton ; these serve many parishes in the area . The RPA ( Rural Payments Agency ) was based here until 2014 . The nearby base at RAF Leeming is a major source of employment and income in the area . Northallerton Prison , which used to house young offenders and adults from the North Yorkshire area , closed in 2014 . It once had the world 's largest treadmill . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = Parish = = = 
 The ancient parish of Northallerton covered a wide area . It included the townships and chapelries of Romanby , Brompton and Deighton , and the detached part of High <unk> on the River Tees . All of these places became separate civil parishes in the 19th century . 
 The parish council of Northallerton has exercised its right to be known as the town council . There are 12 town councillors , elected in four wards . 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 In 1889 the County of York , North Riding administrative county was formed . In 1894 it was divided into municipal boroughs , urban districts and rural districts . Following a review of local government in 1974 , the North Riding was abolished as an administrative county . The district council of Hambleton was then formed from the merger of the Northallerton Urban District with Bedale Rural District , Easingwold Rural District , Northallerton Rural District , Thirsk Rural District and Croft Rural District . This became part of the non @-@ metropolitan county of North Yorkshire . 
 Policing in the town remains the responsibility of North Yorkshire Police and firefighting the responsibility of North Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service . The fire station at Northallerton is a " Day <unk> " station which operates from 08 : 00 to 18 : 00 each day and on call outside these hours . 
 The town has been twinned with <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Marne , a suburb of Paris , France since 1994 . 
