 However Johnson was not the first apothecary or physician to organise botanical expeditions to <unk> their local flora . In Italy <unk> Aldrovandi ( 1522 – 1605 ) organised an expedition to the Sibylline mountains in Umbria in 1557 , and compiled a local Flora . He then began to disseminate his findings amongst other European scholars , forming an early network of knowledge sharing " molti amici in molti <unk> " ( many friends in many places ) , including Charles de l <unk> ( Clusius ) ( 1526 – 1609 ) at Montpellier and Jean de <unk> at Malines . Between them they started developing Latin names for plants , in addition to their common names . The exchange of information and specimens between scholars was often associated with the founding of botanical gardens ( above ) , and to this end Aldrovandi founded one of the earliest at his university in Bologna , the Orto Botanico di Bologna in 1568 . 
 In France , Clusius journeyed throughout most of Western Europe , making discoveries in the vegetable kingdom along the way . He compiled Flora of Spain ( 1576 ) , and Austria and Hungary ( 1583 ) . He was the first to propose dividing plants into classes . Meanwhile , in Switzerland , from 1554 , Conrad Gessner ( 1516 – 1565 ) made regular explorations of the Swiss Alps from his native Zurich and discovered many new plants . He proposed that there were groups or genera of plants . He said that each genus was composed of many species and that these were defined by similar flowers and fruits . This principle of organization laid the groundwork for future botanists . He wrote his important Historia Plantarum shortly before his death . At Malines , in Flanders he established and maintained the botanical gardens of Jean de <unk> from 1568 to 1573 , and first encountered tulips . 
 This approach coupled with the new Linnaean system of binomial nomenclature resulted in plant encyclopaedias without medicinal information called Floras that meticulously described and illustrated the plants growing in particular regions . The 17th century also marked the beginning of experimental botany and application of a rigorous scientific method , while improvements in the microscope launched the new discipline of plant anatomy whose foundations , laid by the careful observations of Englishman Nehemiah Grew and Italian Marcello Malpighi , would last for 150 years . 
 = = = Botanical exploration = = = 
 More new lands were opening up to European colonial powers , the botanical riches being returned to European botanists for description . This was a romantic era of botanical explorers , intrepid plant hunters and gardener @-@ botanists . Significant botanical collections came from : the West Indies ( Hans Sloane ( 1660 – 1753 ) ) ; China ( James Cunningham ) ; the spice islands of the East Indies ( Moluccas , George Rumphius ( 1627 – 1702 ) ) ; China and Mozambique ( João de Loureiro ( 1717 – 1791 ) ) ; West Africa ( Michel Adanson ( 1727 – 1806 ) ) who devised his own classification scheme and forwarded a crude theory of the mutability of species ; Canada , Hebrides , Iceland , New Zealand by Captain James Cook 's chief botanist Joseph Banks ( 1743 – 1820 ) . 
 = = = Classification and morphology = = = 
 By the middle of the 18th century the botanical booty resulting from the era of exploration was accumulating in gardens and herbaria – and it needed to be systematically catalogued . This was the task of the taxonomists , the plant classifiers . 
 Plant classifications have changed over time from " artificial " systems based on general habit and form , to pre @-@ evolutionary " natural " systems expressing similarity using one to many characters , leading to post @-@ evolutionary " natural " systems that use characters to infer evolutionary relationships . 
 Italian physician Andrea Caesalpino ( 1519 – 1603 ) studied medicine and taught botany at the University of Pisa for about 40 years eventually becoming Director of the Botanic Garden of Pisa from 1554 to 1558 . His sixteen @-@ volume De Plantis ( 1583 ) described 1500 plants and his herbarium of 260 pages and 768 mounted specimens still remains . Caesalpino proposed classes based largely on the detailed structure of the flowers and fruit ; he also applied the concept of the genus . He was the first to try and derive principles of natural classification reflecting the overall similarities between plants and he produced a classification scheme well in advance of its day . Gaspard Bauhin ( 1560 – 1624 ) produced two influential publications Prodromus <unk> <unk> ( 1620 ) and <unk> ( 1623 ) . These brought order to the 6000 species now described and in the latter he used binomials and synonyms that may well have influenced Linnaeus 's thinking . He also insisted that taxonomy should be based on natural affinities . 
 To sharpen the precision of description and classification Joachim Jung ( 1587 – 1657 ) compiled a much @-@ needed botanical terminology which has stood the test of time . English botanist John Ray ( 1623 – 1705 ) built on Jung 's work to establish the most elaborate and insightful classification system of the day . His observations started with the local plants of Cambridge where he lived , with the Catalogus Stirpium circa <unk> <unk> ( 1860 ) which later expanded to his Synopsis Methodica Stirpium <unk> , essentially the first British Flora . Although his Historia Plantarum ( 1682 , 1688 , 1704 ) provided a step towards a world Flora as he included more and more plants from his travels , first on the continent and then beyond . He extended Caesalpino 's natural system with a more precise definition of the higher classification levels , deriving many modern families in the process , and asserted that all parts of plants were important in classification . He recognised that variation arises from both internal ( genotypic ) and external environmental ( phenotypic ) causes and that only the former was of taxonomic significance . He was also among the first experimental physiologists . The Historia Plantarum can be regarded as the first botanical synthesis and textbook for modern botany . According to botanical historian Alan Morton , Ray " influenced both the theory and the practice of botany more decisively than any other single person in the latter half of the seventeenth century " . Ray 's family system was later extended by Pierre <unk> ( 1638 – 1715 ) and Joseph de Tournefort ( 1656 – 1708 ) , a student of <unk> , achieved notoriety for his botanical expeditions , his emphasis on floral characters in classification , and for reviving the idea of the genus as the basic unit of classification . 
 Above all it was Swedish Carl Linnaeus ( 1707 – 1778 ) who eased the task of plant cataloguing . He adopted a sexual system of classification using stamens and pistils as important characters . Among his most important publications were Systema Naturae ( 1735 ) , Genera Plantarum ( 1737 ) , and Philosophia Botanica ( 1751 ) but it was in his Species Plantarum ( 1753 ) that he gave every species a binomial thus setting the path for the future accepted method of designating the names of all organisms . Linnaean thought and books dominated the world of taxonomy for nearly a century . His sexual system was later elaborated by Bernard de Jussieu ( 1699 – 1777 ) whose nephew Antoine @-@ Laurent de Jussieu ( 1748 – 1836 ) extended it yet again to include about 100 orders ( present @-@ day families ) . Frenchman Michel Adanson ( 1727 – 1806 ) in his <unk> des Plantes ( 1763 , 1764 ) , apart from extending the current system of family names , emphasized that a natural classification must be based on a consideration of all characters , even though these may later be given different emphasis according to their diagnostic value for the particular plant group . Adanson 's method has , in essence , been followed to this day . 
 18th century plant taxonomy bequeathed to the 19th century a precise binomial nomenclature and botanical terminology , a system of classification based on natural affinities , and a clear idea of the ranks of family , genus and species — although the taxa to be placed within these ranks remains , as always , the subject of taxonomic research . 
 = = = Anatomy = = = 
 In the first half of the 18th century botany was beginning to move beyond descriptive science into experimental science . Although the microscope was invented in 1590 it was only in the late 17th century that lens grinding by Antony van Leeuwenhoek provided the resolution needed to make major discoveries . Important general biological observations were made by Robert Hooke ( 1635 – 1703 ) but the foundations of plant anatomy were laid by Italian Marcello Malpighi ( 1628 – 1694 ) of the University of Bologna in his <unk> Plantarum ( 1675 ) and Royal Society Englishman Nehemiah Grew ( 1628 – 1711 ) in his The Anatomy of Plants Begun ( 1671 ) and Anatomy of Plants ( 1682 ) . These botanists explored what is now called developmental anatomy and morphology by carefully observing , describing and drawing the developmental transition from seed to mature plant , recording stem and wood formation . This work included the discovery and naming of parenchyma and stomata . 
 = = = Physiology = = = 
 In plant physiology research interest was focused on the movement of sap and the absorption of substances through the roots . Jan <unk> ( 1577 – 1644 ) by experimental observation and calculation , noted that the increase in weight of a growing plant cannot be derived purely from the soil , and concluded it must relate to water uptake . Englishman Stephen Hales ( 1677 – 1761 ) established by quantitative experiment that there is uptake of water by plants and a loss of water by transpiration and that this is influenced by environmental conditions : he distinguished " root pressure " , " leaf suction " and " imbibition " and also noted that the major direction of sap flow in woody tissue is upward . His results were published in Vegetable <unk> ( 1727 ) He also noted that " air makes a very considerable part of the substance of vegetables " . English chemist Joseph Priestley ( 1733 – 1804 ) is noted for his discovery of oxygen ( as now called ) and its production by plants . Later Jan <unk> ( 1730 – 1799 ) observed that only in sunlight do the green parts of plants absorb air and release oxygen , this being more rapid in bright sunlight while , at night , the air ( CO2 ) is released from all parts . His results were published in Experiments upon vegetables ( 1779 ) and with this the foundations for 20th century studies of carbon fixation were laid . From his observations he sketched the cycle of carbon in nature even though the composition of carbon dioxide was yet to be resolved . Studies in plant nutrition had also progressed . In 1804 Nicolas @-@ Théodore de Saussure 's ( 1767 – 1845 ) Recherches <unk> sur la <unk> was an exemplary study of scientific exactitude that demonstrated the similarity of respiration in both plants and animals , that the fixation of carbon dioxide includes water , and that just minute amounts of salts and nutrients ( which he analysed in chemical detail from plant ash ) have a powerful influence on plant growth . 
 = = = Plant sexuality = = = 
 It was Rudolf Camerarius ( 1665 – 1721 ) who was the first to establish plant sexuality conclusively by experiment . He declared in a letter to a colleague dated 1694 and titled De <unk> Plantarum Epistola that " no ovules of plants could ever develop into seeds from the female style and ovary without first being prepared by the pollen from the stamens , the male sexual organs of the plant " . 
 Much was learned about plant sexuality by unravelling the reproductive mechanisms of mosses , liverworts and algae . In his <unk> Untersuchungen of 1851 Wilhelm Hofmeister ( 1824 – 1877 ) starting with the ferns and bryophytes demonstrated that the process of sexual reproduction in plants entails an " alternation of generations " between sporophytes and gametophytes . This initiated the new field of comparative morphology which , largely through the combined work of William Farlow ( 1844 – 1919 ) , Nathanael Pringsheim ( 1823 – 1894 ) , Frederick Bower , Eduard Strasburger and others , established that an " alternation of generations " occurs throughout the plant kingdom . 
 Some time later the German academic and natural historian Joseph <unk> ( 1733 – 1806 ) extended this work by noting the function of nectar in attracting pollinators and the role of wind and insects in pollination . He also produced deliberate hybrids , observed the microscopic structure of pollen grains and how the transfer of matter from the pollen to the ovary inducing the formation of the embryo . 
 One hundred years after Camerarius , in 1793 , Christian Sprengel ( 1750 – 1816 ) broadened the understanding of flowers by describing the role of nectar guides in pollination , the adaptive floral mechanisms used for pollination , and the prevalence of cross @-@ pollination , even though male and female parts are usually together on the same flower . 
 = = Nineteenth @-@ century foundations of modern botany = = 
 In about the mid @-@ 19th century scientific communication changed . Until this time ideas were largely exchanged by reading the works of authoritative individuals who dominated in their field : these were often wealthy and influential " gentlemen scientists " . Now research was reported by the publication of " papers " that emanated from research " schools " that promoted the questioning of conventional wisdom . This process had started in the late 18th century when specialist journals began to appear . Even so , botany was greatly stimulated by the appearance of the first " modern " textbook , Matthias Schleiden 's ( 1804 – 1881 ) Grundzüge der <unk> <unk> , published in English in 1849 as Principles of Scientific Botany . By 1850 an invigorated organic chemistry had revealed the structure of many plant constituents . Although the great era of plant classification had now passed the work of description continued . Augustin de Candolle ( 1778 – 1841 ) succeeded Antoine @-@ Laurent de Jussieu in managing the botanical project Prodromus Systematis Naturalis Regni Vegetabilis ( 1824 – 1841 ) which involved 35 authors : it contained all the dicotyledons known in his day , some <unk> species in 161 families , and he doubled the number of recognized plant families , the work being completed by his son Alphonse ( 1806 – 1893 ) in the years from 1841 to 1873 . 
 = = = Plant geography and ecology = = = 
 The opening of the 19th century was marked by an increase in interest in the connection between climate and plant distribution . Carl Willdenow ( 1765 – 1812 ) examined the connection between seed dispersal and distribution , the nature of plant associations and the impact of geological history . He noticed the similarities between the floras of N America and N Asia , the Cape and Australia , and he explored the ideas of " centre of diversity " and " centre of origin " . German Alexander von Humboldt ( 1769 – 1859 ) and Frenchman Aime Bonpland ( 1773 – 1858 ) published a massive and highly influential 30 volume work on their travels ; Robert Brown ( 1773 – 1852 ) noted the similarities between the floras of S Africa , Australia and India , while Joakim <unk> ( 1789 – 1852 ) explored more deeply than anyone else the influence on plant distribution of temperature , soil factors , especially soil water , and light , work that was continued by Alphonse de Candolle ( 1806 – 1893 ) . Joseph Hooker ( 1817 – 1911 ) pushed the boundaries of floristic studies with his work on Antarctica , India and the Middle East with special attention to endemism . August <unk> ( 1814 – 1879 ) in Die Vegetation der Erde ( 1872 ) examined physiognomy in relation to climate and in America geographic studies were pioneered by Asa Gray ( 1810 – 1888 ) . 
 Physiological plant geography , perhaps more familiarly termed ecology , emerged from floristic biogeography in the late 19th century as environmental influences on plants received greater recognition . Early work in this area was synthesised by Danish professor Eugenius Warming ( 1841 – 1924 ) in his book <unk> ( Ecology of Plants , generally taken to mark the beginning of modern ecology ) including new ideas on plant communities , their adaptations and environmental influences . This was followed by another grand synthesis , the <unk> auf <unk> <unk> of Andreas <unk> ( 1856 – 1901 ) in 1898 ( published in English in 1903 as Plant @-@ geography upon a physiological basis translated by W. R. Fischer , Oxford : Clarendon press , 839 pp . ) 
 = = = Anatomy = = = 
 During the 19th century German scientists led the way towards a unitary theory of the structure and life @-@ cycle of plants . Following improvements in the microscope at the end of the 18th century , Charles Mirbel ( 1776 – 1854 ) in 1802 published his Traité d <unk> et de Physiologie <unk> and Johann <unk> ( 1766 – 1827 ) published <unk> zur <unk> der <unk> ( 1812 ) in which he describes techniques for separating cells from the middle lamella . He identified vascular and <unk> tissues , described vascular bundles , observed the cells in the cambium , and interpreted tree rings . He found that stomata were composed of pairs of cells , rather than a single cell with a hole . 
 Anatomical studies on the stele were consolidated by Carl <unk> ( 1832 – 1891 ) who described the secondary tissues and meristem including cambium and its action . Hugo von Mohl ( 1805 – 1872 ) summarized work in anatomy leading up to 1850 in Die <unk> <unk> ( 1851 ) but this work was later eclipsed by the encyclopaedic comparative anatomy of Heinrich Anton de Bary in 1877 . An overview of knowledge of the stele in root and stem was completed by Van <unk> ( 1839 – 1914 ) and of the meristem by Karl Nägeli ( 1817 – 1891 ) . Studies had also begun on the origins of the carpel and flower that continue to the present day . 
 = = = Water relations = = = 
 The riddle of water and nutrient transport through the plant remained . Physiologist Von Mohl explored solute transport and the theory of water uptake by the roots using the concepts of cohesion , <unk> pull , capillarity and root pressure . German dominance in the field of physiology was underlined by the publication of the definitive textbook on plant physiology synthesising the work of this period , Sach 's <unk> über <unk> of 1882 . There were , however , some advances elsewhere such as the early exploration of <unk> ( the effect of gravity on growth ) by Englishman Thomas Knight , and the discovery and naming of osmosis by Frenchman Henri <unk> ( 1776 – 1847 ) . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The cell nucleus was discovered by Robert Brown in 1831 . Demonstration of the cellular composition of all organisms , with each cell possessing all the characteristics of life , is attributed to the combined efforts of botanist Matthias Schleiden and zoologist Theodor Schwann ( 1810 – 1882 ) in the early 19th century although <unk> had already shown that plants were wholly cellular with each cell having its own wall and Julius von Sachs had shown the continuity protoplasm between cell walls . 
 From 1870 to 1880 it became clear that cell nuclei are never formed anew but always derived from the substance of another nucleus . In 1882 Flemming observed the longitudinal splitting of chromosomes in the dividing nucleus and concluded that each daughter nucleus received half of each of the chromosomes of the mother nucleus : then by the early 20th century it was found that the number of chromosomes in a given species is constant . With genetic continuity confirmed and the finding by Eduard Strasburger that the nuclei of reproductive cells ( in pollen and embryo ) have a reducing division ( halving of chromosomes , now known as meiosis ) the field of heredity was opened up . By 1926 Thomas Morgan was able to outline a theory of the gene and its structure and function . The form and function of plastids received similar attention , the association with starch being noted at an early date . With observation of the cellular structure of all organisms and the process of cell division and continuity of genetic material , the analysis of the structure of protoplasm and the cell wall as well as that of plastids and vacuoles – what is now known as cytology , or cell theory became firmly established . 
 Later , the cytological basis of the gene @-@ chromosome theory of heredity extended from about 1900 – 1944 and was initiated by the rediscovery of Gregor Mendel 's ( 1822 – 1884 ) laws of plant heredity first published in 1866 in Experiments on Plant Hybridization and based on cultivated pea , Pisum sativum : this heralded the opening up of plant genetics . The cytological basis for gene @-@ chromosome theory was explored through the role of polyploidy and hybridization in speciation and it was becoming better understood that interbreeding populations were the unit of adaptive change in biology . 
 = = = Developmental morphology and evolution = = = 
 Until the 1860s it was believed that species had remained unchanged through time : each biological form was the result of an independent act of creation and therefore absolutely distinct and immutable . But the hard reality of geological formations and strange fossils needed scientific explanation . Charles Darwin 's Origin of Species ( 1859 ) replaced the assumption of constancy with the theory of descent with modification . Phylogeny became a new principle as " natural " classifications became classifications reflecting , not just similarities , but evolutionary relationships . Wilhelm Hofmeister established that there was a similar pattern of organization in all plants expressed through the alternation of generations and extensive homology of structures . 
 Polymath German intellect Johann Goethe ( 1749 – 1832 ) had interests and influence that extended into botany . In Die <unk> der <unk> ( 1790 ) he provided a theory of plant morphology ( he coined the word " morphology " ) and he included within his concept of " metamorphosis " modification during evolution , thus linking comparative morphology with phylogeny . Though the botanical basis of his work has been challenged there is no doubt that he prompted discussion and research on the origin and function of floral parts . His theory probably stimulated the opposing views of German botanists Alexander Braun ( 1805 – 1877 ) and Matthias Schleiden who applied the experimental method to the principles of growth and form that were later extended by Augustin de Candolle ( 1778 – 1841 ) . 
 = = = Carbon fixation ( photosynthesis ) = = = 
 At the start of the 19th century the idea that plants could synthesise almost all their tissues from atmospheric gases had not yet emerged . The energy component of photosynthesis , the capture and storage of the Sun 's radiant energy in carbon bonds ( a process on which all life depends ) was first elucidated in 1847 by Mayer , but the details of how this was done would take many more years . Chlorophyll was named in 1818 and its chemistry gradually determined , to be finally resolved in the early 20th century . The mechanism of photosynthesis remained a mystery until the mid @-@ 19th century when Sachs , in 1862 , noted that starch was formed in green cells only in the presence of light and in 1882 he confirmed carbohydrates as the starting point for all other organic compounds in plants . The connection between the pigment chlorophyll and starch production was finally made in 1864 but tracing the precise biochemical pathway of starch formation did not begin until about 1915 . 
 = = = Nitrogen fixation = = = 
 Significant discoveries relating to nitrogen assimilation and metabolism , including <unk> , nitrification and nitrogen fixation ( the uptake of atmospheric nitrogen by symbiotic soil microorganisms ) had to wait for advances in chemistry and bacteriology in the late 19th century and this was followed in the early 20th century by the elucidation of protein and amino @-@ acid synthesis and their role in plant metabolism . With this knowledge it was then possible to outline the global nitrogen cycle . 
 = = Twentieth century = = 
 20th century science grew out of the solid foundations laid by the breadth of vision and detailed experimental observations of the 19th century . A vastly increased research force was now rapidly extending the horizons of botanical knowledge at all levels of plant organization from molecules to global plant ecology . There was now an awareness of the unity of biological structure and function at the cellular and biochemical levels of organisation . Botanical advance was closely associated with advances in physics and chemistry with the greatest advances in the 20th century mainly relating to the penetration of molecular organization . However , at the level of plant communities it would take until mid century to consolidate work on ecology and population genetics . By 1910 experiments using labelled isotopes were being used to elucidate plant biochemical pathways , to open the line of research leading to gene technology . On a more practical level research funding was now becoming available from agriculture and industry . 
 = = = Molecules = = = 
 In 1903 <unk> a and b were separated by thin layer chromatography then , through the 1920s and 1930s , biochemists , notably Hans Krebs ( 1900 – 1981 ) and Carl ( 1896 – 1984 ) and Gerty Cori ( 1896 – 1957 ) began tracing out the central metabolic pathways of life . Between the 1930s and 1950s it was determined that ATP , located in mitochondria , was the source of cellular chemical energy and the constituent reactions of photosynthesis were progressively revealed . Then , in 1944 DNA was extracted for the first time . Along with these revelations there was the discovery of plant hormones or " growth substances " , notably auxins , ( 1934 ) <unk> ( 1934 ) and <unk> ( 1964 ) and the effects of <unk> , the control of plant processes , especially flowering , by the relative lengths of day and night . 
 Following the establishment of Mendel 's laws , the gene @-@ chromosome theory of heredity was confirmed by the work of August Weismann who identified chromosomes as the hereditary material . Also , in observing the halving of the chromosome number in germ cells he anticipated work to follow on the details of meiosis , the complex process of redistribution of hereditary material that occurs in the germ cells . In the 1920s and 1930s population genetics combined the theory of evolution with Mendelian genetics to produce the modern synthesis . By the mid @-@ 1960s the molecular basis of metabolism and reproduction was firmly established through the new discipline of molecular biology . Genetic engineering , the insertion of genes into a host cell for cloning , began in the 1970s with the invention of recombinant DNA techniques and its commercial applications applied to agricultural crops followed in the 1990s . There was now the potential to identify organisms by molecular " fingerprinting " and to estimate the times in the past when critical evolutionary changes had occurred through the use of " molecular clocks " . 
 = = = Computers , electron microscopes and evolution = = = 
 Increased experimental precision combined with vastly improved scientific instrumentation was opening up exciting new fields . In 1936 Alexander <unk> ( 1894 – 1980 ) demonstrated a possible mechanism for the synthesis of organic matter from inorganic molecules . In the 1960s it was determined that the Earth 's earliest life @-@ forms treated as plants , the cyanobacteria known as stromatolites , dated back some 3 @.@ 5 billion years . 
 Mid @-@ century transmission and scanning electron microscopy presented another level of resolution to the structure of matter , taking anatomy into the new world of " ultrastructure " . 
 New and revised " phylogenetic " classification systems of the plant kingdom were produced , perhaps the most notable being that of August Eichler ( 1839 – 1887 ) , and the massive 23 volume Die <unk> <unk> of Adolf Engler ( 1844 – 1930 ) & Karl <unk> ( 1849 – 1893 ) published over the period 1887 and 1915 . Taxonomy based on gross morphology was now being supplemented by using characters revealed by pollen morphology , embryology , anatomy , cytology , serology , macromolecules and more . The introduction of computers facilitated the rapid analysis of large data sets used for numerical taxonomy ( also called <unk> or <unk> ) . The emphasis on truly natural phylogenies spawned the disciplines of cladistics and phylogenetic systematics . The grand taxonomic synthesis An Integrated System of Classification of Flowering Plants ( 1981 ) of American Arthur Cronquist ( 1919 – 1992 ) was superseded when , in 1998 , the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group published a phylogeny of flowering plants based on the analysis of DNA sequences using the techniques of the new molecular systematics which was resolving questions concerning the earliest evolutionary branches of the angiosperms ( flowering plants ) . The exact relationship of fungi to plants had for some time been uncertain . Several lines of evidence pointed to fungi being different from plants , animals and bacteria – indeed , more closely related to animals than plants . In the 1980s @-@ 90s molecular analysis revealed an evolutionary divergence of fungi from other organisms about 1 billion years ago – sufficient reason to erect a unique kingdom separate from plants . 
 = = = Biogeography and ecology = = = 
 The publication of Alfred Wegener 's ( 1880 – 1930 ) theory of continental drift 1912 gave additional impetus to comparative physiology and the study of biogeography while ecology in the 1930s contributed the important ideas of plant community , succession , community change , and energy flows . From 1940 to 1950 ecology matured to become an independent discipline as Eugene Odum ( 1913 – 2002 ) formulated many of the concepts of ecosystem ecology , emphasising relationships between groups of organisms ( especially material and energy relationships ) as key factors in the field . Building on the extensive earlier work of Alphonse de Candolle , Nikolai Vavilov ( 1887 – 1943 ) from 1914 to 1940 produced accounts of the geography , centres of origin , and evolutionary history of economic plants . 
 = = Twenty @-@ first century = = 
 In reviewing the sweep of botanical history it is evident that , through the power of the scientific method , most of the basic questions concerning the structure and function of plants have , in principle , been resolved . Now the distinction between pure and applied botany becomes blurred as our historically accumulated botanical wisdom at all levels of plant organisation is needed ( but especially at the molecular and global levels ) to improve human custodianship of planet earth . The most urgent unanswered botanical questions now relate to the role of plants as primary producers in the global cycling of life 's basic ingredients : energy , carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , and nitrogen , and ways that our plant stewardship can help address the global environmental issues of resource management , conservation , human food security , biologically invasive organisms , carbon sequestration , climate change , and sustainability . 
 = Turf Moor = 
 Turf Moor is an association football stadium in Burnley , Lancashire , England . It is the home ground of Premier League club Burnley Football Club , who have played there since moving from its Calder Vale ground in 1883 . The stadium , which is situated on Harry Potts Way , named so after the club 's longest serving Manager , has a capacity of 21 @,@ 401 , all seated . It was one of the last remaining stadiums in England to have the players ' tunnel and dressing rooms behind one of the goals , until it was covered for seating in time for the 2014 @-@ 15 Premier League season and rebuilt between the David Fishwick and James Hargreaves stand . The ground originally consisted of just a pitch and the first grandstand was not built until 1885 . Six years after this , the " Star " stand was erected and terracing was later added to the ends of the ground . After the Second World War , the stadium was redeveloped with all four stands being rebuilt . During the 1990s , the ground underwent further refurbishment when the Longside and Bee Hole End terraces were replaced by all @-@ seater stands . Currently , the four stands at Turf Moor are the James Hargreaves Stand , the Jimmy McIlroy Stand , the Bob Lord Stand and the Cricket Field Stand . 
 Burnley played their first match at the ground on 17 February 1883 , losing 3 – 6 to local side Rawtenstall . When Prince Albert Victor opened a new hospital in Burnley in 1886 , Turf Moor became the first football ground to be visited by a member of the British Royal Family . The first Football League match at the ground took place on 6 October 1888 , with Fred Poland scoring the first competitive goal at the stadium . The record attendance at Turf Moor was set in 1924 when 54 @,@ 755 people attended an FA Cup tie between Burnley and Huddersfield Town . In the same year , Turf Moor hosted its only FA Cup semi @-@ final to date . In 1927 , the stadium was the venue of an international match between England and Wales . Since then , the ground has been used to host matches in the European Under @-@ 19 Championship and European Under @-@ 21 Championship fixtures . 
 In 2007 , plans for expansion of Turf Moor were released to the public . The Burnley directors proposed a major development of the stadium , costing £ 20 million . The plans , which would incorporate the rebuilding of the Cricket Field Stand and the moving of the players ' entrance tunnel , have been put on hold until the current financial climate improves . In 2009 , following Burnley 's promotion to the Premier League , the development of a second tier on the Bob Lord stand was announced . Director Paul Fletcher stated that the anticipated capacity of Turf Moor would eventually be 28 @,@ 000 to cope with extra fans . However following the club 's relegation from the Premier League in 2010 , these plans were put on hold indefinitely . 
 After again achieving promotion to the Premier League in 2014 further Ground renovations were undertaken to comply with new regulations include housing for International Media , relocation of the players tunnel and upgrades to seating in the David Fishwick Stand for away supporters . On 26 June 2014 the club unveiled a planning application for extensions to the Turf Moor front entrance including the rebuilding of the official Club Shop containing a first floor museum . 
 = = History = = 
 Sport was first played at the Turf Moor site in 1833 , when Burnley Cricket Club was founded and made the ground their home . Horse racing also took place at the site in 1840 . In 1883 , the cricket club invited Burnley Football Club , which had been formed in 1882 , to move from their original home at Calder Vale to a football pitch adjacent to the cricket field . The first football match at Turf Moor took place on 17 February 1883 , when Burnley were defeated 3 – 6 by Rawtenstall . Attendances at Turf Moor during the early years averaged at around 2 @,@ 000 , although a crowd of 12 @,@ 000 descended on the stadium on 29 March 1884 to see Burnley lose 2 – 4 to local rivals Padiham . For the first two years , spectators were forced to congregate around the pitch , so in 1885 the club built an 800 @-@ seater wooden grandstand along the Brunshaw Road side ( the south side ) of the ground and installed terracing for 5 @,@ 000 people at the ends of the pitch . The following year , Turf Moor became the first senior football ground to be visited by a member of the British Royal Family when Prince Albert Victor saw Burnley defeated 3 – 4 by Bolton Wanderers on 13 October 1886 , while visiting the town to open a new hospital . 
 Turf Moor hosted its first Football League match on 6 October 1888 , when Burnley won 4 – 1 against Bolton Wanderers . Five minutes into the game , Burnley centre forward Fred Poland scored the first ever league goal at the ground . In 1891 the Burnley Union Star Football Club disbanded , abandoning their <unk> ground , which was complete with its own grandstand . Burnley bought the stand and moved it to Turf Moor . It became known as the " Star " stand and was erected on the site of the current James Hargreaves Stand , on the north side of the ground . In March of the same year , Turf Moor hosted its first floodlit football match . Sixteen creosote @-@ fuelled lamps were placed at regular intervals along the sides of the pitch , and spectators reported that while the edges of the field were sufficiently lit , there was a dark area in the centre . Burnley won the match , beating Nelson 4 – 2 in front of a crowd of 3 @,@ 000 people . 
 On 26 March 1898 , Turf Moor saw a crowd of over 20 @,@ 000 for the first time for Burnley 's FA Cup Third Round tie against Everton . The " Star " stand was demolished in 1898 and replaced by a new , larger stand , although it was still referred to as the " Stars " stand . Five years later , a second tier was built on the Brunshaw Road stand to accommodate club offices and in September 1903 , Turf Moor was able to host the club 's annual general meeting for the first time . In March 1909 the " Star " stand was extended , with new turnstiles and barricades erected in preparation for the FA Cup Quarter Final against reigning league champions Manchester United . In the spring of 1911 , plans were unveiled for the rebuilding of the Brunshaw Road stand , with former Burnley forward Arthur Bell the architect for the project . A strike amongst railway workers delayed the deliveries of steelwork for the new roof but spectators were still able to use the stand in time for Burnley 's first home league game of the 1911 – 12 season . However , work on the dressing rooms had not been completed , and players from both teams were forced to change in the adjoining cricket pavilion . The newly erected Brunshaw Road stand cost the club £ 5 @,@ 000 ( £ 459 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) and could accommodate over 5 @,@ 500 spectators , including 2 @,@ 200 seated places , increasing the capacity of Turf Moor to just under 41 @,@ 000 . 
 In 1913 the Burnley directors decided to demolish the " Star " stand for a second time , just 15 years after it had been rebuilt . In the same year , the Brunshaw Road stand was further extended to run the whole length of the pitch and in 1914 a roof was constructed to cover the terracing at the Cricket Field end , thus increasing the capacity of the ground to almost 50 @,@ 000 . In 1922 , Turf Moor hosted its only FA Cup Semi Final ; a crowd of over 46 @,@ 000 turned out to see Huddersfield Town achieve a 3 – 1 victory over Notts County . On 23 February 1924 , a crowd of over 50 @,@ 000 saw Burnley secure a 1 – 0 win over Huddersfield Town in the FA Cup Third Round . The attendance was later confirmed to be 54 @,@ 775 , which is still a record for Burnley . In 1927 , Turf Moor hosted its only international fixture when England played Wales . England lost the match 2 – 1 , with Burnley captain Jack Hill scoring an own goal to give Wales the win . In 1932 , the Burnley Supporters ' Club raised funds to install a hut and scoreboard at the Bee Hole End of the ground . Six years later , plans were announced to build a new covered terrace on the site of the old " Stars " stand , but these plans were delayed by the outbreak of the Second World War . 
 The plans came to fruition after the war , and the Longside was completed in 1954 . The club spent £ 20 @,@ 000 ( £ 494 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) on the roof alone and the terrace was built using help from players in the Burnley youth team . Three years later , the club also installed permanent floodlights at Turf Moor . The lights were first used on 16 December 1957 , when Burnley hosted rivals Blackburn Rovers in a friendly . On 16 November 1960 , the stadium was the venue of Burnley 's first ever match in the European Cup . Jimmy Robson and Jimmy McIlroy both scored early in the first half as Burnley recorded a 2 – 0 victory over Stade de Reims . During the late 1960s , in an effort to prevent supporters from throwing missiles , a section of the Bee Hole End terrace immediately behind the goal was fenced off . In 1969 , a new , bigger stand was built at a cost of £ 180 @,@ 000 ( £ 2 @.@ 67 million as of 2016 ) at the Cricket Field End that incorporated changing rooms and a players ' tunnel , which had previously been a part of the Brunshaw Road stand . Under @-@ seat heating was installed in the Cricket Field End , but after the first time it was used , chairman Bob Lord deemed it uneconomical and expensive , and it was never again switched on . 
 Redevelopment continued at Turf Moor and later in the early 1970s , the Bee Hole End terrace was extended . The new extension had a capacity of over 7 @,@ 000 and despite having no roof , it was very popular among supporters . In 1974 , Bob Lord hired Cambridge Soil Services to relay the Turf Moor pitch , and the work also incorporated new drainage technology and under @-@ soil heating . The pitch was raised and the slope that been ever @-@ present since the club had arrived at Turf Moor was removed . He then replaced the Brunshaw Road Stand with a new all @-@ seater stand named after himself , which was opened in 1974 by then @-@ prime minister Edward Heath . The stand held 2 @,@ 800 supporters , cost £ 480 @,@ 000 ( £ 4 @.@ 51 million as of 2016 ) and contained the board room and a number of luxurious seats for Burnley 's and visiting clubs ' directors . During the early 1970s , the total capacity increased from 32 @,@ 000 to 38 @,@ 000 . In 1975 , the floodlights that had been installed in 1957 were replaced . On 13 May 1983 , Turf Moor was chosen to host a match between Czechoslovakia and West Germany during the 1983 UEFA European Under @-@ 19 Football Championship . 
 A tragedy occurred at the stadium in March 1992 when 17 @-@ year @-@ old apprentice footballer Ben Lee was killed in a fall from the roof of the Longside Stand , when trying to retrieve a football . 
 Following the installation of the floodlights , Turf Moor did not undergo any further changes until the mid @-@ 1990s . After the Taylor Report had stated that all grounds must become all @-@ seater stadia , the Longside 's and Bee Hole End 's days were numbered , and in December 1994 the club announced the redevelopment of the two standing areas . In 1995 , Lincolnshire @-@ based company <unk> were contracted to build two new stands at Turf Moor . In June 1995 , Turf Moor hosted a match between England U21 and Latvia U21 in the qualifying campaign for the 1996 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship . On 16 September 1995 , the last ever match was played in front of the historic Longside when Burnley won 2 – 1 against Hull City in a Second Division fixture . The Longside , which had housed both home and away supporters , was subsequently demolished and the James Hargreaves Stand , for home fans only , was built in its place . The new stand opened on 23 April 1996 for the visit of Bristol Rovers . The following day , demolition of the Bee Hole End started , with work on the two stands finally completed in September 1996 at a total cost of £ 5 @.@ 3 million ( £ 8 @.@ 97 million as of 2016 ) , taking the capacity of the stadium to 22 @,@ 619 . The new stand was named the Jimmy McIlroy Stand , in honour of the former Burnley forward and Northern Ireland international . 
 Turf Moor saw its first international women 's match on 4 September 2003 when England achieved a 1 – 0 victory over Australia . Two years later , England U20 drew 2 – 2 with Netherlands U20 , with former Burnley midfielder Richard <unk> captaining the England side . On 25 May 2007 , Turf Moor hosted a friendly international between England B and Albania . Although the game was not officially recognised as a full international , a number of England first @-@ team players played in the game . In October 2007 , a Barco video wall was installed in the Cricket Field End , which at the time accommodated visiting supporters . At the start of the 2009 – 10 season , a new PA system was installed and the big screen was moved to allow home fans to sit in the Cricket Field Stand for the club 's inaugural season in the Premier League . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 The pitch at Turf Moor is surrounded by four stands , known as the Bob Lord Stand , the David Fishwick Stand , the James Hargreaves Stand and the Jimmy McIlroy stand . The stadium has a total capacity of 21 @,@ 401 , which is approximately one seat for every three inhabitants of the town , no other league team has such a high ratio . The two newest stands , the James Hargreaves Stand and the Jimmy McIlroy Stand , both have two tiers , while the Bob Lord and David Fishwick are both single @-@ tiered . The Bob Lord Stand and the David Fishwick Stand both have wooden seats . All four stands are entirely seated . Visiting supporters are seated in the Cricket Field Stand . 
 The largest stand at Turf Moor is the James Hargreaves Stand , which was opened in 1996 as part of a ground redevelopment project which saw two new stands built to replace the Longside and the Bee Hole End at a total cost of £ 5 @.@ 3 million . When built it was named the North Stand , although it has its current name thanks to a six @-@ figure sponsorship deal . The stand can accommodate 8 @,@ 154 spectators and was opened on 23 April 1996 , replacing the Longside terrace . It runs parallel to the length of the pitch . The television gantry is located in the James Hargreaves Stand along with the media area , which is situated at the rear of the upper tier . The stand is the traditional seating area of the Suicide Squad , who had previously stood in the Longside until the terrace was demolished in 1995 . In the space between the upper and lower tiers of the James Hargreaves Stand there is a corporate area , which apart from being used for matchday hospitality is used for functions and events . Both the suite and the home dressing room , is licensed to hold civil marriage services . 
 The Jimmy McIlroy Stand is situated at the eastern side of the pitch and has a current capacity of 6 @,@ 280 . The upper tier of the stand is the designated family area at Turf Moor and like the James Hargreaves Stand , it has a number of corporate hospitality boxes . The Bob Lord Stand , which has a capacity of just under 4 @,@ 000 fans , runs parallel with Harry Potts Way and houses the executive lounges as well as the Burnley Football Club trophy room . The stand was built in 1974 and was paid for in part by the sale of Martin Dobson to Everton . Named after Bob Lord , the former chairman of Burnley , the stand cost £ 480 @,@ 000 was opened by Edward Heath , the Conservative Party leader at the time , a Burnley supporter , who had just been defeated as prime minister by Labour 's Harold Wilson . 
 The Cricket Field Stand , also known as the David Fishwick Stand for sponsorship reasons , is the oldest current stand at Turf Moor . It was constructed in 1969 and backs onto the clubhouse and pavilion of Burnley Cricket Club . It contains both teams ' dressing rooms as well as the officials ' lounge and the tunnel leading to the pitch . Turf Moor is one of the few remaining football grounds in England to have the changing facilities behind the goals . The stand was made available to home supporters for Burnley 's first Premier League season in 2009 – 10 , having previously been the away section of the stadium . 
 In the corner of the ground between the James Hargreaves Stand and Jimmy McIlroy Stand there is a 36m ² Barco video wall , which was previously situated in the Cricket Field Stand between 2007 and 2009 . In the car park behind the James Hargreaves Stand is Stadium Fitness , which includes a gymnasium , table @-@ tennis facilities and a large sports <unk> the ground , between the Jimmy McIlroy and Bob Lord stands is the Burnley club shop , otherwise known as the Clarets Superstore . Some of The club 's offices are sited above the store . 
 = = Future = = 
 On 27 July 2007 , Burnley revealed plans for a £ 20 million redevelopment of Turf Moor . The plans also included the creation of a youth academy at the club 's training facility at Gawthorpe Hall in nearby Padiham . The plans were detailed in six phases . In the first phase it was planned to move the changing rooms to the corner between the James Hargreaves Stand and the Jimmy McIlroy Stand . The second phase included the demolition of the Cricket Field Stand , a new stand to be built at that end of the ground that would incorporate a hotel , a restaurant and a newly constructed cricket pavilion , and would be able to accommodate 2 @,@ 500 fans . The redevelopments also included the construction of a multi @-@ storey car park adjacent to the stadium . Other planned improvements include a new club superstore and other retail outlets , and new business offices on the site of the current club shop . Revealed in the fifth phase was a transformation of the Bob Lord Stand , which will eventually house a multi @-@ screen cinema . The development of a second tier on the Bob Lord stand was later revealed by Burnley chief executive Paul Fletcher , taking the anticipated capacity of Turf Moor to 28 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 Work on the stadium was expected to start in late 2007 and finish in time for the 2010 season . Planning permission for the first stage of developments was granted on 7 April 2008 and work on the new players ' block was planned to commence in the summer of 2008 . It was decided to not start building until permission had been received for all phases of the development including the rebuilding of the Cricket Field Stand . In October 2008 , the project was put on hold by the club as a result of the global economic crisis restricting available funds . Revised plans were revealed in November 2009 , with further announcements expected in early 2010 . However further developments may be further delayed due to the club 's relegation from the Premier League . 
 In September 2011 , Burnley Football Club opened the UK 's first ever football university at Turf Moor known as the University College of Football Business . The university teaches up to 100 students per year about the business side of football . Seminar rooms have been added to the Jimmy McIlroy stand for lectures and classes . 
 The opening of this led to the building formerly The Sparrow Hawk Hotel being refurbished to act as student accommodation for the students studying at the <unk> . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Turf Moor is located to the east of Burnley town centre . The stadium has two car parks of its own , and there are also a number of parking facilities in the surrounding area . The railway station with the shortest walk to Turf Moor is Burnley Manchester Road . The stadium is also accessible from Burnley Central station on the East Lancashire Line which , although it is physically closer to the ground , is a slightly further walk due to the street layout and the intervening river . There are also a number of bus services in the area , and Turf Moor is very close to Burnley Bus Station . 
 = Robert C. Michelson = 
 Robert C. Michelson ( born 1951 ) is an American engineer and academic widely known for inventing the entomopter , a biologically inspired flapping @-@ winged aerial robot , and for having established the International Aerial Robotics Competition . He has received degrees in electrical engineering from the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and the Georgia Institute of Technology . Michelson 's professional career began at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory where he worked on radar @-@ based ocean surveillance systems . He later became a member of the research faculty at the Georgia Institute of Technology . At the Georgia Tech Research Institute ( GTRI ) he was involved in full @-@ time research , directing over 30 major research programs . 
 He is the author of three U.S. patents and over 90 journal papers , book chapters and reports . Michelson also developed classes in avionics and taught in the School of Aerospace Engineering at the Georgia Institute of Technology until his retirement from the University System of Georgia in 2004 . Michelson is the recipient of the 1998 AUVSI Pioneer Award and the 2001 Pirelli Award for the diffusion of scientific culture as well as the first Top Pirelli Prize . 
 During the 1990s , he created a tax @-@ exempt corporation to apply high tech solutions to modern archeology and has organized a number of archeological expeditions into eastern Anatolia . He now heads the engineering consulting company , Millennial Vision , LLC . Since the mid @-@ 1990s , Michelson 's work has concentrated on biologically inspired micro air vehicle design . Michelson is certified in various fields including Amateur radio , Scuba diving , experimental aircraft design / mechanics , and general contracting for home building . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Michelson was born in 1951 in Washington D.C. , the only son of Carroll and Evelyn Michelson , and is related to Christian Michelsen , the first Prime Minister of Norway . Michelson attended the Burgundy Farm Country Day School during the sixth through eighth grades where he developed an appreciation for botany and ornithology . While at Fort Hunt High School he was President of the Fort Hunt Amateur Rocket Club which built large ( 2m x 5 cm ) instrumented solid fuel rockets that were launched at the Camp Pickett artillery range in Blackstone , Virginia . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Michelson spent sixth through eighth grade at the Burgundy Farm Country Day School and later graduated from Fort Hunt High School in 1969 . He graduated from Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University in 1973 and the Georgia Institute of Technology in 1974 with degrees in Electrical Engineering . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 From 1971 to 1973 Michelson was a research engineer working on aerospace radar systems at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory in Washington D.C. He spent the next 30 years in various engineering and management capacities within the Georgia Tech Research Institute in Atlanta , Georgia . During the 1970s and 1980s Michelson primarily developed radar signal processing and control hardware , but was also interested in the automation of remote sensing systems ranging from the tracking of endangered species to the creation of realistic soldier training scenarios and simulation and testing of foreign military radar assets . In the late 1980s he became Head of the Georgia Tech Research Institute 's Technology Development Division and his interests turned to unmanned aerial vehicle systems as a fusion of autonomy , information technology , and aeronautics . In particular , " aerial robotics " ( a term he coined in 1990 to represent the infusion of cognition into unmanned aerial vehicles ) dominated his research for the next two decades . Since the mid @-@ 1990s , Michelson 's work has concentrated on biologically inspired micro air vehicle design . From 1997 through 2004 Michelson was adjunct associate professor to the School of Aerospace Engineering , teaching classes in avionics for unmanned aerial vehicles ( UAVs ) and Micro / Mini Air Vehicle ( MAV ) design . Michelson retired from the Georgia Tech Research Institute in September 2004 and currently holds the title of Principal Research Engineer Emeritus with the Institute . In 2004 he created Millennial Vision , LLC to continue research into biologically inspired aerial robots and remote sensing . He is the President of <unk> ( Scientific Enterprise in Pursuit and Discovery of Ancient Cultures ) , a nonprofit educational and scientific organization . He was a member of the board of directors for The Sharp Mountain Preserve for a period of five years ( 2008 @-@ 2012 ) . 
 = = Professional activities = = 
 Michelson has been the U.S. representative and deputy chief referee to the Aviation Industry Corporation of China 's UAV Grand Prix during its inaugural year ( 2011 ) , and again in 2013 and 2015 . He was the section editor for " <unk> and Bio @-@ Inspired UAVs " in Springer 's Handbook of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles ( released in 2014 ) . Michelson was the NATO / RTA ( Research and Technology Agency ) lecturer at the Turkish Air Force Academy ( Hava Harp <unk> ) in Istanbul in 2006 , and invited lecturer on Micro Air Vehicle technology at both the von Karman Institute for Fluid Dynamics ( 1999 & 2003 ) and the Royal Military Academy ( 2001 ) in Brussels . He was the first " <unk> Technology Speaker " ( 1998 ) and has been a visiting technology professor in six nations : Australia ( 2002 ) , Belgium ( 1999 , 2003 ) , Norway ( 2001 ) , Sweden ( 2001 ) , Turkey ( 2001 , 2006 ) , and Mexico ( 2010 ) . Michelson was a consultant to the U.S. Army and the Indian Ministry of Defence in 2008 , responsible for defining and organizing the 1st <unk> Micro Air Vehicle Demonstration in Agra India . He performed similar duties for the U.S. Army in defining the 1st US @-@ European Micro Air Vehicle Competition / Demonstration in Garmisch Germany in 2005 . He created the short course , 21st Century Aerial Robotics , and the digital signal processing lecture / demonstrations in “ Principals of Modern Radar ” at the Georgia Institute of Technology . He is also creator and organizer of the annual International Aerial Robotics Competition . Before joining the staff of the Georgia Tech Research Institute he participated in design and endo @-@ atmospheric flight testing of computer @-@ controlled space @-@ based radar ocean surveillance systems while employed by the Naval Research Laboratory in Washington , D.C. 
 Michelson is listed in various editions of Who ’ s Who in Engineering , Who ’ s Who in America , and the 23rd edition of Who ’ s Who in the World . He is the author of over 90 reports , journal papers , and book chapters . 
 = = = Project director = = = 
 While at the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory , Michelson worked on radar @-@ based ocean surveillance systems and flew hardware test missions on a Lockheed Warning Star PO @-@ 1W Super Constellation . In 1974 Michelson began work at the Georgia Tech Research Institute , where he got his first contract when an entry @-@ level engineer ( Research Engineer I ) . This first project involved methods to electronically track the endangered species Trichechus manatus ( West Indian Manatee ) in the waters around the Kennedy Space Center . 
 Michelson directed over 30 major research projects during his career at the Institute . In 1979 Michelson directed the Army 's Indirect Fire Simulation effort conducted for Combat Development and Experimentation Command ( <unk> ) . Michelson directed a Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA ) program to show feasibility of a non @-@ line @-@ of @-@ sight radio @-@ acoustic sensor for bending radar signals using the Bragg principle to detect obstacle @-@ masked targets ( essentially making radars look around corners ) . He also directed a program to evaluate ground penetration radar for detection of buried natural gas leaks in urban utility systems . During 1981 , Michelson directed a program for the automated noninvasive testing of captured foreign threat assets . This system developed by Michelson 's design team remained in use by a foreign power for nearly a decade . Other radar test devices were also developed by Michelson for U.S. military test and evaluation purposes within the United States , including a program to develop a Ka @-@ band Linear Electronics Countermeasure Source ( <unk> ) for use in testing U.S. Army millimeter wave assets . 
 Michelson directed various efforts pertaining to future transportation . His team invented battery @-@ state @-@ of @-@ charge estimation techniques , developed electric vehicle systems simulation tools , and experimented with actively blown surfaces on passenger vehicles . During the mid @-@ 1990s , Michelson 's research began to focus almost entirely on unmanned vehicle systems , especially those with the power of flight . He directed efforts with both U.S. Government agencies and private industry pertaining to unmanned aerial vehicles systems ( UAS ) . One of his first UAS development programs was for a traffic surveillance drone using a compound ducted fan design , made to fly over Atlanta 's highways in order to fill surveillance gaps in the State 's tower @-@ mounted traffic camera system . It also could be sent to traffic accident locations to gather and relay vital information in advance of first @-@ responder arrival . Funding shortfalls resulted in the cancellation of the project before its maiden flight , but the design was later marketed for military use . Michelson 's focus turned to smaller vehicle systems that could fly indoors autonomously without the aid of global positioning system ( GPS ) reference signals . Under various contracts to DARPA and the Air Force , and using internal research and development funds from the Georgia Tech Research Institute , his design team designed a micro air vehicle ( MAV ) known as the entomopter . The NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts recognized the unique flight qualities of the entomopter and awarded Michelson two contracts to explore the feasibility of the entomopter for slow flight in Mars ' lower atmosphere . 
 In 2004 Michelson retired from the Georgia Tech Research Institute and started Millennial Vision , LLC which continued to pursue UAS and MAV research . Soon after establishing Millennial Vision , LLC , Michelson became engaged in a program to develop an unmanned stratospheric airship for persistent reconnaissance . He also was interested in <unk> and competitions by helping to define and organize various international events such as the 1st US @-@ European MAV event in Garmisch Germany ( MAV @-@ 05 ) and the subsequent 1st US @-@ Asian Demonstration and Assessment of Micro Aerial Vehicle and Unmanned Ground Vehicle Technology ( MAV @-@ 08 ) held in Agra India , as adjunct to the U.S. Army <unk> @-@ Pacific and Indian Ministry of Defence . 
 = = = Associate professor of Aerospace Engineering = = = 
 During the 1990s , Michelson became an adjunct associate professor in the Georgia Tech School of Aerospace Engineering , where he taught graduate classes in avionics , with emphasis on unmanned aerial vehicles and micro air vehicles . 
 In parallel with his teaching duties in the Georgia Tech School of Aerospace Engineering , Michelson created a team @-@ taught short course through the Georgia Tech Department of Continuing Education entitled , " 21st Century Aerial Robotics " . Laurence " Nuke " Newcome and Michelson taught this course on the campus of the Georgia Institute of Technology for several years before engaging in single offerings around the United States as well as Sweden , Norway , and Turkey under NATO grants . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 Michelson is an Associate Fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics ( AIAA ) , Senior Member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers ( IEEE ) , and a Full Member of the Scientific Research Society of North America , Sigma Xi . During the 1990s he served as President and member of the Board of Directors of the Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems ( AUVSI ) International organization . In 1998 Michelson received the AUVSI Pioneer Award which is the highest level of recognition within the unmanned systems industry for technical contributions . Michelson is the recipient of the 2001 Pirelli Award for the diffusion of scientific culture , given by an international jury for the " best multimedia project coming from any educational institution in the world " . For endeavors related to the entomopter , he was also awarded the first € 25 @,@ 000 Top Pirelli Prize . In 2016 , the International Aerial Robotics Competition and its creator , Michelson , were officially recognized during the Georgia legislative session in the form of " Senate Resolution 1255 ” which recognized his effort in the development of the longest running aerial robotics competition in the world and for having been responsible for moving forward the state of the art in aerial robotics on several occasions during the past quarter century . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Michelson has engaged in marine aquarium design and coral propagation since 1997 when he designed and built a fully automated marine reef biome , in which he propagated various coral species that he collected himself . He has been a NAUI certified scuba diver since 1969 , and has been a recreational diver in the Caribbean Sea and Pacific Ocean , where he dived on various wrecks and developed methods of collecting and successfully transporting marine invertebrates for propagation . Michelson has also built and flown his own man @-@ rated experimental rotorcraft . <unk> is a single seat gyrocopter for which Michelson is the FAA certified mechanic and pilot . 
 While working with ground penetrating radar for detection of urban gas leaks , road voids , and buried land mines at the Georgia Tech Research Institute , Michelson became interested in the use of high technology applications to archeology . Since 1995 he has organized half a dozen excursions into the military zone along the Turkish @-@ Iranian border , often with Turkish military escort , to research ancient <unk> artifacts of the eastern Anatolia region and has created a 501 ( c3 ) non @-@ profit corporation to apply various non @-@ traditional technologies to the field of archeology . 
 Michelson completed training in general contracting / home building in 1986 and built his own home . Later he was overseer for the construction of a Woodstock Georgia church building while continuing his career at the Georgia Tech Research Institute . In 2013 he completed a home of his own design in the mountains of North Georgia that was lumber @-@ free , consisting entirely of steel structural members with concrete foundation and concrete exterior . 
 Michelson was a Boy Scout and has maintained interest in scouting principles over the years . As a youth he attained Star rank in Troop 981 located in Alexandria Virginia , and was inducted into the Order of the Arrow . He became a Brotherhood member of <unk> <unk> Lodge 470 , one of the largest lodges in the nation , and participated in activities such as the Philmont Scout Reservation ( 1967 ) . Influenced by their father , both of Michelson 's sons are Eagle Scouts with gold and silver palm awards . Michelson was adult advisor to Boy Scouts of America ( BSA ) Troop / Crew 8880 until its transition away from the BSA to becoming a Trail Life USA unit where Michelson remains in an advisory capacity . 
 Michelson has had interest in languages and syntax both for computers and spoken communication . He was formally taught Fortran in undergraduate school and learned BASIC , Forth , and various assembly languages on his own in support of his computer @-@ based projects . He designed the target processing unit for the Army 's Environment and Radar Operation Simulator ( EROS ) where it was necessary to design the hardware and coding language for a 10 MHz ( 100 ns cycle time ) processor before such things were available in microprocessor form . As to spoken languages , he is fluent in English , and is proficient in both Spanish and Turkish . 
 = = Presence in popular media and literature = = 
 Michelson has been widely interviewed and quoted in print ( e.g. , Business Week , Popular Mechanics , Scientific American , Chronicle of Higher Education ) , radio ( e.g. , National Public Radio , Armed Forces Radio , American Association for the Advancement of Science radio syndicate ) , and on television ( e.g. , Scientific American Frontiers , Discovery Channel , CNN , BBC , and various ABC / CBS / NBC / Fox affiliates ) . Worldwide interest in robotics , and especially the robots of war , spawned a series of televised robotics programming about Michelson 's work . A technical biography of Robert Michelson is the subject of episode 1008 of the television program Beyond Invention , which chronicles a number of his research projects including UAV research , the International Aerial Robotics Competition , the entomopter @-@ based Mars surveyor , and his work with automated coral propagation . Michelson is featured in various television programs focused specifically on the International Aerial Robotics Competition , including an hour @-@ long Discovery Science Channel program entitled <unk> . Michelson has been often quoted in news programming with regard to the International Aerial Robotics Competition and the applications of the underlying technology to military and civilian spheres . As the use of robotic drone aircraft increased during the Gulf Wars , public interest in the subject was peaked and Michelson began to be featured in series and specials such as the NOVA episode " Spies that Fly " and the BBC special Seven Ways to Topple Saddam . Because of the notoriety of his aerial robotic research , Michelson even became the basis for the fictional character Michael C. Robertson in the novel Soft Target : The Air ( 2007 ) by Joel <unk> . In this work , Michael C. Robertson is the creator of the entomopter at the Georgia Technology Research Institute . This fictitious character 's name is an anagram of Robert C. Michelson , the actual inventor of the entomopter at the Georgia Tech Research Institute . Michelson 's entomopter is also featured in another of Joel <unk> 's novels , Target Acquired ( 2003 ) . 
 = = Patents = = 
 US patent 6 @,@ 082 @,@ 671 , Robert C. Michelson , " <unk> and Method for Using Same " , issued 2000 @-@ 07 @-@ 04 
 US patent 6 @,@ 094 @,@ 033 , Robert C. Michelson , " Battery State of Charge Detector with Rapid Charging Capability and Method " , issued 2000 @-@ 07 @-@ 25 
 US patent 6 @,@ 446 @,@ 909 , Robert C. Michelson , " <unk> Chemical Muscle ( RCM ) and Method for Using Same " , issued 2002 @-@ 09 @-@ 10 
 = = Representative publications = = 
 “ Test and Evaluation for Fully Autonomous Micro Air Vehicles , ” The <unk> Journal , December 2008 , Volume 29 , Number 4 , ISSN 1054 @-@ <unk> International Test and Evaluation Association , pp. 367 – 374 
 “ Very small flying machines , ” 2006 Yearbook of Science & Technology , McGraw @-@ Hill , New York , ISBN 0 @-@ 07 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 , 2006 , pp. 341 – 344 
 “ Novel Approaches to Miniature Flight Platforms , ” Proceedings of the Institute of Mechanical Engineers , Vol . 218 Part G : Journal of Aerospace Engineering , Special Issue Paper 2004 , pp. 363 – 373 
 “ Beyond <unk> Inspired Insect Flight , ” von Karman Institute for Fluid Dynamics <unk> / AVT Lecture Series on Low Reynolds Number Aerodynamics on Aircraft Including Applications in Emerging UAV Technology , Brussels Belgium , 24 – 28 November 2003 
 “ The <unk> , ” <unk> for Biomimetic Robots , ISBN 0 @-@ 262 @-@ <unk> @-@ X , The MIT Press , September 2002 , pp. 481 – 509 
 “ Autonomous Vehicles , ” Proceedings of the IEEE , Vol . 84 , No. 8 , August 1996 , pp. 1147 – 1164 
 “ Feasibility of Applying Radio @-@ Acoustic Techniques to Non Line @-@ of @-@ Sight Sensing , ” AIAA Journal of Aircraft , Vol . 33 , No. 2 , March – April 1996 , pp. 260 – 267 
 “ Tracking of the Florida Manatee , ” ISA Transactions , Vol . 21 , No. 1 , 1982 , pp. 79 – 85 
 = French ironclad Normandie = 
 The French ironclad Normandie was the third and last of the three wooden @-@ hulled Gloire @-@ class ironclads built for the French Navy in 1858 – 62 . The ships of the Gloire class were classified as armoured frigates because they only had a single gun deck and their traditional disposition of guns arrayed along the length of the hull also meant that they were broadside ironclads . Normandie was the first ironclad to cross the Atlantic in support of the French intervention in Mexico in 1862 . Although the ship was active during the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 , she saw no action . The unseasoned timber of her hull rotted quickly ; she was condemned in 1871 and subsequently scrapped . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Designed by the French naval architect Henri Dupuy de Lôme , the ships of the class were intended to fight in the line of battle , unlike the first British ironclads . The ship was 77 @.@ 25 metres ( 253 ft 5 in ) long , with a beam of 17 metres ( 55 ft 9 in ) . Normandie had a maximum draft of 8 @.@ 48 metres ( 27 ft 10 in ) , a depth of hold of 10 @.@ 67 metres ( 35 ft 0 in ) and displaced 5 @,@ 650 tonnes ( 5 @,@ 560 long tons ) . The ships of the class had a high metacentric height of 2 @.@ 1 metres ( 7 ft ) and consequently rolled badly . With their gun ports only 1 @.@ 88 metres ( 6 ft 2 in ) above the waterline , they proved to be very wet . 
 Normandie had a single horizontal return connecting @-@ rod compound steam engine that drove one propeller . The engine was powered by eight Indret oval boilers and was designed for a capacity of 2 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 900 kW ) . She carried a maximum of 675 tonnes ( 664 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 4 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 500 mi ) at a speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . The Gloire @-@ class ships were initially fitted with a light barquentine rig with three masts that had a sail area around 1 @,@ 100 square metres ( 11 @,@ 800 sq ft ) . This was later changed to a full ship rig of 2 @,@ 500 square metres ( 27 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , but later had to be reduced because excessive rolling . 
 The Gloire @-@ class ships were armed with 36 Modèle 1858 164 @.@ 7 @-@ millimetre ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns , 34 of which were positioned on the single gun deck in the broadside . The remaining two guns were placed on the upper deck as chase guns . They fired a 44 @.@ 9 @-@ kilogram ( 99 @.@ 0 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of only 322 metres per second ( 1 @,@ 060 ft / s ) and proved to be ineffective against armour . They were replaced by rifled breech @-@ loading Modèle 1864 guns in 1868 . Six 240 @-@ millimetre ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) guns were mounted in the centre of the gun deck and a pair of 194 @-@ millimetre ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) guns replaced the original chase guns . 
 Normandie 's wooden hull was completely armoured with wrought iron plates 120 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick . Backed by the 760 @-@ millimetre ( 30 in ) sides of the hull , the armour extended 5 @.@ 4 metres ( 17 ft 9 in ) above the waterline and 2 @.@ 0 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) below . The Gloire @-@ class ships had an open @-@ topped conning tower with armour 100 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick and 10 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) of armour underneath the wooden upper deck . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Named after the province of Normandy , Normandie was ordered around September 1858 , six months after her sisters . The ship was laid down at the Arsenal de Cherbourg on 14 September 1858 , launched on 10 March 1860 and completed on 13 May 1862 . In July 1862 , Normandie became the first ironclad to cross the Atlantic , as the flagship of Vice Admiral Edmond Jurien de La <unk> , on her way to support the French intervention in Mexico . She was forced to return in April 1863 due to an outbreak of yellow fever that killed her captain , among others . While assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet , the ship made a port visit in August 1865 to Brest where the fleet hosted the British Channel Fleet . A few days later the French fleet made a reciprocal visit to Portsmouth where it was hosted by the Channel Fleet . From 1865 to 1868 , Normandie was assigned to the Evolutionary Squadron where she was commanded by Bernard Jauréguiberry , among others . The ship was assigned to the ironclad squadron commanded by Rear Admiral <unk> during the Franco @-@ Prussian War , but saw no action . Built of unseasoned timber , Normandie was in poor shape after the war and was decommissioned on 17 June 1871 . Condemned on 1 August , the ship was subsequently broken up and her engine was installed in the breastwork monitor Tonnerre . 
 = Care Bears Movie II : A New Generation = 
 Care Bears Movie II : A New Generation is a 1986 children 's animated film produced by LBS Communications , Inc. and Canadian animation studio Nelvana and released by Columbia Pictures . The third animated feature from Nelvana , it was directed by Dale Schott , written by Peter <unk> and produced by Nelvana 's three founders ( Michael Hirsh , Patrick Loubert and Clive A. Smith ) . It starred the voices of Alyson Court , Cree Summer , Maxine Miller and Hadley Kay . 
 In the second film based on the Care Bears franchise , a character called The Great Wishing Star ( voiced by Chris Wiggins ) tells the origins of the Care Bears , and the story of their first Caring Mission . True Heart Bear and Noble Heart Horse lead the other Care Bears and Care Bear Cousins , as they come to the aid of Christy , a young camper who is tempted by an evil shape @-@ shifting figure named Dark Heart . The film marked the first appearance of the Care Bear Cubs , who also had their own line of toys . 
 A New Generation was made over a seven @-@ month period at Nelvana 's Toronto facilities , with additional work handled by Taiwan 's Wang Film Productions , and involved several crew members who had worked on the original Care Bears Movie . Patricia Cullen served as composer , and Los Angeles musicians Dean and Carol Parks worked on the film 's six songs . The Samuel Goldwyn Company , a U.S. independent distributor , was originally set to release this follow @-@ up ; demands from the film 's producers caused the company to give up . To the chagrin of Goldwyn 's founder , the worldwide rights were then acquired by Hollywood studio Columbia Pictures . 
 Upon its release in March 1986 , A New Generation gained mostly negative critical attention ; some of its key elements received comparisons to the German legend Faust and J. M. Barrie 's Peter Pan . The film grossed only US $ 8 @.@ 5 million in North America , about a third of what the previous instalment earned , and over US $ 12 million worldwide . It was released on video in August 1986 , and on DVD in April 2003 . This was the last animated feature for Columbia until Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within in 2001 . A third film starring the title characters , The Care Bears Adventure in Wonderland , was released in 1987 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Aboard their boat , a yellow bear and a purple horse look after the baby animals known as the Care Bear Cubs and Care Bear Cousin Cubs . On the way , a red sea serpent threatens them — one of the many forms of Dark Heart , an evil spirit . They escape by following a rainbow up to the sky , while the boat transforms into the Cloud Clipper . There , the Great Wishing Star gives the group their " tummy symbols " , pictures that indicate each creature 's role or specialty . True Heart Bear and Noble Heart Horse , as the characters are named , become founders of the Kingdom of Caring , a land which comprises Care @-@ a @-@ Lot and the Forest of Feelings . 
 For the Bears ' first Caring Mission , True Heart and stowaway Swift Heart Rabbit ( one of the Cousins ) travel to Earth and visit a summer camp . There , they meet three of its participants : a girl named Christy , and her friends , the twins John and Dawn . A boastful boy nicknamed the " Camp Champ " always defeats them in competitions , and assigns them to trash duty . Christy is unsatisfied at this ; she and her friends run away , only to get lost in the woods . True Heart soon finds John and Dawn , and brings them to the Kingdom of Caring . After they arrive , the children hear a bell toll from the Caring Meter , which tells the Bears how much caring is taking place on Earth . Noble Heart and True Heart tell them to babysit the Cubs , before they leave to search for Dark Heart and Christy . 
 Meanwhile , in the woods , Christy meets Dark Heart ( as a human boy ) for the first time , and asks him to make her the new Camp Champ . He grants her that wish , telling her she must pay him back with one favor , and heads away while she rejoins her friends . Aware of Dark Heart 's potential , True Heart and Noble Heart move the Bear Cubs to Care @-@ a @-@ Lot , and the Cousin Cubs to the Forest of Feelings . Both sets quickly grow up to become the Care Bear Family . 
 Later , while the Bears prepare a party for the Kingdom 's founders , Dark Heart enters Care @-@ a @-@ Lot in disguise so that he can capture the whole Family . A cluster of Star Buddies , assistants to the Bears and Great Wishing Star , drives him off ; he then morphs into a raging red cloud . The Bears shoot light at him from their bellies , forming their " Care Bear Stare " ; the Cousins also help by using their " Care Cousin Call " . Afterward , True Heart and Noble Heart decide to search for him , and leave the Bears to handle missions all by themselves . 
 During their patrol , Wish Bear spots Christy stranded in a canoe within a lake ; the other Bears and Cousins set out to rescue her . Dark Heart fires lightning bolts before the team , and captures many of them with his magic bag — the favor he wanted Christy to do all along . The few Family members at hand determine that she has teamed up with him . This prompts Tenderheart Bear to hold a conference at the Hall of Hearts ; Friend Bear , Secret Bear and Christy 's friends later join them . 
 That night , Dark Heart 's influence causes the other children to wreck the camp . The Bears and Cousins search for the Family members , before Dark Heart imprisons them — first in cages , then inside big rubies hanging from a chandelier . Meanwhile , John and Dawn tell Christy of their conviction to rescue the Family from the villain . Feeling guilty , she finally pays him back by admitting what she has done . Despite this , her bargain with Dark Heart is over . 
 True Heart , Noble Heart , John and Dawn enter Dark Heart 's lair amid his impending deed ; Christy asks him to free the others . While True Heart and Noble Heart enact their Stare , lightning from his cloud strikes Christy , who screams in fear and gets <unk> and wounded . With little energy left in her , she crashes down the chandelier with a marble . The Family members , finally free from the rubies , help True Heart and Noble Heart out . 
 At the sight of a dead Christy , Dark Heart becomes remorseful for his actions . He asks the Care Bears to bring her back to life , but is disappointed that their kindness is not even enough . So he , the Family , John and Dawn chant " We care ! " enough times to bring her back to life . Soon after , the group quickly leaves the cave as it transforms into an outhouse . 
 Dark Heart becomes a real boy , and everyone is overjoyed . After a swim in the lake , the campers say goodbye to the Bears and Cousins ; the former Dark Heart promises to be a better person at camp . The film ends with a message from its narrator , the Great Wishing Star , and flashbacks of the Care Bear Family 's childhood . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The Care Bears franchise was created in 1981 by Those Characters from Cleveland , a division of the greeting card company American Greetings . Early in their tenure , the characters appeared as toys from the Kenner company , and also in greeting cards by Elena Kucharik . They starred in two syndicated television specials from a Canadian animation studio , Atkinson Film @-@ Arts of Ottawa : The Care Bears in the Land Without Feelings ( 1983 ) and The Care Bears Battle the Freeze Machine ( 1984 ) . After the specials , Toronto 's Nelvana studio produced the first Care Bears Movie in less than eight months . It was distributed in the United States by The Samuel Goldwyn Company , an independent outfit , and grossed US $ 22 @.@ 9 million at the North American box @-@ office , the largest amount for a non @-@ Disney animated film at the time . This success guaranteed production of a second film , which was in consideration by May 1985 . As with the original , production took place at Nelvana 's facilities and Taiwan 's Wang Film Productions ; the Canadian studio also hired South Korean personnel to handle inking and painting . This time , over one hundred Nelvana animators worked on the film over a seven @-@ month period that lasted until February 1986 ; the company itself received credit for the story development . American Greetings and Kenner commissioned Nelvana to make the sequel on contract ; television syndicator LBS Communications , a co @-@ financier of the first one , became the producer and presenter . 
 Care Bears Movie II was Nelvana 's third animated feature film , after 1983 's Rock & Rule and The Care Bears Movie . It marked the directorial debut of Dale Schott , a Nelvana staff member who served as assistant director on the first Care Bears Movie , as well as the Nelvana / Lucasfilm TV series Ewoks . Several other crewmembers from the first film returned to the fold ; Nelvana 's founders ( Michael Hirsh , Patrick Loubert and Clive A. Smith ) served as producers , while Peter <unk> wrote the screenplay and Charles Bonifacio handled animation duties . Jack Chojnacki , the co @-@ president of American Greetings ' licensing division Those Characters from Cleveland , served once again as an executive producer . A roster of Toronto voice actors — among them Cree Summer , Sunny <unk> Thrasher , Dan Hennessey and Hadley Kay — appeared in this follow @-@ up . Mickey Rooney and Georgia Engel , who appeared in the first film , did not return . 
 At one point , The Samuel Goldwyn Company was about to release A New Generation , but lost the distribution rights after turning down demands from the producers . Eventually , Nelvana went into negotiations with the Hollywood studio Columbia Pictures , which acquired worldwide theatrical rights in early 1986 . This led founder Samuel Goldwyn , Jr. to remark : " The fact that Columbia is distributing the Care Bears sequel is typical of the greed of the big studios . Someone else has to go in and prove something works , then a studio will charge in . " By contrast , Goldwyn acquired the rights to the original film after major U.S. studios passed on it ; they did not see the financial potential in a movie aimed strictly for children . 
 = = = Allusions = = = 
 According to Richard Freedman of the Newhouse News Service , " This must be the first version of the Faust myth in which not only does Faust ( or Faustina [ Christy ] , here ) manage to weasel out of the pact with the Devil , but succeeds in regenerating him , as well . " Elliot Krieger of Rhode Island 's Providence Journal also took note of such a theme , headlining his review " Faust goes to summer camp " . In regards to continuity issues , a reviewer in The Scarecrow Movie Guide observed a " montage showing the Care Bears and their Cousins growing up together from infancy to full Care Bear maturation — nullifying everything that happened in the first movie " . Mike McLane of Florida 's Gainesville Sun gave a few suggestions of the storyline 's possible religious subtext . He compared the Great Wishing Star to God , the Bears ' " beautiful cloud kingdom " of Care @-@ a @-@ Lot to Heaven , and Dark Heart to Satan ; he also hinted that the Bears protected humankind like angels did . 
 Charles Solomon pointed out that the film 's climax , in which the Bears help revive Christy , " borrows ... flagrantly from Peter Pan " . The Scarecrow contributor took note of this aspect , writing , " There 's an excruciating scene where the Care Bears turn to the audience and plead for help in the form of excessive and focused caring . " In his critique , Hal Lipper called it the " Tinker Bell Principle " , whereupon the audience must come together to save a dying character . In Vincent Canby 's opinion , the Great Wishing Star " looks like Tinker Bell if she were a star @-@ shaped beanbag " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 As with the original film , Patricia Cullen composed the score for Care Bears Movie II . The soundtrack album was released in LP format by Kid Stuff Records . Los Angeles musicians Dean and Carol Parks were credited as producers , writers and performers of the film 's six songs , which were included on the album . Stephen Bishop , performer of the Oscar @-@ nominated " It Might Be You " from Tootsie , and Debbie Allen from the TV series Fame , were on hand as vocalists . John Braden arranged and edited the album . 
 The Parks recorded their contributions to the project at their home . At the time of production , they shared their experiences of working on the soundtrack : 
 Our children helped us tremendously with their feedback as real Care Bear fans . When we took on this project , we made up our mind not to write down to children . There 's a huge library of over @-@ simplistic music available to children , but kids love music and they have very sophisticated tastes . When Debbie came over to the house to record ' Care Bears Cheer Song , ' she brought her baby and nanny and manager and everyone had a great time . 
 The songs are particularly important because they forward the movement and reflect the action and feelings of the story . We try to make it so that everyone can relate to the music . 
 Paul Attanasio of The Washington Post gave a mixed response to the film 's music . " The songs are dopey , " he said , " but the score [ ... ] , which is mostly seven kinds of sprightly , has its occasional moments . " Vincent Canby wrote in his review , " [ There are ] unseen loudspeakers [ that ] pour out a nonstop Hit Parade of songs to be interred by , including ' I Care for You , ' ' Our Beginning ' and ' Forever Young . ' " But Joe Fox of The Windsor Star recommended it , adding , " [ W ] <unk> things start to drag a snappy tune comes along to get everyone interested . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 Initially intended for a mid @-@ year release , Care Bears Movie II opened on March 7 , 1986 , in the U.S. and Canada , grossing US $ 243 @,@ 161 from 55 theatres , and US $ 449 @,@ 649 by its first few days . At this stage , it managed to rank above a reissue of Disney 's 1959 production Sleeping Beauty , which also premiered that same weekend . However , when the final weekend box office results were announced Sleeping Beauty outgrossed Care Bears II by $ 59 @,@ 000 . Its wide @-@ release opening on March 21 brought in $ 2 @.@ 5 million from 1 @,@ 446 theatres , placing seventh on the box office chart . Over the next two weekends it earned little more than $ 1 million in 12th place . During release , it faced competition from another toy @-@ based film , Atlantic Releasing 's <unk> : Battle of the Rock Lords . At the time A New Generation opened , Richard Martin of the Ottawa Citizen commented : " ... The first Care Bears movie has become the most successful non @-@ Disney animated feature ever . This second movie from Nelvana could very well surpass that record , since it held the attention of all but the youngest members of the first @-@ night audience and even has something to offer adults . " Ultimately , this installment earned US $ 8 @,@ 540 @,@ 346 in North America — about a third of what the previous one earned ; over US $ 1 million of this total came from Canada . By 1988 , it made over US $ 12 million worldwide . 
 = = = Overseas = = = 
 Care Bears Movie II made its debut in the United Kingdom , via Columbia @-@ EMI @-@ Warner Distributors , on July 25 , 1986 ; it later appeared on home video in that country under the RCA / Columbia Pictures and Video Collection International labels . Warner @-@ Columbia Film of France released it on April 8 , 1987 as Les Bisounours II — Une nouvelle génération ; publishing rights were held by Hachette Livre . It was released in the Netherlands on April 9 , 1987 , as De Troetelbeertjes Deel 2 : Nieuwe <unk> Van De Troetelbeertjes . The film is also known as Gli <unk> del cuore II in Italy , and <unk> : på nya <unk> in Sweden . 
 The Warner @-@ Columbia branch in West Germany released it under the title Glücks @-@ <unk> , Teil 2 — <unk> im <unk> ( Care Bears lucky , Part 2 Now in Adventureland ) on December 11 , 1986 . It sold 174 @,@ 550 tickets and ranked 84th place among the year 's releases in that market ( excluding re @-@ issues ) , grossing approximately € 665 @,@ 000 ( the equivalent of <unk> , or US $ 824 @,@ 000 ) . By comparison , <unk> 's release of the first film that same year placed 47th with 538 @,@ 487 tickets . On October 13 , 1987 , RCA / Columbia Pictures released the local version of Care Bears Movie II on video . 
 The film was released in Mexico on December 25 , 1986 , as Los <unk> <unk> II , and in April 1987 in the Philippines . By the early 1990s , it was marketed as <unk> <unk> II in Brazil . In China , it is known under the title of Baby Love Bears ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . In the Russia movie was distributed under several names , such as Wonder Bears : The New Generation ( Russian : <unk> @-@ <unk> . Новое <unk> ) , in a more corresponding translation to the original ( Russian : <unk> <unk> 2 : Новое <unk> ) and other . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received mostly negative reviews , in part because of their theory that Care Bears Movie II : A New Generation was part of the franchise 's marketing scheme at the time of release . This led The New York Times ' Vincent Canby to begin his review by proclaiming , " Product merchandising marches on . " Another reviewer claimed to have seen almost every collectible within the film 's first twenty minutes . The film was produced to serve as the franchise introduction of the Care Bear Cubs and the Care Bear Cousin Cubs , who also had their own line of toys from Kenner . The plushes , measuring 11 " in height , consisted of Bedtime Cub , Cheer Cub , <unk> Cub and Share Cub ; the line of Care Bear Cousin Cubs included Li 'l Bright Heart Raccoon , Li 'l Proud Heart Cat and Li 'l Swift Heart Rabbit . Kenner announced the introduction of the Cubs in 1985 , shortly before the film opened , and showcased them at the American International Toy Fair in February 1986 . 
 In The Motion Picture Guide 1987 Annual , Jay Robert Nash wrote that its title " refers to the new featured characters who , more than coincidentally , have ended up on the toy shelves of stores everywhere . " A critic from the Omaha World @-@ Herald , however , found it misleading and complained that the Cubs " are not ' a new generation ' at all " . Several critics considered the film a prequel to the original : the Omaha World Herald reviewer ; Edward Jones of Virginia 's The Free Lance @-@ Star ; Charles Solomon of the Los Angeles Times ; and Bill Cosford of The Miami Herald . According to Michael H. Price of the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram , " Care Bears Movie II is what the film industry calls a ' <unk> , ' tracing the origin of the Care Bear family and relatives of other species . " 
 In his Animated Movie Guide , animation expert Jerry Beck gave Care Bears Movie II a half @-@ star ( ½ ) out of four , and offered this consensus : 
 Unfortunately not many critics cared for the television standard limited animation , bland songs , and <unk> [ sic ] product placement in this film . Strictly for toddlers over age six , [ it ] tries too hard to cram new characters into the plotline . The characters are obviously introduced to create toy lines . 
 This is the weakest of the Care Bear movies . Avoid at all costs . 
 John Stanley expressed his views likewise in his 1988 film guide , Revenge of the Creature Features : 
 [ This ] inferior sequel [ is ] rather charmless . This is strictly Saturday Morning at the Cartoons , a blatant commercial for Care Bear toys and related products ... [ T ] he bulbs are out as far as ideas are concerned . 
 " Care Bears Movie II is a sort of pre @-@ sequel that , I suspect , requires its audiences to have some prior knowledge of Care Bears , " Vincent Canby said in his New York Times review . " Very young kids may love this , but anybody over the age of 4 might find it too spooky . " Hal Lipper of the St. Petersburg Times remarked that it " is an enormously engaging cartoon — quite a feat when you consider the saccharine psychobabble passing for dialogue " . The Miami Herald 's Bill Cosford gave it two and a half stars out of four , the same rating he had applied to its predecessor . Edward Jones commented that " The animation can 't compare with the best of Disney . Take a look at Sleeping Beauty [ ... ] and you 'll see the difference . " Likewise , Italian critic Paolo <unk> complained , " [ This is an ] ugly sequel with awkward animation , and not even the small fry will find it fun . " 
 Charles Solomon said , " The new Care Bears film ... is even more sloppily made and hawks its goods even more shamelessly . [ ... ] The film makers seem more concerned with showcasing the toys than providing entertainment ; shared profits obviously count for more than shared feelings . If someone started selling ' Hate Bears , ' there undoubtedly would be a film about them . " Gene Siskel awarded the film zero stars out of four ( along with " Thumbs Down " on At the Movies — the Siskel & Ebert TV show having not been introduced yet ) , while Leonard Maltin gave it a " BOMB " rating in his Movie Guide , and added : " Your kids deserve better entertainment than this treacly stuff about the Kingdom of Caring . <unk> animation from the era of toy merchandising tie @-@ ins . " The Gale Group publication , VideoHound 's Golden Movie Retriever , gave it one bone out of four in its 1992 edition , but revised it to two later on . In 2001 , the Los Angeles @-@ based Hastings Bad Cinema Society picked A New Generation as one of The 100 Worst Movies of the 20th Century . " Even suffering through a Barney video would be preferable to sitting through this , " said compiler Michael Lancaster . 
 The film received some positive reviews , however . Writing for The Advocate of Baton Rouge , Louisiana , Norma Dyess Michaud deemed it " a must @-@ see for preschoolers , especially those who are in the throes of the current Care Bear mania " . Richard Martin praised the script and climax , along with the performances of the orphan Cubs . " Their pastel , birthday @-@ cake @-@ and @-@ whipped @-@ cream world has never looked sweeter , " he stated . The Philadelphia Daily News commented that it was " even better than the first one , which was good " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Care Bears Movie II was released on VHS and Betamax by RCA / Columbia Pictures Home Video on August 21 , 1986 , and debuted in 12th place on Billboard 's Top Kid Video Sales chart on September 27 that same year . The film aired during 1987 on the Disney Channel , a premium television station , and was broadcast in later years on CBS , HBO , Showtime and The Movie Channel . It returned on VHS as part of the Columbia TriStar Family Collection on August 13 , 1996 . Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment premiered it on DVD on April 8 , 2003 ; the only special features in this edition were trailers for several of the company 's family @-@ oriented titles . This was the last animated feature to be released by Columbia Pictures until Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within in 2001 . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In 1987 , Nelvana followed A New Generation with The Care Bears Adventure in Wonderland or The Care Bears Movie . In this third film , the Bears and Cousins travel to Wonderland and save its Princess from a wizard ; Alice , a girl from the real world , takes her place . Self @-@ financed by Nelvana and released by Cineplex Odeon Films , it was the last Care Bears movie of the 1980s to go into theatres . It grossed US $ 2 @.@ 6 million in the North American market , and US $ 6 million worldwide by February 1988 . The Bears would not appear in another feature production until 2004 's direct @-@ to @-@ video effort , Care Bears : Journey to Joke @-@ a @-@ lot . 
 = Ohio State Route 363 = 
 State Route 363 ( SR 363 ) is a short north – south state highway located in west @-@ central Ohio . The southern terminus of this spur route is along the shores of Lake Loramie approximately two and a half miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) southeast of Minster , where the roadway becomes known as Lotus Road . The northern terminus of SR 363 is at a T @-@ intersection with SR 119 about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) east of Minster . 
 Created in the middle of the 1930s , this short highway , which exists in both Shelby and Auglaize counties , provides access from SR 119 to a small community of cottages situated on a peninsula that juts out from the north side of Lake Loramie . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 363 runs for less than one @-@ half mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) in Shelby County and a little more than one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) in Auglaize County . The highway is not a part of the National Highway System . Around 490 vehicles use the road in Auglaize County on average every year , and 410 vehicles in Shelby County . 
 The route begins on a peninsula that juts out from the north shore of Lake Loramie in Shelby County 's McLean Township , at a transition from Lotus Road , a street that continues for a short distance further onto the peninsula before dead ending . This peninsula is populated by a number of cottages . SR 363 traverses northeasterly through this community of cottages before turning north and heading into more rural territory . Bounded by farmland on the west side and woods on the east side , SR 363 intersects F and K Road , then crosses into Auglaize County 's Jackson Township . At this point , the highway is now bordered by woods on the west and a pair of homes on the east , before entering fully into a landscape of open farmland . SR 363 passes a few homes prior to coming to its endpoint at a T @-@ intersection with SR 119 . 
 = = History = = 
 This two @-@ county spur route was first designated in 1934 along the routing that it occupies today . No major changes have taken place to this highway since its inception . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Cyclone Bella = 
 Cyclone Bella was a destructive tropical cyclone that passed near the Mauritius outer island of Rodrigues . The second named storm of the season , Bella originated in the middle of January 1991 from a surge in the monsoon trough to the southwest of Sumatra . For several days , the system remained weak as it moved generally west @-@ southwestward . On January 25 , it intensified to tropical storm status , but Bella took three more days to intensify to tropical cyclone status , with 10 minute maximum sustained winds of 120 kilometres per hour ( 75 miles per hour ) . The cyclone attained peak intensity on January 29 , officially reaching winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center unofficially estimated winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) , the highest the agency estimated for any storm in the Southern Hemisphere in the year . Bella later turned to the southeast and weakened , passing about 50 km ( 30 mi ) west of Rodrigues on January 31 . The storm turned to the south @-@ southwest and back to the southeast again , becoming extratropical on February 4 . 
 While passing near Rodrigues , Bella produced strong winds and high tides , the latter of which caused flooding in the capital Port Mathurin . The storm was considered the worst on the island in 20 years . About 1 @,@ 500 homes were damaged or destroyed , leaving 1 @,@ 000 people homeless . Bella also severely damaged crops , roads , and the power grid on Rodrigues . The storm killed about half of the Rodrigues flying fox , a critically endangered species . Elsewhere , Bella was believed to have sunk a Madagascar cargo ship , with its 36 people on board . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Similar to Cyclone Alison that had formed in early January 1991 , a surge in the monsoon trough spawned what would become Tropical Cyclone Bella , associated with the intertropical convergence zone . On January 13 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began monitoring a system about 660 km ( 410 mi ) southwest of Padang , Sumatra in the Australian basin . Moving to the west @-@ southwest , the system crossed into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean on January 17 , and the next day was tracked by the Météo France office in Réunion ( MFR ) . On January 20 , the disturbance turned sharply to the south @-@ southeast , although its westward motion resumed late the following day , influenced by a ridge to the south . 
 On January 22 , the disturbance intensified into a tropical depression . The JTWC upgraded the storm to tropical storm status on January 23 , three days after classifying it as Tropical Cyclone 08S . On January 25 , the MFR upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Bella , a week after beginning to issue advisories . Around that time , the storm became visible on MFR satellite imagery . Following a lengthy period of minimal development , Bella subsequently intensified at a more regular rate as it slowed its forward motion . On January 26 , it turned more to the southwest , but the westward track resumed on the next day . Aided by warm sea surface temperatures of 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) , Bella began to intensify quickly . On January 28 , both the JTWC and the MFR upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , estimating winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) ; this made Bella a tropical cyclone , the first of the season . Around this time , the storm developed a well @-@ defined eye 60 km ( 35 mi ) in diameter . 
 After becoming a tropical cyclone , Bella continued to intensify , reaching peak winds on January 29 . The MFR estimated 10 minute winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) , and assessed a barometric pressure of 936 mbar ( 27 @.@ 6 inHg ) at that time . Meanwhile , the JTWC estimated 1 minute peak winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) ; this strength , equivalent to a super typhoon , was the highest the JTWC estimated for any Southern Hemisphere storm during the tropical cyclone year . On January 30 , Bella turned to the southeast and began weakening , affected by wind shear in the region . The cyclone passed about 50 km ( 30 mi ) west of Rodrigues at 03 : 00 UTC on January 31 , with 10 minute winds of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) . Shortly thereafter , the cyclone deteriorated into a tropical storm . The southeast trajectory was short @-@ lived , as Bella turned more to the south @-@ southwest on February 1 . After a final turn to the southeast , Bella became an extratropical cyclone on February 4 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Before Bella affected land , a class one warning , the lowest of four , was issued for Réunion , while a class four warning was issued for Rodrigues . 
 While moving near Rodrigues , Bella produced wind gusts of 210 km / h ( 130 mph ) , along with high tides that flooded the northern coastline , including the capital Port Mathurin . The storm damaged 1 @,@ 200 homes and destroyed 300 others , leaving about 1 @,@ 000 people homeless . About 30 schools were wrecked . The storm damaged about 75 % of the electrical network was damaged , which also disrupted water supply on the island , and about 30 % of roads were damaged . Over 90 % of the <unk> the island were destroyed , with many livestock killed . Cyclone Bella killed about half of the Rodrigues flying fox , a critically endangered species , decreasing the numbers from around 800 to around 400 . The species had regrown from a minimum of around 70 in 1971 , and the trend toward regrowth continued after the storm , reaching about 3 @,@ 500 in 2002 . The storm also affected the Rodrigues warbler . The storm also injured nine people , and overall , Bella was considered the worst storm on the island in 20 years . 
 A 16 @,@ 570 ton cargo ship traveling from Madagascar to Réunion was lost on January 30 about 700 km ( 430 mi ) to the south of the center of Bella . The ship likely sank due to the cyclone , with 36 people on board . 
 In the aftermath of the storm , seven people contracted Typhoid fever on Rodrigues in relation to the storm . After Bella passed , the government of Mauritius noted the need for 4 @,@ 500 m ( 15 @,@ 000 ft ) of galvanized pipes to assist in rebuilding , as well as generators . The United States Agency for International Development donated $ 25 @,@ 000 ( 1991 USD ) to Mauritius to help in the aftermath . France , the United Kingdom , and India also donated to the country . 
 = Grey 's Anatomy ( season 1 ) = 
 The first season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , began airing in the United States on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) on March 27 , 2005 and concluded on May 22 , 2005 . The first season introduces the main character , Meredith Grey , as she enrolls in Seattle Grace Hospital 's internship program and faces unexpected challenges and surprises . Season one had nine series regulars , four of whom have been part of the main cast ever since . The season initially served as a mid @-@ season replacement for the legal drama Boston Legal , airing in the Sunday night time slot at 10 : 00 , after Desperate Housewives . Although no clip shows have been produced for this season , the events that occur are recapped in " Straight to Heart " , a clip @-@ show which aired one week before the winter holiday hiatus of the second season ended . The season was officially released on DVD as two @-@ disc Region 1 box set under the title of Grey 's Anatomy : Season One on February 14 , 2006 by Buena Vista Home Entertainment . 
 The series ' protagonist and title character is Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , who is accepted into the residency program at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital . She joins the program as an intern and is assigned to work under their resident Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) , along with fellow interns an extremely competitive Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , an insecure Dr. George O 'Malley ( T. R. Knight ) , ex model Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) , and an arrogant Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) . The surgical wing is primarily supervised by the Chief of Surgery Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) . Dr. Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) is the head of <unk> surgery . Meredith is in a romantic relationship with her attending Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) a stranger she had a one @-@ night stand with , and is the daughter of the renowned surgeon Ellis Grey ( Kate Burton ) , who now suffers from Alzheimer 's . 
 The season 's reviews and critiques were hugely positive , and the series received several awards and nominations for the cast and crew including three nominations at the 57th Primetime Emmy Awards including Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series for Oh . The series also received three nominations at the Golden Globe Award with the series itself being nominated for Best Drama Series , Dempsey nominated for Best Actor in a Drama Series Oh winning the Best Supporting Actress while the entire cast was nominated in the Outstanding Cast – Drama Series category . Oh also won the Outstanding Actress in a Drama Series at the 12th Screen Actors Guild Awards . Chambers and Pompeo were nominated Choice TV Breakout Performances at the 2005 Teen Choice Awards . Peter Horton and Jeffrey Melman were also nominated for the Best Directing – Drama Series , Night for A Hard Day 's Night and Into You Like a Train respectively at the 58th Directors Guild of America Awards . 
 The first five episodes of the second season were conceived , written and shot to air as the final five episodes of the first season , but aired during the 2005 @-@ 2006 season due to the high number of viewers that watched " Who 's Zoomin ' Who ? " , the season 's highest @-@ rated episode with 22 @.@ 22 million viewers tuning in . The series was chosen in the top ten for several 2005 " best of television " lists , including USA Today , San Jose Mercury News , The New York Times , The Boston Globe and Chicago Tribune 
 = = Production = = 
 The series was created by Shonda Rhimes and was aired on the ABC Network in the U.S. The season was produced by Touchstone Television , currently ABC Studios , The Mark Gordon Company , ShondaLand Production Company , and was distributed by Buena Vista International , Inc .. The season 's executive producers were Rhimes , Betsy Beers , Mark Gordon , James D. Parriott , Krista Vernoff , Rob Corn , and Mark Wilding . The staff writers were Rhimes , Parriott , Ann Hamilton , Vernoff , Kip Koenig , Mimi Schmir , Gabrielle Stanton , and Harry Werksman , Jr .. The directors throughout the season were Peter Horton , Tony Goldwyn , Adam Davidson . John David Coles , Scott Brazil , Darnell Martin , Sarah Pia Anderson , and Wendey Stanzler . Rhimes served as the season 's show runner . She and Horton , who wrote and directed the first two episodes respectively , would also have written and directed the season 's final two episodes , had they not been transferred into the second season . 
 The show was announced in late 2004 as a mid @-@ season replacement for Boston Legal . It was originally scheduled to run in the Boston Legal time slot for just four weeks , but after receiving high ratings remained in the time slot for the remainder of the season . ABC Entertainment President Steve McPherson commented on the scheduling decision : " Ultimately we decided that , without having adequate lead time or marketing dollars to devote to moving either show so late in the season , we 'd continue to let ' Grey 's ' build on its tremendous momentum through May . " Prior to broadcast , it was announced that the show 's title would change from Grey 's Anatomy to Complications , although ultimately this did not come to pass . Francie Calfo , executive vice president for development at ABC Entertainment , commented on the show 's conception : " I think there was a need for this kind of show on our air , specifically a medical show . And Shonda found a twist on it that made it perfect for where we 're at right now . Medical shows are hard , and it was hard trying to figure out where ours could be different . But where everybody else is speeding up their medical shows , she found a way to slow it down , so you get to know the characters . There 's definitely a strong female appeal to it . " Rhimes explained that she had found the idea of a show about smart women competing against one another an interesting one . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Nine actors had star billing in the show 's first season . Series creator Shonda Rhimes wanted a diverse cast , and so created characters without pre @-@ specified races . Determined not to have a show in which " all the extras are white , except the lone janitor " , she has created what the New York Times have called " one of the most colorful backgrounds in television " . Rhimes used a " blind @-@ casting " technique , which resulted in several roles going to actors of different racial backgrounds than first envisioned . Isaiah Washington , eventually cast as Preston Burke , was originally considered for the role of Derek Shepherd , while Burke was initially to be played by a white actor who dropped out at the last moment . Chandra Wilson was cast in the role of Miranda Bailey , who Rhimes had imagined as a blonde until auditioning Wilson . The Campus have observed that the Grey 's Anatomy cast is actually more diverse than the city it emulates , noting that Seattle is actually 70 % Caucasian . 
 The nine characters who appear as series regulars in the first season all work in the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital . Five of the characters are interns : Meredith Grey portrayed by Ellen Pompeo , who is in a romantic relationship with her attending Derek Shepherd , and is the daughter of the renowned surgeon Ellis Grey , who now suffers from Alzheimer 's ; Cristina Yang portrayed by Sandra Oh , an extremely competitive intern who befriends Meredith and begins a sexual relationship with Preston Burke ; Izzie Stevens portrayed by Katherine Heigl , an ex model who struggles to be recognized as a doctor ; Alex Karev portrayed by Justin Chambers , an arrogant intern who initially irritates his colleagues , and George O 'Malley portrayed by T.R. Knight , an insecure intern with a lack of confidence , who develops a crush on Meredith . The interns are mentored by their resident Miranda Bailey portrayed by Chandra Wilson , a disciplined woman who is nicknamed " The Nazi " . The surgical program is led by the Chief of Surgery Dr. Richard Webber portrayed by James Pickens Jr .. In his employ are Preston Burke and Derek Shepherd from New York portrayed by Isaiah Washington and Patrick Dempsey respectively . Guest stars include Meredith 's mother Ellis , portrayed by Kate Burton , nurse Olivia Harper , portrayed by Sarah Utterback , who serves as a love interest for George and Alex , and Derek 's estranged wife Addison Montgomery , played by Kate Walsh . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The first season 's ratings were consistently high , ranking first in its timeslot and leading its closest competition by 7 @.@ 2 million viewers . It delivered ABC 's best audience retention following Desperate Housewives , was the highest rated show amongst 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds in 13 years since The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles , and produced ABC 's strongest series performance in the hour in more than four years . Commenting on the first season 's high ratings , Magna Global USA media analyst Steve Sternberg stated : " Roughly 80 percent of households during prime time only have one TV set on . People are looking for shows they can watch with other household members . And just as Desperate Housewives reaches a broad audience - younger , older , male , female - so does Grey 's Anatomy . " The season finale was watched by 22 @.@ 22 million viewers , and was ranked the ninth in viewership . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The first season of Grey 's received mostly positive reviews from the critics . In regard to the first season , New York Daily News named Grey 's Anatomy a " winner " , whereas Newsday expressed a positive opinion by stating " You simply can 't stop watching . " Walter <unk> from Film Freak Central said the show was " so odious , so repugnant , that it 's impossible not to have predicted its newly @-@ minted role as the most popular program in the land . " The Washington Post 's Tom Shales was critical of the early series , finding it reminiscent of ER and commenting that : " The show is much more a matter of commercial calculation than an honest attempt to try something fresh and different " . He called Rhimes ' script for the pilot episode " nothing but a casserole made of equal parts ham and corn " , writing that overall : " It 's a ' new ' show only in the sense that Dr. Frankenstein 's monster was a new man . " Kate Aurthur for The New York Times deemed the show a hybrid of Ally McBeal , Sex and the City and ER , writing of the news that it had become the highest @-@ rated midseason drama in 12 years that : " When you parse its ratings , Grey 's Anatomy underscores one of the real lessons of the current season - men will watch shows with a female lead . That goes against conventional wisdom , which dictates that it 's easier to get women to watch shows aimed at men . " Review Stream gave positive reviews regarding the pilot episode , " A Hard Day 's Night " , due to the undeniable chemistry between Ellen Pompeo and Patrick Dempsey from the series ' first scene . Regarding Miranda Bailey 's appearance in the pilot , <unk> stated " She 's such a small woman but wait until she speaks " . <unk> , however , had a mixed perspectives on the pilot , noting that the storylines were similar to fellow ABC series Desperate Housewives , but also " brilliantly written , extremely well acted and directed to near perfection " . IGN gave a positive review stating , " The show isn 't derivative , and actually maintains a tenuous edge over its predecessor , the characters resemble real people - who are fragile , and yes , fallible . " and added , " this facile description does little justice to the show 's tightly @-@ wound plotting , character subtleties , or masterful acting , it speaks to the intangible nature of what differentiates the wheat from the chaff , so to speak , in network television . " 
 Sandra Oh won Best Supporting Actress – Series , Miniseries or Television Film at the 63rd Golden Globe Awards and Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series at the 12th Screen Actors Guild Awards in 2005 , for her portrayal of Cristina Yang during Grey 's Anatomy 's first season . The season also resulted in a number of awards nominations : At the 2005 Directors Guild of America Awards , Peter Horton received a nomination for the Best Directing in a Drama Series , for his work on " A Hard Day 's Night " . He was nominated for the same award and episode at the 57th Primetime Emmy Awards , which also saw Grey 's Anatomy nominated for Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series , and Oh was nominated Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series . Patrick Dempsey was nominated for Best Actor – Television Series Drama at the 63rd Golden Globe Awards , where the show was also nominated Best Television Series – Drama . The Producers Guild of America Awards in 2005 saw the season again nominated for Best Producer in a Drama Series , while that year 's Satellite Awards saw the show nominated for Best Television Series – Drama , and Oh nominated for Best Supporting Actress – Series , Miniseries or Television Film . Dempsey was nominated for the Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series at the 12th Screen Actors Guild Awards , where the whole cast were also nominated for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 The number in the " No. in series " column refers to the episode 's number within the overall series , whereas the number in the " No. in season " column refers to the episode 's number within this particular season . " U.S. viewers in millions " refers to the number of Americans in millions who watched the episodes live . The first season 's episodes are altogether 387 minutes in length . 
 = = DVD Release = = 
 Grey 's Anatomy : Season One was released as a widescreen two @-@ disc Region 1 DVD box set in the USA on February 14 , 2006 . It was distributed by Buena Vista . In addition to all the episodes that had aired , it included an alternate title sequence , audio commentaries , an extended pilot episode and a making @-@ of featurette . The same set was released on October 11 , 2006 in Region 2 , featuring the planned fourteen episodes over three discs . 
 The first season was officially released on DVD in Region 1 on February 14 , 2006 , during the show 's second season . Under the title Grey 's Anatomy : Season One , the box set consists of episodes with Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 surround sound and widescreen format . It also contained extras available only on DVD , including extended episodes , footage from behind the scenes , audio commentaries and unaired scenes cut from the aired episodes . The same set was released in Region 4 on April 26 , 2006 , almost three months after its original release in the United States , whereas its release date in Region 4 was October 11 , 2006 . The UK set contained the original fourteen episodes , being released as a three @-@ disc boxset . The season has not been released on Blu @-@ ray disc in any region . The DVD box set is currently no . 899 in Movies and TV on Amazon.com and no . <unk> in Film and TV on Amazon.co.uk. 
 = Van der Graaf Generator = 
 Van der Graaf Generator are an English progressive rock band , formed in 1967 in Manchester by singer @-@ songwriters Peter Hammill and Chris Judge Smith and the first act signed by Charisma Records . They did not experience much commercial success in the UK , but became popular in Italy during the 1970s . In 2005 the band reformed , and continue to perform as of 2016 . 
 The band formed at Manchester University , but settled in London where they signed with Charisma . They went through a number of incarnations in their early years , including a brief split in 1969 . When they reformed , they found minor commercial success with The Least We Can Do Is Wave to Each Other , and after the follow @-@ up album , H to He , Who Am the Only One , stabilised around a line @-@ up of Hammill , organist Hugh Banton , saxophonist David Jackson , and drummer Guy Evans . The quartet subsequently achieved significant success in Italy with the release of Pawn Hearts in 1971 . 
 After several exhausting tours of Italy , the band split in 1972 . They reformed in 1975 , releasing Godbluff and frequently touring Italy again , before a major line @-@ up change and a slight rename to Van der Graaf . The band split in 1978 . After many years apart , the band finally united at a gig at the Royal Festival Hall and a short tour in 2005 . Since then , the band has continued as a trio of Hammill , Banton , and Evans , who record and tour regularly in between Hammill 's concurrent solo career . A new album is scheduled for release in 2016 . 
 The group 's albums have tended to be both lyrically and musically darker in atmosphere than many of their progressive rock peers ( a trait they shared with King Crimson , whose guitarist Robert Fripp guested on two of their albums ) , and guitar solos were the exception rather than the rule , preferring to use Banton 's classically influenced organ , and , until his departure , Jackson 's multiple saxophones . While Hammill is the primary songwriter for the band , and its members have contributed to his solo albums , he is keen to stress that the band collectively arranges all its material . Hammill 's lyrics frequently covered themes of mortality , due to his love of science fiction writers such as Robert Heinlein and Philip K. Dick , along with his self @-@ confessed warped and obsessive nature . His voice has been a distinctive component of the band throughout its career . It has been described as " a male Nico " and would later on be cited as an influence by Goth bands in the 1980s . Though the group have generally been commercially unsuccessful outside of early 1970s Italy , they have inspired several musicians , including John Lydon and Julian Cope . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early years ( 1967 – 69 ) = = = 
 The band formed in 1967 at Manchester University , after Chris Judge Smith , who had already played in several British rhythm and blues groups whilst a pupil in Oundle School , returned from a trip to San Francisco and , inspired by the bands he had seen , put together a list of possible band names to form a new group . After an unsatisfactory audition they had both attended in response to an advert to form a band , he met fellow student Peter Hammill , who was playing some of his original songs . Hammill had begun writing songs and poetry at the age of 12 while at prep school , and progressed to playing in bands while a pupil at Beaumont College . He was then briefly employed as a computer programmer , during which time he subsequently claimed to have written much of the band 's early material , before enrolling at Manchester . Smith was so impressed with the quality of Hammill 's original material that the two agreed to form a band together . The band name chosen from Smith 's list was based on a Van de Graaff generator , a mechanical device that produces static electricity with lightning @-@ like flashes – the misspellings are accidental . Smith recalls the reason for this may have been that Van de Graaff died in 1967 , which was widely reported in the media . 
 Among the bands that regularly played the university , including Cream , Jimi Hendrix , and Pink Floyd , they were particularly impressed by The Crazy World of Arthur Brown , and recruited an organist , Nick Pearne , to match the format of Arthur Brown 's band . Along with two female dancers , the initial line @-@ up was Hammill on guitar and vocals , Smith on drums , wind instruments and vocals , and Pearne on organ ( though he did not initially have an instrument ) . According to Smith , the band initially played as a two @-@ piece , with Smith occasionally using a typewriter as a percussion instrument ; their first gig as a three piece was in the student union , which lasted five minutes before the group 's amplifiers blew up . 
 The band managed to persuade fellow student Caleb Bradley to manage them , and by the start of 1968 , the band had managed to record a demo tape influenced by blues and jazz , sending it to Lou Reizner , then the U.K. head of Mercury Records , who offered the trio of Hammill , Smith , and Pearne a recording contract in May . At this point , the band had to make a decision whether to stay on at university , or quit their courses and move to London to turn professional . Pearne was not keen to abandon his studies , so decided to leave the group . 
 On arrival in London , Hammill and Smith met up with trainee BBC engineer and classically trained organist Hugh Banton , who was a brother of one of their friends back in Manchester . Later that year , they met Tony Stratton @-@ Smith , who agreed to sign a management contract with them in December . Through him , the band acquired a bass guitar player , Keith Ellis , with drummer Guy Evans joining not too long afterwards . This line @-@ up performed on BBC Radio 1 's Top Gear radio show in November , and recorded a series of demos for Mercury , before releasing a single ( " People You Were Going To " b / w " Firebrand " ) on Polydor Records in January 1969 . Melody Maker said the single was " one of the best records of the week " . But the single was quickly withdrawn under pressure from Mercury , since it violated the contract band members Hammill and Smith signed the previous year . Smith , feeling superfluous to requirements , left the band , amicably , shortly after the recording of the single . He later released demos featuring his time in Van der Graaf Generator on a CD , <unk> . 
 Meanwhile , Mercury refused to let the band record , and at the same time Stratton @-@ Smith refused to let the other members of the band sign to Mercury too , as he did not think the deal was fair to the band ( only Hammill remained now of the original three who had signed with Mercury ) . On top of that in late January 1969 the band 's van and equipment were stolen . The theft aggravated their financial difficulties . Although the band was touring successfully , which included a concert in February at the Royal Albert Hall in support of Jimi Hendrix , it broke up in June after playing a final gig at Nottingham 's Pop & Blues Festival on 10 May entirely with borrowed equipment . John Peel , who was <unk> the show , announced their break @-@ up to the audience . 
 In July 1969 , Hammill had begun performing solo at The Marquee in London , and since there was no group , he decided to record what was intended to be his first solo album at Trident Studios on 31 July and 1 August , with Banton , Evans , and Ellis as session musicians . However , through a deal worked out by Stratton @-@ Smith , the album , The Aerosol Grey Machine , was released by Mercury under the band 's name in return for releasing the band from their contract . The album was initially only released in the United States with hardly any promotion at all , so sales were minimal , but the group decided to reform in the middle of the recording session . Ellis had already committed to joining Juicy Lucy and was replaced by Evan 's former bandmate in The Misunderstood , Nic Potter . The band had also enjoyed flautist Jeff Peach 's contributions to the album and wanted to recruit a further instrumentalist . " There was always the idea of having another melodic instrument , " recalled Evans . " He [ Banton ] ' ll play a solo , sure , and really give it something , but he doesn 't want to do that all the time . " Peach was approached to become a full @-@ time member , but dropped out after one rehearsal . The position was eventually filled by saxophonist and flautist David Jackson , who had previously played in a band called Heebalob with Smith . Hammill had already sat in with Heebalob at the Plumpton National Jazz Festival on 9 August , and , impressed by Jackson 's playing , invited him to join the band , partly because he also needed a flatmate to help pay with the rent . 
 = = = Signing to Charisma ( 1969 – 70 ) = = = 
 In September , the new five piece band began rehearsals in Notting Hill <unk> and began to modify its sound . Banton , influenced by the effects pedals popularised by Jimi Hendrix , used his electronic skills to modify a Farfisa organ , giving it a wider variety of sounds . Jackson took his jazz influences , particularly Rahsaan Roland Kirk , and began to play multiple saxophones ( usually alto and tenor ) simultaneously . Hammill , for his part , elected to sing in received pronunciation , exploring the full range of his vocal capabilities . " We were all megalomaniacs , " said Banton . " We grabbed our own space as best we could . " The band started to gig regularly , including the first of several live appearances at the Friars Aylesbury in November . 
 Tony Stratton @-@ Smith formed Charisma Records and signed the band as his first act , who recorded their second album , The Least We Can Do Is Wave to Each Other from 11 – 14 December with John Anthony in Trident Studios . Hammill 's voice was electronically treated on After The Flood , while Refugees and White Hammer featured cello and cornet respectively . Because the band finished ahead of their rehearsal schedule , Potter decided to overdub some electric guitar – an instrument he had never played before . The album was released in February 1970 and made the top 50 in the U.K , Melody Maker said " If all our groups were as together as this , the British music scene would improve ten @-@ fold . " 
 Potter , however , did not feel he fitted into this increasingly experimental sound the band was developing , and tended to wait until the others had worked out their parts during rehearsals , adding his bass lines on top at the last minute . After recording three tracks of their third album , H to He , Who Am the Only One , he decided to quit the band . His last gig was on 9 August at the 1970 Plumpton Festival . The remaining members auditioned Dave Anderson , roadie for Brinsley Schwarz and friend of the band , but after a week 's rehearsal , found that things weren 't working out musically . Banton , meanwhile , had become influenced by Vincent Crane 's work in Atomic Rooster , where Crane played the bass lines on a Hammond organ 's bass pedals , and suggested that he could do this as well . With just days to go before the next gig , they tried rehearsing as a four piece , and it was successful . Banton later played bass guitar on certain songs , having already learned the instrument in the mid @-@ 1960s , and Hammill expanded his instrumental capabilities on stage to cover piano and keyboards as well as guitar . Jackson modified his saxophones to be completely electric , as opposed to simply being amplified through a microphone , and combined the sound with a wah @-@ wah pedal and an octave divider . 
 H To He continued to be recorded sporadically throughout 1970 , and featured Robert Fripp of King Crimson contributing guitar on " The Emperor in His War @-@ Room " . John Anthony knew Fripp socially , and invited him to a session as a guest , something Fripp had never done before at that point . According to Jackson , Fripp " put headphones on and started searing away " , listening to the track once , then performing two takes . Killer , later to become a live favourite , recycled a middle eight from an old Heebalob song , and Smith received a co @-@ composition credit on the track . Reviewing the album , Sounds particularly praised Jackson 's saxophone work . 
 = = = The classic line @-@ up ( 1971 – 72 ) = = = 
 The Hammill / Banton / Jackson / Evans quartet that resulted from H to He , Who Am the Only One is now considered the " classic " line @-@ up , and went on to play as part of the " Six Bob Tour " in early 1971 with fellow Charisma labelmates Genesis and Lindisfarne . Despite the complexity of their music , the band were well received on the tour , with Hammill noting " at nearly all the gigs , most of the audience have known most of the songs ... It was like a big family actually , exactly as all of us had pictured it in our wildest dreams . " 
 While on tour , the band started working out compositions between gigs for their next album , which would become Pawn Hearts . The intention was to release a double album , and the band recorded the material ; however , for economic reasons , the released recording was a single album containing three tracks – " Lemmings " , " Man @-@ Erg " , and the 23 minute concept piece " A Plague of Lighthouse Keepers " . Reflecting on this , Hammill said : " Charisma Records felt that it wasn 't appropriate for us to release a double album and they vetoed the live studio recordings and the solo tracks by Guy , David , and Hugh . " The master tape of the recording sessions has been lost . Fripp again provided a cameo appearance on guitar . While " Man @-@ Erg " had already been performed on stage , " A Plague of Lighthouse Keepers " evolved in the studio , recorded in small sections and pieced together during mixing . According to producer John Anthony , the track features a lot more studio experimentation than on previous albums , saying " we pushed the facilities at Trident to the limit and had involved the use of every single tape machine in Trident at some stage . " The experiments included tape manipulation and Banton playing Mellotron and synthesizer . According to Jackson , one section of it features the entire band overdubbed 16 times . The album was not a success in the U.K , but proved highly successful in Italy , topping the chart there for 12 weeks . The following single , " Theme One " , reached number one in Italy , too . " Theme One " was an instrumental piece , originally written by Beatles producer George Martin as a fanfare for the BBC radio station Radio 1 , later to appear on US pressings of Pawn Hearts . 
 Following commercial success in Italy , the band did a six @-@ week tour there at the start of 1972 . The band were apprehensive about touring there , concerned they might be playing to half empty venues , but they were all shocked by the sheer volume of the crowds that came to see them . " Pawn Hearts was seen as the ultimate album by the ultimate band , " said Jackson , who at times found it difficult to walk down the street in parts of Italy without being recognised . " The tour was like the prophets have landed ... you couldn 't go anywhere without this lunatic ' Generator Mania ' breaking out . " After the tour , the group was immediately offered another Italian tour , this time doing up to three shows a day . In between the tours , the band made an appearance on Belgian television performing " Theme One " and " A Plague of Lighthouse Keepers " . Since the studio recording of " A Plague of Lighthouse Keepers " was a collage of multiple recordings , impossible to reproduce live in one setting , the band simply filmed individual sections of the song and spliced them together in the editing suite . It was the only live performance of the song until 2013 . 
 By June , the band had performed another Italian tour ( the third that year ) and wanted to start recording new material ( some of which ended up on Hammill 's solo album Chameleon in the Shadow of the Night ) . However , the combination of working for too long without a break , combined with a lack of support from Stratton @-@ Smith and Charisma and continued financial difficulties caused the band to implode , and Hammill left to pursue a solo career in mid @-@ 1972 . 
 The three remaining members recorded an instrumental album with Nic Potter , <unk> Curtis , and Pietro Messina , under the name " The Long Hello " . Their self @-@ titled album ( The Long Hello ) was released in 1974 . 
 = = = First reunion ( 1975 – 78 ) = = = 
 Hammill 's split with the group was amicable , and Banton , Jackson , and Evans , among others , all contributed to his solo work at various times . By 1975 , the members of the band were ready to work with each other again , and they decided to reform the band . All the members were keen on carrying on with new music , with no nostalgia for their previous era , and did not want to play earlier stage favourites such as " Killer " ( the opening track on H to He , Who Am the Only One ) and " Theme One " . " We didn 't want to continue as if nothing had happened , " said Hammill . 
 The reformed band worked at a prolific pace , rehearsing , and touring France before recording three new albums in just 12 months , beginning with Godbluff . Unlike the earlier work with John Anthony at Trident , the sessions were produced by the band themselves , and both the Melody Maker and Sounds thought they were a tighter and more cohesive unit than previously . The album in particular saw Hammill making significant use of the Hohner clavinet keyboard . Still Life followed early the next year . Banton considers this album one of his favourites by the group . 
 In the summer of 1975 , the band returned to play Italy without incident , but when they returned to tour there in November , the intense political situation the country was going through caught up with them . The opening concert in Padova was marked with clashes with communists delivering political speeches , and the audience started throwing missiles towards the stage . After a gig without incident in Genoa , the third day of the tour at the <unk> in Rome , in front of 40 @,@ 000 people , saw similar confrontations to the Padova gig . A fire broke out at the venue , but was brought under control . The next day , the band learned that most of their gear had been stolen from the tour van , including Hammill 's blue Fender Stratocaster , christened " <unk> " . Despite threats from promoters that the band would continue the tour using hired equipment ( which Jackson considered impossible given the electronic modifications he had made to his saxophones ) , they abandoned the tour . Miraculously , all of Jackson 's saxophones had survived the theft . 
 In December 1976 , following World Record , Banton quit , quickly followed by Jackson in February 1977 . Nic Potter returned to replace Banton , and in a typically eccentric move Jackson was replaced by a violinist , Graham Smith ( formerly of Charisma folk @-@ rock band String Driven Thing ) . This line @-@ up produced the album The Quiet Zone / The Pleasure Dome . The band also shortened its name to Van der Graaf . Charles Dickie then joined the band on cello , documented on the live double @-@ album Vital , which saw a brief reunion with Jackson . By the time Vital was released , in the summer of 1978 , the band had already split , because of lack of record company support in the United States and financial difficulties . 
 In 1982 a collection of out @-@ takes and rehearsal recordings from the 1972 – 1975 hiatus was released ( initially on cassette only ) , called Time Vaults . These are not studio @-@ quality recordings . 
 = = = Second reunion ( 2005 to date ) = = = 
 Despite the 1978 split , Banton recalled that the group " never descended very far into our sub @-@ conscience " . Banton , Jackson and Evans appeared on Hammill 's solo albums , and all four occasionally played together . In 1996 , the quartet appeared on stage during a concert by Hammill and Evans at the Union Chapel in London to perform " Lemmings " , which was later released as The Union Chapel Concert . In 2003 , Banton , Jackson , and Evans joined with Hammill to perform " Still Life " at the Queen Elizabeth Hall in London . 
 Following the Queen Elizabeth Hall performance , the band members discussed working together . In mid @-@ 2004 , they began to write and rehearse new material . The result was a double CD , Present , released in April 2005 . Critical response was favourable ; BBC Music 's Peter Marsh said the group was " willing to push the envelope a little , and bless them for that " , while AllMusic ' Dave Thompson said the group " never made a less than fabulous album in their lives . And they 're not about to start now . " A reunion concert took place at the Royal Festival Hall , London , on 6 May , which was released as Real Time in 2007 . The Festival Hall concert was followed by several European dates in the summer and autumn . The concert in Leverkusen , Germany on 5 November was filmed for the <unk> Rundfunk TV show Rockpalast , which was broadcast on 16 January 2006 . 
 Hammill stated in a December 2005 newsletter that there were no plans for further recordings or performances by the " classic " Van der Graaf Generator line @-@ up of himself , Banton , Evans and Jackson . Hammill subsequently announced that the band would be continuing as a trio , for live and studio work , without Jackson . He later stated that the reason for Jackson 's departure was that he " seemed to have difficulty in understanding what we had mutually agreed " and that he clashed with the other band members . Relationships between Jackson and the others become strained , and Hammill , Banton and Evans realised that the only way the group could continue was without him . 
 The group began touring as a trio in April and July 2007 over Europe . A concert on 14 April 2007 in the Paradiso in Amsterdam was recorded and streamed on the <unk> website until March 2009 , and was released on DVD and CD in June 2009 . 
 The first trio recording , <unk> , was released on 17 March 2008 . Live concerts were played in Europe in March and April , and in Japan in June , among them , one at the Gouveia Art Rock Festival . There were further concerts in January 2009 in Europe , and the band played several concerts in Canada and the United States in the summer of 2009 , among them performances at NEARfest , in New York City . It was the first time Van der Graaf Generator had visited the United States since 1976 , and their second gig there . 
 In spring 2010 , the group recorded a new album in Devon . A Grounding in Numbers was released on 14 March 2011 . Live at Metropolis Studios 2010 was released as a 2CD / <unk> set by Salvo / Union Square Music on 4 June 2012 . The band then toured the eastern part of the United States and Canada during June and July 2012 , including an appearance at NEARfest Apocalypse in Bethlehem , Pennsylvania on 22 June . 
 An album of out @-@ takes and in @-@ studio jams , similar to the second disc of Present , called ALT was released in June 2012 . Hammill has stated that he has enjoyed the current reunion , as " the activity has reinvigorated me . Going from one thing to another is an energizing thing . " 
 Hammill revealed via his website that the band 's former bassist Nic Potter died on the night of 16 January 2013 , aged 61 . The group continued to tour in 2013 , including the first live performance of " A Plague of Lighthouse Keepers " . In 2014 , the group collaborated with artist Vladislav <unk> for an art venture titled the <unk> Project . The title comes from the track of the same name on ALT . In 2015 , the group released the live album , Merlin Atmos featuring tracks recorded during the 2013 tour , and After the Flood , an album of BBC recordings from 1968 – 1977 . A new album , Do Not Disturb is scheduled for release in September 2016 . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 No one is likely to confuse the savage energy of King Crimson and Van der Graaf Generator in their mid @-@ 1970s incarnations with the disinterested density of Gentle Giant or the more pastoral , at times delicate , stylizations of Genesis or Renaissance ( or even Yes in their quieter moments ) 
 Due to the time @-@ frame of the original band 's career , Van der Graaf Generator have been frequently referred to as a progressive rock band . Writing in Record Collector , Toby Manning said the music was " philosophical , even intellectual , complex .. at times , terrifying " . While the music on The Aerosol Grey Machine has a more pastoral , hippie feel , with prominent use of Hammill 's acoustic guitar , later work featured more complex instrumentation and arrangements . Hammill thinks the style of the band evolved due to the culture of music in the late 1960s , stating " the whole of music was laid out in front of you ... it was the blues in wonky time signatures . " Both Hammill and Banton have stated that Jimi Hendrix was an influence on the band 's sound , with Hammill remarking that " there 'd been distortion before , but there hadn 't been that real out @-@ there attitude to sound in itself " . The group 's experimental style has also been compared to Krautrock bands such as Can . Because of their musical influences and line @-@ up , the band tended to play darker musical themes than other progressive bands , with the possible exception of King Crimson . However , Hammill has stated that the group is still fun to work with , stating " as far as we 're concerned , it 's serious fun , but fun nonetheless . " 
 Hammill 's lyrics frequently covered themes of mortality , due to his love of science fiction writers such as Robert Heinlein and Philip K. Dick , along with his self @-@ confessed warped and obsessive nature . His voice has been a distinctive component of the band throughout its career . It has been described as " a male Nico " and would later on be cited as an influence by Goth bands in the 1980s . 
 Unlike several other notable prog rock keyboardists , such as Rick Wakeman or Keith Emerson , Banton considers himself primarily an organist , due to his background in classical and church music , and only ever used that instrument on stage , albeit heavily modified with customised electronics and devices . Hammill said that " Hugh is one of the most instinctive , baffling , and brilliant people I 've known and his intuitive hold on the worlds of music and electronics has always astonished me . " Banton used <unk> organs during the 2005 reformation , but since 2009 he has used the Hammond XK @-@ 3c , and thinks Hammond have " cracked that sound at long last " . 
 Although Hammill has written the vast majority of the songs in the band 's catalogue , and all of the lyrics , he is keen to stress that the arrangements of the music comes from all the group 's members . In 1976 , being interviewed for the Melody Maker , he said that " <unk> is a band , a real band ... of course [ it ] is something special , it releases in individual terms parts of us that wouldn 't be aired otherwise . In 2013 , he reiterated , " Some people don 't think Van der Graaf is a democracy , but believe me , it 's entirely democratic , with everyone having very vocal and forceful opinions . " 
 The band have been compared with Genesis due to being label @-@ mates at Charisma Records , sharing management with Tony Stratton @-@ Smith and performing on the same bill on the " Six Bob Tour " . Hammill and Banton both reject this comparison , with Hammill noting that Genesis were far more driven to be commercially successful , whereas he prefers to release music without interference from record companies . In particular , he has mentioned that while he himself continues to release albums on a regular basis in the 21st century , Peter Gabriel 's " average output has been about 0 @.@ 2 albums a year " . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Though the group have generally been commercially unsuccessful outside of early 1970s Italy , they have inspired several notable musicians , including Rush , John Lydon , Marc Almond , Graham Coxon , Luca Prodan , Mark E. Smith , John Frusciante , Bruce Dickinson and Julian Cope . Dickinson , who has been a fan of the band since he saw them at Oundle School aged 13 , said that Hammill was one of his childhood heroes . Coxon is particularly fond of " House With No Door " from H to He , saying the track is " extremely beautiful , with Jackson 's truly lovely sax @-@ and @-@ flute instrumental section . " Almond recalled hearing " Killer " for the first time saying , " I 'd never heard anything like it before . It wasn 't just Peter 's snarling operatic vocal , it was the mix of instruments ... I became an instant fan . " Mentioning their reputation as something of an acquired taste , Lydon said , " There 's a few Van Der Graaf things I like , but I 'm not going to recommend anything to anyone . It might not be for them . Music doesn 't come with a set of guidelines . " 
 Although generally categorised as a progressive rock group , Cope is keen to distance the band from that movement , stating " Their music was like some Brechtian bar band – the opposite of prog rock , really " . Nevertheless , the band have been acknowledged as an influence on the neo @-@ progressive rock subgenre which emerged in the 1980s and featured Marillion as its most successful band . Marillion singer Fish thought highly of Hammill and invited him to be the support on the band 's early tours . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Members = = = 
 = = = Lineups = = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 The Aerosol Grey Machine ( 1969 ) 
 The Least We Can Do Is Wave to Each Other ( 1970 ) 
 H to He , Who Am the Only One ( 1970 ) 
 Pawn Hearts ( 1971 ) 
 Godbluff ( 1975 ) 
 Still Life ( 1976 ) 
 World Record ( 1976 ) 
 The Quiet Zone / The Pleasure Dome ( 1977 ) 
 Present ( 2005 ) 
 <unk> ( 2008 ) 
 A Grounding in Numbers ( 2011 ) 
 ALT ( 2012 ) 
 Do Not Disturb ( announced to be released on 30 September 2016 ) 
 = CMLL World Middleweight Championship = 
 The CMLL World Middleweight Championship ( Spanish : Campeonato Mundial peso Medio de CMLL ) is a professional wrestling world championship promoted by the Mexican wrestling promotion Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( CMLL ) . While lighter weight classes are regularly ignored in wrestling promotions in the United States , with most emphasis placed on " heavyweights " , more emphasis is placed on the lighter classes in Mexican companies . The official definition of the Middleweight division in Mexico is a person between 82 kg ( 181 lb ) and 87 kg ( 192 lb ) , but the weight limits are not strictly adhered to in recent years . As it is a professional wrestling championship , it is not won or lost competitively but instead , by the decision of the bookers of a wrestling promotion . The title is awarded to a wrestler after he " wins " a match to maintain the illusion that professional wrestling is a competitive sport . 
 The current CMLL World Middleweight Champion is Dragón Rojo Jr . , having held the title since November 11 , 2011 , which make him the longest reigning champion in the history of the championship . Since its creation in 1991 , there have been 17 individual championship reigns shared between 12 wrestlers . El Dandy is the only wrestler to hold the championship three times and Apolo Dantés had the shortest reign of any champion , 77 days . 
 = = History = = 
 The middleweight division was one of the first weight divisions in Mexican Lucha libre to have a specific championship as the Mexican National Middleweight Championship was created in 1933 . When the Mexican Professional wrestling promotion Empresa Mexicana de Lucha Libre ( " Mexican Wrestling Enterprise " ; EMLL ) was founded in September 1933 they became one of several Mexican promotions to promote the championship . EMLL later created the " World Middleweight Championship to represent the highest level prize of the middleweight division , higher than the Mexican National Middleweight Championship . In 1952 EMLL joined the National Wrestling Alliance , which mean the title was renamed the NWA World Middleweight Championship . 
 In the late 1980s EMLL left the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) to avoid the politics of the NWA and by 1991 they changed their name to Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( " World Wrestling Council " ; CMLL ) to distance themselves from the NWA . While they left the NWA the promotion kept using the NWA World Middleweight Championship as it had originated in EMLL . Following their name change CMLL decided to create a series of CMLL @-@ branded world championships , including adding the CMLL World Middleweight Championship , the third middleweight championship in the promotion . CMLL held a one @-@ night , eight @-@ man tournament to determine the first middleweight champion on December 18 , 1991 . The tournament final saw Blue Panther defeat El Satánico to become the first CMLL World Middleweight Champion . 
 In June 1992 Blue Panther was one of may CMLL wrestlers that left the company to join the newly formed Asistencia Asesoría y Administración ( AAA ) , leaving the CMLL World Middleweight Championship vacant . CMLL held a 16 @-@ man battle royal match to reduce the field to two finalists . El Dandy and Negro Casas survived the match and a week later El Dandy defeated Casas to become the second CMLL World Middleweight Champion . The championship has not been vacated since then . 
 The exodus from CMLL to AAA also meant that CMLL lost control of the Mexican National Middleweight Championship as then @-@ reigning champion Octagón was among the wrestlers that left the promotion . The Mexico City Boxing and Wrestling Commission allowed AAA to take control of the Mexican National Middleweight Championship at that point in time . On August 12 , 2010 , CMLL returned the NWA World Middleweight Championship to the NWA , but immediately replaced it with the NWA World Historic Middleweight Championship to keep two " world " level championships in the middleweight division . On May 3 , 2010 Jushin Thunder Liger defeated Negro Casas to win the championship . The match took place in Fukuoka , <unk> prefecture , Japan , which was the first time the middleweight championship changed hands outside of Mexico and also marked the first time a non @-@ Mexican wrestler held the championship . 
 = = Reigns = = 
 Dragón Rojo Jr. is the current champion having won the title on November 18 , 2011 from Jushin Thunder Liger . This is Dragón Rojo Jr . ' s first reign as middleweight champion , he is the 17th overall champion and also the wrestler who has held the championship the longest , at 1 @,@ 713 days and counting . El Dandy holds the record for most CMLL World Middleweight Championship reigns with three and is one of only three wrestlers to hold the title more than once , the others being Negro Casas and Emilio Charles Jr . Apolo Dantés held the title the shortest amount of time , a total of 77 days . 
 = = Rules = = 
 The official definition of the middleweight division in Mexico is from 82 kg ( 181 lb ) and 87 kg ( 192 lb ) . In the 20th century CMLL were generally consistent and strict about enforcing the actual weight limits . However in the 21st century the official definitions has at times been overlooked for certain champions . One example of this was when Mephisto , officially listed as 90 kg ( 200 lb ) , won the CMLL World Welterweight Championship , a weight class with a 82 kg ( 181 lb ) upper limit . 
 With a total of twelve CMLL promoted championships being labeled as " World " title the promotional focus shifts from championship to championship over time with no single championship being promoted as the " main " championship of the promotion . Championship matches usually take place under best two @-@ out @-@ of @-@ three falls rules . On occasion single fall title matches have taken place , especially when promoting CMLL title matches in Japan , conforming to the traditions of the local promotion , illustrated by Jushin Thunder Liger winning the championship during New Japan Pro Wrestling 's Wrestling Dontaku 2010 in a single @-@ fall match . 
 = = Tournaments = = 
 = = = 1991 = = = 
 In 1991 , CMLL held an eight @-@ man , one @-@ night tournament to crown the first ever CMLL World Middleweight champion . In the end Blue Panther won the championship by defeating El Satánico . 
 = = = 1992 = = = 
 Due to a large number of wrestlers leaving the company in the summer of 1992 the middleweight championship was vacated , forcing CMLL to hold a tournament . They opted to start out with a 16 @-@ man battle royal elimination match as a means to qualify for the final match the following week . Negro Casas and El Dandy outlasted a field of wrestlers that included Guerrero Maya , Águila <unk> , <unk> , Guerrero del Futuro , Plata , <unk> de <unk> , <unk> Jr . , Oro , Javier Cruz , Kung Fu , Kato Kung Lee , Ringo Mendoza , Bestia Salvaje and Último Dragón . The following week El Dandy defeated Casas to start his first of three championship reigns . 
 = Shin @-@ shiro ( album ) = 
 Shin @-@ shiro ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Shinshiro , " New White " ) ( Japanese pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) is the third studio album by Japanese band Sakanaction . It was released on January 21 , 2009 through Victor Entertainment . The release was the band 's first album after relocating to Tokyo and moving to Victor Entertainment 's main roster . Led by the singles " Sen to Rei " and " Native Dancer " , the album became the group 's first release to chart in the top 10 albums on Oricon 's weekly album chart . 
 Shin @-@ shiro featured a different production approach to the band 's previous albums . Band vocalist Ichiro Yamaguchi collaborated with a different member of the band in a two @-@ person demo session for each songs , instead of their previous approach involving all five members working together . This approach was difficult for pianist Emi Okazaki , who had no experience with song production previously , and for drummer Keiichi Ejima , who learnt the guitar specifically to record demos for this album . The first finished demo , created by Yamaguchi and bassist Ami Kusakari 's for the song " Sen to Rei " strongly influenced the album 's production . 
 The album was well @-@ received critically , with critics noting the band 's growth ; praising the band 's electronic and pop sound , as well as Ichiro Yamaguchi 's songwriting and vocals . The album led Sakanaction to be chosen one of the ten iTunes Japan Sound of 2009 artists , as well as nominated at the Life Music Award 2009 . 
 In 2009 , the album was made available globally as a digital download , alongside the band 's debut and second albums Go to the Future ( 2007 ) and Night Fishing ( 2008 ) . In 2015 , the album was reissued on CD , LP record and lossless digital formats . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Sakanaction was first formed in 2005 in Sapporo , Hokkaido . The band gained notoriety in Hokkaido after winning the audition to perform as a newcomer artist at the Rising Sun Rock Festival in Otaru in August 2006 , and after demos of their songs " Mikazuki Sunset " and " Shiranami Top Water " performed well on College Radio Japan Sapporo . The band were signed to major label Victor Entertainment , and released their debut album Go to the Future on May 7 , 2007 , through Victor 's BabeStar Label , and followed this up eight month later with the album Night Fishing ( 2009 ) . 
 The album is the band 's first after joining the main Victor Entertainment roster , after releasing two albums with Victor sub @-@ label BabeStar . After the release of Night Fishing , the band began looking for a new management company to sign a contract with . Originally , the members did not want to leave Sapporo , especially guitarist Motoharu Iwadera and bassist Ami Kusakari . Of the five management companies they were choosing between , none of them needed the band to relocate , except for <unk> Management . Vocalist Ichiro Yamaguchi realized that staying in Sapporo was against the band 's goal of making music for a much wider group of listeners , and was surprised when all of the members agreed with him . In Spring 2008 , the band moved to Tokyo from Hokkaido . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 = = = Production techniques = = = 
 In April , Sakanaction had already started making songs for Shin @-@ shiro , despite having just finished their tour in March for the band 's second album Night Fishing , which had been released in January of the same year . The album 's production took a different approach to how Go to the Future and Night Fishing were produced . In their previous albums Yamaguchi produced the song demos , then took them to the studio and explained his vision for each song ; creating them in sessions with all of the band members . For Shin @-@ shiro , Yamaguchi created the songs , and then assigned each member of the band to create a demo based on their two @-@ person vision . This was a conscious move by Yamaguchi to create a new sound for the album , figuring that if all of members were concurrently working on the songs , it was inevitable that one person would take charge of each song . 
 Iwadera worked with Yamaguchi on the songs " Ame ( B ) " and " Namida Delight " , Kusakari on " Sen to Rei " , pianist Emi Okazaki on " Light Dance " , and drummer Keiichi Ejima on the instrumental composition " Minnanouta " . Kusakari and Okazaki collaborated to create demos for " Kiiroi Kuruma " . Yamaguchi worked by himself on the songs " Native Dancer " and " Enough " , while all of the band members contributed to " Adventure " and " Human " . The exception to this was " Zattō " , which was an old composition from Sakanaction 's early days in 2005 , when Yamaguchi and Iwadera were the only members of the group . The song 's arrangement was basically unchanged from the time of writing to its inclusion in the album . This pattern was not true for " Human " , which was originally a song written before the album sessions , however was completely rewritten when included in Shin @-@ shiro . 
 " Adventure " was created before the band left for Tokyo while they were experimenting with more approachable and pop sounds , and was intended to become the album 's leading single , in the role that was later filled by " Sen to Rei " . Similarly , in the early stages of the album 's creation , Yamaguchi also considered Adventure as a title for the album . When the members were creating demos for songs , Yamaguchi had not at that point finished composing the songs for the album . After finishing each composition , he would give it to a member to develop ; then return to composing more music while the members were all occupied . He found the two @-@ person production process invigorating , and was quickly able to write the remaining album material . 
 The band members all responded to this production method differently , with Iwadera and Kusakari finding the approach the easiest . Okazaki and Ejima both had trouble adopting this method . Okazaki was very anxious about her ability to create demos , having never used music software before , and not even owning a computer before moving to Tokyo . Yamaguchi bought her an iBook to help her with the process . Ejima found difficulty in recording demos due to the problem of recording drums at home for sound sampling . As a result , he learnt how to play the guitar . In June , the band were creating songs on a daily basis , and in August were still in the pre @-@ production stages of the album . The album was created at Yamaguchi 's apartment in <unk> in Kawasaki , Kanagawa , which became a meeting place for all of the band members for the album . In total , around thirty demo compositions were produced for the album . This method of song production also led to Yamaguchi being able to think of the album as a whole , as opposed to their methods on Go to the Future and Night Fishing , in which each song was thought of in its own individual context . 
 Kusakari was the fastest to finish her demo . Other than her , the other members brought their work half @-@ finished to their meetings with Yamaguchi . The song Kusakari was working on , " Sen to Rei " , became crucial to the creation of Shin @-@ shiro , as the band created the entire album in response to the song . Taking note of the musical style of " Sen to Rei " , the band created songs that showcased the other genres they performed , in order to expose new listeners to the entirety of the band 's sound . This was for first @-@ time listeners who came to know Sakanaction through " Sen to Rei " to be able to the entirety of the band 's sound . Kusakari 's version of the song " Sen to Rei " had a very strong guitar @-@ based rock sound , which the band mixed with electronic music . " Sen to Rei " was a challenge for the band , to bring as many entertaining and popular aspects to their music as they could , to balance the underground attributes of their sound . 
 = = = Demo production and location = = = 
 Sakanaction found that after moving to Tokyo , where the band stood in the Japanese music scene was a lot clearer to them . The album 's sound was inspired by Tokyo , and was a search to more consciously define what Sakanaction 's identity was , compared to their first two albums . As a result , Shin @-@ shiro felt like the end of the first chapter of Sakanaction to the band members . The music the band created on Shin @-@ shiro was a mix of everything that the band wanted to try musically , and an attempt to make a more " colorful " album inspired by both new wave and live performance @-@ style arrangements . They increased the tempo on the songs for the album , and focused on the beat of each song more than whether each song was structurally a pop song or not . Consciously attempting to create an album with a more popular sound , Yamaguchi was anxious about how his works would be received , and felt that these anxieties expressed themselves more on the album . For the song " Enough " , however , Yamaguchi wanted to create one song on the album that expressed his own thoughts on the album without being influenced by these pressures . The final studio takes of the songs were recorded in September 2008 . 
 The large amount of demos and separated work that each member was doing led to the creation of the instrumental song " Minnanouta " by Ejima . Originally Yamaguchi asked Ejima to create a song out of elements that Yamaguchi and Kusakari had discarded when making " Namida Delight " , but Ejima eventually took his favorite parts from all of the discarded demo takes to create the piece . At first , the band did not intend to have an interlude on the album , however found it was a helpful guide for new listeners to Sakanaction 's sound , and a good separator between the two halves of the album . " Namida Delight " also began as an instrumental song , however a melody and lyrics were added to the song after the band had entirely finished the piece . 
 The song " Ame ( B ) " was originally written as a folk song that Iwadera reworked into a progressive rock song . In the final stages of creation , Yamaguchi suggested they feature choral vocals in the song . Yamaguchi and Iwadera sung the vocal chorus themselves , with an additional three takes of Iwadera 's voice layered on top of each other . It was inspired by British rock band Queen 's 1980s dance music , and was written as what Yamaguchi thought was an " old style cool " song in a verse – chorus form , featuring two verses and a chorus . The version of the song featured on the album was built around the B verse alone , and felt similar to a remix to Yamaguchi because of this . 
 The demo version of the song " Light Dance " originally sounded similar to a war march , created this way by Okazaki was not very familiar with dance music . After fine @-@ tuning the arrangement , and inserting " oriental " synths in the style of Japanese bands Yellow Magic Orchestra and <unk> , " Light Dance " settled at a new wave sound . Yamaguchi considered aspects of " Light Dance " and " Adventure " were similar to heavy metal , such as the bass drum being layered with different instruments , but felt that these would be interpreted as new wave by most people . 
 The final studio versions of the album songs were recorded at <unk> Studio in <unk> , <unk> , Tokyo . Several compositions had additional recorded elements . For " Zattō " , Iwadera and Yamaguchi incorporated a recording they had made of the crowds at <unk> Station in Tokyo . Parts of " Ame ( B ) " were recorded outside , during a summer thunderstorm . 
 = = = Title = = = 
 The album 's title Shin @-@ shiro was intended to represent the kanji <unk> , a neologism created by Yamaguchi meaning " new white " , although it could also be interpreted as the homonym <unk> ( " pure white " ) . Yamaguchi hoped to express how the album was compiled with new feelings , and express the theme of the album as newness . The word " shin @-@ shiro " first appeared in Ichiro Yamaguchi 's blog in February 2008 , right after the release of Night Fishing . The cover design was created by the creative team <unk> , and features a waveform visual representation of the album title " Shin @-@ shiro " being spoken . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 The album was preceded by two singles . " Sen to Rei " was released on November 12 , 2008 , and later as the band 's first physical CD single release on December 10 . This was followed by a digital single " Native Dancer " in January 2009 . " Native Dancer " served as the leading promotional track on Shin @-@ shiro , promoted with a music video directed by Yuichi Kodama , featuring a pair of Nike sneakers performing an intricate dance . The video was critically successful , winning the best conceptual video award at the 2010 Space Shower Music Video Awards , and winning director Kodama the overall best director award . 
 The band performed a national tour of Japan in February and March 2009 , entitled Sakanaquarium 2009 : Shinshiro . The 13 date tour began in Kyoto on February 14 , and ended with two performances in Sapporo on March 20 and 21 . Following this , Sakanaction performed at three dates on Base Ball Bear 's Live Mathematics Tour : April 29 in <unk> , Fukushima , April 30 in Mito , Ibaraki and on May 7 in Kōfu , Yamanashi . On October 10 , Sakanaction performed their first overseas concert , the <unk> X <unk> Sound Festival in Paju , South Korea . 
 In 2015 the album was reissued , initially on vinyl record and a CD re @-@ release in March , followed by a lossless digital release . Originally the band had planned on releasing a new studio album in March 2015 , but they could not due to bassist Kusakari 's pregnancy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Retrospective = = = 
 In a retrospective interview on the album with Rockin ' On Japan in 2011 , Yamaguchi believed that many aspects of Sakanaction were not represented on the album , and felt that songs such as " Light Dance " , " Zattō " and " Enough " only showed surface @-@ level Sakanaction . The album 's comparative commercial success created an odd feeling for the band , as even though it sold many more copies than their previous works , they were not sure why it had stopped selling at 30 @,@ 000 copies . As a result of the album 's disappointing sales , Yamaguchi felt that Sakanaction needed to create a signature song that would be recognisable to a wide audience and would represent Sakanaction as a band , and spent most of 2009 experimenting on the song " Aruku Around " ( 2010 ) , released as the band 's next single after Shin @-@ shiro . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critics positively reviewed Shin @-@ shiro , with both CDJournal and Vibe reviewers noting the strong contrast to their first two studio albums . Mio Yamada of Vibe wrote that the album was completely different direction to their previous albums , feeling it was more accessible , while CDJournal felt that the album was more " colorful " and " radical " . Yamada described it as a " Sakanaction @-@ style road movie " about finding yourself , while being lonely , anxious and fed up with the tedium of everyday . Shirō Ise of <unk> noted the album 's " high sense and edgy sound " based on " electronica and guitar rock " , while being inspired by a variety of genres such as 1990s alternative rock , new wave , technopop , house , ambient music and African @-@ American music . He praised the fact that despite how many genres the music was inspired by , the band 's music did not forget the heart of songs . CDJournal praised the fact that each song stands on its own musically , instead of being drowned out by the album 's overarching digital sound . Yuji Tanaka of CDJournal described the album as " dynamic <unk> rock " that fused the feel of live music with four on the floor beats . Alexey Eremenko of AllMusic gave the album four or of five stars , comparing it to the works of Asian Kung @-@ Fu Generation . He felt that Sakanaction created " a fresh version of new wave " , and felt that the album was " emotionally cohesive " . He felt that none of the songs on Shin @-@ shiro were " big catchy numbers " , but felt that this was beneficial for the musical flow . Eremenko , however , criticized the album for being " too lightweight " . 
 For the leading single " Sen to Rei " , CDJournal reviewers praised Sakanaction 's " ever @-@ changing sound " , and were impressed with the changing vocals in the song 's chorus . They noted that the song was not very " showy " , however felt that despite this , Sakanaction still expressed a " high quality hybrid " sound . Sakiko Okazaki of Rockin ' On Japan praised the song 's high @-@ pitched synthesizers , fast @-@ paced guitars , groovy bass and heart @-@ hitting drums , and felt the song expressed the vigor of Sakanaction . 
 CDJournal praised Yamaguchi 's " mostly detached but somehow cheerful vocals " in " Ame ( B ) " , and felt that " Light Dance " was an " addictive , danceable number " , and were impressed with the song 's guitar solo , as well as how the digital sound brought up feelings of impatience and doubt . They noted the gap in " Native Dancer " between its dance rhythm and painful lyrical content , and were impressed with its transition from a " nostalgic " piano sound , developing into a dance song . For the instrumental track " Minnanouta " , the reviewers praised the arrangement as " marvelous techno " , and noted the song 's distinctive sound loop , that " called out intoxication and ecstasy " . <unk> Yamada of Bounce felt the album was " fresh " , and demonstrated the many senses that Sakanaction members had . She noted that the band were also comfortable in producing " guitar rock " songs such as " Sen to Rei " , and that the four on the floor such as " Adventure " and " Ame ( B ) " would be comfortable on the dance floor . She singled out " Native Dancer " for its " beautiful fusion of acoustic and synth sounds " , and felt that " Zattō " managed to be profound despite its simple arrangement . 
 In February , Sakanaction were named as one of the ten iTunes Japan Sound of 2009 artists : musicians who iTunes Japan staff expected to make it big in 2009 . At Life Music Award 2009 , a Tokyo FM competition based on radio DJ nominations , Sakanaction were the runners up for the Best Impact of Life award for most surprising act , however lost to 9mm Parabellum Bullet . In the 2009 CD Shop Awards , the album was chosen as one of the ten finalists . 
 = = = Commercial reception = = = 
 In its debut week , Shin @-@ shiro was the eighth most sold album in Japan according to the Japanese music chart Oricon , selling 12 @,@ 000 copies . This resulted in the band having their first top fifty release , and outselling their first two albums in a single week . Rival sales tracking agency SoundScan Japan tracked 10 @,@ 000 physical copies sold in the single 's first week , and a total of 16 @,@ 000 copies over two weeks . The album continued to chart in the top 100 albums for four more weeks , and the top 300 for an additional three , selling an additional 16 @,@ 000 units . During the release of the band 's single " Aruku Around " in January 2010 , the album re @-@ charted for a seven weeks , selling an additional 4 @,@ 000 copies . After re @-@ entering the chart for a single week in 2012 and being reissued in 2015 , the album 's current sales total adds to 34 @,@ 000 copies . In tracking regional sales , CDJournal noted the album had broad charting success across all of Japan , and was the band 's first album to perform well in the regional centers of Nagoya , Osaka and Fukuoka . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Ichiro Yamaguchi . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel details were sourced from Shin @-@ shiro 's liner notes booklet . 
 Sakanaction 
 Personnel and imagery 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Fort Steuben Bridge = 
 The Fort Steuben Bridge , originally the Weirton @-@ Steubenville Bridge , was a suspension bridge which spanned the Ohio River from Steubenville , Ohio to Weirton , West Virginia and carried U.S. Route 22 and then Ohio State Route 822 during its existence . Completed in 1928 and opened as a toll bridge , the Fort Steuben Bridge was a more direct route for the flow of traffic across the river ; particularly for trucks and heavy vehicles from the industrial area . The Fort Steuben Bridge was weight @-@ restricted in 2006 and closed in 2009 due to deterioration . The bridge was demolished by Joseph B. Fay Co. on February 21 , 2012 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Originally named the Weirton @-@ Steubenville Bridge , construction of the bridge began in 1927 and was completed in 1928 . Under the direction of the Dravo Contracting Company 's Engineering Works Department , based in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , the project was referred to as the " Stanton Bridge over the Ohio River at Steubenville , Ohio " . The bridge spanned 1 @,@ 584 ft 9 in ( 483 @.@ 03 m ) and had a width of 29 ft 3 in ( 8 @.@ 92 m ) 
 = = Service life = = 
 Serving as a link between Steubenville , Ohio and Weirton , West Virginia , the Fort Steuben Bridge opened as a toll bridge in November 1928 . The bridge was the main carrier of U.S. Route 22 over the Ohio River , its traffic included trucks and heavy duty vehicles associated with the industrial facilities in Weirton @-@ Steubenville area and along the Ohio River . The Fort Steuben Bridge provided a more direct route for the flow of traffic which previously had to use the Market Street Bridge . As of 1940 the toll for the bridge was 5 cents ( US $ 0 @.@ 84 with inflation ) for pedestrians and 25 cents ( US $ 4 @.@ 22 with inflation ) for automobiles . The toll was removed in 1947 , when ownership of the bridge was transferred to the State of Ohio . Improvements to the bridge were made in 1956 . 
 By the late 1970s , traffic congestion on the bridge had become a serious problem . A 1978 study revealed that although the bridge could handle a peak 1 @,@ 600 vehicles passing over the bridge per hour , excess traffic pushing it towards its theoretical capacity of 1 @,@ 920 vehicles per hour could potentially cause gridlock on the bridge . The United States Senate report accompanying the fiscal 1983 appropriation bill for the United States Department of Transportation mentioned that its replacement had become a high priority . A proposed schedule was for the Federal Highway Administration ( FHWA ) to receive plans for a cable stayed superstructure by February 1 , 1983 , and for the project to be approved by mid @-@ April 1983 . 
 Fort Steuben Bridge 's replacement , the Veterans Memorial Bridge , was completed in 1990 . The Ohio Department of Transportation capped funding for maintaining the Fort Steuben Bridge in 1998 at around $ 200 @,@ 000 ( US $ 290 @,@ 000 with inflation ) per year . The Fort Steuben Bridge was weight @-@ restricted in 2006 due to the weakening of the structure over time . The assessment prompted a weight limit ; reducing the bridge 's traffic which consisted of heavy trucks . The bridge was known to be affected by rain vibration . 
 = = Closing and demolition = = 
 On January 8 , 2009 , a dip in the floor of the bridge was reported in the course of routine maintenance , prompting an inspection on the bridge . On January 15 , 2009 , the Ohio Department of Transportation deemed the bridge unfit for traffic , citing " significant deteriorating changes in the floor condition of the bridge . " Repairs to the bridge were not conducted because the bridge was expected to be demolished in late 2009 and the cost of the repairs would not be " cost effective or prudent " . 
 The Fort Steuben Bridge was destroyed in a controlled demolition on February 21 , 2012 . The Ohio Department of Transportation contracted Joseph B. Fay Co. to demolish the bridge . The roadway and approaches were removed in preparation for the demolition . A collection of 490 linear shape charges were used in 136 locations along the span , totaling 153 pounds ( 69 kg ) of explosives . The charges were rigged in a series of 20 blasts , each lasting only 0 @.@ 35 seconds and occurring only nine milliseconds apart . The cleanup of the debris was done by River Salvage Co. of Pittsburgh . The demolition was featured in a Scholastic <unk> article and it included a picture of the demolition spread across two pages . 
 = Blonde @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Blonde @-@ class cruisers were a pair of scout cruisers built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . Upon completion in 1910 – 11 , they served as flotilla leaders for destroyer flotillas of the First Fleet until 1913 when they were assigned to battleship squadrons . When the First World War began in August 1914 , they remained with their squadrons as the First Fleet was incorporated into the Grand Fleet , although they changed squadrons over the course of the war . Blonde did not participate in the Battle of Jutland in mid @-@ 1916 , unlike her sister ship , Blanche , which did , but never fired a shot . They were converted into minelayers the following year , but only Blanche actually laid mines . The sisters were reduced to reserve in 1919 and sold for scrap in 1920 – 21 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 These scout cruisers were too slow to lead destroyers in battle or to defend the fleet against enemy destroyer attacks , but they were still used as flotilla leaders . The Blonde class was essentially a repeat of the preceding Boadicea class , albeit with a more powerful armament and less fuel . Displacing 3 @,@ 350 long tons ( 3 @,@ 400 t ) , the ships had an overall length of 405 feet ( 123 @.@ 4 m ) , a beam of 41 feet 6 inches ( 12 @.@ 6 m ) and a deep draught of 15 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 7 m ) . They were powered by four sets of Parsons steam turbines , each driving two shafts . The turbines produced a total of 18 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) , using steam produced by 12 Yarrow boilers that burned both fuel oil and coal , and gave a maximum speed of 24 @.@ 5 knots ( 45 @.@ 4 km / h ; 28 @.@ 2 mph ) . They carried a maximum of 780 long tons ( 790 t ) of coal and 190 long tons ( 190 t ) of fuel oil that gave them a range of 4 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 600 km ; 4 @,@ 700 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Their crew consisted of 314 officers and ratings . 
 The main armament of the Blonde class consisted of ten breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) Mk VII guns . The forward pair of guns were mounted side by side on a platform on the forecastle , six were amidships , three on each broadside , and the two remaining guns were on the centreline of the quarterdeck , one ahead of the other . The guns fired their 31 @-@ pound ( 14 kg ) shells to a range of about 11 @,@ 400 yards ( 10 @,@ 400 m ) . Their secondary armament was four quick @-@ firing ( QF ) three @-@ pounder ( 1 @.@ 9 @-@ inch ( 47 mm ) ) Vickers Mk I guns and two submerged 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes . 
 As scout cruisers , the ships were only lightly protected to maximise their speed . They had a curved protective deck that was one inch ( 25 mm ) thick on the slope and 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 13 mm ) on the flat . Their conning tower was protected by four inches of armour . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 Both Blonde and Blanche began their careers with destroyer flotillas , Blonde as senior officers ' ship for the 7th Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet and Blanche with the 1st Destroyer Flotilla of the First Fleet . But the sisters were transferred to the 4th and the 3rd Battle Squadrons , respectively , of the First Fleet in 1913 . 
 Blonde remained with the 4th Battle Squadron through 1916 , although she was detached for several months mid year . She had been transferred to the 1st Battle Squadron by April 1917 and was converted into a minelayer later in the year , although she never laid any mines in combat . Similarly , Blanche remained with the 3rd Battle Squadron until January 1916 when she joined her sister in the 4th Battle Squadron . The ship participated in the Battle of Jutland , but was on the unengaged side of the fleet and did not have the opportunity to fire at the Germans . She was detached from the 4th Battle Squadron at the beginning of 1917 , presumably to be converted into a minelayer . Blanche was assigned to the 5th Battle Squadron by April and laid some mines at the entrance to the Kattegat in February 1918 . 
 Blonde was in reserve by February 1919 and had been assigned to the Nore Reserve by 1 May , together with Blanche . The sisters were listed for sale by 18 March 1920 and Blonde was sold for scrap on 6 May . Blanche followed on 27 July 1921 . 
 = Bless Me Indeed ( Jabez 's Song ) = 
 " Bless Me Indeed ( Jabez 's Song ) " ( sometimes called " Bless Me Indeed " ) is a song by Christian rock band MercyMe . Written by the band and produced by Pete Kipley , it was released as the lead single from the band 's 2001 album Almost There . The song was written at the request of the band 's record label , who wanted to produce a song based on the popular book The Prayer of Jabez ( 2000 ) . Although the band did not want to write it at first , they eventually relented and recorded it . 
 Lyrically , " Bless Me Indeed " asks God for blessing , paralleling Jabez 's prayer in 1 Chronicles . It received a mixed to positive response from critics ; lead singer Bart Millard has since described it as one of the band 's worst songs . The song did not perform well at Christian radio , peaking at number 27 on the Radio & Records Christian AC chart , leading to initial album sales that were lower than expected . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 The idea behind " Bless Me Indeed ( Jabez 's Song ) " came from MercyMe 's record label , INO Records , who wanted to capitalize off the success of Bruce Wilkinson 's popular book The Prayer of Jabez ( 2000 ) . According to lead singer Bart Millard , the label figured that the book could introduce the band and set up a successful career . Although the band did not want to write the song , they eventually relented . " Bless Me Indeed ( Jabez 's Song ) " was written by Jim Bryson , Nathan Cochran , Bart Millard , Mike Scheuchzer , and Robby Shaffer - all five members of MercyMe at the time . Like the rest of Almost There , it was recorded at Ivy Park , The Indigo Room , Paradise Sound , and IBC Studios . Kipley produced and programmed the song , while Skye McCaskey and Julian Kindred engineered it . Salvo mixed the song . String instruments were recorded by the Paltrow Performance Group . 
 " Bless Me Indeed ( Jabez 's Song ) " has a length of four minutes and fourteen seconds . According to the sheet music published by Musicnotes.com , it is in set common time in the key of C major and has a tempo of 108 beats per minute . Bart Millard 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of G ♯ 4 to the high note of F ♯ 5 . The song lyrically relates to the Biblical figure Jabez . In 1 Chronicles 4 : 10 , Jabez requests that God bless him by expanding his territory and keeping him free from evil , a request God accepts . In " Bless Me Indeed ( Jabez 's Song ) " , Millard requests the same from God . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Bless Me Indeed " received a mixed to positive response from critics . Steve Losey of AllMusic selected it as a ' track pick ' . The J Man of Crosswalk.com described it as a " winner " , and appreciated that it was based on The Prayer of Jabez . In Amazon.com 's product description of Almost There , the reviewer stated the track " is a glimmer of brilliance where the group brings it all together " . However , Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today described the song as " [ not ] particularly remarkable " , preferring another song based on Jabez , According to John 's " Song of Jabez " . In an interview in 2014 , Millard stated that it is one of " one of the worst songs we ’ ve ever done " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Bless Me Indeed " was released as the first single from Almost There . Although the label anticipated the song 's connection with The Prayer of <unk> would make it a success , it performed poorly on Christian radio . The song debuted at number 29 on the Radio & Records Christian AC chart for the week of August 31 , 2001 . The following week , it advanced to its peak of number 27 . The song spent four weeks on the chart before dropping off . The poor performance of the song at radio led to initial album sales that were lower than anticipated , although the album would later be certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) following the success of the album 's second single , " I Can Only Imagine " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits from the album liner notes ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Dion Phaneuf = 
 Dion Phaneuf ( born April 10 , 1985 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman for the Ottawa Senators of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He has previously also played for the Calgary Flames and Toronto Maple Leafs . He was drafted ninth overall in the 2003 NHL Entry Draft by Calgary and made his NHL debut in 2005 after a four @-@ year junior career with the Red Deer Rebels of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) , in which he was twice named the Defenceman of the Year . He set a Flames record for most goals by a first @-@ year defenceman and was named a finalist for the Calder Memorial Trophy as top rookie in 2005 – 06 . Two years later , he was a finalist for the James Norris Memorial Trophy as top defenceman , though he did not win either award . Since going pro , Phaneuf has been involved in two blockbuster trades . The first came in late 2009 , when he was involved in a seven @-@ player trade that saw him move from Calgary to Toronto . Six years later , Phaneuf was the centrepiece of a 9 @-@ player deal that saw him sent from Toronto to Ottawa . 
 Phaneuf is a three @-@ time NHL All @-@ Star . He has represented Team Canada internationally five times in his career , winning a silver medal and a gold medal at the World Junior Hockey Championship in 2004 and 2005 , respectively , as well as a gold medal at the 2007 Men 's World Ice Hockey Championships . 
 Phaneuf is active in the community ; the Flames honoured Phaneuf for his role as an ambassador to the Alberta Children 's Hospital , where he participated in events that help sick and injured children during his time in Calgary . Phaneuf was a common sight at Toronto events , often appearing at fundraisers , promotional activities or visiting patients at Sick Kids Hospital . 
 In 2013 , he married Elisha Cuthbert . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dion Phaneuf was born April 10 , 1985 , in Edmonton , Alberta , to Paul , a construction worker , and Amber , a nurse , both originally from the province of Prince Edward Island . Dion attended Harry <unk> Composite High School . Dion has a younger brother , Dane , who played for the P.E.I. Rocket of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) . Paul and Amber Phaneuf describe their family as close @-@ knit . 
 Paul Phaneuf maintained a backyard rink each winter that the young Phaneuf practiced on . His mother , a former figure skater who competed for Prince Edward Island at the 1975 Canada Winter Games , taught him to skate . Phaneuf also practiced his shot relentlessly in the basement of his family 's home , frequently breaking the nets his father bought . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 The Red Deer Rebels selected Phaneuf in the third round of the 2000 WHL Bantam Draft . One year later , he joined the Rebels for the 2001 – 02 season and recorded 17 points in 67 games . He added two assists in 21 games as the Rebels lost in the WHL Final against the Kootenay Ice . He improved to 16 goals and 30 points in 2002 – 03 as the Rebels again reached the WHL Finals , again losing , this time to the Kelowna Rockets . Phaneuf 's development earned him comparisons to Hall of Famer Scott Stevens , as he was lauded by scouts for his physical style and ability to excel both defensively and offensively . Then @-@ Calgary Flames General Manager Darryl Sutter valued Phaneuf so highly in the 2003 NHL Entry Draft that he attempted to trade up from his ninth overall selection in the Draft , though to no avail . Nonetheless , he was able to select Phaneuf with Calgary 's first selection in the draft . 
 Phaneuf established himself as the junior hockey team 's top player following the draft , earning the Bill Hunter Memorial Trophy as the top defenceman in the WHL . He was also named an Eastern Conference All @-@ Star by the WHL , and a First Team All @-@ Star by the Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) . He was considered a candidate to join the Flames in 2004 . The 2004 – 05 NHL lockout , however , forced Phaneuf to play one final year of junior hockey . He scored 56 points in 55 games to finish his junior career with 146 total points . He repeated as the WHL 's Defenceman of the Year , and was again named to both WHL and CHL All @-@ Star Teams . Prospects Hockey rated Phaneuf as the top player in the CHL in both 2004 and 2005 , ahead of Sidney Crosby , naming him one of the best junior defencemen of the previous decade . 
 = = = Calgary Flames = = = 
 Phaneuf joined the Flames for the 2005 – 06 NHL season after signing his first professional contract in September 2005 . Phaneuf made his NHL debut on October 5 , 2005 , against the Minnesota Wild . Five nights later , he scored his first career goal , assist and points against the Colorado Avalanche . He was named the NHL 's Rookie of the Month for November after leading all rookie defencemen with nine points and two game @-@ winning goals . By January , Phaneuf was being named alongside Sidney Crosby and Alexander Ovechkin as a candidate for the NHL 's top rookie . He finished the season with 20 goals , only the third player in NHL history after Brian Leetch and Barry Beck to score 20 as a rookie defenceman . His 20 goals also broke the Flames franchise record for goals by a rookie defenseman , surpassing Gary Suter 's total of 18 . Phaneuf was named a finalist for the Calder Memorial Trophy as top rookie , but lost out to Ovechkin . 
 A 50 @-@ point sophomore season earned Phaneuf his first NHL All @-@ Star Game appearance in 2006 – 07 . He participated in the hardest shot competition at the SuperSkills competition , losing to Zdeno Chára , and scored a goal and an assist in the game itself to help the Western Conference defeat the East 12 – 9 . The Flames signed Phaneuf to a six @-@ year , US $ 39 million contract extension midway through the 2007 – 08 season . He responded by posting a career @-@ high 60 points , and was voted into the starting lineup by the fans for the 2008 All @-@ Star Game . Phaneuf was named to the NHL First All @-@ Star Team following the season , and was a finalist for the James Norris Memorial Trophy as defenceman of the year , losing to the Detroit Red Wings ' Nicklas Lidström . 
 The 2008 – 09 season was a frustrating one for Phaneuf , as he recorded a career @-@ low 11 goals and 47 points , and his poor plus @-@ minus rating of – 11 led fans to question his defensive commitment . His poor season and high salary also led to speculation that Phaneuf might be traded . In spite of his struggles , Phaneuf averaged 26 minutes and 31 seconds of ice time per game , the fourth highest in the League . He missed the final game of the Flames ' 2009 Stanley Cup playoff Western Quarter @-@ final series against the Chicago Blackhawks with broken ribs , after battling a hip injury during the regular season . Flames management defended Phaneuf , claiming that the injuries he battled affected his play . 
 = = = Toronto Maple Leafs = = = 
 On January 31 , 2010 , the Flames dealt Phaneuf , along with Fredrik Sjöström and Keith Aulie , to the Toronto Maple Leafs in exchange for Matt Stajan , Niklas Hagman , Ian White and Jamal Mayers . 
 On February 2 , 2010 , Phaneuf made his Toronto Maple Leaf debut , leading all Maple Leafs players in time on ice and ended the night with a fight and given second star of the game honours . He would record his first point , an assist , four nights later in a game against the Ottawa Senators and scored his first goal as a Leaf on April 7 , 2010 , on Henrik Lundqvist of the New York Rangers . Phaneuf was named an alternate captain in Toronto nine games after being acquired after Mike Komisarek suffered a season @-@ ending injury . While Phaneuf struggled offensively to begin his tenure in Toronto – he played 25 games in Toronto before scoring his first goal – then @-@ Leafs Head Coach Ron Wilson credited him with creating a positive change in the mood in the Toronto dressing room . 
 Phaneuf was named the 18th captain of the Toronto Maple Leafs on June 14 , 2010 , at a press conference held by General Manager Brian Burke , succeeding Mats Sundin , who left after the 2007 – 08 season . 
 On November 2 , 2010 , in a game against the Ottawa Senators , Phaneuf sustained an injury in the leg by having it cut open with a skate from Peter Regin while crashing into the boards . He was carried off the ice immediately and had surgery done the same night . Phaneuf was said to be off the ice for four @-@ to @-@ six weeks , and made a return to the Leafs ' lineup on December 9 , 2010 , a home ice game against the Philadelphia Flyers , which Philadelphia won 4 – 1 , though he had one assist on the lone Toronto goal . 
 On January 5 , 2012 , it was announced that Phaneuf would compete in his third All @-@ Star Game , having finished second amongst all defencemen on the fan ballot , gaining 614 @,@ 933 votes , behind the Ottawa Senators ' Erik Karlsson . On April 21 , 2013 , Phaneuf and the Leafs clinched a Stanley Cup playoff spot , the first time for Phaneuf since the 2008 – 09 season with the Calgary Flames . On December 10 , 2013 , Phaneuf received a two @-@ game suspension on a boarding hit on Boston Bruins defenceman Kevan Miller , which occurred on December 8 , 2013 , in Toronto . Phaneuf forfeited the amount of US $ 66 @,@ 666 @.@ 66 for his action . 
 = = = Ottawa Senators = = = 
 After parts of seven seasons with Toronto , Phaneuf was dealt to the Ottawa Senators on February 9 , 2016 , in a blockbuster nine @-@ player trade . Both fans and media alike viewed the trade with shock , as a significant deal between the arch @-@ rivals was viewed as very unlikely to happen . Phaneuf , Matt <unk> , prospects Casey Bailey , Ryan Rupert and Cody Donaghey were sent to the Senators in exchange for Jared Cowen , Colin Greening , Milan Michalek , prospect Tobias Lindberg and Ottawa 's 2017 second round draft pick . Due to the Battle of Ontario rivalry , this was the first time the Maple Leafs and Senators had made a trade since March 17 , 1998 , when Per Gustafsson was shipped to Ottawa in exchange for an 8th round pick . Phaneuf played a shortened 2015 – 16 season due to an " oblique injury and soreness in his right foot " after blocking a shot during a game against the Toronto Maple Leafs on March 12 , ending the season with 20 games played with the Senators , amassing one goal and eight points . 
 = = International play = = 
 Phaneuf made his international debut for the Canadian junior team at the 2004 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships in Helsinki , earning a leadership role under Head Coach Mario Durocher . A devastating bodycheck to the Czech Republic 's Rostislav <unk> led the referee to eject Phaneuf from the semi @-@ final game ; he was not suspended , however , and played in the gold medal game . The Canadians lost the final to the United States , while Phaneuf was named a tournament All @-@ Star at defence . 
 The Canadian team at the 2005 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships dominated the tournament , outscoring their opposition 35 – 6 in the games leading up to the gold medal match @-@ up with Russia . 
 Phaneuf scored a goal and threw a memorable bodycheck that knocked down two Russian players in the championship game as Canada routed the Russians 6 – 1 to win their first gold medal in eight years . He was again named a tournament All @-@ Star , as well as being named the outstanding defenceman of the tournament . 
 Following the Flames ' elimination in the 2007 Stanley Cup playoffs , Phaneuf joined the Canadian senior team at the 2007 Men 's World Ice Hockey Championships in Moscow . He recorded eight assists in seven games to help Canada win the gold medal over Finland . Once considered a virtual lock to join team Canada at the 2010 Winter Olympics , his struggles in the 2008 – 09 season placed his candidacy in doubt . Team Canada General Manager Steve Yzerman continued to express confidence in Phaneuf during a summer camp held in Calgary , but Phaneuf was not among the seven defencemen ultimately selected for the team . 
 After the Leafs missed the 2011 playoffs , Phaneuf served as alternate captain of Team Canada at the 2011 IIHF World Championship in Bratislava , Slovakia , where Canada finished fifth . Phaneuf was once again alternate captain of the Canadian team at the 2012 World Championship in Sochi , Russia . Canada repeated its fifth @-@ place finish of the prior year . 
 In August 2013 , Phaneuf attended the summer orientation camp for Team Canada in preparation for the 2014 Winter Olympics . Phaneuf , however , was not named to the final Olympic roster . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 In junior hockey , Phaneuf was known not only for his physical presence , but also his calm demeanour and offensive ability . He was compared to Hockey Hall of Famer Scott Stevens by his former coach , Brent Sutter . Scouts praised his defensive ability , and the poise he showed at both ends of the ice . Praised for his leadership abilities , Phaneuf was named the captain of Team WHL at the 2004 ATD Canada @-@ Russia Challenge , and was counted upon to take a leadership role with the Canadian junior team at the 2004 and 2005 World Junior Championships . 
 Entering his sophomore season , Phaneuf 's potential impact on a game was compared to that of Russian star Alexander Ovechkin , and a poll released by ESPN in 2008 revealed that 43 % of players asked argued Phaneuf was the hardest hitter in hockey , at the age of 22 . He was named an alternate captain by the Flames at the start of the 2008 – 09 season , though Brent Sutter chose to alternate amongst a group of veterans , including Phaneuf , in 2009 – 10 . 
 While he earned a James Norris Memorial Trophy nomination for his defensive play in 2008 , he struggled enough during the 2008 – 09 season that some observers began to question his defensive commitment . Phaneuf 's teammates were quick to defend his play and noted that he was among the League leaders in average time on ice per game . His hitting game has also earned criticism at times . The New York Islanders were especially upset at an open @-@ ice charge Phaneuf delivered to Kyle <unk> during a 2009 exhibition game that resulted in the latter suffering a concussion . Phaneuf has also been criticized for occasionally refusing to fight opponents who challenge him after throwing a big hit . For his part , Phaneuf stated he does not believe that he should be forced to fight after every big hit , though he would do so when necessary . His coaches have praised Phaneuf 's mentality . He has also been accused of playing " dirty " and " stupid " by opponents who feel that he occasionally takes unnecessary liberties with opposing players . A 2010 Sports Illustrated poll of 229 NHL players saw 21 % of respondents name Phaneuf as the most overrated player in the NHL , three times as many votes as any other player . Phaneuf dismissed the poll while several of his current and former teammates expressed their disagreement with the result . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Phaneuf began dating Canadian actress Elisha Cuthbert in May 2008 . Their relationship became the centre of controversy in December 2008 when then @-@ Dallas Stars forward Sean Avery , who had dated Cuthbert in the past , commented on how other NHL players , such as Phaneuf — as well as Los Angeles Kings ' center Jarret Stoll , who was dating model Rachel Hunter , another ex @-@ girlfriend — fell in love with his " sloppy seconds . " NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman referred to the remarks as " disgusting " and subsequently suspended Avery six games ; the Stars later cut ties with the player . 
 Phaneuf and Cuthbert announced their engagement in September 2012 , and they married on July 6 , 2013 , at St. James Catholic Church in Summerfield , Prince Edward Island . Living in Toronto during the hockey season , Phaneuf and Cuthbert spend their summers at Phaneuf 's waterfront estate outside of New London , Prince Edward Island , in his parents ' home province . 
 While with the Flames , he was the official ambassador to the Alberta Children 's Hospital in Calgary and donated tickets to Flames games to help families at the facility . The Flames named him the recipient of the Ralph T. Scurfield Humanitarian Award in 2008 in recognition of his participation with the Children 's Hospital . Phaneuf has appeared on the cover of the NHL 09 video game , and played a role in NHL promotions and commercials . 
 Phaneuf is a fourth cousin of Canadian figure skater Cynthia Phaneuf . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = All @-@ Star Games = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Mongrels ( TV series ) = 
 Mongrels is a British puppet @-@ based situation comedy series first broadcast on BBC Three between 22 June and 10 August 2010 , with a making @-@ of documentary entitled " Mongrels Uncovered " broadcast on 11 August 2010 . A second and final series of Mongrels began airing on 7 November 2011 . 
 The series revolves around the lives of five anthropomorphic animals who hang around the back of a pub in Millwall , the Isle of Dogs , London . The characters are Nelson , a metrosexual fox ( voiced by Rufus Jones , performed by Andy Heath ) ; Destiny , an Afghan hound ( voiced by Lucy Montgomery , performed by Richard Coombs and Sue Beattie ) ; Marion , a " borderline @-@ retarded " cat ( voiced by Dan Tetsell , performed by Warrick Brownlow @-@ Pike ) ; Kali , a grudge @-@ bearing pigeon ( voiced by Katy Brand , performed by Iestyn Evans ) ; and Vince , Nelson 's friend , a sociopathic foul @-@ mouthed fox ( voiced by Paul Kaye , performed by various puppeteers ) . 
 The show is aimed at an adult audience , features " neutering , incontinence , cannibalism and catnip overdoses " and humour styles such as slapstick and farce . For example , the first episode begins with a scene in which Marion , portrayed as desperately trying to revive his deceased owner , learns she has actually been dead for four months , whereupon he casually gives his cat friends permission to eat her . Mongrels has attracted accusations of plagiarism , with claims that Mongrels stole ideas from a similar Channel 4 show called Pets . 
 On 18 January 2012 it was announced via Twitter that Mongrels had not been renewed for a third series by the BBC due to a decision made by Zai Bennett . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mongrels looks at the lives of five animals that hang around the back of a pub called The Lord Nelson in Millwall , on the Isle of Dogs in the East End of London . The hero of the series is Nelson ( <unk> <unk> ) , a fox who lives a metrosexual lifestyle . Described as : " The only wild fox in East London with subscriptions to all the major broadsheets ( excluding The Sunday Times ) , Nelson is , as he never tires of introducing himself at dinner parties ... ' An urbane fox ! ' " 
 Nelson 's love interest is Destiny , an Afghan hound . However , Destiny has no interest in Nelson . She is the pet dog of Gary ( Tony Way ) , the landlord of The Lord Nelson . However , like the other humans that appear in the series , he cannot understand what Destiny or what the other animals are saying . Elsewhere there is Marion ( Felis <unk> ) , an idiotic cat to whom Nelson acts as a father @-@ figure . Marion has been abandoned by several owners and is very corruptible . Then there is Kali ( Aves <unk> ) , a pigeon who likes to revel in the misfortune of others . She has several grudges , including a hatred of all humans and foxes for the way they treat birds . Lastly , there is Vince , Nelson 's older brother ( <unk> c * * * <unk> ) , a violent , foul @-@ mouthed fox who considers himself a proper animal . Almost all his lines contain at least one swear word that is always bleeped over . 
 There is no over @-@ riding story arc between episodes , but each episode does contain recurring elements . During each episode there are cutaways from the main plot to create extra gags . Most episodes also feature at least one celebrity appearance and every episode features a comic song . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Rufus Jones as the voice of Nelson , an urban fox who has embraced a middle @-@ class , metrosexual lifestyle . Operated by Andy Heath 
 Dan Tetsell as the voice of Marion , a homeless Persian alley cat . Operated by Warrick Brownlow @-@ Pike 
 Lucy Montgomery as the voice of Destiny , a beautiful Afghan Hound . Operated by Richard Coombs and Sue Beattie 
 Katy Brand as the voice of Kali , a cynical , vindictive and street smart pigeon . Operated by Iestyn Evans 
 Paul Kaye as the voice of Vince , a violent , foul @-@ mouthed sociopathic fox . 
 Tony Way as Gary , Destiny 's owner . 
 Ruth Bratt – various incidental characters . 
 = = Creation = = 
 The show took five years to make . The idea was first suggested between the creator and director of Mongrels , Adam Miller , and the show 's head puppeteer , Andy Heath , when they worked on ITV children 's show Ripley and <unk> . 
 Miller described Mongrels as : " an adult sitcom , trying to do for puppetry what American shows like The Simpsons have done for animation . Obviously that 's aiming very high . Think [ stage musical ] Avenue Q meets Family Guy but with puppet animals . " He also said that : " We wanted to make something that had the pace of an American animation but with British sensibilities , that was adult , but not crude , that was based in the realities of the animal world , and that didn 't rely on the puppets to do the comedy . " 
 The original idea , known as The Un @-@ Natural World was of an urban fox living in Brixton called Nelson , who was so used to living in the city that he had lost any sense of being an animal . It also featured a cat , Marion , who was trying to encourage Nelson to be more animal @-@ like . 
 While Miller was working on a BBC Three sitcom he pitched the idea to producer Stephen McCrum . McCrum criticised the way Miller ended the first script , which ended with Nelson and Marion leave where they live . McCrum told him it was best to set the series in a single place rather than have the characters move from one place to another . McCrum then suggested taking Nelson and Marion , and writing a script about them . Later , another writer , Jon Brown came in to write and at this time rules were set out with regards to writing the show , such as the animals could not be dressed in clothes unless it was in a flashback sequence or during a song . 
 The new script was then pitched to the BBC . The pitch tape they made was based on the same pitch used by The Muppet Show . This was done as a tribute to it , with Miller arguing that when The Muppet Show did it , " it just must have just knocked the socks off the people who saw it , because it 's like nothing you 've ever seen before , and we thought : ' Why fix what ain 't broke , so we did our own very British version of that . " The producers liked it but did not fully understand what the show was about . Miller , Brown and a third writer , Daniel Peak began to write scripts over a period of four years . A pilot was eventually filmed and the BBC commissioned a full series , targeted at adults . Despite the adult nature , Miller did not want to make the show too crude . Eight episodes were filmed so as to spread the cost of making the series over each episode . 
 = = = Character development = = = 
 When writing for the commissioned series began , the character of Nelson was originally depicted as being brash and obnoxious . This was later changed to make him more metrosexual , middle class and likeable . Developing the character of Destiny , Nelson 's love interest , was a challenge to the programme makers . Kali was created to be a villain , with Miller describing her as a " Hitler @-@ figure " . Vince was partly based on the brash version of Nelson . 
 In the unbroadcast pilot We Are Mongrels , another character was included called Debbie . Debbie was a suicidal chicken who never left her coop . However , it was decided that the character did not go anywhere and could not be sustained for a full series , so the character was axed . Another chicken character called Wendy appeared in the first broadcast episode as a reference to Debbie . Both characters had the same voice actress , Ruth Bratt , who performed Wendy 's voice in exactly the same manner as that of Debbie . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Rufus Jones was among the first people auditioned for the role of Nelson . After several other auditions with other actors , Jones was called upon to play the part . Paul Kaye at one time provided the voice for Nelson before taking the role of Vince . 
 It was then decided by the creators to make Marion a foreign character and to find an accent that reflected this . There was discussion about Iranian @-@ British comic Omid Djalili playing the role . In the end , Tetsell was cast after auditioning with a poor version of Djalili 's Iranian accent . Tetsell describes the voice as a mixture of , " every accent on the planet " , but with the joke that Marion was meant to be a Persian cat . 
 = = = Puppets = = = 
 When the puppet for Marion was first created , he was depicted as having <unk> fur , but looked more like a mouse in the eyes of the crew , so his puppet was changed . Marion 's image was based on topless photos of the comic actor James Corden . 
 The show 's puppeteers claim there are different problems working with different characters . For example , Destiny is the largest puppet and so moving her is more difficult . As Marion spends much of his time sitting on top of a rubbish bin , his puppeteer , Brownlow @-@ Pike , has to stand inside a bottomless bin for long periods of time . Kali is said to be the most difficult puppet to work with , because as she has no hands she is limited to what she can hold . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 The show was originally entitled We Are Mongrels , but the title had to be changed for two reasons : one was that the title was too similar to another BBC Three comedy show , We Are Klang . The other is that none of the characters were mongrels . Therefore new suggestions were called for . Rejected titles included I , Nelson ; Humans ! Everywhere ! ; Undergrowth and Never Been <unk> . The last of these titles was rejected after one of the show 's additional writers , Danielle Ward ; " said it sounded like ' a makeover show for virgins ' . " During this time the crew referred to the show as Mongrels and it eventually became the show 's title . 
 When writing for Vince the writers blanked out all of the characters swearing like it is done on the show , but when it came to recording the programme the swear words had to be put in for Kaye to read them . During read @-@ throughs of the scripts , a toy horn was honked whenever Kaye swore to give an idea of what it would sound like during the programme . 
 The show also aims to be environmentally friendly in its production . A report from the BBC 's in @-@ house publication Ariel : " From reusable water bottles filled from tanks of tap water to double @-@ sided scripts , Mongrels is aiming to be the most sustainable production at the BBC . " The production team also use reusable or <unk> cutlery in their canteen , reducing any future merchandise packaging to just a barcode , and replacing conventional lighting with fluorescent tube lights . This last move reduced the electricity bill for the second series by a third , saving £ 500 a week . 
 = = Cancellation = = 
 On 18 January 2012 , Tetsell revealed on Twitter that Mongrels had been cancelled , saying : " we 've all been sacked now " . 
 Miller posted another , longer message online saying : 
 " Mongrels friends , it is my unbearably sad duty to announce that we will not be returning for a third series on BBC Three , a decision that has been made based on the fact that apparently you need more than two people watching a programme to make it successful . Crazy talk . I 'd like to take this opportunity to thank everyone at BBC Comedy , BBC Three and BBC Worldwide who have supported us so strongly over the years , and helped us put our silly puppet show on the digital screens of the nation . I 'd also like to thank , from the bottom of my heart , all the writers , cast , crew and support team who have made a horribly challenging show such an utter joy to make . This news could not be less of a reflection on your brilliant work . Most of all I 'd like to thank those of you that loved watching Mongrels as much as we loved making it . It 's wonderfully reassuring to think that we weren 't mad after all , and that what we find funny , other people do too . I 'd like to believe that there 's room on television for a little show like ours ; one that 's not just another sitcom , one that tries to do things a bit differently and that tries to push a few boundaries here and there . Who knows , maybe we 'll find a that room in the future . I hope it has a <unk> . Thank you for watching . Both of you . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mongrels was given mixed reviews , with some considering its quality to be inconsistent , with a reviewer for <unk> saying that the show was " a bit hit and miss " but also that , " even the laugh @-@ free moments have a well @-@ written sheen . " and that the work put into the jokes show . Jane Simon of the Daily Mirror wrote : " While most of it is very funny , some of the gags about Harold Shipman completely misjudge the tone . Maybe the age group BBC3 is aimed at reckon anything is fair game for comedy . " The Independent 's Tom Sutcliffe said that : " It does have its laughs , though , because the script isn 't entirely about crass shock value " , but that the sitcom , while aimed at adults , is " not really for grown @-@ ups . " Sam Wollaston of The Guardian was mainly positive about Mongrels , but said that the main reason he thought it was funny was because it depicted " cuddly children 's toys [ ... ] saying things you wouldn 't normally expect cuddly children 's toys to say . Like ' You are such a cock @-@ end ' " , and that , " the novelty will wear off at some point not too far away " . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Mongrels won the Royal Television Society Craft and Design Award 2009 – 2010 for " Production Design – Entertainment and Non @-@ Drama " led by production designer Simon Rogers . It was also nominated for the award for " Tape and Film Editing – Entertainment and Situation Comedy " led by film editor Nigel Williams , but lost to Pete versus Life . 
 In 2011 , Brown won the BAFTA Craft Award for " Break @-@ through Talent " . The series was nominated for the Ursa Major Award for " Best <unk> Dramatic Short Work or Series " in 2010 ( series 1 ) and 2011 ( series 2 ) . 
 In 2012 , Andy Heath & Iestyn Evans won the Royal Television Society Craft and Design Award 2011 / 12 for special effects in Mongrels Series 2 , beating Downton Abbey and Great Expectations in the process . 
 = = Appearances in other programmes = = 
 On 13 August 2011 , the cast of Mongrels took part in the first ever Comedy Prom , in which they performed the song " Middle Class is Magical " from the seventh episode of the first series , " Marion The <unk> Feed Character " . The performance was broadcast live on BBC Radio 3 , and later broadcast on BBC Two on 27 August 2011 . 
 = = Plagiarism accusations = = 
 Mongrels has attracted anger from production company <unk> which claimed the BBC " ripped off " their 2001 Channel 4 sitcom Pets . <unk> claimed they received 30 emails from people saying the series were similar , and they once pitched the idea of Pets to then BBC head of comedy Mark Freeland , who also acted as the executive producer of Mongrels . 
 The producer of Pets , Andrew Barclay said : " We checked the BBC 's Mongrels website this morning and the Beeb do appear to have hired the same puppet builders and puppeteers as Pets . We also notice that Mongrels ' executive producer is Mark Freeland , to whom we did once pitch a Pets follow @-@ up show . " 
 The co @-@ creator and co @-@ producer of Pets , Brian West , went on to post his views on a BBC blog post about Mongrels . Following this , a telephone conversation between West and Mongrels producer McCrum took place where McCrum , " claimed that no @-@ one from the BBC production team had watched Pets before or during the development and production of their series . " From this West responded that : " We might therefore conclude that any similarities between the two shows is 100 % coincidental . " West left people to judge for themselves whether Pets had been copied . 
 Afterwards , Andy Heath , a puppet builder who worked for both Mongrels and Pets , said on the same blog that he met Adam Miller in 2002 after he [ Heath ] finished working on Pets in 2000 , to work on Ripley and <unk> . Miller then began developing the idea for Mongrels in 2004 . Heath then went on to say : 
 " Pets was Pets . Mongrels is Mongrels . If , as a viewer , you can sit down and say they are the same , then there is little point of making any new shows , if the slightest similarity ( puppets and animals ) can be suggested as idea stealing . I am surprised Basil Brush hasn 't been on the blower , as he is a fox , and that must be a copy ! Right ? I worked on both , and know for a fact where they both come from . Two very different ideas . " 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 The first series of Mongrels was released on DVD ( region 2 and 4 ) and Blu @-@ ray disc ( region B ) on 16 August 2010 . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray discs featured the unbroadcast pilot amongst their extras . A planned DVD and Blu @-@ ray release of the second series was cancelled , . The DVD release of series two was later rescheduled for October 2012 . The second series was made available on DVD on the 8th of October 2012 in the UK , available separately or as a boxset with series 1 . A Blu @-@ ray release of series 2 should become available soon , but no official date has been set for such a release as of June 2014 . Both series are now available on iTunes and Netflix . 
 = Vance v. Terrazas = 
 Vance v. Terrazas , 444 U.S. 252 ( 1980 ) , was a United States Supreme Court decision that established that a United States citizen cannot have his or her citizenship taken away unless he or she has acted with an intent to give up that citizenship . The Supreme Court overturned portions of an act of Congress which had listed various actions and had said that the performance of any of these actions could be taken as conclusive , <unk> proof of intent to give up U.S. citizenship . However , the Court ruled that a person 's intent to give up citizenship could be established through a standard of preponderance of evidence ( i.e. , more likely than not ) — rejecting an argument that intent to relinquish citizenship could only be found on the basis of clear , convincing and unequivocal evidence . 
 = = Background = = 
 Laurence Terrazas was born in the United States in 1947 . Because Terrazas 's father was Mexican and because Mexico 's citizenship laws then followed the principle of ius sanguinis , Terrazas held Mexican citizenship at birth and because he was born in the United States , Terrazas also held US citizenship under the ius soli of the Fourteenth Amendment ; therefore , Terrazas was a dual citizen of the United States and Mexico at birth . 
 While enrolled at a Mexican university in 1970 , Terrazas applied for a certificate of Mexican nationality . As part of his application , Terrazas signed a statement renouncing " United States citizenship , as well as any submission , obedience and loyalty to any foreign government , especially to that of the United States of America . " 
 During subsequent discussions with a US consular official , Terrazas gave conflicting answers as to whether or not he had truly intended to abandon his rights as a US citizen when he applied for his certificate of Mexican nationality . The State Department eventually concluded that he had lost his US citizenship , a decision which Terrazas appealed , first before the State Department 's board of appellate review , and subsequently to the courts . 
 Before the 1967 Supreme Court ruling in Afroyim v. Rusk , US law had provided for numerous ways for citizens to lose their citizenship . In its Afroyim ruling , the Supreme Court held that the Fourteenth Amendment barred Congress from revoking anyone 's citizenship without their consent . Specifically , the court held that a law automatically revoking the citizenship of anyone who had voted in a foreign election was unconstitutional and unenforceable . However , US law continued , after Afroyim to list several other " expatriating acts , " the voluntary performance of any of which would result in automatic loss of citizenship . 
 The 7th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that according to Afroyim v. Rusk , " Congress is constitutionally devoid of the power " to revoke citizenship ; and that Congress had no power to legislate any evidentiary standard for proving Terrazas 's intent to relinquish his citizenship that fell short of a requirement of proof by clear , convincing and unequivocal evidence . The Secretary of State appealed this ruling to the Supreme Court , questioning not only the appellate court 's finding on the required standard of proof , but also challenging the finding that a separate intent to give up citizenship was required ( as opposed merely to the performance of a designated expatriating act ) . 
 = = Opinion = = 
 A 5 @-@ 4 majority of the Supreme Court held that it was not enough for the government to prove " the voluntary commission of an act , such as swearing allegiance to a foreign nation , that ' is so inherently inconsistent with the continued retention of American citizenship that Congress may accord to it its natural consequences , i. e . , loss of nationality . ' " Rather , the court held that its 1967 ruling in Afroyim v. Rusk " emphasized that loss of citizenship requires the individual 's ' assent , ' ... in addition to his voluntary commission of the expatriating act " and that " the trier of fact must in the end conclude that the citizen not only voluntarily committed the expatriating act prescribed in the statute , but also intended to relinquish his citizenship . " On that point , the Supreme Court agreed with the 7th Circuit ruling in Terrazas 's favor . 
 The majority then turned its attention to the question of a standard of proof in loss @-@ of @-@ citizenship cases . Terrazas had argued and the 7th Circuit had agreed that the 14th Amendment , as interpreted in Afroyim , had left Congress without any constitutional authority to set the standard of proof for intent to relinquish citizenship at a level any lower than one of clear and convincing evidence . The Supreme Court majority rejected this claim and held that Congress was within its rights to specify a standard of preponderance of evidence ( more likely than not ) when cases alleging loss of US citizenship were involved . 
 Finally , the Supreme Court majority upheld the validity of another aspect of the law as enacted by Congress : that the government could assume that a potentially expatriating act had been performed voluntarily and that any claim that a person had acted under duress was up to the person involved to establish by preponderance of evidence . 
 The Supreme Court did not explicitly rule on whether or not Terrazas had lost his US citizenship ; rather , it remanded the case back to the original trial court ( a Federal District Court in Illinois ) for further proceedings consistent with the court 's ruling . 
 Although the court 's membership was divided on the question of whether a " preponderance of evidence " standard was sufficient for establishing someone 's intent to give up their U.S. citizenship , all nine judges agreed with the key holding in Afroyim v. Rusk that US citizenship was safeguarded by the Fourteenth Amendment and could not be taken away by an act of Congress from a person without consent . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The four justices who disagreed with the majority filed three separate dissenting opinions . All of the dissenting justices supported the Afroyim v. Rusk principle that retention of US citizenship was a constitutionally protected right , and they all agreed ( contrary to the court 's majority ) that Terrazas 's actions should not have led to the loss of his citizenship . 
 Justice Thurgood Marshall rejected the majority 's decision that an intent to give up citizenship could be established merely by a preponderance of evidence . Arguing that " the Court 's casual dismissal of the importance of American citizenship cannot withstand scrutiny , " he said that he " would hold that a citizen may not lose his citizenship in the absence of clear and convincing evidence that he intended to do so . " 
 Justice John Paul Stevens also argued that " a person 's interest in retaining his American citizenship is surely an aspect of ' liberty ' of which he cannot be deprived without due process of law " and that " due process requires that a clear and convincing standard of proof be met " in Terrazas 's case or others like it . Additionally , Stevens felt that Congress had not adequately addressed the question of specific intent to relinquish citizenship . " Since we accept dual citizenship , " he wrote , " taking an oath of allegiance to a foreign government is not necessarily inconsistent with an intent to remain an American citizen . Moreover , as now written , the statute cannot fairly be read to require a finding of specific intent to relinquish citizenship . " 
 Justices William J. Brennan , Jr . , and Potter Stewart argued that since Terrazas was born a dual US / Mexican national , his having taken an oath of allegiance to Mexico was consistent with his being a citizen of the U.S. In Brennan 's words : " The formal oath [ of allegiance to Mexico ] adds nothing to the existing foreign citizenship and , therefore , cannot affect his United States citizenship . " Brennan argued , in addition , that since " Congress has provided for a procedure by which one may formally renounce citizenship " before US consular officials , a procedure that all conceded that Terrazas used , Terrazas was still a US citizen . 
 = = Subsequent developments = = 
 After receiving Terrazas 's case from the Supreme Court on remand , the district court again ruled that Terrazas had lost his citizenship . On subsequent appeal , the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals reversed its earlier decision and , this time using a preponderance @-@ of @-@ evidence standard per the instructions of the Supreme Court , ruled against him , finding this time that there was " abundant evidence that plaintiff intended to renounce his United States citizenship when he acquired the Certificate of Mexican Nationality willingly , knowingly , and voluntarily . " since the office of U.S. Secretary of State changed hands twice following the Supreme Court 's ruling in the case , Edmund Muskie replacing Cyrus Vance in 1980 , and Alexander Haig assuming the position in 1981 , the subsequent lower court cases are known as Terrazas v. Muskie and Terrazas v. Haig . 
 Congress amended the Immigration and Nationality Act in 1986 to specify , as required by Vance v. Terrazas , that a potentially expatriating act may result in loss of citizenship only if it was performed " with the intention of relinquishing United States nationality . " 
 Although the Terrazas ruling left intact Congress 's right to specify a preponderance @-@ of @-@ evidence standard for judging intent to give up citizenship , the State Department in 1990 adopted a policy that pursues loss @-@ of @-@ citizenship proceedings issues usually only when an individual affirmatively states the intent to relinquish citizenship . When a case involving possible expatriation comes to the attention of a US consular officer , the officer will normally " simply ask the applicant if there was intent to relinquish U.S. citizenship when performing the act . If the answer is no , the consular officer will certify that it was not the person 's intent to relinquish U.S. citizenship and , consequently , find that the person has retained U.S. citizenship . " 
 A bill was introduced in 2005 , which sought , among other things , to force the State Department to abolish the above policy on loss of citizenship and reinstate its pre @-@ 1990 policy " of viewing dual / multiple citizenship as problematic and as something to be discouraged , not encouraged . " However , the bill never made it to the floor of the House and died in committee when the 109th Congress adjourned . 
 = Falkner Island = 
 Falkner Island ( also called Faulkner 's Island ) is a 2 @.@ 87 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 16 ha ) crescent @-@ shaped island located in Long Island Sound 3 miles ( 5 km ) off the coast of Guilford , Connecticut , United States . The island has been visited by the Native Americans for thousands of years . Its Quinnipiac name is " Massancummock " , meaning " the place of the great fish hawks " . In 1641 , Henry Whitfield and the founders of Guilford purchased the island from the Mohegan tribe 's sachem , Uncas , as part of a transaction for the land east of East River . Purchased by the Stone family in 1715 , it remained in the family until it was sold to the government in 1801 . 
 The Falkner Island Light was constructed in 1802 and commissioned by President Thomas Jefferson . The light is the second oldest in Connecticut and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . The lighthouse was automated in 1978 , and continues to operate as a navigational aid to the nearby Intracoastal Waterway . The island is part of the Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge and has the fifth @-@ largest colony of nesting roseate terns in the northeastern United States . Much of the island 's land mass has been lost to erosion , down to about 2 @.@ 87 acres ( 11 @,@ 600 m2 ) from its original 4 @.@ 5 acres ( 18 @,@ 000 m2 ) . The United States Army Corps of Engineers reinforced the eastern boundary to slow the advancing deterioration . 
 = = Name origins = = 
 The first recorded name of the Falkner Island was coined by the Native Americans . The island name in Quinnipiac was " Massancummock " meaning " the place of the great fish hawks " . The Quinnipiac name did not refer to possession , but instead the usage or resources of the island . 
 The identity of the first European explorer is unknown , but it was likely the Dutch explorer Adrian Block who sailed through Long Island Sound around 1614 . The United States government credits Block as the discoverer . Early English settlers called it " Falcon Island " , likely stemming from the Native American name . <unk> writes that the island was probably named for the osprey , but the English translation to " Falcon " suggesting the presence of the peregrine falcon was one of " simple ignorance " . The island 's name on Dutch maps was " <unk> Eylandt " . The name later evolved to Faulkner Island , perhaps as a result of the Faulkner family who lived on the island in the 1700s . When the island was transferred to the U.S. government in 1801 , the deed states the name as " <unk> " . The U.S. Board on Geographic Names changed and established " Falkner Island " as its name in 1891 . However , the name change is not universally recognized and " popular usage " and the Faulkner 's Light Brigade that conserves the island 's lighthouse use " Faulkner " ; including publications . 
 = = History = = 
 Falkner Island has been the site of human activity for thousands of years . An archaeological survey performed on the island from 1997 @-@ 1998 found a quartz projectile point of the <unk> triangle variety which dates to 1000 @-@ 3000 B.C. The study was conducted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as part of the erosion control project ; it was required by law under the National Historic Preservation Act because the island is on the National Register of Historic Places . The findings were published in the Bulletin of the Archaeological Society of Connecticut in 2001 . In 1994 , John P. Menta 's The History of the Quinnipiac Indians identifies <unk> Island as the site of ceremonial and religious practices , but that these practices are still unknown . According to <unk> 's Thirteen Moons on Turtle 's Back the island was not a permanent settlement , but was likely used for fishing and hunting trips in the summer . 
 European contact occurred in the first half of the 1600s . A map in the possession of Reverend Henry Whitfield from a 1639 deed shows the island and the Quinnipiac name of " Massancummock " . In 1641 , Whitfield and the founders of Guilford purchased the island from the Mohegan tribe 's sachem , Uncas , as part of a transaction for the land east of East River . Uncas acquired the land when he married the daughter of the <unk> sachem , <unk> . At some point in the 1600s , Andrew Leete was an owner of the island . In 1715 , Caleb and Ebenezer Stone purchased the island and it remained in the Stone family until 1801 . In 1800 , Noah Stone sold it to a distant relative named Medad Stone for $ 158 @.@ 34 ( equivalent to $ 2 @,@ 208 in 2015 ) . On May 12 , 1801 , Medad Stone sold the island to the government for $ 325 ( equivalent to $ 4 @,@ 622 in 2015 ) . Joel Henderson , a historian , notes that Medad Stone and the government were likely openly communicating about the island . The United States Congress appropriated $ 6000 in March 1801 for the lighthouse , prior to the government 's acquisition of the property . 
 It was inhabited throughout the 1700s through 1976 , with the Faulkner family and various lightkeepers of the Falkner Island Light . During the War of 1812 , the British forces landed on the island and told the keeper 's wife , Thankful Stone , that they had nothing to fear as long as they kept the light burning . Later , the keeper , Solomon Stone , had to put the light out per order of the New London customs inspector . The British threatened to blow up the lighthouse and Stone got an order to relight the lighthouse . In 2008 , the generator house for the light was renovated to be a summer house for the United States Fish and Wildlife Service interns who study the endangered roseate terns . The erosion control project was completed , but Hurricane Irene and Hurricane Sandy greatly reduced the breeding habitat of the terns to just 50 square metres ( 540 sq ft ) . 
 Erosion threatens the island 's very existence , it is believed that it was around eight acres in 1639 before being reduced to 5 @.@ 70 acres by 1818 . By 1987 , the total area has fallen to 2 @.@ 87 acres and it was projected that it could lose another 12 inches each year until it disappears into the sea around 2026 . 
 = = Falkner Island Light = = 
 The Falkner Island Lighthouse was constructed in 1802 and commissioned by President Thomas Jefferson . The lighthouse has had three keeper 's houses throughout its service life , the first erected in 1802 and rebuilt in 1851 and again in 1871 . In 1976 , the keeper 's house burned in 1976 and the lighthouse was repaired and automated in 1978 . The Faulkner 's Light Brigade has undertaken the restoration and preservation of the lighthouse since 1991 , with the last major restoration work being completed in March 2011 . Access to Falkner Island and the light is restricted during the nesting season of the roseate terns , from May to August . The Falkner Island Lighthouse is the second oldest extant lighthouse in Connecticut and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 In 1985 , the island became part of the Stewart B. McKinney National Wildlife Refuge after it was acquired from the U.S. Coast Guard . According to the Connecticut Audubon Society , " it currently supports over 95 % of the nesting Common Terns in Connecticut . It is the site of one of the ten largest <unk> Tern ( ~ 45 pairs ) colonies in Northeastern North America , and is the only regular nesting location for this federally endangered species in the state . " Also living on the island is the American oystercatcher , with one to two breeding pairs noted each year . Although the erosion control project was completed , Hurricane Irene and Hurricane Sandy greatly reduced the breeding habitat of the terns to just 50 square metres ( 540 sq ft ) . In spring 2014 , the dock damaged by Hurricane Sandy is scheduled to be rebuilt . 
 = Lieutenant Governor of New Jersey = 
 The Lieutenant Governor of New Jersey is an elected constitutional officer in the executive branch of the state government of New Jersey in the United States . The lieutenant governor is the second highest @-@ ranking official in the state government and is elected concurrently on a ticket with the governor for a four @-@ year term . Because the position itself does not carry any powers or duties other than to be next in the order of succession , the state constitution requires that the lieutenant governor be appointed to serve as the head of a cabinet @-@ level department or administrative agency within the governor 's administration . 
 Prior to 2010 , New Jersey was one of a few states in the United States that did not have a lieutenant governor to succeed to the governorship in the event of a vacancy in that office . Only two individuals had previously held the title — both during brief periods in the colonial era ( 1664 – 1776 ) under commission or letters patent from the British Crown . For most of the state 's ( and previously the colony 's ) history , a vacancy in the position of governor was filled by the president of the State Senate ( called the " Legislative Council " from 1776 to 1844 ) , or during the colonial era by the president of the royal governor 's Provincial Council . 
 After several episodes where the state had multiple " acting governors " in the span of a few years following the resignations of Governor Christine Todd Whitman in 2001 and Governor James E. McGreevey in 2004 , popular sentiment and political pressure from the state 's residents and news media outlets sought a permanent and tenable solution to the issue of gubernatorial succession . A referendum put before the state 's voters authorized the amendment of the state 's constitution in 2006 . This amendment provided for the state 's first lieutenant governor to be elected in the state 's 2009 gubernatorial election . 
 Republican Kim Guadagno is the first to serve in the post in its modern form . Guadagno , previously the sheriff in Monmouth County , was chosen by Governor Chris Christie to be his running mate on the Republican party ticket in the 2009 election . In addition to being lieutenant governor , Guadagno serves in Governor Christie 's cabinet as New Jersey 's 33rd Secretary of State . 
 = = Appointments during the colonial period ( 1702 – 1776 ) = = 
 During the proprietary period ( 1664 – 1702 ) , New Jersey was divided into two separate colonies , East Jersey and West Jersey . These were often administered in its first years by deputies who resided in North America and represented the province 's governor and its major investors ( the " proprietors " ) , who typically resided in London . In 1702 , the proprietors of East and West Jersey surrendered their political authority to Queen Anne . The Queen united both provinces into one crown colony to be administered by a royal governor appointed by the Crown . 
 Only two individuals held the post of Lieutenant Governor of New Jersey during its colonial history . This position existed by direct commission from the British monarch only for two brief periods , 1702 – 09 and 1755 – 57 . For most of the colonial period , in the event of the resignation , prolonged absence or death of the royal governor , the province would be administered by an " acting governor " who was the president of the Provincial Council ( also called the " Governor 's Council " ) — the upper house of the colonial legislature . The council presidency was an honorary ceremonial post given to the council 's oldest member . 
 Richard Ingoldesby ( d . 1719 ) , a British army captain who was dispatched to New York to restore royal authority in New York after Leisler 's Rebellion , was commissioned as the Lieutenant Governor of New Jersey and New York in November 1702 . Ingoldesby served under the colony 's first royal governor , Edward Hyde , Lord Cornbury and then his successor John Lovelace , 4th Baron Lovelace . Although Lord Cornbury was frequently absent from New Jersey and focused most of his efforts in New York , he refused to permit Ingoldesby any authority to govern . Ingoldesby became acting governor of both provinces briefly after the sudden death of Lord Lovelace on May 6 , 1709 . However , his authority was opposed by rival factions of the colony 's proprietors who asserted that his commission was invalid . Ingoldesby further angered the colony 's Quaker leaders after he retaliated against them for their opposition to raising troops from New Jersey to support a planned invasion of French colonies in Canada . His commission as governor was revoked in October 1709 , but the news of his removal did not reach him until April 1710 . 
 The second lieutenant governor , Thomas Pownall ( 1722 – 1805 ) , was appointed to the post in 1755 under royal governor Jonathan Belcher ( 1681 / 2 – 1757 ) . Pownall had little responsibility beyond anticipating the death of the aging governor who for most of his tenure was in declining health from a progressive paralytic disorder . Belcher lived longer than expected , and Pownall grew restless . In 1756 , Pownall journeyed to England , where he was offered the governorship of Pennsylvania , but this offer was retracted after he made demands for wide @-@ ranging powers . While in England , Pownall advised the government organized by Thomas Pelham @-@ Holles , 1st Duke of Newcastle , and his close foreign affairs advisor William Pitt on the state of affairs in the colonies during the Seven Years ' War ( called the French and Indian War in North America ) . Because the insights and first @-@ hand knowledge he shared had impressed his superiors in Britain , Pownall was commissioned as Royal Governor of Massachusetts in March 1757 . Pownall arrived in Boston to assume the new post on August 3 , 1757 . When Belcher died on August 31 , 1757 , Pownall did not assume the governorship of New Jersey . Pownall 's appointment in Massachusetts left the New Jersey to be administered by John Reading ( 1686 – 1767 ) in his second tenure as " acting governor " — continuing the previous convention of the president of the Governor 's Council assuming the governorship in an acting capacity . Reading assumed the post reluctantly , after first requesting unsuccessfully that Pownall return to New Jersey to assume the office . 
 From Ingoldesby 's removal in 1710 until the tenure of Pownall , four appointed royal governors ( John Montgomerie , Sir William Cosby , Lewis Morris , and Jonathan Belcher ) died in office and were replaced with acting governors from the provincial council . Two of these acting governors ( John Anderson and John Hamilton ) died in office , and were replaced by another acting governor drawn from the members of the provincial council . 
 = = Gubernatorial succession ( 1776 – 2001 ) = = 
 Prior to the creation of the modern lieutenant governor position , the only state @-@ wide , non @-@ federal , elected office was the Governor of New Jersey . New Jersey was one of eight states without a lieutenant governor and one of four states without any other state @-@ wide elected official ( including County Prosecutors ) . Further , the state constitution does not provide for elections for state @-@ wide cabinet @-@ level positions — it grants the governor the power to appoint the " principal department heads " for the executive branch . For these reasons , New Jersey 's governor was considered the most powerful elected chief executive in the United States . 
 In the event of a vacancy in the governor 's office , the state constitution specified that the President of the New Jersey State Senate , the upper chamber of the state legislature , would assume the role of acting governor without relinquishing his or her powerful role in the state senate . Further , if the acting governorship filled by the state senate president were vacated or that person could not assume the office , he or she would be succeeded by the Speaker of the New Jersey General Assembly , the state legislature 's lower chamber . This order of succession was included in the first state constitution in 1776 , reinstated in the subsequent 1844 constitution , and kept in the 1947 Constitution until the 2006 amendment . 
 On several occasions in the state 's history , proposals for a lieutenant governor were raised and rejected . Governor Alfred E. Driscoll backed a proposal to create the office in 1947 as the state was rewriting its constitution at a constitutional convention held at Rutgers University in New Brunswick . Driscoll 's proposal was not approved . In 1986 , Governor Thomas Kean proposed the creation of the office in a move seen at the time as a political maneuver " apparently to preclude the possibility of a Democratic successor " as Kean was being considered as a viable presidential or senatorial candidate in the 1988 election and the senate president was a Democrat . Kean 's proposal was not successful . 
 = = Modern creation of the office ( 2001 – present ) = = 
 = = = Resignations and succession controversies ( 2001 – 06 ) = = = 
 New Jersey had two recent periods during which several politicians assumed the governorship within the span of a few years . In 2001 , Governor Christine Todd Whitman resigned with one year remaining in her second term after being appointed by President George W. Bush to the position of administrator of the federal Environmental Protection Agency . Senate President Donald DiFrancesco became acting governor following Whitman 's resignation on January 31 , 2001 , and remained in office until he retired from the state senate on January 8 , 2002 . 
 In an unusual political circumstance , the 2001 legislative elections returned a senate with equal numbers of Republicans and Democrats , with each party having 20 senators . Both sides negotiated to choose two senators from their respective parties to serve as co @-@ presidents . Because of an 8 @-@ day gap between the seating of the new state legislature and the inauguration of Governor @-@ elect Jim McGreevey , four men held the position of acting governor : 
 Outgoing Senate President Donald DiFrancesco continued to serve until 12 : 00 noon on January 8 , 2002 , until the new senate session was convened . 
 New Jersey 's Attorney General John J. Farmer , Jr. was acting governor for 90 minutes on January 8 , 2002 , while awaiting the swearing in of the next senate president . 
 Senate co @-@ President John Bennett , a Republican , served as acting governor from January 8 to 12 , 2002 . 
 Senate co @-@ President Richard Codey , a Democrat , served as acting governor from January 12 , 2002 , until McGreevey was sworn in as governor at noon on January 15 , 2002 . 
 After Governor McGreevey resigned in the midst of a sex scandal in 2004 , Richard Codey served again as acting governor from November 15 , 2004 to January 17 , 2006 . Codey was the only acting governor during this time , as the 2003 legislative elections had given the Democrats outright control of the state senate . Codey 's tenure ended with the inauguration of Governor Jon Corzine on January 17 , 2006 . 
 Public attention was directed to the issue of succession in the wake of the resignations of Governor Whitman and Governor McGreevey during so brief a period . The response of the general public and the media was that the situation of acting governors and resignations made the situation untenable and that the state needed a permanent solution such as a lieutenant governor . There were three chief arguments in favor of establishing a lieutenant governor : 
 That the senate president was chosen by the members of the state senate , not elected by voters — eligible to be acting governor solely by virtue of having been elected by the citizens in only one of state 's forty legislative districts . 
 That an acting governor serving simultaneously in the executive branch and legislative branch made the position of governor incredibly powerful and was a breach of the " separation of powers " between branches of the government . 
 That there potentially would be a lack of continuity between political platforms from a governor of one party and a senate president of another who assumes the post as acting governor . As there was no guarantee the two individuals would be members of the same party , there was greater concern that the policies of the acting governor might be in direct conflict with those of the preceding governor . 
 = = = Referendum on a constitutional amendment = = = 
 In 2005 , the state legislature passed resolutions for a proposed constitutional amendment to create the position of lieutenant governor . In accordance with the state constitution , this proposal was put before the voters as a public question on the ballot for the general election held on November 8 , 2005 . The General Assembly considered legislation , designated as " Assembly Concurrent Resolution No. 100 " ( <unk> ) , which it passed on February 24 , 2005 , with 73 votes in favor and 1 opposed The senate followed by approving the legislation , under the title " Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 2 ( <unk> ) , with 32 votes in favor and 5 opposed on March 21 , 2005 . The senate was still run by Acting Governor Richard Codey as senate president . 
 The question proposed on the ballot read : 
 Shall the amendment of Articles II , IV , V and XI of the Constitution , agreed to by the Legislature , establishing the office of lieutenant governor , and providing for the term , election , succession , salary , qualifications , and duties of the office , and for an interim succession to be employed in the event of a vacancy in the office of the governor before the election of the first lieutenant governor , be adopted ? 
 The amendment question was approved by voters by a tally of 836 @,@ 134 votes ( 56 @.@ 1 % ) to 655 @,@ 333 ( 43 @.@ 9 % ) . In the interim period before the next election in 2009 , any vacancy in the office of governor after January 17 , 2006 would be filled first by the senate president , followed by the speaker of the general assembly , who would vacate their legislative seat upon assuming the governor 's office . 
 = = = 2009 gubernatorial election = = = 
 New Jersey elected its first lieutenant governor in 2009 . After the primary election in June 2009 , Governor Corzine signed into law <unk> , a bill from the state legislature that sought to clarify a vague passage in the state constitution concerning a gubernatorial candidate 's selection of a running mate . Corzine signed the bill into law on June 25 , 2009 . The constitution provided that a gubernatorial candidate select a running mate within 30 days after the " nomination . " The confusion that arose concerned whether the " nomination " was the date of the primary election or the date that the vote count of that election was confirmed as final and certified by the state 's Secretary of State . As defined by state law , the primary election is held on " Tuesday after the first Monday in June " . However , the reported winner of a primary election is not official until the state 's 21 county clerks are canvassed for official results after an election . This allows time for the Secretary of State to tabulate stray late absentee ballots ( i.e. from military voters stationed outside the state ) ; calculate final adjustments of vote tallies ; litigate legal disputes ; and conduct recounts if necessary . <unk> provided a clarification of this deadline as " 30 days after primary results are certified by the secretary of state , not the primary election itself . " The bill also reduced the number of days in which the June primary election results must be certified from 86 days ( which would place the deadline in August ) to the fourth Friday in June , less than 4 weeks after the election . By enacting this bill , New Jersey 's gubernatorial candidates had an extra three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half weeks to announce their selection of a lieutenant governor running mate . The 2009 deadline for such an announcement was moved from July 2 ( 30 days after the primary election ) to July 27 ( 30 days after the certification of election results ) . 
 In the week before the deadline , the three candidates nominated for governor and running in the November general election selected their running mates . The incumbent , Democratic nominee Governor Jon Corzine , chose State Senator Loretta Weinberg . His Republican challenger , Chris Christie , a former U.S. Attorney for New Jersey , selected Monmouth County Sheriff Kim Guadagno . Independent candidate Chris Daggett selected Frank J. Esposito , a history professor and former administrator at Kean University . On November 3 , 2009 , Christie defeated Corzine by a margin of 48 @.@ 5 % ( 1 @,@ 174 @,@ 445 votes ) to 44 @.@ 9 % ( 1 @,@ 087 @,@ 731 votes ) , with 5 @.@ 8 % ( 139 @,@ 579 votes ) of the vote going to Daggett . With Christie 's election as governor , Kim Guadagno was slated to become the state 's first lieutenant governor in its modern form . Christie and Guadagno were installed at inaugural ceremonies held on January 19 , 2010 . 
 = = Constitutional provisions = = 
 = = = Qualifications and duties = = = 
 As amended on January 17 , 2006 , New Jersey 's state constitution mandates that a person may only be eligible for the position of lieutenant governor if they meet the eligibility qualifications to serve as governor . Article V , Section I , paragraph 2 , requires that a candidate for governor ( and thus lieutenant governor ) be at least 30 years old , a citizen of the United States for at least 20 years , and a resident of New Jersey for at least seven years . Within 30 days after the certification of the statewide primary election , the candidate for governor selects a running mate to join his ticket as the candidate for lieutenant governor . The governor and lieutenant governor must be members of the same political party . As candidates they campaign on the same ticket , are elected conjointly , and serve the same four @-@ year term concurrently . 
 Additional requirements are imposed by Article V , Section I , paragraph 10 of the state constitution , which provides that the lieutenant governor be appointed as a head of a cabinet @-@ level department or administrative agency within the governor 's administration , with the exception that he or she cannot be the state 's attorney general . The current lieutenant governor , Kim Guadagno , serves as New Jersey 's 33rd Secretary of State . 
 = = = Order of succession = = = 
 The order of succession in the event the governor 's office is left vacant is specified in Article V , Section I , paragraph 6 of the New Jersey State Constitution , as amended , effective January 17 , 2006 , which states : 
 In the event of a vacancy in the office of Governor resulting from the death , resignation or removal of a Governor in office , or the death of a Governor @-@ elect , or from any other cause , the Lieutenant Governor shall become Governor , until a new Governor is elected and qualifies . 
 In the event of simultaneous vacancies in both the offices of Governor and Lieutenant Governor resulting from any cause , the President of the Senate shall become Governor until a new Governor or Lieutenant Governor is elected and qualifies . In the event that there is a vacancy in the office of Senate President , or the Senate President declines to become Governor , then the Speaker of the General Assembly shall become Governor until a new Governor or Lieutenant Governor is elected and qualifies . In the event that there is a vacancy in the office of Speaker of the General Assembly , or if the Speaker declines to become Governor , then the functions , powers , duties and emoluments of the office shall devolve for the time being upon such officers and in the order of succession as may be provided by law , until a new Governor or Lieutenant Governor is elected and qualifies . 
 = = List of lieutenant governors = = 
 = = = In the colonial period = = = 
 = = = In the modern era ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 Democratic ( 0 ) Republican ( 1 ) 
 = German cruiser Deutschland = 
 Deutschland was the lead ship of her class of heavy cruisers ( often termed a pocket battleship ) which served with the Kriegsmarine of Nazi Germany during World War II . Ordered by the Weimar government for the Reichsmarine , she was laid down at the Deutsche Werke shipyard in Kiel in February 1929 and completed by April 1933 . Originally classified as an armored ship ( Panzerschiff ) by the Reichsmarine , in February 1940 the Germans reclassified the remaining two ships of this class as heavy cruisers . In 1940 , she was renamed Lützow , after the Admiral Hipper @-@ class heavy cruiser Lützow was handed over to the Soviet Union . 
 The ship saw significant action with the Kriegsmarine , including several non @-@ intervention patrols in the Spanish Civil War , during which she was attacked by Republican bombers . At the outbreak of World War II , she was cruising the North Atlantic , prepared to attack Allied merchant traffic . Bad weather hampered her efforts , and she only sank or captured a handful of vessels before returning to Germany . She then participated in Operation Weserübung , the invasion of Norway . Damaged at the Battle of Drøbak Sound , she was recalled to Germany for repairs . While en route , she was torpedoed and seriously damaged by a British submarine . 
 Repairs were completed by March 1941 , Lützow returned to Norway to join the forces arrayed against Allied shipping to the Soviet Union . She ran aground during a planned attack on convoy PQ 17 , which necessitated another return to Germany for repairs . She next saw action at the Battle of the Barents Sea with the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper , which ended with a failure to destroy the convoy JW 51B . Engine problems forced a series of repairs culminating in a complete overhaul at the end of 1943 , after which the ship remained in the Baltic . Sunk in shallow waters in the <unk> in April 1945 by Royal Air Force ( RAF ) bombers , Lützow was used as a gun battery to support German troops fighting the Soviet Army until 4 May 1945 , when she was disabled by her crew . Raised by the Soviet Navy in 1947 , she was subsequently sunk as a target in the Baltic . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Deutschland was ordered by the Reichsmarine from the Deutsche Werke shipyard in Kiel as Ersatz Preussen , a replacement for the old battleship Preussen . Her keel was laid on 5 February 1929 , under construction number 219 . The ship was launched on 19 May 1931 ; at her launching , she was christened by German Chancellor Heinrich Brüning . The ship accidentally started sliding down the slipway while Brüning was giving his christening speech . After the completion of fitting out work , initial sea trials began in November 1932 . The ship was commissioned into the Reichsmarine on 1 April 1933 . 
 Deutschland was 186 meters ( 610 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 20 @.@ 69 m ( 67 @.@ 9 ft ) and a maximum draft of 7 @.@ 25 m ( 23 @.@ 8 ft ) . The ship had a design displacement of 12 @,@ 630 t ( 12 @,@ 430 long tons ; 13 @,@ 920 short tons ) and a full load displacement of 14 @,@ 290 long tons ( 14 @,@ 520 t ) , though the ship was officially stated to be within the 10 @,@ 000 long tons ( 10 @,@ 000 t ) limit of the Treaty of Versailles . Deutschland was powered by four sets of MAN 9 @-@ cylinder double @-@ acting two @-@ stroke diesel engines . The ship 's top speed was 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) , at 54 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 40 @,@ 000 kW ) . At a cruising speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , the ship could steam for 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) . As designed , her standard complement consisted of 33 officers and 586 enlisted men , though after 1935 this was significantly increased to 30 officers and 921 – 1 @,@ 040 sailors . 
 Deutschland 's primary armament was six 28 cm ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) SK C / 28 guns mounted in two triple gun turrets , one forward and one aft of the superstructure . The ship carried a secondary battery of eight 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK C / 28 guns in single turrets grouped amidships . Her anti @-@ aircraft battery originally consisted of three 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) L / 45 guns , though in 1935 these were replaced with six 8 @.@ 8 cm L / 78 guns . In 1940 , the 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were removed , and six 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) L / 65 guns , four 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , and ten 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) guns were installed in their place . By the end of the war , her anti @-@ aircraft battery had again been reorganized , consisting of six 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) guns , ten 3 @.@ 7 cm guns , and twenty @-@ eight 2 cm guns . 
 The ship also carried a pair of quadruple 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) deck @-@ mounted torpedo launchers placed on her stern . The ship was equipped with two Arado Ar 196 seaplanes and one catapult . Deutschland 's armored belt was 60 to 80 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick ; her upper deck was 17 mm ( 0 @.@ 67 in ) thick while the main armored deck was 17 to 45 mm ( 0 @.@ 67 to 1 @.@ 77 in ) thick . The main battery turrets had 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) thick faces and 80 mm thick sides . Radar initially consisted of a FMG G ( gO ) " Seetakt " set ; in 1942 , a FuMO 26 set was also installed . 
 = = History = = 
 Deutschland spent the majority of 1933 and 1934 conducting training maneuvers ; early speed trials in May 1933 indicated that a top speed of 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) was preferable , but the ship comfortably reached 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) on speed trials in June . Trials were completed by December 1933 , and the ship was ready for active service with the fleet . The ship also made a series of goodwill visits to foreign ports , including visits to Gothenburg , Sweden , and in October 1934 , a formal state visit to Edinburgh , Scotland . In April 1934 , Adolf Hitler visited the ship ; he reportedly toured the ship alone , speaking informally with crewmen . 
 The ship conducted a series of long distance training voyages into the Atlantic in 1935 . In March 1935 , she sailed as far as the Caribbean and South American waters . After returning to Germany , she went into dock for routine maintenance work , as well as installation of additional equipment . She had her aircraft catapult installed in this period , and was provided with two Heinkel He 60 floatplanes . Deutschland participated in fleet maneuvers in German waters in early 1936 . She was joined by her newly commissioned sister ship Admiral Scheer for a cruise into the mid @-@ Atlantic , which included a stop in Madeira . 
 = = = Spanish Civil War = = = 
 Following the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936 , Deutschland and Admiral Scheer were deployed to the Spanish coast on 23 July 1936 to conduct non @-@ intervention patrols off the Republican @-@ held coast of Spain . During the deployment , her gun turrets were painted with large black , white , and red bands to aid in identification from the air and indicate her neutral status . Her duties during the deployment included evacuating refugees fleeing from the fighting , protecting German ships carrying supplies for Francisco Franco 's Nationalists , and gathering intelligence for the Nationalists . 
 In May 1937 , the ship was docked in the port of Palma on the island of Majorca , along with several other neutral warships , including vessels from the British and Italian navies . The port was attacked by Republican aircraft , though anti @-@ aircraft fire from the warships drove them off . The torpedo boats Seeadler and Albatross escorted Deutschland to the island of Ibiza on 24 May . While moored in port there , she was again attacked by Republican bombers ; a pair of Soviet @-@ built SB @-@ 2 bombers , secretly flown by Soviet Air Force pilots , bombed the ship . Two bombs struck the ship ; the first penetrated the upper deck near the bridge and exploded above the main armored deck while the second hit near the third starboard 15 cm gun , causing serious fires below decks . The attack killed 31 German sailors and wounded 74 . 
 Deutschland quickly weighed anchor and left port . She rendezvoused with Admiral Scheer to take on additional doctors before proceeding to Gibraltar where the dead were buried with full military honors . Ten days later , however , Hitler ordered the men be exhumed and returned for burial in Germany . The ship 's wounded men were also evacuated in Gibraltar for treatment . Hitler , furious over the attack , ordered Admiral Scheer to bombard the port of Almería in retaliation for the so @-@ called " Deutschland incident " . Stalin subsequently issued orders that further attacks on German and Italian warships were strictly prohibited . 
 Deutschland spent the majority of 1938 and 1939 conducting training maneuvers with the rest of the fleet and making goodwill visits to various foreign ports . She made an official visit to Spain following the Nationalist victory in the Spanish Civil War 1939 . The ship participated in a major fleet exercise into the Atlantic with her sister Admiral Graf Spee , the light cruisers Köln , Leipzig , and Nürnberg , and several destroyers , U @-@ boats , and support vessels . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 On 24 August 1939 , a week before the German invasion of Poland , Deutschland set sail from Wilhelmshaven , bound for a position south of Greenland . Here , she would be ready to attack Allied merchant traffic in the event of a general war following the attack on Poland . The supply ship Westerwald was assigned to support Deutschland during the operation . Deutschland was ordered to strictly observe prize rules , which required raiders to stop and search ships for contraband before sinking them , and to ensure that their crews are safely evacuated . The ship was also ordered to avoid combat with even inferior naval forces , as commerce disruption was the primary objective . Hitler hoped to secure a negotiated peace with Britain and France after he overran Poland , and he therefore did not authorize Deutschland to begin her raiding mission against British and French shipping until 26 September . By this time , Deutschland had moved south to hunt in the Bermuda @-@ Azores sea lane . 
 On 5 October , she found and sank the British transport ship Stonegate , though not before the freighter was able to send a distress signal informing vessels in the area of Deutschland 's presence . She then turned north to the Halifax route , where on 9 October , she encountered the American ship City of Flint . The 4 @,@ 963 gross register tons ( GRT ) freighter was found to be carrying contraband , and so was seized . A prize crew was dispatched to the ship ; they took the ship with the original crew held prisoner to Germany via Murmansk . The ship was seized by Norway when she anchored in Haugesund , however , and control of the ship was returned to the original crew . Meanwhile , on 14 October , Deutschland encountered and sank the Norwegian transport Lorentz W Hansen , of some 1 @,@ 918 GRT . The same day , she stopped the neutral Danish steamer <unk> , though when it became apparent that she was headed for a neutral port , the prisoners from Lorentz W Hansen were placed aboard her and she was allowed to proceed . <unk> would eventually report to the British Royal Navy the incident and confirm Deutschland as the raider operating in the North Atlantic . 
 Severe weather in the North Atlantic hampered Deutschland 's raiding mission , though she did tie down several British warships assigned to track her down . The French Force de Raid , centered on the battleship Dunkerque , was occupied with protecting convoys around Britain to prevent them from being attacked by Deutschland . In early November , the Naval High Command recalled Deutschland ; she passed through the Denmark Strait on 15 November and anchored in Gotenhafen on the 17th . In the course of her raiding mission , she sank only two vessels and captured a third . In 1940 , the ship underwent a major overhaul , during which a raked clipper bow was installed to improve the sea @-@ keeping qualities of the ship . At this time , she was re @-@ rated as a heavy cruiser and renamed Lützow . Hitler in person made the decision to rename the ship , recognizing the propaganda value of the sinking of a ship that bore the name of its country . Admiral Erich Raeder , the commander in chief of the Kriegsmarine , also hoped that renaming the ship would confuse Allied intelligence ; the Admiral Hipper @-@ class cruiser Lützow was designated for sale to the Soviet Navy , and it was hoped that the usage of her name for Deutschland would hide the transaction . The refit lasted until March 1940 , after which it was intended to send the ship on another commerce raiding operation into the South Atlantic . In April , however , she was assigned to forces participating in the invasion of Norway . 
 = = = = Operation Weserübung = = = = 
 Lützow was assigned to Group 5 , alongside the new heavy cruiser Blücher and the light cruiser Emden under the command of Konteradmiral Oskar Kummetz . Kummetz flew his flag in Blücher . Group 5 was tasked with capturing Oslo , the capital of Norway , and transported a force of 2 @,@ 000 mountain troops from the Wehrmacht . Lützow embarked over 400 of the soldiers for the voyage to Norway . The force left Germany on 8 April and passed through the Kattegat . While en route , the British submarine HMS Triton attacked the flotilla , though her torpedoes missed . German torpedo boats attacked the submarine and drove her off . 
 Shortly before midnight on the night of 8 April , Group 5 , with Blücher in the lead , passed the outer ring of Norwegian coastal batteries . Lützow followed directly behind the flagship , with Emden astern . Heavy fog and neutrality requirements , which required the Norwegians to fire warning shots , permitted the Germans to avoid damage . The Norwegians , including those manning the guns at the Oscarsborg Fortress were on alert , however . Steaming into the Oslofjord at a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) , the Germans came into range of the Norwegian guns ; the 28 cm , 15 cm and 57 mm guns opened fire on the invaders . During the ensuing Battle of Drøbak Sound , Blücher was hit by many shells and two torpedoes . She quickly capsized and sank with the loss of approximately 1 @,@ 000 sailors and soldiers . Lützow was hit three times by 15 cm shells from Oscarsborg 's Kopås battery , causing significant damage . 
 Lützow 's forward gun turret was hit by one of the 15 cm rounds , which disabled the center gun and damaged the right barrel . Four men were wounded . A second shell struck the ship 's deck and penetrated the upper and main armored decks ; starting a fire in the cruiser 's hospital and operating theater , killing two soldiers and severely wounding six others . A third struck her superstructure behind the port @-@ side aircraft crane . One of the aircraft on board was damaged , and four gunners were killed by the third shell . The ship was only able to fire her secondary battery in return . The heavy damage forced Lützow and the rest of the squadron to reverse course and exit the fjord . She eventually landed her troop complement in Verle Bay , after which she used her operational 28 cm guns to provide fire support . By the afternoon of 9 April , most of the Norwegian fortresses had been captured and the commander of the remaining Norwegian forces opened negotiations for surrender . The delay had , however , allowed enough time for the Norwegian government and royal family to flee Oslo . 
 The damage Lützow sustained prompted the Kriegsmarine to order her to return to Germany for repairs . The rest of Group 5 remained in Norway , so Lützow cruised at top speed to avoid submarines . Nevertheless , the British submarine HMS Spearfish attacked the ship and scored a serious hit . The torpedo destroyed Lützow 's stern , causing it to collapse and nearly fall off , and blew off her steering gear . Unable to steer , she was towed back to port and decommissioned for repairs , which lasted for nearly a year . During the attack on Norway , the ship suffered nineteen dead , and another fifteen were killed by the torpedo strike . Despite the setback , KzS August Thiele , Lützow 's commander , was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross for his actions during the Battle of Drøbak Sound , during which he took command of the task force after the loss of Blücher . 
 She was recommissioned for service on 31 March 1941 , after which the Kriegsmarine initially planned to send the ship on the commerce raiding operation planned the previous year . Her sister Admiral Scheer was to join Lützow for the operation , and on 12 June , she departed for Norway with an escort of destroyers . British torpedo bombers attacked the ship off Egersund and scored a single hit that disabled her electrical system and rendered the ship motionless . She took on a severe list to port and the port shaft was damaged . The crew effected emergency repairs that allowed her to return to Germany ; repair work in Kiel lasted for six months . By 10 May 1942 , the ship was finally pronounced ready for action . 
 = = = = Deployment to Norway = = = = 
 Lützow left Germany on 15 May 1942 for Norway ; by 25 May she had joined Admiral Scheer in Bogen Bay . She was made the flagship of the now Vizeadmiral Kummetz , the commander of Kampfgruppe 2 . Fuel shortages restricted operations , although Lützow and Admiral Scheer were able to conduct limited battle training exercises . Kampfgruppe 2 was assigned to Operation Rösselsprung , a planned attack on the Allied convoy PQ 17 , which was headed to the Soviet Union . On 3 July , the force left their anchorages , and in heavy fog Lützow and three destroyers ran aground and suffered significant damage . The British detected the German departure and ordered the convoy to scatter . Aware that surprise had been lost , the Germans broke off the surface attack and turned the destruction of PQ @-@ 17 over to the U @-@ boats and Luftwaffe . Twenty @-@ four of the convoy 's thirty @-@ five transports were sunk . Lützow returned to Germany for repairs , which lasted until the end of October . She began a brief set of trials starting on 30 October . She returned to Norway in early November with a destroyer escort , arriving in Narvik on the 12th . 
 On 30 December , Lützow , the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper , and six destroyers left Narvik for Operation Regenbogen , an attack on convoy JW 51B , which was reported by German intelligence to be lightly escorted . Kummetz 's plan was to divide his force in half ; he would take Admiral Hipper and three destroyers north of the convoy to attack it and draw away the escorts . Lützow and the remaining three destroyers would then attack the undefended convoy from the south . At 09 : 15 on the 31st , the British destroyer Obdurate spotted the three destroyers screening for Admiral Hipper ; the Germans opened fire first . Four of the other five destroyers escorting the convoy rushed to join the fight , while Achates laid a smoke screen to cover the convoy . Kummetz then turned back north to draw the destroyers away . Captain Robert Sherbrooke , the British escort commander , left two destroyers to cover the convoy while he took the remaining four to pursue Admiral Hipper . 
 Lützow meanwhile steamed toward the convoy from the south , and at 11 : 42 she opened fire . The harsh conditions negatively affected her shooting , which ceased by 12 : 03 without any hits . Rear Admiral Robert Burnett 's Force R , centered on the cruisers Sheffield and Jamaica , standing by in distant support of the Allied convoy , raced to the scene . The cruisers engaged Admiral Hipper , which had been firing to port at the destroyer Obedient . Burnett 's ships approached from Admiral Hipper 's starboard side and achieved complete surprise . Lützow was then ordered to break off the attack on the convoy and reinforce Admiral Hipper . Lützow inadvertently came alongside Sheffield and Jamaica , and after identifying them as hostile , engaged them , though her fire remained inaccurate . The British cruisers turned toward Lützow and came under fire from both German cruisers . Burnett quickly decided to withdraw in the face of superior German firepower ; his ships were armed with 6 in ( 150 mm ) guns , while Admiral Hipper and Lützow carried 20 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) and 28 cm ( 11 in ) guns , respectively . 
 = = = = Operations in the Baltic = = = = 
 Hitler was furious over the failure to destroy the convoy , and ordered that all remaining German major warships be broken up for scrap . In protest , Raeder resigned ; Hitler replaced him with Admiral Karl Dönitz , who persuaded Hitler to rescind the order to dismantle the <unk> 's surface ships . In March , Lützow moved to Altafjord , where she experienced problems with her diesel engines . The propulsion system proved to be so problematic that repairs in Germany were necessary . She briefly returned to Norway , but by the end of September 1943 , a thorough overhaul was required . The work was completed in Kiel by January 1944 , after which she remained in the Baltic Sea to conduct training cruises for new naval personnel . 
 On 13 April 1945 , twenty @-@ four Avro Lancaster bombers attacked Lützow and Prinz Eugen without success due to cloud cover . The RAF made another failed attack two days later , but on 16 April , a force of eighteen Lancasters scored a single hit and several near misses on Lützow with Tallboy bombs in the <unk> . The water was shallow enough that her main deck was still 2 m ( 6 ft 7 in ) above water , permitting her use as a stationary gun battery against advancing Soviet forces under control of Task Force Thiele . She continued in this role until 4 May , by which time she had expended her main battery ammunition . Her crew rigged scuttling charges to destroy the hull , but a fire caused the explosives to detonate prematurely . The ultimate fate of Lützow was long unclear , as with most of the ships seized by the Soviet Navy . According to historians Erich Gröner and M. J. Whitley , the Soviet Navy raised the ship in September 1947 and broke her up for scrap in 1948 – 1949 . Historians Hildebrand , Röhr and Steinmetz , in their book Die Deutschen <unk> , state that she instead sank off Kolberg , claiming that the Lützow broken up in the late 1940s was instead the Admiral Hipper @-@ class cruiser Lützow that had been sold to the Soviet Union in 1940 . The historian Hans Georg Prager examined the former Soviet archives in the early 2000s , and discovered that Lützow actually had been sunk in weapons tests in July 1947 , sinking in the Baltic Sea off <unk> , Poland , on 22 July 1947 . 
