 = = Track listings = = 
 2009 standard edition 
 " The Silence " – 4 : 01 
 2010 deluxe edition 
 " The Silence " ( New Single Mix ) – 3 : 35 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 " The Silence " ( 2009 ) credits adapted from the liner notes of Overcome , and " The Silence " ( New Single Mix ) ( 2010 ) credits adapted from the deluxe edition of Overcome . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Blackford County , Indiana = 
 Blackford County is located in the east central portion of the U.S. state of Indiana . The county is named for Judge Isaac Blackford , who was the first speaker of the Indiana General Assembly and a long @-@ time chief justice of the Indiana Supreme Court . Created in 1838 , Blackford County is divided into four townships , and its county seat is Hartford City . Two incorporated cities and one incorporated town are located within the county . The county is also the site of numerous unincorporated communities and ghost towns . Occupying only 165 @.@ 58 square miles ( 428 @.@ 9 km2 ) , Blackford County is the fourth smallest county in Indiana . As of the 2010 census , the county 's population is 12 @,@ 766 people in 5 @,@ 236 households . Based on population , the county is the 8th smallest county of the 92 in Indiana . Although no interstate highways are located in Blackford County , three Indiana state roads cross the county , and an additional state road is located along the county 's southeast border . The county has two railroad lines . A north – south route crosses the county , and intersects with a second railroad line that connects Hartford City with communities to the west . 
 Before the arrival of European @-@ American settlers during the 1830s , the northeastern portion of the future Blackford County was briefly the site of an Indian reservation for Chief Francois Godfroy of the Miami tribe . The first European @-@ American pioneers were typically farmers that settled near rivers where the land had drainage suitable for agriculture . Originally , the county was mostly swampland , but more land became available for farming as the marshes were cleared and drained . Over the next 30 years , small communities slowly developed throughout the county . When the county 's rail lines were constructed in the 1860s and 1870s , additional communities evolved around railroad stops . 
 Beginning in the late 1880s , the discovery of natural gas and crude oil in the county ( and surrounding region ) caused the area to undergo an economic boom period known as the Indiana Gas Boom . Manufacturers relocated to the area to take advantage of the low @-@ cost energy and railroad facilities . The boom period lasted about 15 years , and is reflected in Blackford County 's population , which peaked in 1900 at 17 @,@ 213 . The new construction associated with the additional prosperity of the boom period caused a significant upgrade in the county 's appearance , as wooden buildings were replaced with structures made with brick and stone . Much of the infrastructure built during that time remains today — including Montpelier 's historic Carnegie Library and many of Hartford City 's buildings in the Courthouse Square Historic District . 
 Agriculture continues to be important to the county , and became even more important after the loss of several large manufacturers during the 20th century . Today , 72 percent of Blackford County is covered by either corn or soybean fields ; additional crops , such as wheat and hay , are also grown . 
 = = Geography = = 
 According to the 2010 census , Blackford County has a total area of 165 @.@ 58 square miles ( 428 @.@ 9 km2 ) , of which 165 @.@ 08 square miles ( 427 @.@ 6 km2 ) ( or 99 @.@ 70 % ) is land and 0 @.@ 50 square miles ( 1 @.@ 3 km2 ) ( or 0 @.@ 30 % ) is water , making it the fourth smallest county in the state . The county is located in East Central Indiana , about 55 miles ( 89 km ) south of Fort Wayne , Indiana , and about 78 miles ( 126 km ) northeast of Indianapolis . Along the north side of the county is Wells County , and on the eastern side of the county is Jay County , which separates Blackford County from Indiana 's border with the state of Ohio . Delaware County is located on Blackford County 's southern border , and to the west is Grant County . 
 The county land was flattened by two glaciers millions of years ago . These glaciers are also responsible for the rich Blackford County farmland that became available after the county was cleared and drained . During the early 20th century , the Renner Stock Farm , in Licking Township , was known statewide for its quality cattle , hogs , and horses . 
 The county has some small streams and lakes , although the lakes are man @-@ made . The Salamonie River , flowing out of Jay County ( Indiana ) from the east , crosses the northeast corner of Blackford County . Big and Little Lick Creek flow westward in Licking and Jackson townships in the southern half of the county . Early settlers were attracted to Lick Creek , and then the Salamonie River , because the nearby land had suitable drainage for farming . The county 's lakes include Lake Blue Water in Harrison Township ; Cain 's Lake , Shamrock Lakes and Lake Mohee in Licking Township ; and Lake Placid in Jackson Township . Lake Blue Water is a spring @-@ fed former stone quarry located one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) east of Montpelier . The Shamrock Lakes ( a group of six lakes ) were created between 1960 and 1965 , and the first lake was originally intended to be a water supply for a farmer 's cattle . 
 Licking and Harrison townships were original to the county . Washington Township , which is named after President George Washington , was created June 29 , 1839 , by the county commissioners . Jackson Township , which is thought to be named after President Andrew Jackson , was created by the commissioners on September 22 , 1839 . 
 = = = Communities = = = 
 Two incorporated cities are located within the county , and a small portion of a third city occupies the county 's southeast corner . The largest city is county seat Hartford City , located in the southern half of the county . Hartford City 's population in 2010 was 6 @,@ 220 — well below its 1970 peak of 8 @,@ 207 . Another incorporated city is Montpelier , which is located on the southern banks of the Salamonie River in the northeastern part of the county . Montpelier 's 2010 population was 1 @,@ 805 , which is below its Census Bureau peak of 3 @,@ 405 achieved in 1900 — and less than one half of an unofficial peak of 5 @,@ 000 estimated during the city 's oil boom in 1895 . A small portion of the city of Dunkirk , known as Shadyside , is located in the Jackson Township portion of Blackford County , but most of Dunkirk is located in Jay County . The population for the entire city of Dunkirk was 2 @,@ 362 in 2010 . Shamrock Lakes is Blackford County 's only incorporated town , achieving that status on May 21 , 1973 — and was the first community in Indiana to do so in 50 years . Its 2010 population was 231 . 
 Road maps typically show five unincorporated communities in Blackford County : Converse ( formerly named Crumley 's Crossing ) , Matamoras , Millgrove , Roll ( formerly named Dundee ) , and Trenton ( former post office named Priam ) . These communities are sometimes listed as ghost towns , as nearly all businesses in these communities have closed . However , residences are still maintained in these communities , and they are listed as populated places by the U.S. Geological Survey . Millgrove , Roll , and Trenton all had post offices during the 19th or 20th centuries . 
 = = = = Extinct settlements = = = = 
 Blackford County has over 10 communities that do not exist anymore . In some cases , a church , farm or single residence remains at the extinct community 's location . Among these former communities , Bowser Station , Dorsey Station , Mollie , Silas , and Slocum all had post offices during the 19th century . Mollie 's post office lasted until 1907 . 
 Bowser Station — This community was a railroad stop in southern Licking Township , and had a post office during the 1870s . 
 Dorsey Station — This Harrison Township community was a railroad stop , and had a post office during the 1870s . 
 Frog Alley — This Washington Township community had a church and school . The name Frog Alley was bestowed on the community because of the swampy condition of the area . The school , which began in 1863 , lasted until 1923 . 
 Greenland — Located in Harrison Township at 400 North and 600 East . 
 Little Chicago — Located in northwest corner of Harrison Township , and in Wells County . 
 Mollie — This community thrived in the 1890s as a railroad stop with a grain elevator , post office , and general store . The Harrison Township oil fields were located nearby . 
 <unk> — Located in Harrison Township , at 300 North and 600 East . 
 Renner — This Licking Township community was a railroad stop next to the Renner Stock Farm . Housing for the farm 's employees was also located there . It thrived from the 1890s until the 1920s . Renner is still listed as a populated place by the U.S. Geological Survey , but its " population " is a farm . 
 Silas — The Washington Township land that became the community of Silas was purchased in 1848 , and the original owner established a church and school . By 1880 , a general store was established at that location , and its owner was community namesake Silas <unk> . During the first decade of the 20th century , the Silas general store closed , contributing to the demise of the community . 
 Slocum — This community was located in southeastern Harrison Township ( exact location not known ) , and had a post office from 1886 until 1902 . 
 The Town of Luck — Located in Harrison Township at 250 North and 800 East . 
 <unk> — Located in Licking Township , at 200 South and 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) East . 
 = = History = = 
 Following thousands of years of varying cultures of indigenous peoples , the historic Miami and Delaware Indians ( a.k.a. Lenape ) are the first @-@ recorded permanent settlers in the Blackford County area , living on the Godfroy Reserve after an 1818 treaty . The site is located in Blackford County 's Harrison Township , east of Montpelier . Although the Godfroy Reserve was allotted to Miami Indian Chief Francois ( a.k.a. Francis ) Godfroy , Delaware Indians were also allowed to stay there . The Miami tribe was the most powerful group of Indians in the region , and Francois Godfroy ( who was half French ) was one of their chiefs . By 1839 , Godfroy had sold the reserve , and the Indians had migrated west . Benjamin Reasoner was the first European – American to enter future Blackford County , and its first land owner . He entered what would become Licking Township on July 9 , 1831 . Reasoner and his sons built the county 's first mill , which was located on the family farm . 
 For a brief period , the land that would become Blackford County was the western part of Jay County . An act of the Indiana General Assembly , which was approved January 30 , 1836 , created Jay County effective after March 1 , 1836 . In December 1836 , a motion was made in the Indiana House of Representatives to review dividing Jay County , but that resolution was not adopted . Two Blackford County communities , Matamoras and Montpelier , originally existed as part of Jay County . Both of these communities are located along the Salamonie River in what became the northeast portion of Blackford County . John Blount founded Matamoras , arriving in 1833 . This village is Blackford County 's oldest community , and is the site of the county 's largest water mill . The mill , constructed around 1843 , was considered one of the finest in the state . Blackford County 's other former Jay County community is Montpelier , which is located west of Matamoras on the Salamonie River . Led by Abel Baldwin , the community was started in 1836 by groups of migrant settlers from Vermont . The Vermont natives named the settlement after the capital of their home state , Montpelier . Blackford County 's Montpelier was platted in 1837 ( before Matamoras ) , and is the county 's oldest platted community . 
 Several sources claim Blackford County was created in 1837 . However , the law was not finalized until 1838 . Indiana bill of the House No. 152 was originally for the creation of a county named Windsor . The name " Windsor " was replaced with the name " Blackford " by the House of Representatives in January 1838 . An " act for the formation of the county of Blackford " was approved on February 15 , 1838 . This act intended that the county would be " open for business " on the first Monday in April , 1838 , which was April 2 . However , the county was not organized . Finally , on January 29 , 1839 , the original February 15 act was amended , stating that Blackford County shall " enjoy the rights and privileges " of an independent county . The act also appointed commissioners , and corrected a misprint that defined the southeast corner of the new county . 
 Over the next two years , a political " battle " continued over the location of the county seat . The tiny community of Hartford was repeatedly selected by the commissioners , but those decisions were challenged by individuals favoring Montpelier . While Licking Township ( location of community of Hartford ) was the most populous township in the county , the community of Montpelier was the county 's oldest platted community . After a third and fourth act of the Indiana General Assembly , Hartford was finalized as the location of the county seat — and construction of a courthouse began . Because it was discovered that another community in Indiana was also named Hartford , Blackford County 's Hartford was eventually renamed Hartford City . 
 During the next 25 years , the county grew slowly . Plans were made for roads and railroads , and swampland was drained . The first railroad line was authorized in 1849 . The plan was for the Fort Wayne & Southern Railroad Company to connect the Indiana cities of Fort Wayne and Muncie — running north – south through the Blackford County communities of Montpelier and Hartford City . Although work constructing the railroad line began in the 1850s , it was not completed ( by connecting Fort Wayne to Muncie ) until 1870 , and this delay caused it to be the second railroad to operate in Blackford County . By the time the railroad began operations , it was named Fort Wayne , Cincinnati & Louisville Railroad . The Lake Erie and Western Railroad acquired this railroad in 1890 . 
 The first railroad to operate in Blackford County crossed somewhat east – west through the county 's southern half . The railroad was named Union and Logansport Railroad Company by the time it entered Blackford County . This line was proposed in 1862 , and completed to Hartford City in 1867 — running through the Blackford County communities of Dunkirk , Crumley 's Crossing , and Hartford City . The small community of Crumley 's Crossing was renamed Converse , and two other communities ( Millgrove and Renner ) became established on this line . The railroad was eventually named Pittsburgh , Cincinnati and St. Louis Railroad . Other names for the railroad since that time include the Panhandle division of the Pennsylvania Railroad , Penn Central Railroad Company , Conrail , and Norfolk Southern Railway . A portion of this line is now abandoned , and the track has been removed between Converse and Hartford City , south of State Road 26 . 
 = = = Gas boom = = = 
 In 1886 , natural gas was discovered in two counties adjacent to Blackford County . The discoveries were in the small community of Eaton ( south of Hartford City along railroad line ) in Delaware County , and in the city of Portland in Jay County ( east of Hartford City and Millgrove ) . The Hartford City Gas & Oil Company was formed in early 1887 , and successfully drilled a natural gas well later in the year . In Montpelier , the Montpelier Gas & Oil Mining company was organized in the spring of 1887 . While natural gas was found throughout Blackford County , crude oil was found mostly in the county 's Harrison Township ( somewhat between Montpelier and Mollie ) . Blackford County 's first successful oil well , located just south of Montpelier , began producing during 1890 . Montpelier was thought to be " the very heart of the greatest natural gas and oil field in the world " . Oil was also found in parts of Washington Township , including a well that was thought to be " the most phenomenal well ever drilled in America " . By 1896 , Blackford County had 18 natural gas companies . These companies were headquartered in all four of the county 's townships , including the communities of Hartford City , Montpelier , Roll , Dunkirk , Trenton ( Priam Post Office ) , and Millgrove . 
 In June 1880 , only 171 people held manufacturing jobs in Blackford County . The Indiana Gas Boom transformed the region , as manufacturers moved to the area to utilize the natural gas and railroad system . During 1901 , Indiana state inspectors visited 21 manufacturing facilities in Blackford County , and these companies employed 1 @,@ 346 people ( compare to 171 two decades earlier ) . Since these inspections were in Hartford City and Montpelier only , additional manufacturing employees from the county 's small communities ( such as Millgrove 's glass factory ) could be added to the count of 1 @,@ 346 . The county 's two largest employers were glass factories : American Window Glass plant number 3 and Sneath Glass Company . Hartford City 's resources ( low cost energy , two railroads , and workforce ) were especially favored by glass factories , and a 1904 directory lists 10 of them . 
 In addition to an economic transformation , another byproduct of the gas boom was an upgrade of Blackford County 's appearance . Many of the county 's landmark buildings were constructed during the gas boom , including the current courthouse and surrounding buildings in Hartford City 's Courthouse Square Historic District . The city 's waterworks was also built during that period . Additional buildings include the Carnegie Library and historic Presbyterian Church . In Montpelier , many of the buildings in its Downtown Historic District were also constructed during the gas boom . Montpelier 's historic Baptist Church and Montpelier 's Carnegie Library were constructed in the early 1900s – near the end of the gas boom . 
 = = = Post @-@ gas boom = = = 
 The Indiana Gas Boom gradually came to an end during the first decade of the 20th century . The end of the gas boom meant less prosperity for the county . The gas and oil workers left , some of the manufacturers moved , and the service industries were forced to close or cut back operations because of fewer customers . Adding to the county 's problems , machines made the labor – intensive method originally used for producing window glass obsolete , causing many of the county 's skilled glass workers at the large American Window Glass plant to lose their jobs . By 1932 , the window glass plant of the county 's former largest employer was closed . According to the United States Census , Blackford County 's population peaked at 17 @,@ 123 in 1900 , and it still has not returned to that zenith over 100 years later . 
 The end of the gas boom was especially difficult for the smaller communities in the county , since the loss of a single business had more of an impact on undersized communities than it did for a town with many businesses . In the case of Millgrove , the community 's major manufacturer ( a glass factory ) closed . For other communities , such as Mollie , the loss of the gas and oil workers meant that the local post office was a " waste of time " , and consumer demand at the general store was significantly diminished . 
 Improvements to the automobile and highways , which coincided with the end of the gas boom , may have also contributed to the decline of the county 's smaller communities . The automobile changed " business and shopping patterns at the expense of the small @-@ town merchant . " Small town residents began to drive to larger communities to purchase goods , because of the wider selection . The improved quality of automobiles and roads competed with passenger service on the railroads ( and interurban lines ) , causing a decline in passenger traffic on the rails . Small towns associated with railroad stations suffered from the loss in traffic . In Blackford County , passenger service on the Lake Erie and Western Railroad line ( owned by the Nickel Plate Road by that time ) was discontinued in 1931 , and the last interurban train ran on January 18 , 1941 . 
 Although the natural gas and oil workers left the area after the gas ( and oil ) boom , Montpelier 's population eventually stabilized — and Hartford City 's grew . Some of the manufacturers remained in the county 's two largest cities because of a lack of better alternatives . Hartford City 's Sneath Glass Company , a major employer , continued operations until the 1950s . Hartford City leaders attracted businesses such as Overhead Door ( 1923 ) and 3M ( 1955 ) to replace some of the companies that left the area . Overhead Door was a major employer in Hartford City for over 60 years . A major setback for the community involving Overhead Door occurred during the 1980s , although it began in the 1960s . During the 1960s , Overhead Door moved its headquarters from Hartford City to Dallas , Texas . Its Hartford City manufacturing plant continued to be a major employer until the 1980s , when Overhead Door cut back local operations . The Hartford City facility finally closed in 2000 . The county lost another major Hartford City employer in 2011 when the Key Plastics plant closed , as 200 people lost their jobs . 
 Agriculture continues to be an important factor in the county 's economy . Over 70 percent of Blackford County 's land is occupied by soybean or corn fields . Additional crops and livestock are also raised . Good returns in agriculture are not always reflected in the economy of nearby towns , as industrial agriculture has reduced the number of workers it needs , and family farms have declined . Many small towns in the " Corn Belt " , such as the communities in Blackford County , continue to decline in size and affluence . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the 2010 United States Census , Blackford County 's population density was 77 @.@ 3 inhabitants per square mile ( 29 @.@ 8 / km2 ) , well below the average for Indiana , which was 180 @.@ 8 inhabitants per square mile ( 69 @.@ 8 / km2 ) . Blackford County had 12 @,@ 766 people , 5 @,@ 236 households , and 3 @,@ 567 families residing within its borders . The racial makeup of the county was 97 @.@ 7 percent white , 0 @.@ 4 percent black or African American , 0 @.@ 2 percent Native American , 0 @.@ 1 percent Asian , 0 @.@ 3 percent from other races , and 1 @.@ 3 percent from two or more races . Those of Hispanic or Latino origin made up 0 @.@ 9 percent of the population . 
 The average household size was 2 @.@ 41 , and the average family size was 2 @.@ 88 . Families accounted for 68 @.@ 1 percent of the county 's 5 @,@ 236 households , and 75 @.@ 5 percent of these families included a husband and wife living together . Children under the age of 18 were living in 38 @.@ 9 percent of the family households . Non @-@ family households accounted for 31 @.@ 9 percent of total households , and 86 @.@ 8 percent of them were occupied by someone living alone . People 65 years and older , living alone , accounted for 40 @.@ 1 percent of non @-@ family households — or 12 @.@ 8 percent of all types of households . 
 In terms of age distribution , 22 @.@ 8 percent of the population were under the age of 18 , and 21 @.@ 6 percent were 62 years of age or older . The median age was 42 @.@ 4 years . For every 100 females , there were 97 @.@ 2 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 93 @.@ 7 males . 
 As of the 2000 United States Census , the median income for a household in the county was $ 34 @,@ 760 , and the median income for a family was $ 41 @,@ 758 . Males had a median income of $ 30 @,@ 172 versus $ 21 @,@ 386 for females . The per capita income for the county was $ 16 @,@ 543 . About 6 @.@ 0 percent of families and 8 @.@ 7 percent of the population were below the poverty line , including 12 @.@ 3 percent of those under age 18 and 8 @.@ 6 percent of those age 65 or over . In terms of ancestry , 16 @.@ 7 percent were German , 15 @.@ 5 percent were American , 9 @.@ 3 percent were Irish and 7 @.@ 8 percent were English . 
 = = Government = = 
 The county government is a constitutional body granted specific powers by the Constitution of Indiana and the Indiana Code . The county council is the legislative branch of the county government and controls all spending and revenue collection . Representatives are elected from county districts . The council members serve four @-@ year terms and are responsible for setting salaries , the annual budget and special spending . The council also has limited authority to impose local taxes , in the form of an income and property tax that is subject to state level approval , excise taxes and service taxes . In 2010 , the county budgeted approximately $ 3 @.@ 95 million for the district 's schools and $ 3 @.@ 18 million for other county operations and services , for a total annual budget of approximately $ 7 @.@ 1 million . 
 The executive body of the county is made of a board of commissioners . The commissioners are elected county @-@ wide , in staggered terms , and each serves a four @-@ year term . One of the commissioners , typically the most senior , serves as president . The commissioners are charged with executing the acts legislated by the council , collecting revenue and managing day @-@ to @-@ day functions of the county government . The 2011 president of Blackford County 's board of commissioners is Fred Walker . 
 The county maintains a small claims court that can handle some civil cases . The judge on the court is elected to a term of four years and must be a member of the Indiana Bar Association . The judge is assisted by a constable who is elected to a four @-@ year term . In some cases , court decisions can be appealed to the state level circuit court . 
 The county has several other elected offices , including sheriff , coroner , auditor , treasurer , recorder , surveyor and circuit court clerk . Each of these elected officers serves a term of four years and oversees a different part of county government . Members elected to county government positions are required to declare party affiliations and be residents of the county . 
 Each of the townships has a trustee who administers rural fire protection and ambulance service , provides poor relief and manages cemetery care , among other duties . The trustee is assisted in these duties by a three @-@ member township board . The trustees and board members are elected to four @-@ year terms . 
 Based on 2000 census results , Blackford County is part of Indiana 's 6th congressional district , Indiana Senate district 19 and Indiana House of Representatives district 31 . 
 = = Climate and weather = = 
 Blackford County has a typical Midwestern humid continental seasonal climate , and its Köppen climate classification is Dfa . There are four distinct seasons , with winters being cold with moderate snowfall , while summers can be warm and humid . In recent years , average temperatures in county seat Hartford City have ranged from a low of 18 ° F ( − 8 ° C ) in January to a high of 84 ° F ( 29 ° C ) in July , although a record low of − 26 ° F ( − 32 ° C ) was recorded in January 1994 and a record high of 103 ° F ( 39 ° C ) was recorded in June 1988 . Average monthly precipitation ranged from 1 @.@ 94 inches ( 49 mm ) in February to 4 @.@ 33 inches ( 110 mm ) in June . 
 March and April are considered tornado season in Indiana . Blackford County endured a category 4 storm on Palm Sunday ( April 11 ) in 1965 . This storm was one of many tornados that occurred in the Midwest on that day . Category 4 tornados have maximum speeds of 207 to 260 miles per hour ( 333 to 418 km / h ) , and this one crossed Blackford County farmland east of Roll . Although there were no fatalities in Blackford County from this tornado , two people were killed in neighboring Wells County . The county has experienced at least five other tornados . The most recent tornados were two that occurred in Hartford City in 2002 . However , the two Hartford City tornados were rated category 1 on the Fujita scale — much less dangerous than a category 4 . 
 Blackford County has a record for hail . Hail 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 110 mm ) in diameter fell in Hartford City on April 9 , 2001 . In a tie with the city of Cayuga , those hail " stones " are the largest ever recorded in the state of Indiana . 
 The biggest recorded snow storm was the Great Blizzard of 1978 , which occurred on January 26 – 27 , 1978 . A federal state of emergency was declared for Indiana at that time . Indiana governor Otis R. Bowen authorized the use of National Guard equipment , facilities , and personnel throughout the state . Low temperatures , high winds , and deep snow caused Hartford City to look like a ghost town , as schools and businesses closed . Wind gusts up to 45 miles per hour ( 72 km / h ) caused snowdrifts up to 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) high , making travel by any type of truck or automobile almost impossible . Snowmobiles were the only viable means of transportation , and volunteers from Hartford City 's Snowmobile Club provided emergency assistance . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Blackford County 's economy is supported by a labor force of approximately 5 @,@ 900 workers with an unemployment rate for June 2013 of 9 @.@ 8 percent . Industrial parks are located in both Montpelier and Hartford City , and both cities are served by railroad line owned by Norfolk Southern . Over 30 employers of varying size are located in the county . The Blackford County School System has the most employees , with locations in both Hartford City and Montpelier . 3M Company is currently the largest manufacturer in the county , and has been located in Hartford City since its purchase of the Hartford City Paper Mill in 1955 . Another business employing more than 100 people is Blackford County Community Hospital , located in Hartford City . <unk> <unk> is Montpelier 's leading employer , with over 100 people working at its facility . 
 Four categories of employment account for over 50 percent of employment in the county : manufacturing , government , retail trade , and health care . The largest category is manufacturing , and it accounts for about 19 percent of the county 's employed workforce . In addition to local Blackford County businesses , larger local economies in the more populous counties to the south and west offer employment and commerce , particularly in the city of Muncie in Delaware County , and the city of Marion in Grant County . Both counties employ more workers than their local workforce can provide . 
 Agriculture has a significant impact on the county , although farm workers account for only about 5 percent of the county 's workers . In 2007 , the county had 250 farms occupying 84 @,@ 626 acres ( 34 @,@ 247 ha ) . Therefore , roughly 80 percent of Blackford County is farmland . Nearly 72 @,@ 000 acres ( 29 @,@ 000 ha ) are devoted to the cultivation of soybeans and corn . Wheat , hay , and oats were also grown . Livestock include over 24 @,@ 000 hogs and pigs . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 There are no interstate highways in Blackford County , although Interstate 69 passes about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) to the west of the county 's western border . U.S. Route 35 shares a portion of I @-@ 69 's route in this area ; it also does not enter Blackford County . 
 State Road 3 enters the county from the south after passing through Eaton in neighboring Delaware County . It passes directly north through Hartford City and leaves the county near Roll , continuing north into Wells County . State Road 18 runs from west to east through the north end of the county , on its way from Marion to the Ohio border ; it passes through Montpelier and Matamoras . 
 State Road 26 also runs from west to east , entering from Upland in neighboring Grant County and passing through Hartford City where it crosses State Road 3 . Going on through Trenton , it enters Jay County on its way to the Ohio border . 
 State Road 167 runs along the eastern border of the county for about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) as it goes north from Dunkirk ; it terminates when it reaches State Road 26 . 
 A Norfolk Southern Railway railroad line enters the county from the south after leaving Eaton ; it runs about a mile to the east of State Road 3 until it reaches Hartford City where it veers to the northeast and passes through Montpelier . It continues into Wells County to the north . Norfolk Southern also owns Blackford County 's east – west line located in the southern half of the county . An 8 @-@ mile ( 13 km ) section of this line , between Converse and Hartford City , was abandoned during the last decade , and track has been removed . The line is still in service north of State Road 26 , between Hartford City and Upland in Grant County . In October 2009 , Central Railroad Company of Indianapolis pursued a leasing agreement to operate the east – west line with Norfolk Southern Railway in Blackford County . However , the line currently does not appear on the Central Railroad Company of Indianapolis system map . 
 = = Education and health care = = 
 The county 's five public schools are administered by the Blackford County School Corporation . During the 2010 – 11 school year , a total of 1 @,@ 943 students attended these schools . The county school system was reorganized in 1963 , after a county @-@ wide vote favored a single school system for the entire county . As a result of this decision , Hartford City and Montpelier High Schools graduated their last classes in 1969 , and a new high school serving the entire county was constructed in time for the 1969 – 1970 school year . Like the county , the new high school was named after Isaac Newton Blackford , and is called Blackford High School . The school is located a few miles north of Hartford City , and is therefore somewhat near the center of the county . The school was designed for 1 @,@ 200 students , and initial enrollment totaled to 1 @,@ 150 students , serving grades 9 through 12 . Current high school enrollment is less than 650 . All students in grades 7 and 8 attend Blackford Junior High School . Although the county was served by eight elementary schools during the 1980s , consolidations have decreased the number of elementary schools to three . Montpelier Elementary School serves grades 1 through 6 , and also has kindergarten classes . In Hartford City , Southside Elementary School hosts a kindergarten and grades 1 through 3 , while students in grades 4 through 6 attend Northside Elementary School . 
 At least four universities are located close to Blackford County . All four are located in adjacent counties , but are less than 25 miles ( 40 km ) from Hartford City . Ball State University is the largest and most well known , and is located south of Hartford City in Muncie . Muncie is also home to Ivy Tech State College @-@ East Central . Private school Indiana Wesleyan University is located in Marion , which is west of Montpelier . Another private school , Taylor University , is less than 10 miles ( 16 km ) west of Hartford City in Upland . 
 The cities of Montpelier and Hartford City both have public libraries . The Public Library of Montpelier and Harrison Township was built in 1907 and 1908 . This building is also known as the Montpelier Carnegie Library because it was made possible by a grant from philanthropist ( and former business magnate ) Andrew Carnegie . The library was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2007 . Hartford City 's Public library was also made possible by a grant from Carnegie , and it was built in 1903 . The Carnegie Fund required local towns to do fundraising to match the grants , and to commit to operating the libraries after their construction . In many localities , women 's groups were instrumental in organizing and doing fundraising for the libraries , both at the time of construction and since . Another library located in Hartford City belongs to the Blackford County Historical Society , and a museum is housed in the same building . 
 The Blackford County Health Department is located in Hartford City , and has a staff of nine people that serves and educates the county . Immunization and blood pressure clinics are provided in addition to educational services and emergency preparedness . The county 's hospital is Indiana University Health Blackford Hospital , a 15 @-@ bed facility located on Hartford City 's north side . This facility was opened January 2005 , and includes a medical office building and ambulance garage . 
 = = Media = = 
 The first newspaper in Blackford County was The Hartford City Times , which was started by Dr. John Moler in 1852 . Moler ran a drug store and print shop , and the Times was mostly an advertiser . At least one source considers The Blackford County News , which was started later in 1852 , as the county ’ s first newspaper — possibly because the Times was mostly for advertising . Across the county in Montpelier , the The Montpelier Examiner was first published in 1879 , and that newspaper is the predecessor of the town ’ s long @-@ time newspaper , The Montpelier Herald . The county 's first daily newspaper , the Evening News , was started in 1894 by Edward Everett Cox . This Hartford City newspaper was eventually renamed Hartford City News . After Cox ’ s death in the 1930s , the Cox family sold the Hartford City News to the owners of Hartford City ’ s Times @-@ Gazette , and the combined entity became the Hartford City News @-@ Times . Changing ownership over the years , the Hartford City News @-@ Times continued operations through the 20th century . During the 21st century , the newspaper began using the name News @-@ Times , and calls itself " Blackford County ’ s only daily newspaper " . 
 The two major television markets that reach Blackford County are Indianapolis and Fort Wayne . Although a few lower @-@ powered stations are located closer to Blackford County in cities such as Muncie , Marion , and Kokomo , these stations typically do not have a broadcast range that covers all of Blackford County . There are no AM radio stations based in Blackford County , but plenty of nearby areas have AM stations in broadcast range . This includes Indianapolis , Fort Wayne , Muncie , and Marion among others . Plenty of FM stations are also in broadcast range , and Blackford County has FM radio stations located in Hartford City and Montpelier . Hartford City , Montpelier , and portions of the county 's rural areas have internet access available . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Kevin A. Ford was born in Portland , Indiana , in 1960 . His family moved to Montpelier , Indiana , and he graduated from Blackford High School in 1978 . Ford holds four academic degrees , and retired from active duty as a colonel in the United States Air Force in 2008 . He was the pilot for the Space Shuttle Discovery during its August 2009 flight , and has logged over 332 hours in outer space . On October 23 , 2012 , Ford began another voyage into outer space . This time , his journey was aboard a Russian spacecraft , with the International Space Station as his destination . 
 Clarence G. Johnson was the first president of Overhead Door Corporation , and lived in Hartford City , Indiana , from 1923 until he died in 1935 . He was a pioneer in the development of garage doors , and holds numerous patents . One of Johnson 's more notable inventions is the first " electric operator for sectional upward @-@ acting doors " . Johnson 's Overhead Door Corporation was a major employer in Blackford County for over 60 years , employing as many as 515 people during its peak years . 
 Maurice Clifford Townsend was born August 11 , 1884 , on a small farm in Blackford County 's Licking Township . After graduating from college in Marion , Indiana , Townsend served as superintendent of Blackford County schools , superintendent of Grant County schools , and as a representative of the Blackford @-@ Grant District in the Indiana General Assembly . Townsend was elected as Indiana 's lieutenant governor in 1932 . He won the 1936 election for governor , and served the single four @-@ year term allowed by law . After Townsend 's public service in Indiana , he served in the administration of President Franklin D. Roosevelt , and worked in agriculture related offices . Townsend 's legacy is directing school buses to be painted yellow for safety and identification purposes , an idea that spread nationwide . 
 Erika <unk> is one of the most decorated female athletes in Indiana University history , earning three Big Ten Player of the Year awards as a golfer . She was the Big Ten women 's golf champion in 1994 , 1995 , and 1996 . A native of Hartford City , Indiana , she later competed in the Ladies Professional Golf Association . <unk> was inducted into the Indiana Athletics Hall of Fame in 2006 . 
 = No. 1 Basic Flying Training School RAAF = 
 No. 1 Basic Flying Training School ( No. 1 BFTS ) was a flying training school of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . Along with No. 1 Initial Flying Training School ( No. 1 IFTS ) , it was formed in response to increased demand for aircrew during the Korean War and Malayan Emergency . No. 1 BFTS was established in December 1951 at RAAF Base Uranquinty , New South Wales , where it operated de Havilland Tiger Moths and CAC Wirraways . The school absorbed the activities of No. 1 IFTS in January 1955 , as aircrew training requirements had <unk> following the end of the Korean War . No. 1 BFTS moved to RAAF Base Point Cook , Victoria , in May 1958 , by which time it was exclusively flying CAC Winjeels . Its training program expanded in the mid @-@ 1960s owing to Australia 's commitments in the Vietnam War . No. 1 BFTS was re @-@ formed as No. 1 Flying Training School at Point Cook in January 1969 . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to World War II , all pilot training in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) was conducted under the auspices of one unit , No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) , at RAAF Point Cook , Victoria . With the dramatic expansion of aircrew training under the wartime Empire Air Training Scheme , No. 1 FTS was supplanted in 1940 – 41 by twelve elementary flying training schools ( EFTS ) and eight service flying training schools ( SFTS ) . Post @-@ war rationalisation saw all the EFTSs and SFTSs disbanded . No. 1 FTS , re @-@ formed using the personnel and equipment of No. 5 Service Flying Training School in Uranquinty , New South Wales , returned to Point Cook and again became the RAAF 's sole facility for training new pilots . 
 = = = Formation at Uranquinty = = = 
 In response to demands for more aircrew to meet Australia 's commitments to the Korean War and Malayan Emergency , flying training in the RAAF was again expanded in 1951 – 52 , resulting in the functions of No. 1 FTS being split among three separately located units . No. 1 FTS itself was renamed No. 1 Applied Flying Training School ( No. 1 AFTS ) in March 1952 , and assumed responsibility for advanced weapons and combat training on CAC Wirraways . Meanwhile , in November 1951 , No. 1 Initial Flying Training School ( No. 1 IFTS ) was raised at RAAF Station Archerfield , Queensland , to impart students with general aeronautical and military knowledge , after which they received their flight grading during twelve hours on de Havilland Tiger Moths . Graduate pilots of No. 1 IFTS went on to another new unit , No. 1 Basic Flying Training School ( No. 1 BFTS ) at RAAF Base Uranquinty , New South Wales , where they underwent further aerial instruction that included instrument , formation and night flying , as well as aerobatics and navigation . The first part of their training at No. 1 BFTS included 40 hours on Tiger Moths , after which they would fly 50 hours on Wirraways . Successful students finally transferred to No. 1 AFTS , before graduating as sergeant pilots . 
 When No. 1 BFTS formed at Uranquinty on 1 December 1951 , it had 377 staff , 37 Tiger Moths and 37 Wirraways , and came under the control of Headquarters Southern Area ( Training Command from 1 October 1953 ) . The first pilots ' course commenced on 1 April 1952 , and graduated on 1 August . The first course of graduates from No. 1 IFTS transferred in the same month . As well as RAAF pilots , No. 1 BFTS trained students from the Australian Army and the Royal Australian Navy 's Fleet Air Arm . In February 1953 , a prototype CAC Winjeel , designed and manufactured in Australia , arrived at the school to undergo trials . From January 1956 to February 1957 , the Winjeel gradually replaced both the Tiger Moth and the Wirraway as No. 1 BFTS 's training aircraft . As well as these aircraft , Link Trainer instrument flying simulators were employed at the school . By November 1954 , following the end of the Korean War , the RAAF 's need for further aircrew to fulfill its international obligations had eased and the decision was made to combine the syllabus of No. 1 IFTS with No. 1 BFTS starting in January 1955 , after which No. 1 IFTS was disbanded . 
 = = = Relocation to Point Cook = = = 
 In May 1958 , No. 1 AFTS relocated to RAAF Base Pearce , Western Australia , to re @-@ equip with de Havilland Vampire jet trainers . Its place at RAAF Base Point Cook was taken by No. 1 BFTS , which transferred from Uranquinty . RAAF Base Uranquinty closed on 18 December 1958 , and No. 1 BFTS commenced operations at Point Cook the following day . Trainee pilots could now expect to fly approximately 85 hours on Winjeels at No. 1 BFTS , followed by 125 hours on Vampires at No. 1 AFTS , and gain a short @-@ service commission as a pilot officer upon graduation . On 31 December 1958 , the Flying Training Squadron at RAAF College , Point Cook , was closed , and graduates undertook their basic flying training at No. 1 BFTS . From 1961 , cadets at the recently established RAAF Academy ( successor to RAAF College ) were given between 25 and 50 hours " motivational flying " at No. 1 BFTS , as practical relief from the " hard grind " of their four years of academic study . By mid @-@ 1964 , the school had a staff of 182 , including 22 flying instructors , and was operating 30 Winjeels . Students were flying 124 hours , including eight at night , over a 40 @-@ week course , and were generally expected to go solo after eight or nine hours in the air . 
 The pace of flying training increased in the mid @-@ 1960s as the RAAF expanded and enlisted more aircrew to fulfill Australia 's commitment to the Vietnam War . According to Air Force historian Alan Stephens , " It was not uncommon for thirteen aircraft , some flown by inexperienced solo students , to be in the circuit simultaneously at Point Cook , creating something of a ' sink or swim ' environment for the trainees " . The ratio of students to instructors was generally around 3 : 1 ; junior instructors might fly four times a day , plus twice more when night training . By mid @-@ 1967 , No. 1 BFTS had 34 instructors , was operating 40 aircraft , and was logging around 2 @,@ 000 flying hours per month ; its training program necessitated the use of as many as five other airstrips at the nearby RAAF Base Laverton and Bacchus Marsh , to augment the four runways at its home airfield in Point Cook . On 31 December 1968 , No. 1 BFTS was disbanded at Point Cook , re @-@ forming there as No. 1 FTS on 1 January 1969 . At the same time , No. 1 AFTS was disbanded at Pearce and re @-@ formed as No. 2 Flying Training School . Subsequent rationalisation of RAAF flying training saw the disbandment of No. 1 FTS at Point Cook on 31 January 1993 . Initial flight grading and basic instruction has since been conducted by civilian contractors at the Australian Defence Force Basic Flying Training School . 
 = Maryland Route 363 = 
 Maryland Route 363 ( MD 363 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known for almost all of its length as Deal Island Road , the state highway runs 18 @.@ 30 miles ( 29 @.@ 45 km ) from a dead end on Deal Island east to Mansion Avenue in Princess Anne . MD 363 connects Princess Anne and U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) with the communities of Deal Island , Chance , and Dames Quarter on Tangier Sound in northwestern Somerset County . The state highway was constructed starting from Princess Anne around 1920 , and reached Chance in the early 1930s . It was extended to Deal Island when a modern bridge to the island was constructed in 1940 . MD 363 was extended to its present terminus on the island in the late 1950s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 363 begins at a dead end in the community of Wenona at the southern end of Deal Island . The state highway heads north , sharply curving before crossing Middle Creek . The road runs through another series of sharp curves through marshland before straightening out and passing St. John 's Methodist Episcopal Church and the old post office building , two examples of buildings on the island preserved as part of the Deal Island Historic District . The route passes a boat ramp accessed from Ralph Abbott Road before a high @-@ level bridge carries it over Upper Thorofare , a strait between Laws Cove and Tangier Sound . On the north side of the bridge , MD 363 intersects MD <unk> , the northern approach to the previous bridge to Deal Island , before passing through the community of Chance , the site of Rock Creek Methodist Episcopal Church . After passing Haines Point Road , which leads to a large public boat ramp , the state highway continues northeast across the two branches of Rock Creek and through more marshland before entering Dames Quarter . MD 363 traverses Dames Quarter Creek and passes through Deal Island Wildlife Management Area . 
 After passing through the wildlife management area , MD 363 heads east on a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) straight through the hamlets of St. Stephens and Monie . The state highway bypasses the village of Oriole , which is accessed by Oriole Back Road from the west and MD 627 ( Oriole Road ) from the east . After passing to the south of <unk> , which features the historic home Panther 's Den and All Saints Church , MD 363 traverses the Chesapeake Forest Lands . On the east edge of the forest , the road curves northeast and then east toward Princess Anne , passing farmland , several residential subdivisions , and the Flying W Airport . Immediately after crossing the Manokin River , MD 363 reaches its intersection with US 13 ( Ocean Highway ) . The state highway continues east into the town of Princess Anne as Manokin Avenue , where it reaches its eastern terminus at Mansion Avenue , named for the Teackle Mansion one block to the south . The roadway continues east through the Princess Anne Historic District toward MD 675 ( Somerset Avenue ) in the center of the town . 
 = = History = = 
 MD 363 had been built from Princess Anne to the eastern end of the 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) straight by 1921 . The state highway reached Monie by 1923 and Dames Quarter in 1926 . MD 363 was under construction west to Chance in 1930 and completed by 1933 . The state highway 's western terminus remained at Chance until 1940 . MD 363 was extended to the other side of Upper Thorofare when a modern bridge replaced a causeway that had been in place since at least 1903 . The state highway was widened in stages from Princess Anne between 1950 and 1958 , culminating in the extension of MD 363 to Wenona in 1958 . MD 363 originally continued east from its present terminus in Princess Anne along Mansion Avenue and Prince William Street to end at MD 675 . The state highway assumed its present eastern terminus around 1985 . The present bridge across Upper Thorofare was completed in 1987 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Somerset County . 
 = = Auxiliary route = = 
 MD <unk> is a 0 @.@ 06 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 097 km ) spur that parallels the westbound side of MD 363 just north of the highway 's bridge over Upper Thorofare between the mainland and Deal Island . 
 = A New System of Domestic Cookery = 
 A New System of Domestic Cookery , first published in 1806 by Maria Eliza Rundell ( 1745 – 16 December 1828 ) , was the most popular English cookbook of the first half of the nineteenth century ; it is often referred to simply as " Mrs Rundell " , but its full title is A New System of Domestic Cookery : Formed Upon Principles of Economy ; and Adapted to the Use of Private Families . 
 Mrs Rundell has been called " the original domestic goddess " and her book " a publishing sensation " and " the most famous cookery book of its time " . It ran to over 67 editions ; the 1865 edition had grown to 644 pages , and earned two thousand guineas . 
 = = Book = = 
 The first edition of 1806 was a short collection of Mrs Rundell 's recipes published by John Murray . It went through dozens of editions , both legitimate and pirated , in both Britain and the United States , where the first edition was published in 1807 . The frontispiece typically credited the authorship to " A Lady " . Later editions continued for some forty years after Mrs Rundell 's death . The author Emma Roberts ( c . 1794 – 1840 ) edited the 64th edition , adding some recipes of her own . 
 Sales of A New System of Domestic Cookery helped to found the John Murray publishing empire . Sales in Britain were over 245 @,@ 000 ; worldwide , over 500 @,@ 000 ; the book stayed in print until the 1880s . When Rundell and Murray fell out , she approached a rival publisher , Longman 's , leading to a legal battle . 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 The 1865 edition is divided into 35 chapters over 644 pages . It begins with a 2 @-@ page preface . The table of contents lists each recipe under its chapter heading . There is a set of tables of weights , measures , wages and taxes before the main text . There is a full index at the end . 
 = = = Approach = = = 
 In contrast to the relative disorder of English eighteenth century cookery books such as Eliza Smith 's The Compleat Housewife ( 1727 ) or Elizabeth Raffald 's The Experienced English Housekeeper ( 1769 ) , Mrs Rundell 's text is strictly ordered and neatly subdivided . Where those books consist almost wholly of recipes , Mrs Rundell begins by explaining techniques of economy ( " A minute account of the annual income and the times of payment should be kept in writing " ) , how to carve , how to stew , how to season , to " Look clean , be careful and nice in work , so that those who have to eat might look on " , how to choose and use steam @-@ kettles and the bain @-@ marie , the meanings of foreign terms like pot @-@ au @-@ feu ( " truly the foundation of all good cookery " ) , all the joints of meat , the " basis of all well @-@ made soups " , so it is page 65 before actual recipes begin . 
 The recipes are written as direct instructions . Quantities , if given , are incorporated in the text . For example , " Gravy to make Mutton eat like Venison " runs : 
 Pick a very stale woodcock , or snipe , cut it to pieces ( but first take out the bag from the entrails ) , and simmer with as much unseasoned meat gravy as you will want . Strain it , and serve in the dish . 
 Basic skills like making pastry are explained separately , and then not mentioned in recipes . Under " Pastry " , Mrs Rundell gives directions for " Rich Puff Paste " , " A less rich Paste " , and " Crust for Venison Pasty " , with variations such as " Raised <unk> for Custards or Fruit " . A recipe for " Shrimp Pie , excellent " then proceeds with the bare minimum indication of quantities and a passing mention of " the paste " : 
 Pick a quart of shrimps ; if they are very salt , season them with only mace and a clove or two . Mince two or three anchovies ; mix these with the spice , and then season the shrimps . Put some butter at the bottom of the dish , and over the shrimps , with a glass of sharp white wine . The paste must be light and thin . They do not take long baking . 
 Advice is given on choosing the best supplies in the market . For instance : 
 Fowls . — If a cock is young , his spurs will be short ; but take care to see they have not been cut or pared , which is a trick often practised . If fresh , the vent will be close and dark . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary = = = 
 The Monthly Review wrote in 1827 that A New System of Domestic Cookery 
 is almost too well known to require notice [ i.e. a review ] . Its chief object is , to teach economy in the management of the table ; and this , we think , it accomplishes . We cannot speak in praise of its receipts for the higher kinds of cookery , but we dare say that they will be very much admired by precisely that class of <unk> whose judgement is worth nothing . " 
 The review concluded that " though we have no respect for Mrs. Rundell 's <unk> , we cordially admire her practical good sense , and applaud her for the production of a useful book " which had been " the pattern of all that have since been published . " 
 By 1841 the Quarterly Literary Advertiser was able to give as the " Opinions of the Press " , on the 64th edition , paragraphs of favourable reviews from the Worcestershire Guardian ( " the standard work of reference in every private family in English society " ) , the Hull Advertiser ( " most valuable advice upon all household matters " ) , the Derby Reporter ( " a complete guide ... suited to the present advanced state of the art " ) , Keane 's Bath Journal ( " it leaves no room to any rival " ) , the Durham Advertiser ( " No housekeeper ought to be without this book " ) , the Brighton Gazette ( " if further proof be wanting , it may be found in the fact that Mrs. Rundell received from her publisher , Mr. Murray , no less a sum than Two Thousand Guineas for her labour ! ! " ) , the Aylesbury News ( " the peculiarity of the present work is its scientific preface , and an attention to economy as well as taste in giving its directions " ) , the Bristol Mirror ( " far surpasses all its predecessors , and continues to be the best treatise extant concerning the art " ) , the Midland Counties Herald ( " ought to be in the hands of every lady who does not consider it vulgar to look after the affairs of her own household " ) , the Inverness Herald ( " enriched with the latest improvements in gastronomic science " ) and The Scotsman , which ventured 
 The sixty @-@ fourth edition ! So much for Mrs. Rundell 's portion of the work . Of that portion , after this , we need say nothing . ... Of the additions made by her successor [ Emma Roberts ] , ... she appears to have brought a large amount of experience in the art of cookery to the task , and her name alone is a sufficient guarantee for the utility and excellence of her new receipts . 
 In 1844 , the Foreign Quarterly Review commented on the 67th edition that 
 it is exclusively a middle class book , and intended for the rich bourgeoisie . The compiler , Mrs. Rundell , had spent the early part of her life in India , and the last edition of the work is enriched with many receipts of Indian cookery . It is on the whole a succinct and judicious compilation ... For many years , if report speaks truly , it has produced 1000 £ . a year to the publisher " . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 Severin Carrell , writing in The Guardian , calls Mrs Rundell " the original domestic goddess " and her book " a publishing sensation " of the early nineteenth century , as it sold " half a million copies and conquered America " , as well as helping to found the John Murray publishing empire . For all that , Carrell notes , both " the most famous cookery book of its time " and Rundell herself vanished into obscurity . 
 Elizabeth Grice , writing in The Telegraph , similarly calls Mrs Rundell " a Victorian domestic goddess " , though without " Nigella 's sexual frisson , or Delia 's uncomplicated kitchen manners " . Grice points out that " at 61 , she was too old to act the pouting goddess " to sell her book , but " sell it did , in vast numbers , as a lifeline to cash @-@ strapped middle @-@ class English households that were desperate to keep up appearances but were having trouble with the staff . " She says that compared to Eliza Acton " who could write better " ( as in her 1845 book , Modern Cookery for Private Families ) , and the " ubiquitous " Mrs Beeton , Mrs Rundell " has unfairly slipped from view " . 
 Alan Davidson , in the Oxford Companion to Food writes that " It did not include many novel features , although it did have one of the first English recipes for tomato sauce . " 
 = = Editions = = 
 There have been over 67 editions , success leading to constant revision and extension : the first edition had 344 pages , while the 1865 edition runs to 644 pages including the index . Some landmarks in the book 's publication history are : 
 " By a Lady . " 1st edition . London : John Murray , 1806 . 
 ( no title page ) Boston : W. Andrews , 1807 . 
 " By a Lady . " Philadelphia : Benjamin C. <unk> , 1807 . 
 " By a Lady . " " Second edition " . Boston : Andrews & Cummings , and L. Blake , 1807 . 
 " By a Lady . " New edition , 1808 . " Price Seven Shillings and Sixpence . " 
 " By a Lady . " New @-@ York : R. <unk> & D. B. Arden , 1814 . 
 " By a Lady . " 1816 edition , reprinted by Persephone Books , 2008 . 
 " By a Lady . " New edition , 1824 . 
 " By a Lady . " London : Thomas Allman , 1840 . 
 " By a Lady . " 66th edition , John Murray , 1842 . 
 " By Mrs. Rundell . " From the Sixty @-@ Seventh London Edition . Philadelphia : Carey and Hart , 1844 . 
 " By a Lady . " New edition , " 245th thousand " , John Murray , 1865 . 
 = 1885 – 86 West Bromwich Albion F.C. season = 
 The 1885 – 86 season was the eighth season in the history of West Bromwich Albion Football Club . In what was their inaugural season as a professional club , Albion moved to the Stoney Lane ground after leaving their previous home at Four Acres . The team also changed the colour of its kit , wearing blue and white striped jerseys for the first time . As league football had not been introduced in England at the time , the team competed solely in cup competitions and friendly matches throughout the season , playing 52 matches in total . 
 West Bromwich Albion won two regional cup competitions in 1885 – 86 . They defeated Walsall Swifts by a single goal in the replayed final of the Birmingham Senior Cup , while in the Staffordshire Senior Cup a replay was again required as Stoke were beaten 4 – 2 following a goalless draw in the original tie . Albion also progressed through seven rounds to reach the FA Cup Final for the first time , becoming the first Midlands team to do so . However , after initially drawing 0 – 0 with Blackburn Rovers , they lost 2 – 0 in the replay . 
 = = Off the field = = 
 Football was an amateur game until July 1885 , when the Football Association decided to legalise payments to players . West Bromwich Albion held a committee meeting the following month , at which it was decided that the club should become professional . Albion 's first professionals earned 10 shillings ( 50 pence ) per week , with no training allowance provided . 
 After deciding not to renew the lease on the Four Acres , Albion moved to their fifth ground , Stoney Lane , in time for the 1885 – 86 season . The ground was located close to the Plough and Harrow public house , which served as the club 's headquarters at the time . Albion took out an initial seven @-@ year lease on the Stoney Lane site , paying an annual rent of £ 28 to its owner , a local undertaker named Mr Webb . The pitch was <unk> and levelled , with ashes spread around the perimeter , and a wooden grandstand was built that came to be known as ' Noah 's Ark ' . The ground cost £ 370 to build , a sum that was offset by a number of friendly matches that took place early in the season . 
 During their early years , West Bromwich Albion had played in whatever coloured kit was available locally . However , at a committee meeting held in September 1885 , the club decreed that blue and white striped jerseys should be adopted on a permanent basis . With the exception of a brief trial of scarlet and blue broad stripes early in the 1889 – 90 season , the team have worn these colours ever since , although initially the blue was of a lighter shade ; the navy blue stripes were not introduced until after the First World War . 
 Due to the club 's financial situation , the reserve team had their wages halved early on in the season , and by January 1886 the payments made to reserve players were withdrawn altogether , although there was a possibility of them receiving a bonus at the end of the season if funds permitted . This resulted in Albion 's second team refusing to play against Small Heath Alliance and the game was cancelled . Some of the players were suspended as a result of their actions , but were later re @-@ instated . 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 In their third season in the FA Cup , West Bromwich Albion were drawn at home in every round prior to the semi @-@ final . In the first two rounds , they defeated Aston Unity 4 – 1 and Wednesbury Old Athletic 3 – 2 . The team then received a bye to the fourth round , where they beat Wolverhampton Wanderers by a 3 – 1 scoreline . Old Carthusians were defeated by a single goal in the fifth round . A hat @-@ trick from Jem Bayliss — the first by an Albion player in the FA Cup — contributed to a 6 – 0 quarter @-@ final victory over Old <unk> , putting the club into the FA Cup semi @-@ final for the first time . 
 The semi @-@ final took place at Aston Lower Grounds and was against one of Albion 's local rivals , Small Heath Alliance . Albion won 4 – 0 — Arthur Loach and George Woodhall each scoring twice — to become the first Midlands club to reach the FA Cup Final . After the game , Small Heath supporters invaded the pitch and then pelted missiles at vehicles bound for West Bromwich , causing several injuries . In the final , Albion met holders Blackburn Rovers at the Kennington Oval , drawing 0 – 0 . No extra time was played , so a replay was arranged at Derby Cricket Ground , the first time that an FA Cup Final match had taken place outside London . Albion were beaten 2 – 0 as Rovers lifted the FA Cup for the third year in succession . This was the first of three successive FA Cup Finals in which West Bromwich Albion participated . 
 Source for match details : 
 = = Birmingham Senior Cup = = 
 Due to a congested fixture list , Albion fielded a reserve side in the first two rounds of their fifth Birmingham Senior Cup campaign , beating <unk> Alliance 6 – 0 and Burton Swifts 4 – 1 . Tommy Green scored a hat @-@ trick in the third round match away at Notts Rangers , as Albion ran out 7 – 2 winners . Burslem Port Vale were defeated 5 – 0 in the semi @-@ final , which took place at a neutral venue , Aston Lower Grounds . The team drew 1 – 1 with Walsall Swifts in the final , which was also at Aston Lower Grounds . The replay took place at the same venue and George Woodhall scored the only goal of the game as Albion won the trophy for the first time . 
 Source for match details : 
 = = Staffordshire Senior Cup = = 
 Albion , taking part in the Staffordshire Senior Cup for the fourth time , defeated Stafford Rangers 4 – 0 in the first round replay ( following a goalless draw ) . In round two , a George Woodhall hat @-@ trick helped to achieve a 5 – 2 win against Leek , after which Albion were handed a bye to the fourth round . They then beat Stoke Free Wanderers 5 – 0 , while in the semi @-@ final Burton Wanderers were defeated 3 – 0 at Stoke 's Victoria Ground . The final took place at the same venue as Stoke themselves provided the opposition . The match finished goalless and Albion won the replay 4 – 2 at Stoney Lane in front of 5 @,@ 500 supporters . Two goals from Jem Bayliss and one each from Tommy Green and George Woodhall gave Albion their second victory in the competition . 
 Source for match details : 
 = = Friendlies and benefit matches = = 
 After the move to Stoney Lane , Albion held four exhibition games to help cover the cost of the ground . The first of these was a 4 – 1 win against Third Lanarkshire Rifle Volunteers on 5 September 1885 , in front of 2 @,@ 122 spectators . Tommy Green scored a hat @-@ trick , including the first goal to be scored at Stoney Lane . As league football had yet to be established , the club also played in a number of other friendly matches throughout the season . Their 31 friendly matches included 21 wins and 9 defeats , while one match against Bolton Wanderers was abandoned with the game still scoreless . Albion 's joint biggest friendly victories of the season were their 7 – 0 wins against Small Heath Alliance , Aston Unity and Halliwell . The season 's heaviest friendly defeat was the 0 – 7 reverse at home to Preston North End . Albion also took part in the Walsall Senior Cup and Birmingham Charity Cup , but entered a reserve team for both competitions . 
 Source for match details : 
 = Crewkerne = 
 Crewkerne / <unk> / is a town and electoral ward in Somerset , England , situated 9 miles ( 14 km ) south west of Yeovil and 7 miles ( 11 km ) east of Chard in the South Somerset district close to the border with Dorset . The civil parish of West Crewkerne includes the hamlets of <unk> and Henley . The town lies on the River Parrett , A30 road and West of England Main Line railway . 
 The earliest written record of Crewkerne is in the 899 will of Alfred the Great . After the Norman conquest it was held by William the Conqueror and in the Domesday Survey of 1086 was described as a royal manor . Crewkerne Castle was possibly a Norman motte castle . The town grew up in the late mediaeval period around the textile industry , its wealth preserved in the fifteenth century Church of St Bartholomew . During the 18th and 19th centuries the main industry was cloth making , including webbing , and sails for the Royal Navy . 
 Local ecological sites include the Bincombe Beeches Local Nature Reserve and the <unk> biological Site of Special Scientific Interest . Crewkerne railway station is served by South West Trains on the main south western railway line . There are local supermarkets and local shops , and some local industry . The town is the birthplace of several notable people and has varied cultural and sporting facilities including those at Wadham Community School . 
 = = History = = 
 The name Crewkerne is thought to be derived from <unk> @-@ <unk> ; from the British <unk> - a spur of a hill , and the Old English <unk> - a house , especially a storehouse . The town was known as <unk> , or <unk> in the 899 will of Alfred the Great when he left it to his younger son Æthelweard , and by 1066 the manor was held by Edith <unk> mistress of King Harold . After the Norman conquest it was held by William the Conqueror and the church estate was given to the Abbaye @-@ aux @-@ Hommes in Caen , Normandy . In the Domesday Survey of 1086 it was described as a royal manor . 
 In 1499 , John de Combe , a precentor of Exeter Cathedral and former vicar of Crewkerne , founded Crewkerne Grammar School . The school survived until 1904 . 
 The parish was part of the hundred of Crewkerne . 
 Crewkerne Castle was possibly a Norman motte castle on a mound to the north @-@ west of the town , which is known as Castle Hill . The town grew up in the late mediaeval period around the textile industry , its wealth preserved in its fifteenth century parish church . It later prospered as a coaching stop in the Georgian period . 
 The Manor Farmhouse in Henley was built from <unk> in the early 17th century , but possibly incorporates medieval fragments . The building is designated by English Heritage as a Grade II * listed building . During the 18th and 19th centuries the main industry was cloth making , including webbing , and sails for the Royal Navy . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The town council has responsibility for local issues , including setting an annual precept ( local rate ) to cover the council ’ s operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny . The parish council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police , district council officers , and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime , security , and traffic . The parish council 's role also includes initiating projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities , as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance , repair , and improvement of highways , drainage , footpaths , public transport , and street cleaning . Conservation matters ( including trees and listed buildings ) and environmental issues are also the responsibility of the council . 
 The town falls within the non @-@ metropolitan district of South Somerset , which was formed on 1 April 1974 under the Local Government Act 1972 , having previously been Crewkerne Urban District . The district council is responsible for local planning and building control , local roads , council housing , environmental health , markets and fairs , refuse collection and recycling , cemeteries and crematoria , leisure services , parks , and tourism . This electoral ward includes Misterton and at the 2011 Census had a population of 7 @,@ 826 . 
 The Town Hall occupies the lower part of the Victoria Hall in the Market Square . The Hamstone building was rebuilt around 1742 , altered in 1836 , when a south piazza was added after the demolition of the shambles . In 1848 @-@ 9 it became a museum , reading room and library and was remodelled in 1900 by Thomas Benson of Yeovil to create shops and offices . It is a Grade II listed building . 
 Somerset County Council is responsible for running the largest and most expensive local services such as education , social services , the library , roads , public transport , trading standards , waste disposal and strategic planning , although fire , police and ambulance services are provided jointly with other authorities through the Devon and Somerset Fire and Rescue Service , Avon and Somerset Constabulary and the South Western Ambulance Service . 
 It is also part of the Yeovil county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom . It elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) by the first past the post system of election , and part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament which elects six MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The town lies west of the River Parrett . The main residential areas are around the town centre with Kithill and Park View to the South and Wadham Park to the North . 
 In the northern outskirts of the town is the Bincombe Beeches 5 hectares ( 12 acres ) Local Nature <unk> which is managed by the town council and includes a line of beech trees , some of which are between 150 and 200 years old . Between 2002 and 2005 grants were obtained to improve access to the site and support the planting of new trees . The <unk> biological Site of Special Scientific Interest consists of a complex mosaic of pasture , wet grassland , tall @-@ herb fen , standing and running water , Alder and Willow carr . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Crewkerne has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country . The annual mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 @.@ 0 ° F ) . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures . The summer months of July and August are the warmest with mean daily maxima of approximately 21 ° C ( 69 @.@ 8 ° F ) . In winter mean minimum temperatures of 1 ° C ( 33 @.@ 8 ° F ) or 2 ° C ( 35 @.@ 6 ° F ) are common . In the summer the Azores high pressure affects the south @-@ west of England , however convective cloud sometimes forms inland , reducing the number of hours of sunshine . Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1 @,@ 600 hours . In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton . Most the rainfall in the south @-@ west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection . Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions , which is when they are most active . In summer , a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms . Average rainfall is around 700 mm ( 28 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , and June to August have the lightest winds . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The following major roads pass through Crewkerne : 
 Northbound : A356 North Street — To A303 for London and North Somerset . 
 Southbound : A356 South <unk> To Maiden Newton and Dorchester . 
 Westbound : A30 West Street — To Exeter and the South West of England . 
 Eastbound : A30 East Street — To Yeovil and Salisbury . 
 Southbound : <unk> Hermitage Street — To Lyme Regis . 
 Crewkerne railway station is served by South West Trains on the main south western railway line . Trains operate to London Waterloo ( two and a half hours away ) via Salisbury ( 70 minutes ) , and in the opposite direction to Exeter St Davids ( under an hour ) . The station was opened by the London and South Western Railway on 19 July 1860 . It was designed by Sir William Tite and has been designated as a Grade II listed building . 
 The town is served by Stagecoach South West with buses to Yeovil via Kithill , Misterton and Haselbury Plucknett and Chard . Buses also run to <unk> , South Petherton and Ilminster and Taunton . First Somerset & Avon has service to Bridport via Beaminster and <unk> , Yeovil via East Chinnock and West Coker and Chard . 
 It is on the route of the Monarch 's Way a 615 @-@ mile ( 990 km ) long @-@ distance footpath in England that approximates the escape route taken by King Charles II in 1651 after being defeated in the Battle of Worcester . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Crewkerne is a small market town centre with many cafes , shops and supermarkets . Crewkerne also has a wide selection of public houses . The largest supermarket is the Waitrose store which is around 21 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 2 @,@ 000 m2 ) and opened in November 2008 . All of the large supermarkets are situated around the South Street multi @-@ storey car park . The other smaller supermarkets are Co @-@ operative ( previously Somerfield ) and Lidl . 
 Ariel Motor Company is based in Crewkerne , and is one of the UK 's smallest automobile companies , with just seven employees , producing fewer than 100 cars per year . It was founded in 1991 and changed its name from <unk> Ltd in 2001 . The company 's flagship car is the Ariel Atom , an extremely light , high performance car . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 St Bartholomew 's Parish Church stands on high ground to the west of the town . The first Saxon church was founded before the end of the 9th century as a " minster " , or main church of a Saxon royal estate that included an area which later became the parishes of <unk> , <unk> and Misterton . This church was replaced after the Norman Conquest with a larger stone cruciform building , with a central tower . This was almost completely rebuilt and enlarged in the late 15th and early 16th centuries . This is , for the most part , the church building visible today . It is an excellent example of the Perpendicular style with many unusual and individual features . These include the west front , the nave , the six @-@ light aisle windows and the Tudor @-@ style chapels and windows in the north east corner . The building material is golden @-@ coloured Ham Hill stone , quarried nearby . There is a notable pair of ' green man ' carvings within the church . 
 No major alterations have been made since the Reformation in the 1530s and 1540s , but there have been many changes to the interior to accommodate various phases of Church of England worship . Among these are an oven used for baking communion bread in the south east corner of the north chapel . During the Civil War , considerable damage was done including the destruction of nearly all of the medieval stained glass . William III of England worshipped in the church following his landing in the Glorious Revolution of 1689 . By the early 19th century , all the medieval furnishings , except the Norman font had disappeared . New pews were made and the west galleries were added in 1808 @-@ 11 . The latest restoration that has left the church interior visible today , took place in the late 19th century ; it was more sympathetic to the church 's architectural character than many Victorian restorations . At this time , the central section of the west gallery was removed to reveal the great west window and the organ was relocated to the south transept . The pews date from around 1900 and have attractive carved bench @-@ ends . The church has been designated by English Heritage as a Grade I listed building . 
 Crewkerne also contains one of very few Unitarian chapels left in the West Country , Crewkerne Unitarian Church , a tiny chapel tucked away on Hermitage Street . The Methodist church on South Street is shared by Roman Catholic and Methodist congregations , following the closure and proposed redevelopment of St Peter 's Catholic Church . 
 = = Education = = 
 The two primary schools within Crewkerne are St. Bartholomew 's first school which is located on Kithill and Ashlands which is located in North Street . The middle school is called Maiden Beech Middle School which is located on the B3165 Lyme Road . The school has students from ages 9 to 13 and this is where they do their Key Stage 2 <unk> . 
 Crewkerne Grammar School was situated at <unk> House , until it closed in the late 1960s , before the Grammar school was combined into St Martins School of Abbey Street . St Martins used to be situated in the High Street , until it moved to its current position in the late 1970s . The Senior and Juniors School section closed in 2003 , and now serves as a pre @-@ school nursery only . The School Gymnasium was located along <unk> Terrace , and is still undergoing repairs to the floor and roof . 
 Wadham School has students from 13 to 18 years old and includes those travelling from surrounding villages . In November 2005 , Wadham was placed into Special measures after failing an Ofsted inspection . In June 2007 Wadham successfully left Special Measures , after a full Ofsted inspection showed the school had sufficiently progressed . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The <unk> Centre provides conference facilities and has also featured exhibitions . 
 Crewkerne and District Museum is part of a wider heritage centre which includes local archives and a meeting room . The museum opened in 2000 in an old house with an 18th @-@ century frontage . It was restored with the help of grants from the Heritage Lottery Fund , Somerset County Council , South Somerset District Council and Crewkerne Town Council . The development of Crewkerne during the 18th and 19th centuries , with particular emphasis on the flax and linen industry is illustrated with a permanent display . Other collections relate to local archaeology , Coins and Medals , Costume and Textiles , Fine Art , Music , Personalities , Science and Technology , Social History , Weapons and War . 
 = = Sport = = 
 The Crewkerne Aqua Centre also provides swimming pool and fitness gym facilities to the town , located on the grounds next to <unk> Park , which used to be the Grammar Schools Playing fields . St. Martins School retained the use of the playing fields until the junior section was closed in 2003 , as regular sports days were a tradition dating back to the Grammar school era in the town . A further sports centre is situated on the Wadham School campus . Crewkerne Cricket Club play in the Dorset Funeral Plan Cricket League , whilst Both Crewkerne Town F.C. and Crewkerne Rangers F.C. play in the Perry Street and District League . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Thomas Coryat a traveller and writer of the late Elizabethan and early Jacobean age was born in Crewkerne around 1577 . Mathematician John Caswell was also born here . A later traveller Colonel Joshua Fry was born in the town in 1699 before becoming a surveyor , adventurer , mapmaker , soldier , and member of the House of Burgesses , the legislature of the colony of Virginia . Another Englishman from Crewkerne who emigrated to the American Colonies was William Phelps who was born around 1599 and became one of the founders of both Dorchester , Massachusetts and Windsor , Connecticut , foreman of the first grand jury in New England , served most of his life in early colonial government , and played a key role in establishing the first democratic town government in the American colonies . Ralph Reader CBE an actor , theatrical producer and songwriter , best known for staging the original Gang Show , a Variety show for members of the Scouting Movement , was born in Crewkerne in 1903 . The cricketer Michael Barnwell was born in the town in 1943 . 
 = = Twin towns = = 
 Crewkerne is twinned with <unk> , Essonne and Bures @-@ sur @-@ Yvette in France . 
 = Ranveer Singh = 
 Ranveer Singh Bhavnani ( born 6 July 1985 ) is an Indian film actor who appears in Hindi films . After completing a bachelor 's degree from Indiana University , Bloomington , Singh returned to India to pursue a career in film . He made his acting debut in 2010 with a leading role in Yash Raj Films ' romantic comedy Band Baaja Baaraat . The film emerged as a critical and commercial success , earning Singh a Filmfare Award in the Best Male Debut category . 
 Singh went on to star in the romantic drama Lootera ( 2013 ) , Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's tragic romance Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram @-@ Leela ( 2013 ) , his biggest commercial successes to that point , and in the action @-@ drama Gunday ( 2014 ) . In 2015 , he starred in the ensemble comedy @-@ drama Dil Dhadakne Do ( 2015 ) , and portrayed Bajirao I in the historical romance Bajirao Mastani , one of the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films , for which he garnered critical acclaim and won the Filmfare Award for Best Actor . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Singh was born on 6 July 1985 into a Sindhi family to Anju and Jagjit Singh Bhavnani . His grandparents , Sunder Singh Bhavnani and Chand Burke , moved to Mumbai from Karachi , Sindh , during the Partition of India . He has an elder sister named Ritika Bhavnani . Singh is the maternal cousin of actress Sonam Kapoor and producer Rhea Kapoor , daughters of actor Anil Kapoor and wife Sunita Kapoor ( née Bhavnani ) . Singh explains that he dropped his surname Bhavnani , since he felt that the name would have been " too long , too many syllables " , thus downplaying his brand as a " saleable commodity " . 
 Singh always aspired to be an actor , participating in several school plays and debates . Once when he had gone for a birthday party , his grandmother asked him to dance and entertain her . Singh remembers that he suddenly jumped in the lawn and started dancing to the song " <unk> <unk> " from the 1991 action film , Hum . He felt the thrill of performing and was interested in acting and dancing . However , after he joined H.R. College of Commerce and Economics in Mumbai , Singh realised that getting a break in the film industry was not at all easy , as it was mostly people with a film background who got these opportunities . Feeling that the idea of acting was " too far @-@ fetched " , Singh focused on creative writing . He went to the United States where he received his Bachelor of Arts degree from Indiana University . 
 At university , he decided to take acting classes and took up theatre as his minor . After completing his studies and returning to Mumbai in 2007 , Singh worked for a few years in advertising as a copywriter , with agencies like O & M and J. Walter Thompson . He then worked as an assistant director , but left it to pursue acting . He decided to send his portfolio to directors . He would go for all kinds of auditions , but did not get any good opportunities , while only getting calls for minor roles : " Everything was so bleak . It was very frustrating . There were times I would think whether I was doing the right thing or not . " 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work ( 2008 – 11 ) = = = 
 In January 2010 , Singh was called for an audition by <unk> Sharma , the head of the casting division for Yash Raj Films . They informed him that it was for a lead role in their film titled Band Baaja Baaraat , a romantic comedy set in the world of wedding planning . Aditya Chopra , the vice president of the company , later saw the audition tapes on video and was impressed by Singh 's acting , and decided that he fit the part of Bittoo Sharma , the hero of the film . However , the director Maneesh Sharma needed some more convincing and he was called for a few more auditions over the next two weeks until they were completely convinced of his caliber . After the two weeks of testing , Singh was confirmed for the role of Bittoo , with Anushka Sharma playing the female lead . 
 Singh described the role of Bittoo Sharma as a typical Delhi boy . To prepare for the role , he spent time with students at the Delhi University campus . Prior to the release of the film , trade analysts were skeptical of the film 's commercial potential , citing the middling response to Yash Raj Films ' last few productions , the lack of a male star and the fact that the female lead , Anushka Sharma , was by then an " almost @-@ forgotten " actress . However , Band Baaja Baaraat went on to become a sleeper hit . Singh 's portrayal of Bittoo was praised , with Anupama Chopra of NDTV writing that Singh was " pitch perfect in the role of the uncouth but good @-@ hearted small town slacker who is a bit of a <unk> when it comes to matters of the heart . The film earned approximately ₹ 214 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 2 million ) at the domestic box office . At the 56th Filmfare Awards , Singh won the award for Best Male Debut . 
 Following Band Baaja Baarat , Singh signed on for Ladies vs Ricky Bahl , a romantic comedy produced by Chopra and directed by Maneesh Sharma . He played a conman Ricky Bahl who cons girls for a living but finally meets his match . The film co @-@ starred Anushka Sharma , Parineeti Chopra , <unk> Sharma and Aditi Sharma . According to Singh , the title character had various avatars in the film , including a chirpy , entertaining side and a sinister side . Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India wrote , " Ranveer is , well Ranveer : your average Joe kind of hero who looks convincing enough as Sunny , Deven , Iqbal , Ricky , his sundry avatars . " Commercially , Ladies vs Ricky Bahl earned ₹ 370 million ( US $ 5 @.@ 5 million ) domestically . 
 = = = Success ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 Singh 's next release was Lootera ( 2013 ) , a period romance , written and directed by Vikramaditya Motwane , and co @-@ starring Sonakshi Sinha . An adaptation of O. Henry 's short story The Last Leaf , Lootera was critically acclaimed . Rajeev Masand of CNN @-@ IBN wrote that Singh " brings a quiet sensitivity to Varun , and occasionally a smoldering intensity . Offering a finely internalized performance , he leaves a lasting impression . " However , Lootera performed poorly at the box office . 
 Singh next starred opposite Deepika Padukone in Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's adaptation of William Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet , entitled Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram @-@ Leela , in which he played Ram , a Gujarati boy based on the character of Romeo . Bhansali was impressed by Singh 's performance in Band Baaja Baaraat and decided to cast him for the film . Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram @-@ Leela generated positive reviews from critics , as did Singh 's performance . Writing for India Today , Rohit Khilnani commented that " Singh has everything going for him here . His Bollywood hero entry scene lying down on a bike in the song ' <unk> <unk> ' is outstanding . He learnt a new language to better his performance for the character Ram and it paid off . In his fourth film he has the presence of a star . " The film emerged as Singh 's biggest commercial success , with worldwide revenues of ₹ 2 @.@ 02 billion ( US $ 30 million ) . For his portrayal , he received several recognitions , including a Best Actor nomination at Filmfare . 
 In 2014 , Singh starred as a Bengali criminal in Ali Abbas Zafar 's Gunday , alongside Arjun Kapoor , Priyanka Chopra and Irrfan Khan . David Chute of Variety praised Singh 's screen presence and wrote that he " tucks the movie 's center of interest under his arm and takes it with him — even though he has the could @-@ be @-@ thankless " good brother " role " . Also , Singh 's chemistry with Kapoor was considered by critic Rohit Khilnani to the prime asset of the film . Gunday proved to be Singh 's biggest box office opener , and eventually emerged a box @-@ office success with a revenue of ₹ 1 billion ( US $ 15 million ) worldwide . After a cameo appearance in Finding Fanny , Singh starred as a gangster in Shaad Ali 's unsuccessful crime drama Kill Dil opposite Parineeti Chopra and Ali Zafar and received negative reviews . 
 In Zoya Akhtar 's ensemble comedy @-@ drama Dil Dhadakne Do ( 2015 ) , Singh starred with Anil Kapoor , Shefali Shah and Priyanka Chopra as the younger sibling of a dysfunctional Punjabi family . Writing for Mumbai Mirror , critic Kunal Guha found Singh to be the " surprise element " of the film ; he praised his " immaculate comic timing " and particularly noted on the <unk> of his performance . The film further was an economic success , grossing ₹ 1 @.@ 47 billion ( US $ 22 million ) worldwide within seventeen days of release . Singh next reunited with Sanjay Leela Bhansali for the epic romance Bajirao Mastani ( 2015 ) opposite Deepika Padukone and Priyanka Chopra . He portrayed Bajirao I , for which he shaved his head and locked himself up in a hotel room for 21 days . Raja Sen in his review mentioned : " Ranveer Singh brings his character to life and does so with both machismo and grace , his Peshwa Bajirao slicing down soldiers like a <unk> @-@ clad golfer wielding a too @-@ sharp <unk> . The film was a box @-@ office success and Singh won the Filmfare Award for Best Actor . 
 As of July 2016 , Singh has completed work on Aditya Chopra 's romance <unk> in Paris , opposite <unk> Kapoor . In addition , he has committed to star in Sanjay Leela Bhansali 's Padmavati , a film based on Rani Padmavati , along with Deepika Padukone and an untitled Rohit Shetty film , co @-@ starring Tamannaah . 
 = = Filmography and awards = = 
 = = = Filmography = = = 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Singh is the recipient of two Filmfare Awards : Best Male Debut for Band Baaja Baaraat ( 2010 ) and Best Actor for Bajirao Mastani ( 2016 ) . He has received an additional Best Actor nomination at the ceremony for Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram @-@ Leela ( 2013 ) . 
 = 1987 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1987 Atlantic hurricane season was a below @-@ average hurricane season that was limited by an ongoing El Niño . The season officially began on June 1 , 1987 , and lasted until November 30 , 1987 , although activity began on May 24 when a tropical depression developed 400 mi ( 640 km ) east of the central Bahamas . The June through November dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . The first cyclone to attain tropical storm status was an unnamed tropical storm which formed on August 9 , nearly a month later than usual . The final storm of the year , Tropical Depression Fourteen , merged with a weak extratropical low on November 4 . The season marked the first year tropical storm watches and warnings were issued ; previously , gale watches and warnings were used for tropical storms , and this season was one of only a few seasons with no deaths in the United States ; the last time this happened was in the 1981 season . 
 During this season , 14 tropical depressions formed of which seven attained tropical storm status . One tropical storm was operationally classified as a tropical depression but was reclassified in post @-@ analysis . Three tropical cyclones reached hurricane status of which only one became a major hurricane , which is a Category 3 or greater on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Hurricane Emily was the costliest storm of the season , causing $ 80 @.@ 3 million in damage ( 1987 USD ) as it ravaged the Dominican Republic and Bermuda . Tropical Depression Fourteen was the deadliest storm of the season , causing six deaths as it passed across Jamaica . Of the seven cyclones that attained tropical storm status , three did not affect land . 
 = = Seasonal forecasts and activity = = 
 Forecasts of hurricane activity are issued before each hurricane season by hurricane expert Dr. William M. Gray and his associates at Colorado State University . An average season , as defined by NOAA , has 6 to 14 named storms , with 4 to 8 of those reaching hurricane strength , and with 3 hurricanes becoming major hurricanes . The June 2 , 1987 report suggested that eight tropical storms would form during the 1987 season , five of them becoming hurricanes . 
 The forecast anticipated more tropical activity than what ultimately occurred . During the season , 14 tropical depressions formed from May 25 to November 5 . Seven of the depressions strengthened into tropical storms , six of them named . Tropical Depression Two was upgraded into a tropical storm in post @-@ season analysis , and as a result has no name . Tropical storms Arlene , Emily and Floyd all reached hurricane status during their durations , of which only Emily reached major hurricane status . 
 The United States was affected by four tropical cyclones in 1987 , of which three struck Florida . The unnamed tropical storm struck Texas and affected much of the Gulf Coast of the United States . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with a cumulative accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 34 , which is classified as " below normal " . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Subtropical cyclones are excluded from the total . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Depression One = = = 
 A low @-@ pressure area was observed by a Reconnaissance Aircraft and declared the first tropical depression of the year on May 25 — one week before the official season began . Moving at about 8 mph ( 13 km / h ) , the depression was located 400 miles ( 640 km ) from the east central Bahamas . It moved towards Florida and stalled off the coast , with a prediction to cause thundershowers across the state on May 28 . The Bahamian government released a storm warning for its northern islands as the system grew stronger . The tropical depression weakened on June 1 , the official start of the hurricane season . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Two = = = 
 The second tropical depression of the season formed in the northwestern Gulf of Mexico from a tropical wave on August 9 . It quickly strengthened into a tropical storm , though the strengthening was not known until post @-@ season analysis . Based on lack of significant organization or reports at the time , the storm remained unnamed . It traveled northwestward and neared the coast . The tropical storm made landfall near High Island , Texas on August 10 , and quickly weakened to a tropical depression as it moved northeastward . It turned to the southeast and reached the Gulf of Mexico . The weakening system accelerated to the northeast , and dissipated over Georgia on August 17 . Just over 21 inches ( 0 @.@ 53 m ) of rainfall was associated with the storm , causing flash flooding and water damage amounting to $ 7 @.@ 4 million ( 1987 USD , $ 13 @.@ 3 million in 2008 USD ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Arlene = = = 
 A low pressure system on the tail end of a stationary cold front organized into a subtropical depression on August 8 near the South Carolina coast , and drifted southward . Convection became more organized , and the storm was classified Tropical Depression Three on August 10 over the Bahamas . It executed an anticyclonic loop to the northeast , and was estimated to have attained tropical storm status on August 11 , based on reports from Hurricane Hunters . Small cells in the ridge of high pressure caused Arlene to take an unusual track to the east , with two southward jogs in its path . A trough of low pressure near Bermuda initially inhibited strengthening . However , after high pressures to its east forced the storm northward , more favorable conditions allowed Arlene to intensify into a hurricane on August 22 . Operationally , it was upgraded two days earlier , based on the appearance of an eye feature on satellite imagery . After becoming a hurricane , Arlene accelerated to the northeast into the cold waters of the north Atlantic Ocean , and on August 23 it became extratropical about halfway between Newfoundland and Ireland . The extratropical remnants turned to the southeast and later to the east , making landfall on the Iberian Peninsula before dissipating on August 28 over Spain . 
 As Arlene approached , islanders of Bermuda were warned to board up windows , with winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) expected . Ultimately , the island experienced winds of 35 mph ( 60 km / h ) with gusts up to 49 mph ( 80 km / h ) . A blind sailor on a trip across the Atlantic was unable to make it to a harbor in Bermuda due to the hurricane , and rode out the storm in the open sea . The storm produced moderate rainfall to coastal areas of Spain , contributing to a monthly rainfall record at Rota . The 14 @.@ 5 day total between the start of its best track and when it attained hurricane status is the largest on record for a North Atlantic hurricane . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Four = = = 
 The fourth tropical depression of the season formed off the coast of Antigua on August 14 . Initially , forecasters anticipated the system to intensify into a tropical storm ; however , a reconnaissance mission into the depression on August 15 revealed that it was poorly organized and was declassified a tropical cyclone . Tropical Depression Four peaked at 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) and dissipated on August 15 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Bret = = = 
 A well @-@ organized tropical disturbance formed off the African coast on August 17 and became a tropical depression the following day , as classified by satellite imagery . Later the same day , the ship S.S. Columbus <unk> reported 40 mph ( 60 km / h ) winds and a minimal pressure of 1004 millibars , and the depression became Tropical Storm Bret . 
 The cyclone moved a westward course of 20 — 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) and reached its peak intensity of 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) winds and 1000 millibars in pressure on August 20 . A ridge of high pressure in the eastern Atlantic Ocean , north of Bret , began to weaken and drift to the east on August 20 . Bret was moving at 17 mph ( 27 km / h ) to the east on August 21 . It was thought that Bret would strengthen at this point . Bret slowed from August 21 until August 23 , moving at only 15 – 20 mph . 
 The cyclone soon moved on a northwestward course and encountered wind shear . Bret weakened into a depression on August 23 , due to the wind shear over the system . The next morning , the depression became a tropical wave with no low @-@ level circulation left . The wave was soon absorbed by a trough of low pressure during the next few days . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Six = = = 
 A tropical depression formed off the African coast on August 31 , in which forecasters predicted would become the third tropical storm of the season . At 0600 UTC August 31 , the depression was seemingly appeared unchanged , with winds of averaging about 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . The depression was then located 950 miles ( 1 @,@ 530 km ) west of Sao <unk> in Cape Verde , stirring up 12 @-@ foot ( 4 m ) seas . 
 The next day , Tropical Depression Six moved westward to a position 1 @,@ 050 miles ( 1 @,@ 690 km ) off the Cape Verde Islands , too far from the Caribbean islands for the National Hurricane Center to send a reconnaissance flight into the depression . Tropical Depression Six was at the time not a threat to land and few ships were in the area . It degenerated into a tropical wave on September 4 , never affecting land or reaching storm @-@ intensity . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Cindy = = = 
 On September 1 a tropical wave exited the African coast , and moved westward across the Atlantic Ocean . A trough of low pressure moved southeastward through the tropics , and brought the wave more towards the north . Generally favorable conditions for development allowed the wave to organize into a tropical depression on September 5 , and two days later it attained tropical storm status . Cindy continued northward , and peaked at 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) winds on September 8 before turning to the northeast . Strong upper @-@ level shear weakened the storm , and after two days of struggling as a tropical storm , Cindy became extratropical on September 10 to the northwest of the Azores . Cindy did not affect any landmasses . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Eight = = = 
 A tropical depression formed in the Caribbean Sea on September 5 . It tracked westward through the body of water , and reached peak winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) on September 7 . Despite its appearance , Tropical Depression Eight failed to develop further and early on September 8 , the depression made landfall near Puerto Cabezas , Nicaragua shortly before dissipating . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Nine = = = 
 An upper @-@ level cyclone in the northern Gulf of Mexico started tropical cyclogenesis offshore the southeast United States . Convection organized around a low pressure area east of Florida , and it was declared Tropical Depression Nine on September 7 . Initially poorly organized , the depression moved generally northward without strengthening , and quickly made landfall along the coast of South Carolina . It maintained its identity as it tracked through North Carolina and the Mid @-@ Atlantic States , and on September 10 the depression merged with a frontal wave over New England . The cyclone dropped moderate precipitation along its path , peaking at 10 @.@ 23 inches ( 0 @.@ 260 m ) in central Virginia ; stations in Maryland , the Carolinas , and Pennsylvania reported over 5 inches ( 125 mm ) of rainfall . Flash flood warnings were issued in some localities due to the precipitation , and in Virginia over 50 roads were washed out . Slick roads caused three tractor @-@ trailers to jackknife along a 2 mile ( 3 km ) portion of the Capital Beltway . Additionally , four people required rescue assistance after being trapped in swollen creeks . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Dennis = = = 
 A tropical depression formed on September 8 off the coast of Africa . It tracked westward , passing to the south of the Cape Verde islands , and based on satellite imagery was estimated to have reached tropical storm status on September 10 . Tropical Storm Dennis continued to gradually intensify , and on September 11 attained peak winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 1 @,@ 000 mbar ( 30 inHg ) . Subsequently the cyclone weakened to minimal tropical storm status , and by September 14 , Dennis was expected to immediately weaken to tropical depression status . However , Dennis remained a minimal tropical storm for four more days before deteriorating to a tropical depression on September 18 , as reported by a Hurricane Hunters plane . The depression turned abruptly northwestward through a weakness in the subtropical ridge , suggesting a new low pressure area developed . On September 19 it turned to the northeast , and on September 20 Dennis merged with an extratropical low . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Eleven = = = 
 On September 14 , a tropical depression developed about 490 miles ( 790 km ) southeast of Antigua . Tracking westward at 5 – 10 mph ( 8 – 16 km / h ) , the depression maintained winds of about 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) , and was deemed " no cause for alarm " for the Lesser Antilles . Failing to intensify further , the depression degenerated into a tropical wave on September 16 to the east of Antigua . No damage or fatalities were reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Emily = = = 
 A tropical depression , the tenth of the season , formed on September 20 . It soon became a tropical storm that day off the South American coast . Emily quickly strengthened becoming a hurricane less than 48 hours later on September 22 . 
 The cyclone then slowly began turning north , soon making landfall in the Dominican Republic , where three people were reported dead and there was $ 30 million ( 1987 US dollars , $ 56 @.@ 9 million in 2009 USD ) in damage . Emily passed over Hispaniola , turned to the northeast , and eventually made landfall in Bermuda , where it caused $ 50 million ( 1987 USD , $ 94 @.@ 8 million in 2009 USD ) in damage , though there were no fatalities . It weakened into a tropical storm after landfall , peaking at 125 miles per hour ( 200 km / h ) in wind speed , a Category @-@ 3 hurricane . 
 After peaking at winds of 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) , Emily dissipated on September 26 . Thousands of migratory birds took refuge on Bermuda during the storm , including ten thousand <unk> and thousands of Connecticut warblers . After the storm passed Bermuda , Emily became the second @-@ fastest @-@ moving hurricane of the previous century ( behind only the 1938 New England hurricane ) , moving at a pace of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) or 31 m / s . Emily was the first hurricane in the Caribbean Sea since Hurricane Katrina of the 1981 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 = = = Hurricane Floyd = = = 
 A broad area of low pressure organized into a tropical depression off the coast of Nicaragua on October 9 . After drifting to the southeast , it turned to the north @-@ northwest and organized into a tropical storm on October 10 . Subsequent to crossing western Cuba , Floyd accelerated to the northeast , and attained hurricane status late on October 12 . It passed through the Florida Keys before <unk> cooler , drier air from a stationary frontal boundary . Its convection became very disorganized , and Floyd weakened back to a tropical storm early on October 13 to the southeast of Miami ; the storm crossed the Bahamas , and becoming an extratropical cyclone before being absorbed by the frontal boundary on October 14 . 
 Damage in Florida was minimal due to the disorganized nature of the hurricane . Floyd brought up to 10 @.@ 07 in ( 256 mm ) of rain to the state , causing moderate crop damage in the southern portion of the state . In addition , a tornado spawned by the storm damaged portions of the Florida Keys . Overall damage amounted to around $ 500 @,@ 000 ( 1987 USD ) , with no casualties or injuries reported . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Fourteen = = = 
 A broad area of low pressure existed in the central Caribbean Sea in late October . It steadily organized , and was classified as Tropical Depression Fourteen on October 31 . It moved northwestward , and entered a high @-@ shear environment due to an upper level low situated toward the end of a high pressure system . By November 1 , little convection remained as the weak depression turned to the north and crossed Cuba . A burst of convection organized over the depression , and brought strong wind gusts to the Florida Keys as it passed through the area on November 2 . It continued to the north @-@ northwest , paralleling the Florida west coast , and lost all of its convection on November 3 . The system turned to the northeast , and merged with a weak extratropical low over northern Florida on November 4 . 
 Rainfall was experienced as far north as eastern Georgia and extreme southern South Carolina . Other parts of the United States received high to moderate rains while the aforementioned region received low amounts . Six fatalities were reported from devastating rainfall in Jamaica from the depression . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of all of the storms that did form in the 1987 Atlantic hurricane season . It includes their duration , names , landfall ( s ) – denoted by bold location names – damages , and death totals . Deaths in parentheses will be additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but are still related to that storm . Damage and deaths will include totals while the storm was extratropical or a wave or low , and all of the damage figures are in 1987 USD . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the north Atlantic in 1987 . This is the same list used for the 1981 season . No names were retired , so it was used again in the 1993 season . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = Do Ya Thang ( Rihanna song ) = 
 " Do Ya Thang " is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna , taken from the deluxe edition of her sixth studio album , Talk That Talk ( 2011 ) . It was written by Terius Nash and Rihanna herself , with production helmed by Nash under his stage @-@ name The @-@ Dream . " Do Ya Thang " is an R & B song with prominent influences of music from the 1980s . The song uses " catchy " drum breaks , synths and " funky " and " subtle " hook . Lyrically , it is a complimentary love track that contains " curse " words and a repetitive chorus . 
 " Do Ya Thang " received predominantly positive reviews from music critics , with many of them praising its composition and sound , while also linking it to Rihanna 's previous works from her first studio album Music of the Sun ( 2005 ) . Upon the release of Talk That Talk , the song debuted on the lower regions of the singles charts in South Korea and the United Kingdom ; at number 80 and 136 respectively . It also debuted on the UK R & B Chart at number 38 . 
 = = Production and recording = = 
 " Do Ya Thang " was written by The @-@ Dream and Rihanna . The @-@ Dream produced the song . He also co @-@ wrote two more songs on the album : its fourth single " Birthday Cake " and " Red Lipstick " , with the latter also being featured on the deluxe edition of Talk That Talk ( 2011 ) . Rihanna recorded " Do Ya Thang " at several recording studios during her worldwide Loud Tour ( 2011 ) , including Pelican Hill , in Newport Coast , California and Studio De La Grand Armee in Paris , France . The song was mixed by Manny Marroquin while Erik Madrid and Chris Galland served as mixing assistants . The vocal production of " Do Ya Thang " was completed by Kuk Harrell and assisted by Jennifer Rosales . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Do Ya Thang " is an R & B song with prominent influences of music from the 1980s . The song has a length of 3 minutes and 44 seconds . Shaun Kitchener of <unk> described the song as a " hip hop flavoured pop treat " . " Do Ya Thang " uses " catchy " drum breaks , synths , " funky " and " subtle " hook that , according Gigwise 's Edward Keeble , can be found on Rihanna 's 2007 single " Umbrella " ( Good Girl Gone Bad , 2007 ) , which was also co @-@ written by Nash . Keeble further called the song a " modern classic " . Emily Exton of Popdust noted the song 's resemblance with the album 's second single " You da One " , " recorded over a loud ' 80s synth " . 
 Lyrically , " Do Ya Thang " is a complimentary love song that contains " curse " words and a repetitive chorus . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy wrote that the song has a simple message evident in the lyrics , " At the end of the day you are who you are and I love you that way . " Maz Halima of Flavour Magazine described the track as a " serene song " . " Do Ya Thang " contains the line " And you my lover / But I love you like a brother " which , according to Popdust 's Exton , is reminiscent of actress Angelina Jolie and her brother James Haven at the Oscars . Exton further explained that the song is full with vague descriptions of Rihanna 's feelings , which result as " hollow " declaration that she is never going away . While singing the lines " Middle of the Day / Give Me What I want / It feels so special / It feels so good " she admits " liking afternoon delights " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 According to Maz Hallima of Flavour Magazine , " Do Ya Thang " has a very " teenager @-@ ish vibe " which according to her works well , however she is aware why Rihanna kept it as a bonus track of the album . Sam Lansky of MTV Buzzworthy wrote that the song " can 't be beat for sheer likability " . He further noted that Rihanna is stepping back from her " hypersexual persona to sing a more earnest , good @-@ natured tune " . Michael Jepson of The Fourth State concluded that " Do Ya Thang " , together with " Cockiness ( Love It ) " and " Roc Me Out " , are the top candidates from Talk That Talk that can be labeled as the album 's " highlights " . According to Jepson , all three songs are " blatantly raunchy " and feel like a follow up to Rihanna 's 2011 single " S & M " ( Loud , 2011 ) . Shaun Kitchener of <unk> concluded that Rihanna " takes a breather for ' Do Ya Thang ' , and we get a rare glimpse of Sweet Loving Rihanna instead . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Pelican Hill , Newport Coast , California ; Studio De La Grand Armee , Paris , France 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Talk That Talk , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Talk That Talk , due to digital downloads " Do Ya Thang " charted on the singles charts in South Korea and the United Kingdom . It debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number 80 on November 26 , 2011 , with sales of 6 @,@ 288 digital copies . In the United Kingdom , " Do Ya Thang " debuted at number 38 on the UK R & B Chart on November 27 , 2011 . The song also debuted at number 136 on the UK Singles Chart for the chart issue dated December 3 , 2011 . 
 = Alabama State Route 73 = 
 State Route 73 , also known as SR @-@ 73 , is a numbered state highway in Alabama . The route runs 11 @.@ 219 miles ( 18 @.@ 055 km ) from SR @-@ 71 in Higdon north to the Tennessee border , where it becomes State Route 377 ( SR @-@ 377 ) . SR @-@ 73 passes through rural areas in eastern Jackson County , serving the community of Bryant . 
 The SR @-@ 73 designation was first used for present @-@ day CR @-@ 29 between Piedmont in Calhoun County and Forney in Cherokee County , existing in the 1930s and 1940s . In the 1950s , SR @-@ 207 was briefly assigned to the road between Higdon and Bryant before it received the SR @-@ 73 designation . SR @-@ 73 was extended in the 1980s north to the Tennessee state line to connect to SR @-@ 377 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR @-@ 73 begins at an intersection with SR @-@ 71 in the community of Higdon , Alabama , heading north on a two @-@ lane undivided road . The route heads through rural areas of farms and woods with some homes , curving to the northwest . The road heads north again as it crosses under several power lines radiating from the Widows Creek Power Plant along the Tennessee River . SR @-@ 73 continues northeast past homes and businesses in the Bryant , Alabama area on top of Sand Mountain prior to going north through more forested areas with a few rural homes . The route passes through a mix of farm and woodland before it turns east into forests . SR @-@ 73 makes a sharp curve north again to traverse Sand Mountain as it comes to the Tennessee border . At this point , the road continues into Tennessee as SR @-@ 377 , which ascends Sand Mountain to end at SR @-@ 156 , east of South Pittsburg , Tennessee . 
 = = History = = 
 The SR @-@ 73 designation was first assigned in 1934 to an unimproved road connecting SR @-@ 74 in Piedmont and SR @-@ 62 in Forney , passing through Spring Garden and Rock Run , Alabama . By 1948 , this road was removed from the state highway system , becoming CR 29 in Calhoun and Cherokee counties by 1955 . What would become the current SR @-@ 73 south of Bryant became a part of SR @-@ 207 by 1955 ; at this time , the portion of road was a paved highway . SR @-@ 207 was redesignated SR @-@ 73 by 1957 . By 1987 , SR @-@ 73 was extended north from Bryant to the Tennessee border . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Jackson County . 
 = The End of the Road = 
 The End of the Road is the second novel by American writer John Barth , published first in 1958 , and then in a revised edition in 1967 . The irony @-@ laden black comedy 's protagonist Jacob Horner suffers from a nihilistic paralysis he calls " cosmopsis " — an inability to choose a course of action from all possibilities . As part of a schedule of unorthodox therapies , Horner 's nameless Doctor has him take a teaching job at a local teachers ' college . There Horner befriends the super @-@ rational Joe Morgan and his wife Rennie . The trio become entangled in a love triangle , with tragic results . The story deals with issues controversial at the time , such as sexuality , racial segregation , and abortion . 
 Barth and his critics often pair the novel with its predecessor , The Floating Opera ( 1956 ) ; both were written in 1955 , and are available together in a one @-@ volume edition . Both are philosophical novels ; The End of the Road continues with the conclusions about absolute values made by the protagonist of The Floating Opera , and takes these ideas " to the end of the road " . Barth wrote both novels in a realistic mode , in contrast to Barth 's better @-@ known metafictional , fabulist , and postmodern works from the 1960s and later , such as Lost in the Funhouse ( 1968 ) and LETTERS ( 1979 ) . 
 Critics have been divided over whether Barth identified with the book 's protagonist , who retreats from emotion and human relations through language and intellectual analysis ; Jake prefers to keep even his sexual relations impersonal . Language is presented as a distortion of experience , yet nevertheless unavoidable . In his later novels Barth <unk> the artifice in his writing , beginning with The Sot @-@ Weed Factor ( 1960 ) , a work Barth conceived as the last of a " loose trilogy of novels " . 
 A 1970 film loosely based on the novel stars James Earl Jones , Stacy Keach and Harris Yulin in their earliest feature roles . It was rated X , in part because of a graphic abortion scene . 
 = = Publishing history = = 
 While teaching at Penn State , Barth embarked on a cycle of 100 stories he called Dorchester Tales ; he abandoned it halfway through to begin his first two published novels . He completed both The Floating Opera and The End of the Road in 1955 . Appleton @-@ Century @-@ Crofts published The Floating Opera in 1956 , but sales were not strong enough to encourage the publisher to pick up Barth 's next offering , which was felt to be too similar to the first book . Doubleday published The End of the Road in 1958 ; it received only marginally more attention than The Floating Opera . A revised edition in 1967 restored material cut from the first edition , and had a new introduction by Barth . Anchor Books collected these two novels in a single @-@ volume edition in 1988 ; in his foreword to it Barth states he originally titled the book What To Do Until the Doctor Comes , but Doubleday editor Edward <unk> persuaded him to change it , as he " feared the novel would be mistaken for a treatise on first aid " . 
 = = Background = = 
 The story narrates the first @-@ person confession Jacob Horner in the form of a therapeutic psychodrama . Horner writes on October 4 , 1955 , of events in 1951 – 53 . 
 Barth spent most of his adult life teaching at universities . As in many of Barth 's novels , the setting and characters of The End of the Road have an academic background ; most of the story takes place on a university campus . The novel tackles controversial contemporary issues such as abortion ( which had yet to achieve wide social acceptance ) and racial segregation . 
 The End of the Road can be viewed with The Floating Opera ( 1956 ) as forming the early , existentialist or nihilist phase of Barth 's writing career . This phase was realistic in a modernist sense ; it lacked the fantastic elements that manifested themselves in Barth 's experimental phase that began with The Sot @-@ Weed Factor ( 1960 ) . Both novels , while displaying a distinctive style , followed conventions readers expected from a novel , and were part of a realist trend in American novels during the 1940s and 1950s . As The Floating Opera closes , its protagonist , Todd Andrews , concludes that life has no absolute values but that there are relative values that are " no less ' real ' , for ... being relative " . Barth has said he wrote The End of the Road to refute this worldview by carrying " all non @-@ mystical value @-@ thinking to the end of the road " , and that the second novel was a " nihilistic tragedy " paired with the " nihilistic comedy " of the first . Barth also sees the book as the second of a " loose trilogy of novels " that concludes with The Sot @-@ Weed Factor , after which he embarked on the fabulist Giles Goat @-@ Boy ( 1966 ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a sense , I am Jacob Horner . 
 Jacob " Jake " Horner suffers from " cosmopsis " — an inability to choose from among all possible choices he can imagine . Having abandoned his graduate studies at Johns Hopkins University , he becomes completely paralyzed in the Pennsylvania Railroad Station in Baltimore just after his 28th birthday , An unnamed African @-@ American doctor who claims to specialize in such conditions takes him under his care at his private therapy center , the Remobilization Farm . 
 As part of his schedule of therapies , Jake takes a job teaching at Wicomico State Teachers College , where he becomes friends with history teacher Joe Morgan and his wife Rennie . Joe and Jake enjoy intellectual sparring in a " duel of articulations " . The philosophical Morgans have a marriage in which everything must be articulated , and in which " the parties involved are able to take each other seriously " — and to Joe " seriously " means sometimes beating his wife . The Doctor prescribes Jake " <unk> " , in which he is to read Sartre and to assign himself " masks " to abolish the ego , inducing action through the adoption of symbolic roles . Jake seeks out a woman , Peggy Rankin , whom he had earlier picked up ; when she rebuffs him , he succeeds in seducing again her by striking her , in imitation of Joe . 
 While Joe busies himself with his Ph.D. dissertation , he encourages Rennie to teach Jake horseback riding . During their rides , Rennie and Jake talk at length about the Morgans ' unusual relationship . After returning from one such outing , Jake encourages a resistant Rennie to spy on her husband . She is convinced that " real people " like Joe are not " any different when they are alone " ; such people have " [ n ] o mask . What you see of them is authentic . " What Rennie sees of Joe while spying disorients her and her vision of him — he masturbates , picks his nose , makes faces , and sputters gibberish syllables to himself . 
 Jake and Rennie commit adultery ; when Joe discovers it , he insists they maintain the affair , in an effort to discover the reasons for his wife 's unfaithfulness . Rennie discovers she is pregnant , but cannot be sure whether Joe or Jake is the father . The Morgans visit Jake , Joe with Colt .45 in hand . Rennie insists on having an abortion , or she will commit suicide . Under an assumed name , Jake hunts for an abortionist ; when Peggy refuses to help him find one , he strikes her . Unable to find a physician who will agree to the procedure , Jake turns to the Doctor . Rennie dies from the botched abortion . His relativist " cosmopsis " confirmed , Jake reverts to his paralysis . Two years later , as part of his <unk> on the relocated Remobilization Farm , he writes of his Wicomico experience . 
 = = Themes and motifs = = 
 The End of the Road is rich in recurring metaphor . In the opening chapter , while in the Doctor 's Progress and Advice Room , Jake finds himself in the awkward position of having to choose the manner in which he will sit , with his choices restricted . Jake notes that Rennie has made the same sort of choice @-@ that @-@ is @-@ not @-@ a @-@ choice by remaining married to Joe , and that Joe , in opposition to his philosophies , has to make a " choice " about Rennie 's adultery and pregnancy . 
 On his mantel Jake keeps a bust of Laocoön sculpted by a dead uncle . As Laocoön was bound by serpents , Jake feels himself bound into inaction " by the serpents Knowledge and Imagination , which ... no longer tempt but annihilate " . This is reflected in Laocoön 's grimace , which Jake frequently consults and interprets according to his mood — with admiration , frustration , or indifference . After the disaster of Rennie 's abortion , Jake tells the bust , " We 've come too far " , and abandons it along with his job , car and apartment . 
 Barth coined the term " cosmopsis " in The End of the Road for a sense of seeing and comprehending all available paths of action and the futility of choosing among them . Jake expands on Jean @-@ Paul Sartre 's famous existentialist line " existence precedes essence " , saying " existence not only precedes essence : in the case of human beings it rather defies essence . " The Doctor tells Jake , " Choosing is existence : to the extent that you don 't choose , you don 't exist . " To cope with inability to make decisions , the Doctor prescribes three therapies : the arbitrary principles of <unk> ( " If the alternatives are side by side , choose the one on the left " ) , <unk> ( " if they 're consecutive in time , choose the earlier " ) and <unk> Priority ( " choose the alternative whose name begins with the earlier letter of the alphabet " ) . 
 The Doctor prescribes " <unk> " to move Jake beyond his paralysis by giving him arbitrary decision @-@ making principles and having him take on identities by wearing " masks " — assuming roles . He tells Jake " fiction isn 't a lie at all , but a true representation of the distortion that everyone makes of life " . These distortions — an approach Jake calls " <unk> " — people employ to with the arbitrary conditions life thrusts upon them . According to Jake , it is the imagination that enables one to cope , and its lack in the Morgans was to lead to their destruction . 
 Both Jake and Joe use their intellects to distance themselves from their emotions ; both see others as specimens to be observed rather than as peers to relate to . Only when overcome with emotion does Jake briefly shed his self @-@ consciousness , which he makes sure to quickly regain . 
 Jake is uncomfortable " with women who took their sexual transports too seriously " , and prefers his sexual relations to be impersonal ; the Doctor recommends he take up masturbation and avoid the complications of marriage or girlfriends . Jake 's attitude toward sex is paralleled by his impersonal attitude to human relations in general . 
 Horse symbols permeate the text . Rennie , an accomplished rider , and her husband whip their heads back and forth horse @-@ like when they laugh . Joe is fond of the epithet <unk> when pointing out nonsense . His surname , Morgan , is the name of an American breed of horse . Joe 's consistent sureness , his " rationality and absence of ' craft or guile ' " , according to Thomas Schaub , seem to echo the <unk> , the race of rational horses in Jonathan Swift 's Gulliver 's Travels . 
 The novel 's opening line recalls the " Call me Ishmael " opening of Herman Melville 's Moby @-@ Dick . Choices of wording such as " inscrutable " and " wrinkled brow " appear to Thomas H. Schaub to be deliberate echoes from Melville 's novel . 
 = = Style = = 
 A virtuoso stylist , Barth concerns himself with deflating the pretensions of his characters . He displays an attitude toward sexuality that is free from taboo . Irony and black comedy are plentiful , but come to a sudden emotional halt with the crisis in the abortion room . 
 The End of the Road is in a realistic style that may come as a surprise to those familiar only with Barth 's later books . The narrator avoids naturalistic descriptions of his surroundings , and most other details , and describes the physical aspects of life ( especially of women ) with disgust or contempt . He indulges in occasional bursts of eloquence : " A turning down of dinner damped , in ways subtle past knowing , manic keys on the flute of me , least pressed of all , which for a moment had <unk> me rarely " . The realism is not a conventional everyday realism : the situations themselves are fantastic , though plausible . 
 Naturalism makes a significant appearance in the 12th chapter , in which Jake witnesses Rennie 's botched abortion and finds himself unable to conquer his emotions with reason . Jac Tharpe saw this change of style as evidence that the chapter had originated as a separate story that was integrated into the novel ; Charles B. Harris sees the " sudden use of naturalistic details " as taking on an " integral function " in the book , one prepared by the previous chapter with the subtle introduction of some passing naturalistic detail . 
 Though he shows concern for verisimilitude — particularly in the immediacy of the abortion scene — Barth at times draws attention to the artifice of the writing . Jake recounts long conversations with Rennie or Joe that he points out never occurred as written — he has ordered and condensed their content . Jake also expresses a belief that was to manifest itself in Barth 's later approach to writing : " To turn experience into speech , that is , to classify , to conceptualize , to <unk> , to <unk> it — is always a betrayal of it , a falsification of it " . 
 = = Primary characters = = 
 Jacob " Jake " Horner 
 Constantly aware of the many possibilities in life , Jake is paralyzed by his inability to choose from among them . In his own words , he is able " to maintain with perfect <unk> contradictory , or at least polarized , opinions at once on a given subject " . On occasion Jake finds himself in an empty mental state , free of mood , personality , or motivation ; he calls these times " <unk> " , after a dream he had in which attempts to find the weather forecast lead him to a meteorologist who informs him that the forecast is " no weather " . He fills the void of his <unk> by occupying himself with rocking in his chair or singing the " Pepsi @-@ Cola hits the spot " advertising jingle to himself . Completely arbitrary , Horner seems the epitome of unreason to Joe Morgan 's ultra @-@ rationality , though Rennie comments that he and Joe " work from a lot of the same rational premises " . He is scrupulously attentive to details , recording the possible positions of his arms and legs in the Progress and Advice Room ; making note of who was on top first , or on which shoulder he was bitten , and which brand of condoms were used in his affair with Rennie ; even parsing the grammar of sentences for the reader . He submits even his emotions to the ordering processes of reason . The name " Jake Horner " is reminiscent of the rationalizing Little Jack Horner , as well as of the horns of a cuckold . 
 Joe Morgan 
 Joe is a history teacher and <unk> . He is consistent , decisive , rational , and lacking " craft or guile " , and thus feels entirely certain of everything . An existentialist , he believes he has rid himself of arbitrary values and arrived at his essence . He believes that if something exists , it can be articulated . He recognizes the relativism of his value system , and that an ultimate system of values cannot be reached through logic . He maintains that " the most a man can ever do is be right from his point of view ... He 's got to expect conflict from people or institutions who are also right from their points of view , but whose points of view are different from his . " 
 Joe 's definition of marriage requires that " the parties involved be able to take each other seriously " . Despite Jake 's making fun of Rennie , he likes Jake for appearing to take her seriously , as he believes few men take women seriously . He is voyeuristic in the rationalized probing of his wife for the minute details of her ongoing affair with Jake . 
 Rennie Morgan 
 Rennie is married to Joe , whom she looks up to . Joe has twice knocked her out in the past . Jake describes her as a " clumsy animal " . Her birth name is Renée , a name signifying rebirth , and her maiden name was MacMahon — " reborn son of man " , perhaps signifying rebirth in Joe 's image , according to Thomas Schaub . Both Joe and Jake observe and treat her like a patient . 
 The Doctor 
 Described by Jake as " bald , dark @-@ eyed , and dignified " , the unnamed , elderly African @-@ American Doctor specializes in immobility and paralysis at his Remobilization Farm in Vineland , New Jersey . He is an existential ultra @-@ pragmatist and insists Jake rely on empirical facts rather than logic in making decisions , and echoes Wittgenstein 's proposition from Tractatus <unk> @-@ <unk> , " The world is everything that is the case " <unk> of racial segregation that would not end until 1954 , he is unable to buy himself a cup of coffee at the bus station . He works outside of the law , and is unable to give Rennie an abortion in the safety of a hospital . 
 Peggy Rankin 
 Rankin is Jake 's " Forty @-@ Year @-@ Old @-@ Pickup " , a local schoolteacher Jake has picked up like " a bird who perches on the muzzle of [ his ] gun " . in nearby Ocean City . In imitation of Joe , Jake hits her , once to woo her , the other time when she will not help him find an abortionist . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 A 1958 Time magazine review called The End of the Road " that rarity of U.S. letters — a true novel of ideas " . In the Chicago Review in 1959 , reviewer David Kerner called it an " ideological farce " , a genre he considered a " special type " with few contemporary examples . George Bluestone in 1960 used the term " serious farce " , calling it an emerging new genre . Kerner praised Barth 's " coherence of ... allegory " , " depth of ... feeling for ideology " , and " excellence of intention " , but argues that the work 's realistic style is at odds with the farcical , two @-@ dimensional characters , who lack a " human and social setting " to give them roundedness and credibility . To Thomas LeClair in 1973 , the novel was Barth 's " purest presentation of the comedy of intellectual abstraction " . 
 As part of a cast that includes characters from each of Barth 's first six books the characters Jake and Joe resurface in Barth 's 1979 novel LETTERS on the Doctor 's Remobilization Farm , relocated to Fort Erie , Ontario . The End of the Road is presented in that book as a discarded manuscript Jake had titled What I Did Until the Doctor Came . Barth 's fictitious version of himself in LETTERS uses the manuscript as the basis for The End of the Road ; decades later he writes to Jake of his appropriation , and of the film based on the book , calling the latter " as false to the novel as was the novel to your Account and your Account to the actual Horner @-@ Morgan @-@ Morgan triangle " . 
 Jonathan Lethem wrote of the influence The End of the Road had on his novel As She <unk> Across the Table ( 1997 ) , which also involves a love triangle in an academic setting . In Lethem 's novel , the narrator , in a position similar to Joe Morgan 's , experiences the dilemma of " losing a woman to a rival who " , like Jake Horner , " refuses to provide any fixed identity to hate , compete with , or understand " . 
 = = = Critical views = = = 
 As The Floating Opera and The End of the Road make little display of the metafictional formal prowess of Barth 's later works , critics often overlook them . Some consider these first two novels little more than apprentice works , while others see them in light of the later works , removed from their historical and social context . 
 Critics have been divided on whether Barth identified with the narrator 's beliefs ; this appeared probable to John Gardner , Richard W. Noland , and Tony Tanner , while Beverly Gross and Campbell Tatham believed the tragic ending demonstrates the contrary . Philosopher Robert C. Solomon included excerpts from the book in a collection on existentialism . Gardner objected to the book 's absurdist philosophy , " vulgarities of style " , and a " touch of life @-@ hate which reveals itself in the author 's fascination with the ugly , the disgusting " ; Gardner found this " fascination " perplexing , as " in other respects Barth seems all sunshine and good cheer " . Christopher Conti saw a " moral @-@ satiric design " also found in Nabokov 's Lolita ( 1955 ) and Gardner 's Grendel ( 1971 ) , in which the reader is meant to see through the moral failings of the novels ' " monstrous narrators " . 
 Charles B. Harris sees Jake 's and Joe 's intellectualism as a Freudian obsessional neurosis . To Freud , he writes , the source of such a condition lies in " the chronic existence of love and hatred , both directed towards the same person and both of the highest degree of intensity " . Rennie expresses this overtly when she tells Jake , " [ I ] f I love you at all , I don 't just love you . I swear , along with it I honestly and truly hate your God @-@ damned guts ! " 
 To Dirk <unk> , the " masks " the Doctor prescribes mask the " essential emptiness " of egoless existential philosophy . He writes that , anticipating Michel Foucault 's theories of the self in The Archaeology of Knowledge ( 1974 ) , all the characters wear self @-@ defining masks that they at some point let slip , and that Jake 's paralysis stems from an inability to choose a role with which to participate in society . <unk> writes , " <unk> is not simply the cure for Jacob 's state of mind but the general mode of human existence . " 
 Cynthia Davis sees the women in Barth 's early works as lacking the choice @-@ making , identity @-@ forming dynamism of the men ; Rennie has no viewpoint of her own , only ones formed by Joe or Jake . Davis states , " Only as bodies do Barth 's women defy male control : in sex , in pregnancy , in death . " To Judith Wilt , Rennie appears to assert herself in a seeming determination to die on the abortion table , cutting herself with the <unk> and inhaling her own vomit ; there is no evidence in the book beyond her own assertion that Rennie had ever been pregnant . Barth returned to the subject of abortion in Sabbatical in 1982 . 
 To literary theorist Michael <unk> , Barth 's first two novels confront a logical positivist " separation of facts and values " common in postwar American fiction . The End of the Road displays " aesthetic resistance to the philosophical realism it desires results in a state of narrative , logical , affective , and ethical exhaustion at the end of the book " . The narrative conflict echoes an ethical conflict between the characters ' value systems that Joe insists is inevitable . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The End of the Road is the only work of Barth 's to have been adapted to film . Director Aram Avakian 's loose adaptation End of the Road ( 1970 ) stars James Earl Jones , Stacy Keach and Harris Yulin in their earliest feature roles . Graphic scenes earned the film an X rating , such as those of the botched abortion and of what Barth calls a " man rapes chicken " scene not found in the book . Barth and critics widely panned the movie ; Barth wrote disdainfully about it in the introduction to the 1988 single @-@ volume edition of The Floating Opera and The End of the Road . Academics Ken Pellow and Rita Hug opined that the linguistic , literary and philosophical aspects of the book made it difficult to adapt ; they argued that Jake Horner 's frequent speaking to the reader is key to the book 's effectiveness but does not lend itself to film . 
 Director Paul Edwards made a stage adaptation of the novel for <unk> Productions in 1993 , with John Mozes as Jake , Kate Fry as Rennie , and Patrick McNulty as Joe . Edwards makes Jake 's immobility central to the play ; it opens with him seated and writing , and closes with him doing the same until the audience has left . The production won a Joseph Jefferson Award in 1993 . 
 = = = = = Academic journals = = = = = 
 = = = = = Books = = = = = 
 = = = = = Newspapers = = = = = 
 = = = = = Web = = = = = 
 = William of Wrotham = 
 William of Wrotham or William de Wrotham ( died c . 1217 ) was a medieval English royal administrator and clergyman . Although a late 13th @-@ century source says that William held a royal office under King Henry II of England ( reigned 1154 – 1189 ) , the first contemporary reference to William is in 1197 , when he became responsible among other things for the royal tin mines . He also held ecclesiastical office , eventually becoming Archdeacon of Taunton , and served King John of England as an administrator of ecclesiastical lands and a collector of taxes . 
 William 's main administrative work was naval . He was in charge of the royal fleet in the south of England in 1205 , and was one of those responsible for the development of Portsmouth as a naval dockyard . He continued to be involved in naval matters until 1214 or later , but by 1215 he had joined the First Barons ' War against John . After John 's death in 1216 , William returned to the royalist cause . He probably died in late 1217 . Known to a contemporary chronicler as one of John 's " evil advisers " , William is said by modern historians to have had a " special responsibility for ports , customs , and the navy " , and was " keeper of ports " , a forerunner of the office of First Lord of the Admiralty . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Little is known of William 's background or family , except that his father Godwin held land in Shipbourne , near Wrotham in Kent , perhaps as a vassal of the Archbishops of Canterbury . William 's brother Richard was named as William 's deputy in 1207 . 
 According to late 13th @-@ century documents , the Hundred Rolls , King Henry II gave William the office of steward of Exmoor , and lands at North Petherton , Somerset . William was the prebend of St Decumans in the cathedral chapter of Bath Cathedral by 9 May 1204 . He claimed to have held the office since 1194 during a later dispute with Savaric fitzGeldewin , the Bishop of Bath and another canon of the cathedral , Roger <unk> , who claimed the prebend . By 23 December 1205 , William had secured a papal judgement against Roger . 
 William may have owed his advancement in royal service to Geoffrey fitzPeter , a royal judge . In 1197 he granted William a manor at Sutton @-@ at @-@ Hone , Kent , which later was supposed to become a hospital , but instead eventually became a preceptory for the Knights Hospitaller . From 1197 William was responsible for the collection of revenues from Geoffrey 's lands at Lydford , Devon , and held the office of chief forester of Somerset ; it is unclear to whom he owed that position . 
 = = Royal service = = 
 In 1197 , Hubert Walter , who was Archbishop of Canterbury and Justiciar , appointed William to the administration of the royal stannaries , or tin mines , and in 1198 William was placed in charge of tin production , an office later known as the Lord Warden of the Stannaries . Under his control the mines became much more lucrative for the king , and accounted for a total of £ 1100 in William 's first year of administration . As part of his administrative work he became the first warden of Lydford Castle after it was constructed in the 1190s . In 1199 he was involved in a dispute over the stannaries with another official , Hugh Bardulf , temporarily losing control of them – along with his office as sheriff – in 1200 . The reason for the loss of these offices is uncertain . After restoration to office , he remained as Lord Warden of the Stannaries until 1215 . 
 In 1198 and 1199 , William was Sheriff of Devon and Sheriff of Cornwall , along with another royal servant , and served as a royal justice . In 1200 he was recorded as a receiver of the carucage , a tax on land , in the Pipe roll ; whether this meant that he was a local or a national collector of the tax is unclear . By 12 September 1204 , William was Archdeacon of Taunton in the Diocese of Bath , and he witnessed the election of Jocelin of Wells as the new bishop of the diocese . He was jointly placed in charge of the mints of London and Canterbury in 1205 , along with Reginald de Cornhill , with whom he also shared the collection of the tax of a fifteenth on merchants , a post the two had held since 1202 . In May 1205 William , along with de Cornhill , was given custody of one of three dies for the mint at Chichester ; in July the king gave William 's custody to Simon of Wells , the Bishop of Chichester . William was one of the officials in charge of the collection of a tax of a thirteenth in 1207 . 
 William was also placed in charge of vacant ecclesiastical offices , collecting their revenues for the king . He performed this office for the Diocese of Worcester around 1200 , the Diocese of Winchester in 1204 , for Glastonbury Abbey in 1205 , and for Whitby Abbey in 1206 and 1209 . From his actions it can be assumed that Wrotham was a member of the royal household , probably working in the wardrobe . 
 = = Naval administration = = 
 William 's main administrative work concerned the navy . In 1204 he , de Cornhill , and William of Furnell were placed in charge of granting wool export licences . William of Wrotham was also one of the officials charged with supervising the ships dispatched to the coasts in 1204 , after the loss of Normandy exposed England to invasion by the French . In 1205 he was again one of the keepers of the royal fleet along the south coast . William was in charge of the 17 ships based in Romney , Rye , Shoreham , Southampton , Winchelsea , and Exeter , while the rest of the fleet came under Cornhill 's control . In the same year , he was also in charge of naval spending for the attempted invasion of France , which in June alone totalled over 470 pounds . William surrendered custody of Taunton Castle to Peter de <unk> in July and was in charge of purchasing the royal wine in August . No further naval duties are recorded until November , when along with Cornhill he was responsible for assessing the ports . 
 In 1206 William was in charge of the naval forces in the Cinque Ports and commanded the fleet that invaded Poitou . Whether he accompanied the fleet or stayed in England after it sailed is unclear ; according to two historians – F. W. Brooks and R. W. Powell – it is more likely he stayed . From 1206 until 1215 he was effectively commander of King John 's navy , and helped to develop Portsmouth as a royal dockyard . In 1208 William was put in charge of ensuring that no ships sailed without royal permission . That year he also oversaw the naval preparations made by the Cinque Ports . The purpose of these preparations is unknown ; the Annals of Dunstable ascribe to John a desire to oppress the Cinque Ports . During May 1208 a royal order was issued that William 's deputies in all the seaports should seize any ships in the ports that were from foreign countries , excluding Denmark , Norway and other countries that did not oppose John 's diplomatic efforts . A gap in the governmental records does not allow a detailed view of William 's activities for the next years , until 1212 , when William is shown performing many of the same duties as earlier . He was in charge of repair of some ships and the construction of a large new ship , named the <unk> , owned by the king . William was also responsible for impressing privately owned merchant ships into royal service . These ships were used in the naval action of the Battle of Damme at <unk> in 1213 , when a fleet under William Longespee , the Earl of Salisbury , destroyed a substantial French naval force and sacked the town of Damme . 
 In late 1213 William was directing the efforts of the seaports of south @-@ western England and the Cinque Ports in naval affairs . He was also responsible for the setting up of a supply depot for the navy in June 1213 , for which he received supplies from the diocese of Chichester . In 1214 William had custody of some royal prisoners . The same year , the king ordered him to return a merchant ship if he had indeed seized it from its owner , Joscelin de Hampton . Also in 1214 , William co @-@ founded the hospital of Domus Dei in Portsmouth with Peter des Roches , the Bishop of Winchester . The foundation was confirmed by the king in October 1214 . 
 John rewarded William for his service with churches in Sheppey and East Malling , which were granted in 1207 , and the right to oversee the royal forests in Cornwall and Devon . Other grants included lands in Dartford and Sutton @-@ at @-@ Hone that had escheated to the crown , lands in Westminster and a prebend in the royal ecclesiastical foundation at Hastings . 
 = = Later years and legacy = = 
 During John 's reign , Pope Innocent III placed an interdict on England , forbidding public celebration of sacred rites in English churches . William supported John , and remained in England . The medieval chronicler Roger of Wendover named William as one of John 's " evil advisers " , or " most wicked counsellors " . Modern historians argue that Roger 's account of John 's reign , while containing some truth , was written to defame men who were prominent in the early years of King Henry III , John 's son who had succeeded his father in October 1216 . According to Nicholas Vincent , while Roger 's account of the exactions and crimes of the members of his list of evil advisers certainly had a strong basis of truth , it was also greatly exaggerated . W. L. Warren agrees and points out that many of the details of Roger 's accounts that can be checked with other records are wrong , making the other parts of his stories suspect . 
 In 1215 William joined the baronial rebellion against John , and lost his naval offices , the royal forester 's office for Somerset , and custody of Lydford Castle . In May 1216 the king offered William a safe conduct , which noted that William had fled overseas . The letters were witnessed by Peter des Roches . In mid @-@ 1217 , he rejoined the royalist cause , returning to the side of Henry III . This action regained him some of his lost lands . 
 William last appeared in documents on 25 July 1217 and was dead by 16 February 1218 , probably before 2 December 1217 , when someone else is mentioned as archdeacon . On 16 February 1218 , John Marshall became the guardian of Richard , William 's nephew and heir , who was the son of William 's brother Richard . 
 William has been described as having a " special responsibility for ports , customs , and the navy " by the historian Robert Bartlett . He is usually given the title of " keeper of ports " or " keeper of galleys " , which Ralph Turner equates with being First Lord of the Admiralty in later history . Sometimes this would be given as " custos <unk> maris " in Latin , or " keeper of the seaports " . At other times he was titled " keeper of the king 's ships " . Bartlett also called William " one of the king 's most important administrators " . Charles Young said that William 's service to King John was a " distinguished administrative career " , and J. E. A. Joliffe called William one of the " greatest of the king 's clerks " . 
 = Guitar Solos = 
 Guitar Solos is the debut solo album of English guitarist , composer and improviser Fred Frith . It was recorded while Frith was still a member of the English experimental rock group Henry Cow and was released in the United Kingdom on LP record by Caroline Records in October 1974 . The album comprises eight tracks of unaccompanied and improvised experimental rock music played on prepared guitars by Frith without any overdubbing . 
 Guitar Solos was voted one of the best albums of 1974 by NME critics . AllMusic called it a landmark album because of its innovative and experimental approach to guitar playing . It also attracted the attention of Brian Eno , resulting in Frith 's playing guitar on two of Eno 's albums , and spawned two follow @-@ up albums , Guitar Solos 2 ( 1976 ) and Guitar Solos 3 ( 1979 ) . Guitar Solos was remastered and released on CD on Frith 's own record label , Fred Records in 2002 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fred Frith was a classically @-@ trained violinist who turned to playing blues guitar while still at school . In 1967 he went to Cambridge University where he and fellow student , Tim Hodgkinson formed Henry Cow . While at University , Frith read John Cage 's Silence : Lectures and Writings , which changed his attitude to music completely . He realised that " sound , in and of itself , can be as important as [ ... ] melody and harmony and rhythm . " This changed his approach to the guitar , " just to see what I could get out of it " and initiated a long period of experimentation that continued throughout Frith 's musical career . 
 While the music of Henry Cow was highly orchestrated and structured , Frith also began to experiment with unstructured music , using prepared instruments and chance composition . In June 1974 , after the release of Henry Cow 's second album , Virgin Records ( Henry Cow 's record label ) commissioned a solo record from Frith . They were impressed with his musical ability and gave him free rein to record whatever he wanted . In a 2001 radio interview , Frith said he used the opportunity as a challenge : " I said to myself [ ... ] in two weeks time I 'm going to go into the studio and I have no idea what I 'm going to do and I 'm going to kind of reinvent the instrument for myself . " Frith spent four days in July 1974 recording at the Kaleidophon Studios in London , and the resulting experimentation and the process of <unk> and pressure led to the " radical approach to the guitar " on the album . In October 1974 , Virgin released the album as Guitar Solos on their budget label , Caroline Records . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Frith recorded the album at David <unk> 's Kaleidophon Studios in London on 11 – 13 and 15 July 1974 , where he played a modified 1936 Gibson K @-@ 11 . He added an extra pickup over the strings at the nut , enabling him to amplify sound from both sides of the fretted note . He then split the fretboard in two with a capo , effectively giving him two guitars , each amplified separately that he could play independently with each hand . To split the sounds further he attached alligator clips at various positions on the strings . The net result was a guitar with multiple sound sources that could be channelled to a mixer and distributed across the stereo soundscape . 
 The album was recorded in four days without any overdubbing . All the pieces were improvised , some completely , some to a roughly preconceived idea , and sound as they were played , except for " No Birds " , which was recorded in two parts , and " Not Forgotten " , from which two notes were removed . The only sounds not produced ' naturally ' by guitar are those of a fuzzbox used on " Out of Their Heads ( On <unk> ) " , " Heat c / w Moment " and " No Birds " , an echo delay used on " No Birds " , and ambient noise from Frith 's breath and feet on " Heat c / w Moment " . 
 On the longest track on the album , " No Birds " , Frith played on two prepared guitars simultaneously , creating the timbre and range of an orchestra . He laid the two guitars flat on a table , neck to neck with the bodies of the guitars at opposite ends and the necks parallel to each other . He tuned the strings on both guitars to one note , and because they were stereo guitars with nut pickups , he had six separate sound sources coming from each guitar . Using volume pedals on some of the sound sources , he filtered sounds in and out of the mix without doing anything on the guitars . 
 = = Reception and influence = = 
 Guitar Solos was voted one of the best albums of 1974 by NME critics . Sean Westergaard of AllMusic called Guitar Solos a landmark album because of its innovative and experimental approach to guitar playing . Radio journalist Chris Comer said it was a " ground breaking guitar improvisation record . " In the January 1983 edition of Down Beat magazine , Bill Milkowski wrote that on Guitar Solos " Frith unveiled a haunting collection of improvised music on prepared guitar which must have stunned listeners of the day . Even today that album stands up as uniquely innovative and undeniably daring . " The album also attracted the attention of Brian Eno who was " excited by the timbral possibilities that [ Frith had ] been discovering . " Eno asked Frith to record with him , and this resulted in Frith playing guitar on two of Eno 's albums , Before and After Science ( 1977 ) and Music for Films ( 1978 ) . 
 The table @-@ top guitar setup Frith used on this album became a standard for many of his subsequent live solo performances , including those recorded on his 1982 live double album Live in Japan . He later extended his technique to include " found objects " , which he used on his guitars to extract new sounds . 
 The success of Guitar Solos spawned two follow @-@ up albums , Guitar Solos 2 ( 1976 ) and Guitar Solos 3 ( 1979 ) , which featured Frith and other improvising guitarists , including Derek Bailey and Hans Reichel . Frith coordinated and produced these albums , and employed many of the same " unorthodox techniques " he had used on Guitar Solos . When a remastered edition of the original Guitar Solos was released 28 years later on Frith 's own Fred Records label , it attracted further praise from critics . Westergaard wrote that " Guitar Solos ' lasting legacy is that it radically redefined the way some people think about the guitar . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks written by Fred Frith . 
 = = = Original 1974 release = = = 
 = = = 1991 CD re @-@ issue bonus tracks = = = 
 = = = Track notes = = = 
 Tracks 9 – 10 were recorded on Tom Newman 's barge ( Argonaut Studio ) in January 1976 , and were originally released on the follow @-@ up album , Guitar Solos 2 ( 1976 ) . 
 Tracks 11 – 13 were recorded at <unk> , France , in October 1978 , and were originally released on the follow @-@ up album , Guitar Solos 3 ( 1979 ) . 
 Tracks 14 – 18 were recorded at Noise , New York City , in September 1988 , and were previously unreleased . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Fred Frith – prepared guitars 
 = = = Production = = = 
 David <unk> – recording engineer 
 Ray Smith – album sleeve photography and design 
 = = CD re @-@ issues = = 
 In 1991 RecRec Music ( Switzerland ) and East Side Digital ( United States ) re @-@ issued Guitar Solos on CD comprising all the tracks from the original Guitar Solos LP , plus the Fred Frith tracks from the follow @-@ up albums , Guitar Solos 2 and Guitar Solos 3 , along with five previously unreleased tracks by Frith . 
 In 2002 Fred Records issued a remastered version of the original Guitar Solos LP with no extra tracks . 
 = German occupation of Luxembourg during World War I = 
 The German occupation of Luxembourg in World War I was the first of two military occupations of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg by Germany in the twentieth century . From August 1914 until the end of World War I on 11 November 1918 , Luxembourg was under full occupation by the German Empire . The German government justified the occupation by citing the need to support their armies in neighbouring France , although many Luxembourgers , contemporary and present , have interpreted German actions otherwise . 
 During this period , Luxembourg was allowed to retain its own government and political system , but all proceedings were overshadowed by the German army 's presence . Despite the overbearing distraction of the occupation , the Luxembourgish people attempted to lead their lives as normally as possible . The political parties attempted to focus on other matters , such as the economy , education , and constitutional reform . 
 The domestic political environment was further complicated by the death of Paul Eyschen , who had been Prime Minister for 27 years . With his death came a string of short @-@ lived governments , culminating in rebellion , and constitutional turmoil after the withdrawal of German soldiers . 
 = = Background = = 
 Since the 1867 Treaty of London , Luxembourg had been an explicitly neutral state . The Luxembourg Crisis had seen Prussia thwart France 's attempt to purchase the Grand Duchy from the Netherlands . Luxembourg 's neutrality was accepted by Prussia 's then @-@ Chancellor , Otto von Bismarck , who boasted , " In exchange for the fortress of Luxembourg , we have been compensated by the neutrality of the country , and a guarantee that it shall be maintained in perpetuity . " 
 In June 1914 , Archduke Franz Ferdinand , heir to the thrones of Austria @-@ Hungary , was assassinated by pan @-@ Slavic nationalists , leading to a sudden deterioration in relations between Austria @-@ Hungary and Serbia . Austria @-@ Hungary was supported by the German Empire , whilst Serbia had the backing of the Russian Empire . On 28 July , Austria @-@ Hungary attacked Serbia , which , in turn , required the mobilisation of Russia , hence of Germany , thanks to its responsibilities under the Dual Alliance . 
 Anticipating a retaliatory declaration of war from Russia 's closest western ally , France , Germany put into action the Schlieffen Plan . Under this military strategy , formulated by Count Schlieffen in 1905 , Germany would launch a lightning attack on France through the poorly defended Low Countries . This would bypass France 's main defences , arranged to the south . Germany 's army would be able to encircle Paris , force France to surrender , and turn its full attention to the Eastern Front . 
 Since the 1860s , Luxembourgers had been keenly aware of German ambition , and Luxembourg 's government was well aware of the implications of the Schlieffen Plan . In 1911 , Prime Minister Paul Eyschen commissioned an engineer to evaluate Germany 's western railroad network , particularly the likelihood that Germany would occupy Luxembourg to suit its logistical needs for a campaign in France . Moreover , given the strong ethnic and linguistic links between Luxembourg and Germany , it was feared that Germany might seek to annex Luxembourg into its empire . The government of Luxembourg aimed to avoid this by re @-@ affirming the country 's neutrality . 
 = = Invasion = = 
 On 1 August 1914 , Germany declared war on Russia . On the outbreak of war with its eastern neighbour , Germany put the Schlieffen Plan into action , and Luxembourg 's government 's fears were realised . Initially , Luxembourg was only a transit point for Albrecht von Württemberg 's Fourth Army . One of the railways from the northern Rhineland into France passed through <unk> , in the far north of Luxembourg , and Germany 's first infringement of Luxembourg 's sovereignty and neutrality was the unauthorised use of <unk> station . Eyschen protested , but could do nothing to prevent Germany 's incursion . 
 The next day , while French troops were still at a distance from the German frontier , Germany launched a full invasion . German soldiers began moving through south @-@ eastern Luxembourg , crossing the Moselle River at <unk> and <unk> , and headed towards the capital , Luxembourg City . Tens of thousands of German soldiers had been deployed to Luxembourg in those twenty @-@ four hours ( although the Grand Duchy 's government refuted any precise number that was suggested ) . Grand Duchess Marie @-@ Adélaïde ordered that the Grand Duchy 's small army , which numbered under 400 , not to resist , and , on the afternoon of the 2 August , she and Eyschen met the German commander , Oberst Richard Karl von Tessmar , on Luxembourg City 's Adolphe Bridge , the symbol of Luxembourg 's modernisation . They protested mildly , but both the young Grand Duchess and her aging statesman accepted German military rule as inevitable . 
 On 2 August , German Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg justified the complete occupation of Luxembourg in terms of military necessity , arguing that France was ready to invade Luxembourg itself . The French minister in Luxembourg dismissed this argument , claiming that it would not have considered violating Luxembourg 's neutrality unless Germany had done so first . Bethmann Hollweg attempted to prove his country 's regret by offering Luxembourg compensation for the losses due to the military presence . On 4 August , Bethmann Hollweg told the Reichstag : 
 However , when it seemed that Germany was on the verge of victory , the Chancellor began to revise his statements . In his <unk> , Bethmann Hollweg called for Luxembourg to become a German federal state , and for that result to be forced upon the Luxembourgish people once Germany achieved victory over the Triple Entente . Given this promise , it came as a great relief to most Luxembourgers that the British and French halted the German advance at the Battle of the Marne in mid @-@ September . The result for the combatant nations was trench warfare , but , for Luxembourg , it was the indefinite continuation of German occupation . 
 = = Eyschen government = = 
 Just as the war was in the balance on the Western Front , so the fate of Luxembourg was see @-@ sawing back and forth . It was clear to all that the good conduct of the Luxembourgish government , if fully receptive to the needs of the German military administrators , could guarantee Luxembourg 's continued self @-@ government , at least in the short @-@ term . Eyschen was a familiar and overwhelmingly popular leader , and all factions put their utmost faith in his ability to steer Luxembourg through the diplomatic minefield that was occupation . On 4 August 1914 , he expelled the French minister in Luxembourg at the request of the German minister , followed by the Belgian minister four days later and the Italian minister when his country entered the war . To the same end , Eyschen refused to speak ill of the German Zollverein , even though he had talked openly of exiting the customs union before the war began . 
 On occasions , Eyschen 's principles got the better of him . On 13 October 1914 , a Luxembourgish journalist named Karl <unk> was arrested by the German army for publishing anti @-@ German stories . He was then taken to Koblenz , and tried and sentenced by court @-@ martial to three months imprisonment . Eyschen was outraged that the Germans had kidnapped a Luxembourgish citizen and tried him for an extraterritorial offence , and Eyschen did nothing to hide his indignation . Eyschen told the German minister in Luxembourg that the action was a ' direct injury to the Grand Duchy 's national sovereignty ' . 
 Such vexatious complaints were repeated , by both Eyschen and Victor Thorn , when a railway worker was arrested in January 1915 for allegedly working for French military intelligence , and subsequently tried and sentenced in Trier . As Minister for Justice , Thorn was incensed that the Luxembourgish legal system had been treated with such disdain . Such objections were not received well by the German authorities . Although they tired of Eyschen 's stubborn ways , he remained a useful tool to unite the various Luxembourgish political factions . On 23 June 1915 a letter was sent to the Luxembourg government stating that the Germans considered Luxembourg to be a theatre of war and that the population , therefore , was subject to military law . 
 Eyschen was not alone in letting his principles obstruct government business . In the summer of 1915 , Eyschen pushed to further reduce the role of the Catholic Church in the state school system . Grand Duchess Marie @-@ Adélaïde objected . A fervently religious Catholic ( as was most of the country , but not her late father , who was Protestant ) , she was reputed to have said , " I will not allow their most precious heritage [ Roman Catholicism ] to be stolen while I have the key . " Marie @-@ Adélaïde refused to budge , inviting Eyschen to resign if he could not accept her decision . Eyschen nearly did , but decided to control himself . Nevertheless , he would not be long in the job . 
 = = After Eyschen = = 
 = = = Eyschen 's death = = = 
 On 11 October 1915 , Luxembourg 's political system was brought to its knees by the death of Paul Eyschen . When war broke out , Eyschen had been 73 years old , but his premiership of twenty @-@ seven years was the only government that most Luxembourgers had known . Throughout the first year of German occupation , he had been a rock for the Luxembourgish people . He had also been of great importance to Marie @-@ Adélaïde ; the Grand Duchess had never been groomed for the position , was fifty @-@ three years Eyschen 's junior , and was considered both politically naïve and dangerously partisan for a constitutional monarch . The recent strains were relatively cosmetic . 
 Critically , Eyschen had the confidence of the Chamber of Deputies , and he had managed to hold together a government containing all major factions , seemingly by force of personality alone . To make matters worse for national unity , the strain of occupation had broken apart the pre @-@ war anti @-@ <unk> alliance between the socialist and the liberal factions , thus depriving both the <unk> and anti @-@ <unk> of a legislative majority . The Catholic conservatives formed the largest bloc , but they were least likely to form a majority coalition . 
 = = = Mongenast government = = = 
 The day after Eyschen 's death , Grand Duchess Marie @-@ Adélaïde invited Mathias Mongenast , who had been Minister for Finance since 1882 , to form a minority government . Mongenast 's special status as a ' caretaker ' Prime Minister is underlined by his official title ; he was not ' President of the Government ' , as all other Prime Ministers since 1857 had been , but held the lesser title of ' President of the Council ' . 
 Mongenast 's administration was never intended to be long @-@ lived , and Marie @-@ Adélaïde 's main objective when appointing the experienced Mongenast was to steady the ship . Nevertheless , nobody expected the government to fall as soon as it did . On 4 November 1915 , Mongenast nominated a new candidate for head of Luxembourg 's école <unk> . The nomination did not meet with Grand Ducal approval , and Marie @-@ Adélaïde rejected him . Mongenast persisted ; education had been a hobby horse of his , and he imagined that the Grand Duchess would accept the advice of a minister as experienced as he was . He was wrong ; the Grand Duchess had always been single @-@ minded , and resented a minority Prime Minister , particularly one so new to the job , making demands of her . The next day , Mongenast resigned , just twenty @-@ five days after being given the job . 
 = = = Loutsch government = = = 
 Having fought with Mongenast , the Grand Duchess decided to appoint an all @-@ conservative cabinet led by Hubert Loutsch . The Chamber of Deputies was steadfastly opposed ; the Party of the Right held only 20 seats out of 52 , but they formed the plurality . Marie @-@ Adélaïde sought to end this deadlock by dissolving the Chamber of Deputies and by calling for the voters to grant a mandate to the conservatives . This outraged the left , which assumed that its deputies alone had the constitutional right to grant the government confidence ; it was dubbed by those on the left a ' coup d 'état by the Grand Duchess ' . Nonetheless , on 23 December 1915 , Luxembourg went to the polls . Although the position of the Party of the Right was improved , taking 25 seats , it fell a whisker short of winning an absolute majority . On 11 January 1916 , the Chamber of Deputies passed a motion of no confidence , and Loutsch resigned . 
 = = National Union Government = = 
 = = = Forming a consensus = = = 
 After the failure of the all @-@ conservative government , the Grand Duchess turned to the leading liberal politician , Victor Thorn , to form a new government . After Eyschen 's premiership of 27 years , two governments had come and gone in three months , and the Luxembourgish people were becoming disillusioned with the failure of the politicians . Thorn 's nature was to be a conciliatory leader , and he made a direct appeal to the Chamber of Deputies to support his government , no matter the deputies ' individual ideological persuasions : " If you want a government that acts , and is capable of acting , it is imperative that all parties support this government . " This support was forthcoming from all parties , but only on the condition that each was invited into the government ; Thorn was left with no choice but to afford them this . The resulting grand coalition cabinet included every leading light in Luxembourgish politics ; besides Thorn himself , there were the conservatives Léon Kauffmann and Antoine Lefort , the socialist leader Dr Michel Welter , and the liberal Léon <unk> . 
 = = = Food shortage = = = 
 The most pressing concern of the Luxembourgish government was that of food supply . The war had made importation of food an impossibility , and the needs of the German occupiers inevitably came before those of the Luxembourgish people . To slow the food supply 's diminishment , Michel Welter , the Director @-@ General for both agriculture and commerce , banned the export of food from Luxembourg . Furthermore , the government introduced rationing and price controls to counteract the soaring demand and to make food more affordable for poorer Luxembourgers . However , the measures did not have the desired effect . Increasing numbers of Luxembourgers turned to the black market , and , to the consternation of the Luxembourgish government , the German army of occupation seemed to do little to help . Moreover , the government accused Germany of aiding the development of the black market by refusing to enforce regulations , and even of smuggling goods themselves . 
 Through 1916 , the food crisis deepened , compounded by a poor potato harvest across all of the Low Countries ; in neighbouring Belgium , the harvest was between 30 % and 40 % down on the previous year . Although many Luxembourgers were on near @-@ starvation level dietary intakes , the country managed to avoid famine . In part , this was due to a reduction of German soldiers ' dependence upon local food sources , instead relying on imports from Germany . 
 Despite the avoidance of a famine , the Luxembourgish government lost much of the faith placed in it by the public and by the politicians . On 22 December 1916 , Michel Welter , the minister responsible , was censured by the Chamber of Deputies , which demanded his resignation . Thorn procrastinated , seeking any option but firing the leader of one of three major parties , but could find none . On 3 January 1917 , Welter was fired , and replaced by another socialist , Ernest <unk> . Even after the change and von Tessmar 's promise of his soldiers ' better conduct in future , Léon Kauffmann was capable of citing thirty @-@ six instances of German soldiers caught smuggling foodstuffs between March 1917 and June 1918 . 
 = = = Miners ' strike = = = 
 Discontent amongst the population grew constantly , particularly in the country 's industrialised south . The autumn of 1916 had seen the first unionisation within the iron and steel industries , with trade unions springing up in both Luxembourg City and Esch @-@ sur @-@ Alzette . Despite the war demand , iron production had slumped , leading to greater employment insecurity . In March and April , three independents were elected as deputies from the canton of Esch @-@ sur @-@ Alzette , where the economy was dominated by iron and steel . As independents , these newly elected deputies were the only legislative opposition to the National Union Government . 
 For many Luxembourgers , particularly the miners , expression of disgust at the government could not be directed through the ballot box alone . Sensing the threat of civil disobedience or worse , von Tessmar threatened any individual committing an act of violence ( in which he included strike action ) with the death penalty . However , on 31 May 1917 , the workers sought to use their most potent weapon , by defying von Tessmar 's ultimatum and downing tools . Germany was dependent upon Luxembourgish iron , as the British Royal Navy 's naval blockade forced Germany to look to accessible local supplies ; in 1916 , Luxembourg produced over one @-@ seventh of the Zollverein 's pig iron . As such , Germany simply could not afford a strike , lest it be deprived of critical raw materials . 
 In putting down the strike , von Tessmar was ruthlessly efficient , but he was not required to resort to the executions that he had threatened . Within nine days , the strike was defeated and the leaders arrested . The two ringleaders were then sentenced by German court @-@ martial in Trier to ten years imprisonment , to the disgust of the government . The continued refusal of the German authorities to respect the Luxembourgish government , and the humiliating manner in which the strike was put down by German military muscle rather than the Luxembourgish gendarmerie , were too much for Thorn . On 19 June 1917 , the government resigned . 
 = = Kauffmann government = = 
 Although the experiment in grand coalition had failed , the need for some political unity remained . As the National Union Government was collapsing , Kauffmann arranged an alliance between his Party of the Right and <unk> 's Liberal League , seeking to achieve change that would outlive the occupation . The primary objective was to address the perennial grievances of the left by amending the constitution ; in November 1917 , the Chamber of Deputies launched a wide @-@ ranging series of debates on various amendments to the constitutions . Ultimately , the constitution was amended to prohibit the government from entering into secret treaties , to improve deputies ' pay ( hitherto set at just 5 francs a day ) , to introduce universal suffrage , and to change the plurality voting system to a proportional one . 
 Whereas all of the above measures were broadly popular , across most of the political spectrum , the same was not true of the proposal to amend Article 32 . Said article had not been amended in the overhaul of 1868 , and its text had remained unchanged since the original constitution of 1848 , stating unequivocally that all sovereignty resided in the person of the Grand Duchess . For some , particularly those that resented the close relations between Marie @-@ Adélaïde and the German royalty , the idea of national sovereignty residing in such a person was unacceptable . The Chamber of Deputies voted to review Article 32 , but Kauffmann refused to allow it , seeing the redefinition of the source of national sovereignty as covert republicanism . 
 The summer of 1918 saw a dramatic decline in the fortunes of the government . On 8 July , Clausen , in central Luxembourg City , had been bombed by the British Royal Air Force , killing ten civilians . Although this did not endear the Allies to Luxembourgers , the Grand Duchess ' instinct was to run to the Germans , who were even less popular amongst the people . On 16 August , German Chancellor Georg von Hertling paid a visit to Luxembourg ; although Hertling asked only to see the Grand Duchess , Kauffmann asked that he also attend . To the Luxembourgish people , relations between the two countries now seemed unambiguously cordial , and all that was left of Kauffmann 's credibility disappeared . This was compounded further by the news on 26 August of the engagement of the Grand Duchess ' sister , Princess Antonia , to Crown Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria , who was Generalfeldmarschall in the German army . Pressure mounted on Kauffmann ; with his party still strong , but with his personal reputation shattered , he was left with no option but to resign , which he did on 28 September in favour of Émile Reuter , another conservative . 
 = = End of the war = = 
 = = = Armistice = = = 
 By the autumn of 1918 , Germany 's position in the war was becoming untenable . The massive Spring Offensive had been an unmitigated disaster , whereas the Allied counter @-@ attack , the Hundred Days Offensive , had driven Germany back towards its own borders . On 6 November , von Tessmar announced the full withdrawal of German soldiers from Luxembourg . Five days after von Tessmar 's announcement , Germany signed an armistice treaty , which brought an end to the war of four years . One of the terms of the armistice involved the withdrawal of German soldiers from Luxembourg , along with the other occupied countries . 
 The Allied Powers agreed that the German withdrawal from Luxembourg would be observed by the United States , and that the USA would receive the honour of liberating the captive country . On 18 November , General John Pershing issued a proclamation to the people of Luxembourg , stating that the United States ' newly formed Third Army would move through Luxembourg to occupy the German Rhineland , but that the Americans would come as allies and as liberators : 
 After four years of violation of its territory , the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg is to be fortunately liberated . ... American troops enter the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg as friends , and will abide rigorously by international law . Their presence , which will not be extended longer than is absolutely necessary , will not be a burden upon you . The operation of the government and institutions will not be impeded . Your lives and livelihoods will not be disturbed . Your person and your property will be respected . 
 The following day , American soldiers crossed the Franco @-@ Luxembourgish border . Everywhere , they were fêted as liberators , in the spirit that Pershing had intended to inspire , and were met by bands and civilians waving flags , and were adorned with flowers . Luc <unk> , the Mayor of Luxembourg City , told the advancing American army that the Germans had , on the whole , been disciplined and well @-@ behaved in the previous three weeks : a marked improvement upon his numerous complaints earlier in the conflict . Finally , on 22 November 1918 , the German army completed its withdrawal from Luxembourg , ending its occupation . 
 Germany 's defeat created the perfect opportunity for the Allied powers to resolve the Luxembourgish question once and for all . By removing Luxembourg from Germany 's sphere of influence , they hoped to guarantee its continued independence , and thus preserve the peace they had won . On 19 December , at the instigation of the British and French governments , the Luxembourgish government announced its withdrawal from the Zollverein and an end to the railway concessions that Luxembourg had previously granted Germany . 
 = = = Rebellion = = = 
 Although the Allies were satisfied at this remedy , at the time , the Luxembourgish government was threatened by a communist insurgency . After the retreat of the German army , revolutionaries established Russian @-@ influenced Workers ' councils across Luxembourg . On 10 November , the day after Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg declared a similar ' socialist republic ' in Germany , communists in Luxembourg City declared a republic , but it lasted for only a matter of hours . Another revolt took place in Esch @-@ sur @-@ Alzette in the early hours of 11 November , but also failed . The socialists had been fired up by the behaviour of Grand Duchess Marie @-@ Adélaïde , whose interventionist and obstructive streak had stymied even Eyschen . On 12 November , socialist and liberal politicians , finding their old commonality on the issue , called for her abdication . A motion in the Chamber of Deputies demanding the abolition of the monarchy was defeated by 21 votes to 19 ( with 3 abstentions ) , but the Chamber did demand the government hold a popular referendum on the issue . 
 Although the left 's early attempts at founding a republic had failed , the underlying cause of the resentment had not been addressed , and , as long as Marie @-@ Adélaïde was Grand Duchess , the liberals would ally themselves to the socialists in opposition to her . The French government also refused to cooperate with a government led by a so @-@ called ' collaborator ' ; French Foreign Minister <unk> Pichon called cooperation ' a grave compromise with the enemies of France ' . More pressing than either of these troubles , on 9 January , a company of the Luxembourgish army rebelled , declaring itself to be the army of the new republic , with Émile Servais ( the son of Emmanuel Servais ) as ' Chairman of the Committee of Public Safety ' . However , by January , the vacuum left by the German withdrawal had been filled by American and French soldiers . President of the Chamber François <unk> asked French troops to intervene . Eager to put an end to what it perceived to be pro @-@ Belgian revolutions , the French army crushed the would @-@ be revolutionaries . 
 Nonetheless , the disloyalty shown by her own armed forces was too much for Marie @-@ Adélaïde , who abdicated in favour of her sister , Charlotte . Belgium , which had hoped to either annex Luxembourg or force it into personal union , grudgingly recognised Charlotte on 13 February . The dynasty 's hold on power would be tenuous until September 1919 , when a referendum on the future of the Grand Duchy found 77 @.@ 8 % in favour of continued rule by the House of Nassau @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Paris Peace Conference = = = 
 Despite the armistice ending the war , and the end of the revolts , Luxembourg 's own future was still uncertain . Belgium was one of the countries hit hardest by the war ; almost the whole of the country was occupied by Germany , and over 43 @,@ 000 Belgians , including 30 @,@ 000 civilians , had died as a result . Belgium sought compensation , and had its eye on any and all of its neighbours ; in November 1918 , Lord Hardinge , the Permanent Secretary at the Foreign Office , told the Dutch ambassador in London , " The Belgians are on the make , and they want to grab whatever they can . " 
 From early 1919 , Belgium engaged in a propaganda campaign to promote its vision of annexation . At the Paris Peace Conference , the Belgian delegation argued in favour of the international community allowing Belgium to annex Luxembourg . However , fearing loss of influence over the left bank of the Rhine , France rejected Belgium 's overtures out of hand , thus guaranteeing Luxembourg 's continued independence . 
 The resulting Treaty of Versailles set aside two articles ( § 40 and § 41 ) to address concerns for Luxembourg 's status . The main article , § 40 , revoked all special privileges that Germany had acquired in Luxembourg , with Germany specifically renouncing advantages gained in the treaties of 1842 , 1847 , 1865 , 1866 , February 1867 , May 1867 , 1871 , 1872 , and 1902 . The effects of these treaties ' revocation were then explicitly stated ; Luxembourg would withdraw from the Zollverein , Germany would lose its right to use the Luxembourgish railways , and Germany was obligated to recognise the termination of Luxembourg 's neutrality , thus validating the actions of the Luxembourgish government since the armistice . Furthermore , to prevent economic embargo after the end of the customs union , the treaty allowed Luxembourg an indefinite option on German coal , and prohibited Germany from levying duty on Luxembourgish exports until 1924 . 
 = = Luxembourgers overseas = = 
 Thousands of Luxembourgers overseas , unconstrained by the Luxembourgish government 's need to remain neutral , signed up to serve with foreign armies . 3 @,@ 700 Luxembourgish nationals served in the French Army , of whom over 2 @,@ 000 died . As Luxembourg 's pre @-@ war population was only 266 @,@ 000 , the loss of life solely in the service of the French army amounted to almost 1 % of the entire Luxembourgish population , relatively greater than the totals for many combatant countries ( see : World War I casualties ) . The Luxembourgish volunteers are commemorated by the <unk> Fra ( literally ' Golden Lady ' ) war memorial , which was unveiled in Luxembourg City on 27 May 1923 . The original memorial was destroyed on 20 October 1940 , during the Nazi occupation , as it symbolised the rejection of German identity and active resistance against Germanisation . After World War II , it was gradually rebuilt , culminating in its second unveiling , on 23 June 1985 . 
 The Luxembourgish community in the United States found itself confronted by a crisis of identity . Traditionally , they had identified themselves as ethnically German , rather than as a separate community of their own . As such , they read German language newspapers , attended German schools , and lived amongst German Americans . Nonetheless , when it became apparent that the war would not be over quickly , the opinions of Luxembourg Americans changed ; on 2 May 1915 , the <unk> Brotherhood of America 's annual convention decided to adopt English as its only official language . Other organisations were less inclined to change their ways ; the <unk> Gazette opposed President Woodrow Wilson 's supposed ' favouritism ' towards the United Kingdom as late in the war as 1917 . However , when the United States entered the war in April of that year , the wavering members of the community supported the Allies , changing forever the relationship between the German and Luxembourgish communities in the USA . 
 = Neptune = 
 Neptune is the eighth and farthest known planet from the Sun in the Solar System . In the Solar System , it is the fourth @-@ largest planet by diameter , the third @-@ most @-@ massive planet , and the densest giant planet . Neptune is 17 times the mass of Earth and is slightly more massive than its near @-@ twin Uranus , which is 15 times the mass of Earth and slightly larger than Neptune . Neptune orbits the Sun once every 164 @.@ 8 years at an average distance of 30 @.@ 1 astronomical units ( 4 @.@ 50 × 109 km ) . Named after the Roman god of the sea , its astronomical symbol is <unk> , a stylised version of the god Neptune 's trident . 
 Neptune is not visible to the unaided eye and is the only planet in the Solar System found by mathematical prediction rather than by empirical observation . Unexpected changes in the orbit of Uranus led Alexis Bouvard to deduce that its orbit was subject to gravitational perturbation by an unknown planet . Neptune was subsequently observed with a telescope on 23 September 1846 by Johann Galle within a degree of the position predicted by Urbain Le Verrier . Its largest moon , Triton , was discovered shortly thereafter , though none of the planet 's remaining known 14 moons were located telescopically until the 20th century . The planet 's distance from Earth gives it a very small apparent size , making it challenging to study with Earth @-@ based telescopes . Neptune was visited by Voyager 2 , when it flew by the planet on 25 August 1989 . The advent of the Hubble Space Telescope and large ground @-@ based telescopes with adaptive optics has recently allowed for additional detailed observations from afar . 
 Neptune is similar in composition to Uranus , and both have compositions that differ from those of the larger gas giants , Jupiter and Saturn . Like Jupiter and Saturn , Neptune 's atmosphere is composed primarily of hydrogen and helium , along with traces of hydrocarbons and possibly nitrogen , but contains a higher proportion of " ices " such as water , ammonia , and methane . However , its interior , like that of Uranus , is primarily composed of ices and rock , and hence Uranus and Neptune are normally considered " ice giants " to emphasise this distinction . Traces of methane in the outermost regions in part account for the planet 's blue appearance . 
 In contrast to the hazy , relatively featureless atmosphere of Uranus , Neptune 's atmosphere has active and visible weather patterns . For example , at the time of the Voyager 2 flyby in 1989 , the planet 's southern hemisphere had a Great Dark Spot comparable to the Great Red Spot on Jupiter . These weather patterns are driven by the strongest sustained winds of any planet in the Solar System , with recorded wind speeds as high as 2 @,@ 100 kilometres per hour ( 580 m / s ; 1 @,@ 300 mph ) . Because of its great distance from the Sun , Neptune 's outer atmosphere is one of the coldest places in the Solar System , with temperatures at its cloud tops approaching 55 K ( − 218 ° C ) . Temperatures at the planet 's centre are approximately 5 @,@ 400 K ( 5 @,@ 100 ° C ) . Neptune has a faint and fragmented ring system ( labelled " arcs " ) , which was first detected during the 1960s and confirmed by Voyager 2 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 Some of the earliest recorded observations ever made through a telescope , Galileo 's drawings on 28 December 1612 and 27 January 1613 , contain plotted points that match up with what is now known to be the position of Neptune . On both occasions , Galileo seems to have mistaken Neptune for a fixed star when it appeared close — in conjunction — to Jupiter in the night sky ; hence , he is not credited with Neptune 's discovery . At his first observation in December 1612 , Neptune was almost stationary in the sky because it had just turned retrograde that day . This apparent backward motion is created when Earth 's orbit takes it past an outer planet . Because Neptune was only beginning its yearly retrograde cycle , the motion of the planet was far too slight to be detected with Galileo 's small telescope . In July 2009 , University of Melbourne physicist David Jamieson announced new evidence suggesting that Galileo was at least aware that the ' star ' he had observed had moved relative to the fixed stars . 
 In 1821 , Alexis Bouvard published astronomical tables of the orbit of Neptune 's neighbour Uranus . Subsequent observations revealed substantial deviations from the tables , leading Bouvard to hypothesise that an unknown body was perturbing the orbit through gravitational interaction . In 1843 , John Couch Adams began work on the orbit of Uranus using the data he had . Via Cambridge Observatory director James Challis , he requested extra data from Sir George Airy , the Astronomer Royal , who supplied it in February 1844 . Adams continued to work in 1845 – 46 and produced several different estimates of a new planet . 
 In 1845 – 46 , Urbain Le Verrier , independently of Adams , developed his own calculations but aroused no enthusiasm in his compatriots . In June 1846 , upon seeing Le Verrier 's first published estimate of the planet 's longitude and its similarity to Adams 's estimate , Airy persuaded Challis to search for the planet . Challis vainly scoured the sky throughout August and September . 
 Meanwhile , Le Verrier by letter urged Berlin Observatory astronomer Johann Gottfried Galle to search with the observatory 's refractor . Heinrich d <unk> , a student at the observatory , suggested to Galle that they could compare a recently drawn chart of the sky in the region of Le Verrier 's predicted location with the current sky to seek the displacement characteristic of a planet , as opposed to a fixed star . On the evening of 23 September 1846 , the day Galle received the letter , he discovered Neptune within 1 ° of where Le Verrier had predicted it to be , about 12 ° from Adams ' prediction . Challis later realised that he had observed the planet twice , on 4 and 12 August , but did not recognise it as a planet because he lacked an up @-@ to @-@ date star map and was distracted by his concurrent work on comet observations . 
 In the wake of the discovery , there was much nationalistic rivalry between the French and the British over who deserved credit for the discovery . Eventually , an international consensus emerged that both Le Verrier and Adams jointly deserved credit . Since 1966 , Dennis Rawlins has questioned the credibility of Adams 's claim to co @-@ discovery , and the issue was re @-@ evaluated by historians with the return in 1998 of the " Neptune papers " ( historical documents ) to the Royal Observatory , Greenwich . After reviewing the documents , they suggest that " Adams does not deserve equal credit with Le Verrier for the discovery of Neptune . That credit belongs only to the person who succeeded both in predicting the planet 's place and in convincing astronomers to search for it . " 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 Shortly after its discovery , Neptune was referred to simply as " the planet exterior to Uranus " or as " Le Verrier 's planet " . The first suggestion for a name came from Galle , who proposed the name Janus . In England , Challis put forward the name Oceanus . 
 Claiming the right to name his discovery , Le Verrier quickly proposed the name Neptune for this new planet , though falsely stating that this had been officially approved by the French Bureau des <unk> . In October , he sought to name the planet Le Verrier , after himself , and he had loyal support in this from the observatory director , François Arago . This suggestion met with stiff resistance outside France . French almanacs quickly reintroduced the name Herschel for Uranus , after that planet 's discoverer Sir William Herschel , and <unk> for the new planet . 
 Struve came out in favour of the name Neptune on 29 December 1846 , to the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences . Soon , Neptune became the internationally accepted name . In Roman mythology , Neptune was the god of the sea , identified with the Greek Poseidon . The demand for a mythological name seemed to be in keeping with the nomenclature of the other planets , all of which , except for Earth , were named for deities in Greek and Roman mythology . 
 Most languages today , even in countries that have no direct link to Greco @-@ Roman culture , use some variant of the name " Neptune " for the planet . However , in Chinese , Japanese , and Korean , the planet 's name was translated as " sea king star " ( <unk> ) , because Neptune was the god of the sea . In Mongolian , Neptune is called <unk> Van ( <unk> <unk> ) , reflecting its namesake god 's role as the ruler of the sea . In modern Greek the planet is called Poseidon ( <unk> , Poseidonas ) , the Greek counterpart of Neptune . In Hebrew , " Rahab " ( <unk> ) , from a Biblical sea monster mentioned in the Book of Psalms , was selected in a vote managed by the Academy of the Hebrew Language in 2009 as the official name for the planet , even though the existing Latin term " Neptun " ( <unk> ) is commonly used . In Māori , the planet is called Tangaroa , named after the Māori god of the sea . In Nahuatl , the planet is called <unk> , named after the rain god <unk> . 
 = = = Status = = = 
 From its discovery in 1846 until the subsequent discovery of Pluto in 1930 , Neptune was the farthest known planet . When Pluto was discovered it was considered a planet , and Neptune thus became the penultimate known planet , except for a 20 @-@ year period between 1979 and 1999 when Pluto 's elliptical orbit brought it closer to the Sun than Neptune . The discovery of the Kuiper belt in 1992 led many astronomers to debate whether Pluto should be considered a planet or as part of the Kuiper belt . In 2006 , the International Astronomical Union defined the word " planet " for the first time , reclassifying Pluto as a " dwarf planet " and making Neptune once again the outermost known planet in the Solar System . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 Neptune 's mass of 1 @.@ <unk> × 1026 kg , is intermediate between Earth and the larger gas giants : it is 17 times that of Earth but just 1 / 19th that of Jupiter . Its gravity at 1 bar is 11 @.@ 15 m / s2 , 1 @.@ 14 times the surface gravity of Earth , and surpassed only by Jupiter . Neptune 's equatorial radius of 24 @,@ 764 km is nearly four times that of Earth . Neptune , like Uranus , is an ice giant , a subclass of giant planet , due to their smaller size and higher concentrations of volatiles relative to Jupiter and Saturn . In the search for extrasolar planets , Neptune has been used as a metonym : discovered bodies of similar mass are often referred to as " Neptunes " , just as scientists refer to various extrasolar bodies as " Jupiters " . 
 = = = Internal structure = = = 
 Neptune 's internal structure resembles that of Uranus . Its atmosphere forms about 5 % to 10 % of its mass and extends perhaps 10 % to 20 % of the way towards the core , where it reaches pressures of about 10 GPa , or about 100 @,@ 000 times that of Earth 's atmosphere . Increasing concentrations of methane , ammonia and water are found in the lower regions of the atmosphere . 
 The mantle is equivalent to 10 to 15 Earth masses and is rich in water , ammonia and methane . As is customary in planetary science , this mixture is referred to as icy even though it is a hot , dense fluid . This fluid , which has a high electrical conductivity , is sometimes called a water – ammonia ocean . The mantle may consist of a layer of ionic water in which the water molecules break down into a soup of hydrogen and oxygen ions , and deeper down <unk> water in which the oxygen crystallises but the hydrogen ions float around freely within the oxygen lattice . At a depth of 7000 km , the conditions may be such that methane decomposes into diamond crystals that rain downwards like hailstones . Very @-@ high @-@ pressure experiments at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory suggest that the base of the mantle may comprise an ocean of liquid carbon with floating solid ' diamonds ' . 
 The core of Neptune is composed of iron , nickel and silicates , with an interior model giving a mass about 1 @.@ 2 times that of Earth . The pressure at the centre is 7 <unk> ( 700 GPa ) , about twice as high as that at the centre of Earth , and the temperature may be 5 @,@ 400 K. 
 = = = Atmosphere = = = 
 At high altitudes , Neptune 's atmosphere is 80 % hydrogen and 19 % helium . A trace amount of methane is also present . Prominent absorption bands of methane exist at wavelengths above 600 nm , in the red and infrared portion of the spectrum . As with Uranus , this absorption of red light by the atmospheric methane is part of what gives Neptune its blue hue , although Neptune 's vivid azure differs from Uranus 's milder cyan . Because Neptune 's atmospheric methane content is similar to that of Uranus , some unknown atmospheric constituent is thought to contribute to Neptune 's colour . 
 Neptune 's atmosphere is subdivided into two main regions : the lower troposphere , where temperature decreases with altitude , and the stratosphere , where temperature increases with altitude . The boundary between the two , the tropopause , lies at a pressure of 0 @.@ 1 bars ( 10 kPa ) . The stratosphere then gives way to the thermosphere at a pressure lower than 10 − 5 to 10 − 4 <unk> ( 1 to 10 Pa ) . The thermosphere gradually transitions to the exosphere . 
 Models suggest that Neptune 's troposphere is banded by clouds of varying compositions depending on altitude . The upper @-@ level clouds lie at pressures below one bar , where the temperature is suitable for methane to condense . For pressures between one and five bars ( 100 and 500 kPa ) , clouds of ammonia and hydrogen sulfide are thought to form . Above a pressure of five bars , the clouds may consist of ammonia , ammonium sulfide , hydrogen sulfide and water . Deeper clouds of water ice should be found at pressures of about 50 bars ( 5 @.@ 0 MPa ) , where the temperature reaches 273 K ( 0 ° C ) . Underneath , clouds of ammonia and hydrogen sulfide may be found . 
 High @-@ altitude clouds on Neptune have been observed casting shadows on the opaque cloud deck below . There are also high @-@ altitude cloud bands that wrap around the planet at constant latitude . These circumferential bands have widths of 50 – 150 km and lie about 50 – 110 km above the cloud deck . These altitudes are in the layer where weather occurs , the troposphere . Weather does not occur in the higher stratosphere or thermosphere . Unlike Uranus , Neptune 's composition has a higher volume of ocean , whereas Uranus has a smaller mantle . 
 Neptune 's spectra suggest that its lower stratosphere is hazy due to condensation of products of ultraviolet photolysis of methane , such as ethane and <unk> . The stratosphere is also home to trace amounts of carbon monoxide and hydrogen cyanide . The stratosphere of Neptune is warmer than that of Uranus due to the elevated concentration of hydrocarbons . 
 For reasons that remain obscure , the planet 's thermosphere is at an anomalously high temperature of about 750 K. The planet is too far from the Sun for this heat to be generated by ultraviolet radiation . One candidate for a heating mechanism is atmospheric interaction with ions in the planet 's magnetic field . Other candidates are gravity waves from the interior that dissipate in the atmosphere . The thermosphere contains traces of carbon dioxide and water , which may have been deposited from external sources such as meteorites and dust . 
 = = = Magnetosphere = = = 
 Neptune also resembles Uranus in its magnetosphere , with a magnetic field strongly tilted relative to its rotational axis at 47 ° and offset at least 0 @.@ 55 radii , or about <unk> km from the planet 's physical centre . Before Voyager 2 's arrival at Neptune , it was hypothesised that Uranus 's tilted magnetosphere was the result of its sideways rotation . In comparing the magnetic fields of the two planets , scientists now think the extreme orientation may be characteristic of flows in the planets ' interiors . This field may be generated by convective fluid motions in a thin spherical shell of electrically conducting liquids ( probably a combination of ammonia , methane and water ) resulting in a dynamo action . 
 The dipole component of the magnetic field at the magnetic equator of Neptune is about 14 <unk> ( 0 @.@ 14 G ) . The dipole magnetic moment of Neptune is about 2 @.@ 2 × 1017 T · m3 ( 14 μT · <unk> , where RN is the radius of Neptune ) . Neptune 's magnetic field has a complex geometry that includes relatively large contributions from non @-@ dipolar components , including a strong quadrupole moment that may exceed the dipole moment in strength . By contrast , Earth , Jupiter and Saturn have only relatively small quadrupole moments , and their fields are less tilted from the polar axis . The large quadrupole moment of Neptune may be the result of offset from the planet 's centre and geometrical constraints of the field 's dynamo generator . 
 Neptune 's bow shock , where the magnetosphere begins to slow the solar wind , occurs at a distance of 34 @.@ 9 times the radius of the planet . The magnetopause , where the pressure of the magnetosphere counterbalances the solar wind , lies at a distance of 23 – 26 @.@ 5 times the radius of Neptune . The tail of the magnetosphere extends out to at least 72 times the radius of Neptune , and likely much farther . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Neptune 's weather is characterised by extremely dynamic storm systems , with winds reaching speeds of almost 600 m / s ( 2 @,@ 200 km / h ; 1 @,@ 300 mph ) — nearly reaching supersonic flow . More typically , by tracking the motion of persistent clouds , wind speeds have been shown to vary from 20 m / s in the easterly direction to 325 m / s westward . At the cloud tops , the prevailing winds range in speed from 400 m / s along the equator to 250 m / s at the poles . Most of the winds on Neptune move in a direction opposite the planet 's rotation . The general pattern of winds showed prograde rotation at high latitudes vs. retrograde rotation at lower latitudes . The difference in flow direction is thought to be a " skin effect " and not due to any deeper atmospheric processes . At 70 ° S latitude , a high @-@ speed jet travels at a speed of 300 m / s . 
 Neptune differs from Uranus in its typical level of meteorological activity . Voyager 2 observed weather phenomena on Neptune during its 1989 flyby , but no comparable phenomena on Uranus during its 1986 fly @-@ by . 
 The abundance of methane , ethane and acetylene at Neptune 's equator is 10 – 100 times greater than at the poles . This is interpreted as evidence for upwelling at the equator and subsidence near the poles . 
 In 2007 , it was discovered that the upper troposphere of Neptune 's south pole was about 10 K warmer than the rest of its atmosphere , which averages approximately 73 K ( − 200 ° C ) . The temperature differential is enough to let methane , which elsewhere is frozen in the troposphere , escape into the stratosphere near the pole . The relative " hot spot " is due to Neptune 's axial tilt , which has exposed the south pole to the Sun for the last quarter of Neptune 's year , or roughly 40 Earth years . As Neptune slowly moves towards the opposite side of the Sun , the south pole will be darkened and the north pole illuminated , causing the methane release to shift to the north pole . 
 Because of seasonal changes , the cloud bands in the southern hemisphere of Neptune have been observed to increase in size and albedo . This trend was first seen in 1980 and is expected to last until about 2020 . The long orbital period of Neptune results in seasons lasting forty years . 
 = = = Storms = = = 
 In 1989 , the Great Dark Spot , an anti @-@ cyclonic storm system spanning <unk> × 6600 km , was discovered by NASA 's Voyager 2 spacecraft . The storm resembled the Great Red Spot of Jupiter . Some five years later , on 2 November 1994 , the Hubble Space Telescope did not see the Great Dark Spot on the planet . Instead , a new storm similar to the Great Dark Spot was found in Neptune 's northern hemisphere . 
 The Scooter is another storm , a white cloud group farther south than the Great Dark Spot . This nickname first arose during the months leading up to the Voyager 2 encounter in 1989 , when they were observed moving at speeds faster than the Great Dark Spot ( and images acquired later would subsequently reveal the presence of clouds moving even faster than those that had initially been detected by Voyager 2 ) . The Small Dark Spot is a southern cyclonic storm , the second @-@ most @-@ intense storm observed during the 1989 encounter . It was initially completely dark , but as Voyager 2 approached the planet , a bright core developed and can be seen in most of the highest @-@ resolution images . 
 Neptune 's dark spots are thought to occur in the troposphere at lower altitudes than the brighter cloud features , so they appear as holes in the upper cloud decks . As they are stable features that can persist for several months , they are thought to be vortex structures . Often associated with dark spots are brighter , persistent methane clouds that form around the tropopause layer . The persistence of companion clouds shows that some former dark spots may continue to exist as cyclones even though they are no longer visible as a dark feature . Dark spots may dissipate when they migrate too close to the equator or possibly through some other unknown mechanism . 
 = = = Internal heating = = = 
 Neptune 's more varied weather when compared to Uranus is due in part to its higher internal heating . Although Neptune lies over 50 % further from the Sun than Uranus , and receives only 40 % its amount of sunlight , the two planets ' surface temperatures are roughly equal . The upper regions of Neptune 's troposphere reach a low temperature of 51 @.@ 8 K ( − 221 @.@ 3 ° C ) . At a depth where the atmospheric pressure equals 1 bar ( 100 kPa ) , the temperature is 72 @.@ 00 K ( − 201 @.@ 15 ° C ) . Deeper inside the layers of gas , the temperature rises steadily . As with Uranus , the source of this heating is unknown , but the discrepancy is larger : Uranus only radiates 1 @.@ 1 times as much energy as it receives from the Sun ; whereas Neptune radiates about 2 @.@ 61 times as much energy as it receives from the Sun . Neptune is the farthest planet from the Sun , yet its internal energy is sufficient to drive the fastest planetary winds seen in the Solar System . Depending on the thermal properties of its interior , the heat left over from Neptune 's formation may be sufficient to explain its current heat flow , though it is more difficult to simultaneously explain Uranus 's lack of internal heat while preserving the apparent similarity between the two planets . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 The average distance between Neptune and the Sun is 4 @.@ 50 billion km ( about 30 @.@ 1 astronomical units ( AU ) ) , and it completes an orbit on average every 164 @.@ 79 years , subject to a variability of around ± 0 @.@ 1 years . The perihelion distance is 29 @.@ 81 AU ; the aphelion distance is 30 @.@ 33 AU . 
 On 11 July 2011 , Neptune completed its first full barycentric orbit since its discovery in 1846 , although it did not appear at its exact discovery position in the sky , because Earth was in a different location in its 365 @.@ 26 @-@ day orbit . Because of the motion of the Sun in relation to the barycentre of the Solar System , on 11 July Neptune was also not at its exact discovery position in relation to the Sun ; if the more common heliocentric coordinate system is used , the discovery longitude was reached on 12 July 2011 . 
 The elliptical orbit of Neptune is inclined 1 @.@ 77 ° compared to that of Earth . 
 The axial tilt of Neptune is 28 @.@ 32 ° , which is similar to the tilts of Earth ( 23 ° ) and Mars ( 25 ° ) . As a result , this planet experiences similar seasonal changes . The long orbital period of Neptune means that the seasons last for forty Earth years . Its sidereal rotation period ( day ) is roughly 16 @.@ 11 hours . Because its axial tilt is comparable to Earth 's , the variation in the length of its day over the course of its long year is not any more extreme . 
 Because Neptune is not a solid body , its atmosphere undergoes differential rotation . The wide equatorial zone rotates with a period of about 18 hours , which is slower than the 16 @.@ 1 @-@ hour rotation of the planet 's magnetic field . By contrast , the reverse is true for the polar regions where the rotation period is 12 hours . This differential rotation is the most pronounced of any planet in the Solar System , and it results in strong latitudinal wind shear . 
 = = = Orbital resonances = = = 
 Neptune 's orbit has a profound impact on the region directly beyond it , known as the Kuiper belt . The Kuiper belt is a ring of small icy worlds , similar to the asteroid belt but far larger , extending from Neptune 's orbit at 30 AU out to about 55 AU from the Sun . Much in the same way that Jupiter 's gravity dominates the asteroid belt , shaping its structure , so Neptune 's gravity dominates the Kuiper belt . Over the age of the Solar System , certain regions of the Kuiper belt became destabilised by Neptune 's gravity , creating gaps in the Kuiper belt 's structure . The region between 40 and 42 AU is an example . 
 There do exist orbits within these empty regions where objects can survive for the age of the Solar System . These resonances occur when Neptune 's orbital period is a precise fraction of that of the object , such as 1 : 2 , or 3 : 4 . If , say , an object orbits the Sun once for every two Neptune orbits , it will only complete half an orbit by the time Neptune returns to its original position . The most heavily populated resonance in the Kuiper belt , with over 200 known objects , is the 2 : 3 resonance . Objects in this resonance complete 2 orbits for every 3 of Neptune , and are known as plutinos because the largest of the known Kuiper belt objects , Pluto , is among them . Although Pluto crosses Neptune 's orbit regularly , the 2 : 3 resonance ensures they can never collide . The 3 : 4 , 3 : 5 , 4 : 7 and 2 : 5 resonances are less populated . 
 Neptune has a number of known trojan objects occupying both the Sun – Neptune L4 and L5 Lagrangian points — gravitationally stable regions leading and trailing Neptune in its orbit , respectively . Neptune trojans can be viewed as being in a 1 : 1 resonance with Neptune . Some Neptune trojans are remarkably stable in their orbits , and are likely to have formed alongside Neptune rather than being captured . The first and so far only object identified as associated with Neptune 's trailing L5 Lagrangian point is 2008 <unk> . Neptune also has a temporary quasi @-@ satellite , ( <unk> ) 2007 <unk> . The object has been a quasi @-@ satellite of Neptune for about 12 @,@ 500 years and it will remain in that dynamical state for another 12 @,@ 500 years . 
 = = Formation and migration = = 
 The formation of the ice giants , Neptune and Uranus , has proven difficult to model precisely . Current models suggest that the matter density in the outer regions of the Solar System was too low to account for the formation of such large bodies from the traditionally accepted method of core accretion , and various hypotheses have been advanced to explain their formation . One is that the ice giants were not formed by core accretion but from instabilities within the original protoplanetary disc and later had their atmospheres blasted away by radiation from a nearby massive OB star . 
 An alternative concept is that they formed closer to the Sun , where the matter density was higher , and then subsequently migrated to their current orbits after the removal of the gaseous protoplanetary disc . This hypothesis of migration after formation is favoured , due to its ability to better explain the occupancy of the populations of small objects observed in the trans @-@ Neptunian region . The current most widely accepted explanation of the details of this hypothesis is known as the Nice model , which explores the effect of a migrating Neptune and the other giant planets on the structure of the Kuiper belt . 
 = = Moons = = 
 Neptune has 14 known moons . Triton is the largest Neptunian moon , comprising more than 99 @.@ 5 % of the mass in orbit around Neptune , and it is the only one massive enough to be spheroidal . Triton was discovered by William Lassell just 17 days after the discovery of Neptune itself . Unlike all other large planetary moons in the Solar System , Triton has a retrograde orbit , indicating that it was captured rather than forming in place ; it was probably once a dwarf planet in the Kuiper belt . It is close enough to Neptune to be locked into a synchronous rotation , and it is slowly spiralling inward because of tidal acceleration . It will eventually be torn apart , in about 3 @.@ 6 billion years , when it reaches the Roche limit . In 1989 , Triton was the coldest object that had yet been measured in the Solar System , with estimated temperatures of 38 K ( − 235 ° C ) . 
 Neptune 's second known satellite ( by order of discovery ) , the irregular moon Nereid , has one of the most eccentric orbits of any satellite in the Solar System . The eccentricity of 0 @.@ <unk> gives it an apoapsis that is seven times its periapsis distance from Neptune . 
 From July to September 1989 , Voyager 2 discovered six moons of Neptune . Of these , the irregularly shaped Proteus is notable for being as large as a body of its density can be without being pulled into a spherical shape by its own gravity . Although the second @-@ most @-@ massive Neptunian moon , it is only 0 @.@ 25 % the mass of Triton . Neptune 's innermost four moons — Naiad , Thalassa , Despina and Galatea — orbit close enough to be within Neptune 's rings . The next @-@ farthest out , Larissa , was originally discovered in 1981 when it had occulted a star . This occultation had been attributed to ring arcs , but when Voyager 2 observed Neptune in 1989 , Larissa was found to have caused it . Five new irregular moons discovered between 2002 and 2003 were announced in 2004 . A new moon and the smallest yet , S / 2004 N 1 , was found in 2013 . Because Neptune was the Roman god of the sea , Neptune 's moons have been named after lesser sea gods . 
 = = = Planetary rings = = = 
 Neptune has a planetary ring system , though one much less substantial than that of Saturn . The rings may consist of ice particles coated with silicates or carbon @-@ based material , which most likely gives them a reddish hue . The three main rings are the narrow Adams Ring , 63 @,@ 000 km from the centre of Neptune , the Le Verrier Ring , at 53 @,@ 000 km , and the broader , fainter Galle Ring , at 42 @,@ 000 km . A faint outward extension to the Le Verrier Ring has been named Lassell ; it is bounded at its outer edge by the Arago Ring at 57 @,@ 000 km . 
 The first of these planetary rings was detected in 1968 by a team led by Edward Guinan . In the early 1980s , analysis of this data along with newer observations led to the hypothesis that this ring might be incomplete . Evidence that the rings might have gaps first arose during a stellar occultation in 1984 when the rings obscured a star on immersion but not on <unk> . Images from Voyager 2 in 1989 settled the issue by showing several faint rings . 
 The outermost ring , Adams , contains five prominent arcs now named Courage , Liberté , <unk> 1 , <unk> 2 and Fraternité ( Courage , Liberty , Equality and Fraternity ) . The existence of arcs was difficult to explain because the laws of motion would predict that arcs would spread out into a uniform ring over short timescales . Astronomers now estimate that the arcs are corralled into their current form by the gravitational effects of Galatea , a moon just inward from the ring . 
 Earth @-@ based observations announced in 2005 appeared to show that Neptune 's rings are much more unstable than previously thought . Images taken from the W. M. Keck Observatory in 2002 and 2003 show considerable decay in the rings when compared to images by Voyager 2 . In particular , it seems that the Liberté arc might disappear in as little as one century . 
 = = Observation = = 
 With an apparent magnitude between + 7 @.@ 7 and + 8 @.@ 0 , Neptune is never visible to the naked eye and can be outshone by Jupiter 's Galilean moons , the dwarf planet Ceres and the asteroids 4 Vesta , 2 Pallas , 7 Iris , 3 Juno and 6 Hebe . A telescope or strong binoculars will resolve Neptune as a small blue disk , similar in appearance to Uranus . 
 Because of the distance of Neptune from Earth , its angular diameter only ranges from 2 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 4 arcseconds , the smallest of the Solar System planets . Its small apparent size makes it challenging to study it visually . Most telescopic data was fairly limited until the advent of the Hubble Space Telescope and large ground @-@ based telescopes with adaptive optics ( AO ) . The first scientifically useful observation of Neptune from ground @-@ based telescopes using adaptive optics , was commenced in 1997 from Hawaii . Neptune is currently entering its spring and summer season and has been shown to be heating up , with increased atmospheric activity and brightness as a consequence . Combined with technological advancements , ground @-@ based telescopes with adaptive optics are recording increasingly more detailed images of it . Both Hubble and the adaptive @-@ optics telescopes on Earth has made many new discoveries within the Solar System since the mid @-@ 1990s , with a large increase in the number of known satellites and moons around the outer planet , among others . In 2004 and 2005 , five new small satellites of Neptune with diameters between 38 and 61 kilometres were discovered . 
 From Earth , Neptune goes through apparent retrograde motion every 367 days , resulting in a looping motion against the background stars during each opposition . These loops carried it close to the 1846 discovery coordinates in April and July 2010 and again in October and November 2011 . 
 Observation of Neptune in the radio @-@ frequency band shows that it is a source of both continuous emission and irregular bursts . Both sources are thought to originate from its rotating magnetic field . In the infrared part of the spectrum , Neptune 's storms appear bright against the cooler background , allowing the size and shape of these features to be readily tracked . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 Voyager 2 is the only spacecraft that has visited Neptune . The spacecraft 's closest approach to the planet occurred on 25 August 1989 . Because this was the last major planet the spacecraft could visit , it was decided to make a close flyby of the moon Triton , regardless of the consequences to the trajectory , similarly to what was done for Voyager 1 's encounter with Saturn and its moon Titan . The images relayed back to Earth from Voyager 2 became the basis of a 1989 PBS all @-@ night program , Neptune All Night . 
 During the encounter , signals from the spacecraft required 246 minutes to reach Earth . Hence , for the most part , Voyager 2 's mission relied on preloaded commands for the Neptune encounter . The spacecraft performed a near @-@ encounter with the moon Nereid before it came within 4400 km of Neptune 's atmosphere on 25 August , then passed close to the planet 's largest moon Triton later the same day . 
 The spacecraft verified the existence of a magnetic field surrounding the planet and discovered that the field was offset from the centre and tilted in a manner similar to the field around Uranus . Neptune 's rotation period was determined using measurements of radio emissions and Voyager 2 also showed that Neptune had a surprisingly active weather system . Six new moons were discovered , and the planet was shown to have more than one ring . 
 The flyby also provided the first accurate measurement of Neptune 's mass which was found to be 0 @.@ 5 percent less than previously calculated . The new figure disproved the hypothesis that an undiscovered Planet X acted upon the orbits of Neptune and Uranus . 
 After the Voyager 2 flyby mission , the next step in scientific exploration of the Neptunian system , is considered to be a Flagship orbital mission . Such a hypothetical mission is envisioned to be possible in the late 2020s or early 2030s . However , there have been a couple of discussions to launch Neptune missions sooner . In 2003 , there was a proposal in NASA 's " Vision Missions Studies " for a " Neptune Orbiter with Probes " mission that does Cassini @-@ level science . Another , more recent proposal was for Argo , a flyby spacecraft to be launched in 2019 , that would visit Jupiter , Saturn , Neptune , and a Kuiper belt object . The focus would be on Neptune and its largest moon Triton to be investigated around 2029 . The proposed New Horizons 2 mission ( which was later scrapped ) might also have done a close flyby of the Neptunian system . 
 = Terry Bywater = 
 Terrance " Terry " Bywater ( born 28 February 1983 ) is a British wheelchair basketball player . He participated in the 2000 Summer Paralympics , where his team came in fourth place ; in the 2004 Summer Paralympics , where he won a bronze medal and was the highest scorer for Great Britain ; the 2008 Summer Paralympics , winning another bronze medal ; and the 2012 Summer Paralympics , where his team again came in fourth place . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Bywater was born on 28 February 1983 in <unk> , England and currently lives in Cleveland , North Yorkshire . As of 2009 , he weighs 74 kilograms ( 11 st 9 lb ) and is 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 ft 11 in ) tall . He was born without a tibia and a fibula in his left leg , which was amputated when he was two . He has a son , Benjamin Bywater . 
 = = Wheelchair basketball = = 
 Bywater began playing wheelchair basketball at the age of 13 at an open day in Middlesbrough with the Teesside Lions . He later played with them . After playing for a year , he was selected for the Great Britain Under @-@ 23 team and began training in 1993 . He made his debut at the Sydney 2000 Summer Paralympics , and finished fourth . He participated in the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , where he won a bronze medal , and was the top Great Britain scorer in the event . He currently plays for the Sheffield Steelers . He once played for C. D. <unk> in Spain , along with many other European clubs . Bywater returned to England so he could play with the Super League Club Sheffield Steelers throughout the 2011 — 12 season . He is a 4 @.@ 5 point player . 
 His first championships were the 2001 / 2002 European Championships in Amsterdam , Netherlands , where he finished fourth . In 2002 he went to the World Championships in Kitakyushu in Japan , where he finished second ( silver ) . He participated in the 2003 European Championships in Sassari , Italy , and won bronze . He competed in the 2005 European Championships in Paris , France , and won silver . He competed in the 2006 World Championships in Amsterdam and was fifth place , and in 2007 he participated in the European Championships in Wetzlar , Netherlands , and received a silver medal . Two years later , he won bronze in the European Championships of Adana in Turkey . In 2010 , for the first time , he participated in the World Wheelchair Basketball Championships in Birmingham , and was fifth place . He won gold in the 2011 European Championships in Nazareth , Israel . At the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , the wheelchair basketball team lost to the United States , and finished in fourth position , after losing to Canada , missing out of the finals . He said that not winning a medal at the Paralympics was the " worst moment " of his career . 
 = Illinois Route 120 = 
 Illinois Route 120 ( IL 120 ) is a major east – west state highway in northeastern Illinois . It runs from U.S. Route 14 near Woodstock to Illinois Route 131 in Waukegan . It travels a distance of 34 @.@ 48 miles ( 55 @.@ 49 km ) and is one of the few roads that provides direct access from McHenry County to Interstate 94 ( Tri @-@ State Tollway ) in Lake County . Throughout its length , it shifts between two and four lanes as it passes through a setting that consists of open rural areas , as well as larger developments and heavy congestion . 
 Although small capacity improvements have been made over time , a lengthy two lane section of road in the Grayslake vicinity has yet to see any major expansion . This key segment has been the subject of much delay and debate regarding the greater traffic flow across north @-@ central Lake County . In October 2009 , a special council approved a unified vision for an improvement plan for most of the Lake County portion of Illinois 120 , which includes a long discussed bypass around downtown Grayslake . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = McHenry County = = = 
 Beginning at its western terminus at a rural unsignalized intersection with U.S. Route 14 ( Northwest Highway ) , IL 120 starts out as a two lane road just west of the city of Woodstock . This section is known as Washington Street as it heads in a southeast direction and enters the outer residential neighborhoods of Woodstock . In this area , the road curves due east , crosses the Metra Union Pacific / Northwest Line tracks near the station , then briefly heads north before turning once more to the northwest . Immediately after doing so , it passes a signalized intersection with IL 47 ( Seminary Avenue / Eastwood Drive ) before traveling north of the McHenry County Fairgrounds and then heading out of the Woodstock area and back into a prairie setting . The road then curves back to the north and then takes a right turn at an unsignalized intersection where it continues generally east for the remainder of its length . 
 Before reaching the McHenry area a little more than four miles east , the road passes through two signalized intersections , some light forests , and some sparse residential developments . Now entering the busier city of McHenry , it takes on the name Elm Street and widens to four lanes west of Ringwood Road . Light commercial buildings with neighborhoods behind them line the roadway until the crossing of the McHenry Branch of the Union Pacific / Northwest Line near the McHenry Metra station . At the next intersection , IL 120 meets with IL 31 ( Front Street / Richmond Road ) where they briefly run concurrently for less than a half mile . It next travels over the Fox River , passes by another section of commercial business , and then returns to a quieter setting that features a mix of open areas , neighborhoods , small business , and Lily Lake . 
 = = = Lake County = = = 
 Continuing its somewhat rural journey to the east , Illinois 120 becomes known as Belvidere Road as it enters Lake County and the town of <unk> which is soon followed by the busy intersection of U.S. Route 12 / Illinois Route 59 ( Rand Road ) . The road then heads into the town of Volo which features land developed with businesses and homes on the south and undeveloped land on the north . This is also where it passes the intersection of the western terminus of IL 60 and then narrows down to two lanes . The road then runs past the Baxter Healthcare facility and proceeds into the Round Lake area where it goes by the <unk> Forest Preserve on the north and then between two residential developments . For just a slight instance , it travels through Round Lake Park before entering the town of Hainesville where it passes the Metra Milwaukee District / North Line tracks , the eastern terminus of IL 134 , and a few business before going into the more populated city of Grayslake . Neighborhoods and occasional small businesses lie north and south of the road until it crosses Canadian National Railway ( CN ) tracks ( used by the Metra North Central Service ) immediately before an intersection with IL 83 ( Barron Boulevard ) . After passing a shopping plaza on the south , the next stretch of roadway contains a mix of other businesses and residential developments , as well as a branch of the Lake Forest Hospital , while also widening to four lanes on its approach to a major junction with U.S. Route 45 . Past the intersection , the road passes a commercial plaza and again narrows back to two lanes before going by more neighborhoods on the north , and some open areas that contain the Almond Marsh Forest Preserve on the south . 
 At this point it widens to become a four @-@ lane divided highway west of Almond Road and it enters the southern part of Gurnee where travels near the Merit Club golf course which lies to the south of a " T " intersection with Hunt Club Road . The eastbound approach to this intersection features the only dual @-@ left turn lanes on the entire length of Illinois 120 . The remaining section of highway , although only briefly limited @-@ access , does have limited signalized intersections which keeps traffic flowing at a more constant rate . It first passes under a grade separation at Illinois Route 21 ( Milwaukee Avenue ) and goes over the Des Plaines River before forming an interchange with Interstate 94 ( Tri @-@ State Tollway ) . Only southbound access is permitted to I @-@ 94 ; northbound access is available via IL 21 . It next enters part of the Waukegan area and shortly encounters an at @-@ grade intersection with O <unk> Road and then continues with more grade separation at the Canadian Pacific Railway ( CP ) tracks and Greenleaf Avenue . Interchanges with IL 43 ( Waukegan Road ) and U.S. Route 41 ( Skokie Highway ) closely follow one another with a brief transition into Park City located between these two junctions . It can be confusing in this area as there is no direct access to northbound US @-@ 41 or southbound IL @-@ 43 , which terminates immediately north at US @-@ 41 . Illinois 120 loses its divided highway status after traveling over the Union Pacific ( UP ) tracks and passing by its last stretch of businesses as it reenters Waukegan . It soon reaches the commercially developed , signalized intersection of Illinois Route 131 ( Green Bay Road ) where it terminates as a state route ; Belvidere Road continues east as a local road . 
 = = History = = 
 State Bond Issue ( SBI ) Route 120 originally ran from Havana to Mason City in west @-@ central Illinois . In 1939 this became IL 119 , and in 1951 , U.S. Route 136 . In the meantime , in 1941 Illinois 120 replaced Illinois Route 20 to avoid confusion with nearby U.S. Route 20 . In 1972 , the designation was removed east of IL 131 . During the early 1990s , plans came about to widen 5 @.@ 7 miles of roadway in McHenry and Lake counties . The project extended from River Road in McHenry to east of Illinois 60 . These plans also included the construction of a short southern bypass around the town of Volo . By 1994 , the work had concluded which resulted in four concrete travel lanes , providing easier access between the two counties . In 2000 , a $ 4 @.@ 6 million construction project was completed at the intersection of US @-@ 45 . The improvements that took place to Illinois 120 were : expanding to two lanes in each direction and adding a right turn lane to the eastbound approach . The most recent major construction that has taken place was between August 2007 and July 2008 at the interchange with I @-@ 94 . The work consisted of demolishing the two bridge structures that travel over the tollway and replacing them with new ones . 
 = = Future = = 
 In recent years there has been much discussion on how to improve the east – west traffic flow throughout north @-@ central Lake County . IL 120 enters Lake County from the west as a four @-@ lane highway and then downgrades to a two @-@ lane highway less than three miles east , just past IL 60 and later becomes a four lane divided highway west of Hunt Club Road . Since there is heavy traffic from nearby Interstate 94 to the east as well as traffic traveling to and from McHenry County in the west , it seems logical to address this gap which is not yet four lanes . The solution to this problem was agreed to be a 17 @-@ mile improvement from US @-@ 12 to US @-@ 41 , including a 7 @-@ mile southern bypass in Grayslake . This has since become known as the " 120 bypass " . 
 This project is closely related to another long delayed Lake county transportation project ; the IL 53 extension . The currently stalled project has been planned to extend the limited @-@ access expressway , which carries IL 53 and terminates at Lake @-@ Cook Road , north to connect to the 120 bypass , and then branch off toward U.S. Route 12 to the west and Interstate 94 to the east . If the project were ever built , it would seem necessary that the east – west 120 bypass would be built as a limited @-@ access expressway to connect with the proposed north – south Illinois 53 extension which is also limited @-@ access . The entire scope of this project ; starting on Illinois 120 at Interstate 94 , continuing west on the 120 bypass , and connecting with the Illinois 53 extension would provide a direct route for commuters in northern Lake County to gain access to the western and southwestern Chicago suburbs . Since there have been many delays over the decades on how to proceed with this extension , the 120 bypass project moved forward on its own as an independent project . 
 In 2006 , a feasibility study got underway by a special corridor planning council which was composed of groups from nearby communities and local government officials and took public input . Initially , the main focus for the public was to provide feedback for the road character or type of road . The alternatives considered were : a four lane roundabout boulevard , four lane signalized boulevard , six lane signalized arterial , and six lane expressway . In December 2008 , it was revealed that the four lane boulevard option was selected in an 11 – 2 vote over an expressway , however it still remained open whether or not roundabouts would be used in place of traffic signals at intersections . The cost of the project was estimated at $ 521 million . In May 2009 , the preferred roadway alignment was selected . 
 On October 14 , 2009 , the Route 120 Corridor Planning Council Governance Board came to a consensus and approved a unified vision for the project which recommends that the bypass be built as a four lane arterial highway with limited @-@ access . The next step is for the Illinois Department of Transportation to begin a Phase I Preliminary Engineering Study . 
 In 2012 , the Blue Ribbon Advisory Council revived the 120 expressway alternative as a tollway , rather than a roundabout or signalized boulevard , and proposed the 53 / 120 expressway plan to IDOT as a 4 lane completely below grade tollway with a speed limit of 45 mph with a multi @-@ use path , <unk> grassy median , and landscaped raised berms , in @-@ pavement lighting , all electronic tolling , and innovative interchange designs . Proposed interchanges of Rt 53 : IL Rt 22 - unknown innovative interchange design , Midlothian Rd - design not yet proposed , Peterson Rd - Village of Grayslake proposes a folded diamond interchange to reduce land acquisitions , 120 bypass - Village of Grayslake proposes a triple @-@ stack interchange complex with the highest fly @-@ over ramp at 12 feet above grade , the middle elevation fly @-@ over ramp 10 feet below grade , and the main line beneath to be a tunnel with road surface at 32 feet below grade . Proposed interchanges of Rt 120 : Alleghany Rd - Village of Grayslake proposes a folded diamond interchange to reduce land acquisitions , IL Rt 83 ( Village of Grayslake proposes to be realigned to Atkinson Rd with Rt 83 aligned to a bridge constructed over a railyard and stone business , to pass west of FedEx , pass west of the current 83 alignment at Peterson , and veer back east to join the existing 83 alignment south of Peterson ) , Rt 53 - tunnel , U.S. Rt 45 - Single Point Urban Interchange ( SPUI ) . IDOT is in the Phase I Preliminary Engineering Study , to be completed sometime in 2015 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Divine Intervention ( album ) = 
 Divine Intervention is the sixth studio album by American thrash metal band Slayer . Released on September 27 , 1994 , through American Recordings , it was their first album to feature Paul Bostaph , replacing the band 's original drummer Dave Lombardo . The production posed a challenge to the record company , as its marketing situation drew arguments over the album 's explicitness . The band used the Decade of Aggression live album to give them time to decide the album 's style . Since it was released nearly four years after Seasons in the Abyss , vocalist Tom Araya said that there was more time spent on production compared to the band 's previous albums . The cover was painted and designed by Wes Benscoter as a re @-@ imaging of the group 's early " <unk> " graphic . 
 Even though so much time was spent on production , Kerry King said that the mixing and mastering should have had more attention . The song 's origins came not only from television shows , but were also inspired by various other things , including Rush Limbaugh , and serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer . In 1998 the album was banned in Germany due to the lyrics of " SS @-@ 3 " , " Circle of Beliefs " , " Serenity in Murder " , " 213 " and " Mind Control " . Divine Intervention received mixed reviews by critics . The album sold 93 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It peaked number eight on the Billboard 200 and charted at number 15 on UK Albums Chart . It was rewarded gold in the United States and Canada . An EP entitled Serenity in Murder was released shortly after the album . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 Tom Araya said that " when we did Divine Intervention , this was the last conference we ever had with a record label where they sat us down and sold us the idea of how they wanted to do " Divine " , and how they were going to do this with the cover ... and all these different ideas for the album . Then one guy looked at us and said , ' But we need a hit song . ' And we said , ' But you 've got eleven songs , and if you can 't find a hit in one of them then you 're shit out of luck because that 's what we 're giving you . ' So we 're like saying to them , ' Right , you write the fucking hit song and we 'll record it . ' That shut the guy up and that was the last time we had any kind of meetings like that ! " 
 Araya described " For this one , I just kind of got inspired by watching TV . That gave me a whole lot of ideas . The whole idea about the dude with Slayer in his arms was brought about because reality is scarier than anything you can make up . The production of the album posed as a challenge to the record company , " how to market a group whose gore @-@ soaked , extreme music is anathema to radio programmers . " It is the company 's first attempt to " hit the thrash band 's core @-@ audience of rabid enthusiasts with a fan @-@ orientated marketing assault . " Araya related : " We decided to take more time to bring this one together . We actually went into the studio with more written material than the past . We completed three out of seven songs outside the studio . We all sort of felt it was important to do it slowly . After the last tour , we had the intention to take the break . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 The College Music Journal said that " the band deals almost exclusively with realism " in the album , and noted that it " shocks and splatters like a severed artery , painting crimson pictures of murders , <unk> , and the ravaged , chaotic world they inhabit " . Both the mixing and mastering were criticized , with guitarist Kerry King saying that the band should have " paid more attention to the mix " , and Araya saying that it " is the one ( if any ) that he would not mind re @-@ mastering " . Neil Strauss from The New York Times explained many of the album 's origins . " 213 " was described as a " love song " by Araya , which was something they had never done before . The song was named after serial killer and sex offender Jeffrey Dahmer 's old apartment number . " Dittohead " , a partial tribute to Rush Limbaugh , begins by criticizing the legal system for " being too lenient on killers " . The song " ended up not denouncing the system but advocating its permissiveness " . " Sex , Murder , Art " was said by <unk> to feature " roars about a maddening relationship and his ' pleasure in inflicting pain . ' " 
 King said that the album contained origins relating to " war stories " and " explorations of madness " . It is Paul Bostaph 's first studio album with Slayer , resulting in Alex Henderson of AllMusic saying that it is a " positive , energizing influence on Slayer , which sounds better than ever on such dark triumphs as ' Killing Fields , ' ' Serenity in Murder , ' and ' Circle of Beliefs . ' " Henderson also said that they " focus [ ed ] on the violently repressive nature of governments and the lengths to which they will go to wield power " . 
 = = Artwork and packaging = = 
 The album was issued in a clear jewel box with a die @-@ cut cardboard O @-@ card . It included sixteen pages , which fold out to be a poster , which displays the cover art . Both the disc and the disc tray feature — as described by Chris Morris — an " image reflective of the mania displayed by the group 's fans , and exemplary of American frequently deployed shock tactics : a kid carving the band 's name into his arms with a scalpel . " Mike Bone from American Recordings said that " we captured this not only by photography , but with video — him actually doing it . " The front cover was painted and designed by Wes Benscoter , an American artist who would later paint the covers for the other Slayer releases Undisputed Attitude and Live Intrusion . The album sleeve features for the second time the backronym Satan Laughs As You Eternally Rot . This phrase was first used on the vinyl edition of the album Show No Mercy where it was carved into the <unk> groove of the record . 
 = = Reception = = 
 AllMusic said that " instead of doing something calculated like emulating Nirvana or Pearl Jam — or for that matter , Nine Inch Nails or Ministry — Slayer wisely refused to sound like anyone but Slayer . Tom Araya and co. responded to the new environment simply by striving to be the heaviest metal band they possibly could . " By the album 's release date , vocalist Tom Araya considered it to be their best album . 
 Divine Intervention sold 93 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , and by 2002 , it sold over 400 @,@ 000 copies in the US . It was reported that in the same year of its released , Kevin Kirk from the Heavy Metal Shop " ordered 1 @,@ 000 copies of Slayer 's Divine Intervention and sold every last album in a matter of weeks " . Although it is less accessible than its predecessor Seasons in the Abyss , Rolling Stone considered it to be their most successful album as of 2001 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Chart positions and certifications = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 Personnel information can be verified at AllMusic . 
 = Leonardo da Vinci = 
 Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci , more commonly Leonardo da Vinci or simply Leonardo ( Italian : [ <unk> di ser <unk> da ( v ) <unk> ] ; 15 April 1452 – 2 May 1519 ) , was an Italian polymath whose areas of interest included invention , painting , sculpting , architecture , science , music , mathematics , engineering , literature , anatomy , geology , astronomy , botany , writing , history , and cartography . He has been variously called the father of paleontology , <unk> , and architecture , and is widely considered one of the greatest painters of all time . Sometimes credited with the inventions of the parachute , helicopter and tank , he epitomized the Renaissance humanist ideal . 
 Many historians and scholars regard Leonardo as the prime exemplar of the " Universal Genius " or " Renaissance Man " , an individual of " unquenchable curiosity " and " feverishly inventive imagination " . According to art historian Helen Gardner , the scope and depth of his interests were without precedent in recorded history , and " his mind and personality seem to us superhuman , while the man himself mysterious and remote " . Marco <unk> notes that while there is much speculation regarding his life and personality , his view of the world was logical rather than mysterious , and that the empirical methods he employed were unorthodox for his time . 
 Born out of wedlock to a notary , Piero da Vinci , and a peasant woman , Caterina , in Vinci in the region of Florence , Leonardo was educated in the studio of the renowned Florentine painter Andrea del Verrocchio . Much of his earlier working life was spent in the service of Ludovico il Moro in Milan . He later worked in Rome , Bologna and Venice , and he spent his last years in France at the home awarded to him by Francis I of France . 
