 Leonardo was , and is , renowned primarily as a painter . Among his works , the Mona Lisa is the most famous and most parodied portrait and The Last Supper the most reproduced religious painting of all time , their fame approached only by Michelangelo 's The Creation of Adam . Leonardo 's drawing of the Vitruvian Man is also regarded as a cultural icon , being reproduced on items as varied as the euro coin , textbooks , and T @-@ shirts . Perhaps fifteen of his paintings have survived . Nevertheless , these few works , together with his notebooks , which contain drawings , scientific diagrams , and his thoughts on the nature of painting , compose a contribution to later generations of artists rivalled only by that of his contemporary , Michelangelo . 
 Leonardo is revered for his technological ingenuity . He conceptualised flying machines , a type of armoured fighting vehicle , concentrated solar power , an adding machine , and the double hull , also outlining a rudimentary theory of plate tectonics . Relatively few of his designs were constructed or even feasible during his lifetime , as the modern scientific approaches to metallurgy and engineering were only in their infancy during the Renaissance . Some of his smaller inventions , however , such as an automated bobbin winder and a machine for testing the tensile strength of wire , entered the world of manufacturing unheralded . A number of Leonardo 's most practical inventions are nowadays displayed as working models at the Museum of Vinci . He made substantial discoveries in anatomy , civil engineering , optics , and hydrodynamics , but he did not publish his findings and they had no direct influence on later science . 
 Today , Leonardo is widely considered one of the most diversely talented individuals ever to have lived . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Childhood , 1452 – 1466 = = = 
 Leonardo was born on 15 April 1452 ( Old Style ) " at the third hour of the night " in the Tuscan hill town of Vinci , in the lower valley of the Arno river in the territory of the Medici @-@ ruled Republic of Florence . He was the out @-@ of @-@ wedlock son of the wealthy Messer Piero <unk> di Antonio da Vinci , a Florentine legal notary , and Caterina , a peasant . Leonardo had no surname in the modern sense – " da Vinci " simply meaning " of Vinci " ; his full birth name was " Lionardo di ser Piero da Vinci " , meaning " Leonardo , ( son ) of ( Mes ) ser Piero from Vinci " . The inclusion of the title " ser " indicated that Leonardo 's father was a gentleman . 
 Little is known about Leonardo 's early life . He spent his first five years in the hamlet of <unk> in the home of his mother , and from 1457 lived in the household of his father , grandparents and uncle , Francesco , in the small town of Vinci . His father had married a sixteen @-@ year @-@ old girl named <unk> <unk> , who loved Leonardo but died young in 1465 without children . When Leonardo was sixteen ( 1468 ) , his father married again to twenty @-@ year @-@ old Francesca <unk> , who also died without children . Piero 's legitimate heirs were born from his third wife Margherita di Guglielmo ( who gave birth to six children : Antonio , <unk> , Maddalena , Lorenzo , Violante and Domenico ) and his fourth and final wife , Lucrezia <unk> ( who bore him another six children : Margherita , Benedetto , Pandolfo , Guglielmo , Bartolomeo and Giovanni ) . 
 In all Leonardo had twelve half @-@ siblings , who were much younger than him ( the last was born when Leonardo was forty years old ) and with whom he had very few contacts , but they caused him difficulty after his father 's death in the dispute over the inheritance . 
 Leonardo received an informal education in Latin , geometry and mathematics . In later life , Leonardo recorded only two childhood incidents . One , which he regarded as an omen , was when a kite dropped from the sky and hovered over his cradle , its tail feathers brushing his face . The second occurred while he was exploring in the mountains : he discovered a cave and was both terrified that some great monster might lurk there and driven by curiosity to find out what was inside . 
 Leonardo 's early life has been the subject of historical conjecture . Vasari , the 16th @-@ century biographer of Renaissance painters , tells of how a local peasant made himself a round shield and requested that Ser Piero have it painted for him . Leonardo responded with a painting of a monster spitting fire that was so terrifying that Ser Piero sold it to a Florentine art dealer , who sold it to the Duke of Milan . Meanwhile , having made a profit , Ser Piero bought a shield decorated with a heart pierced by an arrow , which he gave to the peasant . 
 = = = Verrocchio 's workshop , 1466 – 76 = = = 
 In 1466 , at the age of fourteen , Leonardo was apprenticed to the artist Andrea di <unk> , known as Verrocchio , whose workshop was " one of the finest in Florence " . He apprenticed as a <unk> ( studio boy ) to Andrea del Verrocchio , the leading Florentine painter and sculptor of his day Other famous painters apprenticed or associated with the workshop include Domenico Ghirlandaio , Perugino , Botticelli , and Lorenzo di Credi . Leonardo would have been exposed to both theoretical training and a vast range of technical skills , including drafting , chemistry , metallurgy , metal working , plaster casting , leather working , mechanics and carpentry as well as the artistic skills of drawing , painting , sculpting and modelling . 
 Much of the painted production of Verrocchio 's workshop was done by his employees . According to Vasari , Leonardo collaborated with Verrocchio on his The Baptism of Christ , painting the young angel holding Jesus ' robe in a manner that was so far superior to his master 's that Verrocchio put down his brush and never painted again . On close examination , the painting reveals much that has been painted or touched @-@ up over the tempera using the new technique of oil paint , with the landscape , the rocks that can be seen through the brown mountain stream and much of the figure of Jesus bearing witness to the hand of Leonardo . Leonardo may have been the model for two works by Verrocchio : the bronze statue of David in the Bargello and the Archangel Raphael in Tobias and the Angel . 
 By 1472 , at the age of twenty , Leonardo qualified as a master in the Guild of Saint Luke , the guild of artists and doctors of medicine , but even after his father set him up in his own workshop , his attachment to Verrocchio was such that he continued to collaborate with him . Leonardo 's earliest known dated work is a drawing in pen and ink of the Arno valley , drawn on 5 August 1473 . 
 = = = Professional life , 1476 – 1513 = = = 
 Florentine court records of 1476 show that Leonardo and three other young men were charged with sodomy but acquitted ; homosexual acts were illegal in Renaissance Florence . From that date until 1478 there is no record of his work or even of his whereabouts . In 1478 , he left Verrocchio 's studio and was no longer resident at his father 's house . One writer , the " <unk> " <unk> , claims that in 1480 Leonardo was living with the Medici and working in the Garden of the Piazza San Marco in Florence , a Neo @-@ Platonic academy of artists , poets and philosophers that the Medici had established . In January 1478 , he received an independent commission to paint an altarpiece for the Chapel of St. Bernard in the Palazzo Vecchio ; in March 1481 , he received a second independent commission for The Adoration of the Magi for the monks of San Donato a Scopeto . Neither commission was completed , the second being interrupted when Leonardo went to Milan . 
 In 1482 , Leonardo , who according to Vasari was a most talented musician , created a silver lyre in the shape of a horse 's head . Lorenzo de ' Medici sent Leonardo to Milan , bearing the lyre as a gift , to secure peace with Ludovico Sforza , Duke of Milan . At this time Leonardo wrote an often @-@ quoted letter describing the many marvellous and diverse things that he could achieve in the field of engineering and informing Ludovico that he could also paint . 
 Leonardo worked in Milan from 1482 until 1499 . He was commissioned to paint the Virgin of the Rocks for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception and The Last Supper for the monastery of Santa Maria delle Grazie . In the spring of 1485 , Leonardo travelled to Hungary on behalf of Ludovico to meet Matthias Corvinus , for whom he is believed to have painted a Holy Family . Between 1493 and 1495 , Leonardo listed a woman called Caterina among his dependents in his taxation documents . When she died in 1495 , the list of funeral expenditures suggests that she was his mother . 
 Leonardo was employed on many different projects for Ludovico , including the preparation of floats and pageants for special occasions , designs for a dome for Milan Cathedral and a model for a huge equestrian monument to Francesco Sforza , Ludovico 's predecessor . Seventy tons of bronze were set aside for casting it . The monument remained unfinished for several years , which was not unusual for Leonardo . In 1492 , the clay model of the horse was completed . It surpassed in size the only two large equestrian statues of the Renaissance , Donatello 's <unk> in Padua and Verrocchio 's Bartolomeo Colleoni in Venice , and became known as the " Gran Cavallo " . Leonardo began making detailed plans for its casting ; however , Michelangelo insulted Leonardo by implying that he was unable to cast it . In November 1494 , Ludovico gave the bronze to be used for cannon to defend the city from invasion by Charles VIII . 
 At the start of the Second Italian War in 1499 , the invading French troops used the life @-@ size clay model for the Gran Cavallo for target practice . With Ludovico Sforza overthrown , Leonardo , with his assistant Salai and friend , the mathematician Luca Pacioli , fled Milan for Venice , where he was employed as a military architect and engineer , devising methods to defend the city from naval attack . On his return to Florence in 1500 , he and his household were guests of the Servite monks at the monastery of Santissima Annunziata and were provided with a workshop where , according to Vasari , Leonardo created the cartoon of The Virgin and Child with St Anne and St John the Baptist , a work that won such admiration that " men and women , young and old " flocked to see it " as if they were attending a great festival " . 
 In Cesena in 1502 , Leonardo entered the service of Cesare Borgia , the son of Pope Alexander VI , acting as a military architect and engineer and travelling throughout Italy with his patron . Leonardo created a map of Cesare Borgia 's stronghold , a town plan of Imola in order to win his patronage . Maps were extremely rare at the time and it would have seemed like a new concept . Upon seeing it , Cesare hired Leonardo as his chief military engineer and architect . Later in the year , Leonardo produced another map for his patron , one of Chiana Valley , Tuscany , so as to give his patron a better overlay of the land and greater strategic position . He created this map in conjunction with his other project of constructing a dam from the sea to Florence , in order to allow a supply of water to sustain the canal during all seasons . 
 Leonardo returned to Florence where he rejoined the Guild of Saint Luke on 18 October 1503 , and spent two years designing and painting a mural of The Battle of Anghiari for the Signoria , with Michelangelo designing its companion piece , The Battle of Cascina . In Florence in 1504 , he was part of a committee formed to relocate , against the artist 's will , Michelangelo 's statue of David . 
 In 1506 Leonardo returned to Milan . Many of his most prominent pupils or followers in painting either knew or worked with him in Milan , including Bernardino <unk> , Giovanni Antonio <unk> and Marco d <unk> . At this time he may have commenced a project for an equestrian figure of Charles II d 'Amboise , the acting French governor of Milan . A wax model survives , and if genuine , is the only example of Leonardo 's sculpture . 
 Leonardo did not stay in Milan for long because his father had died in 1504 , and in 1507 he was back in Florence trying to sort out problems with his brothers over his father 's estate . By 1508 Leonardo was back in Milan , living in his own house in Porta Orientale in the parish of Santa <unk> . 
 = = = Old age , 1513 – 1519 = = = 
 From September 1513 to 1516 , under Pope Leo X , Leonardo spent much of his time living in the Belvedere in the Vatican in Rome , where Raphael and Michelangelo were both active at the time . In October 1515 , King Francis I of France recaptured Milan . On 19 December , Leonardo was present at the meeting of Francis I and Pope Leo X , which took place in Bologna . Leonardo was commissioned to make for Francis a mechanical lion which could walk forward , then open its chest to reveal a cluster of lilies . In 1516 , he entered François ' service , being given the use of the manor house Clos <unk> , now a public museum , near the king 's residence at the royal Château d 'Amboise . It was here that he spent the last three years of his life , accompanied by his friend and apprentice , Count Francesco Melzi , and supported by a pension totalling 10 @,@ 000 scudi . 
 Leonardo died at Clos <unk> , on 2 May 1519 . Francis I had become a close friend . Vasari records that the king held Leonardo 's head in his arms as he died , although this story , beloved by the French and portrayed in romantic paintings by Ingres , <unk> and other French artists , as well as by Angelica Kauffman , may be legend rather than fact . Vasari states that in his last days , Leonardo sent for a priest to make his confession and to receive the Holy Sacrament . In accordance with his will , sixty beggars followed his casket . Melzi was the principal heir and executor , receiving as well as money , Leonardo 's paintings , tools , library and personal effects . Leonardo also remembered his other long @-@ time pupil and companion , Salai and his servant Battista di <unk> , who each received half of Leonardo 's vineyards , his brothers who received land , and his serving woman who received a black cloak " of good stuff " with a fur edge . Leonardo da Vinci was buried in the Chapel of Saint @-@ Hubert in Château d 'Amboise , in France . 
 Some 20 years after Leonardo 's death , Francis was reported by the goldsmith and sculptor Benvenuto Cellini as saying : " There had never been another man born in the world who knew as much as Leonardo , not so much about painting , sculpture and architecture , as that he was a very great philosopher . " 
 = = Relationships and influences = = 
 = = = Florence : Leonardo 's artistic and social background = = = 
 Florence at the time of Leonardo 's youth was the centre of Christian Humanist thought and culture . Leonardo commenced his apprenticeship with Verrocchio in 1466 , the year that Verrocchio 's master , the great sculptor Donatello , died . The painter Uccello , whose early experiments with perspective were to influence the development of landscape painting , was a very old man . The painters Piero della Francesca and Filippo Lippi , sculptor Luca della Robbia , and architect and writer Leon Battista Alberti were in their sixties . The successful artists of the next generation were Leonardo 's teacher Verrocchio , Antonio del <unk> and the portrait sculptor Mino da Fiesole , whose lifelike busts give the most reliable likenesses of Lorenzo Medici 's father Piero and uncle Giovanni . 
 Leonardo 's youth was spent in a Florence that was ornamented by the works of these artists and by Donatello 's contemporaries , Masaccio , whose figurative frescoes were imbued with realism and emotion , and Ghiberti , whose Gates of Paradise , gleaming with gold leaf , displayed the art of combining complex figure compositions with detailed architectural backgrounds . Piero della Francesca had made a detailed study of perspective , and was the first painter to make a scientific study of light . These studies and Alberti 's treatise De Pictura were to have a profound effect on younger artists and in particular on Leonardo 's own observations and artworks . 
 <unk> 's " Expulsion from the Garden of Eden " depicting the naked and distraught Adam and Eve created a powerfully expressive image of the human form , cast into three dimensions by the use of light and shade , which was to be developed in the works of Leonardo in a way that was to be influential in the course of painting . The humanist influence of Donatello 's " David " can be seen in Leonardo 's late paintings , particularly John the Baptist . 
 A prevalent tradition in Florence was the small altarpiece of the Virgin and Child . Many of these were created in tempera or glazed terracotta by the workshops of Filippo Lippi , Verrocchio and the prolific della Robbia family . Leonardo 's early Madonnas such as The Madonna with a carnation and the Benois Madonna followed this tradition while showing idiosyncratic departures , particularly in the case of the Benois Madonna in which the Virgin is set at an oblique angle to the picture space with the Christ Child at the opposite angle . This compositional theme was to emerge in Leonardo 's later paintings such as The Virgin and Child with St. Anne . 
 Leonardo was a contemporary of Botticelli , Domenico Ghirlandaio and Perugino , who were all slightly older than he was . He would have met them at the workshop of Verrocchio , with whom they had associations , and at the Academy of the Medici . Botticelli was a particular favourite of the Medici family , and thus his success as a painter was assured . Ghirlandaio and Perugino were both prolific and ran large workshops . They competently delivered commissions to well @-@ satisfied patrons who appreciated Ghirlandaio 's ability to portray the wealthy citizens of Florence within large religious frescoes , and Perugino 's ability to deliver a multitude of saints and angels of unfailing sweetness and innocence . 
 These three were among those commissioned to paint the walls of the Sistine Chapel , the work commencing with Perugino 's employment in 1479 . Leonardo was not part of this prestigious commission . His first significant commission , The Adoration of the Magi for the Monks of Scopeto , was never completed . 
 In 1476 , during the time of Leonardo 's association with Verrocchio 's workshop , the Portinari Altarpiece by Hugo van der Goes arrived in Florence , bringing from Northern Europe new painterly techniques that were to profoundly affect Leonardo , Ghirlandaio , Perugino and others . In 1479 , the Sicilian painter Antonello da Messina , who worked exclusively in oils , traveled north on his way to Venice , where the leading painter Giovanni Bellini adopted the technique of oil painting , quickly making it the preferred method in Venice . Leonardo was also later to visit Venice . 
 Like the two contemporary architects Bramante and Antonio da Sangallo the Elder , Leonardo experimented with designs for centrally planned churches , a number of which appear in his journals , as both plans and views , although none was ever realised . 
 Leonardo 's political contemporaries were Lorenzo Medici ( il <unk> ) , who was three years older , and his younger brother Giuliano , who was slain in the Pazzi conspiracy in 1478 . Leonardo was sent as an ambassador by the Medici court to Ludovico il Moro , who ruled Milan between 1479 and 1499 . 
 With Alberti , Leonardo visited the home of the Medici and through them came to know the older Humanist philosophers of whom <unk> Ficino , proponent of Neo Platonism ; Cristoforo <unk> , writer of commentaries on Classical writings , and John Argyropoulos , teacher of Greek and translator of Aristotle were the foremost . Also associated with the Academy of the Medici was Leonardo 's contemporary , the brilliant young poet and philosopher Pico della Mirandola . Leonardo later wrote in the margin of a journal , " The Medici made me and the Medici destroyed me . " While it was through the action of Lorenzo that Leonardo received his employment at the court of Milan , it is not known exactly what Leonardo meant by this cryptic comment . 
 Although usually named together as the three giants of the High Renaissance , Leonardo , Michelangelo and Raphael were not of the same generation . Leonardo was twenty @-@ three when Michelangelo was born and thirty @-@ one when Raphael was born . Raphael lived until the age of only 37 and died in 1520 , the year after Leonardo died , but Michelangelo went on creating for another 45 years . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Within Leonardo 's lifetime , his extraordinary powers of invention , his " outstanding physical beauty " , " infinite grace " , " great strength and generosity " , " regal spirit and tremendous breadth of mind " , as described by Vasari , as well as all other aspects of his life , attracted the curiosity of others . One such aspect was his respect for life , evidenced by his vegetarianism and his habit , according to Vasari , of purchasing caged birds and releasing them . 
 Leonardo had many friends who are now renowned either in their fields or for their historical significance . They included the mathematician Luca Pacioli , with whom he collaborated on the book De divina proportione in the 1490s . Leonardo appears to have had no close relationships with women except for his friendship with Cecilia <unk> and the two Este sisters , Beatrice and Isabella . While on a journey that took him through Mantua , he drew a portrait of Isabella that appears to have been used to create a painted portrait , now lost . 
 Beyond friendship , Leonardo kept his private life secret . His sexuality has been the subject of satire , analysis , and speculation . This trend began in the mid @-@ 16th century and was revived in the 19th and 20th centuries , most notably by Sigmund Freud . Leonardo 's most intimate relationships were perhaps with his pupils Salai and Melzi . Melzi , writing to inform Leonardo 's brothers of his death , described Leonardo 's feelings for his pupils as both loving and passionate . It has been claimed since the 16th century that these relationships were of a sexual or erotic nature . Court records of 1476 , when he was aged twenty @-@ four , show that Leonardo and three other young men were charged with sodomy in an incident involving a well @-@ known male prostitute . The charges were dismissed for lack of evidence , and there is speculation that since one of the accused , Lionardo de <unk> , was related to Lorenzo de ' Medici , the family exerted its influence to secure the dismissal . Since that date much has been written about his presumed homosexuality and its role in his art , particularly in the androgyny and eroticism manifested in John the Baptist and Bacchus and more explicitly in a number of erotic drawings . 
 = = = Assistants and pupils = = = 
 Gian Giacomo Caprotti da <unk> , nicknamed Salai or Il <unk> ( " The Little <unk> One " i.e. , the devil ) , entered Leonardo 's household in 1490 . After only a year , Leonardo made a list of his misdemeanours , calling him " a thief , a liar , stubborn , and a glutton " , after he had made off with money and valuables on at least five occasions and spent a fortune on clothes . Nevertheless , Leonardo treated him with great indulgence , and he remained in Leonardo 's household for the next thirty years . Salai executed a number of paintings under the name of Andrea Salai , but although Vasari claims that Leonardo " taught him a great deal about painting " , his work is generally considered to be of less artistic merit than others among Leonardo 's pupils , such as Marco d <unk> and <unk> . In 1515 , he painted a nude version of the Mona Lisa , known as <unk> Vanna . Salai owned the Mona Lisa at the time of his death in 1525 , and in his will it was assessed at 505 lire , an exceptionally high valuation for a small panel portrait . 
 In 1506 , Leonardo took on another pupil , Count Francesco Melzi , the son of a Lombard aristocrat , who is considered to have been his favourite student . He travelled to France with Leonardo and remained with him until Leonardo 's death . Melzi inherited the artistic and scientific works , manuscripts , and collections of Leonardo and administered the estate . 
 = = Painting = = 
 Despite the recent awareness and admiration of Leonardo as a scientist and inventor , for the better part of four hundred years his fame rested on his achievements as a painter and on a handful of works , either authenticated or attributed to him that have been regarded as among the masterpieces . 
 These paintings are famous for a variety of qualities which have been much imitated by students and discussed at great length by connoisseurs and critics . Among the qualities that make Leonardo 's work unique are the innovative techniques which he used in laying on the paint , his detailed knowledge of anatomy , light , botany and geology , his interest in physiognomy and the way in which humans register emotion in expression and gesture , his innovative use of the human form in figurative composition , and his use of the subtle gradation of tone . All these qualities come together in his most famous painted works , the Mona Lisa , the Last Supper and the Virgin of the Rocks . 
 = = = Early works = = = 
 Leonardo 's early works begin with the Baptism of Christ painted in conjunction with Verrocchio . Two other paintings appear to date from his time at the workshop , both of which are <unk> . One is small , 59 centimetres ( 23 in ) long and 14 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) high . It is a " predella " to go at the base of a larger composition , in this case a painting by Lorenzo di Credi from which it has become separated . The other is a much larger work , 217 centimetres ( 85 in ) long . In both these <unk> , Leonardo used a formal arrangement , such as in Fra Angelico 's two well @-@ known pictures of the same subject , of the Virgin Mary sitting or kneeling to the right of the picture , approached from the left by an angel in profile , with a rich flowing garment , raised wings and bearing a lily . Although previously attributed to Ghirlandaio , the larger work is now generally attributed to Leonardo . 
 In the smaller picture , Mary averts her eyes and folds her hands in a gesture that symbolised submission to God 's will . In the larger picture , however , Mary is not submissive . The girl , interrupted in her reading by this unexpected messenger , puts a finger in her bible to mark the place and raises her hand in a formal gesture of greeting or surprise . This calm young woman appears to accept her role as the Mother of God , not with resignation but with confidence . In this painting , the young Leonardo presents the humanist face of the Virgin Mary , recognising humanity 's role in God 's incarnation . 
 = = = Paintings of the 1480s = = = 
 In the 1480s , Leonardo received two very important commissions and commenced another work which was also of ground @-@ breaking importance in terms of composition . Two of the three were never finished , and the third took so long that it was subject to lengthy negotiations over completion and payment . One of these paintings is that of St. Jerome in the Wilderness . <unk> associates this picture with a difficult period of Leonardo 's life , as evidenced in his diary : " I thought I was learning to live ; I was only learning to die . " 
 Although the painting is barely begun , the composition can be seen and it is very unusual . Jerome , as a penitent , occupies the middle of the picture , set on a slight diagonal and viewed somewhat from above . His kneeling form takes on a trapezoid shape , with one arm stretched to the outer edge of the painting and his gaze looking in the opposite direction . J. Wasserman points out the link between this painting and Leonardo 's anatomical studies . Across the foreground sprawls his symbol , a great lion whose body and tail make a double spiral across the base of the picture space . The other remarkable feature is the sketchy landscape of craggy rocks against which the figure is silhouetted . 
 The daring display of figure composition , the landscape elements and personal drama also appear in the great unfinished masterpiece , the Adoration of the Magi , a commission from the Monks of San Donato a Scopeto . It is a complex composition , of about 250 x 250 centimetres . Leonardo did numerous drawings and preparatory studies , including a detailed one in linear perspective of the ruined classical architecture which makes part of the backdrop to the scene . But in 1482 Leonardo went off to Milan at the behest of Lorenzo de ' Medici in order to win favour with Ludovico il Moro , and the painting was abandoned . 
 The third important work of this period is the Virgin of the Rocks which was commissioned in Milan for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception . The painting , to be done with the assistance of the de Predis brothers , was to fill a large complex altarpiece , already constructed . Leonardo chose to paint an apocryphal moment of the infancy of Christ when the infant John the Baptist , in protection of an angel , met the Holy Family on the road to Egypt . In this scene , as painted by Leonardo , John recognizes and worships Jesus as the Christ . The painting demonstrates an eerie beauty as the graceful figures kneel in adoration around the infant Christ in a wild landscape of tumbling rock and whirling water . While the painting is quite large , about 200 × 120 centimetres , it is not nearly as complex as the painting ordered by the monks of St Donato , having only four figures rather than about fifty and a rocky landscape rather than architectural details . The painting was eventually finished ; in fact , two versions of the painting were finished , one which remained at the chapel of the Confraternity and the other which Leonardo carried away to France . But the Brothers did not get their painting , or the de Predis their payment , until the next century . 
 = = = Paintings of the 1490s = = = 
 Leonardo 's most famous painting of the 1490s is The Last Supper , painted for the refectory of the Convent of Santa Maria della Grazie in Milan . The painting represents the last meal shared by Jesus with his disciples before his capture and death . It shows specifically the moment when Jesus has just said " one of you will betray me " . Leonardo tells the story of the consternation that this statement caused to the twelve followers of Jesus . 
 The novelist Matteo Bandello observed Leonardo at work and wrote that some days he would paint from dawn till dusk without stopping to eat and then not paint for three or four days at a time . This was beyond the comprehension of the prior of the convent , who hounded him until Leonardo asked Ludovico to intervene . Vasari describes how Leonardo , troubled over his ability to adequately depict the faces of Christ and the traitor Judas , told the Duke that he might be obliged to use the prior as his model . 
 When finished , the painting was acclaimed as a masterpiece of design and characterisation , but it deteriorated rapidly , so that within a hundred years it was described by one viewer as " completely ruined " . Leonardo , instead of using the reliable technique of fresco , had used tempera over a ground that was mainly gesso , resulting in a surface which was subject to mold and to flaking . Despite this , the painting has remained one of the most reproduced works of art , countless copies being made in every medium from carpets to cameos . 
 = = = Paintings of the 16th century = = = 
 Among the works created by Leonardo in the 16th century is the small portrait known as the Mona Lisa or " la Gioconda " , the laughing one . In the present era it is arguably the most famous painting in the world . Its fame rests , in particular , on the elusive smile on the woman 's face , its mysterious quality brought about perhaps by the fact that the artist has subtly shadowed the corners of the mouth and eyes so that the exact nature of the smile cannot be determined . The shadowy quality for which the work is renowned came to be called " <unk> " or Leonardo 's smoke . Vasari , who is generally thought to have known the painting only by repute , said that " the smile was so pleasing that it seemed divine rather than human ; and those who saw it were amazed to find that it was as alive as the original " . 
 Other characteristics found in this work are the unadorned dress , in which the eyes and hands have no competition from other details , the dramatic landscape background in which the world seems to be in a state of flux , the subdued colouring and the extremely smooth nature of the painterly technique , employing oils , but laid on much like tempera and blended on the surface so that the brushstrokes are indistinguishable . Vasari expressed the opinion that the manner of painting would make even " the most confident master ... despair and lose heart . " The perfect state of preservation and the fact that there is no sign of repair or overpainting is rare in a panel painting of this date . 
 In the painting Virgin and Child with St. Anne the composition again picks up the theme of figures in a landscape which Wasserman describes as " breathtakingly beautiful " and harkens back to the St Jerome picture with the figure set at an oblique angle . What makes this painting unusual is that there are two obliquely set figures superimposed . Mary is seated on the knee of her mother , St Anne . She leans forward to restrain the Christ Child as he plays roughly with a lamb , the sign of his own impending sacrifice . This painting , which was copied many times , influenced Michelangelo , Raphael , and Andrea del Sarto , and through them Pontormo and Correggio . The trends in composition were adopted in particular by the Venetian painters Tintoretto and Veronese . 
 = = = Murals = = = 
 Leonardo 's The Battle of <unk> was commissioned in 1505 , but was lost . All that remains is a copy by Rubens , but Maurizio <unk> is convinced it can still be found and has spent a lifetime searching for it . He was allowed to drill some pilot holes in a mural in the Salone dei <unk> , Palazzo Vecchio , Florence , and his team did find evidence of an oil painting underneath . 
 = = = Drawings = = = 
 Leonardo was not a prolific painter , but he was a most prolific draftsman , keeping journals full of small sketches and detailed drawings recording all manner of things that took his attention . As well as the journals there exist many studies for paintings , some of which can be identified as preparatory to particular works such as The Adoration of the Magi , The Virgin of the Rocks and The Last Supper . His earliest dated drawing is a Landscape of the Arno Valley , 1473 , which shows the river , the mountains , <unk> Castle and the farmlands beyond it in great detail . 
 Among his famous drawings are the Vitruvian Man , a study of the proportions of the human body , the Head of an Angel , for The Virgin of the Rocks in the Louvre , a botanical study of Star of Bethlehem and a large drawing ( 160 × 100 cm ) in black chalk on coloured paper of The Virgin and Child with St. Anne and St. John the Baptist in the National Gallery , London . This drawing employs the subtle <unk> technique of shading , in the manner of the Mona Lisa . It is thought that Leonardo never made a painting from it , the closest similarity being to The Virgin and Child with St. Anne in the Louvre . 
 Other drawings of interest include numerous studies generally referred to as " caricatures " because , although exaggerated , they appear to be based upon observation of live models . Vasari relates that if Leonardo saw a person with an interesting face he would follow them around all day observing them . There are numerous studies of beautiful young men , often associated with Salai , with the rare and much admired facial feature , the so @-@ called " Grecian profile " . These faces are often contrasted with that of a warrior . Salai is often depicted in fancy @-@ dress costume . Leonardo is known to have designed sets for pageants with which these may be associated . Other , often meticulous , drawings show studies of drapery . A marked development in Leonardo 's ability to draw drapery occurred in his early works . Another often @-@ reproduced drawing is a macabre sketch that was done by Leonardo in Florence in 1479 showing the body of Bernardo Baroncelli , hanged in connection with the murder of Giuliano , brother of Lorenzo de ' Medici , in the Pazzi conspiracy . With dispassionate integrity Leonardo has registered in neat mirror writing the colours of the robes that Baroncelli was wearing when he died . 
 = = Observation and invention = = 
 = = = Journals and notes = = = 
 Renaissance humanism recognized no mutually exclusive polarities between the sciences and the arts , and Leonardo 's studies in science and engineering are sometimes considered as impressive and innovative as his artistic work . These studies were recorded in 13 @,@ 000 pages of notes and drawings , which fuse art and natural philosophy ( the forerunner of modern science ) , made and maintained daily throughout Leonardo 's life and travels , as he made continual observations of the world around him . 
 Leonardo 's writings are mostly in mirror @-@ image cursive . The reason may have been more a practical expediency than for reasons of secrecy as is often suggested . Since Leonardo wrote with his left hand , it is probable that it was easier for him to write from right to left . 
 His notes and drawings display an enormous range of interests and preoccupations , some as mundane as lists of groceries and people who owed him money and some as intriguing as designs for wings and shoes for walking on water . There are compositions for paintings , studies of details and drapery , studies of faces and emotions , of animals , babies , dissections , plant studies , rock formations , whirlpools , war machines , flying machines and architecture . 
 These notebooks — originally loose papers of different types and sizes , distributed by friends after his death — have found their way into major collections such as the Royal Library at Windsor Castle , the Louvre , the Biblioteca Nacional de España , the Victoria and Albert Museum , the Biblioteca Ambrosiana in Milan which holds the twelve @-@ volume Codex Atlanticus , and British Library in London which has put a selection from the Codex Arundel ( BL Arundel MS 263 ) online . The Codex Leicester is the only major scientific work of Leonardo 's in private hands . It is owned by Bill Gates and is displayed once a year in different cities around the world . 
 Leonardo 's notes appear to have been intended for publication because many of the sheets have a form and order that would facilitate this . In many cases a single topic , for example , the heart or the human fetus , is covered in detail in both words and pictures on a single sheet . Why they were not published within Leonardo 's lifetime is unknown . 
 = = = Scientific studies = = = 
 Leonardo 's approach to science was an observational one : he tried to understand a phenomenon by describing and depicting it in utmost detail and did not emphasize experiments or theoretical explanation . Since he lacked formal education in Latin and mathematics , contemporary scholars mostly ignored Leonardo the scientist , although he did teach himself Latin . In the 1490s he studied mathematics under Luca Pacioli and prepared a series of drawings of regular solids in a skeletal form to be engraved as plates for Pacioli 's book De divina proportione , published in 1509 . 
 It appears that from the content of his journals he was planning a series of treatises to be published on a variety of subjects . A coherent treatise on anatomy was said to have been observed during a visit by Cardinal Louis ' D ' Aragon 's secretary in 1517 . Aspects of his work on the studies of anatomy , light and the landscape were assembled for publication by his pupil Francesco Melzi and eventually published as Treatise on Painting by Leonardo da Vinci in France and Italy in 1651 and Germany in 1724 , with engravings based upon drawings by the Classical painter Nicolas Poussin . According to <unk> , the treatise , which in France went into 62 editions in fifty years , caused Leonardo to be seen as " the precursor of French academic thought on art " . 
 While Leonardo 's experimentation followed clear scientific methods , a recent and exhaustive analysis of Leonardo as a scientist by <unk> Capra argues that Leonardo was a fundamentally different kind of scientist from Galileo , Newton and other scientists who followed him in that , as a Renaissance Man , his theorising and hypothesising integrated the arts and particularly painting . 
 = = = Anatomy = = = 
 Leonardo started his study in the anatomy of the human body under the apprenticeship of Andrea del Verrocchio , who demanded that his students develop a deep knowledge of the subject . As an artist , he quickly became master of topographic anatomy , drawing many studies of muscles , tendons and other visible anatomical features . 
 As a successful artist , he was given permission to dissect human corpses at the Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova in Florence and later at hospitals in Milan and Rome . From 1510 to 1511 he collaborated in his studies with the doctor Marcantonio della Torre . Leonardo made over 240 detailed drawings and wrote about 13 @,@ 000 words towards a treatise on anatomy . These papers were left to his heir , Francesco Melzi , for publication , a task of overwhelming difficulty because of its scope and Leonardo 's idiosyncratic writing . It was left incomplete at the time of Melzi 's death more than 50 years later , with only a small amount of the material on anatomy included in Leonardo 's Treatise on painting , published in France in 1632 . During the time that Melzi was ordering the material into chapters for publication , they were examined by a number of anatomists and artists , including Vasari , Cellini and Albrecht Dürer who made a number of drawings from them . 
 Leonardo 's anatomical drawings include many studies of the human skeleton and its parts , and studies muscles and sinews . He studied the mechanical functions of the skeleton and the muscular forces that are applied to it in a manner that prefigured the modern science of biomechanics . He drew the heart and vascular system , the sex organs and other internal organs , making one of the first scientific drawings of a fetus in utero . The drawings and notation are far ahead of their time , and if published , would undoubtedly have made a major contribution to medical science . 
 As an artist , Leonardo also closely observed and recorded the effects of age and of human emotion on the physiology , studying in particular the effects of rage . He also drew many figures who had significant facial deformities or signs of illness . Leonardo also studied and drew the anatomy of many animals , dissecting cows , birds , monkeys , bears , and frogs , and comparing in his drawings their anatomical structure with that of humans . He also made a number of studies of horses . 
 = = = Investigations = = = 
 Da Vinci performed some very detailed investigations into not only anatomy but also physiology . He attempted to identify the source of ' emotions ' and their expression . His dissections and documentation of muscles , nerves , and vessels helped to describe the physiology and mechanics of movement . He found it difficult to incorporate the prevailing system and theories of bodily humours , but eventually he abandoned these physiological explanations of bodily functions . He made the observations that humours were not located in cerebral spaces or ventricles . He also documented that the humours were not contained in the heart or the liver , and it was the heart that defined the circulatory system . He was the first to define atherosclerosis and liver cirrhosis . He created models of the cerebral ventricles with the use of melted wax and constructed a glass aorta to observe the circulation of blood through the aortic valve by using water and grass seed to watch flow patterns . Vesalius published his work on anatomy and physiology in De humani corporis fabrica in 1543 . 
 = = = Engineering and inventions = = = 
 During his lifetime , Leonardo was valued as an engineer . In a letter to Ludovico il Moro , he claimed to be able to create all sorts of machines both for the protection of a city and for siege . When he fled to Venice in 1499 , he found employment as an engineer and devised a system of moveable barricades to protect the city from attack . He also had a scheme for diverting the flow of the Arno river , a project on which Niccolò Machiavelli also worked . Leonardo 's journals include a vast number of inventions , both practical and impractical . They include musical instruments , a mechanical knight , hydraulic pumps , reversible crank mechanisms , finned mortar shells , and a steam cannon . 
 In 1502 , Leonardo produced a drawing of a single span 720 @-@ foot ( 220 m ) bridge as part of a civil engineering project for Ottoman Sultan <unk> II of Constantinople . The bridge was intended to span an inlet at the mouth of the Bosporus known as the Golden Horn . <unk> did not pursue the project because he believed that such a construction was impossible . Leonardo 's vision was resurrected in 2001 when a smaller bridge based on his design was constructed in Norway . 
 Leonardo was fascinated by the phenomenon of flight for much of his life , producing many studies including Codex on the Flight of Birds ( c . 1505 ) , as well as plans for several flying machines such as a flapping ornithopter and a machine with a helical rotor . The British television station Channel Four commissioned a 2003 documentary Leonardo 's Dream Machines . Leonardo 's designs for machines such as a parachute , and giant crossbow were interpreted , constructed and tested . Some of those designs proved successes , whilst others fared less well when practically tested . 
 = = Fame and reputation = = 
 Leonardo 's fame within his own lifetime was such that the King of France carried him away like a trophy , and was claimed to have supported him in his old age and held him in his arms as he died . Interest in Leonardo and his work has never diminished . Crowds still queue to see his best @-@ known artworks , T @-@ shirts still bear his most famous drawing , and writers continue to hail him as a genius while speculating about his private life , as well as about what one so intelligent actually believed in . 
 Giorgio Vasari , in the enlarged edition of Lives of the Artists , 1568 , introduced his chapter on Leonardo da Vinci with the following words : 
 In the normal course of events many men and women are born with remarkable talents ; but occasionally , in a way that transcends nature , a single person is marvellously endowed by Heaven with beauty , grace and talent in such abundance that he leaves other men far behind , all his actions seem inspired and indeed everything he does clearly comes from God rather than from human skill . Everyone acknowledged that this was true of Leonardo da Vinci , an artist of outstanding physical beauty , who displayed infinite grace in everything that he did and who cultivated his genius so brilliantly that all problems he studied he solved with ease . 
 The continued admiration that Leonardo commanded from painters , critics and historians is reflected in many other written tributes . Baldassare Castiglione , author of Il <unk> ( " The Courtier " ) , wrote in 1528 : " ... Another of the greatest painters in this world looks down on this art in which he is unequalled ... " while the biographer known as " <unk> <unk> " wrote , c . 1540 : " His genius was so rare and universal that it can be said that nature worked a miracle on his behalf ... " . 
 The 19th century brought a particular admiration for Leonardo 's genius , causing Henry Fuseli to write in 1801 : " Such was the dawn of modern art , when Leonardo da Vinci broke forth with a splendour that distanced former excellence : made up of all the elements that constitute the essence of genius ... " This is echoed by A. E. Rio who wrote in 1861 : " He towered above all other artists through the strength and the nobility of his talents . " 
 By the 19th century , the scope of Leonardo 's notebooks was known , as well as his paintings . Hippolyte Taine wrote in 1866 : " There may not be in the world an example of another genius so universal , so incapable of fulfilment , so full of yearning for the infinite , so naturally refined , so far ahead of his own century and the following centuries . " Art historian Bernard Berenson wrote in 1896 : " Leonardo is the one artist of whom it may be said with perfect <unk> : Nothing that he touched but turned into a thing of eternal beauty . Whether it be the cross section of a skull , the structure of a weed , or a study of muscles , he , with his feeling for line and for light and shade , forever transmuted it into life @-@ communicating values . " 
 The interest in Leonardo 's genius has continued unabated ; experts study and translate his writings , analyse his paintings using scientific techniques , argue over attributions and search for works which have been recorded but never found . Liana <unk> , writing in 1967 , said : " Because of the multiplicity of interests that spurred him to pursue every field of knowledge ... Leonardo can be considered , quite rightly , to have been the universal genius par excellence , and with all the disquieting overtones inherent in that term . Man is as uncomfortable today , faced with a genius , as he was in the 16th century . Five centuries have passed , yet we still view Leonardo with awe . " 
 = = Miscellaneous = = 
 <unk> , a recently described mineral recognized in 2011 by the International Mineralogical Association , is named in honor of the artist . 
 = Ali Abu Nuwar = 
 Ali Abu Nuwar ( surname also spelled Abu <unk> , Abu Nawar or Abu <unk> ; 1925 – 15 August 1991 ) was a Jordanian army officer , serving as chief of staff in May 1956 – April 1957 . He participated in the 1948 Arab – Israeli War as an artillery officer in the Jordanian army 's predecessor , the Arab Legion , but his vocal opposition to British influence in Jordan led to his virtual exile to Paris as military attaché in 1952 . There , he forged close ties with Jordanian crown prince Hussein , who promoted Abu Nuwar after his accession to the throne . 
 Abu Nuwar 's enmity with Glubb Pasha , the Arab Legion 's powerful British chief of staff , his insistence on establishing Arab command over the army and his influence with Hussein led the latter to dismiss Glubb Pasha and appoint Abu Nuwar in his place . However , Abu Nuwar 's ardent support for the pan @-@ Arabist policies of Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser contributed to Jordan 's increasing isolation from the UK and the US , which were major sources of foreign aid to Jordan . At the same time , existing dissatisfaction with Abu Nuwar 's leadership by palace officials and veteran Bedouin army units culminated into violent confrontations at the large army barracks in al @-@ Zarqa between royalist and Arab nationalist units . Two principal accounts emerged regarding the events at al @-@ Zarqa , with the royalist version holding that the incident was an abortive coup by Abu Nuwar against Hussein , and the dissident version asserting that it was a staged , American @-@ backed counter @-@ coup by Hussein against the pan @-@ Arabist movement in Jordan . In any case , Abu Nuwar resigned and was allowed to leave Jordan for Syria . He was subsequently sentenced to 15 years in absentia . 
 Abu Nuwar spent much of his time in exile between Syria and Egypt organizing opposition to Hussein and the monarchy , all the while maintaining his innocence in the al @-@ Zarqa incident . He returned to Jordan in 1964 after being pardoned by Hussein as part of the latter 's broader reconciliation efforts with his exiled opposition . In 1971 , Abu Nuwar was made ambassador to France and he was later appointed to the senate of Jordan 's parliament in 1989 . He died from blood cancer at a London hospital at age 66 , one year after the publication of his memoirs , A Time of Arab Decline : Memoirs of Arab Politics ( 1948 – 1964 ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ali Abu Nuwar was born in 1925 in al @-@ Salt , Transjordan , which was then under British control . His father 's family , the Abu Nuwar , was a prominent Arab clan in al @-@ Salt . His mother was of Circassian descent . In his youth , Abu Nuwar was influenced by the discussions that his father and relatives held about the effects of the 1916 Arab Revolt , the 1917 Balfour Declaration and the 1920 Syrian Arab defeat at the Battle of Maysalun had on the fate of the Middle East . During the closing years of World War I , the Ottomans had been driven out of their Arab territories by an alliance of Hashemite @-@ led Arab rebels and British forces , and were thereafter replaced by the British and French , who effectively occupied the Arab territories . Revolts and popular opposition against European rule in Palestine , Transjordan and elsewhere in the region emerged in the 1920s and 1930s . In his memoirs , Abu Nuwar recalled that his teachers in al @-@ Salt would tell him and his classmates that the " Arab Nation was colonized and fragmented and that it was on the shoulders of our generation to take responsibility for freedom and unity " . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Abu Nuwar joined the Arab Legion and was made an artillery officer in 1946 , during the reign of Emir Abdullah I. During the 1948 Arab – Israeli War , he served as a lieutenant . Afterward , he received training in the British staff college of <unk> for two years before returning to Jordan , which was formed out of Transjordan and the West Bank as a result of the 1948 war . Israeli gains during the war had caused an upswing in anti @-@ colonialist and Arab nationalist militancy among numerous officers in the Arab armies who blamed their political and military leadership for the Israeli victories . They considered the old guard incompetent , corrupt and beholden to the colonial powers . Among these incensed officers was Abu Nuwar . Although he was not a founder of the " Free Officers " , a Baathist @-@ affiliated underground organization of anti @-@ British Jordanian officers , he joined the group after being invited in 1950 , following his return to Jordan . 
 Abu Nuwar became a vociferous critic of British aid to Jordan , viewing it as a form of dependency on Jordan 's former colonial ruler , and of Glubb Pasha , the influential British officer in charge of the Arab Legion who was derided by Arab nationalists as a symbol of lingering British colonialism in Jordan . When Abdullah I was assassinated in 1951 , Glubb and Prime Minister Tawfik Abu al @-@ Huda 's government discussed preventing Abdullah 's son and heir apparent , Emir Talal , a sympathizer of the Free Officers , from being enthroned ; Talal had been checked into a mental institution in Switzerland , but many Free Officers believed the British were fabricating Talal 's mental illness to keep him out of Jordan . In response , Abu Nuwar sought to install Talal on the throne by force , and to that end he appealed for support from the Free Officers and sent Awni <unk> , a Jordanian military doctor , to bring Talal to Jordan . However , <unk> was forbidden from meeting Talal due to visitation restrictions and was dismissed by Glubb for alleged incitement against British interests . Nonetheless , Talal was enthroned , and Abu Nuwar subsequently urged him to dismiss Glubb . The latter feared Abu Nuwar 's efforts posed a threat to British interests in Jordan , and thus directed Abu al @-@ Huda 's government to effectively exile Abu Nuwar from the country . The government complied , dispatching Abu Nuwar to Paris to serve as Jordan 's military attaché in September 1952 . Talal was later dethroned by parliamentary decision on the basis of his mental incapacity . 
 During his assignment in Paris , Abu Nuwar met King Talal 's son and successor , Crown Prince Hussein , who frequently visited the city during weekend breaks from his training at the Sandhurst Military Academy . Abu Nuwar was keen to gain Hussein 's favor and disseminate to him Arab nationalist ideas calling for an end to British influence in the Jordanian military . Hussein was enthused by Abu Nuwar , and after his enthronement in May 1953 , Hussein attempted to have Abu Nuwar return to Jordan despite Glubb 's reservations . In August , Hussein visited London where he invited Abu Nuwar and other like @-@ minded officers , including Free Officer Shahir Abu <unk> , to meet with him . There , Abu <unk> informed Abu Nuwar of the Free Officers ' plans to " <unk> " the Arab Legion , i.e. remove the force 's British leadership , including Glubb . Afterward , Abu Nuwar informed Hussein at a party celebrating his enthronement that he was a leading member of the Free Officers ( though he was not ) and communicated the group 's desire to assert Arab command over the Arab Legion , an aim to which Hussein was receptive . Hussein was impressed by Abu Nuwar who vocally condemned the British presence in Jordan during the party , which earned Abu Nuwar cheers by Jordanian officers . 
 = = = Aide @-@ de @-@ camp = = = 
 After Hussein returned to Amman , he continued to press for Abu Nuwar 's return to Jordan , but Glubb consistently stalled efforts to reassign Abu Nuwar . Later in 1953 , Hussein sent Abu Nuwar to confer with the strongman of Egypt , Gamal Abdel Nasser , who had recently toppled his country 's pro @-@ British monarchy . In 1954 , Abu Nuwar was briefly brought to Amman for consultations with Hussein . Hussein ultimately bypassed Glubb and had Abu Nuwar permanently reassigned to Jordan in November 1955 . Abu Nuwar arrived amid growing anti @-@ British upheaval . In a meeting between Glubb and Abu Nuwar , Glubb made clear his displeasure with Hussein 's decision and threatened " shorten his [ Abu Nuwar 's ] life " if he incited against British interests in the country . After being informed of the meeting , Hussein appointed Abu Nuwar as his senior aide @-@ de @-@ camp ( ADC ) . Abu Nuwar was also promoted to lieutenant @-@ colonel . 
 As ADC , Abu Nuwar was a major influence over then @-@ 20 year old Hussein and was constantly at his side , advising Hussein to dismiss Glubb and sever ties with the British . Hussein was also influenced by other Arab nationalist officers and personalities , including his cousin Zaid ibn Shaker , and the increasingly anti @-@ imperialist and Arab nationalist political atmosphere in the country . As a sign of his increasing nationalism and as a means to quiet political opposition to his rule , Hussein decided to dismiss Glubb . He coordinated with Abu Nuwar and other Free Officers to ensure that his impending dismissal of Glubb would not result in a revolt by the latter 's supporters within the Arab Legion . Thus , on 28 February 1956 , Abu Nuwar was instructed to ready his troops , and he subsequently posted Free Officers at the Amman Airport , the major army base at al @-@ Zarqa and in the vicinity of Glubb Pasha 's Amman residence . After Abu Nuwar 's positions were confirmed to him , Hussein conferred with his cabinet and dismissed Glubb on 1 March . Glubb complied with the order and departed Jordan the following day . Hussein then promoted Abu Nuwar to major @-@ colonel and appointed Major General Radi <unk> to Glubb 's former position as chief of staff of the Arab Legion , which was concurrently renamed the Jordanian Armed Forces . 
 = = = Chief of staff = = = 
 On 24 May , Abu Nuwar was appointed as chief of staff following <unk> 's retirement . Glubb 's dismissal was met with great enthusiasm among Jordan 's inhabitants and Arab nationalists in and outside of the country . However , Abu Nuwar 's ascendancy as head of the army was resented by its veteran Bedouin units ; he was generally regarded as a competent staff officer , but did not have experience as a commander . As part of his efforts to modernize the army , he mandated that education was a prerequisite for advancement , an act which disproportionately affected Bedouin officers , many of whom lacked formal education . As a result of Abu Nuwar 's measure , several senior Bedouin officers were retired or reassigned to non @-@ command posts . To counterbalance opposition to him within the army 's ranks , Abu Nuwar established the Fourth Infantry Brigade , which mostly consisted of Palestinians , who he believed would form an integral part of his power base within the military . Abu Nuwar 's appointment also contributed to the increasing deterioration of ties between Jordan and the British government . 
 As chief of staff , Abu Nuwar embraced many of the pan @-@ Arabist and anti @-@ imperialist ideas of Nasser , who became president of Egypt in 1956 . Abu Nuwar communicated his support for Nasser and the Arab nationalist Ba 'ath Party , which was active in Syria and Jordan , during a meeting with Lebanese president and Nasser opponent , Camille Chamoun , in 1956 . An American embassy official in Jordan remarked that during a discussion with Abu Nuwar , the latter " out @-@ <unk> Nasser " . He was regarded as an " ultranationalist " by the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) . According to historian Ivan Pearson , American diplomatic and intelligence views were colored by the negative perceptions of Abu Nuwar in Israel and Abu Nuwar 's role in the dismissal of Prime Minister Samir al @-@ Rifai in May ; Rifai was seen by the Israelis as a counterbalance to Hussein 's Arab nationalist advisers , and Abu Nuwar maneuvered to sideline Rifai soon after Glubb 's dismissal . Abu Nuwar was a major opponent of Iraq 's Hashemite rulers ( relatives of Hussein ) and that country 's pro @-@ British prime minister , Nuri al @-@ Said . Abu Nuwar 's opposition was driven by suspicions that the Iraqis sought to oust him from his military post , while King Abd al @-@ <unk> and al @-@ Said mutually regarded Abu Nuwar with suspicion . Abu Nuwar 's influence with Hussein was likely a major reason Jordan resisted Iraqi attempts to merge the two Hashemite @-@ ruled countries . 
 = = = = Suez Crisis = = = = 
 In late 1956 , parliamentary elections in Jordan resulted in major victories for Arab nationalist and other left @-@ leaning parties . Hussein subsequently appointed Sulayman al @-@ Nabulsi , an Arab nationalist , socialist and one of the leading pro @-@ Nasser MP @-@ elects , as prime minister in October . Roughly coinciding with al @-@ Nabulsi 's appointment , the British , French and Israelis launched a tripartite invasion of the Suez Canal and the Sinai Peninsula of Egypt , mainly in response to Nasser 's nationalization of the Suez Canal Company among other reasons . Hussein declared a state of emergency and his opposition against the invasion and agreed to Egyptian chief of staff Abdel Hakim Amer 's request for Jordanian military intervention . To that end , Hussein instructed Abu Nuwar to immediately execute Amer 's order to launch Operation Beisan , which entailed a Jordanian @-@ Syrian armored invasion of the Israeli coastal plain , which was seen as Israel 's most vulnerable region due to the short length between the coast and the Jordanian @-@ held West Bank . However , Abu Nuwar viewed the operation as far too risky for the Jordanian army and advised Hussein to await Syria 's adherence to the plan ; Egypt , Syria and Jordan had formed a defense pact days before the Israeli occupation of Sinai on 29 October . 
 Al @-@ Nabulsi also hesitated to abide by Hussein 's orders , prompting a meeting of Hussein , Abu Nuwar and the Jordanian cabinet to assess the situation . According to then @-@ Public Works Minister Anwar al @-@ Khatib 's recollections , Abu Nuwar argued that his troops would quickly lose control of the Hebron and Nablus regions to Israel , but would " defend Jerusalem to the last man and the last drop of blood " . Hussein 's eagerness to aid Egypt was tempered by Abu Nuwar 's assessment , but he only relented in his attempted intervention after Nasser communicated to Hussein appreciation of his genuine support and a warning not to risk losing the Jordanian army to the far stronger Israeli military . Later in his life , Abu Nuwar had stated that he had been ready " to give the Israelis a very rough time " in 1956 , but only dissuaded Hussein when Nasser counseled the king against intervention , after which Abu Nuwar told Hussein that attacking Israel while the Egyptians had withdrawn from Sinai " would be suicide " . 
 During the Suez Crisis , Hussein requested that Syria , Saudi Arabia and Iraq send troops to Jordan as a precautionary measure to prevent a potential invasion of the country by the tripartite allies . Prime Minister al @-@ Said was reticent to put Iraqi troops under Abu Nuwar 's command and suggested that Abu Nuwar be dismissed as a prerequisite to any deployment of troops to Jordan . This did not occur , but the Iraqis nonetheless sent troops to Jordan . However , their deployment was opposed by al @-@ Nabulsi on the grounds that Iraq was a member of the Baghdad Pact , an alliance of Middle Eastern countries with the UK that was condemned by Arab nationalists as a British @-@ led attempt to stifle pan @-@ Arab unity , instead of the Egyptian @-@ Jordanian @-@ Syrian @-@ Saudi alliance known as the " Amman Pact " . Despite Hussein 's protestations , al @-@ Nabulsi , using his prerogative as head of the government , succeeded in forcing the Iraqis ' withdrawal by the end of November . 
 = = = = Support for pan @-@ Arab unity = = = = 
 On 19 January 1957 , Jordan signed the Arab Solidarity Agreement ( ASA ) with Saudi Arabia , Egypt and Syria which entailed those countries ' financial assistance to replace the annual British aid to Jordan that ended with the abrogation of the Anglo @-@ Jordanian Treaty in November 1956 ( the treaty was officially and mutually abrogated in March 1957 ) . However , implementation of the ASA was hindered by Egypt and Syria 's inability or unwillingness to subsidize the Jordanian army , whose budget rivaled that of their own armies . Furthermore , by then , Abu Nuwar was steadily losing Hussein 's confidence due to dissatisfaction with Abu Nuwar among the army brass and the negative effects that his anti @-@ Western hostility was having on relations with Jordan 's principal Western allies , the UK and US ; Hussein viewed the latter two as much @-@ needed alternatives of financial support to Jordan in lieu of his disappointment with the ASA . 
 Meanwhile , serious divisions emerged in the Jordanian state over reactions to the Eisenhower Doctrine , which ostensibly aimed to stem Soviet expansion in the Middle East , but was viewed by Arab nationalists as a neo @-@ colonialist ploy to control the region . Al @-@ Nabulsi and Foreign Minister Abdullah Rimawi , a Baathist , led the camp opposing the doctrine as a threat to Arab sovereignty and as means to control the region 's oil assets and support Israel , while Hussein publicly embraced the doctrine as a preventive measure against growing communist influence in the country . Prior to these disagreements , al @-@ Nabulsi had been clamping down on communist literature and influence in the press ( the communists were generally opposed by Arab nationalists ) , whilst attempting to establish diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union ( USSR ) without Hussein 's knowledge . To that end , he dispatched Abu Nuwar to Moscow in February 1957 to serve as an initial contact with the Soviets . Later , al @-@ Nabulsi publicly declared his intention to establish relations with the USSR and pursue a political union with Egypt and Syria , and requested from Hussein a confirmation of his dismissal of several royalist officials . Hussein responded by forcing al @-@ Nabulsi to resign on 10 April 1957 . 
 = = = Alleged coup attempt and resignation = = = 
 Amid the political chaos in Jordan and two days before al @-@ Nabulsi 's resignation , an army unit from the First Armoured Brigade commanded by Captain <unk> Rashid engaged in a maneuver , named Operation Hashem in honor of the Hashemite royal family , at the major intersections of Amman . The move raised Hussein 's suspicions and prompted him to order Abu Nuwar to withdraw the unit , which he did . Hussein believed the move was a presage to an impending coup . Abu Nuwar sought to allay Hussein 's concerns and told him it was a routine exercise executed numerous times in the preceding years to monitor the traffic into and out of the city , while Rashid later claimed it was part of a broader contingency plan to move troops to the West Bank in the event of an Israeli invasion . According to Pearson , Rashid 's maneuver was meant to intimidate Hussein , while historian Betty Anderson has speculated that the " officers could have been testing the waters to see what they could achieve militarily " . Whatever the actual reason for the maneuver , it heightened Hussein 's suspicions of a coup by Abu Nuwar and the Arab nationalists , and it prompted warnings from veteran royalist officials , namely Bahjat al @-@ <unk> and Sharif Naser , that such a coup was impending . 
 On 13 April , rioting broke out at the army barracks in al @-@ Zarqa , which contained the largest concentration of troops in the country , between mostly <unk> ( non @-@ Bedouin ) units loyal to Abu Nuwar and Bedouin @-@ dominated units loyal to Hussein . Two main accounts emerged regarding this incident , known as the " Zarqa uprising " among other names , with one account having been advanced by Hussein and Western historiographers and the other by political dissidents and many in the Jordanian and Arab press . Pearson has said the " incident is steeped in mystery and persistent controversy " , and Anderson likewise has written that " questions abound about whether this coup attempt originated with the military , led by Abu Nuwar and the Free Officers , or with the king and the Americans , who wanted an excuse to remove " the Arab nationalist movement " from Jordan 's political scene " . 
 According to Hussein 's account of the events , Abu Nuwar and the Free Officers had planned for the Bedouin @-@ dominated First Infantry Regiment in al @-@ Zarqa to participate in a training exercise in the desert without ammunition to render it unavailable for Hussein to use against a planned anti @-@ government demonstration scheduled to be held by al @-@ Nabulsi on 14 April . Hussein was still wary of al @-@ Nabulsi due to an alleged intercept of a message from Nasser imploring al @-@ Nabulsi to resist his dismissal from the premiership . Hussein was informed of the Free Officers ' alleged plot by Sharif Naser and Bedouin officers from Zarqa on the evening of 13 April . The incident coincided with a delivery by Abu Nuwar of an ultimatum to Prime Minister Said al @-@ Mufti ( al @-@ Nabulsi 's successor ) warning Hussein to appoint a government reflecting the will of the elected parliament or face an army revolt . Al @-@ Mufti apparently broke down emotionally in Hussein 's presence , prompting the latter to inquire from Abu Nuwar about the ultimatum , to which Abu Nuwar professed his surprise . Hussein then brought Abu Nuwar along with him to inspect the scene at al @-@ Zarqa , where Hussein was told by loyalist officers from al @-@ Zarqa that rumors of his death had provoked heavy clashes between his loyalists and those of Abu Nuwar and that only the physical presence of Hussein would put an end to the fighting . Moreover , Hussein was told that Rashid and Ma 'an Abu Nuwar ( a distant cousin of Abu Nuwar ) had been ordered to Amman to besiege the royal palace and arrest Hussein . 
 Both accounts agree that the during the fighting in al @-@ Zarqa , numerous Free Officers were rounded up and arrested by loyalist Bedouin officers . Both accounts also agree that as Hussein made his way to into al @-@ Zarqa , he was cheered on by loyalist soldiers and he intervened in the middle of the clashes at his own risk and was emotionally embraced by his supporters , who chanted " Death to Abu Nuwar and all the traitors ! " Abu Nuwar remained in the car , fearful for his life by Hussein 's loyalist troops and he then apparently begged Hussein to protect him and allow him to return to Amman , which Hussein agreed to . By nightfall , Abu Nuwar persuaded Hussein to allow him to leave the country and on the morning of 14 March , he officially resigned and departed for Damascus , Syria with his family . 
 Major @-@ General Ali al @-@ Hiyari , Abu Nuwar 's chief rival in the Jordanian army , was appointed as Abu Nuwar 's replacement , but on 20 April , he defected to Syria . Al @-@ Hiyari claimed that prior to the incident at al @-@ Zarqa and shortly after the forced resignation of al @-@ Nabulsi 's cabinet , palace officials had canvassed the army general staff to inquire about the officers ' opinions regarding a change in direction of the new government away from the pan @-@ Arabist policies of Egypt and Syria . Accordingly , when Abu Nuwar and the Free Officers voiced their refusal " to use the army against " the popular will in the country , palace officials laid out plans to royalist officers , including al @-@ Hiyari , for a false flag operation at al @-@ Zarqa . Al @-@ Hiyari 's account was widely reported throughout Jordan and the Arab world , and despite dismissal of the account by palace officials , it led to further public skepticism toward the official version of events regarding the alleged coup plot . 
 Abu Nuwar consistently denied any betrayal of Hussein and claimed he was a " fall man " , the victim of political intrigue in the kingdom in which his rivals sought to discredit him . At a press conference in Damascus , he stated that the entire incident was an overreaction by Hussein to sensational and false reports of a coup plot and that the incident was likely a preemptive coup by Hussein and the old guard , supported or engineered by US intelligence , against the main proponents of pan @-@ Arab unity in Jordan . Rashid and Ma 'an Abu Nuwar likewise strongly denied any kind of coup plot on their end . According to Pearson , the accounts of the Free Officers and al @-@ Hiyari were lent further credence by the lack of evidence in the military trials against the alleged conspirators who were arrested , the light sentences that they were given and the eventual rehabilitation of the alleged conspirators , including Abu Nuwar , who were later reassigned to high @-@ ranking posts in the state and military . 
 = = Later career = = 
 On 22 April , Abu Nuwar issued a radio statement from the Cairo @-@ based Voice of the Arabs radio station denouncing Hussein . In coordination with Abu Nuwar , the following day , a Patriotic Congress composed of Hussein 's secularist opposition was held in Nablus in the West Bank demanding major palace officials be dismissed , expulsion of the American ambassador and military attaché , rejection of the Eisenhower Doctrine , federal unity with Egypt and Syria and reinstatement of the dismissed army officers , including Abu Nuwar . As a result of the congress , Hussein put Nablus , Jerusalem and Amman under military curfew , dissolved political parties , imposed press censorship , dismissed municipal councils in the West Bank in favor of military governors , disbanded Palestinian @-@ dominated army units , arrested al @-@ Nabulsi ( who had since been made foreign minister ) and dismissed the cabinet of Prime Minister Fakhri al @-@ Khalidi . Although he eventually relaxed some of these measures , namely military curfews and severe press censorship , Hussein 's moves significantly curtailed the constitutional democracy that existed in Jordan in the mid @-@ 1950s . 
 On 26 September 1957 , Abu Nuwar , Rimawi and al @-@ Hiyari were sentenced to 15 years imprisonment in absentia . During his exile from Jordan , Abu Nuwar initially resided in Damascus , along with other Jordanian dissidents , including al @-@ Hiyari and Rimawi . However , in 1958 , Abu Nuwar moved to Egypt following that country 's union with Syria forming the United Arab Republic ( UAR ) under Nasser 's presidency ( Syria seceded in 1961 ) . Thenceforth , Abu Nuwar lived much of the remainder of his exile in Cairo . In 1958 , under the aegis of the UAR and with assistance from the head of Syrian intelligence , Abd al @-@ Hamid al @-@ Sarraj , the Jordanian dissidents in exile formed the Jordanian Revolutionary Council . It consisted of Jordanian <unk> , left @-@ leaning politicians and dissident army officers , including Abu Nuwar , al @-@ Hiyari and Abdullah al @-@ Tal , a friend of Abu Nuwar who had been exiled by Hussein before him . The group attempted to recruit a university students in Jordan to form the vanguard of the nationalist movement in the country , funded the smuggling of weapons to Palestinian dissidents in the West Bank and the refugee camps around Amman , financially assisted Jordanian officers and politicians dismissed by Hussein , and organized assassination attempts against leading royalist politicians , including al @-@ Rifai , <unk> and <unk> al @-@ Majali . There were disputes between al @-@ Tal and Abu Nuwar over leadership of the group . 
 In April 1963 , Abu Nuwar declared a government in exile in the name of the Jordanian Republic and disseminated propaganda through his own radio station . The following year , or in 1965 , Abu Nuwar returned to Jordan after being pardoned by Hussein as part of a broader reconciliation with exiled dissidents in a bid to co @-@ opt opposition to his rule . In February 1971 , Abu Nuwar was appointed Jordan 's ambassador to France . In the 1989 Jordanian parliamentary election , Abu Nuwar was appointed by Hussein to the senate , the Jordanian Parliament 's upper house . Abu Nuwar 's memoirs , A Time of Arab Decline : Memoirs of Arab Politics ( 1948 – 1964 ) , were published in London in 1990 . Abu Nuwar suffered from blood cancer in his later years , and he died in a London hospital on 15 August 1991 , at the age of 66 . He was still in office when he died . 
 = Battle of Loznica ( 1941 ) = 
 The Battle of Loznica involved an attack on the German garrison of that town by the Jadar Chetnik Detachment on 31 August 1941 . Following the World War II German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , the Kingdom of Yugoslavia was partitioned . At the time , Loznica was part of the German @-@ occupied territory of Serbia , which included Serbia proper , with the addition of the northern part of Kosovo ( around Kosovska Mitrovica ) , and the Banat . 
 The Chetniks attacked , led by Lieutenant Colonel Veselin Misita , who was killed during the assault . The Germans surrendered , and 93 were captured . This battle was closely followed by the joint Partisan @-@ Chetnik attack on the German garrison at Banja Koviljača . 
 = = Background = = 
 In April 1941 , Germany and its allies invaded and occupied the Kingdom of Yugoslavia , which was then partitioned . Some Yugoslav territory was annexed by its Axis neighbours , Hungary , Bulgaria and Italy . The Germans engineered and supported the creation of the puppet state , the Independent State of Croatia ( Croatian : Nezavisna Država Hrvatska , NDH ) , which roughly comprised most of the pre @-@ war Banovina Croatia , along with rest of present @-@ day Bosnia and Herzegovina and some adjacent territory . The Italians , Hungarians and Bulgarians occupied other parts of Yugoslavian territory . Germany did not annex any Yugoslav territory , but occupied northern parts of present @-@ day Slovenia and stationed occupation troops in the northern half of the NDH . The German @-@ occupied part of Slovenia was divided into two areas that were placed under the administration of the Gauleiters of the neighbouring Reichsgau Kärnten and Reichsgau Steiermark . 
 The remaining territory , which consisted of Serbia proper , the northern part of Kosovo ( around Kosovska Mitrovica ) , and the Banat was occupied by the Germans and placed under the administration of a German military government . This was due to the key rail and riverine transport routes that passed through it , and its valuable resources , particularly non @-@ ferrous metals . 
 In May , German troops of the 750th Infantry Regiment of the <unk> Infantry Division were stationed in the Mačva , <unk> and <unk> ( Cer ) districts of the Podrinje region , garrisoning Šabac , Banja Koviljača and Loznica . 
 In early July , shortly after the launching of Operation Barbarossa against the Soviet Union , armed resistance began in the German @-@ occupied territory of Serbia , against both the German Army and the representatives of the German @-@ installed puppet government known as the Commissioner Government . This was a response to appeals from both Joseph Stalin and the Communist International for communist organisations across occupied Europe to draw German troops away from the Eastern Front , and followed a meeting of the Central Committee of the Yugoslav Communist Party in Belgrade on 4 July . This meeting resolved to shift to a general uprising , form Partisan detachments of fighters and commence armed resistance , and call for the populace to rise up against the occupiers throughout Yugoslavia . This also coincided with the departure of the last of the German invasion force that had remained to oversee the transition to occupation . From the appearance of posters and pamphlets urging the population to undertake sabotage , it rapidly turned to attempted and actual sabotage of German propaganda facilities and railway and telephone lines . The first fighting occurred at the village of Bela Crkva on 7 July , when gendarmes tried to disperse a public meeting , and two gendarmes were killed . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In the Podrinje region , encompassing the Drina basin , a Partisan district committee had been formed on 29 June , to oversee the local uprising and form Partisan detachments . After collecting weapons and ammunition , the detachment 's first action was to attack the gendarmerie station in Bogatić on 7 August , disarming the gendarmes and capturing more weapons . Due to the scope of the local uprising , on 9 August the detachment was renamed the Podrinje Partisan Detachment . They disarmed the re @-@ equipped gendarme platoon at Bogatić on 10 August , and then carried out the destruction of town archives , telephone lines and bridges in the district . By 14 August , the detachment 's ranks had swelled to about 360 fighters in six companies , the occupation forces and local collaborators were finding it difficult to use the road from the district centre Šabac to Loznica due to Partisan ambushes , and the railway line between the two towns was out of action . 
 The first royalist Chetnik units were mobilised by order of Draža Mihailović in August 1941 . In late July , Mihailović had sent a regular officer , Lieutenant Colonel Veselin Misita to the Jadar district as his emissary . Misita had established himself at the <unk> Monastery near Loznica . The abbot of the monastery was Georgije Bojić , who was also a captain in the Royal Yugoslav Army reserves . In August , Misita and Bojić held a meeting with pro @-@ Chetnik people from the Jadar district to set up the Jadar Chetnik Detachment . Other key attendees included Nikola <unk> and Mika <unk> . On 15 August , the 25 @-@ strong Cer Chetnik Detachment was formed under the command of a regular artillery officer , Captain First Class Dragoslav Račić . Due to Mihailović 's position that the Chetniks should prepare for an uprising , but not engage in fighting the occupiers until the time was right , some Chetniks left the Jadar detachment and joined the more aggressive Račić or the Partisans . 
 Račić signed a mutual cooperation agreement against the occupation forces with the commander of the Podrinje Partisans , Nebojša Jerković . Due to its lack of action against the Germans and puppet government , the Jadar Chetnik Detachment became quite isolated . Their leadership realised that the Partisans were getting stronger with each success against the occupiers , and the Chetnik position was becoming relatively weaker due to their inaction . Misita 's decision to attack Loznica was a consequence of the cooperation agreement Račić signed with the Partisans . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At the time of the attack on Loznica , the Jadar Chetnik Detachment consisted of a large number of poorly organised peasants , drawn mainly from the villages around the town . The Germans had established strongpoints in the gymnasium , Vuk Karadžić Cultural Centre , and the " <unk> <unk> " cafe . The attack commenced at 07 : 00 , with Misita in the vanguard . He was killed at the head of his troops while throwing hand grenades at German positions . Many of the Germans surrendered in the face of the Chetnik assault . During the battle , Misita 's Chetniks suffered 18 killed and four wounded , while the Germans incurred several killed and wounded and 93 captured . The remaining Germans fled in the direction of Banja Koviljača . The wounded Germans were taken to hospital , and the rest of the captured troops were escorted to the monastery , and treated humanely . 
 At the same time as the Jadar Chetniks were attacking Loznica , Račić 's Cer detachment attacked the village of Bogatić in accordance with the Chetnik @-@ Partisan agreement . The gendarmes had been reinforced by the 6th Company of the German 750th Infantry Regiment with artillery support . On the second day of the attack , the garrison was reinforced by the 7th Company of the 750th Infantry Regiment arriving from Sremska Mitrovica , and an additional platoon sent from Šabac . After two days fighting , Račić 's Chetniks withdrew to Cer mountain with considerable losses , after which they marched to Loznica to join the Jadar Chetniks . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 Following its capture , the Chetniks established a command post in the town and mobilised the populace . Supporters of the Partisans formed a local unit and directed workers into the fields and a nearby mine . The Partisans also set up a workshop in the town to manufacture hand grenades . After their failed attack on Bogatić , the two Chetnik detachments decided to attack Banja Koviljača . Launched on 1 September , this attack was initially unsuccessful . After being reinforced by the Podrinje Partisans , the town was captured in the early hours of 6 September . In the meantime , other elements of the Podrinje Partisan Detachment had expelled the German garrison and collaborationist gendarmes from Bogatić on 3 September . On 6 October 1941 , Loznica was re @-@ occupied during the German Mačva operation . 
 Josip Broz Tito 's biographer Vladimir Dedijer described Misita 's death as a great loss for the uprising . On 31 August 2008 , the deputy speaker of the Serbian National Assembly , Božidar Delić of the Serbian Radical Party , dedicated a plaque to Misita in the Vuk Karadžić Square in Loznica . One of the people present was the man that had applied for the plaque to be installed , Božidar Panić , who had idolised Misita in his youth , and had lit a candle for him every year . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Journals = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Imperial Gift = 
 The Imperial Gift was the donation of aircraft from British surplus stocks after the First World War to the Dominions : Canada , Australia , New Zealand , South Africa and the Empire of India . On 29 May 1919 , the British Cabinet agreed to give 100 aircraft to each of these countries plus replacements for aircraft donated by these countries to Britain during the war . These aircraft formed the core of newly established air forces in several of the countries . 
 In Canada the 100 Imperial Gift aircraft supplemented by another 20 and other related spares , supplies and equipment were used to establish the Canadian Air Force from 1920 and the later Royal Canadian Air Force from 1924 . Australia 's 100 aircraft , supplemented by an additional 28 and related supplies and other equipment were used to establish the Royal Australian Air Force in 1921 . New Zealand initially refused the Imperial Gift but later accepted a reduced allotment of 34 aircraft . Most were loaned to private aviation companies , but were returned to the government in the mid @-@ 1920s to constitute the New Zealand Permanent Air Force . South Africa 's 100 Imperial Gift aircraft and related items , supplemented by another 13 , led to the establishment of the South African Air Force in 1920 . The colonial government of India accepted 100 aircraft but did not use them to establish their own air force . Twenty were allocated to the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) in India , while 80 were used by various civil government departments or sold to commercial and private operators . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the First World War , the Royal Air Force had an estimated 20 @,@ 000 surplus aircraft or more , many still in production at the end of the war . Sir Hugh Trenchard , Chief of the Air Staff , argued for the establishment of air forces in the Dominions . He further argued that a coordinated uniform approach to organising and equipping these air forces was essential to facilitate the air component of the defence of the empire . This proposal was taken up by the Secretary of State for Air , John Edward Bernard Seely , who described it as being " an opportunity of giving assistance to Dominions which will be valued by them and which should be of great use in the general interest of the defence of the Empire by Air . " The British Cabinet approved the proposal on 29 May 1919 , though it chose to widen it by offering aircraft to the colonial governments as well as those of the Dominions . These governments were notified of the offer on 4 June . 
 = = Canada = = 
 While 22 @,@ 812 Canadian military personnel had served in the Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) , Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) and RAF , Canadian air services were not created and did not operate as an independent military force until nearly the end of the war . With 1 Squadron and 2 Squadron of the Canadian Air Force established at Upper Heyford in Britain during August 1918 and the Royal Canadian Naval Air Service , established for home defence in September 1918 , Canadian units had only reached operational status by the end of hostilities and never saw combat . 
 In 1919 , when the Canadian Air Board Director of Flying Operations , Lieutenant Colonel Robert Leckie studied the types that were being offered , he specified aircraft that would be suitable for civil operations as the peacetime force would undertake a number of roles that involved surveillance , fire @-@ fighting and mapping . Although combat aircraft were offered from the large stock of surplus aircraft , Canada 's share of the Imperial Gift mainly consisted of the following 114 " multi @-@ purpose " aircraft , although a small number of fighters were also included : 
 62 × Avro 504 trainers 
 23 × Airco / de Havilland DH @-@ 4 ( 10 ) and Airco / de Havilland DH @-@ 9A ( 12 ) bombers 
 12 × Royal Aircraft Factory <unk> fighters 
 8 × Felixstowe F.3 ( patrol flying boat ) 
 2 × Curtiss <unk> ( patrol flying boat ) 
 2 × Bristol <unk> Fighter two seat fighter 
 2 × Sopwith Snipe fighters 
 1 × Fairey <unk> ( patrol seaplane ) 
 The final deliveries included six non @-@ rigid airships , several kite balloons and additional aircraft , including two Royal Aircraft Factory <unk> , and single examples of Royal Aircraft Factory <unk> and Vickers <unk> , along with some replacement airframes , bringing the total to 120 aircraft . In addition to the aircraft , numerous spares were sent , including engines and ancillary equipment such as cameras and seaplane beaching gear , along with 300 support vehicles consisting of motor transports , trailers and motorcycles . The value of the Imperial Gift was about $ 5 million , more money than the Canadian government spent on aviation from 1919 to 1923 . 
 The Imperial Gift aircraft formed the basis of the postwar Canadian Air Force ( CAF ) , later the Royal Canadian Air Force . In 1920 , the Canadian Air Board sponsored a project to conduct the first Trans @-@ Canada flight to determine the feasibility of such flights for air mail and passenger services . Rivière du Loup to Winnipeg was flown by Leckie and Major Basil Hobbs in a Felixstowe F.3 and the remainder of the relay was completed using several of the CAF 's DH @-@ <unk> . All aircraft were part of the Imperial Gift . Although not considered suitable for the harsh Canadian weather , the Imperial Gift aircraft soldiered on into the 1930s ; the last aircraft in service , an Avro 504K , was retired in 1934 . 
 = = Australia = = 
 The Imperial Gift to Australia originally consisted of 100 aircraft , spare engines , tools , motor transport and 13 transportable hangars shipped in over 19 @,@ 000 packing cases . An additional 28 aircraft were provided at the same time to replace aircraft donated by the people of Australia to Great Britain during the First World War . Australia 's aircraft allotment consisted of : 
 35 × Avro 504K trainers 
 35 × Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5a fighters 
 30 × Airco / de Haviland DH @-@ 9a bombers 
 28 × Airco / de Haviland DH @-@ 9 bombers 
 On 30 June 1919 , the Australian Army Service Corps recommended the creation of a temporary " Australian Air Corps " ( AAC ) formed into two wings ( one wing to meet the needs of the Navy and the other for the Army ) . The Imperial Gift enabled the formation of the Royal Australian Air Force on 31 March 1921 . An Air Board , answering to the Minister for Defence , would administer the new service . 
 Imperial Gift aircraft were shipped to Australia in 1919 , assembled upon delivery in 1920 and served for up to 10 years . The Airco / de Haviland DH @-@ 9a ( A1 @-@ 17 / <unk> ) was the longest serving Imperial Gift aircraft , being written off on 4 February 1930 . The only original surviving Imperial Gift aircraft in Australia are an Avro 504K ( A3 @-@ 4 / <unk> ) , stored at the Treloar Technology Centre ( Canberra ) and an S.E.5a ( A2 @-@ 4 / <unk> ) , in the collection of the Australian War Memorial , exhibited in the ANZAC Hall of the main Australian War Memorial displays . 
 = = New Zealand = = 
 At first New Zealand refused the offer , but later accepted 34 aircraft and 42 aero engines : 
 21 × Avro 504K trainers 
 9 × Airco / de Haviland DH @-@ 9 bombers 
 2 × Bristol <unk> Fighter two seat fighters 
 2 × Airco / de Haviland DH @-@ 4 bombers 
 The <unk> , DH @-@ 4s and one Avro 504K were retained for government use , and the balance were issued on loan as transports and training aircraft to civil aviation companies between 1920 and 1924 . By the mid @-@ 1920s , all of the private firms involved had collapsed , and surviving aircraft were taken back by the government to constitute the New Zealand Permanent Air Force . 
 All Imperial Gift aircraft in military service were either wrecked , scrapped or burnt and nothing has survived . 
 = = South Africa = = 
 South Africa was the second country after Britain to establish an air force independent from army or naval control on 1 February 1920 . The South African Air Force 's ( SAAF ) share of the Imperial Gift was : 
 48 × Airco / de Haviland DH @-@ 9 bombers 
 30 × Avro 504 trainers 
 22 × Royal Aircraft Factory <unk> fighters 
 10 × Airco / de Haviland DH @-@ 4 bombers 
 The 10 DH @-@ 4s were war loss replacements sponsored by the Over @-@ Seas Club of London . An additional DH @-@ 9 was donated by the city of Birmingham . The SAAF 's initial fleet was completed by two Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2s left over from Allister Miller 's wartime recruitment campaign and handed over to the Union Defence Force in October 1919 . According to author Dave Becker , there is no record of the B.E.2s ever being used after 1919 . 
 The ancillary equipment and materials from the donation included 20 steel hangars , 30 portable wood and canvas <unk> hangars , radio and photographic equipment , complete engine and airframe workshops with tools , trucks , tenders , trailers , 50 @,@ 000 gallons of engine oils and 20 @,@ 000 gallons of paints , varnishes and dope . The total value of the donation was estimated at £ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 An offer of four Type Zero airships was turned down due to doubts about their usability above 6 @,@ 000 feet and the expense of replacing the envelopes , which were estimated to have a useful life of only three months in the harsh South African sunshine . 
 The first batch of aircraft arrived in South Africa in September 1919 at the Artillery Depot at Roberts Heights , Pretoria where an Air Depot was established on 1 January 1920 . The combined facility was then known as the Aircraft and Artillery Depot . 
 Two Avro 504s were sold for £ 1 @,@ 563 @-@ 11s @-@ 8d to the South African Aerial Transport Company in 1920 . 
 A 23 @.@ 5 <unk> ( 20 @.@ 1 hectare ) piece of land two miles east of Roberts Heights was acquired for an aerodrome and named <unk> after a nearby hill . No. 1 Flight was formed at <unk> Air Force Station on 26 April 1920 , equipped with DH @-@ 9s . After the formation of a second flight , 1 Squadron was established in early 1922 . 
 The SAAF Museum 's Pretoria branch is housed in six of the original steel hangars . 
 = = India = = 
 India 's share of the Imperial Gift was : 
 60 × Airco / de Haviland DH @-@ 9 bombers 
 40 × Avro 504 trainers 
 Unlike other recipients , India did not use the gift to establish a national air force . The RAF in India received 20 Avro 504 airframes for military use . The rest went to various colonial government departments and entities , or were sold to commercial and private operators . 
 The remains of three DH @-@ 9s were discovered in 1995 in disused elephant stables at the palace of the Maharajah of Bikaner . Taken to the Imperial War Museum ( IWM ) in the UK , parts of all three were used to restore one of the aircraft , with the addition of an engine the IWM had in storage . It is on display at the IWM 's Duxford facility . 
 = Operation Pleshet = 
 Operation Pleshet ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> , <unk> Pleshet , lit . " Operation Philistia " ) , named after the geographical region where it took place , was an Israeli military operation during the 1948 Arab – Israeli War . It was carried out from May 29 to June 3 , 1948 , in the Isdud / Ad Halom area of the southern front , against the Egyptian Army . The aim of the operation was to capture Isdud and stop the Egyptian advance northwards . While only the June 2 – 3 engagements are officially named Operation Pleshet , the events immediately preceding are <unk> joined with it . 
 The preceding events consisted of an aerial bombardment , followed by small @-@ scale Israeli harassment of the Egyptian lines , and later a ground assault ( Operation Pleshet ) . The original plan was to attack on June 1 – 2 , but this was canceled due to an impending ceasefire , and re @-@ attempted on June 2 – 3 . The Israelis , under the Givati Brigade 's umbrella command , attacked in two main forces : one from the north ( 3 companies ) and one from the south ( 4 reinforced companies ) . The Israelis had little intelligence on their enemy and were forced to retreat . They failed to capture territory , and suffered heavy casualties . However , following the operation , Egypt changed its strategy from offensive to defensive , thus halting their advance northwards . 
 Two unsettled historiographic debates exist revolving around the operation : whether the Egyptians were intending to advance toward Tel Aviv , which most historians agree was not the case ; and whether the operation was a turning point on the Israeli southern front . Traditional Israeli historiography , supported by early Arab accounts , maintains that it was a turning point , while later Arab sources , and New Historians , dispute this . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the founding of the State of Israel , the Yishuv leadership anticipated an attack by regular Arab armies , of which Egypt 's was the strongest in terms of manpower , arms and equipment . As such , Plan <unk> took stopping a potential Egyptian attack into account , and the Ad Halom ( <unk> ) dual bridge over the Lakhish River was blown up as part of Operation Barak on May 12 . In the eyes of the Givati command , this part of the operation was of marginal importance . A platoon from the 54th Battalion , two mules and 300 kilograms of explosives were allocated for it . The mules fled the scene , and the explosives were divided among the soldiers , who delivered them to the bridge . It took two attempts to destroy it , as some of the explosives did not work the first time . 
 The original bridge was built over the Lakhish River ( Wadi <unk> / Wadi <unk> ) during the Roman period , and re @-@ built by the Ottoman Empire at the end of the 19th century . A parallel railway bridge was added when the coastal railway ( Lebanon – Egypt ) was laid . After numerous armed raids in the area during the 1936 – 1939 Arab revolt in Palestine , the British authorities set up a series of pillboxes in the area , one of them next to the bridges . 
 Egypt invaded the newly declared State of Israel on May 15 , 1948 . Their strength was approximately one division , commanded by Major General Ahmed Ali al @-@ Mwawi . Their advance was three @-@ pronged : The main column moved north through what is today the Gaza Strip and attacked Kfar Darom , another column went east toward Beersheba , and a third attacked kibbutz <unk> . On May 17 , a small force split off from Beersheba to link up with more Egyptian forces at Auja al @-@ Hafir , on May 19 the main column attacked Yad Mordechai , and on May 20 , the main force in Beersheba set out to link with the Jordanian Arab Legion in Hebron . 
 On May 21 , Cairo sent an urgent message to its units in Palestine , saying " we want al @-@ Majdal today " . Following the Israeli Operation Bin Nun , on May 25 , the Jordanian Arab Legion pressured the Egyptians to move northwards to the Ramla – Aqir – Yibna area , in order to connect later with the legion at Bab al @-@ Wad . Doing so would divide the Israeli forces into two — the Negev , and the rest of Israel . The Egyptian commander al @-@ Mwawi , was opposed to such a move , but the leadership in Cairo dismissed his worries , and on May 28 ordered a quarter of his total combat forces to move north from Majdal . 
 Gamal Abdel Nasser wrote in his memoirs that already by May 25 , the Egyptian forces were spread so thin that they had no mobile reserves to assault a Jewish force , and considered it strange that they would be ordered to allocate a major contingent to fight in an unfamiliar area . Following @-@ up his victory in the Battle of Yad Mordechai on May 23 – 24 , al @-@ Mwawi pushed north along the coast , bypassing the relatively well @-@ defended Israeli village of Nitzanim . His column was reinforced by sea near Majdal , where he sent part of his force to the Majdal – Hebron road , hoping it would be able to link with another column , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Abd el @-@ Aziz , south of Jerusalem . Reduced to about 2 @,@ 500 men , al @-@ Mwawi resumed his march northwards . Brigadier General Muhammad Naguib was put in charge of the column by al @-@ Mwawi , because the original commander was on vacation in Egypt . 
 On the afternoon of May 29 , 1948 , the observation post in Nitzanim spotted an Egyptian column , including tanks , armoured fighting vehicles and artillery moving north up the coastal road . The figure it reported at 16 : 45 was about 1 @,@ 300 vehicles , although Yehoshua Goldrat , the operations officer of the Givati Brigade , being familiar with Egyptian formations , estimated that it was a brigade with about 500 vehicles . Estimates from the General Staff stood at 200 vehicles and 2 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 soldiers . At the time , the Israeli decision makers did not know where the Egyptians were headed . They envisioned one of three possibilities : A march on Tel Aviv , about 40 kilometers ( 25 mi ) northwards — the view adopted by David Ben @-@ Gurion ; an attempt to connect to the Transjordanian Arab Legion in the Hebron area and capture the Negev — proposed by Nahum Sarig of the Negev Brigade ; or an attempt to connect with the remaining Arab forces in Lydda and Ramla . 
 The IDF command did not see the forces in the western Negev as sufficient to fully stop an Egyptian invasion , wherever it was headed , and ordered an operation to stop or delay the advancing column . The command also feared that the Arab forces would try to create facts on the ground before the impending UN @-@ imposed ceasefire . The two Arab forces that were considered a threat were the Iraqis in the Triangle ( Jenin – Nablus – Tulkarm ) and the Egyptians at Majdal – Isdud . Thus , Golani and Carmeli were to attack Jenin , Alexandroni was to harass Tulkarm , and Givati was to attack Isdud . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 At 11 : 00 on May 29 , the Egyptian 2nd Battalion passed through Isdud , and at 12 : 00 – 13 : 00 , the 9th Battalion took the village itself , their progress hampered only by occasional machine gun fire from Nitzanim . Later on the same day , the 2nd Battalion stopped at the Lakhish River , about 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) north of Isdud . The Egyptians began preparations to cross the river by erecting a Bailey bridge . Volunteers from Sudan and Saudi Arabia also joined the Isdud position . 
 Shimon Avidan , the commander of the Givati Brigade , which was responsible for the southern Shephelah area ( including most southern Israeli villages at the time ) , asked to allocate forces to stop or hinder the Egyptian advance . A number of 65 mm Napoleonchik cannons were given to Givati , and units from the Palmach 's Negev Brigade were poised to assist it , despite a severe shortage of manpower and munitions in the brigade . On May 28 , Czech technicians at the Ekron Airbase finished assembling four Avia S @-@ 199 planes ( a Messerschmitt variant ) brought from Czechoslovakia , which were meant to harass the Egyptian air force base at El Arish , thus forming the IDF 's first fighter squadron . Despite being untested , the Chief of Operations Yigael Yadin ordered the planes to assist Avidan 's forces . According to Lou Lenart , an American pilot who flew one of the fighters , Avidan told the pilots that Givati " were desperate because between the Egyptian army of ten thousand men with several hundred vehicles and Tel Aviv stood only about 250 Israeli soldiers . The Egyptians were so confident of victory that they were lined up bumper to bumper behind the bridge " . 
 = = = Airstrike = = = 
 At 18 : 00 , the four fighter planes left Ekron to bomb and strafe the Egyptian lines concentrated near the bridge . Each plane had two 70 kilograms ( 150 lb ) bombs , two 13 mm machine guns and two 20 mm cannons . The pilots were Lou Lenart , Mordechai Alon ( <unk> ) , Ezer Weizmann and Eddie Cohen , in that order . The attack was disorganized , and the damage it did was minimal . Lenart came from the north and dropped his bombs in the middle of Isdud . He them circled and strafed the Egyptians from the southeast and then the north again , before his cockpit was hit and he decided to return to Ekron . According to him , the cannons ceased to fire after the first ten rounds , and he began to smell cordite . Alon also made three runs , on a large concentration of vehicles south of Isdud . He returned to Ekron through the sea . Weizmann circled and attacked the Egyptians from the south , then the west , and then the south again . His cannons stopped firing after one round . 
 The Egyptian army unleashed its full anti @-@ aircraft arsenal and hit Alon 's plane , but he managed to crash @-@ land unharmed at 20 : 05 , performing a ground loop . Weizmann landed at 20 : 15 . Eddie Cohen , a volunteer pilot from South Africa , crashed and died , although it is unknown whether he was hit by anti @-@ aircraft fire , or a technical problem caused the plane to malfunction . A report by Dan <unk> , the Israeli Air Force operations officer at the time , stated that Cohen likely attempted to land at the Hatzor Airbase instead of Ekron , where eyewitnesses saw a burning plane crashing in the distance . He was the first Israeli Air Force KIA , and was buried in Tel Aviv ( <unk> Yitzhak ) after his remains were found at the end of 1949 . 
 Even so , the Egyptians were caught by complete surprise and the attack had a profound psychological effect . This was the first time that such aircraft had been used . The Arab armies had previously had complete air superiority and had no knowledge of the existence of fighter aircraft in the Israeli Air Force . An intercepted Egyptian radio message stated : " We have been heavily attacked by enemy aircraft , we are dispersing " . The official Egyptian report assessed that there were only two airplanes , and that they were Spitfires . According to Ezer Weizmann , the airplanes had not been tested before the attack , and there was no evidence that they could fly or fire their weapons . However , the pilots considered this a minor issue in light of the fact that they were making history by being the first to fly Israeli fighter planes . The combination of the appearance of the IAF , the introduction of Israeli artillery , the Israeli defenses and the threat to his flank convinced al @-@ Mwawi to stop . He concluded that his forces were overstretched and that his positions needed to be consolidated . He left Brigadier General Muhammad Naguib in command of Isdud and ordered him to dig in . 
 = = = Operations on May 30 – June 1 = = = 
 Between May 29 and June 2 , the Israel Defense Forces constantly bombarded the Egyptians in Isdud with Napoleonchik cannons and Givati patrols harassed the Egyptian lines . The 51st Battalion was tasked with laying mines along the main road near Isdud , Yavne and Hill 69 . The 3rd Company of the 53rd Battalion , commanded by Yosef Geva , was tasked with harassing the enemy lines , while the 1st Company of the 54th Battalion , commanded by Aryeh Kotzer , was ordered to assault several targets . In his book In the Fields of Philistia , Uri <unk> , who participated in the battles , wrote of the harassment operation that during those days the Egyptians were fearing an Israeli attack and were firing in all directions and launching flares in hopes of discovering their enemy . 
 Of the preparations , he wrote : 
 On the night of May 30 , the 54th Battalion 's 1st Company attacked the area around Isdud 's railway station , but was outgunned and had to retreat with four wounded . According to the company 's report , the food that was given to them was rotten and further deteriorated the soldiers ' ability to fight . On May 31 , the Egyptian radio described the attack as a victory , and claimed hundreds of dead Israelis . The 3rd Company was unsuccessful , as intelligence on precise Egyptian positions was sparse , while the company gave its position away quickly . An Egyptian mortar scored a direct hit on one of the company 's squads , which caused casualties and panic . One of the soldiers ran for cover , but lost direction , and ended up in Isdud . He walked around the village unnoticed and found a chance to return to Givati , and provided the command with invaluable information for the operation . 
 On May 30 , the General Staff ordered the creation of a new battalion in Givati , the 57th , that would consist of about 200 <unk> . A hundred rifles for the battalion were provided by Givati , with 50 – 80 more provided by the General Staff . The brigade commander Avidan also created two new companies , one in the 54th Battalion , and one in the 55th , consisting of 80 persons each . These combined forces were tasked with the mission of capturing the Arab Yibna ( May 31 ) , although the attack never materialized because the battalion took off completely unprepared , lost its way , and returned to its starting position . Also on May 30 , four light planes set out from Sde Dov Airport to bomb the area of Isdud , although only one Rapide pilot spotted his target . He could not tell if any of the bombs actually exploded . 
 The General Staff issued an order to attack the Egyptian positions with a force three battalions strong ( from the Givati and Palmach 's Negev brigades ) . The attack was meant to take place on the night of June 1 – 2 , and at about midnight the units involved took up positions from which the assault was meant to take off . The 51st Battalion set up positions in the Yavne – Gan Yavne – Hatzor area , the 53rd Battalion — in the Be 'er Tuvia – Kfar Warburg area , and the 54th entered a company into the Gedera – <unk> area . At the last minute , the General Staff cancelled the order because of an imminent ceasefire . The ceasefire did not take effect however , and the attack was postponed to the night of June 2 – 3 . The Egyptians discovered the original plan , and were prepared to engage the Israeli forces . 
 = = = Cancelled attack on June 1 – 2 and subsequent reorganizations = = = 
 The Israeli General Staff called for a full @-@ scale assault on the Egyptian positions , but backed out at the last minute due to ceasefire talks . The General Staff 's order , sent among others to the Givati , 7th and Negev brigades , estimated that the Egyptian forces consisted of 2 @,@ 000 troops between Ashdod and the bridges to the north . The order called for the annihilation of the force on the night of June 1 – 2 , first by staging a major attack on the supply lines , and later by assaulting and capturing Isdud . The command was officially given to Givati . The forces outlined were : seven Givati companies ( of them three from the Irgun ) , three infantry companies and one Jeep regiment from Negev , three companies from Yiftach , a 65 mm artillery battery , and 4 @.@ 2 " and 25 @-@ pounder platoons . The order also said , however , and if all forces and equipment were not assembled by zero hour , Givati would have to do with the forces that were mustered . 
 Immediately upon receiving the order , Shimon Avidan called an emergency meeting at Hatzor . Yehoshua Goldrat , the only officer in the brigade who had experience from the British Army operating a combined force of infantry , armor , artillery and air , wrote the operational order . The order was in English , as Goldrat was not fluent in Hebrew , and was handed out to the battalion commanders on June 1 . The battalion commanders translated the document into Hebrew for the company commanders . According to the plan , six companies ( 3 Palmach and 3 Irgun ) would attack the Egyptians from the south . Three companies ( 2 from the 52nd and one from the 51st battalions ) would attack from the north , and two companies ( one from the 53rd Battalion and one from Irgun ) would prevent a retreat to the east . A company from the 53rd Battalion would block reinforcement from Majdal . Only senior officers knew of the full plans however . Simha <unk> , commander of the Palmach forces ( Negev Beasts Battalion ) , commented that his forces came exhausted and completely unprepared to the assembly points , and he had given consent for their deployment only after being assured that they would serve as the operational reserve ( the plan in fact called for these forces to lead the southern assault ) . 
 Zero hour was set for 03 : 00 on the night of June 1 – 2 , but at the last moment an order came down to cancel the attack . This was a significant blow to the troops ' morale , especially because before the operation , Abba <unk> , the culture officer of Givati , made a speech claiming that the attack would be an historic moment when the IDF would annihilate the Egyptian forces . <unk> <unk> , in his book The Good Sapper Alex , and Uri <unk> in In the Fields of Philistia , provided excerpts from the speech : 
 Tonight for the first time you will hear the wrath of our airplanes and the thunder of our cannons ... because the goal is not to capture a single village or territory , but to destroy the Egyptian column ... The air force , artillery and infantry this time will act together ... Everything that could possibly have been prepared , was . 
 Orders were immediately issued ( at 06 : 00 ) to start new preparations . Under the new ones , two companies from the 51st Battalion were to base themselves in Hatzor and Barqa , respectively . The 52nd Battalion was to prepare at Camp <unk> ( next to Kfar <unk> ) . The 53rd Battalion was to put two companies in Be 'er Tuvia , two platoons in <unk> , and one in Kfar Warburg . Two companies from the 54th were to be placed at Tel Nof ( <unk> Airbase ) . Six platoons from the 55th were to be based between al @-@ Maghar and al @-@ <unk> . The 8th Brigade was to be based between Gat , Gal On and Nitzanim , as well as remaining in the Gedera – <unk> area . A battalion was also temporarily transferred from <unk> to Givati ( now referred to as the 56th ) , preparing in Abu Shusha and Hulda . The 57th Battalion ( Irgun ) was to be placed in <unk> . Of the Negev Brigade , two companies would be in Camp Julis and one in Camp Beit Daras . Finally , the artillery forces were to keep their former positions , as well as taking new ones in <unk> . 
 On the same day , the Egyptian forces also changed the disposition of their forces , moving the 9th Battalion to the Ad Halom bridge , the 2nd to Isdud itself , and the 1st to Iraq <unk> and Faluja . Heavy machine gun and armored units were dispersed in between . Staff soldiers and those who manned Bren carriers took positions together with regular infantry soldiers . The Israeli side did not know of this development , but was aware that they had been detected in the previous night 's preparations . The army was against attacking Isdud soon , but the order was given by the political echelon . The attack was expected to be a tactical failure ; Avraham Ayalon writes that it could have succeeded if only the southern Egyptian force in Isdud itself was attacked , but attributes that lack of such a plan to the inexperience of the command and the heterogeneous nature of the Israeli force , which according to him could not have pulled off such an offensive . 
 The new IDF plans put forth for the June 2 – 3 operation were slightly changed from the original . These included 1 @,@ 150 fighters , as opposed to 1 @,@ 300 in the initial plan . The forces consisted of the following : two Palmach companies from the Beersheba Battalion and one from the Negev Beasts Battalion , under <unk> <unk> , a light vehicle company , two companies from the 54th Battalion and one from the 51st , under Zvi Zur , three Irgun companies , a reinforced company and platoon from the 53rd Battalion and eight artillery pieces ( six <unk> and two 4 @.@ 2 " mortars ) . Another light vehicle company would be in the operational reserve . Against them were placed Egypt 's 2nd Brigade , including the 2nd and 9th Battalions , three medium gun platoons , the brigade headquarters , and 12 pieces of artillery . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The operation officially began when a lone Israeli S @-@ 199 bombed Egyptian positions in Isdud at 18 : 00 on June 2 . Five light planes — two Fairchild 24s , two Rapides and one Bonanza — also made bombing runs between 20 : 25 and 21 : 30 . The bombardment did not make an impression on the readying Israeli soldiers , and in light of the noise created by the Egyptian anti @-@ aircraft guns , the Israelis considered that the plane was lucky to have survived the run . In addition , the troops were exhausted , not having had proper sleep in the four days preceding the operation . At 22 : 00 , the Israeli forces started moving against the Egyptian positions . 
 A soldier from the 54th Battalion said of the airstrike : 
 = = = Northern effort = = = 
 The forces that were to attack the Isdud bridge ( today Ad Halom ) set out from Gan Yavne at 22 : 20 : the 3rd Company of the 51st Battalion ( commanded by Yosef " <unk> " Harpaz ) , a mixed company from the 54th ( from the 2nd and 3rd companies ) under Asher Dromi , and the 54th 's 1st Company under Aryeh Kotzer . The overall commander was Zvi Zur , who was accompanied by the battalion staff , soldiers from a light vehicle company , and from the 54th 's 3rd Company . According to plan , Zur was meant to flank the Egyptians from the west and achieve surprise . When they reached Wadi <unk> however , about 700 m from the Egyptian position , it proved difficult to cross and caused a significant delay . 
 The movement was discovered at about 00 : 30 on June 3 , and Zur 's force lost the element of surprise . The Egyptian position that engaged the Israelis had two companies , but Harpaz , the 51st 's 3rd Company 's commander , underestimated the force and reported that it contained only one platoon . Zur decided to regroup in the wadi and ordered Aryeh Kotzer 's 1st Company to stay and engage the Egyptians at the spot where they were originally discovered and assault the pillbox there , while the rest of the forces would try a turning movement . 
 Kotzer estimated that a frontal assault against the Egyptians would be useless , as they were dug in on both sides of the pillbox . In complete darkness , the 1st Company made its way south through the wadi hoping to avoid enemy fire from superior positions and weapons until they were close enough to respond . At 03 : 00 , the Israeli artillery barrage started , but did not do significant damage and only alerted all Egyptian positions to the Israeli presence . The only Israeli unit close to engagement at the time was Kotzer 's company . About 100 m away from the Egyptian defense line , they stepped into an ambush and the leading squad was eliminated . Kotzer ordered the machine gunners to climb to the east bank of the wadi to provide cover for a counterattack , and this move also led to Israeli casualties . The counterattack was difficult and only destroyed some small Egyptian entrenchments . 
 Even though some of his soldiers came within 60 meters of the pillbox , after 19 of them ( over a third ) were killed and the sun began rising in the horizon , Kotzer decided to retreat , unable to receive official permission due to communication problems . He ordered all of his troops to collect the wounded and any weapons they could carry , helping with the task himself . The dead were left in the field , including the medics ( not a single medic survived ) . The injured were brought under fire into the wadi and at about 07 : 00 the force made its way to an unoccupied two @-@ storey building on the east bank . After the Egyptians started shelling the building with mortars , Kotzer 's company began to move towards Gan Yavne . 
 A soldier who witnessed the events stated : 
 Zur 's maneuver sent Israel 's forces into unknown territory , and they encountered an Egyptian entrenchment that caught them unawares . His original plan was to send Yosef Harpaz and the 3rd Company and then Dromi 's company , but when fire was opened on Harpaz 's men ( at approximately 04 : 00 ) , Zur ordered him to execute a frontal assault . Harpaz decided to do this in three single @-@ platoon waves : the first two would attack the Egyptians , while the third would provide cover for the forces . The first platoon was inexperienced and had never fought against Egypt 's army . After advancing , they encountered what were probably Bren carriers , which their commander reported were tanks . Harpaz then sent the second , more experienced , platoon of 15 men , who were also able to better utilize the cover fire . Eventually , the first platoon fled from the battlefield without being ordered to do so and the attack was only two platoons strong . However , this still assisted Aryeh Kotzer on the other side of the Egyptian positions to evacuate his injured troops . 
 At dawn , after his attacked failed to overtake any major positions , Zur decided to withdraw , for the first time in his life . He ordered Harpaz 's company , which had the most casualties , to go first , and at 06 : 00 told Dromi 's company to follow . Harpaz 's company had five men missing in action , four of whom were picked up by Dromi 's people . One of Dromi 's platoons remained on top of a sand dune to provide cover fire for the retreat . Meanwhile , the rest of the company made its way under the road and the railway through culverts . On the eastern side , Dromi met Harpaz . They sent the cover platoon home with the injured , and remained in their place to wait for Zur . Their lookout also spotted Kotzer 's retreating company and Harpaz requested artillery cover using the only working communication device they had . The <unk> missed their targets , but deterred the Egyptians , who stopped following Kotzer . 
 Zur was extremely reluctant to withdraw his personal forces . He decided to do so only at 09 : 00 , when it became clear that the other two companies were at a safe distance , and the Egyptians were massing for a counterattack . First , the injured were evacuated , then the rest of the forces made their way back , each squad providing cover for the next . The Egyptian artillery caused the forces to scatter , and the commanders had difficulty diverting them to the general retreat path . After they came to a small grove to the west of the main road , it was discovered that three were missing and 17 injured , who were treated by the only remaining medic . Approximately at noon , Zur 's men met with Dromi and Harpaz , and the working communication device was used to summon vehicles to take the soldiers to Gan Yavne . 
 = = = Southern effort = = = 
 Four motorized companies from the Negev Brigade left Be 'er Tuvia . They set up a position of 4 @.@ 2 inch mortars and medium machine guns about midway between Isdud and Beit Daras , to shell Isdud from the southeast . A reinforced company also left Be 'er Tuvia and took up positions between Hill 69 and the military base near Nitzanim to cut off Egyptian reinforcements coming from Majdal . The 57th Battalion ( consisting of Irgun veterans ) left Hatzor to assault Isdud from the northeast . The 53rd Battalion was accompanied by a reinforced platoon of 44 soldiers from the temporary 58th Battalion ( a new recruit unit ) , which made its way to Nitzanim in order to be replaced by a more experienced platoon from the 53rd . 
 When the Negev forces reached the coastal road , they realized that they could not continue on their vehicles , which could not travel in the sand dunes to the west of the road . The vehicles were therefore left with a platoon to the south of Isdud to block a possible Egyptian retreat . The other soldiers continued on foot into the sand dunes in an attempt to flank the Egyptian positions . On the second try , the Negev forces successfully captured several key points in the village , and destroyed a cannon . Nahum Sarig , the Negev Brigade commander , later wrote that the lack of intelligence on the enemy prevented the Israeli force from continuing its assault , while the Egyptians had time to regroup . 
 Despite Negev 's achievements , they were also given an order to retreat , as the Israeli command did not wish to fight in broad daylight . The retreating forces had no choice but to use a route similar to the ones they came from , which slowed down their movement . Most of the machine guns that they had brought had broken down in the sandy environment , and could not provide them with cover . They were also carrying a multitude of wounded soldiers . Muhammad Naguib decided to use the armored vehicles in his operational reserve against the retreating forces , fearing a possible cut @-@ off from the rest of the Egyptian forces in Palestine . According to Simha <unk> , commander of the Negev Beasts battalion , the Israelis , especially the wounded , thought that all was lost when this happened . However , the vehicles stopped eventually as they got bogged down in the sands , and the troops made it back to Nitzanim . Sixteen Israeli soldiers were killed in the retreat . 
 Meanwhile , the 57th Battalion made its way via Barqa towards Isdud . These troops were meant to serve as a diversionary force . As such , when they reached Wadi al @-@ <unk> , about 750 m ( 820 yd ) from the Egyptian position , they decided not to cross the wadi and instead fired on the Egyptians from the other side . They were too far away however to inflict concrete damage , but also did not suffer any casualties . Nahum Sarig later accused this force of also falsely reporting their positions , undermining the efforts of his Negev Brigade . 
 On Hill 69 and the coastal road , the 53rd Battalion intercepted and engaged a contingent of Egyptian reinforcements from Majdal . After the battles , the 53rd Battalion reported that at 03 : 00 , they had been ready to ambush possible reinforcements , and at 06 : 00 , an Egyptian convoy of two armored vehicles and 4 other vehicles made their way to Isdud . They were hit by Israeli mines , operated by Avraham <unk> 's platoon ( see Battle of Nitzanim ) , and only two vehicles made it out and back to Majdal . At 09 : 00 the general retreat order was given , and after reaching Nitzanim , <unk> 's platoon set out to assist the Negev forces ' retreat , helping carry the 20 @-@ so casualties . The forces on Hill 69 retreated only at noon to Be 'er Tuvia . 
 = = Aftermath and significance = = 
 In all , 45 Israelis were killed , 50 were wounded , and 5 captured by Egypt . Of them , 29 killed and 34 wounded were from Zur 's 54th Company . Egyptian sources reported 15 killed and 30 wounded , although this does not include the casualties suffered by the intercepted reinforcements from Majdal . Even before the final retreating troops came home , the Givati command had issued a new operation order , calling for renewed artillery and air bombardment of Isdud , and small harassment operations . The 57th Battalion , which gained a bad reputation after its failures in Yibna and Isdud , carried out several such successful operations , regaining prestige in the brigade . 
 While the Israelis suffered a major tactical defeat in Operation Pleshet , it is generally believed in Israel that the strategic goal of the operation — stopping the Egyptian advance — was achieved , unbeknown to the Israeli command at the time . This also allowed the capture of Arab Yibna , where the remaining residents expected the Egyptian Army to reach them , and mostly fled following the battle . Since the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine line ran between Isdud and Yibna , the outcome of the battle meant that on the coastal strip , the Egyptians had failed to cross over into territory assigned to the State of Israel . The bridge over the Lakhish River has since been known as Ad Halom ( " thus far " ) . 
 Even though in his 1955 book Egypt 's Destiny , Naguib wrote that his brigade 's successful stand was a glorious victory with few consequences , estimating 450 Israeli dead ( out of a perceived 4 @,@ 000 attackers ) , a logbook captured by Israel during the war revealed that he was extremely worried about the future fate of his forces . He requested immediate assistance , including air support to determine the location of the Israeli cannons , a medevac unit , reinforcements , munitions and communication wires . It is also likely that he believed that the 53rd Battalion 's force blocking the road from Majdal was still in place , and therefore thought that he was surrounded . 
 Sizable reinforcements — the 6th Battalion — came to Naguib only when his 9th Battalion was poised to attack Nitzanim . Aside from Nitzanim ( June 7 ) , the Egyptian Army shifted its entire concentration on clearing it flanks , successfully clearing a path between Majdal and al @-@ Faluja . The Israeli chronicler and officer Avraham Ayalon wrote that the Israeli retreat from Hill 69 on June 3 , along with the rest of the forces , which he believed unnecessary , was a major contributing factor to the subsequent Egyptian victories . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 The main points of historiographical dispute about the battle are whether or not the Egyptians were planning to advance northward toward Tel Aviv , and whether or not the battle was one of the turning points of the 1948 Arab – Israeli War . On June 18 , after the first truce of the war took effect , Nahum Sarig said in a staff meeting , attended by the Minister of Defense , that at the time the Egyptian plans were not clear , but that now their plans were to penetrate the Negev . Ben Gurion , on the other hand , noted in his diary that the Egyptians were set on taking Tel Aviv and advancing north . In 1958 , Major General Yitzhak Rabin addressed the issue ; he felt that the Egyptian stop at Isdud was the result of technical difficulties , following fifteen days of continuous movement , including battles along the way . This , Rabin thought , along with ground and aerial counterattacks , eventually delayed their drive on Tel Aviv . Later , he said , the Egyptians tried to make contact with the Jordanian forces at Latrun and , after a failed pincer movement , tried to cut the Negev off from Israel . According to Israeli historian Reuven Aharoni , the battle 's glorification and idealization suited the sentimental needs of the Israeli people . He believes that there is still no definite answer to the question of whether or not the Egyptians planning to drive on to Tel Aviv . 
 Israeli Arab historian Mustafa <unk> wrote that Egyptian and other Arab historians did not attribute as much importance to the battle as Israeli ones . They ask what the Egyptian objective was , and whether or not it was wise to advance without securing their lines of communication . Abdullah el Tell , commander of the Jordanian Legion in Jerusalem , thought that the Egyptians did not consider the Legion 's needs . Aware of their weaknesses , they did not let anything distract them from reaching Tel Aviv . The Egyptian war log , from 19 : 00 on May 28 , 1948 , showed concern over the lines of communication . Muhammad Nimr al @-@ <unk> wrote that while the Egyptians publicly declared that the target was Tel Aviv , they never actually meant to advance farther than their Isdud fortifications . As evidence , he cited the Egyptian refusal to take the undefended Yibna despite the villagers ' repeated cries for help . Bahjat Abu @-@ <unk> , one of Abd al @-@ Qadir al @-@ Husayni 's deputies and commander of the Beit Jibrin area , wrote that the Egyptians never had a clear plan , because their leadership were not really interested in a war . Therefore , their efforts were improvised . <unk> concludes that Arab historiography considers the battle the successful realization of a tactical move , designed to serve the actions of the badly coordinated Arab armies . 
 The Egyptian officer Kamal Ismail ash @-@ Sharif commented in his memoirs that this was a turning point in the war on the Egyptian – Israeli front : 
 According to the plan created by the Arab countries , the Egyptian Army was meant to advance until Yibna , although as soon as the first Egyptian forces reached Isdud , the enemy concentrated large forces in the area of Rehovot and began a heavy assault on the Egyptian Army . This attack was repelled , but the enemy managed to accomplish at least one goal – pinning down the Egyptian Army to its positions in Isdud . It is not an exaggeration to say that the Jewish attack on Isdud was a turning point in the Egyptian – Israeli war , because from that moment , the Egyptian headquarters was forced to change its plans . Because the Egyptian command would be chasing Zionist gangs , it decided to be content with separating the Negev from the other parts of the country . 
 Israeli historian David Tal agreed with this view ; Yoav Gelber , when asked about this , commented that the significance of the attack , along with two other major tactical failures — Latrun and Jenin — was in the fact that the initiative passed to the Israeli side , and the Arabs conducted only small assaults after these operations . Scholar <unk> <unk> noted that the Egyptians originally assumed that the further their army advances , the weaker the Israeli resistance would become . 
 Unlike traditional Israeli historiography , Arab sources in general do not see it as a turning point in the war . They agree that the Egyptian declarations regarding Tel Aviv as the main strategic objective were ostentatious rather than operative . In his book 1948 , New Historian Benny Morris also disagrees with the traditional Israeli view , and states that portraying the operation as the catalyst for the Egyptian halt is a mistake . However , in a March 15 , 2007 panel of historians , Morris said that at least in the Egyptian expeditionary force , the Israeli attack did lead to a decision to stop advancing . 
 = M @-@ 73 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 73 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the Upper Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . It connects with US Highway 2 ( US 2 ) and Highway 55 ( WIS 55 ) at the state line near Iron River . Running through forest , the highway was first designated along with the rest of the state highway system in 1919 . <unk> since its inception , M @-@ 73 was completely paved by the mid @-@ 1930s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 73 starts on its southwestern end on a bridge over the Brule River that connects across the state line to WIS 55 in Forest County , Wisconsin . On the Michigan side of the border , the highway runs north away from the river . It runs along the western edge of a section of farm fields before turning eastward to run through them . M @-@ 73 passes to the south of Hagerman , Little Hagerman and Bass lakes , after which it turns northeasterly running north of Stanley Lake . The northern terminus is at US 2 west of downtown Iron River . All of M @-@ 73 is two @-@ lane rural highway through wooded terrain except the section immediately north of the state line which runs along the aforementioned farm . 
 No part of M @-@ 73 is listed on the National Highway System . In 2009 , the Michigan Department of Transportation conducted a survey to determine the traffic volume along the highway , reported using a metric called average annual daily traffic . The department determined that 890 vehicles a day used the southern half of the highway while 1 @,@ 100 vehicles used the northern section closest to US 2 . In the same surveys , MDOT calculated that , on average , 30 trucks used the roadway daily . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 73 was designated by July 1 , 1919 , along with the rest of the initial state trunkline highway system . In 1937 , the highway was completely hard @-@ surfaced for the first time . Its routing has been largely unchanged since designation . The original bridge over the Brule River was built in 1922 . In a joint project with the Wisconsin Department of Transportation ( WisDOT ) , MDOT funded a replacement in 2003 . WisDOT supervised construction of the new span in a project that ran between July 14 and November 4 , 2003 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Iron County . 
 = Hurricane Philippe ( 2005 ) = 
 Hurricane Philippe was a short @-@ lived hurricane that formed over the Atlantic in September during the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season . Philippe was the sixteenth named storm and ninth hurricane of the season . 
 Hurricane Philippe initially formed to the east of the Lesser Antilles on September 17 and moved to the north strengthening as it did so . Philippe became a hurricane on September 18 and stayed as such for two days before increasing wind shear from a non @-@ tropical system took its toll on September 20 and weakened Philippe into a tropical storm . Philippe continued to weaken as it looped around this low and was absorbed by it on September 23 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 9 a tropical wave moved off the African coast and moved west into the Atlantic . It started to become more organized on September 13 and the National Hurricane Center began to watch it closely for further development . Tropical Depression Seventeen formed from the wave on September 17 when it was 350 miles ( 560 km ) east of Barbados . The depression strengthened further to become Tropical Storm Philippe that evening , and the official forecasts correctly indicated that Philippe would move northwards and not approach the Lesser Antilles despite climatology suggesting an impact on the islands . 
 Philippe continued to steadily strengthen , becoming a hurricane late on September 18 as it traveled north in a low @-@ shear environment and some models suggested that this trend would continue and Philippe would go on to become a major hurricane . However Philippe began to encounter higher wind shear from a non @-@ tropical low , the development of which partly resulted from Hurricane Rita 's outflow . As a result of this shear Philippe 's winds only managed to reach a peak of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) before Philippe weakened back into a tropical storm on September 20 . 
 Philippe moved farther north skirting the low and Philippe continued to weaken gradually . The official forecast did not predict this , primarily as a result of some models indicating a reintensification to hurricane status . Philippe began to loop around the center of the non @-@ tropical system , weakening as it did so . As Philippe turned towards Bermuda it weakened into a tropical depression on September 22 . The depression degenerated into a remnant low the next day and this remnant continued to loop cyclonically and could be tracked for a further day or two within the circulation of the non @-@ tropical system . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and naming = = 
 Despite forming fairly close to the Lesser Antilles , no tropical cyclone warnings were issued for the islands , as the official forecast correctly foresaw that Philippe would stay well to the east . A tropical storm warning was issued for Bermuda on September 23 , but proved redundant when Philippe dissipated well to the south of the island . The storm still brought gusty winds and moisture to the island , with 0 @.@ 15 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 mm ) of precipitation reported on September 23 . The circulation that absorbed Philippe dropped light rainfall on the island , and was responsible for the lowest barometric pressure during the month . 
 When Tropical Storm Philippe formed on September 17 , it was the earliest ever in the season that the sixteenth storm formed , beating the previous record held by Storm 16 of the 1933 season by 10 days . 
 = Ao dai = 
 The áo dài is a Vietnamese national costume , now most commonly worn by women . In its current form , it is a tight @-@ fitting silk tunic worn over pants . The word is pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] in the North and [ <unk> <unk> ] in the South . <unk> classifies the item as a piece of clothing on the upper part of the body . <unk> means " long " . 
 The word " ao dai " was originally applied to the outfit worn at the court of the Nguyễn Lords at Huế in the 18th century . This outfit evolved into the áo ngũ thân , a five @-@ paneled aristocratic gown worn in the 19th and early 20th centuries . Inspired by Paris fashions , Nguyễn Cát Tường and other artists associated with Hanoi University redesigned the ngũ thân as a modern dress in the 1920s and 1930s . The updated look was promoted by the artists and magazines of Tự Lực <unk> <unk> ( Self @-@ Reliant Literary Group ) as a national costume for the modern era . In the 1950s , Saigon designers tightened the fit to produce the version worn by Vietnamese women today . The dress was extremely popular in South Vietnam in the 1960s and early 1970s . On Tết and other occasions , Vietnamese men may wear an áo <unk> ( brocade robe ) , a version of the ao dai made of thicker fabric . 
 Academic commentary on the ao dai emphasizes the way the dress ties feminine beauty to Vietnamese nationalism , especially in the form of " Miss Ao Dai " pageants , popular both among overseas Vietnamese and in Vietnam itself . " Ao dai " is one of the few Vietnamese words that appear in English @-@ language dictionaries . 
 = = Parts of dress = = 
 <unk> <unk> : back flap 
 <unk> <unk> thân áo : hooks used as fasteners and holes 
 <unk> tay : sleeve 
 <unk> <unk> : inside seam 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> : main hook and hole 
 <unk> <unk> : front flap 
 <unk> <unk> : collar button 
 <unk> áo : collar 
 <unk> may : seam 
 <unk> ( eo ) : waist 
 The ao dai can be worn with a <unk> lá ( conical leaf hat ) , a style associated with Huế . On weddings and other formal occasions , a circular headgear called a <unk> <unk> is worn . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Before the Nguyen Dynasty = = = 
 For centuries , peasant women typically wore a halter top ( <unk> ) underneath a blouse or overcoat , alongside a skirt ( <unk> ) . Aristocrats , on the other hand , favored a cross @-@ collared robe called áo <unk> <unk> , which bore resemblance to the Chinese <unk> , Korean <unk> , and the Japanese Kimono . In 1744 , Lord Nguyễn Phúc <unk> of Huế decreed that both men and women at his court wear trousers and a gown with buttons down the front . Writer Lê <unk> Đôn described the newfangled outfit as an áo dài ( long garment ) . The members of the southern court were thus distinguished from the courtiers of the Trịnh Lords in Hanoi , who wore áo <unk> <unk> with long skirts . 
 Chinese style clothing was forced on Vietnamese people by the Nguyễn dynasty . Trousers have been adopted by White H <unk> . The trousers replaced the traditional skirts of the females of the White Hmong . The tunics and trouser clothing of the Han Chinese on the Ming tradition was worn by the Vietnamese . The Ao Dai was created when tucks which were close fitting and compact were added in the 1920s to this Chinese style . Trousers and tunics on the Chinese pattern in 1774 were ordered by the Vo Vuong Emperor to replace the sarong type Vietnamese clothing . The Chinese clothing in the form of trousers and tunic were mandated by the Vietnamese Nguyen government . It was up to the 1920s in Vietnam 's north area in isolated hamlets wear skirts were worn . The Chinese Ming dynasty , Tang dynasty , and Han dynasty clothing was ordered to be adopted by Vietnamese military and bureaucrats by the Nguyen Lord Nguyễn Phúc <unk> ( Nguyen The Tong ) . Chinese clothing started having an impact on Vietnamese dress in the Ly dynasty . The current Ao Dai was introduced b the Nguyen Lords . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The áo <unk> thân , a traditional four @-@ paneled gown , evolved into the five @-@ paneled áo ngũ thân in the early 19th century . <unk> is Sino @-@ Vietnamese for " five . " It refers not only to the number of panels , but also to the five elements in oriental cosmology . The áo ngũ thân had a loose fit and sometimes had wide sleeves . <unk> could display their prosperity by putting on multiple layers of fabric , which at that time was costly . Despite Vietnam 's tropical climate , northern aristocrats were known to wear three to five layers . 
 The áo ngũ thân had two flaps sewn together in the back , two flaps sewn together in the front , and a " baby flap " hidden underneath the main front flap . The gown appeared to have two @-@ flaps with slits on both sides , features preserved in the later ao dai . Compared to a modern ao dai , the front and back flaps were much broader and the fit looser . It had a high collar and was buttoned in the same fashion as a modern ao dai . Women could wear the dress with the top few buttons undone , revealing a glimpse of their <unk> underneath . 
 Vietnamese garments throughout the centuries : 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 = = = = Modernization of style = = = = 
 Huế 's Đồng Khánh Girl 's High School , which opened in 1917 , was widely praised for the ao dai uniform worn by its students . The first modernized ao dai appeared at a Paris fashion show in 1921 . In 1930 , Hanoi artist Cát Tường , also known as Le Mur , designed a dress inspired by the áo ngũ thân and by Paris fashions . It reached to the floor and fit the curves of the body by using darts and a nipped @-@ in waist . When fabric became inexpensive , the rationale for multiple layers and thick flaps disappeared . Modern <unk> manufacture allows for wider panels , eliminating the need to sew narrow panels together . The áo dài Le Mur , or " trendy " ao dai , created a sensation when model Nguyễn Thị Hậu wore it for a feature published by the newspaper Today in January 1935 . The style was promoted by the artists of Tự Lực <unk> <unk> ( " Self @-@ Reliant Literary Group " ) as a national costume for the modern era . The painter Lê <unk> introduced several popular styles of ao dai beginning in 1934 . Such Westernized garments temporarily disappeared during World War II ( 1939 – 45 ) . 
 In the 1950s , Saigon designers tightened the fit of the ao dai to create the version commonly seen today . Trần Kim of Thiết <unk> Tailors and Dũng of Dũng Tailors created a dress with <unk> sleeves and a diagonal seam that runs from the collar to the underarm . Madame Nhu , first lady of South Vietnam , popularized a collarless version beginning in 1958 . The ao dai was most popular from 1960 to 1975 . A brightly colored áo dài hippy was introduced in 1968 . The áo dài mini , a version designed for practical use and convenience , had slits that extended above the waist and panels that reached only to the knee . 
 = = = = Communist period = = = = 
 The ao dai has always been more common in the South than in the North . The communists , who gained power in the North in 1954 and in the South in the 1975 , had conflicted feelings about the ao dai . They praised it as a national costume and one was worn to the Paris Peace Conference ( 1968 – 73 ) by Vietcong negotiator Nguyễn Thị Bình . Yet Westernized versions of the dress and those associated with " decadent " Saigon of the 1960s and early 1970s were condemned . Economic crisis , famine , and war with Cambodia combined to make the 1980s a fashion low point . The ao dai was rarely worn except at weddings and other formal occasions , with the older , looser @-@ fitting style preferred . Overseas Vietnamese , meanwhile , kept tradition alive with " Miss Ao Dai " pageants ( Hoa Hậu <unk> <unk> ) , the most notable one held annually in Long Beach , California . 
 The ao dai experienced a revival beginning in late 1980s , when state enterprise and schools began adopting the dress as a uniform again . In 1989 , 16 @,@ 000 Vietnamese attended a Miss Ao Dai Beauty Contest held in Ho Chi Minh City . When the Miss International Pageant in Tokyo gave its " Best National Costume " award to an ao dai @-@ clad Trường <unk> Mai in 1995 , <unk> Trang <unk> ( New Fashion Magazine ) claimed that Vietnam 's " national soul " was " once again honored . " An " ao dai craze " followed that lasted for several years and led to wider use of the dress as a school uniform . 
 = = Present day = = 
 No longer deemed politically controversial , ao dai fashion design is supported by the Vietnamese government . It is often called áo dài Việt Nam to link it to patriotic feelings . Designer Le Si Hoang is a celebrity in Vietnam and his shop in Saigon is the place to visit for those who admire the dress . In Hanoi , tourists get fitted with ao dai on Luong Van Can Street . The elegant city of Huế in the central region is known for its ao dai , <unk> lá ( leaf hats ) , and well @-@ dressed women . 
 The ao dai is now standard for weddings , for celebrating Tết and for other formal occasions . It 's required uniform for female teacher ( mostly from high school to below ) and female student in common high school in the South ; no require about color or pattern for teacher when student use plain white for school uniform . Companies often require their female staff to wear uniforms that include the ao dai , so flight attendants , receptionists , bank female staff , restaurant staff , and hotel workers in Vietnam may be seen wearing it . 
 The most popular style of ao dai fits tightly around the wearer 's upper torso , emphasizing her bust and curves . Although the dress covers the entire body , it is thought to be provocative , especially when it is made of thin fabric . " The ao dai covers everything , but hides nothing " , according to one saying . The dress must be individually fitted and usually requires several weeks for a tailor to complete . An ao dai costs about $ 200 in the United States and about $ 40 in Vietnam . 
 " Symbolically , the ao dai invokes nostalgia and timelessness associated with a gendered image of the homeland for which many Vietnamese people throughout the diaspora yearn " , wrote <unk> T. Lieu , an assistant professor at the University of Texas at Austin . The difficulties of working while wearing an ao dai link the dress to frailty and innocence , she wrote . Vietnamese writers who favor the use of the ao dai as a school uniform cite the inconvenience of wearing it as an advantage , a way of teaching students feminine behavior such as modesty , caution , and a refined manner . 
 The ao dai is featured in an array of Vietnam @-@ themed or related movies . In Good Morning , Vietnam ( 1987 ) , Robin Williams 's character is wowed by ao dai @-@ clad women when he first arrives in Saigon . The 1992 films <unk> and The Lover inspired several international fashion houses to design ao dai collections , including Prada 's <unk> collection and a <unk> Armani collection . In the Vietnamese film The White Silk Dress ( 2007 ) , an ao dai is the sole legacy that the mother of a poverty @-@ stricken family has to pass on to her daughters . The Hanoi City Complex , a 65 @-@ story building now under construction , will have an ao dai @-@ inspired design . Vietnamese designers created ao dai for the contestants in the Miss Universe beauty contest , which was held July 2008 in Nha Trang , Vietnam . 
 The most prominent annual Ao Dai Festival outside of Vietnam is held each year in San Jose , California , a city that is home to a large Vietnamese American community . This event features an international array of designer ao dia under the direction of festival founder , Jenny Do . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 Ao dai 
 = No Code = 
 No Code is the fourth studio album by the American rock band Pearl Jam , released on August 27 , 1996 through Epic Records . Following a troubled tour for its previous album , Vitalogy ( 1994 ) , in which Pearl Jam engaged in a much @-@ publicized boycott of Ticketmaster , the band went into the studio to record its follow @-@ up . The music on the record was more diverse than what the band had done on previous releases , incorporating elements of garage rock , worldbeat , and psychedelia . 
 Although No Code debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , it left a large section of the band ’ s fanbase unsatisfied and quickly fell down the charts . Critical reviews were also mixed , with praise to the musical variety but the album being considered inconsistent . The album became the first Pearl Jam album to not reach multi @-@ platinum status , receiving a single platinum certification by the RIAA in the United States . 
 = = Recording = = 
 For its fourth album , Pearl Jam again worked with producer Brendan O 'Brien , with whom they had worked on predecessors Vs . ( 1993 ) and Vitalogy ( 1994 ) . No Code was the band 's first album with drummer Jack Irons , who had joined the band as Vitalogy was being completed . Following the summer U.S. leg of the band 's Vitalogy Tour , the band began work on No Code in Chicago , Illinois in July 1995 during the infamous Chicago heat wave . The Chicago sessions lasted a week at the Chicago Recording Company . During a break in a string of make @-@ up dates for the 1995 tour the band went into the studio for a week @-@ long session in New Orleans , Louisiana , where the band recorded " Off He Goes " . The rest of the recording took place in the first half of 1996 in Seattle , Washington at Studio Litho , which is owned by guitarist Stone Gossard . The album was then mixed by O 'Brien at his mixing facility at Southern Tracks in Atlanta , Georgia . 
 The sessions for the album began with strife and tension . Bassist Jeff Ament wasn 't made aware that the band was recording until three days into the sessions , and said that he " wasn 't super involved with that record on any level . " Guitarist Mike McCready said , " I 'm sure Jeff was pissed , but it was more about separating , because if we played all together nothing would get done . We 'd all just get pissed off at each other . " At one point Ament even walked out of the recording sessions , and considered quitting the band due to lead vocalist Eddie Vedder 's control of the creation process . Due to Pearl Jam balancing recording and touring , Irons commented that the band was " more on @-@ the @-@ fly during the making of No Code , and some good things happened out of that , but we were also really tired . It was difficult to tour and play these shows that were two or three hours long and then force ourselves to produce something in a studio . " 
 McCready said that a lot of the songs were developed out of jam sessions , and said " I think we kind of rushed it a little bit . " Ament said that the band members would bring in fragments of songs , and it would take hours before Vedder could have music to which he could add vocals . He added that " Ed 's typically the guy who finishes off the songs ... But by the end of No Code , he was so burnt , it was so much work for him . " The band 's mood had gone better by the time the album was finished , and the bandmembers gave credit for this to Irons . Regarding Irons , O 'Brien stated that " everybody was on their best musical behavior around him . " McCready said that Irons urged the band members to discuss their problems , and called him " a big spiritual influence , if not the biggest . " Vedder said , " Making No Code was all about gaining perspective . " Commenting upon the sessions as a whole , O 'Brien said , " It was really a transitional record . We had a good time making it . " 
 = = = Outtakes = = = 
 Two outtakes from the recording sessions ended up as B @-@ sides , " Black , Red , Yellow " on the " Hail , Hail " single , and " Dead Man " , which was originally intended for the film Dead Man Walking , on " Off He Goes . " Both songs were included on the 2003 Lost Dogs collection of rarities , along with four other tracks from the No Code sessions , two of which ended up in compilations - " Leaving Here " , which appeared on Home Alive , and " <unk> Out of Control , " featured on Music for Our Mother Ocean Vol . 1 . The other rejected songs were " All Night " and " Don 't Gimme No Lip . " " Olympic Platinum " , written by the album 's mixer Nick DiDia around the time of the 1996 Summer Olympics , was recorded by the band and released on its 1996 fan club Christmas single . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 While Vitalogy had shifted away from the earlier albums ' accessible compositions and polished production , No Code represented a deliberate break from Ten 's stadium sound , favoring experimental ballads and noisy garage rock songs . It stood out with its emphasis on subtle harmony ( " Off He Goes " ) , Eastern influences ( " Who You Are " ) , and spoken word ( " I 'm Open " ) . Irons lends a tribal drum sound on the songs " Who You Are " and " In My Tree " . Irons stated , " To turn my drum music into a song is pretty challenging , but the guys have been really supportive of me doing it , and we 've worked some things into a few songs . " Vedder said , " We realized that we had an opportunity to experiment . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly stated that " No Code displays a wider range of moods and instrumentation than on any previous Pearl Jam album . " 
 The lyrical themes on the album deal with issues of spirituality , morality , and self @-@ examination . Vedder said , " I think there 's a little self @-@ examination in those songs , something that a lot of my friends are going through too , as they approach 30 . " Ament said , " In some ways , it 's like the band 's story . It 's about growing up . " The lyrics of " Hail , Hail " refer to two people in a troubled relationship struggling to hold it together . Vedder has said that he wrote the song " Off He Goes " about himself and how he is a " shit friend , " adding , " I 'll show up and everything 's great and then all of the sudden I 'm outta there ... " " Lukin " is about the " pretty intense stalker problem , " Vedder faced during the mid @-@ 1990s . " Around the Bend " was written by Vedder as a lullaby that Irons could sing to his son . 
 The lyrics to " Smile " are taken from a note that Dennis Flemion of The Frogs hid inside Vedder 's notebook while he was onstage performing . The words used in the note are taken from the Frogs songs " This Is How I Feel " and " Now I Wanna Be Dead " . Flemion is given credit in the vinyl , but the credit is absent from the CD version . The lyrics to " Red Mosquito " were inspired by the events surrounding Pearl Jam 's June 24 , 1995 concert at San Francisco 's Golden Gate Park , which happened on the same day Vedder was hospitalized due to food poisoning . Vedder only made it through seven songs and the band was forced to cancel the remaining dates of the short tour that it was on . For the first time on a Pearl Jam album a band member other than Vedder contributed lyrics , with Gossard writing the lyrics to " Mankind " . Gossard also sang lead vocals on the track . 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 The album package consists of 156 Polaroid photos that unfold into a 2x2 square . The Polaroid photos are seemingly random . One of the photos featured on the front cover is the eyeball of Dennis Rodman , former Chicago Bulls player and friend of the band , while another photo is of Vedder 's foot after he had been stung by a stingray . The pictures , when viewed from afar , blend to form the No Code triangle / eyeball logo that is the theme throughout the album . The CD and vinyl came with lyrics printed on the back of replica Polaroids . Only nine Polaroids came in a set , leaving one to have to obtain another set to accumulate all thirteen songs . 
 When discussing the album 's title , Vedder said " it 's called No Code because it 's full of code . It 's misinformation . " In medical terminology , a " no code " order is a medical order to withhold CPR on a patient . It is also known as a " do not resuscitate " order . In another interview , Vedder said that " if the record is a complete failure you 've kind of owned up to it in a subliminal way . No Code was the same thing . For me , No Code meant ' Do Not <unk> ' . " 
 = = Tour = = 
 Pearl Jam promoted the album with tours in North America and Europe in the fall of 1996 . The short tour of North America focused on the East Coast of the United States . As with Vitalogy , very little touring was done in the United States to promote No Code because of the band 's refusal to play in Ticketmaster 's venues . The band chose to use alternate ticketing companies for the shows . A European tour followed in the fall of 1996 , of which the band 's November 3 , 1996 show in Berlin , Germany at <unk> was broadcast on many radio stations worldwide . 
 During the North American tour fans complained about the difficulty in obtaining tickets and the use of non @-@ Ticketmaster venues , which were judged to be remote and impersonal . Gossard stated that there was " a lot of stress associated with trying to tour at that time " and that " it was growing more and more difficult to be excited about being part of the band . " He added , " Ticketmaster , as monopolistic as it may be , is very efficient so we weren 't playing the venues we wanted to play . " 
 On October 17 , 2014 at the i wireless Center in Moline , Illinois , during the Lightning Bolt Tour , Pearl Jam played the entire album in order as part of their set . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 No Code sold 366 @,@ 500 copies in its first week of release , topping the Billboard 200 , but falling short of analysts ' predictions of at least 535 @,@ 000 copies . This was significantly less than what the band 's previous two albums sold in their respective first weeks of release . It was , however , the seventh biggest @-@ selling debut of what was a slow year for the industry . It stayed at number one for two weeks , and was Pearl Jam 's last album to debut at number one on the album chart until Backspacer was released in 2009 . No Code was the band 's first album to not reach multi @-@ platinum status , being certified platinum by the RIAA , and , as of 2013 , has sold 1 @.@ 75 million copies in the United States according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 Three singles were released from No Code . The lead single " Who You Are " peaked at number 31 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and reached number one on the Modern Rock charts and number five on the Mainstream Rock charts . Neither of the album 's other singles , " Hail , Hail " and " Off He Goes " , charted on the Hot 100 , but both placed on the Mainstream Rock and Modern Rock charts , as did album track " Red Mosquito " . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Upon its release , No Code received a mixed to positive critical reception . Rolling Stone staff writer David Fricke gave No Code four out of five stars , saying that the album " is abrupt in its mood swings almost to the point of vertigo . " He praised the album as " the kind of impulsive , quixotic , provocative ruckus that has become rare in a modern @-@ rock mainstream " and added that " No Code basically means no rule books , no limits and , above all , no fear . " Q gave the album four out of five stars . The review said that the album " constantly adds unexpected and <unk> [ sic ] details .... A solid attraction amid intriguing oddities is the powerful array of guitar sounds . " Critic Robert Christgau described the album as " slowly winning a heartwarming battle against constitutional melancholia . " AllMusic staff writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album three and a half out of five stars , saying , " While a bit too incoherent , No Code is Pearl Jam 's richest and most rewarding album to date as well as their most human . " NME gave No Code a seven out of ten . In the review , it is stated that " Vedder is still preoccupied with his own mortality , but now he appears more quasi @-@ mystical than miserable .... for all its relative <unk> , No Code is still a difficult beast . " 
 Referring to the songs on the album , Jon Pareles of The New York Times said " about half are worth the effort . " He observed that " too often , [ Vedder ] falls into American culture 's Disney syndrome , idealizing childhood innocence above all . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a C , saying that while No Code " cracks open their sound , " it " becomes a collection of fragments that don 't add up to much of anything , except a portrait of a musically disjointed band . " On the change in mood compared with the band ’ s previous releases , he said that " the album leaves you with the vaguely unsettling feeling that Pearl Jam without pain are like a pretzel without salt , or Seattle without rain . " Ryan Schreiber of Pitchfork Media called it " a nice listen , " but stated that " there 's a ton of filler here . In fact , it 's almost all filler . " Time reviewer Christopher John Farley said that the album " makes it sound as if they 're having a midlife crisis . " Farley added that " too few of the songs on the Pearl Jam CD explore the musical possibilities they suggest in any kind of definitive or provocative manner . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Eddie Vedder , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Terry Sanford = 
 James Terry Sanford ( August 20 , 1917 – April 18 , 1998 ) was a United States politician and educator from North Carolina . A member of the Democratic Party , Sanford was the 65th Governor of North Carolina ( 1961 – 1965 ) , a two @-@ time U.S. Presidential candidate in the 1970s and a U.S. Senator ( 1986 – 1993 ) . Sanford was a strong proponent of public education and introduced a number of reforms and new programs in North Carolina 's schools and institutions of higher education as the state 's governor , increasing funding for education and establishing the North Carolina Fund . From 1969 to 1985 , Sanford was President of Duke University . 
 An Eagle Scout as a youth , Sanford became an FBI agent after graduating from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1939 . During World War II , he saw combat in the European Theatre and received a battlefield commission . Following his return to civilian life after World War II , Sanford attended and graduated from the University of North Carolina School of Law and began a legal career in the late 1940s , soon becoming involved in politics . A lifelong Democrat , he was noted for his progressive leadership in civil rights and education ; although his opponents criticized him as a " tax @-@ and @-@ spend " liberal , Sanford is remembered as a major public figure of the South after World War II . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sanford was born in 1917 in Laurinburg , North Carolina , the son of Elizabeth Terry ( Martin ) and Cecil Leroy Sanford , both of English descent . He became an Eagle Scout in Laurinburg 's Troop 20 of the Boy Scouts of America ( BSA ) . Shortly before he died , Sanford related his Scouting experience to journalist David Gergen and said that it " probably saved my life in the war . Boys who had been Scouts or had been in the CCC knew how to look after themselves in the woods . ... What I learned in Scouts sustained me all my life ; it helped me make decisions about what was best . " The BSA recognized him with its Distinguished Eagle Scout Award . 
 Sanford graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1939 and then served as a special agent in the FBI for two years . He married Margaret Rose Knight on July 4 , 1942 , and later had two children with her , Terry Jr. and Elizabeth . During World War II , he enlisted as a private in the US Army and later attained the rank of first lieutenant . He parachuted into France with the 517th Parachute Infantry Regiment and subsequently fought in the Battle of the Bulge . He was awarded the Bronze Star and Purple Heart for his bravery and wounds , respectively . Sanford was honorably discharged in 1946 . Sanford later served as a company commander with the rank of captain in Company K of 119th Infantry Regiment of the North Carolina Army National Guard from 1948 to 1960 . After the war , Sanford earned a law degree from the University of North Carolina School of Law and served as president of the Young Democratic Clubs of North Carolina , now known as the Young Democrats of North Carolina . 
 = = Gubernatorial career = = 
 Sanford was an assistant director of the Institute of Government of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill from 1946 until 1948 , then began a private practice of law in Fayetteville . Sanford served one term as a state senator ( 1953 – 55 ) , and chose not to run for a second term . He ran for governor of North Carolina in 1960 , defeating I. Beverly Lake , Sr. , Malcolm <unk> Seawell , and John D. Larkins in the Democratic primary and Robert Gavin in the general election . Elected to a single term ( as North Carolina governors could not at that time be elected for more than one term ) , Sanford served from January 1961 through January 1965 . 
 Driven by his belief that a person could accomplish anything with a good education , Sanford nearly doubled North Carolina 's expenditures on public schools . He began consolidating the University of North Carolina system to ensure its solvency and strength and oversaw the creation of the North Carolina Community College System . He conceived the idea for the Governor 's School of North Carolina , a publicly funded six @-@ week residential summer program for gifted high school students in the state . He established the North Carolina School of the Arts ( now University of North Carolina School of the Arts ) to keep talented students " in the fields of music , drama , the dance and allied performing arts , at both the high school and college levels of instruction " in their home state . He fought for racial desegregation , and even sent his son to a desegregated public school at a time when such a position was politically unpopular and possibly dangerous . He also established the North Carolina Fund under the leadership of George Esser to fight poverty and promote racial equality across the state . Controversial tax increases were made to finance these educational programs . One such tax , on food , roused much opposition and was decried as regressive by many , including by some of the governor 's most loyal supporters . The food tax , nicknamed " Terry 's Tax " , and other taxes implemented by Sanford diminished his popularity and were heavily criticized by his political opponents . 
 Governor Sanford was a close political ally of President John F. Kennedy , a fact that disturbed some North Carolina Democrats who were suspicious of Kennedy 's Catholicism . According to President Kennedy 's personal secretary Evelyn Lincoln , Sanford would have been Kennedy 's choice for vice president on the 1964 Democratic ticket , had Kennedy lived . In her 1968 book Kennedy and Johnson she reported that President Kennedy told her that Lyndon B. Johnson would be replaced as Vice President . Lincoln wrote of that November 19 , 1963 , conversation just three days before Kennedy 's assassination : 
 As Mr. Kennedy sat in the rocker in my office , his head resting on its back he placed his left leg across his right knee . He rocked slightly as he talked . In a slow pensive voice he said to me , ' You know if I am re @-@ elected in sixty @-@ four , I am going to spend more and more time toward making government service an honorable career . I would like to tailor the executive and legislative branches of government so that they can keep up with the tremendous strides and progress being made in other fields ... I am going to advocate changing some of the outmoded rules and regulations in the Congress , such as the seniority rule . To do this I will need as a running mate in sixty @-@ four a man who believes as I do . ' ... I was fascinated by this conversation and wrote it down verbatim in my diary . Now I asked , ... ' Who is your choice as a running @-@ mate ? ' He looked straight ahead , and without hesitating he replied , ' At this time I am thinking about Governor Terry Sanford of North Carolina . But it will not be <unk> 
 Additionally , Sanford used his leverage with the White House to expand the Research Triangle Park ( RTP ) , which sparked an economic surge in the state , eventually luring IBM and the United States Environmental Protection Agency to the Triangle area . 
 Sanford was also a staunch opponent of capital punishment . His " numerous statements against capital punishment were so well known that prisoners on North Carolina ’ s death row pointedly referred to them in their clemency appeals . " 
 After his term in office ended , Sanford opened a law firm . He had agreed to serve as Lyndon Johnson 's campaign manager in 1968 just before Johnson 's withdrawal on March 31 , and later took over as the campaign manager for the Democratic nominee Hubert Humphrey in his race against Republican Richard Nixon for the presidency . President Johnson wanted Humphrey to pick Sanford as his running mate . On one occasion , the Humphrey campaign asked Sanford if he wanted to be the vice presidential candidate . Sanford declined and Humphrey ultimately picked Senator Edmund Muskie of Maine . Though Sanford received a number of legal and business offers from the private sector during this period , he was interested in a position that would allow him to keep his political prospects open . 
 = = President of Duke University = = 
 In 1969 , Sanford became president of Duke University , a position he held for the next sixteen years . This approach helped quell student unrest over the Vietnam War early in his tenure as university president . Addressing the protests of the 1970 Kent State shootings with tolerance , choosing to not call in police to clear the roads , leading to the protesting students going back to their rooms at night so that West Campus could be reopened the next day kept the campus calm during a turbulent spring . Shortly before his tenure , on February 13 , 1969 , 60 student members of the Afro @-@ American Society had occupied Duke 's main administration center , the Allen Building , demanding the creation of a Black Studies program . After three days of clashes with police , they left the building peaceably February 16 when school officials agreed to the program . During his tenure , Sanford maintained a policy of non @-@ confrontation , opposed heavy police action and helped defuse racial tensions . 
 Perhaps the greatest controversy of Sanford 's presidency was his effort to establish the presidential library of former U.S. President Richard Nixon at Duke . Sanford raised the subject with Nixon during a visit to the former president at Nixon 's New York City office on July 28 , 1981 . Sanford continued to seek Nixon 's advice on multiple issues within the months that followed . The library proposal became public in mid @-@ August , creating considerable controversy at the university . Though Sanford enjoyed some support for his effort , most of the faculty were against the proposal , the largest concern being that the facility would be a monument to Nixon rather than a center of study . Sanford tried to engineer a compromise , but the proposal by the Duke Academic Council of a library only one @-@ third the size of that which Nixon wanted and their rejection of a Nixon museum to accompany it , ultimately led Nixon to decline Sanford 's offer and instead site his library in the city of his birth , Yorba Linda , California , where it was dedicated in 1990 . 
 Sanford 's legacy lasted at Duke well after his retirement , thanks to the spectacular success enjoyed by the men 's basketball team . In 1980 , Sanford presided over the hiring of Mike Krzyzewski by Athletic Director Tom <unk> coach the Blue Devils , and he has taken Duke to unprecedented heights , with five national championships ( 1991 , 1992 , 2001 , 2010 , 2015 ) , 12 trips to the Final Four , and 13 Atlantic Coast Conference championships . Krzyzewski is 945 @-@ 251 in 35 seasons at Duke and is the NCAA career leader in Division I men 's basketball victories with 1 @,@ 018 . 
 = = Campaigns for the Democratic presidential nomination = = 
 Though Sanford enjoyed his time as Duke 's president , he still harbored political ambitions . As the 1972 presidential primary season began , he was approached by several people who felt that the field of Democratic candidates was weak . He was particularly keen to challenge Alabama governor George Wallace in an effort to show that Wallace 's segregationist views did not represent Southern opinion . Announcing his candidacy on March 8 , he faced long odds in a crowded field . Knowing that he could not win a majority of delegates in the primary , he hoped to secure enough to emerge as a compromise candidate in a deadlocked convention . Even in the North Carolina primary , however , Wallace beat Sanford by 100 @,@ 000 votes , and Sanford managed only a fifth @-@ place finish at the 1972 Democratic National Convention with 77 @.@ 5 votes , behind George McGovern ( 1 @,@ 864 @.@ 95 ) , Henry M. Jackson ( 525 ) , Wallace ( 381 @.@ 7 ) , and Shirley Chisholm ( 151 @.@ 95 ) . 
 Undeterred , Sanford began preparations two years later for a run for the 1976 Democratic presidential nomination . Announcing his candidacy on June 1 , 1975 , he juggled campaign appearances with his obligations as president of Duke . While he developed a following among educators , he did not have a satisfactory campaign theme by the new year . Then , while campaigning in Massachusetts in January , he suffered sharp pains and was diagnosed with a heart murmur . On January 25 , Sanford withdrew from the primaries , the first Democrat to do so that year . 
 = = Senate career = = 
 After retiring as president of Duke University in 1985 , Sanford remained active in party politics . He made an unsuccessful run for chairman of the Democratic National Committee in 1985 , in which he was supported by future House Speaker Nancy Pelosi . Sanford lost to Paul G. Kirk by a vote of 203 – 150 . 
 After failing to find a Democrat willing to run for the Senate seat being vacated by Republican John P. East , Sanford announced his own candidacy for the nomination . His opponent was Congressman Jim Broyhill . After East committed suicide on June 29 , 1986 , Broyhill was temporarily appointed to the seat on July 3 , until a special election could be held on November 4 . Despite being attacked as a liberal , Sanford defeated Broyhill by three percentage points in the November election . Critics of Sanford primarily focused on three areas : his promotion of opportunities for minorities , " tax @-@ and @-@ spend " education funding , and his anti @-@ poverty campaign . He took office on November 5 , the day after the special election , to serve out the last two months of East 's term and the subsequent six @-@ year term . 
 Sanford found his years in the Senate frustrating . He was concerned about the runaway deficit spending of the era , and he pursued economic development for Central America as an alternative to Republican @-@ driven military policies . He led the Duke @-@ based International Commission for Central American Recovery and Development , a task force of scholars and leaders that published Poverty , Conflict , and Hope : A Turning Point in Central America ( also known as the Sanford Commission Report since he was " the principal catalyst of the commission 's work " ) in 1989 with the principles for promoting peace , democracy and equitable development in Central America . Sanford served on multiple Senate committees : Select Committee on Ethics ( Chair ) ; Special Committee on Aging ; Budget ; Banking , Housing , and Urban Affairs including the Subcommittee on International Finance and Monetary Policy and Subcommittee on Securities ; and Foreign Relations including Subcommittee on Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs ( Chair ) , Subcommittee on African Affairs , and Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere and Peace Corps Affairs . He had a liberal voting record in comparison to his Democratic colleagues from the South , and he campaigned successfully against the passage of a constitutional amendment prohibiting flag @-@ burning with a counter @-@ campaign promoting the United States Bill of Rights . Yet Sanford thought his accomplishments in the Senate paled against those he made as governor , and he seriously contemplated retiring and pursuing other projects before deciding to run for reelection . 
 Sanford 's opponent in the 1992 election was <unk> Faircloth , a former Democrat turned Republican who had served as state Highway Commissioner in Sanford 's gubernatorial administration . Enjoying substantial backing from Sanford 's Senate colleague , Jesse Helms , Faircloth accused Sanford of being a tax @-@ and @-@ spend liberal bound to special interests . While initial polls showed that Sanford had a comfortable lead over his rival , he lost supporters after an operation for an infected heart valve kept him from campaigning for much of October and raised doubts as to whether he was capable of serving another term . On November 3 , 1992 , Faircloth won the election by a 100 @,@ 000 @-@ vote margin . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Sanford wrote several books , including : But What About the People ? , where he describes his efforts during the 1960s to establish a system of quality public education in North Carolina ; Storm Over the States , where he lays forth a new groundwork for state government and the federal system by recommending a " creative federalism " ; and Outlive Your Enemies : Grow Old <unk> , where he describes actions that will slow the aging process and rules for prolonging healthy life . He also taught classes in law and political science at Duke University and campaigned for the construction of a major performing arts center in the Research Triangle area that would provide a permanent home for the American Dance Festival , the North Carolina Symphony and the Carolina Ballet . Sanford practiced law again in his later years and merged his own firm with that of another former governor , James Holshouser . Holshouser continued to practice with Sanford Holshouser LLP until his death ( the firm continues under that name ) , and their economic development consulting firm continued under that name . 
 The New York Times writer David Stout characterized Sanford as a " contradictory politician " and a man who " lack [ ed ] burning desire . " 
 Sanford announced in late December 1997 that he had been diagnosed with inoperable esophageal cancer and that his doctors said he had a few months to live . After his release from the hospital , his condition slowly deteriorated . He died in his sleep while surrounded by his family at his Durham home . He was 80 years old . At his funeral , he was eulogized by a childhood friend who said Sanford " took [ the Boy Scout ] oath when he was twelve years old and kept it . It started out , ' On my honor , I will do my best to do my duty to God and my country , ' and included such things as ' help other people at all times . ' He believed it . He was the eternal Boy Scout . " Sanford is entombed in the crypt of Duke University Chapel . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Sanford was a major public figure of the post @-@ World War II South . He played a key role in the transformation of Southern politics into the New South , primarily in the areas of race relations and education . In recognition of his efforts in education and in countless other areas , a 1981 Harvard University survey named him one of the 10 best governors of the 20th century . 
 The Terry Sanford Federal Building and Courthouse in Raleigh , the state capital , is named after Sanford . President Bill Clinton said in a statement issued from the Summit of the Americas in Santiago , Chile : " His work and his influence literally changed the face and future of the South , making him one of the most influential Americans of the last 50 years . " John Edwards said in Terry Sanford and the New South that Sanford was his political hero . 
 Duke University has since established an undergraduate and graduate school ( formerly institute ) in public policy called the Terry Sanford School of Public Policy . Fayetteville High School , in Fayetteville , North Carolina , was renamed Terry Sanford High School in his honor in 1968 . 
 = = = Selected books by Terry Sanford = = = 
 Sanford , Terry ( 1966 ) . But What about the People ? . New York , NY : Harper & Row . ISBN 0 @-@ 8223 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Sanford , Terry ( 1967 ) . Storm over the States . Rochester , NY : McGraw @-@ Hill . ISBN 0 @-@ 07 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Sanford , Terry ( 1981 ) . A Danger of Democracy : The Presidential Nominating Process . Boulder , CO : Westview Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 159 @-@ 5 . 
 Sanford , Terry ( 1996 ) . Outlive Your Enemies : Grow Old <unk> . Hauppauge , NY : Nova Science Publishers . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 289 @-@ 4 . 
 = Greece in the Eurovision Song Contest 2008 = 
 Greece entered the Eurovision Song Contest 2008 with the song " Secret Combination " , written by Konstantinos Pantzis with lyrics by Poseidonas Giannopoulos . The song was performed by Kalomoira , an American singer of Greek descent who had previously won a Greek talent show . In February 2008 , as part of the selection process organized by the Greek national broadcaster Ellinikí Radiofonía Tileórasi ( ERT ) , three competing artists — Chrispa , Kostas Martakis , and Kalomoira — performed their prospective entries live during a televised broadcast watched by nearly two million viewers . " Secret Combination " was selected to represent Greece at the Eurovision Song Contest by a combination of a public televote and panel of judges . 
 Following a promotional tour of many European cities , " Secret Combination " came first in the first of the Eurovision semi @-@ finals at Belgrade in May , and was seen as a possible competition winner . In Greece 's twenty @-@ ninth Eurovision appearance on May 24 , " Secret Combination " initially led the voting with full marks from six countries . However , the song ultimately finished third , behind Russia and Ukraine . Greece had previously won the competition in 2005 . 
 After the show , the song went on to chart in several European countries , reaching number one in Greece and Cyprus . Kalomoira , citing differences with her record label , briefly moved to the United States before returning to Greece in January 2009 ; she regards her Eurovision performance as a pivotal moment in her career , and stated in an interview that her desire was for the people of Greece to be proud of her performance , regardless of the competition 's outcome . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the 2008 Contest , Greece had participated in the Eurovision Song Contest twenty @-@ eight times since its first entry in 1974 , winning it in 2005 with the song " My Number One " performed by Elena Paparizou , and being placed third twice : in 2001 with the song " Die for You " performed by the duo Antique and in 2004 with " Shake It " performed by Sakis Rouvas . Following the introduction of semi @-@ finals for the 2004 contest , Greece has had a top ten placing each year . Greece 's least successful result was in 1998 when it placed twentieth with the song " Mia Krifi Evesthisia " by Thalassa , receiving only twelve points in total , all from Cyprus . 
 The Greek national broadcaster , Ellinikí Radiofonía Tileórasi ( ERT ) broadcasts the event in Greece each year and organizes the selection process for its entry . From 2004 to 2006 , ERT had selected high @-@ profile artists internally and set up national finals to choose the song , while in 2007 it held a televised national final to choose both the song and performer . For the 2008 Eurovision Song Contest , ERT decided again to hold a televised national final after failing to secure a big name artist : As every other year since his first participation in the 2004 contest , ERT asked Sakis Rouvas to represent Greece but he did not accept . ERT officials had also approached Elli <unk> to represent Greece , but she declined the offer as she was pregnant . 
 = = Before Eurovision = = 
 = = = Selection procedure = = = 
 On December 17 , 2007 , ERT officially announced the three participants for the Greek national final : Kalomoira , Kostas Martakis , and Chrispa ; all of them young performers and mainly new to the Greek music scene . Greek singers Martakis and Chrispa , though young and fairly new , had album releases at the time of the contest . Kostas Martakis had emerged from the reality talent show Dream Show in 2006 , releasing the album <unk> ( Reversal ) in 2007 which reached # 9 in the Greek chart . Chrispa started her musical career in 2003 and had released four studio albums . Kalomoira , born in the United States but of Greek descent , had gained popularity in Greece after winning the Greek talent show Fame Story in 2004 . Before her Eurovision appearance , she had released three studio albums , the first of which was certified gold . 
 The participants ' songs had to be submitted to ERT by January 25 , 2008 in order to be accepted . On February 3 , 2008 , Kalomoira and Kostas Martakis ' songs for the national final were leaked via the internet , three days before ERT set release date before a press conference on February 6 , 2008 . At the February 6 press conference at the Athens Hilton Hotel , ERT officially revealed the songs to the media and public as well as more details about the national final . The national final would take place on February 27 , 2008 at the <unk> Arena with the winner being chosen via 60 % <unk> / SMS Messaging and 40 % internal jury . 
 = = = = The songs = = = = 
 = = = = = " A Chance to Love " = = = = = 
 Chrispa 's record label , Minos EMI , chose a song composed by Marios <unk> with lyrics by Antonis Papas . Antonis Papas had previously written lyrics for Elina <unk> 's " Pia <unk> " in 1995 and Antique 's Die for You in 2001 which both represented Greece . The provisional title of the song was " SOS for Love " , but it was later changed to " A Chance to Love " . The song has an ethnic style , described as a " Dance Oriental " , with lyrics in both Greek and English . 
 = = = = = " Always and Forever " = = = = = 
 Kostas Martakis and his record label , Sony BMG Greece , chose " Always and Forever " , a song by Dimitris Kontopoulos with lyrics by Vicky <unk> . Kontopoulos is known for his dance @-@ pop songs and had previously submitted songs to past national finals including " Welcome To The Party " for Anna Vissi in 2006 . The song was originally presented at the ERT press conference in its original form as a pop song with a rock feel to it , but for the national final he sang a dance version of it . 
 = = = = = " Secret Combination " = = = = = 
 Kalomoira , and her record company Heaven Music , had several submissions , from which they chose " Secret Combination " , an upbeat R & B song composed by Konstantinos Pantzis with lyrics by Poseidonas Giannopoulos . Though the song had an American production style , it did contain some Greek musical elements , such as the use of a darbuka ( Greek hand drum ) with a western rhythm . Giannopoulos also wrote lyrics for " Comme Ci , Comme Ça " ( Cyprus 's Eurovision song in 2007 ) , while Pantzis has written over 300 songs , some of which have been featured on over 17 platinum and 25 gold certified albums . 
 = = = = Result = = = = 
 The national final took place on February 27 , 2008 at <unk> CET at the <unk> Arena on a stage that was slightly bigger than the previous year 's . Kalomoira , Kostas Martakis , and Chrispa each sang their chosen song live ; the winner was selected via 60 % <unk> / SMS Messaging and 40 % internal jury . The president of the jury , which included Christos Dantis , ERT executive Johnny <unk> , Mr. <unk> and Mr. Andrikakis ( representatives from ERT 's TV and Radio divisions ) , was singer Mimis <unk> . The show was hosted by the two <unk> sisters , known also as actresses and comedy singers in Greece . As in the previous year 's show , additional entertainment by participants from other countries in the Eurovision Song Contest was featured . The international participants included <unk> <unk> from Slovenia , Nico & Vlad <unk> from Romania , Elnur <unk> and Samir <unk> from Azerbaijan , and <unk> Kadi from Cyprus . <unk> , Greece 's 2007 entrant , also performed his entry " <unk> Maria " as well as the previously unheard single " <unk> <unk> " . The national final was streamed live on New Hellenic Television ( NET ) , ERT World , and the official websites of ERT and the Eurovision Song Contest . The whole show had a Las Vegas show girl theme . 
 Despite a few small faults in the program , the production ran more smoothly than in 2007 . It lasted about two and a half hours and ERT 's broadcast topped the programs aired on February 27 by 45 @.@ 9 % according to AGB Hellas ; it is estimated that 1 @.@ 9 million viewers watched the show . Kalomoira was the overall winner , coming first in the televoting , and second in the jury vote . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 To promote " Secret Combination " , a music video was officially released on March 14 , 2008 . It was shown exclusively on NET , but was available internationally through ERT World . The director was Kostas <unk> , who had also directed the video of Helena Paparizou 's 2005 winning entry . 
 Before her appearance at the contest , Kalomoira went on a promotional tour , singing " Secret Combination " in several Eurovision countries . The first stop was Azerbaijan on March 22 , 2008 , where she made guest appearances on many major television and radio programs ; staying until March 26 . On March 27 , Kalomoira arrived in Romania for a three @-@ day stay , where she again appeared on television and gave interviews . After a brief break , she traveled to Turkey , arriving on April 10 , where she posed for pictures , gave interviews to the local media , and went shopping through the Grand Bazaar along with Turkish media . She also met with Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople , who wished her success and presented her with a medallion . By April 17 , Kalomoira had reached Bosnia and Herzegovina ; in addition to hosting a show on PINK TV , she appeared on television shows , gave many interviews , and met with <unk> <unk> <unk> and his sister Mirella , Bosnia and Herzegovina 's entrants in the contest . Kalomoira then went to Belgrade , Serbia , where she was a guest star on a morning television show , performed " Secret Combination " live on Radio Television of Serbia , and had an interview with FOX TV . She spent one day in Belgrade and returned to Greece to conclude her tour . 
 = = At Eurovision = = 
 Although Greece had been granted a spot in the 2008 final because of its seventh place finish at the Eurovision Song Contest 2007 , it had to compete in a semi @-@ final for the first time since 2004 because of new rules put into effect by the European Broadcasting Union ( EBU ) . In previous years , countries that received a top 10 placing were automatically granted a spot in the next year 's final without having to compete in a semi @-@ final , but for 2008 , the EBU changed the automatic qualification regulations so that all countries except the " Big 4 " ( France , Germany , Spain , and the United Kingdom ) and host country , would have to pass through one of two semi @-@ finals . The EBU split up countries with a friendly voting history into separate semi @-@ finals , to give a better chance for other countries to win . Greece and Cyprus had often been accused of favoring each other , with each awarding the other the maximum number of points ( twelve ) at the previous contest . On January 28 , 2008 , the EBU held a special draw which determined that Greece would be in Semi @-@ final 1 held on May 20 , 2008 in Belgrade , Serbia ; Cyprus was subsequently placed in the second semi @-@ final . 
 The <unk> Sisters were the commentators for both the semi @-@ final and final while Alexis <unk> was the Greek jury spokesperson . 
 = = = Semi @-@ final = = = 
 Kalomoira presented " Secret Combination " nineteenth ( last ) in the first semi @-@ final on May 20 , 2008 . In March 2008 , Konstantinos Pantzis , the composer , announced that there would be a few tweaks to the song for its appearance at Eurovision . The changes included a new beat to the introduction and a few changes to the chorus . ERT announced that this new version would be presented to the EBU as the official version of the song . 
 The stage show included new choreography , as well as Victoria <unk> and <unk> <unk> as backing vocalists . Kalomoira started off the show sitting on a diamond sequenced bench held up by her dancers . She then got down and started a dance routine with complex choreography . There was also a large purple book on stage that opened up as a heart shaped pop @-@ up book that Kalomoira stepped out of when she sang the lyrics " an open book " . In time with the book opening , Kalomoira removed her pink dress revealing a pink and silver mini @-@ dress underneath . Toward the middle of the song during the break , the cameras cut to Kalomoira who was doing a provocative dance ; shaking her whole body . At the end of the song , she was slightly lifted up by her dancers . The background image on stage was a skyline of buildings that moved with glowing lights . She wore clothes exclusively by <unk> and managed to finish in first place out of nineteen countries , receiving 156 points . 
 = = = Final = = = 
 Kalomoira performed a repeat of her semi @-@ final performance at the Eurovision Final on May 24 , 2008 . She was the twenty @-@ first act out of twenty @-@ five countries , after Azerbaijan and before Spain . Having led initially in the voting , Greece finished in third place behind Russia and Ukraine , receiving 218 points . Greece received 12 points , the maximum number of points a country can give to another country , from six countries . The broadcast received 93 % ratings and was watched by over six million people in Greece . 
 = = After Eurovision = = 
 " Secret Combination " became a successful hit throughout Europe , peaking at number one in Greece and Cyprus and charting in a number of other countries . 
 During a press conference in Athens after the final , Kalomoira said that " it was an honor ... to represent Greece in this contest " and thanked Greece because they supported her from the first moment she said she would compete . However , she reported later that she had returned to the United States because she felt mistreated by her record label and was not paid for several arrangements she had made with Heaven during her stay in Belgrade and had to pay for many things herself . In an interview with Downtown Magazine , Kalomoira 's father stated that she was treated " like dirt " by Heaven Music and that she may or may not continue her singing career , but that it was up to her . In response , Makis <unk> , the new CEO of Heaven Music , claimed that he was " surprised " by Kalomoira 's remarks and couldn 't offer an explanation , though he did say that her contract would be honored should she choose to go back and sing again . Kalomoira returned to Greece in January 2009 , and in an interview with Eleni <unk> , she said that her Eurovision participation was the biggest thing that she has done in her career , and that it was also one of the most personal events in her life that will always be remembered with good memories . When asked if she expected to do so well in the competition , she stated that she had always wanted to do well , but above all she wanted the Greek people to be proud of the performance regardless of how well it did . In the same interview , host Eleni <unk> stated that many , including herself , viewed Eurovision as a defining point in Kalomoira 's career to date : her mature professional performance distanced her from the innocent little girl image associated with her participation in Fame Story . 
 = = = Points Awarded by Greece = = = 
 = Femme Fatale Tour = 
 The Femme Fatale Tour was the eighth concert tour by American recording artist Britney Spears . It was launched in support of her seventh studio album Femme Fatale ( 2011 ) . It was officially announced in March 2011 , with dates for North American venues revealed . The tour was initially planned as a co @-@ headlining tour with Enrique Iglesias , but he canceled only hours after the announcement . The show is inspired by the concept of the femme fatale and femmes fatales throughout the ages . The setlist was mostly composed of songs from Femme Fatale , although Spears also performed hits from her previous albums for her fans . Fashion designer Zaldy Goco created the costumes . In July 2011 , Spears announced plans of playing a South American leg in territories she either had never been to or had not played for a long time . Spears has named the Femme Fatale Tour the best show of her career . 
 The tour , divided in five segments , portrays a story in which Spears is a secret agent , who is chased by a stalker named <unk> Lancie ; played by Rudolf Martin . The first section features her escaping from prison along with other female inmates . The second segment displays upbeat dance numbers and ends with a performance inspired by Marilyn Monroe . The third section features an Egyptian theme with fireworks and acrobatics . The fourth segment displays energetic routines and motorcycle costumes . The encore begins with a video interlude of Spears capturing the stalker , and is followed by two performances in which she defeats a group of ninjas . 
 The Femme Fatale Tour received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Some described it as Spears ' most entertaining show and praised her performance , while others criticized her dancing and lack of audience interaction . The Femme Fatale Tour grossed $ 6 @.@ 2 million in the first ten shows , and was included on Pollstar 's Top 100 North American Tours list . 
 An unofficial high @-@ quality recording of the Las Vegas show was leaked onto YouTube in July 2011 ; it was removed after the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) filed legal action against the site to obtain information on the uploader . 3ality Digital filmed a special of the tour during the Toronto shows in August 2011 in 2D and 3D . The special , titled Britney Spears Live : The Femme Fatale Tour , aired on Epix in the United States . BBC Worldwide acquired the rights to both 2D and 3D versions outside the United States . Worldwide , the Femme Fatale Tour was the eleventh highest @-@ grossing tour of 2011 , with a gross of $ 68 @.@ 7 million . 697 @,@ 957 fans attended the shows worldwide , with an average attendance of 8 @,@ 724 , paying an average of $ 98 @.@ 43 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview on Ryan Seacrest 's radio show on March 4 , 2011 , Spears stated she would tour the United States in the " early summer " in support of Femme Fatale . On March 29 , 2011 , following her performances on Good Morning America , she announced a co @-@ headlining tour with Enrique Iglesias , starting in June 2011 . Hours after the announcement , it was reported by Billboard that Iglesias had pulled out of the tour . Ray <unk> of Billboard speculated that the reason may have been that Spears was deemed by news outlets as the headliner , while Iglesias was considered the opening act . The first twenty @-@ six North American dates were also announced on March 29 , 2011 . The opening acts were announced on April 12 , 2011 . Spears stated , " This is the Femme Fatale tour and I 'm thrilled to have Nicki Minaj , Jessie and the Toy Boys , and Nervo join me and get everyone on the dance floor . Can 't wait to take the Femme Fatales on the road . " Tickets for select markets went on sale on April 30 , 2011 , at ticket seller Ticketmaster and tour promoter Live Nation 's websites . 
 In May 2011 , it was announced that Spears would headline Summerfest on July 9 , 2011 , at the Marcus Amphitheater in Milwaukee . She previously headlined the festival on July 8 , 2000 , during the Oops ! ... I Did It Again World Tour , and had to cancel her performance during The Onyx Hotel Tour in 2004 due to a knee injury . Summerfest 's entertainment director Bob <unk> said , " It 's going to be a great dance party . [ ... ] This is going to be the biggest production we 've ever put in the Marcus Amphitheatre . There 's a thrust that goes out on the stage about 80 feet , and it 's about 80 feet wide , and there 's all kinds of things flying in and out . " The European tour dates were announced on her official website on June 5 , 2011 . On July 25 , 2011 , Spears announced through her Ustream page at 18 : 00 EST ( 23 : 00 UTC ) a South American leg of the tour . Accompanied by two of her dancers — one translating in Spanish and the other in Portuguese — she also apologized for not touring in the region during The Circus Starring Britney Spears in 2009 . A notice following the stream announced the first two dates in Brazil and ten more dates to be announced in the near future . It will mark Spears first concert in Brazil in ten years , since her 2001 performance at Rock in Rio . During the next few days , concerts in countries such as Argentina , Chile , Colombia and Peru were announced . On September 26 , 2011 , it was announced that Spears would perform on the first day of the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix . 
 = = Development = = 
 In March 2011 , Spears 's manager Larry Rudolph told MTV News that the tour would have a " post @-@ apocalyptic vibe " , and commented that " Till The World Ends " " keeps becoming a theme for us . " He also confirmed Jamie King as the tour director and Brian Friedman as the choreographer . The following month , Friedman announced that he had pulled out of the tour due to scheduling conflicts with his own reality series . In a video interview posted on Spears 's official website , she said , " The Femme Fatale Tour will hopefully just be outrageously spectacular . I 'm just hoping that the choreographers will come up with just the most outrageous things , and I 'm really excited . This is one of the most excited I 've been about a project in a really long time , so I can 't wait . " The script of the show was created by Jamie King , and was inspired by the concept of the femme fatale and femme fatales throughout the ages . Rudolph stated that the idea for the show was to have Spears as an " international woman of mystery " . The setlist was composed mostly of songs from Femme Fatale , but also included hits from her previous albums , as Spears explained , " The fans really like a lot of the old songs , because that 's what they are used to . So it 's just about finding the balance , and how many songs I wanna incorporate from the past and from the present . " 
 The costume design was done by Zaldy Goco , and the outfits were created to fit the different personas of Spears throughout the show . He also commented that the inspiration for the costumes was " Britney herself [ ... ] She 's a very sexy girl . " Among the outfits that Goco previewed to Extra prior to the beginning of the tour were a pink latex jacket , a nude bodysuit , a Marilyn Monroe @-@ inspired white flowing dress , several gladiator @-@ inspired gold @-@ mirrored options , pink @-@ chrome @-@ studded leather and denim , as well as a " Toxic " -inspired catsuit . For the finale , she was revealed to wear a kimono , with an anime version of herself silk @-@ screened on one sleeve , over a sparkling , black bodysuit with LED lights built into it . On April 30 , 2011 , a video of Spears rehearsing " How I Roll " from Femme Fatale with her dancers surfaced online . On May 11 , 2011 , Sabi spoke to MTV News at a St. Bernard Project dinner hosted by Spears , stating that she would join her during the performances of " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " at select dates such as Los Angeles , Las Vegas and New York . On June 7 , 2011 , a video surfaced online of Spears seeing the stage for the first time , along with a soundcheck of the music and staging for " Hold It Against Me " . According to Jocelyn Vena of MTV , the stage " has it all : lights , video screens , a funky neon @-@ colored floor , lasers , lifts and giant butterfly wings . " In an interview with Entertainment Tonight on June 8 , 2011 , Spears said about the show , 
 " I 'm really excited . I 'm probably going to be extra nervous the day before . We 've been working hard for , like , two months now , and everything 's coming together really good . [ ... ] [ The show ] can be kind of [ grueling ] , especially when you 're onstage and you 're on your eighth number , you get really winded and you 're like , ' How can I do the rest of the show ? ' But I 've been training for a while and I actually — before I come to rehearsals — I 've been working out and stuff like that so I won 't have that predicament . " 
 After Minaj was announced as the opening act in April 2011 , she said on Ryan Seacrest 's radio show she was looking forward to creating " a new , a bigger , a brighter , a more spectacular show . " She stated that as much as her set was about the music , she wanted to put more theater on stage , saying , " my goal [ is ] to truly put on a show and incorporate theater and dance . " The hair and make @-@ up was done by Marco <unk> , who was inspired by European women such as Brigitte Bardot . " It 's the epitome of a strong woman . I wanted to bring out that strength and sexiness for all the girls on tour " , he said . He applied Spears with makeup and designed it to " be a little bit neutral so that it could work with anything . " As for the hair , it was changed at every show to fit the vibe of the city . For example , at the Uniondale show on August 2 , 2011 , Spears sported wavy hair , inspired by Sarah Jessica Parker and the street style of New York women . 
 BuzzFeed reported that 23 18 @-@ wheeler trucks arrived at each venue at 5 a.m. on show day . It took 7 hours to unload and build the stage . Unlike most tours who built the stage from the bottom up , the stage was built from the ceiling down . The tour comprised 140 workers , 125 crew members , 14 tour buses , 16 dancers and 2 band members . In July 2011 , Spears told MTV News she was having " a blast " on the tour , commenting , " The shows have been equally amazing . The crowds have been so good each night and that gives you the adrenaline you need to get through the show . It just pumps you up . " She also talked about the performance of " Till the World Ends " , saying that " at the end of the show , the last song [ Minaj ] comes on every once in awhile [ sic ] . Not every show , but it 's usually special when she does it . " In an interview with Glamour in October 2011 , Spears said : " I seriously think it 's the best tour I 've done so far . [ ... ] right now I ’ m really excited about the show – this is the funnest show I 've done in my career . " 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 After a neon sign reading " Femme Fatale " is lifted from the stage , the show begins with a video introduction in which Spears is arrested by the police after a chasing sequence . As she says " I 'm not that innocent " , the video screens part and she appears sitting on a metallic throne in a silver costume to perform " Hold It Against Me " . She is accompanied by her back @-@ up dancers in white and silver costumes . " Up N ' Down " features Spears and her female dancers performing inside cages , with the male dancers looking at them dressed as policemen . After walking to the B @-@ stage in a conveyor belt , Spears puts on a white trench coat and a satin fedora to perform " 3 " . She then goes into " Piece of Me " while floating above the stage in a platform . This is followed by a video intermission that contains the beginning of the music video for " My Prerogative " , and in which a stalker reveals that Spears is a secret agent . The next section begins with Spears in a pink latex and lace jacket emerging from inside a bass to perform " Big Fat Bass " , while will.i.am appears in the backdrops . She removes the jacket to reveal a nude leotard for the performance of " How I Roll " , which features a pink convertible Mini Cooper @-@ like car and her dancers wearing colorful outfits . This is followed by a segment in which Spears and her dancers select a male member from the audience . She then bursts into " Lace and Leather " and performs sensually for him . After a costume change , Spears goes into the song " If U Seek Amy " while wearing a white skirt over a fan , recalling Marilyn Monroe 's iconic scene in The Seven Year Itch ( 1955 ) . 
 A video interlude in which the stalker talks about femme fatales in history sees the beginning of the third section . Spears returns to the stage wearing a golden outfit and performs an Egyptian @-@ inspired version of " Gimme More " , containing a barge and fireworks . In her next number " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " Spears is surrounded by her dancers carrying picture frames , and includes an appearance by Sabi in select cities . She then sings " He About to Lose Me " on a purple couch while her male dancers climb metallic structures . She wears a golden cape for a snake charming number of " Boys " ( The Co @-@ Ed Remix ) . After climbing into a swing , she starts singing " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " , while an acrobat hangs from it . Another video interlude follows , featuring Spears changing clothes and choosing between different passports inside a hotel room . The final segment features Spears and her dancers dressed in motorcycle gear to perform a medley of " ... Baby One More Time " and " S & M " , while her next number " Trouble for Me " features Spears and her dancers performing in the B @-@ stage . Accompanied by her female dancers , Spears performs " I 'm a Slave 4 U " with gay soft porn in the backdrops , and subsequently a cover of Madonna 's " Burning Up " on top of a giant silver guitar . She then brings several fans onstage for a performance of " I Wanna Go " . She sings " Womanizer " with her dancers dressed as policemen and thanks the audience . The encore starts with a video interlude in which Spears finally captures the stalker while wearing a kimono . She reappears to perform a martial arts @-@ inspired version of " Toxic " , in which she defeats a group of ninjas . At the end of the song , she goes below the stage and returns wearing a black sparkly bodysuit for " Till the World Ends " . Halfway through the performance , Nicki Minaj appears on the backdrops rapping her verse of The Femme Fatale Remix of the song . She also joined Spears to perform the verse in select cities . After the song changes back to the original version , Spears starts flying in a platform with giant angel wings . The show ends with Spears and her dancers thanking the audience , as confetti falls and the " Femme Fatale " sign is lowered onstage . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Barry Walters from Rolling Stone called the show " possibly her flashiest , fastest moving , and most entertaining production yet " , and added that the night belonged to Spears , as " she managed to prove that she 's still progressing as a showgirl . Not only that , she 's doing it better than even diehard defenders would ’ ve predicted . At 29 , the pop star whose career seemed in danger of ending just a couple years ago has shown that she 's back – hopefully this time to stay . " Evelyn McDonnell of Spin said that " the idol America loves to hate went all out . Her body perpetually moved , she sang steadfastly into her headset ( okay , she 's got plenty of digital support , but she doesn 't merely lip @-@ sync ) , and she shimmied through an endless parade of outfits . [ ... ] Having been knocked down by the tabloid press and the public repeatedly in recent years , Spears is now desperately seeking our attention . And she earns it . Haters go home . " Kelley L. Carter of MTV commented that " the Spears that captivated the audience at the Staples Center [ ... ] was the old , fun @-@ loving , free @-@ wheeling Spears — with a sexy , showgirl twist . There wasn 't much pretense , though those glamazon outfits blinded in the best way possible . Instead , there was just good dance music . " Carla Meyer of The Sacramento Bee stated that " Though Spears performed like a pro throughout the show , hitting all her marks , she had shown hesitancy in her movements — natural for the first stop on a tour . But that hesitancy vanished when she put on the denim . She seemed at ease . " 
 Shaunna Murphy of Entertainment Weekly criticized " Britney 's complete lack of verbal audience interaction [ ... ] and her obviously diminished dancing ability " but also added that " with her slim waist , her dangerously toned legs , and most importantly her engaged , wide @-@ eyed smile , [ Spears ] looked happy to be there with us — the crucial element that has been missing from so many Britney shows of late . " August Brown of the Los Angeles Times stated that " the Femme Fatale tour gets its drama by largely erasing — or at least tweaking — the past . [ ... ] Spears manipulates pop 's virgin @-@ whore complex better than just about anyone , and her seamless sweep from lasciviously grinding on an awestruck dude from the audience to the earnest balladry of ' Don ’ t Let Me Be the Last to Know ' [ ... ] felt true to the sweep of her career — she learned that she can control the narrative by vanishing into a club 's heat or into literal thin air . " Matt Kivel of Variety commented , " Though visually impressive , the show lacked a truly engaging human quality . Spears moved with an almost mechanical detachment , lightly shifting through dance routines without fully letting her body release itself . With her voice heavily processed and laden with backing tracks , she appeared onstage as some strange blend of Michael Jackson , Madonna and Kraftwerk 's Ralf and Florian . " However , Jam ! Canoe considered the show was " best described as Janet Jackson @-@ like . " 
 Steve <unk> of Metro Silicon Valley said , " Musically , the show is heavy on the hits , although considering Britney as a musical phenomenon is like asking which of Madonna 's albums is best . She 's a cultural phenomenon , obviously , and the only edicts that seem to have been handed down in regards to the music is ' no lip @-@ synching ' ( she definitely doesn 't ) and ' bigger and louder whenever possible . ' " Shirley Halperin of The Hollywood Reporter stated it was " entertaining " , but Spears " doesn ’ t quite have that spring in her dance step anymore and who requires a constant barrage of visual distractions while she mostly lip @-@ synchs along to her hits " . Jim Harrington of the Oakland Tribune deemed the show as " a mess pretty much from start to finish . The theatrics are awkward and confusing , the dance routines are numbingly bland and old @-@ hat , the song selection is weak and misguided , and Britney 's star power , so blinding on tours past , is remarkably dim . " Alexis Petridis of The Guardian gave the show two stars out of five , saying that " there 's a suspicion that the kind of person who goes to see Britney Spears live isn 't really there for the music or her sparkling personality : tonight she seems as dead @-@ eyed and distant as ever . What they 're interested in is proximity to a global celebrity . " Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph gave the show one star out of five , and called it " the saddest , laziest , dullest and most tawdry pop concert I have ever witnessed . " He added that " the most amazing thing about the whole second @-@ rate spectacle was that thousands of people , having forked out around £ 50 a head for tickets , practically raised the roof , cheering every dismal dance move , roaring for lip @-@ synched vocals and lustily applauding limp erotica . " 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 Live Nation announced in early May 2011 a partnership with deal @-@ of @-@ the @-@ day website Groupon . A spokesperson explained , " Offering a deal on Groupon is not a reflection of the quality or status or sales of a show " but rather " segmented marketing and a way to reach new and additional consumers . " A staff editor for VH1 noted that as of June 16 , 2011 , 18 @,@ 000 tickets were sold at discounted prices through Groupon for fifteen of the first twenty @-@ four dates of the tour , including 1 @,@ 800 at opening night in Sacramento . The Groupon deals for shows in Seattle , Winnipeg , Saint Paul , and Atlanta actually expired before all available discounted tickets were sold . The editor also stated that " the shows look to be under @-@ attended in smaller cities , even as , in metropolitan areas like Greater New York City , new shows have been added . It remains to be seen whether this could have been remedied by better price optimization , or whether the tour 's ambition was more outsized than its actual draw . " The Femme Fatale Tour was ranked at number fifty @-@ five by Pollstar on the Top 100 North American Tours list , grossing $ 6 @.@ 2 million in the first ten shows . On July 22 , 2011 , the shows in Atlanta and Nashville ranked Spears at number ten on Billboard 's Hot Tours list , with a combined gross of $ 1 @,@ 563 @,@ 934 . On September 22 , 2011 , the tour was ranked at number six on the Top 20 Concert Tours list from Pollstar . It had an average gross of $ 940 @,@ 165 per city , and an average ticket price of $ 84 @.@ 19 during the shows in North America . 
 Groupon and <unk> offered discounted tickets for the shows in London , Manchester and Birmingham . Rene <unk> from <unk> explained that " promoters are thinking , instead of shows being 90 % sold out , they 'd rather have it full and promote it to a wider audience . " 238 tickets were sold through Groupon within minutes of the offer , and 5 @,@ 000 tickets were sold for the UK shows by the time the offer expired . The move divided opinions in the music industry of the United Kingdom : festival organizer Melvin Benn said that discounted tickets work " particularly well for an awful lot of concerts . It 's definitely emerging . In tough economic times people will look at varying ways of pricing their tickets . " Independent promoter John Rostrum called it " very short @-@ term " and " incredibly damaging for shows because in the future when a show goes on sale people will sit back and go , ' I won 't buy until the week before ' " . The October 30 , 2011 concert in Birmingham was her first in the English Midlands since The Onyx Hotel Tour in 2004 . A week before the show , the venue 's box office told the Leicester Mercury that the concert was " probably about half @-@ full . There 's good availability " . 
 In December 2011 , the Femme Fatale Tour was number 19 on Billboard 's Top 25 Tours of 2011 . The magazine counted for 39 of the tour 's dates ( 14 of which were sold out ) with an overall gross of $ 37 @.@ 1 million and 396 @,@ 000 tickets sold . In the North America , the tour was the fourteenth highest @-@ grossing tour 2011 , with $ 38 @.@ 3 million in ticket sales and 423 @,@ 017 people attending at an average of 9 @,@ 196 per show . Worldwide , the Femme Fatale Tour was the eleventh highest @-@ grossing tour of 2011 , with a gross of $ 68 @.@ 7 million . 697 @,@ 957 fans attended the shows worldwide , with an average attendance of 8 @,@ 724 , paying an average of $ 98 @.@ 43 . 
 = = Broadcast and recordings = = 
 In July 2011 , a high @-@ quality recording of the Las Vegas show was uploaded to YouTube . On July 14 , 2011 , the vice president of Online Anti @-@ Piracy from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , Marc McDevitt , requested a subpoena at a federal court to obtain personal details from YouTube of the user who uploaded the video , including the IP address , e @-@ mail address and any other relevant information to identify the person . Although it is common for major music labels to send takedown requests to YouTube , it is thought to be the first time the RIAA filed legal action against the video hosting site in order to obtain the personal details of an uploader . The case was closed after a week ; according to a copyright lawyer , it is most likely that the subpoena was granted by the court and that YouTube agreed to hand over the personal details that were requested . The video was removed from YouTube , but copies of the full concert can still be found on the site . 
 On August 12 , 2011 , Spears announced through her Twitter account that the Toronto shows at the Air Canada Centre would be taped to air on the Epix television channel , and for release on DVD . Within minutes of her announcement , traffic to <unk> social sites doubled and Britney Spears became a worldwide trending topic on Twitter . The show , initially titled Britney Spears : Femme Fatale , was shot in 2D and 3D by 3ality Digital . On September 9 , 2011 , it was announced by the BBC that BBC Worldwide had attained distribution rights of the show outside the United States . The 2D version will be available for broadcast from Christmas Eve 2011 , with the 3D version available in February 2012 . The special premiered on November 12 , 2011 at 20 : 00 EST ( 01 : 00 UTC ) . It received mixed reviews from critics : some praised the special and the impressive stage , while others criticized Spears ' dancing . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray were released in the United States on November 21 , 2011 . The DVD was released in the United Kingdom on November 28 , 2011 . During the concert in Lima , Peru , the song " I Wanna Go " was professionally filmed by Coca @-@ Cola as part of the competition " Dance with Britney Spears . " 
 = = Opening acts = = 
 Jessie and the Toy Boys ( North America ) ( select dates ) 
 Nervo ( North America ) ( select dates ) 
 DJ Pauly D ( North America ) ( select dates ) 
 Joe Jonas ( East Rutherford ) ( Europe ) ( select dates ) 
 <unk> & Paris ( North America , Europe ) ( select dates ) 
 The Wanted ( Manchester ) 
 Howie <unk> ( South America ) ( select dates ) 
 Teen Angels ( La Plata ) 
 = = Set list = = 
 The following set list is representative of the show on June 22 , 2011 . It is not representative of all concerts for the duration of the tour . 
 " He About To Lose Me " and " Burning Up " were only performed in the North American leg . 
 = = Shows = = 
 = = = Box office score data = = = 
 = New Jersey Route 155 = 
 Route 155 was a short state highway in the community of Palmyra , New Jersey in Burlington County . The route ran from the ferry docks to the north of the Tacony – Palmyra Bridge ( New Jersey Route 73 ) through the community , terminating at an intersection with U.S. Route 130 . The highway was a former alignment of NJ 73 before the construction of the bridge . The route originated as Route <unk> in the 1927 renumbering . The route was decommissioned and turned over to Burlington County , who designated it as an extension of County Route 607 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 New Jersey Route 155 began at the ferry docks in Palmyra , just to the north of the Tacony – Palmyra Bridge . The route headed eastward along Cinnaminson Avenue , intersecting with several local roads as it progressed from the harbor and into downtown Palmyra . A short distance later , Route 155 , paralleling New Jersey Route 73 , and intersected with Broad Street ( County Route 543 ) in Palmyra . The highway continued eastward to the southeast , following Cinnaminson Avenue until leaving downtown Palmyra . After leaving the community for Cinnaminson Township , the highway ended at an intersection with U.S. Route 130 , a four @-@ lane highway in the local area . 
 = = History = = 
 The original alignment of Cinnaminson Avenue in the community of Palmyra was originally a part of New Jersey State Highway Route 2 , which was assigned in 1922 , as a part of the original state highway system in New Jersey . Five years later , the highway re @-@ designated during the period between the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering and year of 1941 as a spur of State Highway Route S @-@ 41 , which is currently New Jersey Route 73 . The route designation remained intact for several years until the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , when numerous highways around the state were given new designations . After the spur routes were dropped in the renumbering , the highway was re @-@ designated as NJ 155 . Route 155 's alignment was later turned over to the county of Burlington , who re @-@ designated it as an extension of County Route 607 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Burlington County . 
 = Banksia coccinea = 
 Banksia coccinea , commonly known as the scarlet banksia , waratah banksia or Albany banksia , is an erect shrub or small tree in the family Proteaceae . Endemic to south west Western Australia , it occurs from Denmark to the Stokes National Park , and north to the Stirling Range , growing on white or grey sand in shrubland , heath or open woodland . Reaching up to 8 m ( 26 ft ) in height , it is a single @-@ stemmed plant that has oblong leaves , which are 3 – 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) long and 2 – 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) wide . The prominent red and white flower spikes appear mainly in the spring . As they age they develop small follicles that store seeds until opened by fire . Though widely occurring , it is highly sensitive to dieback and large populations of plants have succumbed to the disease . 
 Collected and described by Robert Brown in the early 19th century , Banksia coccinea appears to be most closely related to Banksia speciosa and B. baxteri . Banksia coccinea plants are killed by bushfire , and regenerate from seed . The flowers attract <unk> and insect @-@ feeding birds , particularly honeyeaters , and a variety of insects . Widely considered one of the most attractive Banksia species , B. coccinea is a popular garden plant and one of the most important Banksia species for the cut flower industry ; it is grown commercially in several countries including Australia , South Africa , Canada , the United States , New Zealand and Israel . In cultivation , B. coccinea grows well in a sunny location on well @-@ drained soil , but it cannot survive in areas with humid or wet summers . 
 = = Description = = 
 The scarlet banksia grows as an erect shrub or small tree , generally around 2 – 4 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 13 @.@ 1 ft ) tall , with little lateral spread . However , it can reach 8 metres ( 26 ft ) in height , particularly in the vicinity of Albany . The trunk is generally single at the base before branching , and covered with smooth grey bark that is 2 – 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 079 – 0 @.@ 197 in ) thick and lacking in lenticels . Peaking in the summer months , the pinkish @-@ brown new growth is densely hairy . The oblong , cordate or <unk> leaves are 3 – 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) long and 2 – 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) wide , with 3 – 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 – 0 @.@ 20 in ) long petioles . <unk> at the apex , they have dentate margins with small ( 1 – 3 mm long ) teeth 3 – 18 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 – 0 @.@ 71 in ) apart , separated by shallow u- or v @-@ shaped sinuses . The upper surface is covered in fine fur when young and becomes smooth with age , while the undersurface is covered with white fur , particularly along the midrib . 
 The process of flowering takes 9 – 12 months ; the stems begin developing microscopically in spring , with no visible evidence of flower spike development for around five months before the buds actually appear . Flower spikes are in bloom from May to December or January , peaking between July and October . The distinctive inflorescences arise from the ends of one @-@ year @-@ old branchlets . Squat and roughly cylindrical , they are 3 – 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) high and 8 – 10 cm ( 3 – 4 in ) wide . A field study on the southern sandplains revealed an average count of around 286 individual flowers on each spike . The white flower is covered in grey or pale brown fur , and there is little variation in colour . The style is generally scarlet , but can be dark red , orange or pink . The perianth is 3 – 3 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 3 in ) long , while the style is 4 – 4 @.@ 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 9 in ) long and strongly recurved or looped until they are released at anthesis . Anthesis is acropetal , that is , the flowers open from the base up the spike to the apex . The flowers of all banksias arise in a spiral pattern around the flower spike axis ; however in Banksia coccinea they develop into distinctive vertical columns , which are strongly accentuated by large gaps in between . Paired in columns , the red styles contrast with the grey @-@ white perianth making a striking flower spike . 
 The infructescence is small , with up to 20 small follicles concentrated at the lower end of the spike . Each follicle is 6 – 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 24 – 0 @.@ 31 in ) long , 1 – 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 039 – 0 @.@ 079 in ) high , and 2 – 3 mm ( c . 0 @.@ 1 in ) wide and usually opens with fire . The 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 43 – 0 @.@ 55 in ) long seed is composed of the cuneate ( wedge @-@ shaped ) seed body proper , measuring 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 3 in ) long and 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 3 in ) wide , and a papery wing . One side , termed the outer surface , is grey @-@ black and wrinkled and the other — the inner surface — protrudes and is black and glistening . The seeds are separated by a dark brown seed separator that is roughly the same shape as the seeds with a depression where the seed body sits adjacent to it in the follicle . It measures 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) long and 0 @.@ 7 – 0 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 3 in ) wide . The dull green cotyledons of seedlings are 0 @.@ 8 – 0 @.@ 9 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 4 in ) long and 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 2 in ) wide , described by Alex George as " cuneate to obovate " . Each cotyledon has a 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 in ) auricle at its base . The thick , smooth hypocotyl is 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) high and 1 @.@ 5 mm thick . The seedling leaves are crowded above the cotyledons and linear to spathulate in shape , with recurved and deeply serrated margins with v @-@ shaped sinuses , almost dividing the leaves into triangular lobes . The first pair are 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 5 in ) long , with the next 2 – 4 leaves up to 1 @.@ 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 7 in ) long . Successive leaves are more obovate in shape and up to 4 cm ( 2 in ) long and 1 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) wide . The seedling stems are covered in white hair . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 = = = Discovery and naming = = = 
 The first known specimens of Banksia coccinea were collected in December 1801 , during the visit to King George Sound of HMS Investigator under the command of Matthew Flinders . On board were botanist Robert Brown , botanical artist Ferdinand Bauer , and gardener Peter Good . All three men gathered plant specimens , but those collected by Bauer and Good were incorporated into Brown 's herbarium without attribution , so it is not possible to identify the actual collector of this species . The surviving specimen of B. coccinea , held by the Natural History Museum in London , is annotated in Brown 's hand " King George <unk> Sound Princess Royal Harbour especially near the observatory " . The observatory was apparently located in what is now the central business district of Albany . No further information on the collection is available , as the species is mentioned in neither Brown 's nor Good 's diary . 
 Good also made a separate seed collection , which included B. coccinea , and the species was drawn by Bauer . Like nearly all of Bauer 's field drawings of Proteaceae , the original field sketch of B. coccinea was destroyed in a Hofburg fire in 1945 . However a watercolour painting by Bauer , based on his field sketches , still survives at the Natural History Museum in London , and a hand @-@ coloured copper engraving from that painting was published as Plate 3 of Bauer 's 1813 <unk> Florae Novae Hollandiae . German botanist Adalbert <unk> described B. purpurea in 1843 , now regarded as a synonym of B. coccinea . Common names include scarlet banksia , waratah banksia and Albany banksia . 
 Brown published the species in his 1810 On the Proteaceae of Jussieu , its species name derived from the Latin coccineus , meaning " scarlet " , and referring to the pistils . He recorded 31 species of Banksia in his 1810 work Prodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae et Insulae Van Diemen , and , in his taxonomic arrangement , placed the taxon in the subgenus Banksia verae , the " true banksias " , because the inflorescence is a typical Banksia flower spike . By the time Carl Meissner published his 1856 arrangement of the genus , there were 58 described Banksia species . Meissner divided Brown 's Banksia verae , which had been renamed Eubanksia by Stephan Endlicher in 1847 , into four series based on leaf properties . He placed B. coccinea in the series Quercinae . 
 George Bentham published a thorough revision of Banksia in his landmark publication Flora Australiensis in 1870 . In Bentham 's arrangement , the number of recognised Banksia species was reduced from 60 to 46 . Bentham defined four sections based on leaf , style and pollen @-@ presenter characters . Banksia coccinea was placed in section Orthostylis . 
 In 1891 , German botanist Otto Kuntze challenged the generic name Banksia L.f. , on the grounds that the name Banksia had previously been published in 1775 as Banksia J.R.Forst & G.Forst , referring to the genus now known as Pimelea . Kuntze proposed Sirmuellera as an alternative , republishing B. coccinea as Sirmuellera coccinea . The challenge failed , and Banksia L.f. was formally conserved . 
 Alex George published a new taxonomic arrangement of Banksia in his classic 1981 monograph The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) . Endlicher 's Eubanksia became B. subgenus Banksia , and was divided into three sections . George placed Banksia coccinea in its own series — Banksia series <unk> — within the section B. section Banksia on account of a unique combination of characters , namely the vertical arrangement of flowers on the spike , combined with the branched open habit , broad leaves and very small follicles . Members of the series Quercinae and five species within the series Spicigerae share the vertically aligned flowers , but do not wholly exhibit the other characters . 
 Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published a new arrangement for the genus in 1996 ; their morphological cladistic analysis yielded a cladogram significantly different from George 's arrangement . They were uncertain of B. coccinea 's placement as it had highly <unk> characteristics which made analysis of its relationships difficult . Hence , in their arrangement it was located within series Banksia but not allocated to a subseries ( incertae sedis ) . It was reclassified in its own section Coccinea in 1996 by Tina Maguire and colleagues ; pollen compatibility tests indicated its pollen was most compatible with Banksia ericifolia , B. micrantha and B. sphaerocarpa , all of section Oncostylis . However , they did not place it in that section as all members of Oncostylis have hooked styles at anthesis . This was upheld by George in his monograph for the Flora of Australia series . B. coccinea 's placement within Banksia according to Flora of Australia is as follows : 
 Genus Banksia 
 Subgenus Banksia 
 Section Banksia sect . <unk> 
 B. coccinea 
 In 2002 , a molecular study by Austin Mast again showed Banksia coccinea to be the next closest relative of a group comprising Banksia speciosa and B. baxteri and only distantly related to other members of the series Banksia . This was reinforced in a 2013 molecular study by Marcel Cardillo and colleagues using chloroplast DNA and combining it with earlier results . 
 Mast , Eric Jones and Shawn Havery published the results of their cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for Banksia in 2005 . They inferred a phylogeny greatly different from the accepted taxonomic arrangement , including finding Banksia to be paraphyletic with respect to Dryandra . A new taxonomic arrangement was not published at the time , but early in 2007 Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement by transferring Dryandra to Banksia , and publishing B. subgenus Spathulatae for the species having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; in this way they also redefined the autonym B. subg . Banksia . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete . In the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. coccinea is placed in B. subg . Banksia . 
 No subspecies are recognised , although DNA analysis showed that a population at Redmond was genetically distinctive , while those at Gull Rock , Two Peoples Bay and Cheyne Beach were unusually diverse . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 B. coccinea occurs close to the south coast of Western Australia , from the Hay River northeast of Denmark Albany in the west , east to Stokes National Park southeast of <unk> and inland to the Stirling Range and the northern border of Fitzgerald River National Park . Around 47 % of plants are protected in conservation areas , while 13 % are located on road verges . It prefers deep white or grey sand , among tall shrubland , heath , mallee @-@ heath , associated with such species as Banksia baxteri , B. speciosa , B. attenuata and Lambertia inermis , or low open woodland in the Stirling Range and near Albany , where it is found with Eucalyptus marginata , Banksia attenuata and B. ilicifolia . Most of its range has a gently undulating topography , but it also occurs on a steep rocky slope at Ellen Peak in the Stirling Ranges . The annual rainfall is 400 – 800 mm ( 16 – 31 in ) . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 A field study conducted around Albany found the honey possum ( Tarsipes rostratus ) sometimes visit Banksia coccinea , as do the New Holland honeyeater ( Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ) , white @-@ cheeked honeyeater ( P. nigra ) , and western spinebill ( Acanthorhynchus superciliosus ) . Banksia coccinea flowers are visited by <unk> bees Hylaeus <unk> and H. <unk> . The short @-@ billed black cockatoo breaks off old cones with follicles to eat the seed , often doing so before the seed is ripe . 
 Banksia coccinea is killed by fire and regenerates afterwards from seed released from burnt follicles . It has is some degree of serotiny , that is , it has an aerial seed bank in its canopy in the form of the follicles of the old flower spikes . However , numbers of seed are less than other co @-@ occurring species of banksia on the southern plains and peak several years after a fire . Unusually for banksias , B. coccinea can release seed with resulting seedlings growing in the absence of a bushfire trigger . Plants flower and fruit three years after germination and are shorter @-@ lived than other banksias , appearing in poor health or dying before 20 years of age . They hence appear to be suited to fire intervals of less than 20 years . 
 <unk> growing conditions on plants in cultivation showed that longer daylight ( 16 hours vs 8 hours ) led to development of more flower spikes , indicating that flower initiation was related to day length . 
 Extremely sensitive to dieback caused by Phytophthora cinnamomi , Banksia coccinea is an indicator species for the presence of the disease . There is no known means of eradicating dieback . Much of the Stirling Range National Park is infested , though Fitzgerald River National Park has been largely spared . Applying phosphite to infested areas has been shown to reduce the mortality rates to around 50 % . Banksia coccinea has shown some symptoms of toxicity to application of phosphite , with some patchy necrosis of leaves , but the plant 's uptake of the compound is somewhat lower compared with uptake by other shrub species . Unusually , the symptoms do not appear to be proportional to exposure levels . 
 Dying stands of B. coccinea were observed in 1989 , and the fungus <unk> <unk> isolated as the cause in 1995 . The disease , a form of aerial canker , manifested initially as dead dry brown leaves and the tips of new growth . Plants would die from the top downwards , with larger branches affected over time . Under the outer bark , orange and brown patches of necrosis spread out from leaf nodes until they encircle the stem , which then dies . Flower spikes may be affected during flowering season . In humid spells during warm weather , white or pink spore tendrils are produced on dead wood . One affected stand monitored over three years from October 1989 to June 1992 showed a 97 % mortality of plants ( compared with a baseline 40 % ) . Investigators Bryan Shearer and colleagues isolated another virulent pathogen that they identified as a species of Zythiostroma , however it appeared to invoke an immune response in the plant . This immune response , coupled with the fact that it had not been observed in the wild , led them to believe it was not a major pathogen of the species . This species has since been reclassified and named as <unk> <unk> . 
 Banksia coccinea is a host for the gall midge <unk> banksiae , a species of fly that attacks and lays eggs on the leaves between late October and early December . The round white hairy galls are 5 – 7 mm in diameter and generally contain one larva , or up to five on severely infested plants . The larvae moult and feed until January to March , when they reduce activity until early October . Although these are not harmful to the plant , they disfigure the cut foliage and hence reduce its value . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Widely considered one of the most attractive Banksia species , B. coccinea is a popular garden plant and one of the most important Banksia species for the cut flower industry ; it is grown commercially in Australia , South Africa , Canada , the United States , New Zealand , Israel , and trialled in France , Spain and South America . Its striking terminal inflorescences and furry new growth are its main horticultural attributes . However , it is highly sensitive to dieback and succumbs readily when exposed . It is difficult to keep alive in areas of heavy soils or summer rainfall or humidity , such as the Australian east coast . Furthermore , flowering may be sparse or not occur when cultivated in warmer climates such as Perth . Pruning promotes branching , which leads to more flower spikes being produced . 
 Propagation is by seed , though these can be difficult to extract from the follicles . Seeds do not require any treatment before sowing , and take 12 to 48 days to germinate . Cultivars require propagation by cutting for progeny to grow true . Cuttings are slow to strike . Attempts to graft B. coccinea have met with little success . 
 In a breeding program conducted by Margaret Sedgley of the Department of Horticulture , Viticulture and <unk> , Waite Agricultural Research Institute of the University of Adelaide in Adelaide , South Australia , two forms of Banksia coccinea were bred , registered under plant breeders ' rights ( PBR ) , and commercially propagated , mainly for the cut flower industry . Banksia ' Waite Flame ' is an early flowering somewhat orange @-@ hued form , and B. ' Waite Crimson ' is a red @-@ flowering form that peaks mid @-@ season . 
 = Vida ( Ricardo Arjona song ) = 
 " Vida " is a latin pop song by Guatemalan recording artist Ricardo Arjona , released on 7 December 2010 as the second single from his twelfth studio album , Poquita Ropa ( 2010 ) . The song was written by Arjona , who produced it with longtime collaborators Dan Warner and Lee Levin under their stage name Los Gringos . The song is considered to be an autobiographical song for the singer , and its lyrics are based on " matters of identity " . 
 An accompanying music video for " Vida " was released in November 2010 . It was directed by Joaquín Cambré and filmed in Mexico , and " represent [ s ] that mix of feelings crafting an ambience of hope inside of a story that <unk> has a tragic end . " The video was used as part of the feature film Poquita Ropa — Una Historia Apasionada as well as on Arjona 's Metamorfosis World Tour . As of 28 July 2012 , the video has reached 3 @.@ 9 million views on YouTube . 
 = = Background = = 
 With Poquita Ropa , Arjona wanted to drastically change his musical style . He tried to use as few instruments as possible , resulting in a production that sounds like a capella performances . Arjona said about the album , " music and women look better with little clothes " , and that " they [ the songs ] are like women ; they get things up and are so concerned about this that they forget that the less clothes , more beauty . The songs are often overwhelmed by ourselves , because we saturate them with arrangements looking to exalt their qualities and we end up hiding them . " 
 Arjona produced the album with the assistance of Dan Warner , who has worked with Shakira , Celine Dion and Christina Aguilera . Jason Birchmeier from Allmusic commented that Poquita Ropa " finds Arjona at his most naked , backed by spare arrangements of acoustic guitar , piano , and Hammond B @-@ 3 along with occasional touches of strings , woodwinds , and chorus vocals . " Poquita Ropa was the first album that Arjona recorded without producer Tommy Torres , whose last production was 5to Piso ( 2008 ) . The album is similar in style to Arjona 's work on Galería Caribe ( 2000 ) . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Vida " is a latin pop song written by Arjona , who produced it alongside longtime collaborators Dan Warner and Lee Levin , under their stagename Los Gringos . Doug Emery provided the piano , while Lee Levin performed the percussion and drums instruments and <unk> Lang the bass . Roger Silvestre Ramírez and Wendy Pedersen provided additional background vocals on the song , while Andrés Saavedra and Isaías García served as the recording engineers . It is considered by Arjona as an autobiographical song , commenting that it " contains a good dose of the life of my old <unk> " , as a reference to his father , who died in 2011 . In an interview , music video director Joaquín Cambre commented that " ' Vida ' is a sweet song , exciting and bitter nonetheless . " Jason Birchmeier from Allmusic praised the song , stating that it " deal [ s ] with matters of identity and take a long view , concerning themselves with the past as well as the present and raising questions about the future . " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " Vida " was released on 15 November 2010 . It was filmed in Mexico and directed by Argentinian filmmaker Joaquín Cambre . In an interview , Joaquín Cambre commented that he " tried to represent that mix of feelings crafting an ambience of hope inside of a story that <unk> has a tragic end . Ricardo Arjona plays the song while listening to the story playing on an old disc . " On the video , Arjona is seen on an old room , playing guitar and sitting on a couch , close to a bed , while singing the lyrics . In between , scenes showing a family reaching to a house , in which the father of the men is laying , close to death . As of 28 July 2012 , the video has reached 3 @.@ 9 million views on YouTube . 
 = = = Live performances and media appearances = = = 
 " Vida " was included on the film Poquita Ropa – Una Historia Apasionada , a compilation of the music videos for all of the songs on the album which <unk> on February 2011 by HBO . It was directed by Joaquín Cambre , and co @-@ starred Arjona , González , Edgar Vivar , Daniel Arenas , Mimi Morales , and Kenny . Jesús Grovas , HBO 's corporate communication manager for Mexico and Central America said that it was " a pleasure to have on screen the music of a songwriter like Ricardo Arjona , which is warranty of quality " . The film was also broadcast by A & E. The song is also present on his ongoing Metamorfosis World Tour , where it is used as an introductory video for the show , showcased on an LDC screen present during the concert . 
 = = Trackslisting = = 
 Digital Download 
 " Vida " — 5 : 15 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The credits are taken from the iTunes exclusive digital booklet . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Hanged , drawn and quartered = 
 To be hanged , drawn and quartered was from 1351 a statutory penalty in England for men convicted of high treason , although the ritual was first recorded during the reign of King Henry III ( 1216 – 1272 ) . Convicts were fastened to a hurdle , or wooden panel , and drawn by horse to the place of execution , where they were hanged ( almost to the point of death ) , emasculated , disembowelled , beheaded and quartered ( chopped into four pieces ) . Their remains were often displayed in prominent places across the country , such as London Bridge . For reasons of public decency , women convicted of high treason were instead burned at the stake . 
 The severity of the sentence was measured against the seriousness of the crime . As an attack on the monarch 's authority , high treason was considered a deplorable act demanding the most extreme form of punishment ; although some convicts had their sentences modified and suffered a less ignominious end , over a period of several hundred years many men found guilty of high treason were subjected to the law 's ultimate sanction . They included many English Catholic priests executed during the Elizabethan era , and several of the regicides involved in the 1649 execution of Charles I. 
 Although the Act of Parliament defining high treason remains on the United Kingdom 's statute books , during a long period of 19th @-@ century legal reform the sentence of hanging , drawing and quartering was changed to drawing , hanging until dead , and posthumous beheading and quartering , before being abolished in England in 1870 . The death penalty for treason was abolished in 1998 . 
 = = Treason in England = = 
 During the High Middle Ages those in England guilty of treason were punished in a variety of ways , including drawing and hanging . In the 13th century other , more brutal penalties were introduced , such as disembowelling , burning , beheading and quartering . The 13th @-@ century English chronicler Matthew Paris described how in 1238 " a certain man at arms , a man of some education ( armiger literatus ) " attempted to kill King Henry III . His account records in gruesome detail how the would @-@ be assassin was executed : " dragged asunder , then beheaded , and his body divided into three parts ; each part was then dragged through one of the principal cities of England , and was afterwards hung on a gibbet used for robbers . " He was apparently sent by William de Marisco , an outlaw who some years earlier had killed a man under royal protection before fleeing to Lundy Island . De Marisco was captured in 1242 and on Henry 's order dragged from Westminster to the Tower of London to be executed . There he was hanged from a gibbet until dead . His corpse was disembowelled , his entrails burned , his body quartered and the parts distributed to cities across the country . The punishment is more frequently recorded during Edward I 's reign . Welshman Dafydd ap Gruffydd became the first nobleman in England to be hanged , drawn and quartered after he turned against the king and proclaimed himself Prince of Wales and Lord of Snowdon . Dafydd 's rebellion infuriated Edward so much that he demanded a novel punishment . Therefore , following his capture and trial in 1283 , for his betrayal he was drawn by horse to his place of execution . For killing English nobles he was hanged alive . For killing those nobles at Easter he was eviscerated and his entrails burned . For conspiring to kill the king in various parts of the realm , his body was quartered and the parts sent across the country ; his head was placed on top of the Tower of London . A similar fate was suffered by the Scottish leader Sir William Wallace . Captured and tried in 1305 , he was forced to wear a crown of laurel leaves and was drawn to Smithfield , where he was hanged and beheaded . His entrails were then burned and his corpse quartered . His head was set on London Bridge and the quarters sent to Newcastle , Berwick , Stirling and Perth . 
 These and other executions , such as those of Andrew Harclay , 1st Earl of Carlisle , and Hugh Despenser the Younger , which each occurred during King Edward II 's reign , happened when acts of treason in England , and their punishments , were not clearly defined in common law . Treason was based on an allegiance to the sovereign from all subjects aged 14 or over and it remained for the king and his judges to determine whether that allegiance had been broken . Edward III 's justices had offered somewhat over @-@ zealous interpretations of what activities constituted treason , " calling felonies treasons and <unk> indictments by talk of <unk> of the royal power " , prompting parliamentary demands to clarify the law . Edward therefore introduced the Treason Act 1351 . It was enacted at a time in English history when a monarch 's right to rule was indisputable and was therefore written principally to protect the throne and sovereign . The new law offered a narrower definition of treason than had existed before and split the old feudal offence into two classes . Petty treason referred to the killing of a master ( or lord ) by his servant , a husband by his wife , or a prelate by his clergyman . Men guilty of petty treason were drawn and hanged , whereas women were burned . 
 High treason was the most egregious offence an individual could commit . Attempts to undermine the king 's authority were viewed with as much seriousness as if the accused had attacked him personally , which itself would be an assault on his status as sovereign and a direct threat to his right to govern . As this might undermine the state , retribution was considered an absolute necessity and the crime deserving of the ultimate punishment . The practical difference between the two offences therefore was in the consequence of being convicted ; rather than being drawn and hanged , men were to be hanged , drawn and quartered , while for reasons of public decency ( their anatomy being considered inappropriate for the sentence ) , women were instead drawn and burned . The Act declared that a person had committed high treason if they were : compassing or imagining the death of the king , his wife or his eldest son and heir ; violating the king 's wife , his eldest daughter if she were unmarried , or the wife of his eldest son and heir ; levying war against the king in his realm ; adhering to the king 's enemies in his realm , giving them aid and comfort in his realm or elsewhere ; counterfeiting the Great Seal or the Privy Seal , or the king 's coinage ; knowingly importing counterfeit money ; killing the Chancellor , Treasurer or one of the king 's Justices while performing their offices . The Act did not limit the king 's authority in defining the scope of treason . It contained a proviso giving English judges discretion to extend that scope whenever required , a process more commonly known as constructive treason . It also applied to subjects overseas in British colonies in the Americas , but the only documented incident of an individual there being hanged , drawn and quartered was that of Joshua <unk> , an English colonist accused of having fought on the side of the Narragansett during the Great Swamp Fight . He was executed in January 1676 . Later sentences resulted either in a pardon or a hanging . 
 Only one witness was required to convict a person of treason , although in 1547 this was increased to two . Suspects were first questioned in private by the Privy Council before they were publicly tried . They were allowed no witnesses or defence counsel , and were generally presumed guilty from the outset . This meant that for centuries anyone accused of treason found themselves severely legally disadvantaged , a situation which lasted until the late 17th century , when several years of politically motivated treason charges made against Whig politicians prompted the introduction of the Treason Act of 1695 . This allowed defendants counsel , witnesses , a copy of their indictment and a jury , and when not charged with an attempt on the monarch 's life , they were to be prosecuted within three years of the alleged offence . 
 Edward Stafford , 3rd Duke of Buckingham was executed on 17 May 1521 for the crime of treason . The wording of his sentence has survived and indicates the precision with which the method of execution was described ; he was to be " laid on a hurdle and so drawn to the place of execution , and there to be hanged , cut down alive , your members to be cut off and cast in the fire , your bowels burnt before you , your head smitten off , and your body quartered and divided at the King 's will , and God have mercy on your soul . " 
 = = Execution of the sentence = = 
 Once sentenced , malefactors were usually held in prison for a few days before being taken to the place of execution . During the early Middle Ages this journey may have been made tied directly to the back of a horse , but it subsequently became customary to be fastened instead to a wicker hurdle , or wooden panel , itself tied to the horse . Historian Frederic William Maitland thought that this was probably to " [ secure ] for the hangman a yet living body " . The use of the word drawn , as in " to draw " , has caused a degree of confusion . One of the Oxford English Dictionary 's definitions of draw is " to draw out the viscera or intestines of ; to disembowel ( a fowl , etc. before cooking , a traitor or other criminal after hanging ) " , but this is followed by " in many cases of executions it is uncertain whether this , or sense 4 [ To drag ( a criminal ) at a horse 's tail , or on a hurdle or the like , to the place of execution ; formerly a legal punishment of high treason ] , is meant . The presumption is that where drawn is mentioned after hanged , the sense is as here . " Historian Ram Sharan Sharma arrived at the same conclusion : " Where , as in the popular hung , drawn and quartered [ use ] ( meaning facetiously , of a person , completely disposed of ) , drawn follows hanged or hung , it is to be referred to as the disembowelling of the traitor . " The historian and author Ian Mortimer disagrees . In an essay published on his website , he writes that the separate mention of evisceration is a relatively modern device , and that while it certainly took place on many occasions , the presumption that drawing means to disembowel is spurious . Instead , drawing ( as a method of transportation ) may be mentioned after hanging because it was a supplementary part of the execution . 
 Although some reports indicate that during Queen Mary I 's reign bystanders were vocal in their support , while in transit convicts sometimes suffered directly at the hands of the crowd . William Wallace was whipped , attacked and had rotten food and waste thrown at him , and the priest Thomas Pilchard was reportedly barely alive by the time he reached the gallows in 1587 . Others found themselves admonished by " zealous and godly men " ; it became customary for a preacher to follow the condemned , asking them to repent . According to Samuel Clarke , the Puritan clergyman William Perkins ( 1558 – 1602 ) once managed to convince a young man at the gallows that he had been forgiven , enabling the youth to go to his death " with tears of joy in his eyes ... as if he actually saw himself delivered from the hell which he feared before , and heaven opened for receiving his soul " . 
 After the king 's commission had been read aloud , the crowd were normally asked to move back from the scaffold before being addressed by the convict . While these speeches were mostly an admission of guilt ( although few admitted treason ) , still they were carefully monitored by the sheriff and chaplain , who were occasionally forced to act ; in 1588 , Catholic priest William Dean 's address to the crowd was considered so inappropriate that he was gagged almost to the point of suffocation . Questions on matters of allegiance and politics were sometimes put to the prisoner , as happened to Edmund <unk> in 1591 . He was asked by priest hunter Richard Topcliffe to " confess his treason " , but when <unk> responded " if to say Mass be treason , I confess to have done it and glory in it " , Topcliffe ordered him to be quiet and instructed the hangman to push him off the ladder . Sometimes the witness responsible for the condemned man 's execution was also present . A government spy , John Munday , was in 1582 present for the execution of Thomas Ford . Munday supported the sheriff , who had reminded the priest of his confession when he protested his innocence . The sentiments expressed in such speeches may be related to the conditions encountered during imprisonment . Many Jesuit priests suffered badly at the hands of their captors but were frequently the most defiant ; conversely , those of a higher station were often the most apologetic . Such contrition may have arisen from the sheer terror felt by those who thought they might be disembowelled rather than simply beheaded as they would normally expect , and any apparent acceptance of their fate may have stemmed from the belief that a serious , but not treasonable act , had been committed . Good behaviour at the gallows may also have been due to a convict 's desire for his heirs not to be disinherited . 
 The condemned were occasionally forced to watch as other traitors , sometimes their confederates , were executed before them . The priest James Bell was in 1584 made to watch as his companion , John Finch , was " a @-@ quarter @-@ <unk> " . Edward James and Francis Edwardes were made to witness Ralph Crockett 's execution in 1588 , in an effort to elicit their co @-@ operation and acceptance of Elizabeth I 's religious supremacy before they were themselves executed . Normally stripped to the shirt with their arms bound in front of them , prisoners were then hanged for a short period , either from a ladder or cart . On the sheriff 's orders the cart would be taken away ( or if a ladder , turned ) , leaving the man suspended in mid @-@ air . The aim was usually to cause strangulation and near @-@ death , although some victims were killed prematurely , the priest John Payne 's death in 1582 being hastened by a group of men pulling on his legs . Conversely , some , such as the deeply unpopular William Hacket ( d . 1591 ) , were cut down instantly and taken to be disembowelled and normally emasculated — the latter , according to Sir Edward Coke , to " show his issue was disinherited with corruption of blood . " . 
 Those still conscious at that point might have seen their entrails burned , before their heart was removed and the body decapitated and quartered ( chopped into four pieces ) . The regicide Major @-@ General Thomas Harrison , after being hanged for several minutes and then cut open in October 1660 , was reported to have leaned across and hit his executioner — resulting in the swift removal of his head . His entrails were thrown onto a nearby fire . John Houghton was reported to have prayed while being disembowelled in 1535 , and in his final moments to have cried " Good Jesu , what will you do with my heart ? " Executioners were often inexperienced and proceedings did not always run smoothly . In 1584 Richard White 's executioner removed his bowels piece by piece , through a small hole in his belly , " the which device taking no good success , he mangled his breast with a butcher 's axe to the very chine most pitifully " . At his execution in January 1606 for his involvement in the Gunpowder Plot , Guy Fawkes managed to break his neck by jumping from the gallows , cheating the executioner . 
 No records exist to demonstrate exactly how the corpse was quartered , although an engraving of the quartering of Sir Thomas Armstrong in 1684 shows the executioner making vertical cuts through the spine and removing the legs at the hip . The distribution of Dafydd ap Gruffydd 's remains was described by Herbert Maxwell : " the right arm with a ring on the finger in York ; the left arm in Bristol ; the right leg and hip at Northampton ; the left [ leg ] at Hereford . But the villain 's head was bound with iron , lest it should fall to pieces from putrefaction , and set conspicuously upon a long spear @-@ shaft for the mockery of London . " After the execution in 1660 of several of the regicides involved in the death of King Charles I eleven years earlier , the diarist John Evelyn remarked : " I saw not their execution , but met their quarters , mangled , and cut , and reeking , as they were brought from the gallows in baskets on the hurdle . " Such remains were typically parboiled and displayed as a gruesome reminder of the penalty for high treason , usually wherever the traitor had conspired or found support . The head was often displayed on London Bridge , for centuries the route by which many travellers from the south entered the city . Several eminent commentators remarked on the displays . In 1566 Joseph Justus Scaliger wrote that " in London there were many heads on the bridge ... I have seen there , as if they were masts of ships , and at the top of them , quarters of men 's corpses " . In 1602 the Duke of <unk> @-@ Stettin emphasised the ominous nature of their presence when he wrote " near the end of the bridge , on the suburb side , were stuck up the heads of thirty gentlemen of high standing who had been beheaded on account of treason and secret practices against the Queen " . The practice of using London Bridge in this manner ended following the hanging , drawing and quartering in 1678 of William Staley , a victim of the fictitious Popish Plot . His quarters were given to his relatives , who promptly arranged a " grand " funeral ; this incensed the coroner so much that he ordered the body to be dug up and set upon the city gates . Staley 's was the last head to be placed on London Bridge . 
 = = Later history = = 
 Another victim of the Popish Plot , Oliver Plunket the Archbishop of Armagh , was hanged , drawn and quartered at Tyburn in July 1681 . His executioner was bribed so that Plunket 's body parts were saved from the fire ; the head is now displayed at St Peter 's Church in Drogheda . Francis Towneley and several other captured Jacobite officers involved in the Jacobite Rising of 1745 were executed , but by then the executioner possessed some discretion as to how much they should suffer and thus they were killed before their bodies were eviscerated . The French spy François Henri de la Motte was hanged in 1781 for almost an hour before his heart was cut out and burned , and the following year David <unk> was hanged , decapitated and then quartered at Portsmouth . Pieces of his corpse were fought over by members of the 20 @,@ 000 @-@ strong crowd there , some making trophies of his limbs and fingers . In 1803 Edward Despard and six co @-@ conspirators in the Despard Plot were sentenced to be hanged , drawn and quartered . Before they were hanged and beheaded at <unk> Lane Gaol , they were first placed on sledges attached to horses , and ritually pulled in circuits around the gaol yards . Their execution was attended by an audience of about 20 @,@ 000 . A contemporary report describes the scene after Despard had made his speech : 
 This energetic , but inflammatory appeal , was followed by such enthusiastic plaudits , that the Sheriff hinted to the Clergyman to withdraw , and forbade Colonel Despard to proceed . The cap was then drawn over their eyes , during which the Colonel was observed again to fix the knot under his left ear , and , at seven minutes before nine o 'clock the signal being given , the platform dropped , and they were all launched into eternity . From the precaution taken by the Colonel , he appeared to suffer very little , neither did the others struggle much , except Broughton , who had been the most indecently profane of the whole . Wood , the soldier , died very hard . The Executioners went under , and kept pulling them by the feet . Several drops of blood fell from the fingers of Macnamara and Wood , during the time they were suspended . After hanging thirty @-@ seven minutes , the Colonel 's body was cut down , at half an hour past nine o 'clock , and being stripped of his coat and waistcoat , it was laid upon saw @-@ dust , with the head reclined upon a block . A surgeon then in attempting to sever the head from the body by a common dissecting knife , missed the particular joint aimed at , when he kept haggling it , till the executioner was obliged to take the head between his hands , and to twist it several times round , when it was with difficulty severed from the body . It was then held up by the executioner , who exclaimed — " Behold the head of EDWARD <unk> <unk> , a Traitor ! " The same ceremony followed with the others respectively ; and the whole concluded by ten o 'clock . 
 At the burnings of Isabella Condon in 1779 and Phoebe Harris in 1786 , the sheriffs present inflated their expenses ; in the opinion of Simon Devereaux they were probably dismayed at being forced to attend such spectacles . Harris 's fate prompted William Wilberforce to sponsor a bill which if passed would have abolished the practice , but as one of its proposals would have allowed the anatomical dissection of criminals other than murderers , the House of Lords rejected it . The burning in 1789 of Catherine Murphy , a counterfeiter , was impugned in Parliament by Sir Benjamin Hammett . He called it one of " the savage remains of Norman policy " and subsequently , amidst a growing tide of public disgust at the burning of women , Parliament passed the Treason Act 1790 , which for women guilty of treason substituted hanging for burning . It was followed by the Treason Act 1814 , introduced by Samuel Romilly , a legal reformer . Influenced by his friend , Jeremy Bentham , Romilly had long argued that punitive laws should serve to reform criminal behaviour and that far from acting as a deterrent , the severity of England 's laws was responsible for an increase in crime . When appointed the MP for Queensborough in 1806 he resolved to improve what he described as " Our sanguinary and barbarous penal code , written in blood " . He managed to repeal the death penalty for certain thefts and vagrancy , and in 1814 proposed to change the sentence for men guilty of treason to being hanged until dead and the body left at the king 's disposal . However , when it was pointed out that this would be a less severe punishment than that given for murder , he agreed that the corpse should also be <unk> , " as a fit punishment and appropriate stigma . " This is what happened to Jeremiah Brandreth , leader of a 100 @-@ strong contingent of men in the <unk> rising and one of three men executed in 1817 at Derby Gaol . As with Edward Despard and his confederates the three were drawn to the scaffold on sledges before being hanged for about an hour , and then on the insistence of the Prince Regent were beheaded with an axe . The local miner appointed to the task of beheading them was inexperienced though , and having failed with the first two blows , completed his job with a knife . As he held the first head up and made the customary announcement , the crowd reacted with horror and fled . A different reaction was seen in 1820 , when amidst more social unrest five men involved in the Cato Street Conspiracy were hanged and beheaded at Newgate Prison . Although the beheading was performed by a surgeon , following the usual proclamation the crowd was angry enough to force the executioners to find safety behind the prison walls . The plot was the last crime for which the sentence was applied . 
 Reformation of England 's capital punishment laws continued throughout the 19th century , as politicians such as John Russell , 1st Earl Russell , sought to remove from the statute books many of the capital offences that remained . Robert Peel 's drive to ameliorate law enforcement saw petty treason abolished by the Offences against the Person Act 1828 , which removed the distinction between crimes formerly considered as petty treason , and murder . The Royal Commission on Capital Punishment 1864 @-@ 1866 recommended that there be no change to treason law , quoting the " more merciful " Treason Felony Act 1848 , which limited the punishment for most treasonous acts to penal servitude . Its report recommended that for " rebellion , assassination or other violence ... we are of opinion that the extreme penalty must remain " , although the most recent occasion ( and ultimately , the last ) on which anyone had been sentenced to be hanged , drawn and quartered was in November 1839 , following the Chartist Newport Rising — and those men sentenced to death were instead transported . The report highlighted the changing public mood toward public executions ( brought about in part by the growing prosperity created by the Industrial Revolution ) . Home Secretary Spencer Horatio Walpole told the commission that executions had " become so demoralizing that , instead of its having a good effect , it has a tendency rather to brutalize the public mind than to deter the criminal class from committing crime " . The commission recommended that executions should be performed privately , behind prison walls and away from the public 's view , " under such regulations as may be considered necessary to prevent abuse , and to satisfy the public that the law has been complied with . " The practice of executing criminals in public was ended two years later by the Capital Punishment Amendment Act 1868 , introduced by Home Secretary Gathorne Hardy . An amendment to abolish capital punishment completely , suggested before the bill 's third reading , failed by 127 votes to 23 . 
 Hanging , drawing and quartering was abolished in England by the Forfeiture Act 1870 , Liberal politician Charles Forster 's second attempt since 1864 to end the forfeiture of a felon 's lands and goods ( thereby not making paupers of his family ) . The Act also limited the penalty for treason to hanging alone , although it did not remove the monarch 's right under the 1814 Act to replace hanging with beheading . The death penalty for treason was abolished by the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 , enabling the UK to ratify protocol six of the European Convention on Human Rights in 1999 . 
 = Battle of Red Cliffs = 
 The Battle of Red Cliffs , otherwise known as the Battle of Chibi , was a decisive battle fought at the end of the Han dynasty , about twelve years prior to the beginning of the Three Kingdoms period in Chinese history . It was fought in the winter of 208 / 9 AD between the allied forces of the southern warlords Liu Bei and Sun Quan and the numerically superior forces of the northern warlord Cao Cao . Liu Bei and Sun Quan successfully frustrated Cao Cao 's effort to conquer the land south of the Yangtze River and reunite the territory of the Eastern Han dynasty . The allied victory at Red Cliffs ensured the survival of Liu Bei and Sun Quan , gave them control of the Yangtze ( de Crespigny 1990 : 273 ) , and provided a line of defence that was the basis for the later creation of the two southern states of Shu Han and Eastern Wu . The battle has been called the largest naval battle in history in terms of numbers involved . 
 Descriptions of the battle differ widely , and the location of the battle is fiercely debated ( de Crespigny 1990 : 256 <unk> ) . Although its precise location remains uncertain , the majority of academic conjectures place it on the south bank of the Yangtze River , southwest of present @-@ day Wuhan and northeast of <unk> ( present @-@ day <unk> , Hunan ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 By the early third century , the Han dynasty , which had ruled China for almost four centuries ( albeit with a 16 @-@ year interruption , dividing the dynasty into its Western and Eastern periods ) , was crumbling . Emperor Xian had been a political figurehead since 189 , with no control over the actions of the various warlords controlling their respective territories . One of the most powerful warlords in China was Cao Cao , who , by 207 , had unified northern China and retained total control of the North China Plain . He then completed a successful campaign against the Wuhuan in the winter of the same year , thus securing his northern frontier . Upon his return in 208 , he was appointed Chancellor , a position that granted him absolute authority over the entire imperial government ( de Crespigny 1969 : 253 , 465 <unk> ) . Shortly afterwards , in the autumn of 208 , his army began a southern campaign ( Eikenberry 1994 ; de Crespigny 2003 ) . 
 The Yangtze River in the area of Jing Province ( covering present @-@ day Hubei and Hunan provinces ) was key to the success of this strategy . If Cao Cao was to have any hope of reuniting the sundered Han empire , he had to achieve naval control of the middle Yangtze and command the strategic naval base at Jiangling as a means of access to the southern region ( de Crespigny 2003 ) . Two warlords controlled the regions of the Yangtze that were key to Cao Cao 's success : Liu Biao , the Governor of Jing Province , controlled the area west of the mouth of the Han River , roughly encompassing the area around the city of Xiakou and all territory south of that region . Sun Quan controlled the river east of the Han and the southeastern territories abutting it ( de Crespigny 2007 : 773 ) . A third ally , Liu Bei , was living in refuge with Liu Biao at the garrison in <unk> ( in present @-@ day Xiangyang ) , having fled from the northeast to Jing Province following a failed plot to assassinate Cao Cao and restore power to the imperial dynasty ( de Crespigny 2007 : 480 ; de Crespigny 1969 : 258 ) . 
 The initial stages of the campaign were an unqualified success for Cao Cao , as the command of Jing Province had been substantially weakened and the Jing armies exhausted by conflict with Sun Quan to the south ( de Crespigny 2007 : 486 ) . Factions had arisen supporting either of Liu Biao 's two sons in a struggle for succession . The younger son prevailed , and Liu Biao 's dispossessed eldest son , Liu Qi , departed to assume a commandery in <unk> ( present @-@ day <unk> County , Hubei ) ( de Crespigny 1990 : 241 ) . Liu Biao died of illness only a few weeks later , while Cao Cao was advancing from the north and , under these circumstances , Liu Biao 's younger son and successor , Liu Cong , quickly surrendered . Cao Cao thus captured a sizeable fleet and secured the naval base at Jiangling . This provided him with a key strategic military depot and forward base to harbour his ships ( de Crespigny 1990 : 246 @,@ 250 @,@ 255 ) . 
 When Jing Province fell , Liu Bei quickly fled south , accompanied by a refugee population of civilians and soldiers . This disorganised exodus was pursued by Cao Cao 's elite cavalry , and was surrounded and decisively beaten at the Battle of Changban ( near present @-@ day Dangyang , Hubei ) . Liu Bei escaped , however , and fled further east to Xiakou , where he liaised with Sun Quan 's emissary Lu Su . At this point historical accounts are inconsistent ; Lu Su may have successfully encouraged Liu Bei to move even further east , to Fankou ( <unk> ; around present @-@ day Ezhou , Hubei ) . In either case , Liu Bei was later joined by Liu Qi and levies from <unk> ( de Crespigny 1990 : 255 ) . Liu Bei 's main advisor , Zhuge Liang , was sent to <unk> ( <unk> ; in present @-@ day Jiujiang , Jiangxi ) to negotiate forming a mutual front against Cao Cao with Sun Quan ( de Crespigny 1969 : 263 ) . 
 By the time Zhuge Liang arrived , Cao Cao had already sent Sun Quan a letter boasting of commanding 800 @,@ 000 men and hinting that he wanted Sun to surrender . The faction led by Sun Quan 's Chief Clerk , Zhang Zhao , advocated surrender , citing Cao Cao 's overwhelming numerical advantage . However , on separate occasions , Lu Su , Zhuge Liang , and Sun Quan 's chief commander , Zhou Yu , all presented arguments to persuade Sun Quan to agree to the alliance against the northerners . Sun Quan finally decided upon war , chopping off a corner of his desk during an assembly and stating : " Anyone who still dares argue for surrender will be [ treated ] the same as this desk . " He then assigned Zhou Yu , Cheng Pu , and Lu Su with 30 @,@ 000 men to aid Liu Bei against Cao Cao ( de Crespigny 1996 ) . 
 Although Cao Cao had boasted command of 800 @,@ 000 men , Zhou Yu estimated Cao Cao 's actual troop strength to be closer to 230 @,@ 000 . Furthermore , this total included 80 @,@ 000 impressed troops from the armies of the recently deceased Liu Biao , so the loyalty and morale of a large number of Cao Cao 's force was uncertain ( Eikenberry 1994 : 60 ) . With the 20 @,@ 000 soldiers that Liu Bei had gathered , the alliance consisted of approximately 50 @,@ 000 marines who were trained and prepared for battle ( de Crespigny 1990 : 252 ; 255 ) . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The Battle of Red Cliffs unfolded in three stages : an initial skirmish at Red Cliffs followed by a retreat to the Wulin ( <unk> ) battlefields on the northwestern bank of the Yangtze , a decisive naval engagement , and Cao Cao 's disastrous retreat along Huarong Road . 
 The combined Sun @-@ Liu force sailed upstream from either Xiakou or Fankou to Red Cliffs , where they encountered Cao Cao 's vanguard force . Plagued by disease and low morale due to the series of forced marches they had undertaken on the prolonged southern campaign ( de Crespigny 2003 ) , Cao Cao 's men could not gain an advantage in the small skirmish which ensued , so Cao Cao retreated to Wulin ( north of the Yangtze River ) and the allies pulled back to the south ( de Crespigny 1990 : 257 ) . 
 Cao Cao had chained his ships from stem to stern , possibly aiming to reduce seasickness in his navy , which comprised mostly northerners who were not used to living on ships . Observing this , divisional commander Huang Gai sent Cao Cao a letter feigning surrender and prepared a squadron of capital ships described as <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) . The ships had been converted into fire ships by filling them with bundles of kindling , dry reeds , and fatty oil . As Huang Gai 's " defecting " squadron approached the midpoint of the river , the sailors applied fire to the ships before taking to small boats . The unmanned fire ships , carried by the southeastern wind , sped towards Cao Cao 's fleet and set it ablaze . A large number of men and horses either burned to death or drowned ( Chen c . 280 : 54 @.@ 1262 – 63 ) . 
 Following the initial shock , Zhou Yu and the allies led a lightly armed force to capitalise on the assault . The northern army was thrown into confusion and was utterly defeated . Seeing the situation was hopeless , Cao Cao then issued a general order of retreat and destroyed a number of his remaining ships before withdrawing ( Chen c . 280 ) . 
 Cao Cao 's army attempted a retreat along Huarong Road , including a long stretch passing through marshlands north of Dongting Lake . Heavy rains had made the road so treacherous that many of the sick soldiers had to carry bundles of grass on their backs and use them to fill the road to allow the horsemen to cross . Many of these soldiers drowned in the mud or were trampled to death in the effort . The allies , led by Zhou Yu and Liu Bei , gave chase over land and water until they reached Nan Commandery ( <unk> ; present @-@ day Jiangling County , Jingzhou , Hubei ) ; combined with famine and disease , this decimated Cao Cao 's remaining forces . Cao Cao then retreated north to his home base of Ye ( in present @-@ day Handan , Hebei ) , leaving Cao Ren and Xu Huang to guard Jiangling , Yue Jin stationed in Xiangyang , and Man Chong in Dangyang ( Chen c . 280 ) . 
 The allied counterattack might have vanquished Cao Cao and his forces entirely . However , the crossing of the Yangtze River dissolved into chaos as the allied armies converged on the riverbank and fought over the limited number of ferries . To restore order , a detachment led by Sun Quan 's general Gan Ning established a bridgehead in Yiling to the north , and only a staunch rearguard action by Cao Ren prevented further catastrophe ( Eikenberry 1994 : 60 ; de Crespigny 2007 : 239 ) . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 A combination of Cao Cao 's strategic errors and the effectiveness of Huang Gai 's ruse had resulted in the allied victory at the Battle of Red Cliffs . Zhou Yu had previously observed that Cao Cao 's generals and soldiers comprised mostly cavalry and infantry , and few had any experience in naval warfare . Cao Cao also had little support among the people of Jing Province , and thus lacked a secure forward base of operations ( Eikenberry 1994 : 60 ) . Despite the strategic acumen Cao Cao had displayed in earlier campaigns and battles , in this case he had simply assumed that numerical superiority would eventually defeat the Sun and Liu navy . Cao 's first tactical mistake was converting his massive army of infantry and cavalry into a marine corps and navy : with only a few days of drills before the battle , Cao Cao 's troops were ravaged by sea @-@ sickness and lack of experience on water . Tropical diseases , to which the southerners were largely immune , were also rampant in Cao Cao 's camps . Although numerous , Cao Cao 's men were already exhausted by the unfamiliar environment and the extended southern campaign , as Zhuge Liang observed : " Even a powerful arrow at the end of its flight cannot penetrate a silk cloth " ( Military Documents 1979 : 193 ) . 
 A key advisor , Jia Xu , had recommended after the surrender of Liu Cong that the overtaxed armies be given time to rest and replenish before engaging the armies of Sun Quan and Liu Bei , but Cao Cao disregarded the advice ( Eikenberry 1994 : 60 ) . Cao Cao 's own thoughts regarding his failure at Red Cliffs suggest that he held his own actions and misfortunes responsible for the defeat , rather than the strategies utilised by his enemy during the battle : " ... it was only because of the sickness that I burnt my ships and retreated . It is out of all reason for Zhou Yu to take the credit for himself . " ( Chen c . 280 : 54 : 1265 ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By the end of 209 , the post Cao Cao had established at Jiangling fell to Zhou Yu . The borders of the land under Cao Cao 's control contracted about 160 kilometres ( 99 mi ) , to the area around Xiangyang ( de Crespigny 1990 : 291 ) . Liu Bei , on the other hand , had gained territory by taking over the four commanderies ( Wuling , Changsha , Lingling and Guiyang ) south of the Yangtze River . Sun Quan 's troops had suffered far greater casualties than Liu Bei 's in the extended conflict against Cao Ren following the Battle of Red Cliffs ( de Crespigny 1990 : 291 – 292 ) , and the death of Zhou Yu in 210 resulted in a drastic weakening of Sun Quan 's strength in Jing Province ( de Crespigny 1990 : 297 ) . Liu Bei also occupied Jing Province that Cao Cao had recently lost — a strategic and naturally fortified area on the Yangtze River that Sun Quan claimed for himself . The control of Jing Province provided Liu Bei with virtually unlimited access to the passage into Yi Province ( covering present @-@ day Sichuan and Chongqing ) and important waterways into Wu ( southeastern China ) , as well as dominion of the southern Yangtze River . 
 Never again would Cao Cao command so large a fleet as he had at Jiangling , nor would a similar opportunity to destroy his southern rivals present itself again ( de Crespigny 2007 : 37 ) . The Battle of Red Cliffs and the capture of Jing Province by Liu Bei confirmed the separation of southern China from the northern heartland of the Yellow River valley , and also foreshadowed a north @-@ south axis of hostility that would resonate for centuries ( de Crespigny 1990 : 260 ) . 
 = = Location = = 
 The precise location of the Red Cliffs battlefield has long been the subject of both popular and academic debates , but has never been conclusively established . Scholarly debates have continued for at least 1 @,@ 350 years ( Zhang 2006 : 215 ) , and a number of arguments in favour of alternative sites have been put forward . There are clear grounds for rejecting at least some of these proposals , but four alternative locations are still advocated . According to Zhang ( 2006 ) , many of the current debates stem from the fact that the course and length of the Yangtze River between <unk> and Wuhan has changed since the Sui and Tang dynasties ( Zhang 2006 : 225 ) . The modern @-@ day debate is also complicated by the fact that the names of some of the key locations have changed over the following centuries . For example , although modern Huarong city is located in Hunan , south of the Yangtze , in the 3rd century the city of that name was due east of Jiangling , considerably north of the Yangtze ( Zhang 2006 : 229 ; de Crespigny 1990 : 256 <unk> ) . Moreover , one candidate site , Puqi ( <unk> ) , was renamed " Chibi City " ( <unk> ) in 1998 in a direct attempt to tie this location to the historical battlefield . 
 Historical records state that Cao Cao 's forces retreated north across the Yangtze after the initial engagement at Red Cliffs , unequivocally placing the battle site on the south bank of the Yangtze . For this reason , a number of sites on the north bank have been discounted by historians and geographers . Historical accounts also establish east and west boundaries for a stretch of the Yangtze which encompasses all possible sites for the battlefield . The allied forces travelled upstream from either Fankou or Xiakou . Since the Yangtze flows roughly eastward towards the ocean ( with northeast and southeast meanders ) , Red Cliffs must at least be west of Fankou , which is farther downstream . The westernmost boundary is also clear , since Cao Cao 's eastern advance from Jiangling included passing <unk> ( present @-@ day <unk> , Hunan ) on the shore of Dongting Lake . The battle must also have been downstream ( northeast ) of that location ( de Crespigny 1990 : 256 – 257 ; Zhang 2006 : 217 ) . 
 One popular candidate for the battle site is Chibi Hill in Huangzhou , sometimes referred to as " Su Dongpo 's Red Cliffs " or the " Literary Red Cliffs " ( <unk> ) . Support for this conjecture arises largely due to the famous 11th @-@ century poem " First Rhapsody on the Red Cliffs " , which equates the Huangzhou Hill with the battlefield location . Excluding tone marks , the pinyin romanization of this cliff 's name is " Chibi " , the same as the pinyin for Red Cliffs . However , the Chinese characters are completely different ( <unk> ) as is their meaning ( " Red Nose Hill " ) . This site is also on the north bank of the Yangtze , and is directly across from Fankou rather than upstream from it ( Zhang 2006 : 215 ) . Moreover , if the allied Sun @-@ Liu forces left from Xiakou rather than Fankou , as the oldest historical sources suggest , then the hill in Huangzhou would have been downstream from the point of departure , a possibility which cannot be reconciled with historical sources . 
 Puqi , now named Chibi City , is perhaps the most widely accepted candidate . To differentiate from Su Dongpo 's Red Cliffs , the site is also referred to as the " Military Red Cliffs " ( <unk> ) . It is directly across the Yangtze from Wulin . This argument was first proposed in the early Tang dynasty ( Zhang 2006 : 217 ) . There are also characters engraved in the cliffs ( see image at the top of this page ) suggesting that this is the site of the battle . The origin of the engraving can be dated to between the Tang and Song dynasties , making it at least 1 @,@ 000 years old ( Zhang 2006 : 219 ; 228 ) . 
 Some sources mention the south banks of the Yangtze in Jiayu County ( <unk> ) in the prefecture @-@ level city of <unk> in Hubei province as a possible location . This would place the battlefield downstream from Puqi ( Chibi City ) , a view that is supported by scholars of Chinese history such as Rafe de Crespigny , Wang Li and Zhu <unk> , following the Qing dynasty historical document Shui Jing Zhu ( de Crespigny 1990 : 256 ) . 
 Another candidate is Wuhan , which straddles the Yangtze at the confluence of the Yangtze and Han rivers . It is east of both Wulin ( and Chibi City across the river ) and Jiayu . This metropolis was incorporated by joining three cities . There is a local belief in Wuhan that the battle was fought at the junction of the rivers , southwest of the former Wuchang city , which is now part of Wuhan ( de Crespigny 1990 : 256 n 78 ) . Zhang ( 2006 : 215 ; 223 ) asserts that the Chibi battlefield was one of a set of hills in Wuchang that were levelled in the 1930s so that their stone could be used as raw material . Citing several historical @-@ geographical studies , Zhang ( 2006 ) shows that earlier accounts place the battlefield in Wuchang . Sheng <unk> 's 5th @-@ century Jingzhou ji in particular places the Chibi battlefield a distance of 160 li ( approximately 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) ) downstream from Wulin , but since the <unk> and <unk> meanders increased the length of the Yangtze River between <unk> and Wuchang by 100 li ( approximately 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) ; see map ) some time in the Sui and Tang dynasties ( Zhang 2006 : 225 ) , later works do not regard Wuchang as a possible site . 
 = = <unk> account = = 
 The romantic tradition that originated with Luo Guanzhong 's historical novel Romance of the Three Kingdoms differs from historical accounts in many details . For example , Cao Cao 's army strength was exaggerated to over 830 @,@ 000 men . This may be attributed to the ethos of later times , particularly of the Southern Song dynasty ( de Crespigny 2007 : 483 ) . The state of Shu Han , in particular , was viewed by later literati as the " legitimate " successor to the Han dynasty , so fictionalised accounts assign greater prominence than the historical records warrant to the roles of Liu Bei , Zhuge Liang and other heroes from Shu . This is generally accomplished by minimising the importance of Eastern Wu commanders and advisors such as Zhou Yu and Lu Su ( de Crespigny 1990 : xi ) . While historical accounts describe Lu Su as a sensible advisor and Zhou Yu as an eminent military leader and " generous , sensible and courageous " man , Romance of the Three Kingdoms depicts Lu Su as unremarkable and Zhou Yu as cruel and cynical ( de Crespigny 1990 : 300 ; 305 – 306 <unk> ) . Both are depicted as being inferior to Zhuge Liang in every respect ( de Crespigny 1990 : 264 ) . 
 The romances added wholly fictional and fantastical elements to the historical accounts and these were repeated in popular plays and operas . Examples from the Romance of the Three Kingdoms include Zhuge Liang pretending to use magic to call forth favourable winds ( that he had in fact predicted by astronomical observation ) for the fire ship attack , his strategy of " using straw boats to borrow arrows " , and Guan Yu capturing and releasing Cao Cao at Huarong Trail . The fictionalised accounts also name Zhuge Liang as a military commander in the combined forces , which is historically inaccurate ( de Crespigny 1990 : 260 – 264 ) . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Present @-@ day Chibi City in Hubei province was formerly named Puqi . In 1998 , the Chinese State Council approved the renaming of the city in celebration of the battle at Red Cliffs . Cultural festivals held by the city have dramatically increased tourism . ( Xinhua 1997 ) . In 1983 , a statue of prominent Song dynasty poet , Su Shi , was erected at the Huangzhou site of ' Su Dongpo 's Red Cliffs ' in tribute to his writings regarding Red Cliff ( Xinhua 1983 ) . 
 Video games based on the Three Kingdoms era ( such as Koei 's Dynasty Warriors series , Sangokushi <unk> , Destiny of an Emperor and <unk> II ) have scenarios that include the battle . Other games utilise the Battle of Red Cliffs as their central focus . These include titles popular in Asia , such as the original Japanese version of Warriors of Fate and Dragon Throne : Battle of Red Cliffs . 
 A 2008 film titled Red Cliff , directed by John Woo , showcased the Red Cliff legacy and was a massive box @-@ office success in China . 
 Battle at the Red Cliffs is one of the 10 volumes in an illustrated rendition of Romance of the Three Kingdoms by a Singapore publishing company , <unk> Books , in English . 
 = No More Mr. Nice Guy ( House ) = 
 " No More Mr. Nice Guy " is the 13th episode of the fourth season of House , and the 83rd episode overall . It was the first House episode filmed after the resolution of the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . It aired in the United States on April 28 , 2008 . 
 The episode revolves around Dr. Gregory House ( Hugh Laurie ) noticing a man named Jeff ( Paul Rae ) in the Emergency Room ( ER ) , who he thinks is " too nice " . House thinks that Jeff 's inability to get mad is a major symptom of an underlying condition , and decides to find out what is wrong with him . Meanwhile , Dr. Eric Foreman ( Omar Epps ) , thinks the other diagnostic team members don 't respect him , while Amber Volakis ( Anne Dudek ) and House try to create a deal in which they can both spend time with Dr. James Wilson ( Robert Sean Leonard ) . 
 " No More Mr. Nice Guy " was watched by approximately 14 million viewers , making it the night 's second most watched program , behind Dancing with the Stars . The episode gained mixed reviews from critics . Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times stated that the episode was " The worst House episode ever " , while Gina Dinunno of TV Guide commented that she thought the episode was " pretty good " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The local nurses ' union for the Princeton @-@ Plainsboro Teaching Hospital is on strike . Jeff , the husband of Deb ( Chad Morgan ) , one of the nurses , collapses while walking the picket line . At the emergency room , House suspects Jeff 's extreme niceness and inability to get angry is a major symptom of an underlying condition . After various tests , the team suspects his niceness is a personality change resulting from syphilis . Kutner ( Kal Penn ) asks the couple if either of them had an affair , which could lead to syphilis . Deb denies it , stating that it is just the way her husband behaves and that it is impossible for her to not love him . 
 At the same time , House is annoyed because he is not able to spend enough time with his friend , James Wilson . He attempts to negotiate with Amber , Wilson 's girlfriend , about conditions under which they can both have Wilson 's company . They are at a standstill , thus House seeks Lisa Cuddy 's ( Lisa Edelstein ) resolution . However , she will only lay out the conditions if House does his team 's performance reviews ( knowing that he hates doing paperwork ) . House relents and Cuddy sets the rules , although House has Foreman do the team reviews instead . 
 To further interest the case , House manipulates the team , Cameron ( Jennifer Morrison ) , and Chase ( Jesse Spencer ) , by swapping his own blood sample , leading them to believe he too has syphilis , perhaps the cause for his misanthropic , curmudgeon personality and unfriendliness . He then pretends to get a nicer personality , but gets less able as a doctor as he pretends to take the penicillin they prescribe him , and everyone falls for House 's trick ( which he has confided to Wilson ) . Meanwhile , Foreman believes he isn 't getting the respect he deserves from Kutner , Taub ( Peter Jacobson ) and Thirteen ( Olivia Wilde ) , when he tries to do their performance reviews , which he believes is due to House frequently humiliating him . House replies that if he did not humiliate and taunt Foreman , he would not be strong and able enough to handle the rest of the team . 
 After House violates one of the conditions set by Cuddy , Amber informs the team of House 's ruse of faking syphilis . This discovery leads Kutner to suspect that Jeff 's actual , positive syphilis result might really be the result of a parasite called Chagas ' disease , which he contracted while working in the jungles of Costa Rica years ago . The diagnosis is confirmed : the parasite embedded itself in Jeff 's brain during his stay in the country , thus causing the shift in his personality and giving him the inability to be angry . At the end of the episode the only evident change is that the patient says he now does not like ketchup , although he does wonder aloud to his wife , " I wonder what else I don 't like , " which appears to make her anxious . 
 With the case solved , House hands in the reviews to Cuddy , who discovers they are all the same . House also gives Cuddy a performance review . As punishment for not doing his team 's reviews properly and for breaking the rules she set between him and Amber , Cuddy has the two of them cleaning up bedridden patients together while outside in the corridor , Wilson smiles to himself , amused at the scene . 
 = = Production = = 
 " No More Mr. Nice Guy " was the fourth House episode written by David <unk> and the first he wrote along with David Shore . It was the second House episode directed by Deran Sarafian . When " Don 't Ever Change " aired on February 5 , 2008 , it was the final episode to air before mid @-@ season break due to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . On March 25 , 2008 , Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune reported that House would be returning April 29 , 2008 . In an interview with the Chicago Tribune , House creator David Shore commented that , although the characters of Cameron and Chase are not on screen as much as they used to be , they take on a different , and greater , weight with the " stuff " they are doing . " No More Mr. Nice Guy " was the first House episode to air after the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . The nurses ' strike in the episode was a reference to the WGA strike . In the episode Jason Lewis made a small uncredited appearance as Dr. Brock Sterling , a fictional doctor in House 's favorite soap opera Prescription Passion . Lewis appeared as Evan Greer , the fictional actor who portrays Dr. Sterling , in the next episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 With 14 @.@ 51 million viewers watching the show , " No More Mr. Nice Guy " was the second @-@ most watched program of the night , ranking behind Dancing with the Stars . The episode gained a 13 share in the ratings . Out of all programs broadcast by Fox Broadcasting Company between April 28 and May 4 , House was the third most watched , behind American Idol ( Tuesday and Wednesday ) . Jay Black of TV Squad noted that the first image in the episode after the two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half month writer 's strike @-@ induced break was a picket line . Barbara Barnett of Blog Critics Magazine stated that the episode was " a lot of fun , but slightly disappointing " . 
 James Chamberlin of IGN stated that the scenes in which Amber and House were working out terms for sharing Wilson were " hysterical " , and graded the episode with an 8 @.@ 5 ( out of 10 ) . Gina Dinunno of TV Guide thought the episode was pretty good , and the only thing she was not very fond of was that she felt that the characters of Robert Chase and Allison Cameron seemed " forced into the script " . Jessica Paff , from Zap2it , reported that she was pleased that the love triangle between House , Amber and Wilson went on , despite House 's blessing in the previous episode . Sara Morrison of Television Without Pity said she liked the jokes referring to " Thirteen " being bisexual . She graded the episode with an A + . Kal Penn submitted the episode on his behalf for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor - Drama Series , but the episode was not ultimately nominated . 
 = Ida Silverman = 
 Ida Silverman ( 31 October 1882 – 1 November 1973 ) was a Jewish philanthropist , who with her husband helped found approximately 100 synagogues , mostly in Israel . She is the only woman to have served as vice president of the Zionist Organization of America and the American Jewish Congress . 
 A Russian immigrant , Silverman arrived in the United States before she was a year old . Her family settled in Providence , Rhode Island , where she completed her schooling , married and had four children . While doing relief work during the First World War , she became aware of the depth of social problems and the effects of war on refugees . Joining the Zionist movement in the 1900s , within a decade she became a motivational speaker , advocating for the establishment of a permanent Jewish home in Palestine . 
 Between 1925 and the late 1940s , she logged over 600 @,@ 000 air @-@ miles traveling throughout the world , speaking and fund raising for the creation of a Jewish state . Even during World War II , she received special permission to travel into war @-@ torn areas to evaluate conditions . At the war 's end , Silverman turned her efforts toward building infrastructure in the new nation of Israel , but was also involved in philanthropy in her home state of Rhode Island , raising funds for hospitals and mental health organizations . 
 She received many honors and awards for her philanthropy including Jewish Mother of the Year , the Mizrachi Women 's Organization of America 's " Silver Medal " for building Israel , honorary doctorates , and jointly with her husband was inducted into the Rhode Island Heritage Hall of Fame in 1971 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Ida Marcia Camelhor was born on 31 October 1882 in Kovno , Russia to Mary ( née <unk> ) and Louis Camelhor ( also noted as Lieb <unk> ) . She was the only surviving child of a family of eight . Before her first birthday , her parents immigrated to New York and then when she was around ten years old , they moved to Providence , Rhode Island . She attended public grammar school and high school and , at sixteen years old , went to work as a bookkeeper for Archibald Silverman . Archibald , also an immigrant , had begun his career as a designer of costume jewelry . Together with his brother , Charles , he established the Silverman Brothers jewelry company in Providence in 1897 . After two years of working in the jewelry business , Camelhor agreed to marry her boss ; they wed in 1900 . 
 Archibald continued to work his way up and eventually became president of a bank and a philanthropist for Jewish causes . Though Ida was the spokesperson and " presence " of the causes in which the couple were involved , Archibald fully supported her participation and gave his time , moral support , and monetary contributions to further their philanthropy . He also understood and accepted that her work for others would always take precedence over her own household duties . 
 = = Career = = 
 By age 20 , Silverman had two children , and would soon have two more . She was involved in the community of Providence and social betterment programs . She founded and served as president of the Ladies Auxiliary of the Jewish Orphanage of Rhode Island . By 1906 , she was involved in the American Zionist Movement and rose to the national position of vice president of the Hadassah Women 's Zionist Organization of America . Relief work during World War I awakened her to the broad variety of social needs and she became an advocate of health care , poverty relief , and finding a permanent solution for Jewish refugees . In 1915 , Silverman founded the second Hadassah chapter in New England in Providence . She was a " skilled propagandist " , developing a wide following between 1915 and 1919 , and was known as a vigorous leader and talented orator . 
 Her first acknowledgement on the national level was her appointment in 1919 to honorary vice president of the American Jewish Congress ( AJC ) . Traditionally , the AJC leadership were more focused on European Jews than worldwide outreach and were of the aristocratic , wealthy , Reform tradition . By 1919 the organization had become more diverse and while not necessarily embracing the more radical aspects of Zionism , leaders allowed Zionist views to be expressed . Silverman , as an honorary official , could use the status to her advantage : while not officially speaking for the organization , she tacitly had AJC endorsement and was able to parlay that into support from the masses for causes and monetary contributions from elites . 
 = = = 1920s = = = 
 In 1925 Silverman made her first trip to Palestine and was able to use her experiences to gain speaking engagements in a variety of venues . Throughout the remainder of the 1920s , Silverman served as vice president of the Zionist Organization of America and vice chair of the hospital building fund for the Hebrew University . In addition to her national organizational work , Silverman was vice president of the New England Zionist Region , the New England Conference of Hadassah , and an honorary president of the Hadassah Organization in Providence . She is the only woman to have served as vice president of the Zionist Organization of America and the American Jewish Congress . 
 Silverman was an outspoken proponent for Israeli statehood , traveling throughout the Americas and Europe advocating for a Jewish homeland . She depicted the Jews who had resettled in Palestine as simple farmers , seeking an agrarian life to alleviate the hunger they had experienced elsewhere . Silverman stressed that the settlers ' intent was not to industrialize and vie with the international powerhouse nations , but simply to provide for their basic needs . Throughout 1927 and 1928 , her itinerary included a speaking engagement in Savannah , Georgia with Sir Wyndham Deedes , prior chief secretary of Palestine ; a tour of hospitals , clinics and public health programs in the Holy Land to determine how Hadassah could improve the health of the entire region , " without regard to race or creed " ; and attendance at the World Zionist Congress in Basel , Switzerland . Silverman resigned from Hadassah in 1928 in a policy dispute over the high salaries being paid to administrators rather than using the funds for charitable works . 
 = = = 1930s = = = 
 Despite the Great Depression , Silverman 's travels expanded in the 1930s , when she began spending 6 months each year outside the U.S. As early as 1932 , land purchase programs to buy and settle refugees on permanent homes in Palestine were being pursued by Jewish organizations . Silverman not only supported the plans and raised funds for them , but she planted the first tree in the colony at Wady <unk> . With Hitler 's rise to power , Silverman 's pleas for a safe haven for Jews became more urgent and her first @-@ hand reports from Germany , Austria , Hungary , Czechoslovakia , Lithuania , and Poland contained explicit accounts of conditions . In 1938 , Silverman was working with the Youth Aliyah Movement in conjunction with Hadassah in the U.S. to relocate 10 @,@ 000 refugee children to Palestine . As a fund @-@ raiser , Silverman 's goal was to raise a quarter of a million dollars for resettlement and youth training in agricultural and vocational pursuits . In 1939 , she ended her Polish tour studying the conditions and desperation , shortly before the Polish invasion , but the effort was successful in relocating some 7 @,@ 000 young people from Poland , Germany , Czechoslovakia , and Romania to Palestine before the end of 1940 . 
 = = = 1940s = = = 
 Because riots had broken out in the late 1930s over British proposals to partition Palestine , and U.S. diplomats including Sumner Welles proposed American alternatives , Silverman embarked on several tours of South America and the Caribbean in the early 1940s to determine if , as an alternative to Palestinian resettlement , European Jews could be established in the Dominican Republic , Peru , or Uruguay . She reported on her findings at the Inter @-@ American Conference in Baltimore , describing the alternatives as unfavorable and the attempt in the Dominican Republic , as a " failure " . She also wrote articles under the byline Mrs. Archibald Silverman , urging the emigration of Jews to Palestine rather than to other places – such as a Jewish colony in Sosúa , Dominican Republic , promoted by the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee in the early 1940s ; a plan to settle Jews in the Kimberley region of Australia ; and another proposal for a Jewish colony in Paramaribo , Suriname . Her articles were filled with vitriol against what she perceived as the " schemes " of Jewish organizers opposed to Zionism ; in a 1948 article titled " The Surinam Nightmare " , she " described ' diabolical plans ' to abandon Jewish ' guinea pigs ' to ' terrifying tropical diseases ' " . Eventually the alternative emigration plans were scrapped in the wake of the 1948 declaration of independence by the State of Israel . 
 After the Inter @-@ American Conference in Baltimore , Silverman continued her travels in South America , and then obtained special permission to travel through England , Scotland , and Ireland to raise money . Her collections were a resounding success , which she attributed to the acute understanding of homelessness experienced by British citizens who had been displaced during bombing raids . Anticipating the war 's end , Silverman increased efforts to buy land in Palestine , believing that if Jewish organizations owned land , when the Peace Conference occurred , bargaining would be in their favor . 
 As the war was ending in 1945 , Silverman was on the road , traveling through all the countries of Central America , in South America , New Zealand , Australia , and South Africa on fund @-@ raising missions . Then in 1946 , she was in Europe visiting refugee camps in Sweden and Occupied Germany , before returning to Palestine . By the end of the war , she had traveled 600 @,@ 000 air @-@ miles having visited every state in the United States , each province of Canada , Mexico , all of the countries in Central and South America , the West Indies , almost all of Western Europe , parts of Eastern Europe , Australia , New Zealand , Iran , Palestine , Morocco , and South Africa . 
 = = = 1950s and 1960s = = = 
 After the State of Israel was established , Silverman recognized the diverse needs to build the nation and she and Archibald channeled funds into planting orchards , building the Sharon Hotel , and supplementing the Synagogue Centre Building Fund . The Sharon Hotel , built in Herzliya , on the Sharon Plain , was part of an effort to build infrastructure and develop tourism sites to stimulate further growth . Silverman founded and served the board of the company which created the hotel . In the Jezreel Valley , she chaired a water development company and established a mixed @-@ fruit orchard of around 70 acres of trees . She also was involved in several projects in Rhode Island . In 1955 she founded and served as president of the Friends of Butler Hospital in an attempt to reopen the health center , which had been shut down . They were successful in proving its benefit to the community and the hospital reopened . In 1957 , Silverman served as chair of the fundraising for the Rhode Island Association of Mental Health . By the early @-@ 1960s , 33 synagogues throughout Israel had been built through the synagogue fund . During the two years she lived in Israel , she helped erect around 80 additional synagogues and by the time of Silverman 's death , the number was over 100 synagogues in Israel and elsewhere . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 In 1971 , at the age of 89 , Silverman immigrated to Israel . She died on 1 November 1973 in Herzliya , Israel and was buried in the Mount of Olives Jewish Cemetery near Jerusalem . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 In 1951 Silverman was honored as Jewish Mother of the Year by the Jewish National Fund , which established a forest in Israel bearing her name . In 1953 , a village in Israel , <unk> Ida , was named in her honor to recognize her years of financial and moral support , and in 1954 , she was honored as Rhode Island Mother of the Year . She received an honorary doctorate from Rhode Island College in 1954 and one from Bryant College in 1960 . In 1964 , she was awarded the Mizrachi Women 's Organization of America 's " Silver Medal " for having done the most to build Israel . 
 Silverman and her husband ( who had died in 1966 ) were jointly inducted into the Rhode Island Heritage Hall of Fame in 1971 . 
