 = Beautiful , Dirty , Rich = 
 " Beautiful , Dirty , Rich " is a song performed by American recording artist Lady Gaga from her debut studio album , The Fame . It was released as a promotional single from the album on September 16 , 2008 . It is an uptempo dance @-@ pop song that makes heavy use of synthesizers , and is lyrically about Gaga 's experiences as a struggling artist in the Lower East Side . She wrote the song while she was , as she says , " doing a lot of drugs " and " trying to figure things out . " 
 The song was met with critical acclaim , with reviewers complimenting the lyrics and the fun nature of the song . It also achieved minor commercial success , peaking at number eighty @-@ three on the UK Singles Chart . Two versions were released of the song 's accompanying music video – one was intercut with clips of the ABC television series , Dirty Sexy Money , serving as a promotion for the show , and the other was the full @-@ length video . Both versions feature Gaga and company dancing around in various locations of a mansion , and burning money . 
 Gaga has performed the song live several times , including on her first headlining The Fame Ball Tour , where she performed the song while wearing a futuristic bustier with silver triangular panels . The performance was praised by critics for Gaga 's " strong " vocals and her energy , and also for giving the show a strong beginning . 
 = = Background = = 
 Gaga said the song " was just me trying to figure things out " , and she later stated that she " was doing a lot of drugs " when she wrote the song . She claims it is about how " whoever you are or where [ ver ] you live – you can self @-@ proclaim this inner fame based on your personal style , and your opinions about art and the world , despite being conscious of it , " and also about her experiences as a struggling artist working in the Lower East Side . The line " Daddy , I 'm so sorry , I 'm so s @-@ s @-@ sorry , yeah " , according to Gaga , was inspired by " rich kids " in the area who she would hear calling their parents for money to buy drugs with . She added that " ultimately what I want people to take from it is ' Bang @-@ bang . ' No matter who you are and where you come from , you can feel beautiful and dirty rich . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Beautiful , Dirty , Rich " is an uptempo dance @-@ pop song which is more synth @-@ heavy compared to the mostly electronic songs on The Fame . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song has a moderate electro @-@ dance @-@ pop groove and it is composed in the key of B minor with a tempo of 120 beats per minute . The song is set in common time , and Gaga 's vocal range spans from A3 to D5 . It has a basic sequence of Bm – D5 – A ♭ – Bm – D5 – A ♭ as its chord progression . 
 During recording of the song , Gaga was reluctant to add any dance @-@ oriented beats to the song , and insisted on keeping its original rock version . However , music producer Rob Fusari convinced her that a drum machine would not hurt her integrity , telling her that Queen , who was one of Gaga 's musical inspirations , used it in their music . Fusari commented , " I think that 's what finally got her to give it a shot , [ ... ] We finished ' Beautiful , Dirty , Rich ' that day . It 's one of the songs on her debut album . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Beautiful , Dirty , Rich " received general acclaim from critics . Matthew Chisling of Allmusic used the song and " Paparazzi " as examples of how The Fame 's lyrics " salt and pepper the album with a nasty , club @-@ friendly feeling of fun and feistiness that an excellent , well @-@ produced dance album should have . " Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club called " LoveGame " and this song " propulsive club anthems " that " chug along on wave after wave of synths and programmed drums , resulting in a dizzying sonic trip that approximates the high point of a chemically enhanced night of club @-@ hopping . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said that Gaga " successfully [ tosses ] out <unk> " on the song . 
 The song debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number eighty @-@ nine due to strong digital downloads , on the issue dated February 21 , 2009 . On its second week , it rose to the eighty @-@ third position which is where it peaked , and the next week it dropped to number eighty @-@ seven , which was its final appearance on the chart . On the Billboard Dance / Electronic Digital Songs chart of April 3 , 2010 , the song reached a peak of number 28 . According to Nielsen Soundscan , the song has sold 275 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the United States . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video was filmed for the song and directed by Melina Matsoukas . There are two versions of the video — one intercut with clips from the ABC series Dirty Sexy Money and created to promote the show , and another which is the official video . The video is set in a mansion , and starts with Gaga making her way down a hallway with several people who are either walking behind her , holding an umbrella over her , dancing in front of her , or tossing dollar bills around her . Gaga and company are then featured in many repeatedly @-@ changing shots at various locations in the mansion . She is seen lying seductively on a table covered with money , crawling along a black grand piano and striking the keys with her leg several times , dancing around and later making out with a statue , and dancing in an elevator solo . There are also several close @-@ up shots of her burning money and later stuffing it into her mouth . Over the course of the video , she undergoes numerous costume changes . Singer @-@ songwriter Space Cowboy is also shown , most notably in scenes where he climbs a wall . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Gaga has performed " Beautiful , Dirty , Rich " live at the AOL Sessions , where she also performed " Just Dance , " an acoustic version of " Poker Face , " " Paparazzi , " and " LoveGame . " She also performed it at the MTV UK Live Sessions , also singing " Just Dance , " " LoveGame , " and " Poker Face . " She most notably performed the song on her first headlining The Fame Ball Tour . On the tour , it was preceded by the song " Paparazzi , " which ended with clicking cameras and a brief medley of " Starstruck " and " LoveGame . " The performance of " Beautiful , Dirty , Rich " followed , with Gaga frolicking with her dancers and wearing an " austere " blonde bob wig and a " sculptural bustier with futuristic triangular silver panels , and exaggerated peplum , " which was one of her six costumes over the course of the show . The song was the end of the first of four parts of the show , and was followed by a video clip , " The Brain , " which featured Gaga as her alter ego , Candy Warhol , brushing her hair . 
 The performance of the song , along with the rest of the first quarter of the show , was praised by Jim Harrington of San Jose Mercury News for giving the show a strong beginning , and Gaga 's vocal performance was also complimented . Mikael Wood of Rolling Stone was rather critical of the performance ; Wood claimed that it grew tiresome quickly but praised Gaga for her energy . Whitney Pastorek of Entertainment Weekly praised Gaga 's " strong " singing voice , adding , " The girl can , and does , sing . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Lady Gaga – vocals , songwriting , piano , synthesizer 
 Rob Fusari – songwriting , production 
 Tom <unk> – guitar 
 Calvin " Sci @-@ Fidelty " Gaines – bass guitar , programming 
 Dave <unk> – drums 
 Robert Orton – audio mixing 
 Gene Grimaldi – audio mastering at Oasis Mastering , Burbank , California 
 Recorded at 150 Studios , Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills , New Jersey 
 Credits adapted from The Fame album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certification = = 
 = Because You Left = 
 " Because You Left " is the television season premiere of the American Broadcasting Company 's fifth season of the serial drama television series Lost . The episode is the 87th episode of the show overall , and was written by executive producers / show runners Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse and directed by co @-@ executive producer Stephen Williams . It first aired on January 21 , 2009 , on ABC in the United States and was simulcast on A in Canada . It aired immediately after a clip @-@ show that recaps the first four seasons and aired back @-@ to @-@ back with the next episode , " The Lie " . 
 In 2007 , Jack Shephard and Benjamin Linus start their quest to reunite the " Oceanic 6 " . Hugo " Hurley " Reyes and Sayid Jarrah are ambushed at their safehouse . Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon is confronted by Charles Widmore . Kate Austen and Aaron Littleton flee from their home after being ordered to submit a maternity test . At the island , James " Sawyer " Ford , Daniel Faraday , Juliet Burke , Charlotte Lewis , Miles Straume , John Locke and the other survivors of Oceanic 815 left on the island erratically jump through time upon the island 's move . " Because You Left " averaged 11 @.@ 347 million viewers in the United States , and received good reviews , praising the writing and the unraveling of new elements . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins in the late 1970s , when the Dharma Initiative has begun to build stations on the island . Dr. Pierre Chang ( François Chau ) begins to film the orientation film for the Arrow Station , when he is informed of an incident at the construction site of the Orchid Station . Upon arriving there , he realizes that the workers have found the " unlimited " energy source that the Dharma Initiative has been looking for , which will enable them to manipulate time . As he leaves the station , he bumps into Daniel Faraday ( Jeremy Davies ) , who is dressed as a Dharma construction worker . 
 On December 30 , 2004 , following the island being moved in " There 's No Place Like Home " , the survivors of Oceanic Flight 815 , the freighter team , and Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) begin to erratically jump through time , while the Others are unaffected . The first jump takes them to the day when the Beechcraft carrying Mr. Eko 's brother crashes onto the island . John Locke is shot in the leg by Ethan Rom ( William Mapother ) , who has not yet met him and therefore does not recognize him . Meanwhile , James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) , Juliet and the freighter team head to the Swan Station in order to determine when they are . A second jump brings the group forward in time to after the destruction of the station , saving Locke from Ethan in the process . When pressed for an explanation by Sawyer , Daniel Faraday likens the experience to a record skipping . Locke is approached by Richard Alpert ( Nestor Carbonell ) , who recognizes Locke and treats his wound . He informs Locke that they will be strangers at their next meeting , and thus gives him a compass to get his younger self to trust Locke . He explains that the only way to stop the erratic movements through time is to bring back everyone who has left the island , and to do that Locke will have to die . Another jump brings them to the past , and they find that the Swan station is now intact . Sawyer tries to contact Desmond Hume ( Henry Ian Cusick ) , who is inside , but Daniel asserts that the past can not be changed , and since Desmond didn 't know Sawyer already when they first met ( later in Desmond 's timeline ) , Sawyer cannot be successful . No one answers , and everyone heads back to the beach . Daniel stays behind and knocks again , and Desmond emerges dressed in a hazmat suit , thus belying Daniel 's original assertion . Daniel tells him that if Desmond 's future self and the survivors of 815 make it off the island on the helicopter then he should go to Oxford University and find Daniel 's mother , in order to help the survivors . Another jump occurs just before Daniel can give his mother 's name . 
 In 2007 , back in Los Angeles , two lawyers visit Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) . They deliver a court order for a maternity test for her and Aaron , Claire Littleton 's ( Emilie de Ravin ) son , whom Kate is raising as her own , but refuse to reveal their client 's identity . In London while en route to Los Angeles , Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon ( Yunjin Kim ) is confronted by Charles Widmore ( Alan Dale ) at the airport . She tells him that she wants to kill Benjamin Linus ( Michael Emerson ) , a desire they seem to have in common . Following Hugo " Hurley " Reyes 's ( Jorge Garcia ) breakout of a mental institution , he and Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) go to a safehouse , which has been infiltrated by two armed men . Sayid kills the men , but not before one of them shoots him with two potent drugged darts , knocking him unconscious . Meanwhile , Ben and Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) have left the funeral parlor with Locke 's body . They discover that Hurley has broken out , hindering Ben 's plan to reunite the Oceanic Six . On a boat in an unknown location , Desmond wakes up , having remembered what Daniel told him , and sets off for Oxford . 
 = = Production = = 
 Following a writing " mini @-@ camp " to map out the fifth season , the premiere 's script was written and filming began on August 19 . Show runners Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse wrote " Because You Left " , and decided to put in the episode a setup for most elements of season 5 , specially time travel . In order to avert implementing the time travel in a confusing way , the exposition of Faraday 's theories was rewritten to start earlier and be more specific . While previous seasons had been filmed in high definition , this season premiere was the first Lost episode to be edited in it . 
 Lindelof stated that " When season five starts , you won 't know when or where you are . And the way we tell stories will be different too " , and confirmed that the " whooshing sound " effect will continue to be used as the transition for the new storytelling device . When asked if episodes continue to focus on specific and different characters , actor Jorge Garcia , who portrays Hurley Reyes , replied that " It 's not as clear cut as it 's been in the past . We don 't have the moments where someone stares off into space and then we cut to something that happened in their previous life . They 've gone in a slightly different direction as far as how they 're telling the story and they 're definitely trying to show what 's going on with more people in every given episode . " The script included scenes with all the main characters , including Desmond in the ending , because the writers felt that after a long break the audience would like to see every character again . Like the previous three season openers , the opening scene was meant to make viewers " not supposed to have any sense of where and when we are " . But while the other premieres had the teaser connecting into the main plot of the episode , the writers decided to put a scene that would only return in the fourteenth episode , " The Variable " . The time flashes were designed in a way that demonstrated both the castaways at the beach and John Locke in the jungle were " skipping " to the same time periods , and also to show that time travel was painful for the characters . 
 In regard to what Lindelof described as " the Zodiac boat with Faraday and the five people that have never spoken a line on show " , executive producer / writer / show runner Carlton Cuse said that " I 'd be a little bit more worried about the non @-@ line speakers than Faraday " , while Lindelof added that " things are looking up for Faraday " and " there is a monsoon coming . " Regarding the background survivors in general , Carlton Cuse has responded that there is " a very tragic event that happens this season . " According to Lindelof , Neil " Frogurt " ( Sean Whalen ) , a background survivor who has appeared solely in the Lost : Missing Pieces mobisodes , " will rise up this season in the grand tradition of Dr. Arzt [ Daniel Roebuck ] to let his feelings be known . " Sawyer is shirtless throughout the episode . Cuse jokingly justified as that " for people who really couldn 't grasp the time travel aspects of the show , there would be Sawyer without his shirt on for the entire hour . " His actor , Josh Holloway , kept fit in the summer break before shooting and noted this as " really disturbing . Coming after a hiatus , that ain 't fair ! " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The fifth season of Lost was promoted with a music video for the song " You Found Me " by The Fray intercut with new Lost scenes and the tagline , " Destiny Calls " . Television critic Maureen Ryan of The Chicago Tribune has deemed the latter an " endlessly <unk> slogan " ; Don Williams of BuddyTV gave a more positive review , summing it up as " a fitting way to describe the upcoming season . " The staff of TV.com ranked the fifth season first on their " Most Anticipated of Early 2009 " list . Christopher Rosen of The New York Observer went so far as to deem the return of Lost a " bigge [ r ] event " than other happenings in that week , specifically the unveiling of the 81st Academy Awards nominations and the United States presidential inauguration of Barack Obama . " Because You Left " , as well as the following episode " The Lie " averaged 11 @.@ 347 million viewers in the US , and 1 @.@ 195 million in the UK . The episode , aired by itself , brought in 405 @,@ 000 Australian viewers . " Because You Left " and " The Lie " were uploaded to ABC 's media website — ABC Medianet — on December 29 , 2008 to be viewed by members of the press for advance reviews attached to limited confidentiality agreements . " Because You Left " was first broadcast on January 21 , 2009 on ABC in the United States and was simulcast on A in Canada , back @-@ to @-@ back with the next episode , " The Lie " . Before the broadcast was aired " Lost : Destiny Calls " , a clip @-@ show recapping the first four seasons . It marked Lost 's return to its original timeslot on Wednesdays . 
 Reviews were positive . James Poniewozik of Time thought that " Because You Left " provided a good balance of characterization and mythology and commended the character of Faraday , partially " because a perfectly @-@ cast Jeremy Davies has turned him into a likeable , flawed , brusque , slightly @-@ in @-@ over @-@ his @-@ head nebbish @-@ god . " Matt Mitovich of TV Guide stated that the premiere " offer [ s ] compelling twists … the foundation is laid for a pivotal penultimate season … it sends the mind reeling and <unk> infinite possibilities . " Robert Bianco of USA Today wrote that " it 's hard to name a series that is as engaging , surprising and flat @-@ out gorgeous as Lost , or one in which every effort and penny expended seems to be put to shimmering good use . This is an epic big @-@ screen adventure done for the small screen — and done in a way that makes most big @-@ screen versions pale in comparison . " Bianco also commended the characterizations , noting them as realistic and compelling . Maureen Ryan of The Chicago Tribune praised the opening sequence , calling it " really , really great … nerd @-@ tastic for [ the ] hardcore Lost fan ; it 's full of shout @-@ outs and callbacks to classic Lost moments and trivia . " She concluded that the premiere is " quite good " ( three and a half out of four stars ) with " a lot to like " , specifically the expanded screen time for Faraday ; however , Ryan expressed difficulty in understanding the use of time ( travel ) in the show and felt that one to two more viewings were warranted for her to give a better review of that aspect . Verne Gay of Newsday summed up that " The season 's premiere represents pig @-@ in @-@ the @-@ python storytelling — there 's so much to work through , so many details , stories , characters and time dimensions to attend to , that after a while this all starts to feel like a very full meal . A bloated feeling may result . " Among other pieces of praise , Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle was impressed by the " parallel plotting " of the characters on and off the island in different times . Despite deeming the premiere " riveting " and the script " tantalizing as ever " , Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe had a mixed response , for he worried that he would not be able to handle a season 's worth of time travel , stating that " I may be alone in this , and I hope I will be proven wrong , but I expected the solution to " Lost " to be more metaphysical , and more original , than simply people being unstuck in time . " Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger deemed it " really good , in terms of keeping the momentum from last season going , servicing the characters and their emotions , and providing an appropriate number of ' Whoa 's per hour . " In a three out of four stars review , Thomas Connor of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times stated that " the time @-@ travel training wheels are coming off — and the path thus far seems blissfully free of the usual stumbling blocks " , due to the previous four seasons of " baby steps " that set up the science fiction driven fifth season . Caryn Kunz of the Honolulu Advertiser said that " This was a great episode to get back into every aspect of our favorite show : relationships , mythology , reunions / cameos , and enough whoa moments to keep me on the edge of my seat throughout . " 
 Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly summed up the entirety of the premiere as " pretty cool " and " worth the wait " . He wrote that " Lost 's tradition of opening the year with a killer , capture @-@ the @-@ imagination sequence is honored and upheld , though the thing I loved most was how it was brazenly frank ( and engagingly funny ) about the heady high @-@ concept conceit that will define the season . " Brian Lowry of Variety concluded that " Lost … approaches its twists with what appears to be a greater degree of intellectual rigor than almost anything else on primetime . Even when it 's difficult to keep track of the myriad connections , a sense lingers that somebody knows — which is strangely reassuring . " Despite being more interested in the romantic aspirations of the show 's characters , Jennifer Godwin of E ! remarked that " the Lost mythology is a miracle to behold . It 's grandiose , compelling , <unk> and , despite what the haters would have you believe , altogether satisfying " . Katherine Nichols of the Honolulu Star @-@ Bulletin enjoyed the opening scene , " but the rest of it didn 't capture [ her ] as [ she ] hoped it would " , citing high expectations due to the eight @-@ month hiatus after the fourth season finale and a possible " yearning for more character @-@ driven stories over machinations revolving around time travel , however clever they might be . " John Kubicek of BuddyTV said that " the opening scene itself will leave your mouth wide open and you 'll probably forget to close it for a few minutes . " He also wrote the premiere episodes " are vintage Lost , full of some unbelievable twists and a whole lot of groundwork " . H.T. Strong of Ain 't It Cool News said that " Because You Left " " is a corker , aggressively advancing the story in all kinds of directions . " 
 = Llandaff Cathedral = 
 Llandaff Cathedral ( Welsh : Eglwys <unk> Llandaf ) is an Anglican cathedral in Llandaff , Cardiff , Wales . It is the seat of the Bishop of Llandaff , head of the Church in Wales Diocese of Llandaff . It is dedicated to Saint Peter and Saint Paul , and also to three Welsh saints : Dubricius ( Welsh : Dyfrig ) , Teilo and Oudoceus ( Welsh : <unk> ) . It is one of two cathedrals in Cardiff , the other being the Roman Catholic Cardiff Cathedral in the city centre . 
 The current building was constructed in the 12th century over the site of an earlier church . Severe damage was done to the church in 1400 during the rebellion of Owain Glyndŵr , during the English Civil War when it was overrun by Parliamentarian troops , and during the Great Storm of 1703 . By 1717 , the damage to the cathedral was so extensive that the church seriously considered removal of the see . Following further storms in the early 1720s , a new cathedral began construction in 1734 , designed by John Wood , the Elder . During the Cardiff Blitz of the Second World War in January 1941 , the cathedral was severely damaged when a parachute mine was dropped ; blowing the roof off the nave , south aisle and chapter house . The stonework which remains from the medieval period is primarily Somerset Dundry stone , though local blue lias constitutes most of the stonework done in the post @-@ Reformation period . The work done on the church since World War II is primarily concrete and Pennant sandstone , and the roofs , of Welsh slate and lead , were added during the post @-@ War rebuilding . In February 2007 , the organ was damaged during a severe lightning strike , prompting a fundraiser of £ 1 @.@ 5 million to raise money for an entirely new organ . 
 For many years , the cathedral had the traditional Anglican choir of boys and men , and more recently a girls ' choir , with the only dedicated choir school in the Church in Wales , the Cathedral School , Llandaff . The cathedral contains a number of notable tombs , including Dubricius , a 6th century Briton Saint who evangelised <unk> ( now Archenfield ) and much of South @-@ East Wales , Meurig ap Tewdrig , King of Gwent , Teilo , a 6th century Welsh clergyman , church founder and Saint , and many Bishops of Llandaff , from the 7th century Oudoceus to the 19th century Alfred Ollivant , who was Bishop from 1849 to 1882 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Medieval period = = = 
 Llandaff Cathedral was built on the site of an existing church . According to tradition , the community was established by Saint Dubricius at a ford on the River Taff and the first church was founded by Dubricius ' successor , Saint Teilo . These two are regarded as the cathedral 's patron saints , along with their successor Oudoceus . The original church is no longer extant , but a standing Celtic cross testifies to the presence of Christian worship at the site in pre @-@ Norman times . 
 The Normans occupied Glamorgan early in the Norman conquest , appointing Urban their first bishop in 1107 . He began construction of the cathedral in 1120 and had the remains of Saint Dyfrig transferred from Bardsey . After the death of Urban , it is believed the work was completed some time in the last years of Bishop Nicholas ap <unk> , who died in 1183 . The cathedral was dedicated to St Peter and St Paul , St Dubricius , St Teilo and St Oudoceus . 
 Bishop Henry de Abergavenny organised the Llandaff Cathedral chapter circa 1214 . He appointed fourteen prebends , eight priests , four deacons and two sub @-@ deacons . De Abergavenny also made changes to Llandaff 's episcopal seal , giving more detail to the figure of the bishop depicted on it and adding the phrase " by the grace of God " to its inscription . The west front dates from 1220 and contains a statue of St Teilo . By 1266 , the structure that Urban began had been altered ; the cathedral was dedicated again in 1266 . 
 The Lady Chapel was built by William de Braose , bishop from 1266 to 1287 . It was built at the rear of the church constructed by Urban and the old choir area was removed in order to build the chapel . From this time on , it seemed as if the cathedral was in a constant state of repair or alterations at a slow pace . After the Lady Chapel had been completed , the two bays of the north choir aisle were rebuilt . 
 Severe damage was done to the church in 1400 during the rebellion of Owain Glyndŵr ; his forces also destroyed the Bishop 's Palace at Llandaff . The damage was extensive enough to cause Bishop Blethyn to notify his fellow clergymen in 1575 that he believed the cathedral to possibly be damaged beyond repair . Most of the other damage was repaired , most notably by Bishop Marshall , whose reredos partly survives . The northwest tower , the one without a spire , was added by Jasper Tudor and is now named after him . He assumed the lordship of Cardiff after the accession to the throne of his nephew , King Henry VII of England . 
 Late medieval tombs include that of Sir David Mathew of Llandaff ( 1400 – 1484 ) . Sir David ap Mathew was " Grand Standard Bearer of England " , granted under King Edward IV , for saving his life at the Battle of Towton as part of the War of the Roses . 
 = = = Post medieval to Victorian period = = = 
 During the English Civil War , the cathedral was overrun by Parliamentarian troops . Along with other destruction , the troops seized the books of the cathedral library , taking them to Cardiff Castle , where they were burned along with many copies of the Book of Common Prayer . Among those invited to the castle to warm themselves by the fire on that cold winter day , were the wives of some sequestered clergymen . Also during this time of unrest , a man named Milles , who claimed to be a practising Puritan , appropriated portions of the cathedral for his own gain . Milles set up a tavern in the cathedral , used part of it as a stable , turned the choir area into a pen for his calves and used the font as a trough for his pigs . 
 The southwest tower suffered major damage in the Great Storm of 1703 and by 1720 , was in a state of collapse . The damage to the cathedral was so extensive that the church seriously considered removal of the see to Cardiff in 1717 . Between 1720 and 1723 , a series of storms proceeded to damage the cathedral further , bringing down sections of the roof as well as other destruction . The collapse of 1723 forced worship services to be confined to the Lady Chapel and closed the western entrance of the cathedral entirely . 
 Thirty years after the cathedral roof collapsed , the chapter asked an architect , John Wood , the Elder , to prepare estimates and plans to restore the cathedral . In 1734 , work began on a new cathedral , designed by Wood . Wood produced an Italian temple style edifice , working only on the eastern portion of the building , while leaving the remaining western half in ruins . What Wood was trying to build at Llandaff was not Italian , but a recreation of Solomon 's Temple . Another sixteen years passed before the chapter solicited funds to repair the western half of the building . Wood 's plans were to replace the western entrance of the cathedral with a tower and rustic porch . No changes were made to the western entrance until Wyatt and Prichard began their work in 1841 , when the damage to the western portion of the structure was repaired and all traces of the Italian temple work by Wood had been removed from the cathedral . 
 During the 19th century , the Bishop began to reside in Llandaff for the first time in centuries ; no bishops of the see resided in Llandaff for almost 300 years . In 1836 , there was another unsuccessful attempt to transfer the see — this time to Bristol . After the attempt at transferring the see , the office of Dean was restored to Llandaff ; the position had not been filled in 700 years . The office of Dean was separated from that of the Archdeacon of Llandaff in November 1843 . The restoration of the Dean 's office was the beginning of better times for the cathedral . The new Dean , William Bruce Knight , was instrumental in bringing about the much @-@ needed restorations . 
 Enough restoration had been completed to allow the cathedral to be reopened for worship on 16 April 1857 . The see of Gloucester lent their cathedral choir for this service , making it possible to hear choral music in Llandaff Cathedral for the first time since 1691 . The restoration done up to this point was to remove all traces of the Italian temple and to repair damages caused by the attempt to transform the cathedral by Wood . Arches with beautiful moulding were hidden by walls , <unk> were removed from their original positions and reredos had been covered with plaster or hidden with walls . 
 A meeting was held after the service and a detailed restoration plan was announced at the meeting along with a list for those wishing to donate to the work . Edward VII , ( then Prince of Wales ) and the Marquess of Bute were among those who pledged donations , which were large enough to allow the restoration work to continue immediately . The cathedral was extensively restored , the tower rebuilt and a spire added . Much of the restoration work was completed by local architect John Prichard between 1843 and 1869 . A triptych by Dante Gabriel Rossetti was designed for use as a reredos , and a new stained glass window , Shipwreck of St Paul , was designed by Ford Madox Brown . Sir Edward Burne @-@ Jones designed the porcelain panels Six Days of Creation in St Dyfrig 's Chapel . 
 From 1691 until circa 1860 , there was no choir at the cathedral . There was also no organ for some time . Browne Willis ' 1719 account describes the ruins of an organ given to the cathedral by Lady <unk> of Cefn Mably found in the organ loft at that time . In 1860 , Alfred Ollivant , who was then Bishop of <unk> , published a book , Some Account of the Condition of the Fabric of Llandaff Cathedral , from 1575 to the present time , intended to raise funds to restore the cathedral 's choir and to purchase a new organ . A cathedral school of some type has existed since the 9th century . Dean Vaughan reorganised the school in 1888 . Since 1978 , the cathedral school has accepted female pupils . 
 = = = 20th and 21st centuries = = = 
 On the evening of 2 January 1941 during the Second World War , the cathedral was severely damaged when a parachute mine was dropped near it during the Cardiff Blitz , blowing the roof off the nave , south aisle and chapter house . The top of the spire also had to be reconstructed and there was also damage to the organ . The Sunday after the bombing , worship took place in the Deanery . Work soon began to clear the Lady Chapel and the Sanctuary and to repair the roof in these areas . This was not completed until April 1942 . Further work was not possible until the end of the war and the repaired areas served as a place of worship until 1957 . Of British cathedrals , only Coventry Cathedral was damaged more , during the infamous Coventry Blitz . Due to its importance , it received Grade I building status on 2 December 1952 . 
 Major restorations and reconfigurations were carried out under architect George Pace of York , and the building was back in use in June 1958 . The Queen attended a service celebrating the completion of the restoration on 6 August 1960 . The Welch Regiment memorial chapel was constructed , and Sir Jacob Epstein created the figure of Christ in Majesty which is suspended above the nave on a concrete arch designed by George Pace . 
 Pace presented two options to replace the pulpitum which was not part of the cathedral restoration done earlier by Pritchard . One was for a baldacchino having four columns with a suitable painting beneath it . The other was for a double wishbone arch topped by a hollow drum to house the division of the organ . The figure of " Christ in Glory " would be installed on the west face of the drum . This proposal was accepted by the Dean and the cathedral chapter . They approached the War Damage Commission about whether funds initially meant for replacement of stained glass damaged in the bombing could be used for art in other media . This permission helped to finance the <unk> figure . 
 In February 2007 the cathedral suffered a severe lightning strike . Particular damage was caused to the electrics of the organ , which was already in poor condition . The instrument was not able to be used after the lightning damage . This prompted the 2007 launch of an appeal to raise £ 1 @.@ 5 million for the construction of an entirely new organ . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The original pre @-@ Norman church was recorded in the 12th century Book of Llandaff to have been no more than 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) long , 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide and 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high . It contained low , narrow aisles with an apsidal porticus measuring 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) long . Construction began of a grander building under the orders of the second Norman bishop of Llandaff , Urban , in the 1120s , to administer power over the newly formed diocese . It doesn 't appear to have lasted long as an extensive construction was ordered between 1193 and 1218 during the episcopate of Henry of Abergavenny . The western parts replaced those that Urban had built , and the nave and front of this side remain today . The fine craftsmanship and subtlety of the architecture show a clear similarity to those of Glastonbury Abbey and Wells Cathedral , so it is probable that several of the leading craftsman of Somerset were hired for the building . 
 Though some remodelling work was done in the 13th and 14th centuries , with a northwest tower funded by Jasper Tudor , lord of Glamorgan from 1484 – 95 , by the late 16th century the church had fallen into a state of disrepair . In 1594 the bishop complained that the cathedral was " more like a desolate and profane place than like a house of prayer and holy exercises " . The church continued to exist in a poor state , so that by 1692 choral services had to be suspended in fear that the roof would collapse . The battlements of the northwestern tower blew away during a storm in 1703 , and the southwest tower fell down in 1722 . In 1734 , John Wood of Bath was hired to restore the cathedral , but his work on the temple was still not complete by 1752 and remained that way . It was not until 1840 that in the wake of industrial development in Cardiff that the cathedral could raise the funds to commence a full restoration . 
 T. H. Wyatt was hired to restore the Lady Chapel in 1841 , but due to other commitments later left much of the work to John Prichard , who worked the most extensively on the church in the 1840s and 1850s . Prichard had restored the sanctuary by 1850 , and by 1852 he had begun to work on the nave , largely demolishing much of the temple Wood had built . Together with London @-@ based John Pollard Seddon , who was able to hire pre @-@ Raphaelite artists Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Thomas Woolner , extensive developments were made . Morris & Co. provided the stained glass in the 1860s . Prichard was responsible for a dramatic redevelopment of the southwest tower in 1867 @-@ 9 , aided by a number of talented artists and craftsmen . 
 In 1941 , a landmine exploded near the south aisle of the cathedral , resulting in the roof of the nave collapsing and the shattering of the windows . Sir Charles Nicholson was hired to rebuild the roof , and made the decision to remove the altarpiece that Rossetti had added to the north aisle . In 1949 , Nicholson was replaced with George Pace of York , who in coordination with the dean at the time , Glyn Simon , saw a number of improvements in the modern style , though many fittings were clearly still influenced by the Gothic . 
 The material of the church which remains from the medieval period is primarily Somerset Dundry stone , though Sutton stone and local blue lias also make up the stonework , with the latter constituting most of the stonework done in the post @-@ Reformation period . The work done on the church since World War II is primarily concrete and Pennant sandstone . The roofs , added in the post @-@ war period , are made of Welsh slate and lead . The West front of the cathedral is gabled along its length and contains the grand central doorway , higher in level than the floor of the nave . It is described as being " double lobed " with an " arched head with continuous chamfer outline , colonnettes and <unk> " . 
 The south side of the nave is characterised by eight bays with stepped buttresses between them , with aisle windows featuring reticulated heads . At the side of the south aisle of the sanctuary is Chapter House , a small , square building , of two storeys . It dates to the mid 13th century and is made from Chipping Camden and Bath limestone , with some local red sandstone from Radyr . The octagonal roof was the brainchild of Prichard , though it was lowered in pitch by Pace and later worked on by Donald Buttress . The buttresses of the building are made from ashlar . The seven stained glass roundels are of 16th century Flemish origin . In the interior is a pulpit featuring Moses . Also of note is the St David 's Chapel , added by George Pace in 1953 – 56 , which is accessed through the Norman north door of the cathedral . 
 = = Music = = 
 For many years , the cathedral had the traditional Anglican choir of boys and men , and more recently a girls ' choir , with the only dedicated choir school in the Church in Wales , the Cathedral School , Llandaff . In addition , the parish choir sings at the weekly Parish Eucharist , and is a mixed choir of boys , girls , men and women . The cathedral has a ring of twelve bells ( with an additional " flat sixth " , to make thirteen in total ) hung for change @-@ ringing , located in the Jasper tower . The current bells were installed in 1992 , replacing a previous ring of ten . Only one other church in Wales has a ring of twelve bells ; the cathedral is the only church in Cardiff with a set of twelve bells . 
 The organ , dating from 1900 , had been rebuilt in 1937 and again after the wartime damage ; it was never entirely satisfactory , even before the lightning damage made it unusable . Originally it had been planned to install a new organ at that time , but the costs of about £ 1 million were deemed to be too high in the austere climate of post @-@ war Britain . Work on installing the new organ , by the Nicholson 's of Malvern firm of organ builders , began in autumn 2008 . Though not fully completed , it was brought to a playable stage by Easter 2010 and had its inaugural performance ( the Gloria of Louis Vierne 's Messe <unk> ) at the Easter Vigil service on 3 April 2010 . Proceeds from the 2011 Llandaff Festival of Music were donated to the cathedral for the completion of the new organ . The remaining stops were added in the late summer of 2013 . This is the first entirely new organ for a British cathedral since the Coventry installation in the 1960s . 
 In 2012 the cathedral premiered its own record label with a recording called <unk> . The music focuses on both the new cathedral organ and the Llandaff Cathedral choir . The recording 's title was taken from the Jacob Epstein sculpture in the cathedral 's nave that was part of the post war renewal of the structure . Proceeds from sales of the record were donated to African charities . In December 2013 , five days before Christmas , the cathedral chapter announced that all salaried adult members of the choir ( altos , tenors and basses ) were being made redundant , along with the assistant organist . The cathedral was in the midst of a financial crisis , and the chapter intended to save £ 45 @,@ 000 a year by taking these measures . 
 = = = List of organists = = = 
 = = = Assistant organists = = = 
 Arthur Charles Edwards 1894 
 R. M. <unk> 1940 – ? 
 V. Anthony Lewis c . 1948 – 1966 
 Graham John Elliott 1966 – 1970 ( afterwards organist of St Asaph Cathedral ) 
 Anthony Burns @-@ Cox 1970 – 1980 <unk> organist of Romsey Abbey 
 Michael <unk> <unk> 1980 – 2010 
 James Norrey 2010 – 2012 ( afterwards Assistant Director of Music at Newcastle Cathedral ) 
 Sachin Gunga 2012 – 2013 ( post dissolved December 2013 ) 
 = = Burials = = 
 Dubricius , 6th @-@ century Briton Saint who evangelised <unk> ( now Archenfield ) and much of South @-@ East Wales ; his body was transferred to Llandaff Cathedral in 1120 . 
 Meurig ap Tewdrig , King of Gwent and the husband of <unk> , daughter of <unk> Fawr , who was a cousin of Dubricius 
 Teilo , 6th @-@ century Welsh clergyman , church founder and Saint 
 Oudoceus , 7th @-@ century third Bishop of Llandaff , was supposedly buried at the church in Llandaff on the site where the present Cathedral now stands . 
 Henry de Abergavenny , Bishop of Llandaff ( 1193 – 1218 ) 
 William de Braose ( bishop ) , Bishop of Llandaff ( 1266 – 1287 ) 
 John of Monmouth ( bishop ) , Bishop of Llandaff ( 1297 – 1323 ) 
 Edmund de Bromfield , Bishop of Llandaff ( 1390 – 1393 ) 
 John Paschal , Bishop of Llandaff ( 1347 – 1361 ) 
 John Smith , Bishop of Llandaff ( 1476 – 1478 ) 
 Sir David Mathew , ( 1484 ) 
 John Marshall ( bishop ) , Bishop of Llandaff ( 1478 – 1496 ) 
 Miles Salley , Bishop of Llandaff ( 1500 – 1516 / 17 ) 
 Hugh Lloyd ( bishop ) , Bishop of Llandaff ( 1660 – 1667 ) 
 Francis Davies , Bishop of Llandaff ( 1667 – 1675 ) 
 Edward Copleston , Bishop of Llandaff ( 1828 – 1849 ) 
 Alfred Ollivant , Bishop of Llandaff ( 1849 – 1882 ) 
 = The Beatles in the United States = 
 The Beatles ' rise to prominence in the United States in February 1964 was a significant development in the history of the band 's commercial success . In addition to establishing the Beatles ' international stature , it changed attitudes to popular music in the United States , whose own Memphis @-@ driven musical evolution had made it a global trend @-@ setter . 
 The Beatles ' first visit to the United States came at a time of great popularity in Britain . The band 's UK commercial breakthrough , in late 1962 , had been followed by a year of successful concerts and tours . The start of the Beatles ' popularity in the United States , in early 1964 , was marked by intense demand for the single " I Want to Hold Your Hand " — which sold one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half million copies in under three weeks — and the band 's arrival the following month . The visit , advertised across the United States on five million posters , was a defining moment in the Beatles ' history , and the starting @-@ point of the British Invasion . 
 Following popular television appearances and concerts during their February 1964 visit , the Beatles returned to the United States in August 1964 , and again in August 1965 , for tours . In August 1966 they returned once more , and although this tour was commercially successful , it coincided with a storm of U.S. public protest after publication of a quote from John Lennon 's remarks about Christianity . The 1966 U.S. tour marked the end of the Beatles ' concert days . The band ceased to perform commercial concerts , instead devoting their efforts to creating new material in the recording studio . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Impact of Beatlemania = = = 
 In the United Kingdom , the Beatles had experienced popularity since the start of 1963 . But in the United States , Capitol Records , owned by the band 's record company EMI , had for most of the year declined to issue any of the singles . The phenomenon of Beatlemania in the UK was regarded with amusement by the U.S. press , once it made any comment . When newspaper and magazine articles did begin to appear towards the end of 1963 , they cited the English stereotype of eccentricity , reporting that the UK had developed an interest in something that had come and gone a long time ago in the United States : rock and roll . Headlines included " The New Madness " and " Beatle Bug Bites Britain " , and writers employed word @-@ play linking " beetle " with the " infestation " afflicting the UK . In late 1963 , Capitol Records agreed to release the single " I Want to Hold Your Hand " with a large accompanying promotional campaign , due to Ed Sullivan 's agreement to headline the Beatles on The Ed Sullivan Show . The Beatles ' American television debut was on 18 November 1963 on The Huntley @-@ Brinkley Report , with a four @-@ minute long piece by Edwin Newman . On 22 November 1963 , the CBS Morning News ran a five @-@ minute feature on Beatlemania in the UK which heavily featured their then current UK hit " She Loves You . " The evening 's scheduled repeat was cancelled following the assassination of John F. Kennedy the same day . On 10 December , Walter Cronkite decided to transmit the piece again on the CBS Evening News , and the resulting interest led to the rush @-@ release of " I Want to Hold Your Hand " and — only weeks before the Beatles ' arrival — a U.S. commercial breakthrough . 
 = = = American political climate , early 1964 = = = 
 Eleven weeks before the Beatles ' arrival in the U.S. President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas , Texas . The nation was in mourning , in fear , and in disbelief . The assassination came after a fifteen @-@ year build @-@ up of Cold War tension . The motivation and identity of the assassin would be doubted by many Americans for decades , despite the Warren Commission 's issued report in September 1964 . As the United States tried to restore a sense of normality , teenagers in particular struggled to cope , as their disbelief began to be replaced by a personal reaction to what had happened : in school essays , teenagers wrote that " then it became real " , and " I was feeling the whole world is going to collapse on me " , and " I never felt so empty in all my life " . 
 = = = Musical influences = = = 
 The music industry in Memphis had large role in bringing bands to the attention of the American public , and in the 1960s , many British bands , among them the Beatles , aspired to emulate the sounds of Memphis musicians including Elvis Presley — without whom , according to Lennon , " there would not have been the Beatles " . The sudden popularity of the Beatles , and the British Invasion triggered by their arrival , became a major new influence in the United States , which not only established the popularity of British bands , but also affected the musical style of U.S. bands — including those subsequently formed in Memphis . 
 During their U.S. tours , the Beatles were introduced to both Elvis Presley and Bob Dylan . Strongly influenced by Presley since before their formation , the band had tried to meet him in the past , but arrangements had fallen through . At Presley 's suggestion , guitars were set up in his living room and the gathering played music for an hour , following which they discussed the music business and exchanged anecdotes . The other meeting , with Dylan , influenced the music subsequently produced by the Beatles as well as shaping Dylan 's own musical style . This was made evident both in Dylan 's controversial adoption of electric guitar , and in changes that were apparent in Lennon 's vocal and guitar @-@ playing styles . 
 However , before their visits to United States in 1964 the Beatles still doubted that they could bring anything new to the country . In apprehensive conversation among the Beatles on board the aircraft to New York February 1964 , McCartney had questioned , " They 've got their own groups . What are we going to give them that they don 't already have ? " 
 = = The Beatles ' U.S. performances = = 
 = = = February 1964 – First U.S. Concerts = = = 
 An estimated four thousand Beatles ' fans were present on 7 February 1964 as Pan Am Flight 101 left Heathrow Airport . Among the passengers were the Beatles , on their first trip to the United States as a band , with their entourage of photographers and journalists , and Phil Spector . When the group arrived at New York 's newly renamed John F. Kennedy Airport , they were greeted by a second large crowd , with Beatles fans again estimated to number four thousand , and journalists , two hundred . From having so many people packed in a little space , a few people in the crowd got injured . The airport had not previously experienced such a large crowd . 
 After a press conference , where they first met disc jockey Murray the K , the Beatles were put into limousines — one per Beatle — and driven to New York City . On the way , McCartney turned on a radio and listened to a running commentary : " They have just left the airport and are coming to New York City ... " After reaching the Plaza Hotel , the Beatles were besieged by fans and reporters . Harrison had a fever of 102 ° F ( 39 ° C ) the next day and was ordered to stay in bed , so Neil Aspinall , the band 's personal assistant , replaced Harrison on guitar during the Beatles ' first rehearsal for The Ed Sullivan Show . On 9 February 1964 , the Beatles made their first live U.S. television appearance . 73 million viewers — about two @-@ fifths of the total American population — watched the group perform on The Ed Sullivan Show at 8 P.M. According to the Nielsen ratings audience measurement system , the show had the largest number of viewers that had been recorded for a U.S. television program . 
 Two days after the television appearance , on 11 February 1964 , the Beatles ' first U.S. concert took place , at Washington Coliseum , a sports arena in Washington , D.C. The concert was attended by eight thousand fans . The Beatles performed on a central stage in the arena , with the audience on all sides , and there were regular pauses to enable the band to turn their equipment around and perform facing in another direction . The concert generated intense excitement . The following day , the Beatles performed a second concert , in Carnegie Hall , New York , which was attended by two thousand fans . The concert was again well received . Following the Carnegie Hall concert , the Beatles flew to Miami Beach and on Sunday 16 February 1964 made their second television appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show , which this time was broadcast live from the Napoleon Ballroom of the Deauville Hotel in Miami Beach . As it had done on 9 February , the television broadcast attracted around 70 million viewers . On 22 February 1964 , the Beatles returned to the UK . Arriving at Heathrow airport at 7 am , they were met by an estimated ten thousand fans . 
 = = = August 1964 – First U.S. Tour = = = 
 In August 1964 , the Beatles returned to the United States for a second visit , this time remaining for a month @-@ long tour . A request was received from the White House press office , which asked for the Beatles to be photographed with the new President of the United States , Lyndon B. Johnson , laying a wreath on the grave of John F. Kennedy . The request was politely declined by Epstein , as it was not the group 's policy to accept " official " invitations . During the tour , the Beatles performed at thirty concerts , starting in San Francisco and ending in New York , twenty @-@ three cities in all . One of the major stipulations for the tour was that the band would not perform for segregated audiences or at venues that excluded African Americans . 
 At each venue , the concert was treated as a major event by the local press and attended by between ten and twenty thousand fans , whose enthusiastic response to the Beatles produced sound levels that left the music only semi @-@ audible . The tour earned the Beatles over a million dollars in ticket sales . It also stimulated a further increase in record sales , and resulted in the sale of a considerable quantity of Beatle @-@ related merchandise . 
 By this point in the year , the British Invasion — started by the Beatles ' previous U.S. visit — was gathering momentum , and several more UK acts had come to the United States , including The Dave Clark Five , Billy J. Kramer , and Gerry & the Pacemakers . One third of all U.S. top ten hits in 1964 were by British acts . After the tour 's final concert in New York , the Beatles were introduced to Bob Dylan , a meeting brought about at the instigation of the New York journalist Al Aronowitz , who arranged for Dylan to visit the Beatles at their hotel before they returned to the UK . 
 = = = August 1965 – Second U.S. Tour = = = 
 In June 1965 , after completing a two @-@ week European tour of France , Italy and Spain , the Beatles attended the London premiere of Help ! , their second film , and then returned to the United States for another two @-@ week tour . The tour commenced at Shea Stadium , New York City on Sunday 15 August 1965 . The circular stadium had been constructed the previous year , opening on 17 April 1964 , with seating arranged in four ascending decks , all of which were filled for the concert . It was the first time in history that a large outdoor stadium had been used for such a purpose , and the event sold out in seventeen minutes . 
 The 1965 tour was highly successful , with well @-@ attended concerts on each of its ten dates . The opening concert at Shea Stadium attracted an audience of fifty @-@ five thousand , the largest of any live concert that the Beatles would perform . The band arrived by armoured car . After the 1965 tour 's final concert , which took place at Cow Palace , San Francisco , the Beatles accepted an invitation to visit Elvis Presley before returning to the UK . 
 = = = August 1966 – Third U.S. Tour = = = 
 Following the UK and U.S. releases of their new album Revolver in August 1966 , the Beatles returned to the United States for what would be their last tour . The tour coincided with a storm of U.S. public protest against the Beatles , caused by a published quote from a remark Lennon had made about Christianity . Because of the severity of the protests , which included Beatles ' records being publicly burned and claims being made that the Beatles were " anti @-@ Christ " , Epstein had considered cancelling the fourteen @-@ concert tour , fearing for their lives . Nevertheless , the tour went ahead . 
 In Memphis , the city council decided not to let " municipal facilities be used as a forum to ridicule anyone 's religion " , and voted to cancel their Beatles concert , although it did in fact take place . There were disturbances during the tour , and one performance was brought to a temporary halt when a member of the audience threw a firecracker , leading the Beatles to believe they were being shot at . In other incidents , telephone threats were received , and the Ku Klux Klan picketed the Beatles ' concerts . The tour ended with a concert at Candlestick Park . Although commercially successful , the tour had been affected by the prevailing mood of controversy , and there had been rows of empty seats at some venues . 
 = = After the United States = = 
 The Beatles ' arrival in the United States in 1964 marked the spread of Beatlemania from the UK to the wider world , established the group 's international stature , and , triggering the British Invasion , caused changes in U.S. popular culture . The Candlestick Park concert at the close of the 1966 U.S. tour marked the end of a four @-@ year period dominated by touring and concerts , including nearly sixty U.S. appearances , and over one thousand four hundred internationally . The Beatles , from the end of their 1966 U.S. tour until their break @-@ up in 1970 , gave no further commercial concerts , instead devoting their efforts to creating new material in the recording studio . 
 = Effects of Hurricane Ivan in the Lesser Antilles and South America = 
 The effects of Hurricane Ivan in the Lesser Antilles and South America in September 2004 included 44 deaths and over $ 1 billion in damage ( 2004 USD ) , primarily in Grenada where it was considered the worst hurricane in nearly 50 years . Hurricane Ivan developed from a tropical wave on September 2 and rapidly intensified to become a major hurricane , passing through the southern Lesser Antilles on September 7 with winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . At the time , its typical storm force winds extended outward up to 160 miles ( 260 km ) with hurricane @-@ force winds outward to 70 miles ( 110 km ) , and the northern portion of the eye passed over Grenada . 
 In the region , the worst damage occurred on Grenada , where the damage total of $ 1 @.@ 1 billion ( 2004 USD , ( $ 1 @.@ 38 billion 2016 USD ) ) represented 200 % of its GDP . The hurricane damaged more than 14 @,@ 000 homes and destroyed 30 % of the houses , leaving about 18 @,@ 000 people homeless . A total of 39 people were killed by the hurricane on the island . Elsewhere , Hurricane Ivan caused at least three fatalities and moderate damage in northern Venezuela . One person died each in Trinidad and Barbados . The name Ivan was later retired . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Early in the duration of the storm , the National Hurricane Center consistently forecast Ivan to track further to the north than it eventually did . Late on September 5 , the government of Barbados issued a hurricane watch for its territory . Shortly thereafter , Saint Lucia was put under a hurricane watch and Grenada and its dependencies were put under a tropical storm watch . As the hurricane approached the southern Lesser Antilles , more watches were issued , and by 24 hours prior to Ivan passing through the island chain a hurricane warning was in effect for Barbados , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Saint Lucia , Tobago , and Grenada , and a tropical storm warning was in effect for Trinidad . With the path of Ivan more southerly than predicted , the hurricane warnings were downgraded to tropical storm warnings for the northern islands , and by late on September 7 when the eye of the hurricane passed near Grenada , hurricane warnings were in effect for Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Trinidad and Tobago , and Grenada . Subsequently , a tropical storm warning was issued for the northern coast of Venezuela through the Guajira Peninsula of Colombia . 
 In Venezuela , citizens in coastal areas of Falcón , Sucre and Isla Margarita were moved to safer areas , and several thousands were evacuated due to the hurricane . The Simón Bolívar International Airport , as well as three other mainland airports , were closed . Petróleos de Venezuela S.A. temporarily closed its oil refinery in Curaçao , and two ports were briefly shut down ; this caused a delay in two oil deliveries . The Valero Energy Corporation shut down its largest oil refinery in Aruba . Prior to the arrival of the hurricane , oil companies in Trinidad and Tobago ceased production and removed workers from offshore rigs ; the Atlantic LNG company closed exports . Seven shelters were opened on Tobago , where about 560 people evacuated for the storm . Two people died : one man trying to save his car , and one girl sleeping in her bed , when a tree fell on the roof above her room . Most evacuees were from low @-@ lying areas , and on the day of the storm 's passage most schools and businesses were closed . The two main airports in the country were closed , with one airline canceling all of its flights . 
 Over 1 @,@ 000 people evacuated to emergency shelters on Grenada , including hundreds in low @-@ lying areas in the capital city . Some shelters were damaged during the hurricane , forcing the evacuees to go elsewhere . Overall , the population responded little to the official advisories and recommendations , which potentially contributed to the death toll on the island . More than 1 @,@ 000 residents of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines evacuated to 28 emergency shelters . On Barbados , officials closed schools and government buildings and prepared shelters prior to the arrival of the hurricane . To minimize danger , the island power grid was shut down . Four shelters opened on Saint Lucia , where many people sought safety during the storm . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Venezuela , Trinidad and Tobago , and the ABC islands = = = 
 Along the northern coastline of Venezuela , the hurricane produced heavy precipitation and a storm surge of about 13 feet ( 4 m ) , which damaged 60 homes . Sustained winds on Isla Margarita peaked at 26 mph ( 42 km / h ) , and the most affected states were Falcón , Vargas , Aragua , Carabobo , and <unk> . Rough waves capsized 10 boats and closed several beaches , and one person drowned due to the surf . Further inland , two people drowned when a river overflowed its banks , and near Caracas a man died after strong winds toppled a wall . The combination of rainfall and winds destroyed 21 houses and blew off the roof of several others , affecting 1 @,@ 376 people , of whom 80 were left homeless . Power outages and lack of water were reported . In the country , the hurricane caused 127 injuries , and a death toll reported between three and five . An initial news story reported 28 people missing offshore on three boats . 
 Moderate wind gusts of up 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) were reported in Tobago , which downed several trees and caused power outages in seven villages ; power was cut to more than 30 % of the island . Twenty villages on the island suffered various forms of damage , and at least 45 homes lost their roofs . The hurricane left 22 people homeless and directly impacted about 1 @,@ 000 people . The hurricane caused one death when a falling tree killed a woman . Wave heights were estimated at 65 feet ( 20 m ) , and at least one home collapsed and fell into the ocean . Rainfall from the storm 's passage unofficially peaked at 16 @.@ 2 inches ( 411 mm ) on the island , which caused some mudslides . Some crop damage was also reported , and overall damage on Tobago was estimated at $ 4 @.@ 9 million ( 2004 USD , ( $ 6 @.@ 14 million 2016 USD ) ) ; damage in neighboring Trinidad was minimal . 
 As Ivan continued to strengthen , it proceeded about 80 mi ( 130 km ) north of the ABC islands on September 9 . High winds blew away roof shingles and produced large swells that battered several coastal facilities . A developing spiral band dropped heavy rainfall over Aruba , causing flooding and $ 1 @.@ 1 million worth in structural damage . 
 = = = Grenada = = = 
 Passing just to the south of the island , Hurricane Ivan produced strong winds in Grenada , with sustained winds reaching 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and gusts peaking at 133 mph ( 215 km / h ) at Point <unk> International Airport . The airport recorded 5 @.@ 26 inches ( 134 mm ) of precipitation during the hurricane 's passage . Of the nation 's six parishes , the four southernmost ones were most severely affected , constituting 80 percent of the total population . 
 The strong winds impacted more than 14 @,@ 000 homes on Grenada with 90 percent of the nation 's houses damaged and of which 30 percent were destroyed . The capital city of St. George 's was severely damaged , where every major building was either damaged or destroyed . Ivan 's passage either damaged or destroyed 85 percent of the structures on the island , including the nation 's emergency operations center and a 17th @-@ century prison , which allowed many inmates to briefly escape during the height of the storm . The hurricane damaged or destroyed 75 primary or secondary schools , with only two left in working condition . All of Grenada was left without power or running water . 
 Tourism was adversely affected ; an estimated 60 percent of hotel rooms were damaged . The winds downed 80 percent of the nutmeg trees on the island , with other crop losses varying between 60 – 90 percent . An estimated 18 @,@ 000 people were left homeless by the hurricane , and about 700 people sustained injuries from the storm . Ivan was considered the worst hurricane to strike the nation since Hurricane Janet in 1955 ; its passage resulted in 39 fatalities and $ 1 @.@ 1 billion in damage ( 2004 USD , ( $ 1 @.@ 38 billion 2016 USD ) , about 200 % of its GDP and of which about 45 % resulted from housing damage . 
 = = = Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Barbados , and northward = = = 
 Wave heights from the hurricane reached 20 feet ( 6 m ) along coastline portions of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , which washed away 2 homes ; the storm surge destroyed 19 homes and damaged 40 more . On Union Island , the winds damaged the roof of a hospital , while the northern portion of the island sustained heavy damage from the waves . Moderate damage was also reported on Palm Island and Carriacou and Petite Martinique . The winds left more than two @-@ thirds of the island without power , and also damaged the island 's banana crop . Damage in the country totaled $ 40 million ( 2004 USD , ( $ 50 @.@ 1 million 2016 USD ) . 
 On the island of Barbados , sustained winds peaked at 69 mph ( 112 km / h ) while gusts reached 92 mph ( 149 km / h ) , which damaged many trees and roofs . A total of 531 houses were damaged , of which 43 were completely destroyed . Additionally , four hotels sustained some damage . The winds left most of island without electricity , though officials worked quickly to restore the power . Rainfall from the storm was light , with less than 1 inch ( 25 mm ) in most areas . Storm surge and wave action caused beach erosion that severely damaged most coastal roads . One death was reported on the island , and damage was estimated at more than $ 5 million ( 2004 USD , ( $ 6 @.@ 26 million 2016 USD ) . 
 Strong winds and rough surf caused moderate coastal damage to southern portions of Saint Lucia ; the combination impacted houses near the coast and also led to losses in the banana crop . Minor roof damage was also reported , and damage totalled $ 2 @.@ 6 million ( 2004 USD $ 3 @.@ 26 million 2016 USD ) ) on the island ; three serious injuries were reported on the island due to the hurricane , though no fatalities were reported . In Dominica , winds reached 43 mph ( 69 km / h ) . High waves from Ivan caused light damage to southwestern Martinique and Guadeloupe . 
 Cayman Islands 
 Damage Sustained by the System . Contrary to what was done in other places , electricity was not shut down in Grand Cayman before arrival of the hurricane . Total system failure came at around 01 : 40 hours on 12 September . Slight damage was sustained by the North Sound Road power plant , and more extensive damage occurred in transmission lines and several substations as well as in distribution grids . Furthermore , it was found that the submarine cable in the North Sound was damaged 1 @,@ 500 feet offshore . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The government of Barbados created a Hurricane Ivan Housing Recovery Project , which repaired or rebuilt 190 houses for people without the available funds ; around 90 homes required minor immediate repairs , while the rest required significant reconstruction . The project finished in early 2006 for a total of $ 5 million ( 2004 BBD , ( $ 6 @.@ 26 million 2016 USD ) . 
 Several nearby countries assisted Grenada in its aftermath . The government of Guyana shipped about $ 250 @,@ 000 ( 2004 USD , $ 40 million 2004 <unk> ) worth of sugar , as well as 100 members of the Guyana Defense Force to assist in restoring order and reconstruction . The government of Trinidad and Tobago sent 190 policemen , and the government of Anguilla sent 1 @,@ 230 cases of water . A committee of Caribbean nations realized the local governments could not provide the support that Grenada needed in its aftermath , and thus turned to international assistance . Within a day of Ivan passing to the south of Grenada , the United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) deployed 67 @,@ 600 gallons of water , 500 rolls of plastic sheeting , four 10 @,@ 000 liter water bladder kits , and a water treatment kit ; assistance from USAID totaled $ 6 million ( 2004 USD ) within a few weeks of the storm 's passage , primarily in aid for reconstruction and rehabilitation . In the weeks subsequent to the hurricane , the European Commission Humanitarian aid Office ( ECHO ) provided € 3 million ( 2004 EUR ) . By a year later , housing redevelopments and disaster preparation problems continued after being impacted by Hurricane Emily ; as a result , the ECHO provided € 1 @.@ 2 million ( 2005 EUR ) to Grenada in September 2005 . Nine months after the hurricane , Chinese officials provided assistance in reconstruction and handling foreign debts after meeting with the Grenadian Prime Minister ; in 2007 , Chinese officials funded the construction of a new $ 40 million ( 2007 USD ) cricket stadium near St. George 's . The Caribbean Development Bank approved a $ 10 million loan ( 2004 USD ) requested by the government of Grenada in July 2005 , which was intended to assist in long @-@ term development of the housing , business , and environmental sectors . Emergency operations in Grenada in coordination with the Pan American Disaster Response Unit ended in July 2005 . 
 Within a few days after the hurricane passed , the Grenada Emergency Operations Center temporarily prevented relief supplies from entering the country to ensure the safety of the incoming items ; the decision was reversed shortly thereafter , and planes flew supplies during daylight hours into the reopened airport . Severe looting occurred in the immediate aftermath of Ivan , prompting police officials to enact a curfew for the night hours . In the first week following the hurricane , aid was slow to the affected residents , due to the lack of an efficient aid distribution system . 30 official shelters and 17 prepared ones housed over 5 @,@ 000 people in the aftermath of the storm . Thousands of people lost their jobs due to the hurricane , with all businesses shut down following the hurricane . By two months after the hurricane struck , 65 schools were opened , some of which serving as shelters ; water and power were gradually restored to the island . By a year after the storm 's passage , all schools were reopened , and most buildings enacted provisional repairs . Officials determined around 10 @,@ 000 houses on the island required complete reconstruction , while a further 22 @,@ 000 needed repairs . The government of Grenada initially planned to rebuild 1 @,@ 000 houses in the year after the hurricane struck ; by June 2005 , 260 families were provided houses , with a further 85 under construction . The government also established a Material Assistance Programme , which provided $ 5 @,@ 000 ( 2004 <unk> ) of free materials to more than 5 @,@ 000 families , as well as a total of $ 4 @.@ 3 million ( 2004 <unk> ) in low interest loans to 148 families . Several indirect fatalities occurred in the aftermath of the hurricane , primarily senior citizens . 
 = Remedies in Singapore administrative law = 
 The remedies available in Singapore administrative law are the prerogative orders – the mandatory order ( formerly known as mandamus ) , prohibiting order ( prohibition ) , quashing order ( certiorari ) , and order for review of detention ( habeas corpus ) – and the declaration , a form of equitable remedy . In Singapore , administrative law is the branch of law that enables a person to challenge an exercise of power by the executive branch of the Government . The challenge is carried out by applying to the High Court for judicial review . The Court 's power to review a law or an official act of a government official is part of its supervisory jurisdiction , and at its fullest may involve quashing an action or decision and ordering that it be redone or remade . 
 A mandatory order is an order of the High Court commanding a public authority to perform a public duty , while a prohibiting order operates to prevent illegal action by an authority from occurring in the first place . A quashing order , the most commonly sought prerogative order , has the effect of invalidating an ultra vires decision made by an authority . Obtaining a mandatory , prohibiting or quashing order is a two @-@ stage process , as an applicant must be granted leave by the Court to apply for the order . The Court must find the existence of a proper public law issue and available grounds of review . Leave will be granted provided that an arguable and prima facie case of reasonable suspicion that the authority has acted in breach of administrative law rules is established . 
 An order for review of detention directs someone holding a person in detention to produce the detainee before the High Court so that the legality of the detention can be established . The power of the Court to require that this be done is specifically mentioned in Article 9 ( 2 ) of the Constitution of Singapore . While the other prerogative orders may only be applied for with the court 's permission , an order for review of detention may be applied for without prior permission from the court . 
 A declaration is a pronouncement by a court stating the legal position between the parties to an action , based on the facts that have been presented to the court . Before 1 May 2011 , it was not possible to apply for prerogative orders and declarations in the same set of legal proceedings . Following that date , changes to Order 53 of the Rules of Court permitted an application for a declaration to be made together with an application for one or more prerogative orders . However , the application for a declaration cannot be made unless the court grants leave for the prerogative orders to be applied for . 
 The Government Proceedings Act bars the High Court from granting injunctions against the Government or one of its officers . An injunction is an equitable private law remedy that restrains a public authority from doing an act that is wrongful or ultra vires . In place of an injunction , the Court may make a declaration concerning the parties ' rights . At common law , there is no general right to claim damages – that is , monetary compensation – if rules of public law have been breached by an authority . In order to obtain damages , an aggrieved person must be able to establish a private law claim in contract or tort law . 
 = = Introduction = = 
 = = = Supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court = = = 
 The aim of administrative law is to regulate the executive government by providing remedies which individuals can apply for when challenging administrative actions and decisions , and failures to take action and make decisions . Where the exercise of statutory or other discretionary power by public authorities contravenes the Constitution or is unlawful under administrative law , various remedies may be available when a judicial review action is taken . 
 Judicial review , the means by which the High Court controls the exercise of legislative and executive power , is part of the Court 's supervisory jurisdiction . The basis of this jurisdiction was affirmed by the Court of Appeal in Ng Chye Huey v. Public Prosecutor ( 2007 ) as inherent in nature , that is , deriving from the common law rather than statute . The Court noted that this jurisdiction had " existed historically at common law " and " is still very much a part of our judicial system " . The inherent power of the High Court to review the decisions of inferior courts and other administrative bodies does not , however , extend to co @-@ ordinate bodies . In other words , one High Court judge may not exercise judicial review over a decision by another High Court judge . In addition , there are no provisions in the Supreme Court of Judicature Act which confer on the Court of Appeal the power to exercise supervisory jurisdiction over the High Court or – as pointed out in Ng Chye Huey – the Subordinate Courts . 
 The effective scope of the principles of judicial review depends on how the Court chooses to exercise its discretion in pursuance of its supervisory jurisdiction . 
 = = = Remedies = = = 
 The remedies available in a judicial review action are the prerogative orders – the mandatory order ( formerly known as mandamus ) , prohibiting order ( prohibition ) , quashing order ( certiorari ) , and order for review of detention ( habeas corpus ) – and the declaration , a form of equitable remedy . All these remedies that the High Court may grant are discretionary . A successful claimant has no absolute right to a remedy . In deciding whether to grant a remedy , the Court will take into account factors such as the following : 
 any prejudicial delay by the claimant in bringing the case ; 
 whether the claimant has suffered substantial hardship ; 
 any impact the remedy may have on third parties ; 
 whether a remedy will have any practical effect , or whether the matter has become academic ( in which case a remedy will usually not be granted ) ; 
 the merits of the case ; and 
 whether the remedy will promote good administration . 
 = = Prerogative orders = = 
 The ancient remedies of certiorari , mandamus , prohibition and habeas corpus were originally only available to the British Crown and thus termed prerogative writs , that is , writs that could be issued at the prerogative of the sovereign . By the end of the 16th century , they could theoretically be sought by any aggrieved citizen . In 1938 , the writs were abolished in the United Kingdom and replaced by prerogative orders with essentially the same names and functions . As a former British colony , Singapore inherited English administrative law at independence and the Singapore courts continue to pay close attention to English cases . In Singapore , the prerogative orders were known by their traditional names until 2006 , when the names were modernized . 
 Following the change , paragraph 1 of the First Schedule to the Supreme Court of Judicature Act , which is entitled " Prerogative orders " , now states that the High Court possesses the following power : 
 Power to issue to any person or authority any direction , order or writ for the enforcement of any right conferred by any written law or for any other purpose , including the following prerogative orders : 
 ( a ) a Mandatory Order ( formerly known as mandamus ) ; 
 ( b ) a Prohibiting Order ( formerly known as a prohibition ) ; 
 ( c ) a Quashing Order ( formerly known as certiorari ) ; and 
 ( d ) an Order for Review of Detention ( formerly known as a writ of habeas corpus ) . 
 The Subordinate Courts are not empowered to grant prerogative orders . 
 The amendment of the provision removed a specific reference to the High Court 's power to issue writs of quo warranto , a remedy used to challenge a person 's right to hold public office . There are no reported cases of quo warranto having been issued in Singapore . Since paragraph 1 still empowers the High Court " to issue to any person or authority any ... order or writ for the enforcement of any right conferred by any written law or for any other purpose " , it may be that the Court 's power to issue an order equivalent to a quo warranto has not been impaired . 
 = = = Mandatory orders = = = 
 A mandatory order is an order of the High Court which commands a public body to perform a public duty , and is usually employed to compel public bodies to exercise the powers given to them . It may be used in combination with another remedy , most commonly a quashing order . In such a case , the quashing order will set aside the unlawful decision , and the mandatory order will require the public body to reconsider the matter . A person who complies with a mandatory order cannot have legal proceedings taken against him or her for doing so . 
 Since it is the responsibility of the High Court to determine the legality of a decision rather than its merits , it will not order a public body to take a certain course of action , but will merely enjoin it to perform its duty in a lawful manner . In R. v. Justices of Kingston , ex parte Davey ( 1902 ) , it was held : 
 [ T ] his court does not by mandamus direct justices or any public body or anybody else upon whom a duty is cast , how and in what manner they are to perform their duty . They simply direct them by mandamus to perform their duty . I think also that even where the facts are all admitted , so that in the particular circumstances of a particular case – as my brother has pointed out in this case – there happens to be but one way of performing that duty , still the mandamus goes to perform the duty , and not to perform it in a particular way . 
 In Re San Development Co 's Application ( 1971 ) , the applicant sought certiorari to quash the decision of a Commissioner of Appeals of an Appeals Board under the Land Acquisition Act 1966 refusing to allow the applicant to proceed with an appeal against an award made by the Collector of Land Revenue as the notice of appeal had been filed late , and a mandamus directing the Commissioner to hear the appeal . Relying on the above case , the High Court held that it could not grant a mandamus in such terms . Instead , it quashed the Commissioner 's decision and issued a mandamus directing him to " consider and determine the application of the applicants according to law " . Similarly , in Borissik v. Urban Redevelopment Authority ( 2009 ) , the High Court held that the applicant should not have asked for a mandatory order requiring the Urban Redevelopment Authority to unconditionally approve the redevelopment plan for her property that she sought , and for a processing fee she had paid to be refunded . 
 Re Lim Chor Pee , ex parte Law Society of Singapore ( 1985 ) is another example of a case where a mandatory order was granted by the High Court . The appellant , Lim Chor Pee , who was an advocate and solicitor , had been convicted of several income tax offences and had been found to have tampered with a witness . On 16 July 1982 , the Attorney @-@ General wrote to the President of the Law Society of Singapore , providing information on the appellant 's conviction and other records . Following a report by the Society 's Inquiry Committee that a formal inquiry into the appellant 's conduct was necessary , a Disciplinary Committee was appointed . The appellant successfully applied to the Disciplinary Committee to delete certain paragraphs of the statement of case which had been formulated against him by the Council of the Law Society , on the ground that the facts in those paragraphs did not appear in the Inquiry Committee 's report . Consequently , three of the six charges against the appellant and a major portion of one other charge did not require investigation by the Disciplinary Committee . Dissatisfied with this decision , the Law Society applied to the High Court for an order of mandamus to direct the Disciplinary Committee to hear and investigate all the six charges against the appellant . The High Court granted the application , holding that under the Legal Profession Act , the Inquiry Committee 's only function was to consider the matters before it and decide whether or not there should be a formal investigation by a Disciplinary Committee . It was the duty of the Council of the Law Society to draw up the charges , and the duty of the Disciplinary Committee to hear and investigate the charges properly before the Committee in the statement of case . Thus , the appellant could not object that some of the charges against him were based on facts not mentioned in the Inquiry Committee 's report . The decision was affirmed by the Court of Appeal . 
 One of the issues before the Court of Appeal in Lim Chor Pee was whether the Law Society had standing ( locus standi ) to apply for mandamus against the Disciplinary Committee . The Court cited R. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners , ex parte National Federation of Self Employed and Small Businesses Ltd . ( 1981 ) , in which the House of Lords noted that although the law had formerly required an applicant to show that he or she " has a legal specific right to ask for the interference of the Court " to obtain a mandamus , this was no longer correct and that the courts had moved to a sufficient interest standard . The Court then went on to find that the Law Society had sufficient interest to apply for mandamus as under the Legal Profession Act one of its purposes was " to maintain and impose the standards of conduct ... of the legal profession in Singapore " , and the Council of the Society was empowered by the Act to formulate charges against advocates and solicitors whom the Inquiry Committee felt should be formally investigated . 
 = = = Prohibiting orders = = = 
 A prohibiting order operates to prevent illegal action by a public authority from occurring in the first place . It may be granted by the High Court in cases where the applicant is aware that the authority is about to take an unlawful course of action , or to prevent the authority from repeating an unlawful act . Like a quashing order , a prohibiting order is used to help maintain good standards of public administration . 
 R. v. Kent Police Authority , ex parte Godden ( 1972 ) is an instance of a United Kingdom case in which an order of prohibition was issued to avert action that would not have complied with administrative law rules . In July 1970 , Godden , a police chief inspector of Kent Police Authority , was examined by the police authority 's chief medical officer , who took the view that he was suffering from a mental disorder and thus unfit for duty . Godden was therefore placed on sick leave , although his own specialist found that he did not have any psychiatric illness . Subsequently , in January 1971 , the police authority informed him that it would be appointing the chief medical officer to assess if he was permanently disabled , for the purpose of determining if he should be compulsorily retired . The Court of Appeal of England and Wales found that since the medical officer had previously formed the opinion that Godden was mentally disordered , he could not be impartial when assessing if Godden was permanently disabled . Thus , an order of prohibition should be issued to prohibit him from carrying out this assessment . 
 In the Singapore case Re Fong Thin Choo ( 1991 ) , a company had removed a large quantity of cigarettes from a warehouse , ostensibly for loading on board a vessel to be exported . However , the alleged loading had not been supervised by the Customs and Excise Department . The Director @-@ General of Customs and Excise subsequently concluded that the goods had never been exported , and requested that the company pay import duty of $ 130 @,@ 241 @.@ 30 on them . The company applied for an order of prohibition to bar the Director @-@ General from proceeding to recover a sum of $ 130 @,@ 241 @.@ 30 by deducting it from several bankers ' guarantees that had been lodged with Customs as security . As regards whether an order of prohibition could be obtained against the Director @-@ General , the High Court said : 
 Prohibition will issue against any inferior court , tribunal or public authority to carry out any order or decision which is invalid under the law as being in excess of its authority to make . The principles applicable to certiorari to quash such an order or decision are equally applicable to prohibition . The law in this field has reached the stage where the test as to amenability to prohibition is whether the tribunal concerned is exercising a public duty . 
 As the Director @-@ General was a public officer appointed by statute to discharge public duties , he was subject to an order of prohibition in an appropriate case . The Court found that on the affidavit evidence produced by the applicants , the Director @-@ General could not reasonably have come to the conclusion he came to without hearing the applicants ' witnesses . He had thus misdirected himself on the law as to the nature of the evidence that was required to be produced to prove the export of the goods . Finally , there had been an insufficient inquiry which had resulted in a failure to take into account relevant considerations , and an investigation that was unfair to the applicant . The Court therefore made an order of prohibition against the Director @-@ General to prevent him from deducting money from the bankers ' guarantees . 
 A person seeking to obtain a prohibiting order must demonstrate that he or she has a sufficient interest to do so . In Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Minister for Information and the Arts ( 1995 ) , the High Court cited the following passage from Sir William Wade 's Administrative Law ( 4th ed . , 1977 ) : 
 One of the valuable features of the " public " character of certiorari and prohibition , already emphasized , is that they may be awarded to a member of the public without any special personal right . In other words , there is no restrictive requirement of standing on the part of an applicant . ... Consequently the court is prepared to act at the instance of a mere stranger , though it retains discretion to refuse to do so if it considers that no good would be done to the public . Every citizen has standing to invite the court to prevent some abuse of power , and in doing so he may claim to be regarded not as a meddlesome busybody but as a public benefactor . 
 When the case was appealed , the sufficient interest test was upheld by the Court of Appeal . 
 = = = Quashing orders = = = 
 The effect of a quashing order is to invalidate an ultra vires decision made by a public body , usually acting under some statutory authority . It is the most commonly sought of the prerogative orders in judicial review proceedings . 
 Quashing orders may only be obtained against decisions which have some direct or indirect actual or ostensible legal effect , and not against mere opinions . In Comptroller of Income Tax v. ACC ( 2010 ) , the respondent , a locally incorporated company , had arranged to enter into interest rate swap agreements with Singapore banks or Singapore branches of foreign banks on behalf of its offshore subsidiaries . The Comptroller of Income Tax took the position that payments made by the respondent to its subsidiaries pursuant to those swap agreements fell within the ambit of section 12 ( 6 ) of the Income Tax Act , such that the withholding tax requirements imposed by section 45 of the same statute applied . As the respondent had not complied with the relevant withholding tax requirements with respect to the payments in question , the respondent was required to account to the Comptroller for the amount of tax which should have been withheld . This was conveyed to the respondent in a letter . The respondent sought leave to apply to quash the determination by the Comptroller . The Court of Appeal held that the Comptroller 's letter was no more than advice to the respondent , and did not amount to a legal determination that withholding tax was due from the respondent . Thus , technically speaking , there was no determination to quash and the respondent should have applied for a declaration instead . However , since the parties had accepted a ruling by the High Court that the Comptroller 's letter did amount to a legal determination of the respondent 's tax liability and the Comptroller had not questioned this aspect of the High Court 's judgment , the Court of Appeal proceeded on the basis that the letter did contain a determination that was judicially reviewable . It said that , " given the particular circumstances of this case , for the court to require the respondent to recommence proceedings for a declaratory judgment would be to take an overly legalistic view of what procedural justice requires " . 
 As mentioned above in relation to prohibiting orders , the test for standing to apply for a quashing order is that of sufficient interest in the matter . The High Court in Chan Hiang Leng Colin held that to have standing for certiorari , " [ i ] t was not necessary that the applicant had to have a particular grievance arising out of the order complained about . It was sufficient that there had been an abuse of power which inconvenienced someone . " In support of this rule , it cited Lord Denning , the Master of the Rolls , in R. v. Greater London Council , ex parte Blackburn ( 1976 ) : 
 I regard it as a matter of high constitutional principle that if there is good ground for supposing that a government department or a public authority is transgressing the law , or is about to transgress it , in a way which offends or injures thousands of Her Majesty 's subjects , then anyone of those offended or injured can draw it to the attention of the courts of law and seek to have the law enforced and the courts in their discretion can grant whatever remedy is appropriate . 
 This passage was also approved by the Court of Appeal in Chan Hiang Leng Colin . 
 = = = Orders for review of detention = = = 
 An order for review of detention directs someone holding a person in detention to produce the detainee before the High Court so that the legality of the detention can be established . In Re <unk> <unk> ( 1969 ) , the High Court held : 
 [ T ] he writ [ of habeas corpus ] is a prerogative process of securing the liberty of the subject by affording an effective means of immediate release from unlawful or unjustifiable detention , whether in prison or in private custody . By it the High Court and the judges of that court , at the instance of a subject aggrieved , command the production of that subject , and inquire into the cause of his imprisonment . If there is no legal justification for the detention , the party is ordered to be released . 
 The power of the Court to require that this be done is specifically mentioned in Article 9 ( 2 ) of the Constitution of Singapore , which states : " Where a complaint is made to the High Court or any Judge thereof that a person is being unlawfully detained , the Court shall inquire into the complaint and , unless satisfied that the detention is lawful , shall order him to be produced before the Court and release him . " 
 In Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1988 ) , the appellants had been detained without trial under section 8 ( 1 ) of the Internal Security Act ( " ISA " ) for alleged involvement in a Marxist conspiracy to subvert and destabilize the country . The detention orders were subsequently suspended under section 10 of the Act , but the suspensions were revoked following the release of a press statement by the appellants in which they denied being Marxist conspirators . Having applied unsuccessfully to the High Court for writs of habeas corpus to be issued , the appellants appealed against the ruling . The Court of Appeal allowed the appeal on the narrow ground that the Government had not adduced sufficient evidence to discharge its burden of proving the President was satisfied that the appellants ' detention was necessary to prevent them from endangering , among other things , Singapore 's security or public order , which was required by section 8 ( 1 ) of the ISA before the Minister for Home Affairs could make detention orders against them . However , in a lengthy obiter discussion , the Court held that an objective rather than a subjective test should apply to the exercise of discretion by the authorities under sections 8 and 10 of the ISA . In other words , the executive could not insist that the exercise of the discretion was unchallengeable . The exercise of discretion could be reviewed by the court , and the executive had to satisfy the court that there were objective facts justifying its decision . 
 In the course of its judgment , the Court of Appeal noted that at common law if the return to a writ of habeas corpus – the response to the writ that a person holding a detainee had to give – was valid on its face , the court could not inquire further into the matter . However , section 3 of the UK Habeas Corpus Act 1816 broadened the court 's power by entitling it to examine the correctness of the facts mentioned in the return . The section stated , in part : 
 Judges to inquire into the Truth of Facts contained in Return . Judge to bail on <unk> to appear in Term , & c . 
 In all cases provided for by this Act , although the return to any writ of habeas corpus shall be good and sufficient in law , it shall be lawful for the justice or baron , before whom such writ may be returnable , to proceed to examine into the truth of the facts set forth in such return by affidavit ... ; and to do therein as to justice shall appertain ... 
 Section 3 of the Act thus " contemplates the possibility of an investigation by the court so that it may satisfy itself where the truth lies " . The extent of the investigation depends on whether a public authority 's exercise of the power to detain rests on the existence or absence of certain jurisdictional or precedent facts . If so , the court must assess if the authority has correctly established the existence or otherwise of these facts . However , if the power to detain is not contingent on precedent facts , the court 's task is only to determine whether there exists evidence upon which the authority could reasonably have acted . 
 The UK Habeas Corpus Act 1816 applied to Singapore by virtue of the Second Charter of Justice 1826 , which is generally accepted to have made all English statutes and principles of English common law and equity in force as at 27 November 1826 applicable in the Straits Settlements ( including Singapore ) , unless they were unsuitable to local conditions and could not be modified to avoid causing injustice or oppression . In 1994 , after Chng Suan Sze was decided , the Application of English Law Act was enacted with the effect that only English statutes specified in the First Schedule of the Act continued to apply in Singapore after 12 November 1993 . The Habeas Corpus Act 1816 is not one of these statutes , and so appears to have ceased to be part of Singapore law . Nonetheless , it may be argued that High Court should continue to apply a rule equivalent to section 3 of the Act to orders for review of detention because of the combined effect of Article 9 ( 2 ) of the Constitution which should not be regarded as having been abridged unless the legislature has used clear and unequivocal language , and the following principle from <unk> <unk> v. Government of Nigeria ( 1931 ) stated by Lord Atkin : 
 In accordance with British jurisprudence no member of the executive can interfere with the liberty or property of a British subject except on the condition that he can support the legality of his action before a court of justice . And it is the tradition of British justice that judges should not shrink from deciding such issues in the face of the executive . 
 Since an order for review of detention is a remedy for establishing the legality of detention , it may not be used to challenge the conditions under which a person is held , if the detention itself is lawful . Moreover , an order can only be sought where a person is being physically detained , and not if he or she is merely under some other form of restriction such as being out on bail . 
 Both nationals and non @-@ nationals of a jurisdiction may apply for orders for review of detention . In the UK context , Lord Scarman disagreed with the suggestion that habeas corpus protection only extends to British nationals , stating in Khera v. Secretary of State for the Home Department ; Khawaja v. Secretary of State for the Home Department ( " Khawaja " , 1983 ) , that " [ e ] very person within the jurisdiction enjoys the equal protection of our laws . There is no distinction between British nationals and others . He who is subject to English law is entitled to its protection . " 
 = = = Procedure for prerogative orders = = = 
 According to the Government Proceedings Act , civil proceedings against the Government must be commenced against an appropriate authorized Government department . If there is no appropriate authorized Government department , or the person wishing to commence proceedings has reasonable doubt as to which department ( if any ) is appropriate , proceedings should be commenced against the Attorney @-@ General . This rule applies to judicial review proceedings in which prerogative orders or declarations are sought . 
 The minister charged with responsibility for the Act is required to publish in the Government Gazette a list stating the Government departments which are authorized departments for the purposes of the Act , and the names and addresses for service of the solicitors for the departments . As of 7 December 2005 , no such list had been published . For this reason , in Chee Siok Chin v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 2005 ) , decided on that date , the High Court held that instead of instituting the action against the Minister for Home Affairs and the Commissioner of Police , the applicants should have done so against the Attorney @-@ General . Nonetheless , the suit should not be dismissed as this was a procedural irregularity that could be cured by substituting the Attorney @-@ General as the respondent . 
 = = = = Mandatory , prohibiting and quashing orders = = = = 
 If a mandatory order , prohibiting order or quashing order is sought , the applicant must follow the procedure set out in Order 53 of the Rules of Court . In general , there are two stages . At the first stage , an applicant must obtain leave to apply for the prerogative order . This requirement prevents <unk> applications from being taken against decision @-@ makers by filtering out groundless cases at an early stage to prevent wastage of judicial time , and protects public bodies from harassment , intentional or otherwise . An application for such leave must be made by ex parte originating summons and must be supported by a statement setting out the name and description of the applicant , the relief sought and the grounds on which it is sought ; and by an affidavit , to be filed when the application is made , verifying the facts relied on . In granting leave , the judge hearing the application for leave may impose such terms as to costs and as to security as he or she thinks fit . 
 In addition , there is a time requirement which stipulates that leave shall not be granted to apply for a quashing order to remove any judgment , order , conviction or other proceeding for the purpose of its being quashed , unless the application for leave is made within three months after the date of the proceeding or such other period ( if any ) as may be prescribed by any written law . However , the High Court may allow an application for leave to be filed out of time if the delay " is accounted for to the satisfaction of the Judge " , as was the case in Chai <unk> v. Singapore Medical Council ( 2009 ) . No such time limit requirements exist for mandatory or prohibiting orders , but such orders should be applied for without undue delay . 
 The test for whether leave should be granted to an applicant was expressed by the High Court in Lai Swee Lin Linda v. Public Service Commission ( 2000 ) , and approved by the Court of Appeal , in the following terms : 
 [ T ] he duty of the court hearing an ex parte application ... was not to embark upon any detailed and microscopic analysis of the material placed before it but ... to peruse the material before it quickly and appraise whether such material disclosed an arguable and a prima facie case of reasonable suspicion . 
 Once leave is granted , an applicant moves on to the second stage and applies for a prerogative order by filing in the High Court a document called a summons within the legal proceedings already started earlier . This must be done between eight and 14 days after leave to do so is granted by the Court ; beyond that , the leave lapses . The applicant must serve the ex parte originating summons , the statement , the supporting affidavit , the order granting leave , and the summons by which the prerogative order is actually applied for , on all persons directly affected . Where the application relates to court proceedings and is intended to compel the court or a court official to do an act relating to the proceedings , or to quash the proceedings or any order made in them , the documents must be served on the registrar of the court and the other parties to the proceedings . The documents must also be served on the judge if his or her conduct is being objected to . If the Court is of opinion that any person who ought to have been served with the documents has not been served , the Court may adjourn the hearing on such terms as it may direct in order that the documents may be served on that person . 
 The High Court has dispensed with the two @-@ stage process and dealt with applications on the merits at the first stage in cases that involved only pure questions of law and where there were no factual disputes . 
 = = = = Orders for review of detention = = = = 
 The procedure for applying for an order for review of detention differs from that for obtaining a mandatory order , prohibiting order or quashing order because the latter orders are only available by leave of court , whereas an order for review of detention may be applied for without prior permission from the court . The procedure for doing so is set out in Order 54 of the Rules of Court . An application must be made to the High Court by way of an ex parte originating summons , supported , if possible , by an affidavit from the person being restrained which shows that the application is being made at his or her instance and explaining the nature of the restraint . If the person under restraint is unable to personally make an affidavit , someone may do so on his or her behalf , explaining the reason for the inability . 
 Upon the filing of the application , the Court may either make an order immediately , or direct that a summons for the order for review of detention be issued to enable all the parties involved to present arguments to the Court . If the latter course is taken , the ex parte originating summons , supporting affidavit , order of court and summons must be served on the person against whom the order is sought . Unless the Court directs otherwise , it is not necessary for the person under restraint to be brought before the Court for the hearing of the application . In addition , the Court may order that the person be released while the application is being heard . Once the Court decides to make an order for review of detention , it will direct when the person under restraint is to be brought before the court . 
 The applicant has the initial burden of showing that he or she has a prima facie case that should be considered by the Court . Once this has been done , it is for the executive to justify the legality of the detention . One commentator has said that the applicant 's task is to discharge his or her evidential burden , following which the public authority detaining the applicant has a legal burden of showing that the detention is lawful . The standard of proof required to be achieved by the authority is the civil standard of a balance of probabilities , but " flexibly applied " in the sense that the degree of probability must be appropriate to what is at stake . Thus , in Khawaja Lord Bridge of Harwich said that given the seriousness of the allegations against a detainee and the consequences of the detention , " the court should not be satisfied with anything less than probability of a high degree " . 
 = = Declarations = = 
 In addition to prerogative orders , the equitable remedy of a declaration can be employed to control an excess of legal authority . A declaration is a pronouncement by a court stating the legal position between the parties to an action , based on the facts that have been presented to the court . In contrast to the prerogative orders which are termed public law remedies , the declaration is called a private law remedy as it was originally developed in court cases between private parties . Only the High Court may grant declarations in judicial review cases ; although the Subordinate Courts are generally empowered by the Subordinate Courts Act to grant declarations , a District Court exercises no judicial review jurisdiction over acts or decisions of persons or authorities , and a Magistrate 's Court cannot deal with any action in which there is no claim for any sum of money . 
 A declaration is only as effective as the willingness of a public body to abide by the court 's statement of the law in it , as it is not a contempt of court to ignore a declaration . In Webster v. Southwark London Borough Council ( 1982 ) , Webster was a parliamentary candidate for the National Front , a far right racial nationalist political party , who wanted to hold an election meeting in a hall owned by Southwark London Borough Council . Despite being required by provisions of the Representation of the People Act 1949 to permit Webster to use the hall , the local council refused to do so as it did not agree with Webster 's political views . The court made a declaration that Webster was legally entitled to use the hall at a certain time for the purpose of his election campaign , on the assumption that the local council would obey it . Nonetheless , the local council still refused to allow Webster use of the hall . It was held that a declaration is not a coercive order of the court and , accordingly , refusal to comply with it is not contempt . 
 There is some authority to the effect that a court will not generally grant a declaration if it considers the issue at hand to be an academic question or one that is entirely hypothetical . For instance , in Vince v. Chief Constable of Dorset Police ( 1992 ) , proceedings against the Chief Constable of Dorset Police were brought by the plaintiffs on behalf of members of the Police Federation of England and Wales to , among other things , enable chief constables throughout the country to know where they stood on a question of law with respect to the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 , namely , whether it was unlawful to appoint an acting sergeant as a custody officer under section 36 ( 3 ) of the Act . <unk> the decision of the judge below , a majority of the Court of Appeal declined to make a declaration on the matter . It took the view that since there was no evidence that any chief constable had ever appointed an acting sergeant as a custody officer , the issue was academic or hypothetical . 
 However , at least in the UK , there are signs that the courts may be moving towards showing more flexibility in granting advisory declarations . In R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department , ex parte Salem ( 1999 ) , Salem , a citizen of Libya , was granted temporary admission to the UK to pursue an asylum claim . One month later , the Home Office recorded in an internal file that Salem 's asylum claim had been refused , but did not communicate the decision to him . Salem only found out when his income support ceased , and the Benefits Agency told him that they had been informed that he had been refused asylum . Subsequently , Salem unsuccessfully sought leave to apply for judicial review of the Home Secretary 's decision to notify the Department of Social Security that his asylum claim had been rejected . He then obtained leave to appeal the matter to the House of Lords , but was then granted refugee status . Before the House of Lords , Salem argued that his appeal should still be heard as the question of law in his case was one of general public importance . The court held that it had discretion to hear an appeal which concerns an issue involving a public authority as to a question of public law , even where there is no longer any live issue which would affect the rights and duties of the parties themselves . However , the court cautioned that this discretion has to be exercised with circumspection and entertained only where there was a good public interest reason to do so . It is not yet known whether the Singapore High Court will adopt a similar approach . 
 The Singapore courts have also yet to directly address the issue of the standing required to apply for a declaration in an administrative law case . In <unk> <unk> Co . LLC v. Pertamina Energy Trading Ltd . ( 2005 ) – not a judicial review case – the Court of Appeal expressed the view that the applicant " must be asserting the recognition of a ' right ' that is personal to him " . It cited the House of Lords ' decision of Gouriet v. Union of Post Office Workers ( 1977 ) , which held that a plaintiff could not be granted a declaration unless he or she : 
 ... in proper proceedings , in which there is a dispute between the plaintiff and the defendant concerning their legal respective rights or liabilities either asserts a legal right which is denied or threatened , or claims immunity from some claim of the defendant against him or claims that the defendant is infringing or threatens to infringe some public right so as to inflict special damage on the plaintiff . 
 The Court preferred the position taken in Gouriet rather than the more flexible approach taken in Re S ( Hospital Patient : Court 's Jurisdiction ) ( 1995 ) where , so long as there existed a " real and present dispute between the parties as to the existence or extent of a legal right " and each of the parties to the litigation " would be affected by the determination of the issue " , it was not necessary for the legal right to be vested in the parties . One of the reasons it came to this conclusion was that Re S is regarded by some scholars as more consistent with rule 40 @.@ 20 of the Civil Procedure Rules , which states : " The court may make binding declarations whether or not any other remedy is claimed . " On the other hand , the relevant Singaporean provision is Order 15 , rule 16 , of the Rules of Court , which reads : " No action or other proceedings shall be open to objection on the ground that a merely declaratory judgment or order is sought thereby , and the Court may make binding declarations of right whether or not any consequential relief is or could be claimed . " [ Emphasis added . ] Hence , the Court concluded that its jurisdiction to make declarations is " confined to declaring contested legal rights of the parties represented in the litigation " . 
 In Tan Eng Hong v. Attorney @-@ General ( 2011 ) , the applicant sought a declaration that section 377A of the Penal Code was unconstitutional . The High Court stated that a person who is asserting an infringement of a constitutional liberty must establish that he or she has not merely a sufficient interest but a substantial interest in the matter , that is , he or she must be alleging a violation of a fundamental liberty . The Court did not discuss the issue of standing in the context of administrative law . 
 = = = Procedure for declarations = = = 
 Before May 2011 , it was not possible to apply for prerogative orders and declarations in the same set of legal proceedings . In Chan Hiang Leng Colin , the appellants contended that a declaration might be obtained in proceedings taken under Order 53 of the Rules of Court . The Court of Appeal , following Re Application by Dow Jones ( Asia ) Inc . ( 1987 ) , held that it had no power to grant a declaration under Order 53 because a declaration is not a form of prerogative order . If a declaration was sought , it had to be applied for by way of writ if there were substantial factual disputes between the parties , or , if not , by originating summons . In Yip Kok Seng v. Traditional Chinese Medicine Practitioners Board ( 2010 ) , the High Court expressed the view that due to the lack of a unified regime in Singapore for applying for prerogative orders and declarations , it was not an abuse of process for an applicant to seek redress for a public law right by way of a declaration instead of applying for a prerogative order . 
 With effect from 1 May 2011 , it became possible to include an application for a declaration together with an application for one or more prerogative orders . However , the application for a declaration cannot be made unless the court grants leave for the prerogative orders to be applied for . 
 = = Remedies that are unavailable = = 
 = = = Injunctions = = = 
 An injunction is an equitable private law remedy that restrains a public body from doing an act that is wrongful or ultra vires . Following law reforms in the United Kingdom in 1977 , it became possible for the High Court of England and Wales to grant prerogative orders as well as a declaration or injunction in the same set of legal proceedings . As these reforms have not been followed in Singapore , the Singapore High Court is not empowered to grant injunctions under Order 53 of the Rules of Court . 
 In addition , if civil proceedings are taken against the Government , section 27 of the Government Proceedings Act bars the High Court from granting injunctions against it . In place of an injunction , the Court may make a declaration concerning the parties ' rights . The Court also may not make an injunction against a government officer if the effect of doing so would be to provide relief that could not be obtained against the Government directly . Section 2 ( 2 ) of the Act makes it clear that the term civil proceedings includes proceedings for judicial review . 
 = = = Damages = = = 
 At common law , there is no general right to claim damages – that is , monetary compensation – if rules of public law have been breached by a public authority . In order to obtain damages , an aggrieved person must be able to establish a private law claim in contract or tort law . While such a person would previously have had to take out a legal action for damages separately from any judicial review proceedings , since May 2011 it has been possible for a person who has successfully obtained prerogative orders or a declaration to ask the High Court to also award him or her " relevant relief " , that is , a liquidated sum , damages , equitable relief or restitution . The Court may give directions to the parties relating to the conduct of the proceedings or otherwise to determine whether the applicant is entitled to the relevant relief sought , and must allow any party opposing the granting of such relief an opportunity to be heard . 
 A special tort that applies only against public authorities is the tort of misfeasance in public office . To successfully make out the tort , a claimant must establish the following elements : 
 the public authority acted maliciously , or while knowing that it had no power to act ; 
 it is foreseeable that the claimant would be harmed in some way by the act ; and 
 the claimant suffered damage as a result of the act . 
 In Lines International Holding ( S ) Pte . Ltd. v. Singapore Tourist Promotion Board ( 1997 ) , the plaintiff , a cruise operator , claimed that the Singapore Tourism Promotion Board and the Port of Singapore Authority had committed the tort by denying it berths for its ship conducting " cruises to nowhere " on which the main activity was gambling . The High Court found that the plaintiff had failed to establish this claim . Since the authorities had not acted ultra vires , they could not have acted while knowing they lacked the power to do so . Moreover , the plaintiff had not adduced any evidence of the financial damage it had incurred due to the denial of berths . It has been said that " the tort is of quite limited value and importance as a means of controlling the ordinary run of inadvertent government illegality " . 
 If a claimant establishes that a public authority 's wrongful action amounts to a tort , he or she may be able to obtain exemplary damages if it can be shown that the authority has been guilty of " oppressive , arbitrary or unconstitutional action " in the exercise of a public function . 
 = = = Cases = = = 
 Re <unk> <unk> [ 1968 – 1970 ] S.L.R. ( R. ) 533 , High Court ( Singapore ) . 
 R. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners , ex parte National Federation of Self Employed and Small Businesses Ltd . [ 1981 ] UKHL 2 , [ 1982 ] A.C. 617 , House of Lords ( UK ) . 
 Khera v. Secretary of State for the Home Department ; Khawaja v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [ 1983 ] UKHL 8 , [ 1984 ] A.C. 74 , H.L. ( UK ) ( " Khawaja " ) . 
 Re Lim Chor Pee , ex parte Law Society of Singapore [ 1985 @-@ 1986 ] S.L.R. ( R. ) [ Singapore Law Reports ( Reissue ) ] 226 , H.C. ( Singapore ) . ( " Lim Chor Pee ( H.C. ) " ) . 
 Re Lim Chor Pee , ex parte Law Society of Singapore [ 1985 – 1986 ] S.L.R. ( R. ) 998 , Court of Appeal ( Singapore ) ( " Lim Chor Pee ( C.A. ) " ) . 
 Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs [ 1988 ] SGCA 16 , [ 1988 ] 2 S.L.R. ( R. ) 525 , C.A. ( Singapore ) , archived from the original on 24 December 2011 . 
 Re Fong Thin Choo [ 1991 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 774 , H.C. ( Singapore ) . 
 Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Minister for Information and the Arts [ 1995 ] 2 S.L.R. ( R. ) 627 , H.C. ( Singapore ) ( " Chan Hiang Leng Colin ( H.C. ) " ) . 
 Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Minister for Information and the Arts [ 1996 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 294 , C.A. ( Singapore ) ( " Chan Hiang Leng Colin ( C.A. ) " ) . 
 <unk> <unk> Ab <unk> v. Mohd <unk> bin Abdullah Teo [ 1996 ] 2 S.L.R. ( R. ) 80 , C.A. ( Singapore ) . 
 Ng Chye Huey v. Public Prosecutor [ 2007 ] SGCA 3 , [ 2007 ] 2 S.L.R. ( R. ) 106 , C.A. ( Singapore ) . 
 Chai <unk> v. Singapore Medical Council [ 2009 ] SGHC 115 , H.C. ( Singapore ) . 
 Comptroller of Income Tax v. ACC [ 2010 ] 2 S.L.R. 1189 , C.A. ( Singapore ) ( " ACC ( C.A. ) " ) . 
 Yip Kok Seng v. Traditional Chinese Medicine Practitioners Board [ 2010 ] 4 S.L.R. 990 , H.C. ( Singapore ) . 
 UDL Marine ( Singapore ) Pte . Ltd. v. Jurong Town Corporation [ 2011 ] 3 S.L.R. 94 , H.C. ( Singapore ) . 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 Government Proceedings Act ( Cap . 121 , 1985 Rev. Ed . ) ( " GPA " ) . 
 Rules of Court ( Cap . 322 , R 5 , 2006 Rev. Ed . ) ( " ROC " ) . 
 Subordinate Courts Act ( Cap . 321 , 2007 Rev. Ed . ) ( " SCA " ) . 
 Supreme Court of Judicature Act ( Cap . 322 , 2007 Rev. Ed . ) ( " SCJA " ) . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Leyland , Peter ; Anthony , Gordon ( 2009 ) , Textbook on Administrative Law ( 6th ed . ) , Oxford ; New York , N.Y. : Oxford University Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 921776 @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Jeffrey , ed . ( 2005 ) , " Order 53 : Application for Order of <unk> , Prohibition , Certiorari , etc . " , Singapore Court Practice 2005 , Singapore : LexisNexis , pp. 1129 – 1141 , ISBN 978 @-@ 981 @-@ 236 @-@ 441 @-@ 8 . 
 Rawlings , H.F. ( 1983 ) , " Habeas Corpus and Preventive Detention in Singapore and Malaysia " , Malaya Law Review 25 : 324 – 350 . 
 = = = Articles and websites = = = 
 Bingham , T [ homas ] H [ enry ] ( 1991 ) , " Should Public Law Remedies be Discretionary ? " , Public Law : 64 – 75 . 
 Huang , Su Mien ( July 1960 ) , " Judicial Review of Administrative Action by the Prerogative Orders " , University of Malaya Law Review 2 ( 1 ) : 64 – 82 . 
 <unk> , Daniel ( December 1999 ) , " Advisory Declarations : Recent Developments " , Judicial Review 4 ( 4 ) : 225 – 230 . 
 Oliver , [ A. ] Dawn ( January 2002 ) , " Public Law Procedures and Remedies – Do We Need Them ? " , Public Law : 91 – 110 . 
 Tan , John Chor @-@ Yong ( December 1960 ) , " Habeas Corpus in Singapore " , University of Malaya Law Journal 2 ( 2 ) : 323 – 334 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Cane , Peter ( 1997 ) , " The Constitutional Basis of Judicial Remedies in Public Law " , in Leyland , Peter ; Woods , Terry , eds . , Administrative Law Facing the Future : Old Constraints and New Horizons , London : Blackstone Press , pp. 242 – 270 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 689 @-@ 9 . 
 Lewis , Clive ( 2009 ) , Judicial Remedies in Public Law ( 4th ed . ) , London : Sweet & Maxwell , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 84703 @-@ 221 @-@ 8 . 
 Lord Woolf ; Woolf , Jeremy ( 2011 ) , Zamir & Woolf : The Declaratory Judgment ( 4th ed . ) , London : Sweet & Maxwell , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 414 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 = Ulysses S. Grant presidential administration scandals = 
 An examination of the Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant reveals many scandals and fraudulent activities associated with his administration , and a cabinet that was in continual transition , divided by the forces of political corruption and reform . President Grant , ever trusting of associates , himself was influenced by both forces . The standards in many of Grant 's appointments were low , and charges of corruption were widespread . Starting with the Black Friday ( 1869 ) gold speculation ring , corruption would be discovered during Grant 's two presidential terms in seven federal departments , including the Navy , Justice , War , Treasury , Interior , State , and the Post Office . Reform movements initiated in both the Democratic Party and the Liberal Republicans , a faction that split from Republican Party to oppose political patronage and corruption in the Grant Administration . Nepotism was prevalent , with over 40 family members benefitting from government appointments and employment . The prevalent corruption in the Grant Administration was eventually called Grantism . Certain historians believe that charges of corruption were exaggerated by reformers , since Grant was the first president to initiate civil service reform , and several of Grant 's cabinet members made solid advances towards ending abuses that occurred in previous administrations . 
 The unprecedented way that Grant ran his cabinet , in a military style rather than civilian , contributed to the scandals . For example , in 1869 , Grant 's private secretary Orville E. Babcock , rather than a State Department official , was sent to negotiate a treaty annexation with Santo Domingo . Grant never even consulted with cabinet members on the treaty annexation ; in effect , the annexation proposal was already decided . A perplexed Secretary of Interior Jacob D. Cox reflected the cabinet 's disappointment over not being consulted : " But Mr. President , has it been settled , then , that we want to Annex Santo Domingo ? " 
 Another instance of Grant 's military @-@ style command arose over the <unk> Claims , a legal dispute over mining patents in California , when Grant overrode the official opinion of Attorney General Ebenezer R. Hoar . Both Cox and Hoar , who were reformers , eventually resigned from the cabinet in 1870 . 
 Grant 's reactions to the scandals ranged from prosecuting the perpetrators to protecting or pardoning those who were accused and convicted of the crimes . For example , when the Whiskey Ring scandal broke out in 1875 , Grant , in a reforming mood , wrote : " Let no guilty man escape " . However , when it was found out that his personal secretary Orville E. Babcock was indicted , Grant testified on behalf of the defendant . During his second term Grant appointed reformers such as Benjamin Bristow , Edwards Pierrepont , and Zachariah Chandler who cleaned their respected departments of corruption . Grant dismissed Orville Babcock from the White House in 1876 , who was linked to several corruption charges and scandals . 
 = = Grant 's temperament and character = = 
 Grant was personally honest with money matters . However , he was extremely careless with his associates . Historian C. Vann Woodward stated that Grant had neither the training nor temperament to fully comprehend the complexities of rapid economic growth , industrialization , and western expansionism . Grant himself had been educated and trained at West Point in subjects as conduct , French , mathematics , artillery , cavalry tactics , and infantry . He had come from a humble background where men of superior intelligence and ability were threats rather than assets . Instead of responding with trust and warmth to men of talent , education , and culture , he turned to his military friends from the Civil War and to politicians as new as himself . A majority of Grant 's cabinet had studied at or graduated from various colleges and universities , including Harvard , Princeton , and Yale . Grant 's son , Grant Jr . , stated that Ulysses S. Grant was " incapable of supposing his friends to be dishonest . " President Grant 's Attorney General George H. Williams stated that Grant 's " trusting heart was the weakness of his character " . Williams stated that Grant was slow to make friends , however , once friendships were made " they took hold with hooks of steel . " 
 Many of Grant 's associates were able to capture his confidence through flattery and brought their intrigues openly to his attention . One of these men , Orville E. Babcock , was a subtle and unscrupulous enemy of reformers , having served as Grant 's personal secretary for seven years while living in the White House . Babcock , twice indicted , gained indirect control of whole departments of the government , planted suspicions of reformers in Grant 's mind , plotted their downfall , and sought to replace them with men like himself . Grant allowed Babcock to be a stumbling block for reformers who might have saved the President from scandal . Grant 's secretary of state , Hamilton Fish , who was often at odds with Babcock , made efforts to save Grant 's reputation by advocating that reformers be appointed to or kept in public office . Grant also unwisely accepted gifts from wealthy donors that cast doubts on his <unk> . 
 = = Scandals and corruption = = 
 The following are scandals or instances of federal corruption associated with the Ulysses S. Grant presidential administration from 1869 to 1877 . Particularly noteworthy are Black Friday and the Whiskey Ring . The Crédit Mobilier is not included as a Grant scandal since the company was founded during the President Abraham Lincoln administration . The fraudulent Emma Silver Mine swindle that involved Ambassador to Britain Robert C. Schenck was a Grant administration embarrassment and is not included as a scandal . An analysis of the scandals and frauds reveals that a majority had to do with illicit financial gain ; the Safe Burglary Conspiracy , however , involved breaking and entering , property damage , and framing an innocent citizen . Two scandals involved women : Black Friday and the Trading Post Ring . Orville E. Babcock , who was indicted in the Whiskey Ring , insinuated that the coded entry " Sylph " signed on communication letters referred to a woman intimately involved with the President . That allegation was never proven and there was nothing to suggest that a presidential affair took place . Babcock invented the story to frustrate the prosecution . Although Grant was never proven to be directly involved with or to have personally profited from the scandals or frauds , his acceptance of personal gifts and his associations with men of questionable character severely damaged his own presidential legacy and reputation . Most of these scandals began during the eight years of prosperity after the Civil War , while many prominent scandals were exposed after the U.S. economy crashed after the Panic of 1873 . 
 = = = Black Friday Gold Panic 1869 = = = 
 The first scandal to taint the Grant administration in 1869 was Black Friday , also known as the Gold Panic , which was an attempt by two aggressive financiers to corner the price of gold without regard to the nation 's economic welfare . The intricate financial scheme was primarily conceived and administered by Wall Street manipulators Jay Gould and his partner James Fisk . Their plan was to convince President Grant not to sell Treasury gold , in order to increase the sales of agriculture products overseas and increase the shipping business of Gould 's Erie Railroad . Gould and Fisk were able to get Grant 's brother in law Abel Rathbone Corbin involved with the scheme as a way to get access to Grant himself . Gould had also given a $ 10 @,@ 000 bribe to the assistant secretary of the treasury , Daniel Butterfield , in exchange for inside information . On June 5 , 1869 while Grant was traveling from New York to Boston , on The Providence , a ship owned by both Gould and Fisk , the two speculators urged Grant not to sell any gold from the Treasury and attempted to convince Grant that a high price of gold helped farmers and the Erie Railroad . President Grant , however , was stoic , and did not agree to Fisk and Gould 's suggestion to stop releasing Treasury Gold into the market . Grant 's Secretary of Treasury , George S. Boutwell , continued to sell Treasury gold on the open market . In late August 1869 President Grant consulted with businessman , A. T. Stewart , Grant 's initial Cabinet nominee , for Secretary of Treasury , concerning the Treasury selling gold . Stewart advised Grant that the Treasury should not sell gold in order that the Government would not be involved in the Gold market . Grant , accepted Stewart 's advise , and wrote to Boutwell that selling extra Treasury gold would upset agriculture sales . Boutwell on September 1 , had originally ordered $ 9 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in gold to be sold from the Treasury in order to buy up U.S. Bonds with greenbacks . However , after receiving a letter from Grant , Boutwell cancelled the order to sell gold . Previously Secretary Boutwell had been selling gold regularly at $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 of gold each week . On September 6 , 1869 , Gould had bought the Tenth National Bank that was used as a buying house for gold , and Gould and Fisk began buying gold in earnest . As the price of gold began to rise , Grant became suspicious of gold manipulation and wrote a letter to Secretary Boutwell on September 12 , " The fact is , a desperate struggle is now taking place ... I write this letter to advise you of what I think you may expect , to put you on your guard . " However , President Grant 's personal associations with Gould and Fisk gave them the clout needed to continue their financial scam on Wall Street . 
 Sometime around September 19 , 1869 , Corbin had sent a letter to Grant , at the urging of Gould , desperately urging Grant not to release gold from the treasury . Grant received the letter from a messenger while playing croquet with Porter at a deluxe Pennsylvania retreat . Grant finally realized what was going on and he was determined to stop the gold manipulation scheme . When pressed for a reply to Corbin 's letter , Grant responded curtly that everything was " all right " and that there was no reply . One Grant biographer described the comical nature of the events as an Edwardian farce . Grant , however , did have his wife Julia respond in a letter to Corbin 's wife that Abel Corbin needed to get out of the gold speculation market . When Gould visited Corbin 's house , he read Julia 's letter with the warning from Grant . After reading the letter , Gould started to sell gold , buying a bit of gold at the same time to keep people from getting suspicious . Gould never told Fisk , who kept buying gold in earnest , that Grant was catching onto their predatory scheme . 
 Secretary Boutwell was already keeping track of the situation and knew that the profits made in the manipulated rising gold market could ruin the nation 's economy for several years . By September 21 the price of gold had jumped from $ 37 to $ 141 , and Gould and Fisk jointly owned $ 50 million to $ 60 million in gold . Boutwell and Grant finally met on Thursday , September 23 , and agreed to release gold from the treasury if the gold price kept rising . Grant wanted $ 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in gold to be released while Boutwell wanted $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 released . Then , on ( Black ) Friday , September 23 , 1869 , when the price of gold had soared to $ 160 an ounce , Boutwell released $ 4 million in gold specie into the market and bought $ 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in bonds . Boutwell had also ordered that the Tenth National Bank be closed on the same day . The gold market crashed and Gould and Fisk were foiled , while many investors were financially ruined . 
 The gold panic devastated the United States economy for months . Stock prices plunged and the price of food crops such as wheat and corn dropped severely , devastating farmers who did not recover for years afterward . Gould had earlier claimed to Grant that raising the price of gold would actually help farmers . Also Fisk refused to pay off many of his investors who had bought gold on paper . The volume of stocks being sold on Wall Street decreased by 20 % . Fisk and Gould , who could afford to hire the best lawyers , were never held accountable for their profiteering , as favorable judges declined to prosecute . Gould remained a powerful force on Wall Street for the next 20 years . Fisk , who practiced a licentious lifestyle , was killed by a jealous rival on January 6 , 1872 . Butterfield later resigned . 
 In an 1869 Congressional investigation into the gold panic , Democrats on the House investigation committee questioned why Julia Grant had received a package from the Adams Express Company containing money reported to be $ 25 @,@ 000 . Another source claims that the package was just $ 25 @.@ 00 , but nonetheless , it was highly unusual for a First Lady to receive cash in the mail . Corbin had bought gold at 33 margin and sold at 37 , leaving Julia a profit of $ 27 @,@ 000 . Neither Mrs. Grant nor Mrs. Corbin testified in front of the investigation committee . In 1876 Secretary of State Hamilton Fish revealed to Grant in that Orville E. Babcock , another private secretary to the President , had also been involved in gold speculations in 1869 . 
 = = = New York custom house ring = = = 
 In 1871 , the New York Custom House collected more revenue from imports than any other port in the United States . By 1872 , two congressional investigations and one by the Treasury Office under Secretary George S. Boutwell looked into allegations of a corruption ring set up at the New York Custom House under two Grant collector appointments , Moses H. Grinnell and Thomas Murphy . Both Grinnell and Murphy allowed private merchants to store goods not claimed on the docks in private warehouses for exorbitant fees . Grant 's secretaries Horace Porter and Orville E. Babcock and Grant 's friend George K. Leet , owner of a private warehouse , allegedly shared in these profits . Secretary Boutwell advocated a reform to keep imports on company dock areas rather than being stored at designated warehouses in New York . Grant 's third collector appointment , Chester A. Arthur , implemented Boutwell 's reform . On May 25 , 1870 , Boutwell had implemented reforms that reduced public cartage and government costs , stopped officer gratuities , and decreased port smuggling , but on July 2 , 1872 , U.S. Senator Carl Schurz insinuated in a speech that no reforms had been undertaken and that the old abuses at the custom house continued . The New York Times claimed that Schurz 's speech was " carefully prepared " and " more or less disfigured and discolored by error . " The second thorough congressional investigation concluded that abuses either did not exist , had been corrected , or were in the process of being corrected . 
 = = = Star route postal ring = = = 
 In the early 1870s , lucrative postal route contracts were given to local contractors on the Pacific coast and southern regions of the United States . These were known as Star Routes because an asterisk was placed on official Post Office documents . These remote routes were hundreds of miles long and went to the most rural parts of the United States by horse and buggy . Previously inaccessible areas on the Pacific coast received weekly , semi @-@ weekly , and daily mail because of these routes . However , corruption ensued , with contractors paid exorbitant fees for fictitious routes and for providing low quality postal service to the rural areas . One contractor , F.P. Sawyer , made $ 500 @,@ 000 a year on routes in the Southwest . 
 To obtain these highly prized postal contracts , contractors , postal clerks , and various intermediary brokers set up an intricate ring of bribery and straw bidding in the Postal Contract Office . Straw bidding reached a peak under Postmaster General John Creswell , who was exonerated by an 1872 congressional investigation that was later revealed to have been tainted by a $ 40 @,@ 000 bribe from western postal contractor Bradley Barlow . An 1876 Democratic investigation was able to temporarily shut down the ring , but it reconstituted itself and continued until a federal trial in 1882 finally ended the Star Route frauds . 
 = = = Salary grab = = = 
 On March 3 , 1873 , President Grant signed a law that increased the president 's salary from $ 25 @,@ 000 a year to $ 50 @,@ 000 a year . The law raised salaries of members of both houses of the United States Congress from $ 5 @,@ 000 to $ 7 @,@ 500 . Although pay increases were constitutional , the act was passed in secret with a clause that gave the congressmen $ 5 @,@ 000 in bonus payouts for the previous two years of their terms . The Sun and other newspapers exposed the $ 5 @,@ 000 bonus clause to the nation . The law was repealed in January 1874 and the bonuses returned to the treasury . This pay raise proposal was submitted as an amendment to the government 's general appropriations bill . Had Grant vetoed the bill , the government would not have any money to operate for the following fiscal year , which would have necessitated a special session of Congress . However , Grant missed an opportunity to make a statement by threatening a veto . 
 = = = Sanborn contracts and reform = = = 
 In 1874 , Grant 's cabinet reached its lowest ebb in terms of public trust and qualified appointments . After the presidential election of 1872 , Grant reappointed all of his cabinet with a single exception . Charges of corruption were rife , particularly from The Nation , a reliable journal that was going after many of Grant 's cabinet members . Treasury Secretary George S. Boutwell had been elected to the U.S. Senate in the 1872 election and was replaced by Assistant Treasury Secretary William A. Richardson in 1873 . Richardson 's tenure as Treasury Secretary was very brief , as another scandal erupted . The government had been known to hire private citizens and groups to collect taxes for the Internal Revenue Service . This moiety contract system , although legal , led to abuse in the loosely run Treasury Department under Sec . Richardson . John D. Sanborn was contracted by Sec . Richardson to collect certain taxes and excises that had been illegally withheld from the government ; having received an exorbitant moiety of 50 % on all tax collections . Treasury officials pressured Internal Revenue agents not to collect delinquent accounts so Sanborn could accumulate more . Although the collections were legal , Sanborn reaped $ 213 @,@ 000 in commissions on $ 420 @,@ 000 taken in taxes . A House investigation committee in 1874 revealed that Sanborn had split $ 156 @,@ 000 of this with unnamed associates as " expenses . " Although Richardson and Senator Benjamin Butler were suspected to have taken a share of the profit money , there was no paper trail to prove such transactions , and Sanborn refused to reveal with whom he split the profits . While the House committee was investigating , Grant quietly appointed Richardson to the Court of Claims and replaced him with the avowed reformer Benjamin H. Bristow . On June 22 , 1874 President Grant , in an effort of reform , signed a bill into law that abolished the moiety contract system . 
 = = = Delano affair = = = 
 In 1875 , the U.S. Department of the Interior was in serious disrepair due to corruption and incompetence . Interior Secretary Columbus Delano , discovered to have taken bribes for fraudulent land grants , was forced to resign from office on October 15 , 1875 . Delano had also given lucrative cartographical contracts to his son John Delano and Ulysses S. Grant 's own brother , Orvil Grant . Neither John Delano nor Orvil Grant performed any work , nor were they qualified to hold such surveying positions . 
 On October 19 , 1875 , Grant made another reforming cabinet choice when he appointed Zachariah Chandler as Secretary of the Interior . Chandler immediately went to work reforming the Interior Department by dismissing all the important clerks in the Patent Office . Chandler had discovered that during Delano 's tenure , money had been paid to fictitious clerks while other clerks had been paid without performing any services . Chandler next turned to the Department of Indian Affairs to reform another Delano debacle . President Grant ordered Chandler to fire everyone , saying , " Have those men dismissed by 3 o 'clock this afternoon or shut down the bureau . " Chandler did exactly as Grant had ordered . Chandler also banned bogus agents , known as " Indian Attorneys , " who had been paid $ 8 @.@ 00 a day plus expenses for , ostensibly , providing tribes with representation in the nation 's capital . Many of these agents were unqualified and swindled the Native American tribes into believing they had a voice in Washington . 
 = = = Pratt & Boyd = = = 
 Attorney General George H. Williams administered the United States Department of Justice with slackness . There were rumors that Williams was taking bribes in exchange for declining to prosecute pending trial cases . In 1875 , Williams was supposed to prosecute the merchant house Pratt & Boyd for fraudulent customhouse entries . The Senate Judiciary Committee had found that Williams had dropped the case after his wife had received a $ 30 @,@ 000 payoff . When informed of this , Grant forced Williams 's resignation . Williams had also indiscreetly used Justice Department funds to pay for carriage and household expenses . 
 = = = Whiskey Ring = = = 
 The worst and most famous scandal to hit the Grant administration was the Whiskey Ring of 1875 , exposed by Treasury Secretary Benjamin H. Bristow and journalist Myron Colony . Whiskey distillers had been evading taxes in the Midwest since the Lincoln Administration . Distillers of whiskey bribed Treasury Department agents who in turn aided the distillers in evading taxes to the tune of up to $ 2 million per year . The agents would neglect to collect the required excise tax of 70 cents per gallon , and then split the illegal gains with the distillers . The ringleaders had to coordinate distillers , rectifiers , <unk> , storekeepers , revenue agents , and Treasury clerks by recruitment , impressment , and extortion . 
 On January 26 , 1875 , Bristow ordered Internal Revenue officers in various sites to different locations , effective February 15 , 1875 , on a suggestion from Grant . This would keep the fraudulent officers off guard and allow investigators to uncover their misdeeds . Grant later rescinded the order on the grounds that advance notice would cause the ringleaders to cover their tracks and become suspicious . <unk> Secretary Bristow 's order would later give rise to a rumor that Grant was interfering with the investigation . Although moving the supervisors most certainly would have disrupted the ring , Bristow conceded that he would need documentary evidence on the ring 's inner workings to prosecute the perpetrators . Bristow , undaunted , kept investigating , and found the ring 's secrets by sending Myron Colony and other spies to gather whiskey shipping and manufacturing information . 
 On May 13 , 1875 , with Grant 's endorsement , Bristow struck hard at the ring , seized the distilleries , and made hundreds of arrests . The Whiskey Ring was broken . Bristow , with the cooperation of Attorney General Edwards Pierrepont and Treasury Solicitor Bluford Wilson , launched proceedings to bring many members of the ring to trial . Bristow had obtained information that the Whiskey Ring operated in Missouri , Illinois , and Wisconsin . Missouri Revenue Agent John A. Joyce and two of Grant 's appointees , Supervisor of Internal Revenue General John McDonald and Orville E. Babcock , the private secretary to the President , would eventually be indicted in the Whiskey Ring trials . Grant 's other private secretary Horace Porter was also involved in the Whiskey Ring according to Solicitor General Bluford Wilson . 
 = = = = Special prosecutors appointed = = = = 
 Grant then appointed a special prosecutor , former senator John B. Henderson , to go after the ring . Henderson , while in the Senate , had been the administration 's worst critic , and Grant appointed him to maintain integrity in the Whiskey Ring investigation . Henderson convened a grand jury , which found that Babcock was one of the ringleaders . Grant received a letter to this effect , on which he wrote , " Let no guilty man escape . " It was discovered that Babcock sent coded letters to McDonald on how to run the ring in St. Louis . During the investigation McDonald claimed he gave Babcock $ 25 @,@ 000 from the divided profits and even personally sent him a $ 1 @,@ 000 bill in a cigar box . 
 After Babcock 's indictment , Grant requested that Babcock go through a military trial rather than a public trial , but the grand jury denied his request . In a reversal of his " let no guilty man escape , " order to Sec . Bristow , Grant unexpectedly issued an order not to give any more immunity to persons involved in the Whiskey Ring , leading to speculation that he was trying to protect Babcock . Although this reversal had the appearance of not letting the guilty get away , the prosecutor 's trial cases were made more difficult to prove in court . The order caused strife between Sec . Bristow and Grant , since Bristow needed distillers to testify with immunity in order to pursue the ringleaders . Prosecutor Henderson , himself , while going after members of the ring in court accused Grant of interfering with Secretary Bristow 's investigation . 
 The accusation angered Grant , who fired Henderson as special prosecutor . Grant then replaced Henderson with James Broadhead . Broadhead , though a capable attorney , had little time to get acquainted with the facts of Babcock 's case and those of other Whiskey Ring members . At the trial a deposition was read from President Grant stating that he had no knowledge that Babcock was involved in the ring . The jury listened to the president 's words and quickly acquitted Babcock of any charges . Broadhead went on to close out all the other cases in the Whiskey Ring . McDonald and Joyce were convicted in the graft trials and sent to prison . On January 26 , 1877 , President Grant pardoned McDonald . 
 = = = = President Grant 's deposition = = = = 
 The Whiskey Ring scandal even came to the steps of the White House . There were rumors that Grant himself was involved with the ring and was diverting its profits to his 1872 re @-@ election campaign . Grant needed to clear his own name as well as Babcock 's . Earlier , Grant had refused to believe Babcock was guilty even when Bristow and Wilson personally presented him with damaging evidence , such as two telegrams signed " Sylph " ; Babcock suggested that the signature was that of a woman giving the president " a great deal of trouble " , hoping that Wilson would back off for fear of igniting a presidential sex scandal , but Wilson was not bluffed . 
 On the advice of Secretary of State Hamilton Fish , the President did not testify in open court but instead gave a deposition in front of a congressional legal representative at the White House . Grant was the first and , to date , only president ever to testify for a defendant . The historic testimony came on Saturday , February 12 , 1876 . Chief Justice Morrison R. Waite , a Grant appointment to the U.S. Supreme Court , presided over the deposition . The following are excerpts from President Grant 's deposition . 
 Eaton : " Have you ever seen anything in the conduct of General Babcock , or has he ever said anything to you , which indicated to your mind that he was in any way interested in or concerned with the Whiskey Ring at St. Louis or elsewhere ? " 
 President Grant : " Never . " 
 Eaton : " Did General Babcock on or about April 23 , 1875 , show you a dispatch in these words : " St. Louis , April 23 , 1875 . Gen. <unk> Babcock , Executive Mansion , Washington , D.C. Tell Mack to see Parker of Colorado ; & telegram to Commissioner . Crush out St. Louis enemies . " 
 Cook : " Objection . " Made for the record . 
 President Grant : " I did not remember about these dispatches at all until since the conspiracy trials have commenced . I have heard General Babcock 's explanation of most or all of them since that . Many of the dispatches may have been shown to me at the time , and explained , but I do not remember it . " 
 Eaton : " Perhaps you are aware , General , that the Whiskey Ring have persistently tried to fix the origins of that ring in the necessity for funds to carry on political campaigns . Did you ever have intimation from General Babcock , or anyone else in any manner , directly or indirectly , that any funds for political purposes were being raised by any improper methods ? " 
 Cook : " Objection . " Made for the record . 
 President Grant : " I never did . I have seen since these trials intimations of that sort in the newspapers , but never before . " 
 Eaton : " Then let me ask you if the prosecuting officers have not been entirely correct in repelling all insinuations that you ever had tolerated any such means for raising funds . " 
 Cook : " Objection . " Made for the record . 
 President Grant : " I was not aware that they had ever attempted to repel any insinuations . " 
 On February 17 , 1876 , U.S. Circuit Justice John F. Dillon , another Grant appointment , overruled Cook 's objections , declaring the questions admissible in court . Grant , who was known for a photographic memory , had many uncharacteristic lapses when it came to remembering incidents involving Babcock . The deposition strategy worked and the Whiskey Ring prosecution never went after Grant again . During Babcock 's trial in St. Louis the deposition was read to the jury . Babcock was acquitted at trial . After the trial , Grant distanced himself from Babcock . After the acquittal , Babcock initially returned to his position as Grant 's private secretary outside the Oval Office . At public outcry and the objection of Hamilton Fish , Babcock was dismissed as private secretary and focused on another position that he had been given by Grant in 1871 : superintending engineer of public buildings and grounds . 
 Grant 's Pulitzer Prize winning biographer , William S. McFeely , stated that Grant knew Babcock was guilty and perjured himself in the deposition . According to McFeely the " evidence was irrefutable " against Babcock , and Grant knew this . McFeely also points out that John McDonald also stated that Grant knew that the Whiskey Ring existed and perjured himself to save Babcock . Grant historian Jean Edward Smith counters that evidence against Babcock was " circumstantial " and the St. Louis jury acquitted Babcock " in the absence of adequate proof . " Many of Grant 's friends who knew him claimed that the President was " a truthful man " and it was " impossible for him to lie . " Grant 's popularity , however , decreased significantly in the country as a result of his testimony and after Babcock was acquitted in the trial . Grant 's political enemies used this deposition as a launchpad to public office . The New York Tribune stated that the Whiskey Ring scandal " had been met at the entrance of the White House and turned back . " However , the national unpopularity of Grant 's testimony on behalf of his friend Babcock ruined any chances for a third term nomination . 
 = = = = Bristow 's investigation results = = = = 
 When Secretary Benjamin Bristow struck suddenly at the Whiskey Ring in May 1875 , many people were arrested and the distilleries involved in the scandal were shut down . Bristow 's investigation resulted in 350 federal indictments . There were 110 convictions , and three million dollars in tax revenues were recovered from the ring . 
 = = = Trading post ring = = = 
 Grant had no time to recover after the Whiskey Ring graft trials ended , for another scandal erupted involving War Secretary William W. Belknap . A Democratic House investigation committee revealed that Belknap had taken extortion money in exchange for an appointment to a lucrative Native American trading post . In 1870 , responding to extensive lobbying by Belknap , Congress had authorized the War Department to award private trading post contracts to military forts throughout the nation . Native Americans would come into the forts and trade for food and clothing , generating huge profits ( at the natives ' expense ) . Belknap 's wife Carrie , who desired to profit from these wealthy contracts , managed to secure a private trading post at Fort Sill for a personal friend from New York , Caleb P. Marsh . 
 An extortion arrangement was set up among Carrie Belknap , Caleb P. Marsh , and incumbent contract holder John S. Evans , in which Carrie Belknap and Marsh would receive $ 3 @,@ 000 every quarter , splitting the proceeds , while Evans would be able to retain his post at Fort Sill . Carrie Belknap died within the year , but William Belknap and his second wife continued to accept payments , though they were smaller due to a dip in Fort Sill 's profits . By 1876 Belknap had received $ 20 @,@ 000 from the illicit arrangement . On February 29 , 1876 , Marsh testified in front of a House investigation committee headed by Representatives Lyman K. Bass and <unk> Clymer . During the testimony Marsh testified that Belknap and both his wives had accepted money in exchange for the lucrative trading post at Fort Sill . The scandal was particularly upsetting , in this Victorian age , since it involved women . Lieut . Col. George A. Custer later testified to the Clymer committee on March 29 and April 4 that Sec . Belknap had received kick back money from the profiteering scheme of post traders through the resale of food meant for Indians . 
 On March 2 , 1876 , Grant was informed by Benjamin Bristow at breakfast of the House investigation against Secretary Belknap . After hearing about Belknap 's predicament , Grant arranged a meeting with Representative Bass about the investigation . However , Belknap , escorted by Interior Secretary Zachariah Chandler , rushed to the White House and met with Grant before his meeting with Representative Bass . Belknap appeared visibly upset or ill , mumbling something about protecting his wives ' honor and beseeching Grant to accept his resignation " at once . " Grant , in a hurry to get to a photography studio for a formal portrait , regretfully agreed and accepted Belknap 's resignation without reservation . 
 Grant historian Josiah Bunting III noted that Grant was never put on his guard when Secretary Belknap came to the White House in a disturbed manner or even asked why Belknap wanted to resign in the first place . Bunting argues that Grant should have pressed Belknap into an explanation for the abrupt resignation request . Grant 's acceptance of the resignation indirectly allowed Belknap , after he was impeached by the House of Representatives for his actions , to escape conviction , since he was no longer a government official . Belknap was acquitted by the Senate , escaping with less than the two @-@ thirds majority vote needed for conviction . Even though the Senate voted that it could put private citizens on trial , many senators were reluctant to convict Belknap since he was no longer Secretary of War . It has been suggested that Grant accepted the resignation in a Victorian impulse to protect the women involved . 
 = = = Cattellism = = = 
 Congress allotted Secretary George M. Robeson 's Department of the Navy $ 56 million for construction programs . In 1876 , a congressional committee headed by Representative Washington C. <unk> discovered that $ 15 million of that sum was unaccounted for . The committee suspected that Robeson , who was responsible for naval spending , embezzled some of the missing money and laundered it in real estate transactions . This allegation remained unproven by the committee . 
 The main charge against Robeson was taking financial favors from Alexander Cattell & Co . , a grain contractor , in exchange for giving the company profitable contracts from the Navy . An 1876 Naval Affairs committee investigation found Robeson to have received such gifts as a team of horses , Washington real estate , and a $ 320 @,@ 000 vacation cottage in Long Branch , New Jersey , from Alexander Cattell & Company . The same company also paid off a $ 10 @,@ 000 note that Robeson owed to Jay Cooke and offered itself as an influence broker for other companies doing business with the Navy , thus turning away any competitive bidding for naval contracts . Robeson was also found to have $ 300 @,@ 000 in excess to his yearly salary of $ 8000 . The House Investigation committee had searched the disorganized books of Cattell , but found no evidence of payments to Robeson . Without enough evidence for impeachment , the House ended the investigation by admonishing Robeson for gross misconduct and claimed that he had set up a system of corruption known as Cattellism . 
 In a previous investigation that Charles Dana headed in 1872 , Robeson had been suspected of awarding a $ 93 @,@ 000 bonus to a building contractor in a " somewhat dangerous stretch of official authority " known as the Secor claims . A competent authority claimed that the contractor had already been paid in full and there was no need for further reward . Robeson was also charged with awarding contracts to ship builder John Roach without public bidding . The latter charge proved to be unfounded . The close friendship with Daniel Ammen , Grant 's longtime friend growing up in Georgetown , Ohio , helped Robeson keep his cabinet position . 
 On March 18 , 1876 , Admiral David D. Porter wrote a letter to William T. Sherman , " ... Our <unk> fish [ Robeson ] of the navy although he may conceal his tracks for a while in the obscure atmosphere which surrounds him , will eventually be brought to bay .... " Robeson later testified in front of a House Naval Committee on January 16 , 1879 , about giving contracts to private companies . Robeson was asked about the use of old material to build ironclads and whether he had the authority to dispose of the Puritan , an outdated ironclad . Although Robeson served ably during the Virginius Affair and did authorize the construction of five new Navy ships , his financial integrity remained in question and was suspect during the Grant administration . To be fair , Congress gave Robeson limited funding to build ships and as Secretary was constantly finding ways to cut budgets . 
 = = = Safe burglary conspiracy = = = 
 In September 1876 , Orville E. Babcock was involved in another scandal . Corrupt building contractors in Washington , D.C. , were on trial for graft when bogus Secret Service agents working for the contractors placed damaging evidence into the safe of the district attorney who was prosecuting the ring . On the night of April 23 , 1874 , hired thieves opened the safe , using an explosive to make it appear that the safe had been broken into . One of the thieves then took the fake evidence to the house of Columbus Alexander , a citizen who was active in prosecuting the ring . The corrupt agents " arrested " the " thieves " who then committed perjury by signing a document falsely stating Alexander was involved in the safe burglary . 
 The conspiracy came apart when two of the thieves turned state evidence and Alexander was exonerated in court . Babcock was named as part of the conspiracy , but later acquitted in the trial against the burglars ; evidence suggests that the jury had been tampered with . Evidence also suggests that Babcock was involved with the swindles by the corrupt Washington contractors ' ring and with those who wanted to get back at Columbus Alexander , an avid reformer and critic of the Grant Administration . In 1876 Grant dismissed Babcock from the White House under public pressure due to Babcock 's unpopularity . Babcock continued on in government and became Chief Light House Inspector . In 1883 , Babcock drowned at sea at the age of 48 while supervising the building of Mosquito Inlet Light station . 
 = = Scandal summary table = = 
 = = Nepotism = = 
 Grant was accused by Senator Charles Sumner in 1872 of practicing nepotism while President . Sumner 's accusation was not an exaggeration . Grant 's cousin Silas A. Hudson was appointed minister to Guatemala . His brother @-@ in @-@ law Reverend M.J. Cramer was appointed as consul at Leipzig . His brother @-@ in @-@ law James F. Casey was given the position of Collector of Customs in New Orleans , Louisiana where he made money by stealing fees . Frederick Dent , another brother @-@ in @-@ law was the White House usher and made money giving out insider information . In all , it is estimated that 40 relatives somehow financially prospered indirectly while Grant was President . 
 = = Liberal Republican @-@ Democratic reform = = 
 = = = Liberal Republican = = = 
 The Liberal Republican movement initially began out of dissatisfaction with the centralized federal government controlled by the Radicals , a faction of the Republican Party who favored African American civil rights , a patronage system , high tariffs , and disenfranchising former confederates . It was the Radicals who sponsored the Presidency of Ulysses S. Grant . Senator Schurz , did not favor federal military intervention in Southern affairs or protecting blacks , and he was against miscegenation . In 1870 , Senator Carl Schurz and B. Gratz Brown , Governor of Missouri , broke away from the Radicals and officially founded the Liberal Republican Party . The founders argued that dependent citizens , corruption , and centralized power endangered people 's liberty . The party advocated confederate amnesty , civil service reform , and free trade . As the party grew nationally prominent persons joined including Charles Francis Adams , Jr . , Senator Charles Sumner , and editor of the Missouri Democrat , William M. Grosvenor . Grant , who was persuaded that the Liberal Republicans were bolting from the Republican Party , used the patronage system to purge them out of office in Missouri . 
 In 1872 , the Republican party split completely in half with Horace Greely nominated by the Liberal Republicans and Ulysses S. Grant again nominated by the more conservative Radicals . A few prominent Democratic Party leaders supported the Liberal Republican cause in Missouri . The result being that the Democratic Party endorsed the reformer and Liberal Republican presidential candidate Horace Greeley . Grant , though , remained very popular in the nation and won the national election of 1872 by a landslide . However , as more scandals broke out the Liberal Republicans became a party of reform who , along with the Democrats , wanted to purge the government from corruption . The wave of reform was beginning in 1875 with the Democrats controlling the House of Representatives . Eventually , Grant put reformers on his cabinet as House investigations in 1875 were beginning to expose the Whiskey Ring depleting tax revenues in the United States Treasury Department . Newspapers exposed bogus agents in Interior Department in 1875 . Navy Department corruption was exposed in 1876 . These Grant reformers included Benjamin Bristow as Secretary of Treasury ( 1874 ) , Edwards Pierrepont as Attorney General ( 1875 ) , and Zachariah Chandler as Secretary of the Interior ( 1875 ) . No reformer was appointed to the Navy Department , however . 
 The Liberal Republican movement lasted from 1870 to 1875 and at times it is difficult to distinguish between party members , both Democrat and Republican , who adopted all or parts of the Liberal Republican reform agenda . President Ulysses S. Grant signed the Amnesty Act of 1872 , a Liberal Republican platform , that gave amnesty to former Confederates . Another instance occurred when the Democratic Party reluctantly and chaotically melded with the Liberal Republican Party in the presidential election of 1872 , in support of the reformer , Horace Greeley . The height of the Liberal Republican era in the U.S. Congress was from the periods of 1873 to 1875 with 7 Liberal Republicans in the Senate and 4 Liberal Republicans in the House of Representatives . 
 = = = Democratic Party = = = 
 The Democratic Party reform movement in Congress , although initially a minority after the American Civil War , began during their investigation into the Grant Administration following the Black Friday gold speculation scandal in 1869 . The Democratic reform movement sought to expose the corruption in the Grant Administration and to do this needed a majority in the House of Representatives . Following the inability of the Grant Administration and Republican Congress to stop the damaging economic effects from Panic of 1873 , in addition to the unpopularity of the Republican Reconstruction Acts , the Democratic Party , on March 4 , 1875 gained a majority in the House of Representatives . Having gained the majority , the Democrats became the reforming party . For the next two years they investigated corruption scandals in the Grant Administration to increase their chances of winning the 1876 presidential election . 
 = = Causes of national corruption = = 
 The scandals in the Grant Administration were indicative of greater national moral decline . According to one respected historian , C. Vann Woodward , there are three primary forces that caused national corruption during this time period . The most compelling event that lead to corruption was the Civil War itself , unleashing a torrent of human depravity , deaths and <unk> gained riches enabled by persons who rose from deserved obscurity to powerful military and civilian positions . These men — the claim agents , speculators , subsidy @-@ seekers , government contractors , and the all @-@ purpose crooks — were born from the war and entered politics after the fighting stopped . The second generator of corruption was the opening of the West and South to unrestrained exploitation that caused older parts of the country to fall into moral confusion . The third cause , according to Vann Woodward , was the rapid rise of American industrialism , which loosened the nation 's standards and values . Americans found themselves released from discipline and restraint by the rapid growth of industrial wealth after the Civil War . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The nation and the constitution survived the rising tide of financial and political corruption during President Grant 's two terms in office from 1869 to 1877 . With slavery no longer the clear moral issue for the American people , and absent the dynamic leadership of Abraham Lincoln taken by an assassin 's bullet , the nation for a while floundered in the seas of financial and political indulgence . The high @-@ water mark of the flood of corruption that swept the nation took place in 1874 , after Benjamin Bristow was put in charge to reform the Treasury . In 1873 , Grant 's friend and publisher , Mark Twain , along with coauthor Charles Dudley Warner , called this American era of speculation and corruption the Gilded Age . Between 1870 and 1900 , the United States population nearly doubled in size , gainful employment increased by 132 percent , and non farm labor constituted 60 percent of the work force . 
 Inevitably , Grant 's low standards in cabinet appointments , and his readiness to cover for associates or friends involved in condemnable behavior , defied the popular notion of a government free of corruption and favoritism . Stemming the flood of corruption that swept the nation during Grant 's presidency and the Reconstruction period would have required the strength of a moral giant in the White House . Grant was no moral giant . In fairness , the booming economy that proceeded after the Civil War enveloped the whole nation in a chaotic frenzy for achieving financial gain and success . The caricature and cliché of the Grant Presidency is eight years of political plundering and that little was accomplished . Grant , however , was committed to complete the unification of a bitterly divided country torn by Civil War , to honor Abraham Lincoln , and give full citizenship rights to African Americans and their posterity . 
 An analysis of the scandals reveals the many powers at Grant 's disposal as the President of the United States . His confidants knew this and in many situations took advantage of Grant 's presidential authority . Having the ability to pardon , accept resignations , and even vouch for an associate in a deposition , created an environment difficult , though not impossible , for reformers in and outside of the Grant Administration . Grant himself , far from being politically naive , had played a shrewd hand at times in the protection of cabinet and appointees . Examples include not allowing Benjamin Bristow to move the Tax Revenue Supervisors and relinquishing immunity in the Whiskey Ring cases , made Grant a protector of political patronage . In fairness , Grant did appoint cabinet reformers and special prosecutors that were able to clean up the Treasury , Interior , War , and Justice departments . Grant , himself , personally participated in reforming the Department of Indian Affairs , by firing all the corrupt clerks . No reforming cabinet member , however , was installed in the Department of Navy . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Ambrose , Stephen E. ( 2001 ) . Nothing Like it in the World : The Men Who Built the Transcontinental Railroad , 1863 – 1869 . New York : Simon & Schuster . ISBN 0 @-@ 684 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Barnett , Louise ( 2006 ) . Touched by fire : the life , death , and mythic afterlife of George Armstrong . Bison Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Bunting III , Josiah ( 2001 ) . A. M. Schlesinger Junior , ed . Ulysses S. Grant . Times Books , Henry Holt and Company , LCC . ISBN 0 @-@ 8050 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Calhoun , Charles William ( 2007 ) . The gilded age : perspectives on the origins of modern America . Rowman & Littlefield . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7425 @-@ 5038 @-@ 4 . 
 Donovan , James ( 2008 ) . A Terrible Glory . New York , New York : Back Bay Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 316 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 The Encyclopedia Americana 8 . New York : J.B. Lyon Company . 1918 . 
 Garland , Hamlin ( 1898 ) . Ulysses S. Grant His life and character . New York Double Day & McClure Co . 
 Grossman , Mark ( 2003 ) . Political corruption in America : an encyclopedia of scandals , power , and greed . ABC @-@ Clio . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 57607 @-@ 060 @-@ 4 . 
 Hatfield , Mark O. ; Ritchie , Donald A. ( 2001 ) . Vice Presidents of the United States , <unk> 1993 ( PDF ) . Washington , D.C. : U.S. Government Printing Office . ISBN <unk> . 
 Hinsdale , Mary Louise ( 1911 ) . A History of the President 's Cabinet . Ann Arbor , MI : G. Wahr . 
 McFeely , William S. ( 1981 ) . Grant : A Biography . W.W. Norton & Company . ISBN 0 @-@ 393 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Morris , Charles R. ( 2005 ) . The <unk> : How Andrew Carnegie , John D. Rockefeller , Jay Gould , and J.P. Morgan Invented the American <unk> . New York : H. Holt and Co . ISBN 0 @-@ 8050 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 O 'Brien , Frank Michael ( 1918 ) . The story of the Sun : New York , 1833 – 1918 . New York : Doran . 
 Pierson , Arthur Tappan ( 1880 ) . Zachariah Chandler : an outline sketch of his life and public services . Detroit : Post and Tribune . 
 Rhodes , James Ford ( 1912 ) . History of the United States from the Compromise of 1850 to the Final Restoration of Home Rule at the South in 1877 . New York : The MacMillan Company . 
 Salinger , Lawrence M. ( 2005 ) . Encyclopedia of White @-@ collar & Corporate Crime . Thousand Oaks , California : Sage Publications . ISBN 0 @-@ 7619 @-@ 3004 @-@ 3 . 
 Simon , John Y. ; Grant , Ulysses S. ( 2005 ) . The Papers of Ulysses S. Grant 27 . Southern Illinois University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8093 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Slap , Andrew L. ( 2006 ) . The doom of Reconstruction : the liberal Republicans in the Civil War era . Fordham University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8232 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Smith , Jean Edward ( 2001 ) . Grant . Simon and Schuster . ISBN 0 @-@ 684 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Spenser , Jesse Ames ( 1913 ) . Edwin Wiley , ed . The United States Its Beginnings , Progress and Modern Development 9 . New York , New York : American Educational Alliance . 
 Stevens , Walter Barlow ; Bixby , William Kenny ( 1916 ) . Grant in Saint Louis . Franklin Club of Saint Louis . 
 Swann , Leonard Alexander ( 1980 ) . John Roach , maritime entrepreneur . Ayer Co Pub . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 405 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Twain , Mark ; Warner , Charles Dudley ( 1874 ) . The Gilded Age . Nabu Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 142 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 = = = Newspapers = = = 
 Staff writer ( September 8 , 1876 ) . " The Safe Burglary Case : Preparing for the trial – Witnesses for the defense summoned " . The New York Times ( New York , NY ) . 
 Staff writer ( September 23 , 1876 ) . " The Safe Burglary Case : Columbus Alexander and Major Richards of the Washington police examined " . The New York Times ( New York , NY ) . 
 = = = Online = = = 
 " 1876 Events " . Harpers Weekly . Retrieved March 12 , 2010 . 
 Kennedy , Robert C. Kennedy ( 2001 ) . " ' Why We Laugh ' Pro Tem " . Harper 's Weekly . Retrieved March 11 , 2010 . 
 <unk> , David ; <unk> , Ray . " Excerpted from Presidential <unk> " . <unk> Retrieved March 12 , 2010 . 
 " Party Divisions of the House of Representatives ( 1879 to Present ) " . U.S. House of Representatives . Retrieved January 18 , 2010 . 
 " Party Division in the Senate , 1789 – Present " . U.S. Senate . Retrieved January 18 , 2010 . 
 Pesca , Mike ( November 2 , 2005 ) . " Orville Babcock 's Indictment and the CIA Leak Case " . Day to Day . Retrieved January 2 , 2010 . 
 Rives , Timothy ( 2000 ) . " Grant , Babcock , and the Whiskey Ring " . <unk> Retrieved January 18 , 2010 . 
 Shenkman , Rick . " The Last High White House Official Indicted While in Office : U.S. Grant 's Orville Babcock " . History News Network . Retrieved February 24 , 2010 . 
 Woodward , C. Vann ( April 1957 ) . " The Lowest Ebb " . American Heritage . Retrieved February 24 , 2010 . 
 = Architecture of Scotland in the Prehistoric era = 
 The architecture of Scotland in the prehistoric era includes all human building within the modern borders of Scotland , before the arrival of the Romans in Britain in the first century BCE . Stone Age settlers began to build in wood in what is now Scotland from at least 8 @,@ 000 years ago . The first permanent houses of stone were constructed around 6 @,@ 000 years ago , as at Knap of Howar , Orkney and settlements like Skara Brae . There are also large numbers of chambered tombs and cairns from this era , particularly in the west and north . In the south and east there are earthen barrows , often linked to timber monuments of which only remnants remain . Related structures include bank barrows , cursus monuments , mortuary enclosures and timber halls . From the Bronze Age there are fewer new buildings , but there is evidence of crannogs , roundhouses built on an artificial islands and of Clava cairns and the first hillforts . From the Iron Age there is evidence of substantial stone Atlantic roundhouses , which include broch towers , smaller duns . There is also evidence of about 1 @,@ 000 hillforts in Scotland , most located below the Clyde @-@ Forth line . 
 = = Stone Age = = 
 The oldest house for which there is evidence in Britain is the oval structure of wooden posts found at South Queensferry near the Firth of Forth , dating from the Mesolithic period , about 8240 BCE . The earliest stone structures are probably the three hearths found at Jura , dated to about 6000 BCE . With the development of agriculture , groups of settlers began building stone houses on what is now Scottish soil in the Neolithic era , around 6 @,@ 000 years ago , and the first villages around 500 years later . Neolithic habitation , burial and ritual sites are particularly common and well @-@ preserved in the Northern and Western Isles , where a lack of trees led to most structures being built of local stone . The stone building at Knap of Howar at Papa Westray , Orkney is one of the oldest surviving houses in north @-@ west Europe , making use of locally gathered rubble in a dry @-@ stone construction , it was probably occupied for 900 years , between 3700 and 2800 BCE . Skara Brae on the Mainland of Orkney also dates from this era , occupied from about 3100 to 2500 BCE and is Europe 's most complete Neolithic village . 
 There are also large numbers of chambered tombs and cairns from this period . Many different types have been identified , but they can be roughly grouped into passage graves , gallery graves and stone cists . <unk> are relatively simple box @-@ like graves , usually made up of stone slaps and covered with a large stone or slab . Maes Howe , near Stenness on the mainland of Orkney ( dated 3400 – 3200 BCE ) and Monamore , Isle of Arran ( dated approximately 3500 BCE ) are passage graves , of megalith construction , built with large stones , many of which weigh several tons . Gallery graves are rectangular gallery @-@ like spaces , where the entrance at one end is the width of the gallery . These were sometimes lined or roofed with slabs and then covered with earth . Among the most impressive surviving monuments of the period are the first sets of standing stones in Scotland , such as those at Stenness on the mainland of Orkney , which date from about 3100 BCE , of four stones , the tallest of which is 16 feet ( 5 m ) in height . 
 In contrast to the Highlands and Islands where stone was extensively used , in the south and east the most visible architectural survivals of the Neolithic are mainly earthen barrows , the earliest probably dating from the beginning of the fourth millennium BCE . Today these monuments consist of massive mounds of earth or stone , most commonly trapezoidal in plan and often orientated to the east . They are widely distributed in the Lowlands , particularly in Aberdeenshire , Angus , Dumfries and Galloway and the Scottish Borders . Related structures include bank barrows , cursus monuments , mortuary enclosures , timber halls , and other forms of enclosure . Bank barrows are parallel @-@ sided mounds , usually flanked by ditches on either side . Originally believed to be Roman in origin , cursus monuments also consist of long parallel lengths of banks of earth with external ditches , but with an open avenue or enclose between . Both forms are usually associated with burial chambers . Examples of bank barrows in Scotland include from Perthshire the long mound at <unk> and the hybrid bank barrow / cursus monument and at <unk> Dyke , which stretches for over 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 km ) . Mortuary enclosures are usually sub @-@ rectangular banks with external ditches and raised platforms of stone or wood within them , thought by J. G. Scott to be used for the exposure of corpses prior to burial elsewhere , although this interpretation is disputed . Remains of mortuary enclosures of this period are often found under long barrows . Key examples include <unk> , Perthshire and two closely related sites at <unk> and <unk> , both in Kirkcudbright . The timber halls are probably unique to Scotland and were massive roofed buildings made of oak , all of which seem to have been subsequently burnt down . There is debate as to the role of these buildings , which have been seen variously as regular farming homesteads of Neolithic families and as related to a series of monumental constructions such as barrows . The hall at Balbridie , Aberdeenshire was 85 feet ( 26 m ) long , 43 feet ( 13 m ) wide and may have had a roof 30 feet ( 9 m ) high , making it large enough to accommodate up to 50 people . 
 = = Bronze Age = = 
 As bronze working developed from about 2000 BCE , there was a decline in the building of large new structures , which , with a reduction of the total area under cultivation , suggests a fall in population . From the Early and Middle Bronze Age there is evidence of cellular round houses of stone , as at Jarlshof and Sumburgh on Shetland . At Jarlshof these are oval houses with thick stone walls , which may have been partly subterranean at the earliest period of inhabitation , a technique that provided both structural stability and insulation . There is also evidence of the occupation of crannogs , roundhouses partially or entirely built on an artificial islands , usually in lakes , rivers and estuarine waters . They were often constructed of layers of brushwood and rubble . Sometimes they were revetted around the edges with vertical piles and sometimes surfaced with logs of oak . 
 The creation of cairns and Megalithic monuments continued into this period . There are approximately fifty Clava cairns in Scotland , named after those at <unk> of Clava near Inverness . They take two distinct forms , either a circular rubble enclosure known as " ring cairns " , or passage graves , with a long entrance , usually in complex astronomical alignments . As elsewhere in Europe , hill forts were first introduced in this period , including the occupation of Eildon hill near Melrose in the Scottish Borders , from around 1000 BCE , which accommodated several hundred houses on a fortified hilltop , and Traprain Law in East Lothian , which had a 20 @-@ acre enclosure , sectioned in two places west of the summit , made up of a coursed , stone wall with a rubble core . 
 = = Iron Age = = 
 In the early Iron Age , from the seventh century BCE , cellular houses begin to be replaced on the northern isles by simple Atlantic roundhouses , substantial circular buildings with a drystone construction . Important examples are at Quanterness , Bu , Pierowall , and Tofts Ness on Orkney , and at <unk> on Shetland . From about 400 BC more complex Atlantic roundhouses began to be built , as at Howe , Orkney and Crosskirk , Caithness . 
 The most massive constructions that date from this era are the circular broch towers , probably dating from about 200 BCE . They are drystone hollow @-@ walled structures that are unique to Scotland . Most ruins only survive up to a few metres above ground level , although there are five extant examples of towers whose walls still exceed 21 feet ( 6 m ) in height . There are at least 100 broch sites in Scotland , of which the best preserved include those at South <unk> near Wick , Midhowe Broch on Orkney and the Broch of <unk> and the Broch of Mousa in Shetland . Despite extensive research , their purpose and the nature of the societies that created them are still a matter of debate . 
 Archaeologists since the 1960s have distinguished brochs from smaller structures of similar construction , usually called duns . The heaviest evidence of the occupation of crannogs was in this era , but they would continue to be used until the Middle Ages . This period also saw the beginnings of wheelhouses , a roundhouse with a characteristic outer wall , within which was a circle of stone piers ( bearing a resemblance to the spokes of a wheel ) , but these would flourish most in the era of Roman occupation . There is evidence for about 1 @,@ 000 Iron Age hillforts in Scotland , most located below the Clyde @-@ Forth line . The majority are circular , with a single palisade around an enclosure . Most are relatively small , covering one or two acres , but some are much larger as at Castle O 'er , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and White <unk> . They appear to have been largely abandoned in the Roman period , but some seem to have been reoccupied after their departure . 
 = 1953 – 54 Port Vale F.C. season = 
 The 1953 – 54 season was Port Vale 's 42nd season of football in the Football League , and their fifth season overall in the Third Division North . Freddie Steele 's side were crowned Third Division North champions with 69 points out of a possible 92 , eleven points ahead of their nearest rivals . They also reached the semi @-@ finals of the FA Cup , and would be denied an appearance in the final due to a controversial goal from a dubious penalty . These achievements were based upon a record @-@ breaking ' Iron Curtain ' defence , and a solid squad of nineteen players , most of whom had taken the club to second in the league the previous season . 
 Seven still @-@ standing club records were set this season , including three Football League records . One Football League record was for the fewest Football League goals conceded in a 46 match season – 26 , just over one every two games . Just five of these were conceded at home , another Football League record . This was based upon 30 clean sheets , again a Football League record . They also recorded a club record low of three league defeats , and a club record home clean sheet streak of eleven matches , lasting from 7 September 1953 to 13 February 1954 . Another club record was a streak of six away draws , lasting from 20 March to 26 April . They were undefeated at home all season , continuing a 42 match unbeaten run started on 8 November 1952 , that would last until 18 September 1954 . 
 The key players that formed the first eleven of 1953 – 54 were : Ray King ( goalkeeper ) ; Reg Potts and Stan Turner ( full @-@ backs ) ; Tommy Cheadle , Albert Leake , Roy Sproson ( half @-@ backs ) ; Colin Askey , John Cunliffe , Ken Griffiths , Basil Hayward , and Albert Mullard ( forwards ) ; Derek Tomkinson ( reserve forward ) . Their achievements came as a team , without any outstanding stars , which caused The Sentinel to remark that the whole team were stars . 
 = = Pre @-@ season = = 
 The pre @-@ season saw no new signings as the young , mostly local squad that had finished second in the 1952 – 53 campaign was enough for manager Freddie Steele . Steele signed a three @-@ year contract following his success the previous season . He considered signing Stoke City goalkeeper Dennis Herod , and the two parties held talks before he was instead sold to Stockport County for £ 500 . Alf Jones was given his first professional contract , whilst Selwyn Whalley ( who was training to become teacher ) , Harry Oliver and John Poole ( both engineering apprentices ) all were given part @-@ time professional contracts . Don Bould and Ron Fitzgerald returned from national service to become full @-@ time professionals . This gave the club a total of 21 full @-@ time professionals , six part @-@ time players and ten players aged 17 – 21 who could only play and train if they could find time off from their compulsory two @-@ year national service . The strip was a traditional white shirt with black shorts , whilst the change kit of red and white stripes were donated by a friend of one of the club 's directors , who was a Sunderland supporter . 
 There was only one public pre @-@ season friendly on 13 August , which saw the club 's first team take on the reserves ; it ended with a surprise 4 – 2 victory for the reserves , Roland Lewis scoring a hat @-@ trick . Pre @-@ season training consisted primarily of assistant manager Ken Fish leading a marathon running session from Burslem to Hanley and back to Burslem following a stop at a pub for a half @-@ pint of shandy . After returning to the ground Fish would organise a practise game . The fitness work was actually crucial to the team 's success , as Steele was ahead of his time in that he insisted that wide players should defend when the opposition were on the ball , in order to support the defence . Superstition was of great importance to Steele , who ensured that the team rigidly stuck their pre @-@ match rituals such as the intricacies of kit layout and the order in which players entered the pitch . 
 = = Third Division North = = 
 The season began with a 2 – 1 win over Mansfield Town at Field Mill on 19 August ; Chris Marron put Mansfield ahead on 52 minutes , before Roy Sproson scored the equaliser on 69 minutes , Basil Hayward scored the winning goal three minutes later after being the first to react to the rebound that came when Colin Askey 's shot hit the crossbar . The main surprise in the line @-@ up of the opening day was that goalkeeper Ray Hancock had been dropped in favour of Ray King after King impressed in the pre @-@ season friendly , the club 's positive season meant that Hancock was unable to win back his place in the side . Vale were then held to two consecutive goalless draws but remained unbeaten in their first seven league games , conceding just two goals . This run included a 3 – 0 win over Darlington at Feethams , and a 4 – 0 win over Barrow in which Hayward scored a hat @-@ trick . They had risen to the top of the table by the third game of the season and remained in first place until the end of the season . Of the Barrow first eleven that day three of the players were brothers : Jack , Alan and Bert Keen . 
 Vale lost by a single goal at Redheugh Park against Gateshead on 12 September ; Vale , playing in their change kit , were beaten by a 57th @-@ minute goal from John Ingham . This brought to an end the club 's then @-@ record streak of 16 games unbeaten . Four days later Vale recorded a 2 – 1 win over Bradford Park Avenue at the Horsfall Stadium despite Reg Potts being injured with a swollen ankle early in the match . A 2 – 0 home win over Workington on 19 September began a sequence of five clean sheets , with Jim <unk> standing in for Potts as Steele changed the starting line @-@ up for the first time in eight games – this brought Potts ' run of 73 consecutive appearances to an end . The defensive fivesome of keeper Ray King , Tommy Cheadle , Reg Potts , Stan Turner and Roy Sproson began to be known as ' the Iron Curtain ' or ' the Steele Curtain ' ( a play on the manager 's name ) . A 21 September game against nearby unbeaten Crewe Alexandra was billed as a ' crunch clash ' between first and second , and a Sproson goal on 87 minutes won the match for the Vale . For the return a week later a stadium record 17 @,@ 883 packed into Gresty Road to witness a goalless draw at Crewe . The attendance figures were helped by the management team of the Crewe Works , who allowed their workforce to leave work an hour early in order to make it for the 5 : 10pm kick @-@ off . The draw was achieved despite injuries to Albert Leake , Hayward and John Cunliffe , who were replaced by Derek Tomkinson , Roland Lewis and Mick <unk> . 
 On 3 October , Vale secured the biggest ever win at Vale Park when they beat York City 5 – 0 . Seven days later Vale 's clean sheet streak came to an end , though they still secured a 2 – 1 victory over Chesterfield at Saltergate ; Cyril Hatton was the scorer for Chesterfield , though it proved not enough to save his team 's unbeaten home record . Albert Mullard had a penalty kick saved towards the end of the game by goalkeeper Ron Powell , the only one of two penalties the club were awarded throughout the campaign . Vale then beat Tranmere Rovers 2 – 0 after their defence successfully contained the threat posed by the division 's then @-@ top scorer Cyril Done . The following week they won 1 – 0 at Halifax Town in a game where Ken Griffiths hit the woodwork three times . 
 On 7 November , Vale conceded twice in one game for the first time in the season , as Peel Park saw their Accrington Stanley side achieve a 2 – 2 draw with the Vale . Vale lost a two @-@ goal lead in the match , as Ian Brydon scored after the ball got stuck in the mud and then Les Cocker scored the equalising goal after Ray King failed to hold on to a shot . By this time Vale were building a significant point advantage over the rest of the league . On 28 November , Ken Griffiths scored a hat @-@ trick as Vale ' tore apart ' a poor Rochdale side 6 – 0 , exceeding the record Vale Park win that had been set only two months earlier . 
 Steele was investigated by a joint FA / Football League inquiry for his time as Mansfield Town manager in regard to suspected illegal payments – found guilty , he was given a £ 250 fine ( equivalent to around £ 6 @,@ 000 in 2014 ) . The good run of results continued though , as they beat fifth @-@ placed Barnsley 1 – 0 at Oakwell through a Hayward goal . On Christmas Day and Boxing Day Vale recorded two 1 – 0 wins over Chester , with Hayward again the only player to find the net . Captain Tommy Cheadle pulled a hamstring against Chester , and lost his place in the team as Steele moved the positions around to accommodate Derek Tomkinson in the team . Roland Lewis was made available on a free transfer in December , and moved to non @-@ league side Witton Albion . 
 The club were granted a licence to build a stand on the Railway Terrace at a cost of £ 25 @,@ 000 . Vale struggled in the league in early 1954 , losing 2 – 1 to Hartlepools United in a fierce wind at Victoria Park . Cheadle was again absent through injury , as two goals from Tommy McGuigan ended Vale 's record run of 21 games unbeaten . Title rivals Gateshead then left Vale Park with a point after a goalless draw , ending the club 's record run of 12 consecutive home victories . 
 A shock came on 6 February , when Bill Shankly 's Workington earned a 2 – 0 win at Borough Park – the only time in the season Vale lost by more than one goal . Seven days later Scunthorpe & Lindsey United left Vale Park with a point as the home side came close to finding the net on numerous occasions without success despite one shot from Hayward partially injuring goalkeeper Norman Malan after he struck the ball hard into Malan 's jaw . Following this short run of poor form they next recorded a win against York City , securing a 1 – 0 victory at Bootham Crescent . On 27 February , Chesterfield became the first away side to score at Vale Park since September , as they fought back from a two @-@ goal deficit to win a point . Vale had previously conceded just one goal in 20 home games over an 11 @-@ month period , and had last conceded twice in a home league game on 30 August 1952 . 
 On 6 March , Tranmere Rovers striker Bill Bainbridge put his side ahead at Prenton Park , but the Vale equalised within two minutes and went on to win the game 3 – 1 . They beat Halifax 2 – 0 the following week , with both goals coming in the last 14 minutes of the game . The trip to face Carlisle United at Brunton Park five days later saw six players sit out with injuries , leaving Hancock , Tomkinson , Len Barber , <unk> , <unk> and Alan Bennett all to make rare appearances ; Ken Fish also took charge of the team as Freddie Steele was watching FA Cup opponents West Bromwich Albion . The game finished goalless , with both Hancock and " Cumbrians " goalkeeper Jimmy McLaren receiving praise for several excellent saves . Vale ended the month with a 1 – 0 victory over Accrington Stanley despite Barber missing the second and last penalty the club would be awarded in the season . 
 Despite playing twelve games in thirty days throughout April they remained unbeaten . On 10 April they thrashed Stockport County 7 – 0 in a ground record victory , with Hayward scoring a hat @-@ trick – they were 6 – 0 up after 36 minutes but then proceeded to play at ' a pleasant trot ' . The championship title was secured on 17 April at Spotland with a goalless draw with Rochdale . They conceded just two goals in their final seven league games . 
 Vale finished top of the table with 69 points , eleven clear of second @-@ placed Barnsley . Their 26 league goals conceded in a 46 games was a record . Just five of these were conceded at home , another Football League record . This was based upon 30 clean sheets , again a Football League record . Ray King kept 29 of these clean sheets , a record only equalled by Gillingham goalkeeper Jim Stannard in 1995 – 96 . Vale 's tally of just three league defeats was a club record . They were undefeated at home all season , continuing a 42 match unbeaten run started on 8 November 1952 , that would last until 18 September 1954 . Their achievements was built on a settled squad of nineteen players , twelve of which played regularly . They were the first team to play 54 competitive games in a single season . 
 = = = Results = = = 
 Port Vale 's score comes first 
 Sourced from Statto . 
 = = = Final league table = = = 
 P 
 = Matches played ; W = 
 Matches won ; D 
 = Matches drawn ; L = 
 Matches lost ; F 
 = Goals for ; A = 
 Goals against ; GA 
 = Goal average ; Pts = 
 Points 
 = = FA Cup = = 
 In the FA Cup , a 3 – 1 win at Feethams took the Vale past league rivals Darlington in the First Round . Les Robson had put the " Quakers " ahead by half @-@ time after Ray King miss @-@ kicked a clearance , but the Vale controlled the game as soon as Albert Leake scored the equaliser . 
 In the Second Round Vale drew another league rival in Southport , who battled to a 1 – 1 draw at Haig Avenue on 12 December , Harry Whitworth 's header cancelling out Basil Hayward 's opener . The Vale players later admitted they were fortunate to come away with a draw , especially seen as Colin Askey and Albert Leake spent much of the game limping . Two days later Vale recorded a 2 – 0 win in the replay in what was a tough game . 
 In the Third Round , Queens Park Rangers of the Third Division South were beaten 1 – 0 at Loftus Road . The pitch was muddy and the weather was pouring rain in a game that was inevitably poor in quality , settled in the 50th minute by Albert Leake following a long ball played by John Cunliffe . 
 The Fourth Round held First Division club Cardiff City in snowy conditions at Ninian Park . Vale won 2 – 0 , and their victory was aided by the fact that Cardiff goalkeeper Ron Howells had to leave the pitch after 20 minutes after being knocked out following a collision with defender Derrick Sullivan , leaving his ten @-@ man team to play 70 minutes with defender Alf Sherwood in goal . Vale attacked through the wings to get in numerous crosses to the box , from which Ken Griffiths and Albert Leake scored their goals . Centre @-@ half Tommy Cheadle restricted centre @-@ forward Trevor Ford to a quiet game , and at full @-@ time the pair were full of bruises but still left the pitch with a handshake and a smile . Cardiff placed a £ 25 @,@ 000 transfer bid for winger Colin Askey , and after their offer was rejected Cardiff stated they were prepared to pay more than £ 25 @,@ 000 , but Port Vale refused any negotiations . Other top clubs also made inquiries , but were all turned away . 
 In the Fifth Round , the " Valiants " faced holders Blackpool , and 42 @,@ 000 tickets were sold for the clash at Vale Park . The victors of the ' Matthews Final ' brought Stanley Matthews and six other internationals to Vale Park , as well a travelling contingent of 10 @,@ 500 . Albert Leake scored two goals on the waterlogged pitch , as his team put ' a dazzling display in attack and defence ' and their ' hard @-@ fighting , quick @-@ on @-@ the @-@ ball play smothered Blackpool 's intricate approach work ' . 
 In the Sixth Round they faced Third Division South club Leyton Orient at Brisbane Road , as 8 @,@ 000 Vale fans made up a 31 @,@ 000 crowd . In the days leading up to the game thieves had stolen 1 @,@ 200 matchday tickets and police were vigilant to catch out anyone who tried to enter the stadium with these stolen tickets . The only goal of the game came from Leake – who struck the ball into the net after controlling the ball from a Hayward knock @-@ down from an Askey corner – put Vale into the semi @-@ finals , with the team ' delightedly mobbed ' by supporters after the finish . Ray King made a name for himself in the dying moments of the game after making a save from a George Poulton shot . 
 The 25 @,@ 000 tickets Vale were allotted for the semi @-@ final clash with West Bromwich Albion at Villa Park sold out on the first day . In all 100 coaches and 14 excursion trains took the supporters to Birmingham for the match on 27 March , at which time high @-@ scoring West Brom were top of the First Division – in all 68 @,@ 221 spectators packed into the stadium . This meant the match secured the club a total of £ 20 @,@ 086 in gate receipts . Ken Griffiths was unable to recover from a knee injury in time for the match and so was replaced by Derek Tomkinson , this was the first and only change to the first eleven throughout the cup run . In the match itself , the ' constructive play ' of Brom was halted by the Vale defence , and a Leake goal on 40 minutes saw Vale 1 – 0 up at half @-@ time . The second half saw the " Throstles " switch to a long ball game , and on 62 minutes Cheadle was bustled off the ball and could only watch the equaliser cross the line . Eight minutes later captain Cheadle was judged to have fouled George Lee just inside the penalty box , though the Port Vale players maintained that the challenge took place well outside of the box , and that Lee also handled the ball . Former " Valiant " star Ronnie Allen converted the resulting penalty . Later in the match Leake had an equalising goal disallowed for offside , and Vale therefore failed to be the first third tier club to reach an FA Cup Final . 
 " West Brom were top of the First Division at the time , but we were playing out of our skins and we should have gone through . We were devastated after the game . I guess it was just fate , it wasn 't meant to be – but that doesn 't make it any easier to take . They score two dodgy goals and we should have been going to Wembley . Their first goal was a fluke of an own goal which came off the back of Tommy Cheadle 's head . Poor Tommy was as deaf as a door post and I was shouting at him to leave it , but he didn 't hear me and he slipped and put it in the net ... Also , the penalty was never a penalty ; the foul was easily outside the box . Looking at the television replays of the incident , even in grainy black and white , you can see that is obvious . Ronnie Allen , who used to play for Vale , took the penalty . He used to practise them against me in those days , so I knew exactly where was going to hit it , and he knew that I knew . When he stepped up , though , he hammered it right into the corner . I got my fingertips to it , but it was hit too hard and flew into the net – and that was that , we were out . " 
 = = = Results = = = 
 = = Finances = = 
 On the financial side , a new profit of £ 2 @,@ 628 was recorded despite the only transfer activity being a £ 350 credit . Gate receipts had risen by more than £ 11 @,@ 000 to £ 50 @,@ 940 thanks to a then club record average attendance of 16 @,@ 702 . No first team players departed in the summer of 1954 due to the club 's " no buy , no sell " policy . At the end of the season only four players were released : William Cook , <unk> , Alf Jones and <unk> , whilst <unk> was made available on a free transfer . None of these five players would play a game in the Football League . In July 1954 the new stand at Vale Park was completed , providing cover for 4 @,@ 500 seated and 12 @,@ 000 standing spectators . The club charged £ 2 @.@ 50 for season tickets to the 42 @,@ 000 ( 1 @,@ 010 seated ) capacity stadium . 
 On 29 March 1954 , the Vale team played an " All @-@ Star XI " in order to raise money for former Port Vale playing staff who had given long service to the club . The All @-@ Star team was as follows : Frank Swift , Bert <unk> , Andy Beattie , Bill Corkhill , Les McDowall , Joe Mercer , Sammy Crooks , Raich Carter , Freddie Steele , Tim Ward and Peter Doherty ; the All @-@ Stars won 2 – 1 with both goals coming from Steele , making the club 's manager the first player to score two goals against the Vale in one match that season . 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 Notes 
 Players marked with an asterisk ( * ) were on national service for all or part of the season . 
 Positions are as follows : GK - goalkeeper , FB - full @-@ back , HB - half @-@ back , FW - forward . 
 = Shoshone National Forest = 
 Shoshone National Forest ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ nee ) is the first federally protected National Forest in the United States and covers nearly 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ha ) in the state of Wyoming . Originally a part of the Yellowstone Timberland Reserve , the forest is managed by the United States Forest Service and was created by an act of Congress and signed into law by U.S. President Benjamin Harrison in 1891 . Shoshone National Forest is one of the first nationally protected land areas anywhere . Native Americans have lived in the region for at least 10 @,@ 000 years , and when the region was first explored by European adventurers , forestlands were occupied by several different tribes . Never heavily settled or exploited , the forest has retained most of its wildness . Shoshone National Forest is a part of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem , a nearly unbroken expanse of federally protected lands encompassing an estimated 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 ha ) . 
 The Absaroka and Beartooth Mountains are partly in the northern section of the forest . The Wind River Range is in the southern portion and contains Gannett Peak , the tallest mountain in Wyoming . Yellowstone National Park forms part of the boundary to the west ; south of Yellowstone , the Continental Divide separates the forest from its neighbor Bridger @-@ Teton National Forest to the west . The eastern boundary includes privately owned property , lands managed by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management and the Wind River Indian Reservation , which belongs to the Shoshone and Arapahoe Indians . Custer National Forest along the Montana border is on the northern frontier . The Oregon Trail , the 19th century covered wagon route , passes just south of the forest , where broad and gentle South Pass allowed the migrants to bypass the rugged mountains to the north . 
 Shoshone National Forest has virtually all the original animal and plant species that were there when white explorers such as John Colter and Jim Bridger first visited the region . The forest is home to the Grizzly bear , cougar , moose , tens of thousands of elk as well as the largest herd of bighorn sheep in the U.S. The streams in the forest are considered to have some of the best game species fishing opportunities in the U.S. including Yellowstone cutthroat trout . More than 1 @,@ 300 miles of hiking trails , 32 campgrounds and adjacent forests and parklands provide numerous recreational opportunities . There are four wilderness areas within the forest , protecting more than half of the managed land area from development . From sagebrush plains through dense spruce and fir forest to craggy mountain peaks , Shoshone National Forest has a rich biodiversity rarely matched in any protected area . 
 = = Human history = = 
 Shoshone National Forest is named after the Shoshone Indians , who , along with other Native American groups such as the Lakota , Crow and Northern Cheyenne , were the major tribes encountered by the first white explorers into the region . Archeological evidence suggests that the presence of Indian tribes in the area extends back at least 10 @,@ 000 years . The forest provided an abundance of game meat , wood products , and shelter during the winter months from the more exposed high plains to the east . Portions of the more mountainous regions were frequented by the Shoshone and Sioux for spiritual healing and vision quests . By the early 1840s , Washakie had become the leader of the easternmost branch of the Shoshone Indians . At the Fort Bridger Treaty Council of 1868 Washakie negotiated with the U.S. Government for 44 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 18 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ha ) ) to be preserved as tribal lands . Subsequent amendments to the treaty reduced the actual acreage to approximately 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 810 @,@ 000 ha ) and is known today as the Wind River Indian Reservation . 
 In 1957 , Mummy Cave was rediscovered by a local resident on the north side of the North Fork Shoshone River , adjacent to U.S. Routes 14 / 16 / 20 , 15 mi ( 24 km ) east of Yellowstone National Park . Subsequent archeological excavations in the 1960s produced evidence that the cave had been occupied for over 9 @,@ 000 years . The oldest deposits in the cave yielded prismatic stone blades and other artifacts created by <unk> and the surrounding soils were radiocarbon dated to 7 @,@ 300 BC . The evidence indicates the cave was occupied from at least 7280 BC to 1580 AD . Besides projectile points , the cave also produced well preserved feathers , animal hides and other usually perishable materials . Additionally , the mummified remains of an individual buried inside a rock cairn were unearthed , which were dated to 800 AD . Considered one of the finest <unk> archeological assemblages in the Rocky Mountain region , the site was placed on the National Register of Historic Places list in 1981 . 
 In the early 19th century , the forest was visited by mountain men and explorers such as John Colter and Jim Bridger . Colter is the first white man known to have visited both the Yellowstone region and the forest , which he did between 1807 and 1808 . Having been an original member of the Lewis and Clark Expedition , Colter requested permission from Meriwether Lewis to leave the expedition after it had finished crossing the Rocky Mountains during their return journey from the Pacific Ocean . Colter teamed up with two unaffiliated explorers the expedition had encountered , but soon thereafter decided to explore regions south of where his new partners wished to venture . Traveling first into the northeastern region of what is today Yellowstone National Park , Colter then explored the Absaroka Mountains , crossing over Togwotee Pass and entering the valley known today as Jackson Hole . Colter survived a grizzly bear attack and a pursuit by a band of Blackfeet Indians who had taken his horse . The explorer later provided William Clark , who had been his commander on the Lewis and Clark Expedition , with previously unknown information on the regions he had explored , which Clark published in 1814 . 
 Travels by fur trappers and adventurers , such as Manuel Lisa and Jim Bridger from 1807 to 1840 , completed the exploration of the region . With the decline of the fur trade in the late 1840s and much of the prized beaver long since made scarce by over @-@ trapping , few white explorers entered the forest over the next few decades . The first federally financed expedition which passed through portions of Shoshone National Forest was the Raynolds Expedition of 1860 , led by topographical engineer Captain William F. Raynolds . The expedition included geologist and naturalist Ferdinand Vandeveer Hayden and was guided by mountain man Jim Bridger . Though the Raynolds Expedition was focused on exploration of the Yellowstone region , several efforts to enter what later became Yellowstone National Park were impeded by heavy snows across the mountain passes such as Two Ocean Pass . The expedition finally crossed the northern Wind River Range at a pass they named Union Pass and entered Jackson Hole valley to the south of Yellowstone . Hayden led another expedition through the region in 1871 . Hayden was primarily interested in documenting the Yellowstone country west of the forest , but his expedition also established that the forest was a prime resource that merited protection . Travels in the forest in the 1880s by later U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt , who was also a strong advocate of land conservation , as well as by General Philip Sheridan , provided the impetus that subsequently established the Yellowstone Timberland Reserve in 1891 , creating the first national forest in the U.S. 
 In 1902 , President Roosevelt first greatly expanded the reserve and then divided the reserve into four separate units , with Shoshone being the largest . Upon the creation of the U.S. Forest Service in 1905 , the reserve was designated a National Forest , but the current wording and title were formulated forty years later in 1945 . A remnant of the earliest years of the forest management is the Wapiti Ranger Station which is located west of Cody , Wyoming . The station was built in 1903 and is the oldest surviving ranger station in any national forest , and is now designated a National Historic Landmark . 
 Prior to the establishment of the Wind River Indian Reservation , the U.S. Cavalry constructed Fort Brown on the reservation lands , which was subsequently renamed Fort Washakie . During the late 19th century , the fort was staffed by African @-@ American members of the U.S. Cavalry , better known as the Buffalo Soldiers , including the second African @-@ American graduated from the United States Military Academy , John Hanks Alexander . Chief Washakie is buried at the fort , which is located immediately east of the forest boundary . Rumor has it that Sacajawea , the Shoshone Indian who provided invaluable assistance to Meriwether Lewis and William Clark during the Lewis and Clark Expedition , is also buried here , but it is now considered that this is unlikely and that her actual burial place was Fort Lisa in North Dakota . 
 During the last decade of the 19th century , minerals such as gold were mined with limited success . The last mine was abandoned in 1907 , but panning for gold is still allowed in many areas of the forest , and in most circumstances no permit is required . After the end of the mining era , numerous camps were established by the Civilian Conservation Corps to help combat unemployment during the Great Depression of the 1930s . The camps housed groups of unemployed men who were paid by the federal government to build roads , hiking trails , and campgrounds for future travelers to the Yellowstone region . Visitation to national forests like Shoshone increased dramatically after World War II with the advent of better roads and accessibility to the region . 
 = = Forest management = = 
 Shoshone National Forest is managed by the U.S. Forest Service , an agency within the U.S. Department of Agriculture . The forest is separated into five districts and from 2008 and 2012 had an average staff of 165 employees and an annual operating budget of $ 17 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . The headquarters and a visitor center are in Cody , Wyoming and a smaller information center is in Lander , Wyoming . There are local ranger district offices in Cody , Dubois and Lander . 
 Shoshone National Forest practices conservation of resources , which ensures a sustainable flow of some raw materials from the forest , such as lumber for construction purposes and wood pulp for paper products . The forest averages an annual harvest of 4 @.@ 5 million board @-@ feet of timber for the purposes of commercial log home construction and another 2 @.@ 5 million board @-@ feet of wood collection from dead and down trees that are used for firewood and poles . Additionally , low @-@ scale mineral extraction and oil and gas exploration and recovery are also conducted , though in Shoshone National Forest this has become less common due to a consensus to protect the natural surroundings . Only 8 @,@ 570 acres ( 3 @,@ 470 ha ) of oil and gas leases were filed as of 2013 . More common than logging and mining are the lease options that are offered to ranchers to allow them to graze cattle and sheep . The U.S. Forest Service provides guidelines and enforces environmental regulations to ensure that resources are not overexploited and that necessary commodities are available for future generations , though conservation groups have voiced concerns over the management practices of the leasing program and especially cattle overgrazing problems . Leases for sheep grazing have declined considerably since the 1940s while cattle grazing has remained relatively constant . 
 = = Natural resources = = 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 Shoshone National Forest is an integral part of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem , which has 1 @,@ 700 documented species of plants . Since the elevation of the land in the forest ranges from 4 @,@ 600 to 13 @,@ 804 ft ( 1 @,@ 402 to 4 @,@ 207 m ) , which is more than 9 @,@ 000 ft ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) , the forest has a wide variety of ecosystems . Lower elevations often have sagebrush and grass @-@ dominated vegetation types , while forested areas are dominated by various combinations of tree and shrub species . These include lodgepole pine , which along with Rocky Mountain juniper , and quaking aspen are found at elevations up to 9 @,@ 000 ft ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) . At higher elevations subalpine fir , Engelmann spruce , whitebark pine and limber pine , are common , each occurring up to timberline . The region above timberline makes up 25 percent of the total acreage of the forest and of that 13 percent is listed as just either barren , rock or ice . The types of plant species is highly dependent on the amount of water available , and trees are more commonly found on higher slopes due to the longer lasting snowfall which keeps the soil moister for a longer time into the summer months . Along lower elevation riparian corridors , cottonwoods and willows are typically dominant . Numerous plant species are endemic to the region including some that are rare . Among them , the whitlow grass , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , and the north fork Easter daisy provide vivid white and yellow flowers during the spring and summer . 
 Exotic species of flora that are not native to the region include Canada thistle , Musk thistle , Spotted knapweed , Leafy spurge and Yellow toadflax . These non @-@ native plant species are considered noxious , impacting native plant communities and the species that thrive on them . Native species such as the mountain pine beetle are having an enormous negative impact on some tree species . A survey of the forest performed in 2010 indicated that over 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 @,@ 000 ha ) of timberland had been impacted by insects such as the mountain pine beetle , spruce bark beetle and Douglas fir beetle , and that the insects had killed between 25 and 100 percent of the trees in the impacted areas . The forest service is addressing the situation by performing controlled burns , selling dead trees as firewood , timber harvesting and spraying the highest value areas . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Since the migration of the endangered gray wolf into Shoshone National Forest after the successful wolf reintroduction program in the Yellowstone region commenced in the mid @-@ 1990s , all of the known 70 mammal species that existed prior to white settlement still exist in the forest . Altogether , at least 335 species of wildlife call Shoshone National Forest their home , including the largest population of Bighorn sheep and one of the few locations Grizzly bears can still be found in the contiguous U. S .. 
 At least 700 grizzly bears are believed to exist in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem , which includes Shoshone National Forest , with approximately 125 grizzlies in the forest . The grizzly is listed as a threatened species by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service , and the forest is one of their last strongholds . For what are considered to be " nuisance bears " , non @-@ lethal traps are set to capture them so that they can be relocated to remote areas , away from civilization . In the case of the grizzly , each captured bear is tranquilized and then ear tagged with an identifying number . Each number is registered , and if the bear continues to return to areas where they pose a risk of imminent threat to human safety , they are exterminated . The grizzly recovery efforts implemented by federal agencies have often resulted in major disagreements with local landowners and surrounding municipalities . This situation occurs less frequently with the smaller and less aggressive black bear . An active management program , in conjunction with other National Forests and National Parks within the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem , works cooperatively to maximize human safety and to ensure habitat protection for both species of endemic bears . Visitors are mandated to store their food in their vehicles or in steel containers found in campgrounds , and bear @-@ proof trash receptacles are located in the front @-@ country zones throughout the forest . In the backcountry , food must be stored some distance from campsites , and other related precautions are enforced to help prevent bad encounters . 
 The cougar ( mountain lion ) and the gray wolf are large apex predators that inhabit the forest . Since the 1990s wolf reintroduction program in Yellowstone National Park , wolves have migrated into the forest and established permanent packs . Approximately a dozen wolf packs totaling 70 individual wolves were documented in the forest in 2012 . The wolf was delisted as endangered once their population levels had reached management objectives and limited hunting of wolves was permitted in the forest starting in 2012 . Cougars are generally nocturnal and rarely seen but hunting of this species is also allowed in highly regulated harvests . Wolverines are rare and elusive so documentation is often only from their tracks . The Canada lynx was native to the forest , but no known populations may still exist due to the rarity of its primary food source , the Snowshoe hare . Shoshone National Forest is considered critical habitat for lynx recovery since the species is listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act and the forest is in their historical range . Other generally carnivorous mammals include coyote , bobcat , weasel , marten , ferret and badger . 
 Omnivorous mammals such as the raccoon and skunk and herbivore mammal species such as the porcupine and pika , are common to the forest . The beaver is considered a species of special interest to Shoshone National Forest since its dam building activities improve habitat for numerous other species such as the moose , breeding waterfowl , various amphibians and other species dependent on a riparian environment . 
 Native herbivores such as the moose are found in small numbers near waterways , especially at lower elevations . Moose populations in northwestern Wyoming and other areas of North America have been on the decline since the end of the 20th century , possibly due to a parasite . There were an estimated 739 moose in the forest in 2006 which is almost 300 fewer than there were 20 years earlier . Other ungulate species are much more common and there are over 20 @,@ 000 elk ( also known as wapiti ) and 40 @,@ 000 mule deer . Bighorn sheep and mountain goats inhabit the rocky terrain and highest elevations . During the winter , one of the largest bighorn sheep herds in the lower 48 states congregate in the region around Dubois , Wyoming ; however , their numbers since 1990 have been diminished due to disease transmitted from contact with domesticated sheep and goats . An estimated 5 @,@ 000 bighorn sheep are found throughout the forest and a small but stable population of 200 mountain goats reside in the northernmost portions of the forest . Bison and pronghorn antelope are two other ungulates that live on the forest and have sustainable populations . 
 An estimated 300 species of birds are found in the forest at least part of the year . Bald eagle , peregrine falcon , Swainson ’ s hawk and the prairie falcon are birds of prey that are relatively common . Waterfowl such as Western grebe , Northern pintail , Great blue heron and Barrow ’ s goldeneye have stable populations and rare sightings of Trumpeter swans are <unk> pheasant , ruffed grouse and wild turkey are widely distributed across the open sage lands . Harlequin duck and northern goshawk are generally rare but management plans were implemented to protect various habitats these two species frequent to try and increase their population numbers . 
 Fish found in Shoshone National Forest include at least six species and subspecies of trout including rainbow , brook and brown trout . The Yellowstone cutthroat trout is widespread throughout the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem , but in the forest is mostly limited to the Shoshone River . The mountain whitefish is also found in the Shoshone River , while the burbot is found in two streams in the southern regions of the forest . 
 There are more than a dozen species of reptiles in the forest including the venomous prairie rattlesnake which can be found at lower elevations . The western painted and the ornate box turtle are turtle species known to exist and about eight species of lizards such as the greater short @-@ horned lizard have been documented . Amphibians such as the Columbia spotted frog and the boreal toad are considered species of concern because of their high susceptibility to disease , habitat loss and human introduced toxins . Boreal toads are found at elevations of between 7 @,@ 380 and 11 @,@ 800 ft ( 2 @,@ 250 and 3 @,@ 600 m ) and the Columbia spotted frog can live at elevations as high as 9 @,@ 480 ft ( 2 @,@ 890 m ) in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem . 
 Exotic species of fauna such as the zebra and quagga mussels and the New Zealand mud snail are invasive species that can greatly impact fish species . Though the mussel species are not known to be in Wyoming , several surrounding regions have reported them . The New Zealand mud snail has been found in the Shoshone River east of the forest . Forest managers have established a preventative program to try to keep these species from entering forest waterways . 
 = = = Wilderness = = = 
 The forest contains four areas of pristine wilderness that have remained largely untouched by human activities such as mining , logging , and road and building construction . The four regions include the North Absaroka , Washakie , Fitzpatrick and Popo Agie <unk> . Additionally , a small portion of the Absaroka @-@ Beartooth Wilderness extends into the extreme northwestern part of the forest , along the Montana border . In Shoshone National Forest , 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 acres ( 570 @,@ 000 ha ) , constituting 56 percent of the forest is designated wilderness . The wilderness designation provides a much higher level of land protection and prohibits any alterations by man to the resource . 
 The Wilderness Act of 1964 enhanced the protection status of remote and / or undeveloped land already contained within federally administered protected areas . Passage of the act ensured that no human improvements would take place aside from those already existing . The protected status in wilderness designated zones prohibits road and building construction , oil and mineral exploration or extraction , and logging , and also prohibits the use of motorized equipment , including even bicycles . The only manner in which people can enter wilderness areas is either on foot or horseback . Hunting and fishing are permitted in the wilderness , just as they are throughout the forest , provided those engaging in such activities have the proper licenses and permits . 
 = = = Fire ecology = = = 
 Fire Management officials in Shoshone National Forest recognize that forest fires are a natural part of the ecosystem ; however , this was not always the case . 20th century fire fighting efforts , especially in the first half of that century , emphasized quickly extinguishing all fires , as fire was seen as completely detrimental to a forest . In 1935 , fire management officials established the 10 am rule for all fires on federal lands , which recommended aggressive attack on fires and to have them controlled by 10 am , the day after they are first detected . This was intended to prevent fires from remaining active into the afternoon when the rising temperatures and more turbulent air caused fires to expand and become more erratic . However , this policy led to an increase in fuels because fires were often extinguished before they had a chance to burn out dead and dying old growth . It was in a stand of old growth fir trees in Shoshone National Forest that the Blackwater fire of 1937 killed 15 fighters during a firestorm 35 mi ( 56 km ) west of Cody , Wyoming . The fire was one of the deadliest in terms of forest firefighter deaths in U.S. history . 
 Between the years 1970 and 2012 , Shoshone National Forest averaged 25 fires annually , of which half were due to natural ignition from lightning , which accounted for 90 percent of the total acreage burned . The remaining acreage that burned was due to campfires that got out of control or from other causes . In Shoshone National Forest , the highest fire incidence is generally in the months of August and September . An average of 2 @,@ 334 acres ( 945 ha ) burns annually , with the worst year in the past century being 1988 , when 194 @,@ 430 acres ( 78 @,@ 680 ha ) burned from fires that had spread from the conflagration that engulfed Yellowstone National Park and the surrounding region . After the Yellowstone region fires of 1988 , an effort to identify areas of similar fire potential was implemented . Fire managers at Shoshone National Forest work with a number of outside agencies to incorporate fire restrictions , fuels management , and a controlled burn plans to reduce the chances of a catastrophic fire . The dead and dying trees which have been killed by various species of bark beetle may have a great impact on future forest fires . Fire managers have stated the worst time for increased fire activity is 1 – 2 years after the trees are killed and then again after the trees have fallen many years later . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Shoshone National Forest borders Yellowstone National Park and Bridger @-@ Teton National Forest to the west . The Continental Divide <unk> the boundary between Shoshone and Bridger @-@ Teton National Forests . Along the Montana border , Shoshone National Forest borders Custer National Forest to the north . Private property , property belonging to the state of Wyoming and lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management form the eastern boundaries . Lastly , the Wind River Indian Reservation also borders on the east , and bisects a smaller southern section which includes the Popo Agie Wilderness and the Washakie Ranger District . 
 The altitude in the forest ranges from 4 @,@ 600 feet ( 1 @,@ 400 m ) near Cody , Wyoming , to 13 @,@ 804 ft ( 4 @,@ 207 m ) at the top of Gannett Peak , an elevation gain of over 9 @,@ 200 ft ( 2 @,@ 800 m ) . Of the three major mountain ranges found in the forest , they are geologically distinct from each other . All of the mountains are a part of the Rocky Mountains . In the northern and central portions of the forest lie the Absaroka Mountains which were named after the Crow Indian tribe . The majority of the Absaroka Mountains are contained within the forest , with the highest peak being Francs Peak at 13 @,@ 158 ft ( 4 @,@ 011 m ) . The peaks of the Absaroka are basaltic in origin , having been the result of volcanic activity estimated to have occurred 50 million years ago during the Eocene epoch . The rocks are composed of mostly andesite and breccias deposited for millions of years during volcanic events and are atop more ancient sedimentary rocks that are considered to have economically viable mineral wealth . Gold was mined from the slopes of Francs Peak between the years 1890 and 1915 , and the small ghost town of <unk> remains as a legacy of that period . Major tributaries of the Bighorn River , such as the Shoshone and <unk> Rivers , originate in the Absaroka Mountains . Important passes through the <unk> include Sylvan Pass , which leads to the eastern entrance of Yellowstone National Park ; and Togwotee Pass , which provides access to Jackson Hole and Grand Teton National Park . 
 In the far north of Shoshone National Forest a small portion of the Beartooth Mountains are located north of the Clarks Fork of the Yellowstone River . The Beartooths are composed of Precambrian granitic rocks that are amongst the oldest found on Earth . Although often considered a part of the Absaroka Mountains , the Beartooths are distinct in appearance and geologic history . <unk> approximately 70 million years ago during the Laramide orogeny , the Beartooths consist of vast windswept plateaus and rugged peaks with sheer cliff faces . The Beartooth Highway ( U.S. Highway 212 ) crosses 10 @,@ 974 @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 340 m ) Beartooth Pass , and from there descends to the northeast entrance to Yellowstone National Park . 
 The Wind River Range is in the southern portion of the forest and is composed primarily of Precambrian granitic rock . Gannett Peak , the tallest mountain in Wyoming , is in the northern part of the range . Altogether eight peaks exceed 13 @,@ 500 ft ( 4 @,@ 100 m ) and 119 rise at least 12 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) above sea level . Fremont Peak , the second highest peak in the range , was originally believed to be the tallest mountain in the Rocky Mountains due to its prominence when viewed from the Oregon Trail by early pioneers . The Wind River Range is popular with mountain climbers because of its solid rock and variety of routes . The Cirque of the Towers in the Popo Agie Wilderness is one of the more popular climbing and hiking destinations , and an estimated 200 different climbing routes are located within the peaks that surround the cirque . 
 There are over 500 lakes in the forest , and 1 @,@ 000 mi ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) of streams and rivers . The Clarks Fork of the Yellowstone River is federally designated as a Wild and Scenic River for 22 mi ( 35 km ) through the forest , with cliffs towering up to 2 @,@ 000 ft ( 610 m ) as the river winds through a gorge . The forest is on the eastern slopes of the Continental Divide , and the rivers flow into the Atlantic Ocean basin . 
 = = = Glaciology = = = 
 According to the U.S. Forest Service , Shoshone National Forest has the greatest number of glaciers of any National Forest in the Rocky Mountains . The forest recreation guide lists 16 named and 140 unnamed glaciers within the forest , all in the Wind River Range . Forty @-@ four of these glaciers are in the Fitzpatrick Wilderness , centered around the highest mountain peaks . However , the state water board for Wyoming lists only 63 glaciers for the entire Wind River Range , which includes glaciers in adjacent Bridger @-@ Teton National Forest . Researchers claim that for most of the period that glaciers have been known to exist in the forest , that they have been in a state of general retreat , with glacial mass losses of as much as 25 percent between the years 1985 and 2009 . 
 Reversing the growth of mid @-@ latitude glaciers that occurred during the Little Ice Age ( 1350 – 1850 ) , there has been a world @-@ wide reduction of mountain glacial ice since , with some regions losing as much as 50 percent of their peak ice cover . This can be correlated by examining photographic evidence of glaciers taken over time even with an absence of other means of documentation . The behavior of the glaciers of Shoshone National Forest is consistent with this pattern . In one study of <unk> and Gannett Glaciers , during the period from 1958 to 1983 , the thickness of these glaciers was reduced 77 and 61 ft ( 23 and 19 m ) , respectively . 
 Gannett Glacier , on the northeast slope of Gannett Peak , is the largest single glacier in the U.S. Rocky Mountains . It has reportedly lost over 50 percent of its volume since 1920 with 25 percent of that occurring between the years 1980 @-@ 1999 . Upper Fremont Glacier has been studied more than any other glacier in the Wind River Range . Scientist have obtained ice cores from the Upper Fremont Glacier and found that there have been measurable changes in the atmosphere over the past several hundred years . The Upper Fremont Glacier and the Quelccaya Ice Cap in the Andes of South America both show nearly identical atmospheric records , which indicate a global linkage of atmospheric conditions over time . 
 The small glaciers in the forest are less able to resist melting than the great ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica . Once a glacier begins retreating , it may fall into disequilibrium and be unable to find mass balance ( accumulation versus melting rate ) at any size . Without a favorable climate change , it will continue to retreat until it disappears . Loss of glacial ice already reduces the summer glacial runoff that supplies water to streams and lakes and provides a cold @-@ water source vital to certain fish and plant species . This , in turn , may have a significant impact on the forest ecosystem over time . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Wyoming is an arid state , averaging 12 @.@ 68 inches ( 32 @.@ 2 cm ) of precipitation annually . However , Shoshone National Forest is located in and near some of the largest mountain ranges in the state , and consequently receives anywhere between 15 and 70 in ( 380 and 1 @,@ 780 mm ) annually . Higher elevations in the forest not only get more precipitation than lower elevations , but also have lower overall temperatures , with summertime highs around 60 ° F ( 16 ° C ) and lows near 35 ° F ( 2 ° C ) while lower elevations may be 20 ° F ( − 7 ° C ) or more warmer on average . Humidity levels throughout the forest are low , especially at higher altitudes . In the middle of the forest at the Wapiti Ranger Station , which is 30 mi ( 48 km ) west of the forest headquarters in Cody , Wyoming , January high and low temperatures are 35 @.@ 8 and 13 @.@ 2 ° F ( 2 @.@ 1 and − 10 @.@ 4 ° C ) , while the July highs and lows are 81 @.@ 4 and 49 @.@ 1 ° F ( 27 @.@ 4 and 9 @.@ 5 ° C ) . The annual precipitation at Wapiti is 10 @.@ 37 in ( 263 mm ) . 
 Most of the precipitation falls in the winter and early spring , while summer is punctuated with widely scattered thunderstorms . The autumn is usually cool and dry . Due to the altitude and dryness of the atmosphere , vigorous radiative cooling occurs throughout the year , and exceptional daily temperature variances are not uncommon . Consequently , the nights range from very cool in the summer to extremely cold in the winter ; therefore , visitors should always remember to bring along at least a jacket , even during the summer . Records indicate that the highest temperature ever recorded in the forest was 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) in 1978 , while the coldest was − 49 ° F ( − 45 ° C ) in 1972 . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Shoshone National Forest receives an average of over half a million visitors a year . Two visitor centers provide orientation , books , maps , and interpretive displays . One visitor center is at the Wapiti Wayside on the Buffalo Bill Cody Scenic Byway , west of Cody , Wyoming and adjacent to the historic Wapiti Ranger Station while the other visitor center is to the south in Lander , Wyoming . There are 30 vehicle access campgrounds in the forest , with up to 54 individual sites per campground . Approximately half of these campgrounds provide running water and restroom facilities and also provide for handicapped accessibility . Referred to as " front country " campgrounds , they also permit recreational vehicle access in most cases . All of the campgrounds are on a first come , first served basis although four campgrounds have sites that can be reserved in advance by contacting the National Reservation Service . Due to the presence of grizzly bears , a few of the campgrounds require what is referred to as " hard @-@ sided " camping only , and tent camping is not permitted . 
 For some visitors the greater solitude of the backcountry requires using hiking trails to backpacking or horseback riding into more remote destinations . There are dozens of trails which total over 1 @,@ 600 mi ( 2 @,@ 600 km ) located throughout the forest . Many of the trailheads can be accessed at campgrounds , with shorter day hikes available as well . The Continental Divide Trail has a 20 @-@ mile ( 32 km ) section which passes through the forest and crosses the Continental Divide at Sheridan Pass . There is also the Nez Perce National Historic Trail and the Beartooth Loop National Recreation Trail , both of which are in the northern regions of the forest . Some remote areas can also be accessed by horseback . <unk> usually provide enough room for horse and pack animal trailers plus personal vehicles . Along forest access roads , all @-@ terrain vehicles ( ATV ) are allowed , but since wilderness areas do not permit access by way of motorized transport , those who wish to visit such areas usually do so either by hiking in or on horseback . 
 Hunting and fishing are popular recreational activities permitted throughout the forest . Many of the streams and rivers are considered to be " Blue Ribbon Trout Streams " . Though many streams and lakes have excellent opportunities to catch various species of trout , the north and south forks of the Shoshone River , the <unk> River and the Clark 's Fork of the Yellowstone , the only federally designated Wild and Scenic River in Wyoming , are a few of the better locations to reign in a trophy level Rainbow or Yellowstone cutthroat trout . 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) of streams and a hundred lakes that can be legally fished from provide plenty of elbow room during even the most crowded of fishing seasons . Hunting and fishing licenses are sponsored by the state of Wyoming and are available through the Wyoming Game and Fish Department . 
 The southern section of the forest in the Wind River Range is the primary destination for mountain climbers . Nine of the highest 10 peaks in Wyoming are here , and the mountains are primarily of granitic rock with countless cliffs and sheer rock walls . The Cirque of the Towers is particularly popular as it has numerous peaks within a relatively short distance of each other . Two particular climbs on the peaks in the cirque are considered amongst the finest climbing adventures available in the U.S. The Absaroka Range also attracts climbers but not of a technical nature since the rocks are not considered solid enough for good anchoring points . For the tallest peaks in the Wind River Range , the entire summiting effort will take even experienced climbers many days due to the inaccessibility of the region and complexity of the climbing effort . 
 Winter activities include cross @-@ country skiing and snowmobiling , with 48 mi ( 77 km ) of groomed trails for cross @-@ country skiing and over 300 mi ( 480 km ) for use by snowmobilers . The region around Togwotee Pass allows snowmobilers easy access from paved roads and has snow depths of between 6 to 10 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) annually at elevations of 8 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 ft ( 2 @,@ 400 to 3 @,@ 000 m ) , which equates to a long season for winter activities . 
 = = = Scenic roads = = = 
 Shoshone National Forest forms the eastern boundary of Yellowstone National Park and the northeastern and eastern entrances to the park are both accessed by way of designated scenic roadways . A federally designated National Scenic Byways All @-@ American Road , the Beartooth Highway ( U.S. Highway 212 ) , weaves through the forest and serves as the northeastern entranceway to Yellowstone National Park . Chief Joseph Scenic Byway ( Wyoming Highway 296 ) connects Cody , Wyoming with the Beartooth Highway and follows the old trail in which Chief Joseph and the Nez Perce tribe attempted to flee the U.S. Cavalry in 1877 . South of there , Buffalo Bill Cody Scenic Byway ( US 14 / 16 / 20 ) heads west from Cody , Wyoming , passes through the forest and crosses Sylvan Pass as it enters Yellowstone . Lastly , the Wyoming Centennial Scenic Byway ( US 26 / 287 ) heads northwest from Dubois , Wyoming , over Togwotee Pass and enters Jackson Hole and Grand Teton National Park . Though the Beartooth Highway is the only one of these four roads that is a National Scenic Byway , all four of them have been designated Wyoming State Scenic Byways by the state of Wyoming . 
 = = Popular Culture = = 
 Shoshone National Forest was the setting of the 2016 first person adventure video game , <unk> . 
 = Battle of Camperdown = 
 The Battle of Camperdown ( known in Dutch as the <unk> bij <unk> ) was a major naval action fought on 11 October 1797 , between a Royal Navy fleet under Admiral Adam Duncan and a Dutch Navy fleet under Vice @-@ Admiral Jan de Winter . The battle was the most significant action between British and Dutch forces during the French Revolutionary Wars and resulted in a complete victory for the British , who captured eleven Dutch ships without losing any of their own . In 1795 , the Dutch Republic had been overrun by the army of the French Republic and had been reorganised into the Batavian Republic , a French client state . In early 1797 , after the French Atlantic Fleet had suffered heavy losses in a disastrous winter campaign , the Dutch fleet was ordered to reinforce the French at Brest . The rendezvous never occurred ; the continental allies failed to capitalise on the Spithead and Nore mutinies that paralysed the British Channel forces and North Sea fleets during the spring of 1797 . 
 By September , the Dutch fleet under De Winter were blockaded within their harbour in the Texel by the British North Sea fleet under Duncan . At the start of October , Duncan was forced to return to Yarmouth for supplies and De Winter used the opportunity to conduct a brief raid into the North Sea . When the Dutch fleet returned to the Dutch coast on 11 October , Duncan was waiting , and intercepted De Winter off the coastal village of Camperduin . Attacking the Dutch line of battle in two loose groups , Duncan 's ships broke through at the rear and van and were subsequently engaged by Dutch frigates lined up on the other side . The battle split into two melees , one to south , or leeward , where the more numerous British overwhelmed the Dutch rear , and one to the north , or windward , where a more evenly matched exchange centred on the battling flagships . As the Dutch fleet attempted to reach shallower waters in an effort to escape the British attack , the British leeward division joined the windward combat and eventually forced the surrender of the Dutch flagship Vrijheid and ten other ships . 
 The loss of their flagship prompted the surviving Dutch ships to disperse and retreat , Duncan recalling the British ships with their prizes for the journey back to Yarmouth . En route , the fleet was struck by a series of gales and two prizes were wrecked and another had to be recaptured before the remainder reached Britain . Casualties in both fleets were heavy , as the Dutch followed the British practice of firing at the hulls of enemy ships rather than their masts and rigging , which caused higher losses among the British crews than they normally experienced against continental navies . The Dutch fleet was broken as an independent fighting force , losing ten ships and more than 1 @,@ 100 men . When British forces confronted the Dutch Navy again two years later in the Vlieter Incident , the Dutch sailors , confronted with superior British fire power as they had been at Camperdown and in the face of pro Orangist insurrection , abandoned their ships and surrendered en masse . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the winter of 1794 – 1795 , forces of the French Republic overran the neighbouring Dutch Republic during the French Revolutionary Wars . The French then reorganised the country as a client state named the Batavian Republic , and it joined France against the allies in the War of the First Coalition . One of the most important Dutch assets of which the French gained control was the Dutch Navy , which had been captured in its frozen harbour in the Texel by French cavalry advancing across the ice . The Dutch fleet provided a substantial reinforcement to the French forces in Northern European waters , which were principally based at Brest on the Atlantic Ocean and whose main opponent was the Royal Navy 's Channel Fleet . The location of the main anchorage of the Dutch fleet in the waters off the Texel prompted a reorganisation of the distribution of British warships in Northern European waters , with a new focus on the importance of the North Sea . With the Navy suffering severe shortages in men and equipment and with other theatres of war deemed more important , small , old and poorly maintained ships were activated from reserve and based in harbours in East Anglia , principally the port of Yarmouth , under the command of Admiral Adam Duncan . The 65 @-@ year @-@ old Duncan was a veteran of the wars of the War of the Austrian Succession ( 1740 – 1748 ) , the Seven Years ' War ( 1756 – 1763 ) and the American Revolutionary War ( 1775 – 1783 ) and had fought at numerous engagements with distinction and success . Standing at 6 ' 4 " he was also noted for his physical strength and size : a contemporary described him as " almost gigantic " . 
 The French Navy had suffered a series of one @-@ sided defeats in the opening years of the war , suffering heavy losses at the Glorious First of June in 1794 and during the Croisière du Grand Hiver the following January . In late 1796 , after prompting from representatives of the United Irishmen ( a society dedicated to ending British rule of the Kingdom of Ireland ) , the French Atlantic Fleet launched a large scale attempt to invade Ireland , known as the Expédition d 'Irlande . This too ended in disaster , with twelve ships lost and thousands of men drowned in fierce winter gales . Their ambitions frustrated , the representatives of the United Irishmen , led by Wolfe Tone , turned to the new Batavian state for support and were promised assistance in the coming year by a united French and Dutch fleet . A plan was formulated to merge the French and Dutch fleets and attack Ireland together in the summer of 1797 . Tone joined the staff of Vice @-@ Admiral Jan de Winter on his flagship Vrijheid in the Texel and 13 @,@ 500 Dutch troops were equipped in preparation for the operation , the fleet waiting only for the best moment to take advantage of easterly winds and sweep past the British blockade and down the English Channel . 
 = = = Spithead Mutiny = = = 
 For the Royal Navy , the early years of the war had been successful , but the commitment to a global conflict was creating a severe strain on available equipment , men and financial resources . The navy had expanded from 134 ships at the start of the conflict in 1793 , to 633 by 1797 , and personnel had increased from 45 @,@ 000 men to 120 @,@ 000 , an achievement possible only as a result of the impressment service , which abducted criminals , beggars and unwilling conscripts for compulsory service at sea . Wages had not been increased since 1653 , and were usually months late , rations were terrible , shore leave forbidden and discipline harsh . Tensions in the fleet had been gradually rising since the start of the war , and in February 1797 , anonymous sailors from the Channel Fleet at Spithead sent letters to their former commander , Lord Howe , soliciting his support in improving their conditions . The list was deliberately ignored on the instructions of First Lord of the Admiralty Lord Spencer , and , on 16 April , the sailors responded with the Spithead Mutiny : a largely peaceful strike action led by a delegation of seamen from each ship tasked with negotiating with the authorities and enforcing discipline . For a month the fleet remained at stalemate , until Lord Howe was able to negotiate a series of improvements in conditions that enabled the strikers to return to regular service . The mutiny had achieved almost all of its aims ; increasing pay , removing unpopular officers and improving conditions for the men serving in the Channel Fleet and , ultimately , the whole navy . 
 While the upheaval continued at Spithead , Duncan had retained order in the North Sea Fleet at Yarmouth by the sheer force of his personality . When men from his flagship , HMS Venerable , clambered up into the rigging and roared three cheers in a prearranged signal for the revolt to begin on 1 May , Duncan initially threatened to run the ringleader through with his sword . <unk> by his subordinates , he instead assembled his officers and the Royal Marines aboard his ship and advanced on the men in the rigging , demanding to know what they were doing . So fierce was his tone that the men fell silent and hesitantly returned to their quarters except for five ringleaders , whom he admonished personally on his quarterdeck before issuing a general pardon and dismissing them to their duty . The following week , he assembled all of the men and demanded to know whether they would follow his orders : in response , the crew nominated a spokesman , who apologised for their actions , saying , " we humbly implore your honour 's pardon with hearts full of gratitude and tears in our eyes for the offense we have given to the worthiest of commanders who has proved a father to us " . A week later , when a similar outbreak of mutiny affected the fourth rate ship , HMS Adamant , under Captain William Hotham , Duncan again acted decisively , coming aboard Adamant as the crew rebelled and demanding to know if there was any man who disputed his authority . When a sailor stepped forward , Duncan seized him by his shirt and dangled him over the side of the ship with one arm crying , " My lads - look at this fellow - he who dares to deprive me of command of the fleet " . The mutiny evaporated almost instantly . 
 = = = Nore Mutiny = = = 
 Despite his initial success , Duncan was unable to retain control in the face of a more widespread revolt on 15 May among the ships based at the Nore , which became known as the Nore Mutiny . Led by a sailor named Richard Parker , the Nore mutineers quickly organised and became a significant threat to water traffic in the Thames Estuary . Duncan was informed that his fleet at Yarmouth might be ordered to attack the mutineers and , although reluctant , responded , " I do not shrink from the business if it cannot otherwise be got the better of " . When rumours of the plan reached the fleet at Yarmouth , the crew of Venerable also expressed their distaste with the plan , but reaffirmed their promise of loyalty to their admiral whatever the circumstances . News then arrived that the Dutch fleet under De Winter was preparing to sail , and Duncan 's fleet was ordered by Lord Spencer to blockade the Dutch coast . Duncan issued orders for the fleet to weigh anchor , but the men disobeyed and ship after ship overthrew their officers and joined the mutineers at the Nore . Eventually Duncan was left with only his own Venerable and Hotham 's Adamant to contain the entire Dutch fleet . Duncan later wrote that , " To be deserted by my own fleet in the face of the enemy is a disgrace which I believe never before happened to a British admiral , nor could I have supposed it possible . " 
 Aware that the escape of the Dutch fleet into the North Sea at such a vulnerable time could be disastrous for Britain , Duncan maintained his position off the Texel for three days , during which the wind was ideal for a Dutch foray , and he disguised his two vessels as different ships on each day and ordered the frigate HMS Circe to make a flurry of nonsensical signals to a fictitious British fleet beyond the horizon . He was subsequently joined by two additional ships , HMS Russell and Sans Pareil , and on the fourth day , with conditions still perfect for the Dutch , he anchored his squadron in the <unk> Channel and gave orders for them to fight until their ships sank , thereby blocking the channel . In a speech to his men , he announced that , " The soundings are such that my flag will continue to fly above the water after the ship and her company have disappeared " . The expected attack never came : the Dutch army that was to have joined the fleet was not prepared , and Duncan 's misleading signals had successfully convinced De Winter that a large British fleet waited just beyond the horizon . The winds subsequently changed direction , and , on 10 June , six more ships joined Duncan 's squadron from the Channel Fleet , and , on 13 June , a Russian squadron arrived . While Duncan had been at sea , the Nore Mutiny had acrimoniously fallen apart under blockade by government forces . Cut off from food supplies and with public support decidedly against the mutiny , Parker issued threats that the ships under his control would be handed over to the French government . Fighting subsequently broke out between the radical leaders and the moderate majority of seamen , and the ships gradually deserted Parker and returned to their anchorages , so that by 12 June only two ships still flew the red flag of the mutineers . Eventually , the last rebellious ship , Parker 's own HMS Sandwich , surrendered on 14 June . 
 = = De Winter 's cruise = = 
 By the middle of August 1797 , after six weeks of constant easterly winds that kept his ships trapped in their harbour , De Winter decided that an attempt to join the French at Brest as the first stage of an invasion of Ireland was impractical and he abandoned the plan . In part this decision was due to the strength of Duncan 's reconstituted fleet , which had increased to 17 ships of the line with the addition of the vessels returned from the Nore . Duncan 's men were also better trained and more experienced than their Dutch counterparts , having spent considerably longer at sea and having been taught to fire three rounds a minute to the Dutch two . In addition to his concerns about the proficiency of his men , De Winter was also worried about their loyalty : the dominion of France over the Batavian Republic and the country 's enforced participation in distant theatres of warfare were unpopular among the Dutch people . Although De Winter was an avowed republican , who had fought in the French Army against the Netherlands between 1793 and 1795 , support for the House of Orange remained strong among the Dutch population and with the fleet 's sailors . Wolfe Tone wrote in frustration that " The destiny of Europe might have been changed for ever . . . the great occasion is lost , and we must do as well as we can . " 
 When news of this decision reached the Admiralty , they recalled Duncan 's blockade fleet to Yarmouth for a refit on 1 October , the admiral insisting on sending some of his ships back to the Dutch coast two days later under Captain Henry Trollope in HMS Russell accompanied by HMS Adamant and the small ships HMS Beaulieu , Circe and Martin with the hired armed cutter Black Joke . Their arrival off Texel on 6 October coincided with De Winter 's much delayed expedition . Although some sources , particularly in France , have claimed that De Winter was determined to bring Duncan to battle , in reality he was more concerned that his men were disaffected and inexperienced by their long stay in port , and had reluctantly acceded to orders from the Batavian government to conduct a brief sweep in the Southern North Sea in search of weak British forces that could be overwhelmed by his fleet or drawn into the dangerous shallow waters of the Dutch coastline . He may also have been hoping to resurrect the plan to augment the French at Brest if he was able to pass westwards down the English Channel undetected . His fleet consisted of 16 ships of the line and a number of smaller support craft , and his orders from The Hague included instructions to remember " how frequently Dutch Admirals have maintained the honour of the Dutch flag , even when the enemy 's forces were sometimes superior to theirs . " Preparing the ships for sea took some time , and the Dutch did not manage to leave the Texel until 10 : 00 on 8 October , De Winter turning southwest in the hope of linking with another Dutch ship of the line at the mouth of the River Maas . Within hours , Trollope had discovered and followed De Winter . 
 The Dutch fleet was watched constantly by the ships Duncan had sent to observe them , and when Dutch preparations to sail were observed a message was sent back to Duncan informing him of the Dutch movements . The despatch vessel flew the signal for an enemy as it entered Yarmouth roads early in the morning on 9 October , so that by the time it had docked the British fleet was already preparing to sail , Duncan sending the final message to the Admiralty : " The wind is now in the NE and [ I ] shall make good course over to them , and if it please God , hope to get at them . The squadron under my command are unmoored and I shall put to sea immediately . " Before midday , Duncan had sailed with the 11 ships that were ready and steered for the mouth of the Texel , intending to intercept De Winter on his return . By evening his fleet was at full strength , three stragglers having rejoined , and on the afternoon of 10 October his ships were anchored off the Dutch port , scouts reporting 22 merchant ships in the harbour but no sign of De Winter 's warships . Since leaving the Texel , De Winter had been unable to escape from Trollope 's ships : on the evening of 10 October , several Dutch vessels were detached to drive his squadron away while the Dutch fleet lay off the Maas , but could not close with the faster British vessels . Having failed to make the rendezvous off the Maas , De Winter then turned to the northwest , cruising off Lowestoft in Suffolk and again unsuccessfully attempting to drive away Trollope 's squadron . There , reports from Dutch fishing vessels of Duncan 's appearance off the Texel reached De Winter and he immediately recalled his ships and ordered the fleet to turn back towards the Dutch coast , aiming for the village of Scheveningen . Meanwhile , further messages from Trollope reporting the Dutch movements had reached Duncan and he turned his fleet west , following the Dutch coastline . At 07 : 00 on the morning of 11 October Trollope 's squadron sighted sails to the northeast and , after confirming that they were Duncan 's fleet , signalled that the Dutch fleet was approximately 3 nautical miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) further to the southwest , becoming visible to the fleet by 08 : 30 . The first clear sighting was reported by Captain Peter Halkett of Circe , who had climbed the mainmast to get a better view . At this point , the Dutch were sailing towards land , approximately 9 nautical miles ( 17 km ) off the coast of Noord @-@ Holland , close to the village of Camperduin . The weather was poor , with heavy seas and strong wind from the southeast broken by frequent rain squalls , but this did not prevent hundreds of Dutch civilians gathering on the dunes to watch the impending combat . 
 = = = Duncan 's attack = = = 
 At 09 : 00 , Duncan made the signal to prepare for battle while De Winter organised his ships into a line of battle to meet the British attack in a solid defensive formation , sailing on the port tack in a northeasterly heading . As they manoeuvred into their assigned stations , the Dutch fleet drew closer to the shore . Duncan intended to follow Lord Howe 's manoeuvres at the Glorious First of June three years earlier and bring each ship through the Dutch line between two opponents , but the Dutch formation and proximity to the shore rendered this plan impractical . To compensate , Duncan signalled for his ships to form line and sail southeast on the port tack so that they had the wind directly behind them . Shortly afterwards , concerned that the Dutch might make the shoreline before he could bring them to battle despite his wry insistence that " I am determined to fight the ships on land if I cannot by sea " , Duncan ordered his fleet to turn southwards and advance on the enemy and " bear up and sail large " . He fired signal guns to alert his captains and then ordered them to " engage the enemy as arriving up " and for his van to attack the Dutch rear . At 11 : 00 , Duncan sought to remedy increasing gaps between his vessels by ordering the faster ships to slow down and wait for their compatriots . He then made an effort to re @-@ establish the line on the starboard tack before realising that the Dutch fleet was still in order awaiting the British attack and continually drawing closer to the dangerous coastline . Abandoning his previous signals , Duncan ordered the entire fleet to turn towards the Dutch and attack directly , each ship to " steer for and engage her opponent " . Many of these signals were poorly executed and incorrect , visibility was low and Trollope 's squadron was still using obsolete signal codes , so a number of vessels failed to comprehend Duncan 's intentions , turning the advancing line into a ragged pattern of scattered vessels clustered into two loose groups . The flurry of orders was so quick and contradictory that at least one captain gave up entirely : the Scottish captain , John Inglis , of HMS Belliqueux threw his signal book to the deck in frustration and shouted " Up wi ' the hel <unk> and gang into the middle o 't . " 
 The combined effect of Duncan 's orders was to split his fleet into two uneven divisions , each sailing in a loose formation towards the unified Dutch line . The northern , or windward , division comprised six third rate ships of the line , two fourth rate ships and the frigate Circe , tasked with repeating signals from the flagship Venerable , which led the division with HMS Triumph and Ardent close behind . This force was aiming for the Dutch flagship , Vrijheid , which lay fifth in the Dutch line . The southern , or leeward , division comprised eight third rate ships of the line and the repeater frigate HMS Beaulieu , and was led by Vice @-@ Admiral Richard Onslow on HMS Monarch . Onslow 's force was aiming for the rear of the Dutch line , to strike the fourth ship from the end . Behind the two divisions lay a line of small craft tasked with repeating Duncan 's signals so that the entire fleet could see his intentions . At 11 : 53 , Duncan raised the signal for each ship to pass through the Dutch line and attack from the far side , but the poor weather prevented the more distant ships from recognising the signal . 
 De Winter had originally intended to close his line up into a solid defensive platform and retreat to shallower waters while Duncan formed his own line of battle , but the sudden , disorganised British attack had thrown his plans into confusion . As a result , gaps had opened up between his van , centre and rear , leaving the last four ships greatly outnumbered and unsupported . De Winter gave urgent orders for the van and centre to drop back and assist the rear , but there was little time , and his situation looked desperate : although the Dutch and British lines each mustered 16 ships , the British vessels were almost all larger and more strongly built than their Dutch counterparts , and their crews were experienced seamen in the heavy weather conditions , while the Dutch crews , confined to port for the previous year , had little understanding of the skills required in combat at sea . The Dutch line of battle was accompanied by a second line to the east , formed from ten frigates , brigs and smaller craft . These vessels , unlike the smaller ships with the British fleet , were well armed and situated so that their guns covered the gaps between the ships that formed the Dutch line of battle , ready to rake any British vessels that attempted to break through . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Collapse of the Dutch rear guard = = = 
 At 12 : 05 , Duncan raised the signal ordering his ships to engage the enemy closely . At the same time , the Dutch ship Jupiter , under Rear @-@ Admiral Hermanus Reijntjes , fourth from the southern end of the line , opened fire on the rapidly approaching Monarch . The Dutch ships had waited until the British were well within effective range in order to maximise the effect of their shot , and soon Onslow 's flagship was under fire from the entire rearguard of the Dutch line , the ship suffering damage while attempting to break through the Dutch line between Jupiter and Haarlem at 12 : 30 . On Monarch , Captain Edward O 'Bryen remarked to Onslow that he could not see where his ship could pass between the closely formed Dutch ships , to which the Admiral responded that " the Monarch will make a passage . " Striking the small gap between the ships , Onslow fired raking broadsides into both vessels and then turned to lay his ship alongside <unk> ' flagship . As he did , the Dutch frigate Monnikkendam and the brig <unk> pulled out of the second line and attempted to fill the gap Monarch had created , firing into the British ship of the line as they did so . In response , Onslow opened fire on the smaller vessels , destroying the frigate 's wheel and damaging the rigging , so that the ship fell back , followed later by the severely damaged brig . 
 Monarch was almost immediately followed by HMS Powerful under Captain William O 'Bryen Drury , which passed through the same gap , raked Haarlem again and poured a destructive fire into the wallowing Monnikkendam . At the same time , HMS Montagu attacked Alkmaar , the next in line , from the west , while HMS Russell , under Captain Trollope , attacked the last Dutch ship , the 56 @-@ gun Delft . These attacks were accompanied by fire from HMS Monmouth , which passed between Alkmaar and Delft , and raked both ships , and from HMS Director ( under William Bligh of Bounty fame ) , which passed up the Dutch line until it reached the battered Haarlem , engaging the ship at close range . The straggling HMS Veteran joined the northern part of the engagement , cutting across Jupiter and then turning in pursuit of the Dutch centre , while Adamant reached the fight late , joining the attack on the already battered Haarlem . Only HMS Agincourt remained apart from the battle entirely , passing up the Dutch line at extreme range ; one anecdotal account reports that on board Agincourt a stray shot passed high over the deck and an officer was seen to flinch , drawing a scornful call from the crew that " There is no danger yet , sir " . Agincourt 's captain John Williamson was subsequently court @-@ martialled and dismissed . 
 In the confusion , the tail of the Dutch line disintegrated into a chaotic melee , with eight British ships of the line fighting four Dutch and the frigate Monnikkendam . So close was the action that the British ships found themselves at risk of firing into one another in the high seas , heavy rain and poor visibility . The Dutch centre , consisting of the ships of the line Brutus , <unk> and the fifth rate razee Mars , pulled away from the engagement behind them under Rear @-@ Admiral Johan Bloys van Treslong , coming under only distant fire from the ships of Onslow 's division . Isolated , the Dutch rearguard were rapidly overwhelmed , with Jupiter , Haarlem , Alkmaar and Delft all surrendering to Onslow 's attack before 13 : 45 , while the battered Monnikkendam was seized by the frigate Beaulieu . 
 = = = Battle of the vanguards = = = 
 While the Dutch rearguard was overwhelmed by British numbers , a more equal combat was being contested to the north . There the combat was centred around the two flagships , Duncan 's Venerable engaging De Winter 's Vrijheid 18 minutes after Monarch broke the line to the south . Duncan had originally intended to break the line between Vrijheid and the next ship Staaten Generaal under Rear @-@ Admiral Samuel Story , but Story ensured that there was no gap between his vessel and the flagship to break through , and their combined fire was so dangerous to the advancing Venerable that Duncan instead cut through behind Staaten Generaal , raking Story 's ship twice and causing it to drift off in confusion as Duncan engaged Vrijheid from the east . 
 While Venerable had diverted south , Vrijheid had been attacked from the west by Ardent under Captain Richard Rundle Burges . The smaller British ship had soon suffered more than a hundred casualties , including Burges killed , under the combined fire of De Winter 's flagship and the next ship ahead Admiraal Tjerk Hiddes De Vries . Only the arrival of Venerable alongside Vrijheid allowed Ardent a brief respite . During the fight , Burges ' men " fought like maniacs " , including the wife of one of the gunners who insisted on joining her husband at his gun , until her legs were torn off by cannon fire . Within a short period however both Venerable and Ardent were surrounded , as at least one of the frigates from the second line joined the attack on the two isolated British vessels . At the height of the combat , the colours and signal flags on Venerable were brought down by cannon fire . To ensure that there was no suggestion that the flagship had surrendered , a sailor named Jack Crawford scrambled to the top of the mainmast and replaced them as the battle raged beneath him . To support Duncan , Captain William Essington of HMS Triumph and Captain Sir Thomas Byard of HMS Bedford drove forward into the battle , Triumph coming close alongside the Dutch Wassenaar and opening a heavy fire while Bedford attacked Admiraal Tjerk Hiddes De Vries and Hercules . At the tip of the line , Beschermer was attacked by Belliqueux to starboard , Captain Inglis passing through the gap between Beschermer and Hercules . Ahead of this combat , the lead ships HMS Isis and Gelijkheid fought alongside one another , Isis having failed to break through the Dutch line and instead drawn up to port . 
 The Dutch central division joined the battle at the head of the line shortly after the engagement of Triumph and Bedford , causing considerable damage to all of the British vessels , particularly Venerable . The British flagship was soon isolated in the midst of the Dutch van , engaging Vrijheid , Staaten General , Admiral Tjerk Hiddes De Vries and Wassenaar simultaneously . Despite the heavy odds Duncan continued to fight hard , the British succeeded in knocking out two opponents by wounding Captain <unk> <unk> <unk> of Beschermer , which drifted eastwards in confusion , while shots from either Bedford or Triumph set a powder barrel on Hercules on fire . The blaze on the latter ship , which soon spread to the sails and rigging , prompted a lull in the battle as the crew of Hercules desperately attempted to extinguish the blaze and other Dutch ships scrambled to escape the burning vessel as it drifted through the melee . Shortly afterwards , the battered Wassenaar surrendered to Triumph , with Captain Holland dead on his quarterdeck . Triumph then moved on towards the battle between Vrijheid and Venerable , at which time the crew of Wassenaar raised their colours again after being fired on by a Dutch brig . 
 = = = Onslow 's reinforcement = = = 
 Following Onslow 's victory over the Dutch rearguard , the admiral ordered the least damaged of his ships to sail in support of the outnumbered British ships in the melee at the Dutch van . Powerful and Director were the quickest to respond , joining the attack on Vrijheid at 14 : 00 . Russell , driving northwards to join the attack , encountered the now extinguished Hercules , whose crew had thrown all of their ammunition overboard during the fire to prevent the ship exploding . The ship was thus defenceless , Commander <unk> surrendering immediately . The remainder of the British fleet now arrived in the battle , Captain John Wells of HMS Lancaster firing on the Beschermer near the head of the Dutch line . Aware that their vessel would be unable to resist the attack , Beschermer 's surviving officers turned away towards the shore , rapidly followed by the unengaged portions of the Dutch line . With the arrival of British reinforcements and the retreat of sections of the Dutch fleet , the battle was almost complete ; the battered Wassenaar surrendered for the second time , to Russell , while Admiraal Tjerk Hiddes De Vries and Gelijkheid , both of which were too badly damaged to escape , also struck their colours . Eventually only the Dutch flagship remained in combat . 
 For an hour De Winter continued his resistance , with Director holding station off the stern of Vrijheid and repeatedly raking it . By 15 : 00 , all three masts had been brought down , obstructing the fire of the starboard battery , while De Winter was the only officer who remained uninjured , standing on his wrecked quarterdeck and still refusing to lower his colours . In an attempt to settle the combat , Captain William Bligh of Director closed to within 20 yards ( 18 m ) of the Dutch flagship and demanded to know if De Winter surrendered . The Dutch admiral replied " What do you think about it ? " , and then attempted to personally raise signals demanding reinforcements from the rest of his fleet , only to find that the halyards had been shot away . De Winter then summoned the ship 's carpenter and ordered him to repair his barge , so that the admiral could transfer command to another ship and continue the battle . When British sailors from Director boarded the drifting flagship , De Winter was discovered assisting the carpenter with repairs to the barge . On being informed that he was a prisoner of war , he replied " This is my destiny not foreseen " and , after checking on a mortally wounded officer who lay on the quarterdeck , he followed the boarding party back to their boat for the trip to Venerable . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 De Winter was immediately taken to see Duncan , the Dutch officer holding out his sword as a token of surrender . Duncan refused the weapon , instead shaking De Winter 's hand and insisting " I would much rather take a brave man 's hand than his sword " . In addition to the losses in the rear , five ships of the Dutch van had been captured as well as the frigate Ambuscade that had attacked from the second line . The remainder of the Dutch ships had fled , making rapid progress towards the coastal shallows . Duncan did not follow them : the Dutch coast between <unk> and Egmond was only 5 nautical miles ( 9 @.@ 3 km ) away , his ship lay in just 9 fathoms ( 18 yards ( 16 m ) ) of water and the weather was too fierce and his ships too battered to risk combat in shoal waters . Instead he ordered his ships to ensure control of their prizes and to return to Britain . Many ships were now undermanned due to the terrible casualties they had suffered : surgeon Robert Young of Ardent , the worst hit of the British ships , worked for more than twelve hours without a break and later wrote : 
 Melancholy cries for assistance were addressed to me from every side by wounded and dying , and piteous moans and bewailing from pain and despair . In the midst of these agonising scenes I was able to preserve myself firm and collected … Many of the worst wounded were stoical beyond belief ; they were determined not to flinch and , when news of the shattering victory was brought down to them , they raised a cheer and declared they regretted not the loss of their limbs . 
 Casualties in the battle were very heavy on both sides , and historians such as William James have noted that the losses among the British ships were proportionally much higher than when British fleets met French or Spanish opposition . This was attributed to the Dutch tactics , mirrored by the British , of firing at the enemy hulls rather than attempting to disable their masts and rigging as in other continental navies . The worst hit of the British ships were those in the first wave , such as Ardent with 148 casualties , Monarch with 136 and Belliqueux with 103 , while both Adamant and Agincourt escaped without a single man killed or wounded . Among the dead were Captain Burges of Ardent and two lieutenants , while the wounded included Captain Essington of Triumph and twelve lieutenants . In total , British losses were recorded after the battle as 203 killed and 622 wounded , although later assessments based on charitable requirements of those wounded or killed gave the higher figures of 228 killed and 812 wounded , including 16 of the latter who subsequently died . Many of the British ships were badly damaged , taking on large quantities of water through damaged hulls . One of the worst hit was Venerable , which had to be completely dismantled and reconstructed after returning to Britain before the ship was ready for active service again . 
 Dutch casualty returns , particularly on the captured ships , were vague , and only partially complete . Among the losses were Captain <unk> of Beschermer and Captain Holland of Wassenaar , both of whom were killed early in the battle . Also lost were Captain Van Rossum of Vrijheid , who was struck in the thigh by a cannonball and died shortly afterwards from the effects of the wound , and Admiral Reijntjes who died while a prisoner in England as a result of the wounds he suffered aboard Jupiter . His remains were subsequently returned to the Netherlands with full military honours . There were also large numbers of wounded among the Dutch fleet , including Rear @-@ Admirals Bloys van Treslong and Story ; one of the few Dutch officers to escape injury or death was De Winter himself , who later commented " It is a matter of marvel that two such gigantic objects as Admiral Duncan and myself should have escaped the general carnage of this day . " In total , Dutch losses were later reported as 540 men killed and 620 wounded , with Vrijheid the worst hit with the loss of almost half of its total complement . 
 = = = Return journeys = = = 
 On Venerable , Duncan assembled all of those men fit to attend for a church service to " return thanks to Almighty God for all His mercies showered on them and him . " For the next 24 hours the 66 @-@ year @-@ old Duncan remained on duty without a break , organising the scattered fleet on its journey home . The British admiral did find time however to play a game of whist in his cabin with De Winter after dinner : when the Dutch admiral lost a rubber , he commented that it was hard to be beaten twice in one day by the same man . On 13 October , Duncan completed his official despatch and sent it ahead of his wallowing ships with Captain William George Fairfax on the cutter Rose : he praised all of his men , reserving special mention for Trollope and the late Burges , whom he called a " good and gallant Officer … a sincere Friend " . De Winter was permitted to send despatches to the Batavian government , in which he blamed Story and his centre for not maintaining the combat longer . He also attributed overwhelming British numbers to his defeat and suggested that he may have captured some of the British fleet if he had been better supported . When this letter was later published it provoked a storm of criticism in Britain , one officer describing it as " a garbled account which , for ought I know , might have been collected by people on shore who knew nothing of the action " . 
 During the afternoon of 12 October , a gale sprang up which inflicted further damage to the battered ships and caused water to gush through the many shot holes in the ships ' hulls . Aboard the Dutch ships , the situation was especially dangerous . Casualties had been significantly higher , particularly on Vrijheid , than on board the British vessels and the small numbers of British sailors placed aboard as prize crews were unable to cope alone , and in the high winds many masts collapsed to the deck and huge quantities of water leaked into the hulls . 
 Delft , captured in the early stages of the battle , was under the command of the Dutch Lieutenant Heilberg and the British Lieutenant Charles Bullen , with a small prize crew of 69 men . Ninety @-@ three Dutch prisoners had been removed , and among the remaining Dutch sailors were 76 wounded men . As the gale intensified , it rapidly became clear that despite a tow line attached from Veteran the ship would never reach Britain , and a large board was raised on deck with the chalked message " The ship is sinking " . Reacting at once , boats from nearby ships organised an evacuation and began loading the Dutch prisoners for transfer to more seaworthy vessels . Bullen offered a place in the first rescue boat , from Veteran , to Heilberg , but the Dutch officer refused , gesturing to the immobile wounded who had been brought onto the maindeck as the lower decks had flooded and replying " But how can I leave these men ? " . In response , Bullen cried out " God bless you , my brave fellow ! Here is my hand ; I give you my word I will stay her with you ! " . The prize crew left on the second rescue boat sent from Russell , and Bullen and Heilberg waited for a third trip to bring them off with the remaining 30 wounded men and three junior Dutch officers who had also elected to stay . Before further help could arrive , however , Delft suddenly foundered , Bullen and Heilberg throwing themselves clear as the ship sank . Both were seen in the water but only Bullen reached safety , swimming to Monmouth alone . 
 Two other prizes were lost to the British fleet : Monnikkendam had been supplied with a prize crew of 35 men from Beaulieu , but had become separated during the gales and lost its remaining masts and spars . The crew fitted jury masts , but they too collapsed and the hull flooded to a depth of 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) . On 12 October , aware that the ship would soon founder , the prize master instructed the Dutch boatswain to run the ship onto the Dutch coast at West <unk> . Local boats came out to the stranded vessel and all aboard were saved , the 35 British prisoners taken to a prison hulk at Flushing . The ship itself was wrecked beyond repair and abandoned . The other captured frigate , Ambuscade , was also driven ashore in a sinking state and the prize crew made prisoner , but in that case the ship was salvaged and later returned to Dutch service . 
 In contrast to the British difficulties , the survivors of the Dutch fleet had few problems returning to the Texel , with the exception of Brutus . Admiral Bloys van Treslong had sailed for the coast off Hinder with two brigs , and there on 13 October the 40 @-@ gun British frigate HMS Endymion under Captain Sir Thomas Williams found him . At 16 : 30 , Endymion closed with the larger , but damaged , Dutch ship and opened fire , Brutus responding with a broadside of its own . Williams successfully raked his opponent twice , but the complicated tides of the Dutch coast dragged his ship out of range at 17 : 30 before he could press his attack any further . Firing rockets in the hope of attracting attention from any of Duncan 's ships , Williams was rewarded at 22 : 30 by the arrival of Beaulieu . On 14 October the frigates hunted for their opponents , and found the Dutch ships off the <unk> channel at 05 : 00 . The frigates closed , and Bloys van Treslong withdrew , passing deeper into Dutch waters and reaching safety at <unk> by 07 : 00 . The British frigates , their quarry having escaped , returned to Duncan 's struggling fleet . 
 = = Effects = = 
 On 17 October 1797 , Duncan 's limping convoy began to arrive at Yarmouth to be greeted with great celebrations . Several ships were delayed , with three wallowing off Kentish Knock , three more in Hosley Bay and several still at sea due to an adverse northwesterly wind . News of the victory had already spread across Britain , and on 20 October Duncan was created Viscount Duncan of Camperdown and Baron Duncan of Lundie . Admiral Onslow was made a baronet and Captains Henry Trollope and William George Fairfax were <unk> George III insisted on meeting Duncan personally , and on 30 October set out for Sheerness in the royal yacht HMY Royal Charlotte before strong winds and waves forced him back to port on 1 November . Unable to reach Duncan 's flagship , the King instead rewarded the fleet as a whole by pardoning 180 men condemned for their role in the Nore Mutiny and held aboard the prison hulk HMS Eagle in the River Medway . Similar pardons were awarded by Rear @-@ Admiral Peter Rainier to mutineers in the East Indies Squadron . Gold medals were created and presented to the captains and both Houses of Parliament voted their thanks for their victory . All first lieutenants were promoted to commander and Duncan and Onslow were presented with valuable presentation swords valued at 200 and 100 guineas each respectively . Duncan was also given a pension of £ 2 @,@ 000 a year by the government , made a freeman of numerous towns and cities and was subject to presentations from numerous patriotic societies , particularly in Scotland , where he was awarded valuable plate by both his birth city of Dundee and the county of Forfarshire . A public subscription was taken up for the widows and wounded and raised £ 52 @,@ 609 10s and 10d ( the equivalent of £ 4 @,@ 910 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) , When Duncan travelled to a reception at The Guildhall on 10 November , a mob surrounded his carriage in the street , <unk> the horses and dragged it themselves up Ludgate Hill as a mark of respect . On 23 December , the King lead a thanksgiving procession and ceremony in St Paul 's Cathedral in London at which Duncan carried De Winter 's flag from Vrijheid and Onslow carried Reijntjes ' flag from Jupiter , followed by Fairfax , Essington , Mitchell , Bligh , Walker , Trollope , Drury , O 'Bryen , Gregory and Hotham as well as numerous seamen from the fleet . Five decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . 
 Not all of the reactions were positive : several of Duncan 's captains were criticised for their failure to rapidly and decisively engage the enemy , including Captain Wells of Lancaster . The worst criticism fell on Captain John Williamson of Agincourt . Agincourt had been barely engaged in the battle and had suffered not one single casualty . As a result , Williamson was accused of failing to do his duty by Captain Hopper of Agincourt 's Royal Marines and court @-@ martialled on 4 December 1797 , at Sheerness aboard Circe , on the charges of " disobedience to signals and not going into action " and " cowardice and disaffection " . Williamson had a history of indecisiveness : in 1779 , while a junior officer on Captain James Cook 's voyage to the Pacific Ocean , Williamson had prevaricated about bringing boats to evacuate Cook from Kealakekua Bay while under attack by Hawaiians . As a result , Cook was trapped on the beach and stabbed to death . At the conclusion of the trial on 1 January 1798 , Williamson was found guilty of the first charge and not guilty of the latter , resulting in demotion to the bottom of the post captains list and prohibition from further naval service . Williamson was reported to have died in 1799 , shortly after his dismissal from the service , but Edward Pelham Brenton later claimed that he had instead gone into hiding under an assumed name and continued to draw his pension for many years . In the Batavian Republic , there were also recriminations against those officers who were deemed to have failed in their duty : De Winter 's despatch from London after the battle placed much of the blame with six ships that had failed to follow his orders and had withdrawn early from the battle . Several officers were brought up on charges , including Admiral Bloys van Treslong who was convicted at court @-@ martial and dismissed the service although later reinstated , and Commander Souter of Batavier who was convicted and imprisoned . Admiral Story was also criticised , particularly by De Winter , and was only permitted to keep his command once he had satisfied the Batavian government that he had had no option but to retreat . 
 All of the captured Dutch ships were bought into the Royal Navy , <unk> , Vrijheid , Wassenaar , Haarlem and Alkmaar under their own names ( although in most cases they were anglicised ) and Admiraal Tjerk Hiddes De Vries as the simpler <unk> . Two were completely renamed , due to the prior existence of ships with their names in the Royal Navy ; Jupiter became HMS Camperdown and Hercules became HMS Delft . None of these ships was ever in sufficient condition for service in open waters : the damage suffered at Camperdown proved too severe for them to be fully repaired . In addition , ships of Dutch construction had lighter hulls and flatter bottoms than ships of other nations as they were designed to operate off the shallow waters of the Dutch coast , and as a result they were of little use to the ocean @-@ going Royal Navy . All the prizes were immediately relegated to harbour duty , and none were used for front @-@ line service . Although the prize court took several years to determine the prize money that would be awarded for the battle , the initial estimates of £ 60 @,@ 000 ( the equivalent of £ 5 @,@ 604 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) proved pessimistic : Duncan and his men were eventually awarded £ 150 @,@ 000 ( the equivalent of £ 14 @,@ 010 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) , although they were forced to defend a claim from the Russian Navy on behalf of the squadron that had reinforced Duncan in May . Since this force had played no part in the battle and had been considered a liability rather than a benefit by the British commanders , the claim was rejected , but legal fees and other claims reduced the eventual payment . Following the award of the first £ 10 @,@ 000 instalment , Duncan was given the unique honour of permission to buy shares on the London Stock Exchange at ⅞ market price . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although Camperdown was considered the greatest ever victory for a British fleet over an equal enemy force to that date , historian Noel Mostert has noted that it " was a battle that , with posterity , somehow lost rank and significance against the greater and more romantically glorious events that followed " . Nevertheless , the effects of the action on the wider war were hugely important . The losses suffered by the Dutch Navy in ships , men and morale gave the Royal Navy superiority in the North Sea , a position enhanced by the disruption the battle caused to French negotiations for an alliance with what historian Edward Pelham Brenton describes as the " Northern Powers " of Scandinavia . The destruction of the Dutch fleet at Camperdown was also a serious blow to French ambitions to invade Ireland , and denied their Atlantic fleet of essential reinforcements ; it may even have played a part in Napoleon Bonaparte 's decision to abandon efforts to attack Britain directly early in 1798 . In 1799 , a significant British and Russian expeditionary force landed in the Netherlands supported by a large fleet under Lord Duncan . Assailed from both sea and land , the remainder of the Dutch Navy under Admiral Story capitulated without a fight : in what became known as the Vlieter Incident , the political divisions between the officers and seamen resulted in a mutiny during which the Dutch sailors threw their ammunition overboard . In Britain , the public relief at the restoration of the Navy 's authority in the aftermath of the spring mutinies was enormous and helped steady the wavering British government in their pursuit of the war by restoring confidence in British naval supremacy in home waters . Christopher Lloyd notes that the events of 1797 led to " a new and blatant patriotism . . . [ which ] was centred on the achievements of ' our gallant tars ' . " A popular rhyme of the time reflected public feeling : 
 " St Vincent drubbed the Dons , Earl Howe he drubbed Monsieur , 
 And gallant Duncan now has soundly drubbed <unk> ; 
 The Spanish , French and Dutch , tho ' all united by , 
 Fear not Britannia cries , My Tars can beat all three . 
 <unk> , <unk> and Dons , your country 's empty boast , 
 Our tars can beat all three , each on his native coast . " 
 Although Duncan 's initial tactics at the battle were reminiscent of those of Howe at the Glorious First of June , and his eventual attack has been compared to Nelson 's tactics at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 , Duncan credited the tactical work Essay on Naval Tactics by John Clerk of Eldin for inspiring his decisions on the day . Duncan was subsequently indirectly criticised some years after the battle by his colleague Earl St Vincent , who had won the Battle of Cape St Vincent over a Spanish fleet nine months before Camperdown . In a letter complaining of Clerk 's assertion that he had been responsible for all of the major naval victories of the war , St Vincent wrote that Duncan " was a brave officer , little versed in the subtleties of naval tactics , and who would have been quickly embarrassed by them . When he saw the enemy , he rushed upon him without thinking of such and such and order of battle . To conquer he calculated upon the brave example he set his captains , and the event justified his expectation . " This assessment was refuted by Captain Hotham , who publicly responded that " the advanced season of the year and the close proximity of the enemy 's coast all made what , upon another occasion , might have appeared haste imperatively necessary , for it was the prompt decision of the Admiral that occasioned the result " . Some modern historians , such as Peter Padfield , have agreed with Hotham 's assertion , with the added suggestion that Duncan 's tactics during the battle might have had an influence on the newly promoted Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson , who was in England recovering from the loss of his right arm at the Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife at the time of Camperdown . Duncan himself felt that he could have done more , noting that " We were obliged ... to be rather rash in our attack . Had we been ten leagues at sea none would have escaped . " but some of the highest praise came from his erstwhile opponent , De Winter , who wrote that " Your not waiting to form line ruined me : if I had got nearer the shore and you had attacked , I should probably have drawn both fleets on it , and it would have been a victory for me , being on my own coast . " Duncan 's health deteriorated after the battle , forcing his retirement from the Navy in 1799 and contributing to his death at Cornhill @-@ on @-@ Tweed in 1804 . 
 De Winter 's actions during in the battle have been commended : Edward Pelham Brenton wrote in 1836 that " The Dutch admiral displayed , in his own person , the most undaunted valour ... but was compelled at length to yield to superior skill , it would be untrue to say superior bravery . " while William James noted in 1827 that after the battle " " Batavian prowess " still claimed the respect of an enemy and the applause of the world " . De Winter was released from captivity in 1798 after news reached Britain that his wife had suffered a stroke , and he subsequently became the Batavian ambassador to France , before resuming command of the Dutch fleet at the start of the Napoleonic Wars . He was a trusted subordinate of Louis Bonaparte , King of Holland between 1806 and 1810 , and was honoured by Emperor Napoleon in 1811 before his sudden death in Paris the following year . 
 The battle became a popular theme for contemporary artists and many paintings depicting it are held in National collections in the United Kingdom , including paintings by Thomas Whitcombe and Philip de Loutherbourg in the Tate Gallery , Whitcombe , Samuel Drummond and Daniel Orme at the National Maritime Museum , and George Chambers , Sr. and John Singleton Copley at the National Gallery of Scotland . In literature , the battle has played a central role in the 1968 novel Sea Road to Camperdown by Showell Styles , and the 1975 novel The <unk> by C. Northcote Parkinson . The battle also inspired composers , such as Daniel <unk> , whose composition Britannia : An Allegorical Overture was created in honour of the victory and Jan Ladislav <unk> , who created a composition entitled The Naval Battle and Total Defeat of the Dutch by Admiral Duncan in 1797 . 
 The Royal Navy has commemorated the battle through the four ships that bore the name HMS Camperdown and seven named HMS Duncan , which have maintained close links with Duncan 's hometown of Dundee . In Dundee , the Battle of Camperdown is commemorated at Camperdown House , originally the Dundee seat of the Viscounts Camperdown , which was completed in 1828 and later became a public park and tourist attraction . The bicentennial of the battle was celebrated in Dundee in 1997 with the " Glorious Victory " exhibition at the city 's McManus Galleries in conjunction with Camperdown House and the National Museum of Scotland . The exhibition became a popular tourist attraction and was viewed by more than 50 @,@ 000 visitors . On 11 October a memorial service was held to remember the dead and a new statue of Admiral Duncan unveiled in the town . 
 = Beta Pictoris = 
 Beta Pictoris ( β Pic , β Pictoris ) is the second brightest star in the constellation Pictor . It is located 63 @.@ 4 light years from the Solar System , and is 1 @.@ 75 times as massive and 8 @.@ 7 times as luminous as the Sun . The Beta Pictoris system is very young , only 8 – 20 million years old , although it is already in the main sequence stage of its evolution . Beta Pictoris is the title member of the Beta Pictoris moving group , an association of young stars which share the same motion through space and have the same age . 
 Beta Pictoris shows an excess of infrared emission compared to normal stars of its type , which is caused by large quantities of dust and gas ( including carbon monoxide ) near the star . Detailed observations reveal a large disk of dust and gas orbiting the star , which was the first debris disk to be imaged around another star . In addition to the presence of several planetesimal belts and cometary activity , there are indications that planets have formed within this disk and that the processes of planet formation may still be ongoing . Material from the Beta Pictoris debris disk is thought to be the dominant source of interstellar meteoroids in the Solar System . 
 The European Southern Observatory ( ESO ) has confirmed the presence of a planet , Beta Pictoris b , matching previous predictions , through the use of direct imagery , orbiting in the plane of the debris disk surrounding the star . This planet is currently the closest extrasolar planet to its star ever photographed : the observed separation is roughly the same as the distance between Saturn and the Sun . 
 = = Location and visibility = = 
 Beta Pictoris is a star in the southern constellation of Pictor , the Easel , and is located to the west of the bright star Canopus . It traditionally marked the sounding line of the ship Argo Navis , before the constellation was split . The star has an apparent visual magnitude of 3 @.@ 861 , so is visible to the naked eye under good conditions , though light pollution may result in stars dimmer than magnitude 3 being too dim to see . It is the second brightest in its constellation , exceeded only by Alpha Pictoris , which has an apparent magnitude of 3 @.@ 30 . 
 The distance to Beta Pictoris and many other stars was measured by the Hipparcos satellite . This was done by measuring its trigonometric parallax : the slight displacement in its position observed as the Earth moves around the Sun . Beta Pictoris was found to exhibit a parallax of 51 @.@ 87 milliarcseconds , a value which was later revised to 51 @.@ 44 milliarcseconds when the data was reanalyzed taking systematic errors more carefully into account . The distance to Beta Pictoris is therefore 63 @.@ 4 light years , with an uncertainty of 0 @.@ 1 light years . 
 The Hipparcos satellite also measured the proper motion of Beta Pictoris : it is traveling eastwards at a rate of 4 @.@ 65 milliarcseconds per year , and northwards at a rate of 83 @.@ 10 milliarcseconds per year . Measurements of the Doppler shift of the star 's spectrum reveals it is moving away from us at a rate of 20 km / s . Several other stars share the same motion through space as Beta Pictoris and likely formed from the same gas cloud at roughly the same time : these comprise the Beta Pictoris moving group . 
 = = Physical properties = = 
 = = = Spectrum , luminosity and variability = = = 
 According to measurements made as part of the Nearby Stars Project , Beta Pictoris has a spectral type of <unk> and has an effective temperature of 8 @,@ 052 K ( 7 @,@ 779 ° C ; 14 @,@ 034 ° F ) , which is hotter than our Sun 's 5 @,@ 778 K ( 5 @,@ 505 ° C ; 9 @,@ 941 ° F ) . Analysis of the spectrum reveals that the star contains a slightly higher ratio of heavy elements , which are termed metals in astronomy , to hydrogen than our Sun . This value is expressed as the quantity [ M / H ] , the base @-@ 10 logarithm of the ratio of the star 's metal fraction to that of the Sun . In the case of Beta Pictoris , the value of [ M / H ] is 0 @.@ 05 , which means that the star 's metal fraction is 12 % greater than that of our Sun . 
 Analysis of the spectrum can also reveal the surface gravity of the star . This is usually expressed as log g , the base @-@ 10 logarithm of the gravitational acceleration given in CGS units , in this case , cm / s ² . Beta Pictoris has log g = 4 @.@ 15 , implying a surface gravity of 140 m / s ² , which is about half of the gravitational acceleration at the surface of our Sun ( 274 m / s ² ) . 
 As an A @-@ type main sequence star , Beta Pictoris is more luminous than our Sun : combining the apparent magnitude of 3 @.@ 861 with the distance of 19 @.@ 44 parsecs gives an absolute magnitude of 2 @.@ 42 , as compared to our Sun which has an absolute magnitude of 4 @.@ 83 . This corresponds to a visual luminosity 9 @.@ 2 times greater than that of the Sun . When the entire spectrum of radiation from Beta Pictoris and the Sun is taken into account , Beta Pictoris is found to be 8 @.@ 7 times more luminous than the Sun . 
 Many main sequence stars of spectral type A fall into a region of the Hertzsprung – Russell diagram called the instability strip , which is occupied by pulsating variable stars . In 2003 , photometric monitoring of the star revealed variations in brightness of around 1 – 2 <unk> on frequencies between about 30 and 40 minutes . Radial velocity studies of Beta Pictoris also reveal variability : there are pulsations at two frequencies , one at 30 @.@ 4 minutes and one at 36 @.@ 9 minutes . As a result , the star is classified as a Delta Scuti variable . 
 = = = Mass , radius and rotation = = = 
 The mass of Beta Pictoris has been determined by using models of stellar evolution and fitting them to the star 's observed properties . This method yields a stellar mass between 1 @.@ 7 and 1 @.@ 8 solar masses . The star 's angular diameter has been measured using interferometry with the Very Large Telescope and was found to be 0 @.@ 84 milliarcseconds . Combining this value with the distance of 63 @.@ 4 light years gives a radius 1 @.@ 8 times that of our Sun . 
 The rotational velocity of Beta Pictoris has been measured to be at least 130 km / s . Since this value is derived by measuring radial velocities , this is a lower limit on the true rotational velocity : the quantity measured is actually v sin ( i ) , where i represents the inclination of the star 's axis of rotation to the line @-@ of @-@ sight . If it is assumed that Beta Pictoris is viewed from Earth in its equatorial plane , a reasonable assumption since the circumstellar disk is seen edge @-@ on , the rotation period can be calculated as approximately 16 hours , which is significantly shorter than that of our Sun ( 609 @.@ 12 hours ) . 
 = = = Age and formation = = = 
 The presence of significant amounts of dust around the star implies a young age of the system and led to debate about whether it had joined the main sequence or was still a pre – main sequence star However , when the star 's distance was measured by Hipparcos it was revealed that Beta Pictoris was located further away than previously thought and hence was more luminous than originally believed . Once the Hipparcos results were taken into account , it was found that Beta Pictoris was located close to the zero age main sequence and was not a pre – main sequence star after all . Analysis of Beta Pictoris and other stars within the Beta Pictoris moving group suggests that they are around 12 million years old . Allowing for uncertainties , the age may range between 8 and 20 million years . 
 Beta Pictoris may have been formed near the Scorpius @-@ Centaurus Association . The collapse of the gas cloud which resulted in the formation of Beta Pictoris may have been triggered by the shock wave from a supernova explosion : the star which went supernova may have been a former companion of HIP <unk> , which is now a runaway star . Tracing the path of HIP <unk> backwards suggests that it would have been in the vicinity of the Scorpius @-@ Centaurus Association about 13 million years ago . 
 = = Circumstellar environment = = 
 = = = Debris disks = = = 
 Excess infrared radiation from Beta Pictoris was detected by the IRAS spacecraft in 1983 . Along with Vega , Fomalhaut and Epsilon Eridani , it was one of the first four stars from which such an excess was detected : these stars are called " Vega @-@ like " after the first such star discovered . Since A @-@ type stars like Beta Pictoris tend to radiate most of their energy at the blue end of the spectrum , this implied the presence of cool matter in orbit around the star , which would radiate at infrared wavelengths and produce the excess . This hypothesis was verified in 1984 when Beta Pictoris became the first star to have its circumstellar disk imaged optically . The IRAS data are ( at the micron <unk> ) : [ 12 ] = 2 @.@ 68 , [ 25 ] = 0 @.@ 05 , [ 60 ] = <unk> and [ 100 ] = <unk> . The <unk> are : E12 = 0 @.@ 69 , E25 = 3 @.@ 35 , E60 = 6 @.@ 17 and E100 = 6 @.@ 90 . 
 The debris disk around Beta Pictoris is seen edge @-@ on by observers on Earth , and is orientated in a northeast @-@ southwest direction . The disk is asymmetric : in the northeast direction it has been observed out to 1835 astronomical units from the star , while the southwest direction the extent is 1450 AU . The disk is rotating : the part to the northeast of the star is moving away from us , while the part to the southwest of the disc is moving towards us . 
 Several elliptical rings of material have been observed in the outer regions of the debris disk between 500 and 800 AU : these may have formed as a result of the system being disrupted by a passing star . Astrometric data from the Hipparcos mission reveal that the red giant star Beta Columbae passed within 2 light years of Beta Pictoris about 110 @,@ 000 years ago , but a larger perturbation would have been caused by Zeta Doradus , which passed at a distance of 3 light years about 350 @,@ 000 years ago . However computer simulations favor a lower encounter velocity than either of these two candidates , which suggest that the star responsible for the rings may have been a companion star of Beta Pictoris on an unstable orbit . The simulations suggest a perturbing star with a mass of 0 @.@ 5 solar masses is likely to blame for the structures . Such a star would be a red dwarf of spectral type <unk> . 
 In 2006 , imaging of the system with the Hubble Space Telescope 's Advanced Camera for Surveys revealed the presence of a secondary dust disk inclined at an angle of about 5 ° to the main disk and extending at least 130 AU from the star . The secondary disk is asymmetrical : the southwest extension is more curved and less inclined than the northeast . The imaging was not good enough to distinguish between the main and secondary disks within 80 AU of Beta Pictoris , however the northeast extension of the dust disk is predicted to intersect with the main disk at about 30 AU from the star . The secondary disk may be produced by a massive planet in an inclined orbit removing matter from the primary disk and causing it to move in an orbit aligned with the planet . 
 Studies made with the NASA Far Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Explorer have discovered that the disk around Beta Pictoris contains an extreme overabundance of carbon @-@ rich gas . This helps stabilize the disk against radiation pressure which would otherwise blow the material away into interstellar space . Currently , there are two suggested explanations for the origin of the carbon overabundance . Beta Pictoris might be in the process of forming exotic carbon @-@ rich planets , in contrast to the terrestrial planets in the Solar System , which are rich in oxygen instead of carbon . Alternatively it may be passing through an unknown phase that might also have occurred early in the development of the Solar System : in the Solar System there are carbon @-@ rich meteorites known as <unk> chondrites , which may have formed in a carbon @-@ rich environment . It has also been proposed that Jupiter may have formed around a carbon @-@ rich core . 
 In 2011 the disk around Beta Pictoris became the first other planetary system to be photographed by an amateur astronomer . Rolf Olsen of New Zealand captured the disk with a 10 @-@ inch Newtonian reflector and a modified webcam . 
 = = = <unk> belts = = = 
 In 2003 , imaging of the inner region of the Beta Pictoris system with the Keck II telescope revealed the presence of several features which are interpreted as being belts or rings of material . Belts at approximately 14 , 28 , 52 and 82 astronomical units from the star were detected , which alternate in inclination with respect to the main disk . 
 Observations in 2004 revealed the presence of an inner belt containing silicate material at a distance of 6 @.@ 4 AU from the star . <unk> material was also detected at 16 and 30 AU from the star , with a lack of dust between 6 @.@ 4 and 16 AU providing evidence that a massive planet may be orbiting in this region . Magnesium @-@ rich olivine has also been detected , strikingly similar to that found in the Solar System comets and different from the olivine found in Solar System asteroids . Olivine crystals can only form closer than 10 AU from the star ; therefore they have been transported to the belt after formation , probably by radial mixing . 
 Modeling of the dust disk at 100 AU from the star suggests the dust in this region may have been produced by a series of collisions initiated by the destruction of planetesimals with radii of about 180 kilometers . After the initial collision , the debris undergoes further collisions in a process called a collisional cascade . Similar processes have been inferred in the debris disks around Fomalhaut and AU Microscopii . 
 = = = Falling evaporating bodies = = = 
 The spectrum of Beta Pictoris shows strong short @-@ term variability that was first noticed in the red @-@ shifted part of various absorption lines , which was interpreted as being caused by material falling onto the star . The source of this material was suggested to be small comet @-@ like objects on orbits which take them close to the star where they begin to evaporate , termed the " falling evaporating bodies " model . Transient blue @-@ shifted absorption events were also detected , though less frequently : these may represent a second group of objects on a different set of orbits . Detailed modeling indicates the falling evaporating bodies are unlikely to be mainly icy like comets , but instead are probably composed of a mixed dust and ice core with a crust of refractory material . These objects may have been perturbed onto their star @-@ grazing orbits by the gravitational influence of a planet in a mildly eccentric orbit around Beta Pictoris at a distance of roughly 10 AU from the star . Falling evaporating bodies may also be responsible for the presence of gas located high above the plane of the main debris disk . 
 = = = Planetary system = = = 
 On November 21 , 2008 , it was announced that infrared observations made in 2003 with the Very Large Telescope had revealed a candidate planetary companion to the star . In the autumn of 2009 the planet was successfully observed on the other side of the parent star , confirming the existence of the planet itself and earlier observations . It is believed that in 15 years it will be possible to record the whole orbit of the planet . 
 The radial velocity method used to discover the majority of currently @-@ known extrasolar planets is not well suited to studying A @-@ type stars like Beta Pictoris , and its very young age makes the noise even worse . Current limits derived from this method are enough to rule out hot Jupiter @-@ type planets more massive than 2 Jupiter masses at a distance of less than 0 @.@ 05 AU from the star . For planets orbiting at 1 AU , planets with less than 9 Jupiter masses would have evaded detection . Therefore , to find planets in the Beta Pictoris system , astronomers look for the effects that the planet has on the circumstellar environment . 
 Multiple lines of evidence suggested the existence of a massive planet orbiting in the region around 10 AU from the star : the dust @-@ free gap between the planetesimal belts at 6 @.@ 4 AU and 16 AU suggest this region is being cleared out ; a planet at this distance would explain the origin of the falling evaporating bodies , and the warps and inclined rings in the inner disk suggest a massive planet on an inclined orbit is disrupting the disk . 
 The observed planet by itself cannot explain the structure of the planetesimal belts at 30 AU and 52 AU from the star . These belts might be associated with smaller planets at 25 and 44 AU , with around 0 @.@ 5 and 0 @.@ 1 Jupiter masses respectively . Such a system of planets , if it exists , would be close to a 1 : 3 : 7 orbital resonance . It may also be that the rings in the outer disc at 500 – 800 AU are indirectly caused by the influence of these planets . 
 The object was observed at an angular distance of 411 milliarcseconds from Beta Pictoris , which corresponds to a distance in the plane of the sky of 8 AU . For comparison , the orbital radii of the planets Jupiter and Saturn are 5 @.@ 2 AU and 9 @.@ 5 AU respectively . The separation in the radial direction is unknown , so this is a lower limit on the true separation . Estimates of its mass depend on theoretical models of planetary evolution , and predict the object has about 8 Jupiter masses and is still cooling , with a temperature ranging from 1400 – 1600 K. These figures come with the caveat that the models have not yet been tested against real data in the likely ranges of mass and age for the planet . 
 The semimajor axis is 8 @-@ 9 AU and its orbital period is 17 – 21 years . A " transit @-@ like event " was observed in November 1981 ; this is consistent with those estimates . If this is confirmed as a true transit , the inferred radius of the transiting object is 2 – 4 Jupiter radii , which is larger than predicted by theoretical models . This may indicate that it is surrounded by a large ring system or a moon @-@ forming disc . 
 = = Dust stream = = 
 In 2000 , observations made with the Advanced Meteor Orbit Radar facility in New Zealand revealed the presence of a stream of particles coming from the direction of Beta Pictoris , which may be a dominant source of interstellar meteoroids in the Solar System . The particles in the Beta Pictoris dust stream are relatively large , with radii exceeding 20 micrometers , and their velocities suggest that they must have left the Beta Pictoris system at roughly 25 km / s . These particles may have been ejected from the Beta Pictoris debris disk as a result of the migration of gas giant planets within the disk and may be an indication that the Beta Pictoris system is forming an Oort cloud . Numerical modeling of dust ejection indicates radiation pressure may also be responsible and suggests that planets further than about 1 AU from the star cannot directly cause the dust stream . 
 = M @-@ 32 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 32 is a state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the U.S. state of Michigan . It is an east – west route running just over 100 miles ( 160 @.@ 9 km ) from M @-@ 66 in East Jordan to US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) in Alpena . It runs via Gaylord and Atlanta through forested terrain . There is one business spur for the highway that currently exists . 
 The highway has been extended a few times during its history , once reaching both lakes Michigan and Huron . Although it is no longer a true " cross @-@ peninsular " highway , it is close , and there are efforts being made to extend the road back to US 31 , restoring the cross @-@ peninsular status lost in 1974 when it was shortened away from Charlevoix . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 32 starts at the corner of Lake and Water streets in East Jordan . From there it follows Water , Bridge , Mill and State streets through town . It finally turns south on Maple Street leaving town . The trunkline turns east on Rogers Road south of Patricia Lake and then runs southeast into Antrim County . There it joins US 131 along a concurrency before turning east through Elmira and running east toward Gaylord . North of the Alba Road intersection , M @-@ 32 passes a cluster of lakes that includes Lake 27 . Continuing east , M @-@ 32 crosses through a retail corridor before it passes under Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) and runs into downtown Gaylord with Business Loop I @-@ 75 ( BL I @-@ 75 ) . Passing out of Gaylord , the highway runs southeasterly toward Johannesburg . The road passes Big Lake and turns south on Turtle Lake Road at the intersection with Beckett Road . The highway resumes its eastward path on McCoy Road into Johannesburg . It passes through the community and meets the county line in Vienna . There M @-@ 32 turns northwesterly to Atlanta . In town , M @-@ 32 meets and joins M @-@ 33 . The two highways cross the Thunder Bay River before parting ways east of Atlanta in Avery Township . M @-@ 32 turns north by Fletcher Pond , which straddles the Montmorency – Alpena county line . Outside of the village of Hillman , M @-@ 32 passes Business M @-@ 32 ( BUS M @-@ 32 ) . In western Alpena County , the trunkline runs to the north of Manning Hill and passes the south end of the Alpena County Regional Airport outside Alpena . In the city , M @-@ 32 follows Washington Avenue , then briefly turns onto a one @-@ way pair with eastbound along Second Avenue and westbound along Third Avenue . The end of the highway is at US 23 , blocks from the Thunder Bay of Lake Huron . 
 All of M @-@ 32 consists of rural two @-@ lane highway outside of the city of Gaylord . The highway passes through forest lands outside of the communities along the highway . From US 131 east to the eastern terminus at US 23 , M @-@ 32 is listed on the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a group of highways which are determined to be important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . The exception is a portion in eastern Otsego and western Montmorency counties , between the corner of Beckett & Turtle Lake Roads , six miles ( 10 km ) east of Gaylord to the crossroads known as Big Rock , five miles ( 8 km ) west of Atlanta . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 32 was formed as a state trunkline in 1919 along its present routing between M @-@ 13 ( now US 131 ) and M @-@ 10 ( later US 23 , now M @-@ 65 ) near Lachine . In 1933 , M @-@ 32 was extended westerly along M @-@ 131 and then to M @-@ 66 in East Jordan . The concurrency along M @-@ 131 would remain when US 131 replaced it in 1939 . Another change in this year comes on the east end as US 23 is realigned north of Alpena . M @-@ 32 takes over the US 23 routing between Lachine and Alpena . M @-@ 32 would be extended along M @-@ 66 to Charlevoix from 1964 until 1974 . Bus . M @-@ 32 would be disconnected from M @-@ 32 when the latter is realigned in Hillman in 1994 . 
 = = Future = = 
 As stated above , a portion of M @-@ 32 is not on the NHS . Instead , the Federal Highway Administration map for the NHS in Michigan shows a proposed realignment that has not been built as of 2008 . 
 Municipal officials in the Village of Ellsworth have sought an extension of M @-@ 32 westward from East Jordan to end at US 31 . Such an extension would restore M @-@ 32 's status as a " cross @-@ peninsular " highway , making it the 4th if extended . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Business spur = = 
 Business M @-@ 32 ( Bus . M @-@ 32 ) is a <unk> @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 188 km ) business spur route running through Hillman , Michigan . There are markers present , but Bus . M @-@ 32 does not connect to M @-@ 32 . It is the shortest business route in the state , and the second shortest overall trunkline . It is 0 @.@ 006 miles ( 0 @.@ 010 km ) longer than M @-@ 212 in Aloha . The termini for Bus . M @-@ 32 are Hillman Road and Old M @-@ 32 south of Hillman and the northern city limit along Hillman Road . 
 = The Devil Wears Prada ( film ) = 
 The Devil Wears Prada is a 2006 comedy drama film based on Lauren Weisberger 's 2003 novel of the same name . This screen adaptation stars Meryl Streep as Miranda Priestly , a powerful fashion magazine editor , and Anne Hathaway as Andrea Sachs , a college graduate who goes to New York City and lands a job as Priestly 's co @-@ assistant . Emily Blunt and Stanley Tucci co @-@ star , as co @-@ assistant Emily Charlton and art director Nigel , respectively . 
 Adrian Grenier , Simon Baker , and Tracie Thoms play key supporting roles . Wendy Finerman produced and David Frankel directed the film , which was distributed by 20th Century Fox . Streep 's performance drew critical acclaim and earned her many award nominations , including her record @-@ setting 14th Oscar bid , as well as the Golden Globe for Best Actress in a Comedy or Musical . Blunt also drew favorable reviews and nominations for her performance , as did many of those involved in the film 's production . 
 The film was well received by both film critics and the public and became a surprise summer box @-@ office hit following its June 30 North American release . The commercial success and critical praise for Streep 's performance continued in foreign markets with the film leading the international box office for most of October . Likewise , the U.S. DVD release was the top rental during December . The film finished in 2006 's Top 20 both in the U.S. and overseas and grossed over $ 300 million , mostly from its international run . 
 Although the movie is set in the fashion world , most designers and other fashion notables avoided appearing as themselves for fear of displeasing U.S. Vogue editor Anna Wintour , who is widely believed to have been the inspiration for Priestly . Still , many allowed their clothes and accessories to be used in the film , making it the most expensively costumed film in history . Wintour later overcame her initial skepticism , saying she liked the film and Streep in particular . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Andrea ( Anne Hathaway ) is an aspiring journalist fresh out of Northwestern University . Despite her ridicule for the shallowness of the fashion industry , she lands a job " a million girls would kill for , " junior personal assistant to Miranda Priestly ( Meryl Streep ) , the icy editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Runway fashion magazine . Andy plans to put up with Miranda 's bizarre and humiliating treatment for one year in hopes of getting a job as a reporter or writer somewhere else . 
 At first , Andy fumbles with her job and fits in poorly with her gossipy , fashion @-@ conscious co @-@ workers , especially Miranda 's senior assistant Emily Charlton ( Emily Blunt ) . However , with the help of art director Nigel ( Stanley Tucci ) , who lends her designer clothes , she gradually learns her responsibilities and begins to dress more stylishly to show her effort and commitment to the position . She also meets attractive young writer Christian Thompson ( Simon Baker ) , who offers to help her with her career . As she spends increasing amounts of time at Miranda 's beck and call , problems arise in her relationships with her college friends and her live @-@ in boyfriend Nate ( Adrian Grenier ) , a chef working his way up the career ladder . 
 Miranda is impressed by Andy and allows her to be the one to bring the treasured " Book , " a mock @-@ up of the upcoming edition , to her home , along with her dry cleaning . She is given instructions by Emily about where to leave the items and is told not to speak with anyone in the home . Andy arrives at Miranda 's home only to discover that the instructions she received are vague . As she tries to figure out what to do , Andy begins to panic . Miranda 's twins ( Caroline and Cassidy , played by Colleen and Suzanne Dengel , respectively ) falsely tell her she can leave the book at the top of the stairs just as Emily has done on many occasions . At the top of the stairs , Andy interrupts Miranda and her husband having an argument . Mortified , Andy leaves the book and runs out of the home . 
 The next day , Miranda tells her that she wants the new unpublished Harry Potter book for her daughters and , if Andy cannot find a copy , she will be fired . Andy desperately attempts to find the book , nearly gives up , but ultimately obtains it through Christian 's contacts . She surprises Miranda by not only finding the book but having copies sent to the girls at the train station , leaving no doubt that she accomplished Miranda 's " impossible " task , thus saving her job . 
 One day , Andy saves Miranda from being embarrassed at a charity benefit , and Miranda rewards her by offering to take her to the fall fashion shows in Paris instead of Emily . Andy hesitates to take this privilege away from Emily but is forced to accept the offer after being told by Miranda that she will lose her job if she declines . Andy tries to tell Emily on her way to work . However , Emily is hit by a car and Andy has to break the bad news while visiting her in the hospital . 
 When Andy tells Nate she is going to Paris , he is angered by her refusal to admit that she 's become what she once ridiculed , and they break up . Once there , Miranda , without makeup , opens up to Andy about the effect Miranda 's impending divorce will have on her daughters . Later that night , Nigel tells Andy that he has accepted a job as Creative Director with rising fashion star James Holt ( Daniel Sunjata ) at Miranda 's recommendation . Andy finally succumbs to Christian 's charms and , after spending the night with him , learns from him about a plan to replace Miranda with Jacqueline Follet as editor of Runway . Despite the suffering she has endured at her boss 's behest , she attempts to warn Miranda . 
 At a luncheon later that day , however , Miranda announces that it is Jacqueline instead of Nigel who will leave Runway for Holt . Nigel remarks to a stunned Andy that , though disappointed , he has to believe that his loyalty to Miranda will one day pay off . Later , when Miranda and Andy are being driven to a show , she explains to a still @-@ stunned Andy that she was grateful for the warning but already knew of the plot to replace her and sacrificed Nigel to keep her own job . Pleased by this display of loyalty , she tells Andy that she sees a great deal of herself in her . Andy , repulsed , says she could never do that to anyone . Miranda replies that she already did , stepping over Emily when she agreed to go to Paris . When they stop , Andy gets out and throws her cell phone into the fountain of the Place de la Concorde , leaving Miranda , Runway , and fashion behind . 
 Some time later , Andy meets up with Nate , who is moving to Boston because he got a new job as the sous chef of a restaurant . They agree to start dating again and see what the future holds . The same day , Andy is interviewed and is accepted to work at a major New York publication company . It was Miranda who insisted that they hire Andy , despite that she didn 't work for her a full year , but the company would be " the biggest idiots " if they don 't . Andy calls Emily and offers her her Paris wardrobe and the two leave on good terms . Andy passes the " Runway " office building and sees Miranda get into a car . Andy gives a wave , but Miranda does not acknowledge her . Andy is used to this and instead walks further into the crowd . Once inside the car , however , Miranda smiles and then orders her chauffeur to drive . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Anne Hathaway as Andrea " Andy " Sachs 
 Meryl Streep as Miranda Priestly 
 Emily Blunt as Emily Charlton 
 Stanley Tucci as Nigel 
 Simon Baker as Christian Thompson 
 Adrian Grenier as Nate Cooper 
 Gisele Bündchen as Serena 
 Tracie Thoms as Lily 
 Rich Sommer as Doug 
 Daniel Sunjata as James Holt 
