 = = = Achievements = = = 
 Although the pilot episode of the show gathered over four million viewers , viewing figures dipped in successive episodes and the first series had generally poor ratings . Through to series VI the ratings had steadily increased and peaked at over six million viewers , achieved with the episode " Gunmen of the Apocalypse " . When the series returned in 1999 it gained the highest audience figures yet – over eight million viewers tuned in for series VIII 's opening episode " Back in the Red : Part I " . In its eight @-@ series history , the series has won numerous awards including the Royal Television Society Award for special effects , the British Science Fiction award for Best Dramatic Presentation , as well as an International Emmy Award for series VI episode " Gunmen of the Apocalypse " , which tied with an Absolutely Fabulous episode , " Hospital " , in the Popular Arts category . The show had also been nominated for the International Emmy Award in 1987 , 1989 , and 1992 . Series VI won a British Comedy Award for ' Best BBC Comedy Series ' . The video sales have won eight Gold Awards from the British Video Association , and the series still holds the record for being BBC Two 's longest @-@ running , highest @-@ rated sitcom . In 2007 the series was voted ' Best Sci @-@ Fi Show Of All Time ' by the readers of Radio Times magazine . Editor Gill Hudson stated that this result had surprised them as ' the series had not given any new episodes this century ' . 
 = = Spin @-@ offs and merchandise = = 
 The show 's logo and characters have appeared on a wide range of merchandise . Red Dwarf has also been spun off in a variety of different media formats . For instance , the song " Tongue Tied " , featured in the " Parallel Universe " episode of the show , was released in 1993 as a single and became a top 20 UK hit for Danny John Jules ( under the name ' The Cat ' ) . Stage plays of the show have been produced through <unk> Yak , a theatre group in Perth , Western Australia , who were given permission by Grant Naylor Productions to mount stage versions of certain episodes in 2002 , 2004 and 2006 . In October 2006 an Interactive Quiz DVD entitled Red Dwarf : Beat The Geek was released , hosted by Norman Lovett and Hattie Hayridge , both reprising their roles as Holly . 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 Working together under the name " Grant Naylor " , the creators of the series collaboratively wrote two novels . The first , Infinity Welcomes Careful Drivers , was published in November 1989 , and incorporates plot lines from several episodes of the show 's first two series . The second novel , Better Than Life , followed in October 1990 , and is largely based on the second @-@ series episode of the same name . Together , the two novels provide expanded backstory and development of the series ' principal characters and themes . 
 The authors began work on a sequel to Better than Life , called The Last Human , but Rob Grant was drawn away from Red Dwarf by an interest in other projects . Still owing Penguin Publishing two more Red Dwarf novels , Grant and Naylor decided to each write an alternative sequel to Better than Life . Two completely different sequels were made as a result , each presenting a possible version of the story 's continuation . Last Human , by Doug Naylor , adds Kochanski to the crew and places more emphasis on the science @-@ fiction and plot elements , while Rob Grant 's novel Backwards , is more in keeping with the previous two novels , and borrows more extensively from established television stories . 
 An omnibus edition of the first two novels was released in 1992 , including edits to the original text and extra material such as the original pilot script of the TV series . All four novels have been released in audiobook format , the first two read by Chris Barrie , Last Human read by Craig Charles , and Backwards read by author Rob Grant . 
 In December 2009 , Infinity Welcomes Careful Drivers was released in Germany with the title Roter <unk> ( Red Dwarf in German ) . 
 = = = = List of Red Dwarf Novels = = = = 
 = = = Home video releases = = = 
 For the initial release of the VHS editions , episodes of Red Dwarf were separated and two volumes released for each series ( except series VII , which was released on three separate tapes ) , labelled ' Byte One ' and ' Byte Two ' ( plus ' Byte Three ' for series VII ) . These videos were named after the first episode of the three presented on the tape , as was typical with other BBC video releases at the time . However , on occasions the BBC decided to ignore the original running order and use the most popular episodes from the series to maximise sales of the videos : for series III ( the first ever release ) , " <unk> " and " Timeslides " were swapped round , so that the latter could receive top billing on the second VHS volume ; for the second VHS volume of series I , " Confidence and Paranoia " was given top billing , even though the original broadcast order was retained ; this was due to the leading episode being " Waiting for God " which shared its name with the title of another comedy series ( set in a retirement home ) ; and for series V , " Back to Reality " and " Quarantine " were given top billing on their respective video release , which completely re @-@ organised the order of episodes from that in which they were originally broadcast . Future releases would increasingly observe authenticity with the ' original broadcast ' context . All eight series were made available on VHS , and three episodes of series VII were also released as special " Xtended " [ sic ] versions with extra scenes ( including an original , unbroadcast ending for the episode " <unk> To Ride " ) and no laugh track ; the remastered versions of series I – III were also released individually and in a complete box @-@ set . Finally , two outtake videos were released , Smeg Ups in 1994 , and its sequel Smeg Outs in 1995 . 
 The first eight series have since been released on DVD in Region 1 , 2 and 4 , each with a bonus disc of extra material and each release from series III onwards being accompanied by an original documentary about the making of each respective series . Regions 2 and 4 have also seen the release of two Just The Shows , digipack boxsets containing the episodes from series I – IV ( Volume 1 ) and V @-@ VIII ( Volume 2 ) with static menus and no extras . Red Dwarf : The Bodysnatcher Collection , containing the 1997 remastered episodes , as well as new documentaries for series I and II , was released in 2007 . This release showcased a storyboard construction of " Bodysnatcher " , an unfinished script from 1987 , which was finally completed in 2007 by Rob Grant and Doug Naylor who were working together for the first time since 1993 . In December 2008 an anniversary DVD set entitled Red Dwarf : All The Shows was released , reworking the vanilla disc content of the two Just The Shows sets within A4 packaging resembling a ' photo album ' , which carefully omitted information that no extras were included . This box @-@ set was re @-@ released in a smaller slip @-@ case sized box , reverting to the Just the Shows title , in November 2009 . The series is also available for download on iTunes . 
 = = = = DVD releases = = = = 
 = = = = Blu @-@ ray releases = = = = 
 = = = Magazine = = = 
 The Red Dwarf Magazine – the magazine part of the title changed to " <unk> " from issue 3 – was launched in 1992 by Fleetway Editions . It comprised a mix of news , reviews , interviews , comic strips and competitions . The comic strips featured episode adaptations and original material , including further stories of popular characters like Mr. <unk> , the Polymorph and Ace Rimmer . 
 Notably , the comic strip stories ' holographic characters , predominately Rimmer , were drawn in greyscale . This was at the request of Grant and Naylor , who had wanted to use the technique for the television series , but the process was deemed too expensive to produce . Despite achieving circulation figures of over 40 @,@ 000 per month , the magazine 's publisher decided to close the title down to concentrate on their other publications . A farewell issue was published , cover dated January 1994 , and featured the remaining interviews , features and comic strips that were to feature in the following issues . 
 Another Red Dwarf magazine was started called Red Dwarf : Better Than Life which is only available through the Red Dwarf Official Fan Club . It features cast interviews and the latest news . Each person gets four issues each year . 
 = = = U.S. version = = = 
 Despite the original version having been broadcast on PBS , A pilot episode for an American version ( known as Red Dwarf USA ) was produced through Universal Studios with the intention of broadcasting on NBC in 1992 . The show essentially followed the same story as the first episode of the original series , using American actors for most of the main roles : Craig Bierko as Lister , Chris Eigeman as Rimmer , and Hinton Battle as Cat . Exceptions to this were Llewellyn , who reprised his role as Kryten , and the British actress Jane Leeves , who played Holly . It was written by Linwood Boomer and directed by Jeffrey Melman , with Grant and Naylor onboard as creators and executive producers . Llewellyn , Grant and Naylor travelled to America for the filming of the American pilot after production of the fifth series of the UK series . According to Llewellyn and Naylor , the cast were not satisfied with Linwood Boomer 's script . Grant and Naylor rewrote the script , but although the cast preferred the re @-@ write , the script as filmed was closer to Boomer 's version . The pilot episode includes footage from the UK series in its title sequence , although it did not retain the logo or the theme music of the UK series . During filming of the pilot , the audience reaction was good and it was felt that the story had been well received . 
 The studio executives were not entirely happy with the pilot , especially the casting , but decided to give the project another chance with Grant and Naylor in charge . The intention was to shoot a " promo video " for the show in a small studio described by the writers as " a garage " . New cast members were hired for the roles of Cat and Rimmer , Terry Farrell and Anthony <unk> respectively . This meant that , unlike the original British series , the cast was all Caucasian . Chris Barrie was asked to play Rimmer in the second pilot , but he declined . With a small budget and deadline , new scenes were quickly shot and mixed in with existing footage of the pilot and UK series V episodes , to give an idea of the basic plot and character dynamics , alongside proposed future episodes , remakes of episodes from the original show . Llewellyn did not participate in the re @-@ shoot , though clips from the British version were used to show the character . Despite the re @-@ shoots and re @-@ casting , the option on the pilot was not picked up . Farrell was cast almost immediately afterwards for Star Trek : Deep Space Nine , in which she was cast as Jadzia Dax . Similarly , one year later Jane Leeves was cast in Frasier as Daphne Moon . 
 The cast of both the British and American versions criticised the casting of Red Dwarf USA , particularly the part of Lister who is portrayed in the British version as a likable slob but in the US version as somewhat clean cut . In the 2004 documentary Dwarfing USA , Danny John @-@ Jules said the only actor who could have successfully portrayed an American Lister was John Belushi . In a 2009 interview on Kevin Pollak 's Chat Show , Bierko said that casting him as Lister was a " huge mistake " and also said a " John Belushi type " would have been better suited to the role . 
 The American pilot has been heavily bootlegged , but it has never been broadcast on TV in any country . Excerpts from the first pilot are included in Dwarfing USA , a featurette on the making of the pilots included on the DVD release of Red Dwarf 's fifth series . Because of rights clearance issues , no footage from the second pilot is included in the featurette . 
 = = = Red Dwarf : The Movie = = = 
 Since the end of the eighth series in 1999 , Doug Naylor has been attempting to make a feature @-@ length version of the show . A final draft of the script was written , by Naylor , and flyers began circulating around certain websites . The flyer was genuine and had been distributed by Winchester Films to market the film overseas . Plot details were included as part of the teaser . It was set in the distant future where Homo <unk> - a race of cyborgs — had taken over the solar system and were wiping out the human race . Spaceships that tried to escape Earth were hunted down until only one remained ... Red Dwarf . 
 Naylor had scouted Australia to get an idea of locations and finance costs , with pre @-@ production beginning in 2004 and filming planned for 2005 . However , finding sufficient funding has been difficult . Naylor explained at a Red Dwarf Dimension Jump convention that the film had been rejected by the BBC and the British Film Council . Reasons given for the rejections were that while the script was considered to be funny , it was not ready . 
 Contents from early drafts of the film were eventually used in the Series X finale " The Beginning " . 
 = = = Roleplaying game = = = 
 <unk> Press ( formerly <unk> LLC ) released Red Dwarf - The Roleplaying Game in February 2003 ( although the printed copyright is 2002 ) . Based on the series , the game allows its players to portray original characters within the Red Dwarf universe . Player characters can be human survivors , holograms , evolved house pets ( cats , dogs , iguanas , rabbits , rats and mice ) , various types of mechanoid ( Series 4000 , <unk> 10 and <unk> in the <unk> , Series 3000 in the Extra Bits Book ) or <unk> ( <unk> and Pleasure GELF in the <unk> , " <unk> " in the Extra Bits Book ) . 
 A total of three products were released for the game : the core 176 @-@ page rulebook , the AI Screen ( analogous to the Game Master 's Screen used in other roleplaying games , also featuring the " Extra Bits Book " booklet ) , and the Series Sourcebook . The Series Sourcebook contains plot summaries of each episode from series I @-@ VIII as well as game rules for all major and minor characters from each series . 
 The game has been praised for staying true to the comedic nature of the series , for its entertaining writing , and for the detail to which the background material is explained . However , some reviewers found the game mechanics to be simplistic and uninspiring compared to other science fiction roleplaying games on the market . 
 = = = Red Dwarf Night = = = 
 On 14 February 1998 , the night before the tenth anniversary of the show 's pilot episode broadcast , BBC Two devoted an evening of programmes to the series , under the banner of Red Dwarf Night . The evening consisted of a mixture of new and existing material , and was introduced and linked by actor and fan Patrick Stewart . In addition , a series of special take @-@ offs on BBC Two 's <unk> , featuring the " 2 " logo falling in love with a <unk> , were used . The night began with Can 't Smeg , Won 't Smeg , a spoof of the cookery programme Can 't Cook , Won 't Cook , presented by that show 's host Ainsley Harriott who had himself appeared as a GELF in the series VI episode " <unk> : Polymorph II " . Taking place outside the continuity of the series , two teams ( Kryten and Lister versus Rimmer and Cat , although Cat quickly departs to be replaced by alter ego Duane <unk> ) were challenged to make the best chicken vindaloo . 
 After a compilation bloopers show , featuring out @-@ takes , the next programme was Universe Challenge , a spoof of University Challenge . Hosted by original University Challenge presenter Bamber Gascoigne , the show had a team of knowledgeable Dwarf fans compete against a team consisting of Chris Barrie , Craig Charles , Robert Llewellyn , Chloë Annett and Danny John Jules . This was followed by The Red Dwarf A – Z , a half @-@ hour documentary that chose a different aspect of the show to focus on for each letter of the alphabet . Talking heads on the episode included Stephen Hawking , Terry Pratchett , original producer Paul Jackson , Mr. Blobby , Patrick Stewart , and a <unk> . Finally , the night ended with a showing of the episode " Gunmen of the Apocalypse " . 
 = Avatar ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Avatar " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the third season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on April 26 , 1996 . The story for the episode was developed by David Duchovny and Howard Gordon , the teleplay was written by Gordon , and it was directed by James Charleston . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Avatar " earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 3 , being watched by 14 @.@ 62 million viewers in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , when Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) is accused of murdering a prostitute , Mulder and Scully investigate to determine the truth behind what happened . 
 " Avatar " was developed after Duchovny initially suggested having a Skinner @-@ centric episode as a way to give himself a break . Skinner 's popularity amongst fans had risen with his increased role in the episodes " The Blessing Way " and " Paper Clip " and these episodes helped re @-@ establish the ground rules regarding where Skinner stood in regards to the X @-@ Files . The episode title means the incarnation of a deity in Sanskrit . 
 = = Plot = = 
 FBI assistant director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) is given divorce papers from his wife , Sharon , after seventeen years of marriage . At a bar , he meets an attractive woman named Carina Sayles ( Amanda Tapping ) ; the two engage in a one night stand . However , after the tryst , Skinner has a nightmare of an old woman in bed with him . He awakens to find Sayles dead , her head twisted completely around . 
 As the murder investigation unfolds , Skinner tells agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) not to get involved . He refuses to take a polygraph test and is viewed as a suspect . Agent Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) examines Sayles ' corpse , finding a phosphorescent glow around her lips . Mulder finds out that Sayles was a prostitute and interviews her madam , who claims that Skinner 's credit card number was collected the previous night . 
 Skinner sees the old woman looking at him on a city street . However , when he pursues the old woman , he instead finds Sharon . The agents talk to Sharon , who says that the marriage failed because of Skinner 's emotional distance . Scully learns that Skinner had been receiving treatment for a sleep disorder , in which he apparently had dreams about being suffocated in bed by an old woman . She fears that Skinner may have unwittingly killed Sayles in his sleep . However , Mulder believes that Skinner may be having visions of a succubus , a female demon , with the mention of similar symptoms of people 's bad dreams they 've experienced . 
 Sharon visits Skinner at his home . After she leaves he falls asleep , seeing the old woman again . He awakens as detectives enter the house , telling him Sharon has been run off the road and severely injured . Skinner admits to Mulder that he saw the woman during his experience in Vietnam , but passed it off as being due to drugs . It is revealed that The Smoking Man is observing their conversation through the one @-@ way mirror of the interrogation room . 
 Mulder investigates the airbag on Skinner 's car , which was the one used to hit Sharon . Scully defends Skinner to the Office of Professional Responsibility , but it does no good and he is fired . Mulder believes this was done to weaken the X @-@ Files . Mulder , with the help of Agent Pendrell finds a face imprint in the airbag which is not Skinner 's . He goes to see the prostitute 's boss again but discovers that she has been murdered . The agents hope to use Judy , an employee who saw the man who actually hired the prostitute and use her to set up another meeting with him . They agree to meet at the Ambassador Hotel in an hour . Skinner goes to see his wife , telling her why he could not sign the divorce papers , and witnesses the old woman again as she awakens from the coma . 
 Mulder waits in the hotel bar while Scully guards Judy in a hotel room . The assassin enters the room to attack them but is quickly killed by Skinner , who was also there . The dead man 's identity is unknown . Skinner returns to work , declining to say to Mulder how he knew to be at the hotel . After Mulder leaves , he reaches into his drawer and puts his wedding ring back on . 
 = = Production = = 
 David Duchovny initially suggested having a Walter Skinner @-@ centric episode as a way to give himself a break , although ultimately he still ended up having a large part in the episode . Duchovny felt that Skinner was a good character who was not utilized to his full extent on the show . Duchovny 's idea , which was written in collaboration with writer Howard Gordon , also surrounded the conceit that what Mulder and Skinner do comes with a tremendous price . Skinner 's popularity amongst fans had risen with his increased role in the episodes " The Blessing Way " and " Paper Clip " and these episodes helped re @-@ establish the ground rules regarding where Skinner stood in regards to the X @-@ Files . Writer Vince Gilligan noted that Skinner was originally intended to be a bad guy , but because Mitch Pileggi was such a good actor the writers decided to not take his character in that direction . 
 A scene between Skinner and The Smoking Man was removed from the final cut due to time considerations , reducing his role in the episode to a very short dialogue @-@ less appearance . Another scene where Mulder questions Skinner 's allegiance was also removed when it was viewed as too combative . The episode title means the incarnation of a deity in Sanskrit . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Avatar " premiered on the Fox network in the United States on April 26 , 1996 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 3 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 9 @.@ 3 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . The episode was watched by a total of 14 @.@ 62 million viewers . The episode later aired in the United Kingdom on January 30 , 1997 on BBC One . 
 The episode received mostly mixed reviews from critics . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a B + . He praised the storytelling , positively commenting on how it revolved around Skinner and his past life . In addition he wrote that the episode possessed some " good scares " . However , he felt that the " central paranormal mystery of the episode is handled in a fashion that feels a bit muddled " . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a moderately negative review and awarded it a 4 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this episode fails to capitalize on the idea of delving into the world of Walter Skinner . The conspiracy elements seem a bit redundant , and the paranormal side of the episode is a forced and inconsistent mess . Instead of developing something unique about Skinner , the episode dwells on what is already known or suggested , leaving the character in the same emotional place at the end as in the beginning . " Entertainment Weekly gave " Avatar " a D + , describing it as " ridiculous " and saying , " The clench @-@ toothed Skinner deserves more air time , but not this USA Network reject " . 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three stars out of five . The two were critical of the storyline , noting that it " doesn 't really work as either a Don 't Look Now ghost story or as a conspiracy piece " , but praised the acting of Pileggi and the dialogue written by Gordon ; the two called the former " great " and the latter " so terse and so real " . Paula Vitaris of Cinefantastique gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it two stars out of four . She referred to the scenes between Skinner and Sharon as " contrived " and derided Skinner 's bedside confession as " simply poor writing " . Vitaris was positive of Duchovny and Hetrick 's acting , and wrote that Pileggi gave " his best " despite the fact that there was little chemistry between the characters to make it effective . David Duchovny , on the other hand , was very pleased with the episode and Mitch Pileggi 's performance ; he later noted , " It was nice for Mitch , and I think he deserved an episode after two years . He did a great job " . 
 = The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 4 – Super Soldiers = 
 The X @-@ Files Mythology – Volume 4 collection is the fourth DVD release containing selected episodes from the eighth to the ninth seasons of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episodes collected in the release form the end of the series ' mythology , and are centered on those that involve the alien " Super Soldiers " and Dana Scully 's ( Gillian Anderson ) son , William . 
 The collection contains seven episodes from the eighth season and seven from the ninth . The episodes follow the investigations of paranormal @-@ related cases , or X @-@ Files , by Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) special agents Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , following Scully 's former partner Fox Mulder 's ( David Duchovny ) abduction by aliens . The two are assisted by Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) and Agent Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) . Events covered in the episodes include : the return , death , and resurrection of Mulder ; the birth of Scully 's child , William ; the discovery of the " Super Soldier " conspiracy ; the discovery of the remains of a space ship in Canada ; Scully 's choice to give William up for adoption ; and Mulder 's trial , conviction , escape , and discovery of the truth . 
 The collection contains the final episodes in the series ' mythology , or fictional overarching story . The release features the closure of most of the series ' long @-@ running arcs . Production for the episodes was drastically affected after co @-@ star Duchovny left the show . Released on November 22 , 2005 , the collection received mixed to negative reviews from critics . Adam Baldwin , Chris Owens , Nicholas Lea , Laurie Holden , and William B. Davis all play supporting roles in the collection . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 When Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) learns that several women have reportedly been abducted and impregnated with alien babies , she begins to question her own pregnancy . John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) introduces Scully to Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , an FBI specialist in ritualistic crime , shortly before Fox Mulder 's ( David Duchovny ) deceased body suddenly appears in a forest at night . Following Mulder 's funeral , Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) is threatened by Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) that he must kill Scully 's baby before it is born . Billy Miles , a multiple abductee who disappeared on the same night as Mulder , is returned deceased but his dead body is resurrected and restored to full health . Mulder also returns from death , with Scully supervising his recovery . Fully rejuvenated , Mulder investigates several X @-@ Files , against orders to do so , but soon gets fired , leaving Doggett in charge of the cases . Mulder continues to provide input in an unofficial capacity . 
 Reluctantly accepting Krycek 's assistance , Mulder , Doggett and Skinner learn that an alien virus recently created in secret by members of the United States government have replaced several humans , including Miles and several high @-@ ranking FBI personnel , with so @-@ called alien " Super Soldiers " . Krycek claims that the soldiers are virtually unstoppable aliens who want to make sure that humans will not survive the colonization of Earth . They have learned that Scully 's baby is a miraculously special child and are afraid that it may be greater than them . When Miles arrives at the FBI Headquarters , Mulder , Doggett , Skinner and Krycek help Scully to escape along with Reyes who drives her to a remote farm . Shortly after Skinner kills Krycek , Scully delivers an apparently normal baby while the alien " Super Soldiers " surround her . Without explanation , the aliens leave the area as Mulder arrives . While Doggett and Reyes report to the FBI Headquarters , Mulder takes Scully and their newborn son , William , back to her apartment . 
 Mulder goes into hiding , Scully is again reassigned to the FBI Academy , and Reyes becomes Doggett 's new FBI partner at the X @-@ Files office . Doggett , Scully , and Reyes discover a conspiracy to place <unk> in the nation 's water , causing mutations and creating " Super Soldiers " . This leads them to a clandestine laboratory where a secret experiment is taking place on board , with connections to Scully 's child , William . The X @-@ Files office 's investigation is hampered by Deputy Director Alvin Kersh ( James Pickens , Jr . ) and Assistant Director Brad Follmer ( Cary Elwes ) . Hopeful about reuniting with Mulder , a complete stranger , " Shadow Man " ( Terry O 'Quinn ) , offers his service to drive Mulder out of hiding . Scully takes the offer , but near gets herself and Mulder killed when it is revealed the man is a Super Soldier . Later on , Scully , Doggett and Reyes find evidence of a dangerous UFO cult which has found a spacecraft similar to one Scully studied in Africa two years ago . The cult kidnaps William , but is destroyed when the baby 's crying activates the ship , killing everyone in the cult , sans William . 
 Doggett finds a strange disfigured man in the X @-@ Files office . Initially , Doggett believes the man is Mulder , but he is revealed to Jeffrey Spender ( Chris Owens ) , Mulder 's half @-@ brother . Spender sticks a needle into William , which the other agents believe to be a virus of some kind , but is later revealed to be a cure for William 's powers . Mulder returns from hiding to only be discovered looking for classified information at an army base and , after allegedly killing an apparently indestructible " Super Soldier " Knowle Rohrer ( Adam Baldwin ) , he is placed on trial to defend the X @-@ Files and himself . But with the help of Kersh , Scully , Reyes , Doggett , Spender , Marita Covarrubias ( Laurie Holden ) and Gibson Praise ( Jeff Gulka ) , Mulder breaks out . Mulder and Scully travel to New Mexico to find an old " wise man " , who is later revealed to be The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) , who tells them that the aliens will arrive in 2012 . Doggett and Reyes aid Mulder and Scully in escaping the FBI , and the two are last seen together in a motel room facing an uncertain future . 
 = = Production = = 
 After settling his contract dispute with Fox , Duchovny quit full @-@ time participation in the show after the seventh season . In order to explain Mulder 's absence , Duchovny 's character was abducted by aliens in the seventh season finale , " Requiem . " After several rounds of contractual discussions , Duchovny agreed to return for a total of 11 eighth season episodes . Thus , " Per Manum " marked the return of Duchovny as Mulder , although he had appeared briefly in flashback appearances and small cameos . Series creator Chris Carter later argued that Mulder 's absences from the series did not affect the characterization , noting that " there are characters who can be powerful as absent centers , as Mulder was through the eight and ninth seasons . " 
 After the end of the eighth season , Duchovny announced that he would leave the show for good . In addition , lead actress Anderson 's contract also expired at the end of the eighth season . Anderson had expressed her growing disinterest in the series ever since the beginning of the eighth season , saying " For a lot of people , if you don 't like your job , you can quit your job , I don 't necessarily have that option . " Anderson cited the fact that " eight years is a long time " as a contributing factor to her indifference . However , Carter soon changed his position and announced he would remain on the show and continue only if Anderson agreed to do another season . Eventually , Fox offered Anderson a " generous " incentive to stay , resulting in the retention of Carter and Anderson and a final season of the show . With the departure of Duchovny and limited use of Anderson , the show garnered much criticism by fans and critics alike , saying the bond between Mulder and Scully was what actually kept the show together for the first seven seasons of the show . 
 Going into the ninth season , the producers decided to drastically change the show . The style of the opening credits in " Nothing Important Happened Today " were changed from the original credits , which , more or less , had been the same for the previous eight seasons . The credits included new graphics as well as new cards for Gish and Pileggi . The finale episode of the series , " The Truth " , was written by series creator Carter ; he later noted , " It 's the end — you don 't get another chance . So you 'd better put everything you 've ever wanted to put in into the episode . There were things to distract us from what was really going on . The band was breaking up . " He expounded on the idea , saying , " Frank [ Spotnitz ] and I [ decided ] it was probably time to go [ … ] it was strange to be writing these things knowing it was the last time we 'd see Scully doing certain things or hear Mulder saying certain things . " Spotnitz explained , " What was kind of nice that Chris made the announcement in January is that we had times to wrap our minds around the end and plan for it and give all of the characters their due . " Gish later said , " I have a great respect for the elegant in which they 're closing the curtain " . Bruce Harwood called the finale the " passing of a generation " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The collection , as well as the episodes themselves , received mixed to negative reviews from critics . Monica Kuebler of Exclaim ! gave the collection a rather negative review and noted that it closed on a " lacklustre note " . Furthermore , she wrote that the main issue with the release was that " the hardcore fans [ of the series ] had come to see The X @-@ Files as Mulder and Scully and understandably weren 't quick to swallow a couple of new characters running the department . " Ultimately , she concluded that the poor episodes and the lack of bonus features included with the collection were proof that " Fox seems eager to wash their hands of the disappointing demise of the show " . 
 Sabadino Parker from PopMatters wrote negatively about the mythology of the last two seasons , noting that " story itself became even more convoluted " and that " the past two seasons should never have happened . " Entertainment Weekly reviewer Ken Tucker speculated that Chris Carter was the only one who seemed to understand the show 's complex mytharc . Joyce Millman from The New York Times called the storyline involving Scully 's child — which left her " haunted and irritable " — " a sad misuse of the radiant Anderson " . The A.V. Club was highly critical of the final season and its mythology story , calling them a " clumsy mish @-@ mash of stuff that had once worked and new serialized storylines about so @-@ called ' super soldiers ' " . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Special features = = 
 = Wandering Son = 
 Wandering Son ( <unk> , <unk> Musuko ) is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Takako Shimura . It was originally serialized in Comic Beam from the December 2002 to August 2013 issue , and published in 15 tankōbon volumes by Enterbrain from July 2003 to August 2013 . The series is licensed in English by Fantagraphics Books , which released the first volume in North America in July 2011 . A 12 @-@ episode anime adaptation produced by AIC Classic and directed by Ei Aoki aired in Japan between January and March 2011 . Eleven episodes aired on television , with episodes 10 and 11 edited into a single episode , and were released individually on their respective BD / DVD volumes . 
 The story depicts a young student named Shuichi Nitori , described by the author as a boy who wants to be a girl , and Shuichi 's friend Yoshino Takatsuki , described as a girl who wants to be a boy . The series deals with issues such as transsexualism , gender identity , and the beginning of puberty . Shimura was originally going to write the story about a girl in high school who wants to be a boy , but she realized that a boy who wants to become a girl before entering into puberty would have a lot of worries related to growing up , and changed the story to fit this model . Wandering Son was selected as a recommended work by the awards jury of the tenth Japan Media Arts Festival in 2006 . The series has been lauded for its use of gender reversal as the core of the story , though the emotional realism of the young characters has been called into question . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the start of Wandering Son , Shuichi Nitori is a young , feminine child assigned male at birth ( <unk> ) in the fifth grade who transfers into a new school . Shuichi quickly becomes friends with another student , tall , boyish Yoshino Takatsuki . Yoshino soon learns of Shuichi 's desire to be a girl . In a show of friendship , Yoshino confesses a similar desire to be a boy . Shuichi also becomes friends with Saori Chiba and Kanako Sasa , two other girls in the class . Saori instantly takes a liking to Shuichi and continuously encourages Shuichi to wear feminine clothes . After Shuichi , Yoshino , and their friends enter sixth grade , Shuichi meets Makoto Ariga , another <unk> student their age from another class who also secretly wants to be a girl . Shuichi and Yoshino become friends with an adult transsexual woman named Yuki who is living with a man named Shiina . Shuichi 's older sister Maho becomes a model and eventually becomes friends with Maiko , a teen model whom she idolizes , and two other teen models : Tamaki Satō and Anna Suehiro . Maho gets a boyfriend , Riku Seya , and Shuichi confesses a crush on Yoshino , but Yoshino cannot reciprocate Shuichi 's feelings . After Saori learns of this , she confesses she likes Shuichi , but Shuichi too cannot return her feelings . This results in a falling @-@ out between Shuichi 's friends as they prepare to enter junior high school . 
 In junior high school , they meet a tall , eccentric girl who befriends everyone named Chizuru Sarashina and her prickly friend Momoko Shirai , who does not get along well with the others — especially Saori . Eventually , Saori and Yoshino rejoin Shuichi 's group of friends , though Saori says she still hates Yoshino and Momoko . Shuichi and Anna start dating , much to the surprise of their friends and Shuichi 's sister . Yoshino and Saori manage to halfway repair their friendship , though Saori is still standoffish to others . Shuichi 's friends are split up into several classes upon entering their second year in junior high school . Shuichi becomes friends with <unk> Doi , who previously teased Shuichi about wanting to be a girl . Yoshino attends school in a boy 's uniform for a short time , and Shuichi tries to go to school dressed as a girl one day , but is laughed at , and becomes discouraged . Shuichi 's friends worry as Shuichi begins skipping school . Although Shuichi eventually starts attending school regularly again , Anna breaks off their relationship . By the time Shuichi , Yoshino , and their friends enter their third year in junior high school , Shuichi 's voice is changing . The group of friends start thinking about their future high school plans , and Shuichi and Anna start dating again . 
 Shuichi begins attending the same all @-@ boy high school as Makoto and Doi , while Yoshino and Saori begin attending a high school where uniforms are not required . Saori starts dating Fumiya Ninomiya . Yoshino starts working at Anna 's modeling agency and Shuichi begins working at a cafe , but later quits . Shuichi starts writing a semi @-@ autobiographical novel . Yoshino later tells Shuichi that Yoshino does not think about wanting to be a boy anymore , and also confesses a romantic attraction to Shuichi . Shuichi still identifies as a girl , and even after informing Anna of this , she stays with Shuichi . After graduating from high school , Shuichi moves out and goes to the same college as Doi . Shuichi continues to write the novel , which is given the title The Boy Who 's a Girl ( <unk> 、 <unk> , Boku wa , Onna no Ko ) . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = = Protagonists = = = 
 Shuichi Nitori ( <unk> <unk> , Nitori Shūichi ) 
 Voiced by : Kōsuke <unk> 
 Shuichi , one of two protagonists , is a young , effeminate child who at the beginning of Wandering Son is in the fifth grade of elementary school . Otherwise known by the nicknames Shu ( <unk> , Shū ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) , Shuichi was assigned male at birth , but wants to be a girl and often cross @-@ dresses to assume the role of the female gender . Shuichi is described as cute by many of the other characters and is able to appear as a girl when cross @-@ dressing , because of a feminine @-@ looking face and physical build . Shuichi enjoys wearing cute clothes ; although initially not a cross @-@ dresser , Shuichi 's friends Yoshino Takatsuki and Saori Chiba encourage Shuichi to dress and act <unk> . As Shuichi grows up , puberty becomes a topic of increasing concern , such as the growth of body hair , a deepening voice , and the onset of pimples . Shuichi exhibits signs of gender dysphoria and displays an outward attraction to two girls in the series — Yoshino and Anna Suehiro . Shuichi and Anna date for a time in junior high , until she breaks off their relationship . However , the two soon resume their relationship with each other . 
 Shuichi is interested in doing indoor activities , and does not partake in activities favored by boys of the same age , such as playing sports . Shuichi enjoys and is skillful in baking sweet foods , though is never shown cooking other , more conventional foods . After starting an exchange diary with Yoshino , Shuichi becomes interested in writing stories , and even joins the drama club as a writer with Saori in junior high school after they co @-@ write a rendition of Romeo and Juliet performed by members of their class . Shuichi has an honest personality , and easily gets along with others . As a child , Shuichi has an obedient , dutiful attitude . However , upon entering puberty , Shuichi sometimes experiences outbursts of intense emotion . Shuichi can be overly sensitive at times and is often shown crying in front of others . Due to these personality quirks , it is easier for Shuichi to associate with girls of the same age . Accordingly , Shuichi has few male friends . 
 Yoshino Takatsuki ( <unk> <unk> , Takatsuki Yoshino ) 
 Voiced by : Asami Seto 
 Yoshino , the other protagonist , is a tall , masculine child who at the beginning of Wandering Son is a fifth grader in Shuichi 's class . Otherwise known as Takatsuki @-@ kun ( <unk> ) by their classmates , with an honorific used mainly with boys , Yoshino was assigned female at birth , but wants to be a boy . Yoshino usually refrains from dressing in traditionally feminine clothes , such as skirts or dresses . Despite this , Yoshino 's mother insists on buying such clothes for Yoshino . Shortly after becoming friends with Shuichi , Yoshino gets a haircut in a boyish style , taking on the appearance of a boy their age , especially when Yoshino is dressed in a male school uniform . Like Shuichi , Yoshino becomes increasingly concerned and resentful about undergoing puberty , such as at the beginning of menstruation or the growth of breasts . Yoshino goes to buy a chest @-@ flattening garment to escape the necessity of wearing a bra . Also like Shuichi , Yoshino shows signs indicating gender dysphoria , though later stops thinking that way due to personal exposure to modeling . 
 Yoshino prefers to dress and act like a boy , but usually abstains from anything which would draw attention , such as going to school in a male uniform after entering junior high . However , Yoshino does on occasion dress in a male school uniform and go to neighboring cities while dressed as a boy ; during one such time , Yoshino enjoys being hit on by an older woman . Yoshino wants to look " cool " and wears clothes which are not girlish . When teased by others , Yoshino is prone to getting emotional and is known to get violent on occasion . Yoshino takes up an interest in basketball after entering junior high school and joins the female basketball team with Chizuru Sarashina . In junior high , Yoshino decides not to get a haircut after a comment by Saori , but later cuts it back to a short , boyish style . Yoshino 's family consists of a father , mother , older brother , and older sister . 
 = = = Classmates = = = 
 Saori Chiba ( <unk> <unk> , Chiba Saori ) 
 Voiced by : Yuuka Nanri 
 Saori , nicknamed <unk> ( <unk> ) , is a girl who is a fifth grader in Shuichi 's class at the beginning of Wandering Son . She takes an interest in encouraging Shuichi to cross @-@ dress , even going so far as to buy Shuichi an expensive dress for Shuichi 's birthday , which Shuichi later returns , much to her displeasure . Saori finds it difficult to associate with others ; she has few friends , though becomes close to Shuichi . She tends to convey what is on her mind and disregards how others may take what she says . As Saori grows up , she gradually becomes more standoffish and stoic ; she even has bad relations with her teachers . Despite her self @-@ centered attitude , she remains popular among her male classmates due to her physical attractiveness . She is a sensitive girl whose temper sometimes gets the better of her when reprimanding bullies that tease Shuichi , because of Shuichi 's femininity and cross @-@ dressing . Saori is often emotionally affected by circumstances involving Shuichi , because of her feelings for Shuichi . Saori converts to Christianity partly because of this influence to seek forgiveness for her previous actions , though she only attends mass when feeling guilty about her behavior . 
 Kanako Sasa ( <unk> <unk> , Sasa Kanako ) 
 Voiced by : Yoshino Nanjō 
 Kanako Sasa , usually referred to by her surname , is a girl who is a fifth grader in Shuichi 's class at the beginning of Wandering Son . She is sometimes called <unk> ( <unk> , lit. drone beetle ) by her younger brother and Chizuru . She makes her first appearance in chapter two of the manga , but is not named until volume two . She is a short , energetic girl who thinks of herself as everyone 's friend and becomes distressed when her friends fight among themselves . Sasa acts as a mediator between her friends in such times and tries not to leave anyone alone . She has been friends with Yoshino since pre @-@ school , and later becomes close with Chizuru . Sasa is an innocent , childish girl who does not have many worries aside from her friends ' quarrels . She tends to be a handful for her mother , who picks out her clothes for her and even helps her get ready for school in the morning . She mentions that if she thinks too hard about something , her brain becomes itchy . 
 Makoto Ariga ( <unk> <unk> , Ariga Makoto ) 
 Voiced by : Yūichi Iguchi 
 Makoto first appears when the cast is in sixth grade , though is in a different class . Known as Mako for short , though mostly only to Shuichi , Makoto was also assigned male at birth , but wishes to be a girl and shares Shuichi 's interest in cross @-@ dressing ; it is this that spurs Makoto to become Shuichi 's closest friend . Due to facial freckles and round glasses , Makoto is not able to appear as cute as Shuichi when wearing feminine clothes . Makoto 's primary reason for wanting to be a girl may be due to an attraction to men , something Shuichi cannot relate to ; Makoto is a romantic who wants to be in a relationship with a cool , adult man . Makoto is unusually mature and is able to think calmly and objectively while providing advice to friends . Makoto also gets along well with boys and girls of the same age , because of good listening skills ; Makoto often becomes an onlooker to what is going on in other characters ' lives . Makoto is an only child whose parents run a bakery . 
 Chizuru Sarashina ( <unk> <unk> , Sarashina Chizuru ) 
 Voiced by : Saeko Chiba 
 Chizuru , nicknamed <unk> @-@ chan , is a tall girl who first appears as a classmate of Shuichi when they both enter junior high school . She is Momoko 's childhood friend , and has a stylish demeanor , highlighted by her stature and long hair , which captivates both Shuichi and Yoshino when they first meet her . Chizuru is described as a free spirit , someone who enjoys doing unconventional , often outrageous things which surprise those around her ; she frequently acts without thinking , and as a result projects a childish personality . Her impulsive behavior sometimes gets her in trouble with other characters , but she quickly becomes ashamed when she realizes the consequences . She tries to be everyone 's friend , though Saori strongly dislikes her impulsiveness . Chizuru joins the girl 's basketball team in junior high . Her family runs a soba restaurant . 
 Momoko Shirai ( <unk> <unk> , Shirai Momoko ) 
 Voiced by : Aki Toyosaki 
 Momoko is a childhood friend and classmate in junior high school of Chizuru ; she is nicknamed Momo . She constantly hangs around Chizuru and is visibly annoyed when Chizuru socializes with others , or even if someone simply sits too close to her . Momoko inevitably starts fighting Saori , who does not particularly respect Chizuru , when they talk . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 Maho Nitori ( <unk> <unk> , Nitori Maho ) 
 Voiced by : Nana Mizuki 
 Maho is Shuichi 's sister . She is one year older than Shuichi is , and at the beginning of Wandering Son , she is in the sixth grade of elementary school . Maho shows a strong interest in clothes , and spends much of her money on new apparel . She is a big fan of a teen fashion model named Maiko , and to meet her , Maho auditions for the same modeling agency as Maiko . After she is hired and becomes recognized as a model , Maho enjoys being asked her autograph by complete strangers . While her modeling career initially starts out slowly , Maho soon gains confidence in her abilities , and becomes friends with Maiko and two other models , Anna Suehiro and Tamaki Satō . In contrast to her younger sibling , Maho is very out @-@ spoken and tends to be rough with Shuichi , even hitting or slapping Shuichi on occasion , and she often forces things on Shuichi with little consideration of Shuichi 's opinion . She does not like Shuichi 's cross @-@ dressing and gets angry and disturbed when she finds Shuichi dressed as a girl . In junior high school , Maho becomes attracted to her classmate Riku Seya , and eventually starts dating him . 
 Riku Seya ( <unk> <unk> , Seya Riku ) 
 Voiced by : Yoshitsugu Matsuoka 
 Riku Seya , usually referred to by his surname , is a classmate of Maho 's who meets her when they enter junior high school . He is generally a soft @-@ spoken boy who initially takes an interest in Shuichi , whom he believes to be a girl , when they first meet . When he learns that Shuichi is assigned male , Seya becomes angry at Maho for hiding this and stringing him along , but he soon reconciles with her and eventually starts dating her . Seya remains polite with Shuichi , though due to their initial meeting , there is always some awkwardness between the two . 
 Anna Suehiro ( <unk> <unk> , Suehiro Anna ) 
 Voiced by : Yui Horie 
 Anna is a teen model who is a good friend of Maiko and goes to the same all @-@ girl school as her ; she is similarly well @-@ known and experienced in modeling . She is considered outspoken and sharp @-@ tongued by other models . Anna at first disapproves of Shuichi dressing as a girl , and even calls Shuichi a freak soon after meeting Shuichi . Anna initially tells Maho she has no interest in her " weak " sibling because of Shuichi 's femininity , though later dates Shuichi for a time after Shuichi asks her out , until she breaks up with Shuichi . However , the two soon resume their relationship with each other . Furthermore , Anna 's opinion of Shuichi presenting as female also changes , she saying that it actually suits Shuichi , and the two even go out together on a date with Shuichi dressed as a girl . She feels Shuichi is an interesting person , and once says Shuichi is like a cute little sister . Anna spends a lot of money on clothes , and enjoys modifying them . 
 Hiroyuki Yoshida ( <unk> <unk> , Yoshida Hiroyuki ) / Yuki ( <unk> ) 
 Voiced by : Takako Honda 
 Hiroyuki , usually referred to as Yuki , is a tall and attractive trans woman living with her boyfriend Shiina . Yuki takes an early interest in Yoshino when she believes Yoshino to be a boy , though remains on good terms with Yoshino even after learning of Yoshino 's assigned sex , and gives Shuichi and Yoshino helpful advice when they are troubled . Despite the differences between their situations , Yuki sees a lot of herself in Shuichi : when they were growing up , Shiina was the only friend who stood by the young Hiroyuki , as she was called then , while girls teased her and the boys bullied her to change . Yuki always keeps up a positive attitude , and runs a gay bar . Since her transition , she has not been on good terms with her parents , who run a uniform store . 
 Yuki is the main character of Takako Shimura 's short story " Hana " ( 花 ) , in the collection Boku wa , Onna no Ko ( <unk> 、 <unk> ) , in which her family — which consists of her father , mother , brother , and sister @-@ in @-@ law — also appears ; Yuki is revealed to be a fan of Keiji Sada , a Shōwa period actor . 
 Shiina ( 椎名 ) 
 Voiced by : Keiji Fujiwara 
 Shiina , given name unknown , otherwise referred to by his nickname Shii ( <unk> ) , is another adult friend of Shuichi and Yoshino . He was Yuki 's classmate in elementary school , and he eventually became her boyfriend after her transition . Unlike Yuki , Shiina had many friends in school . He generally just watches over Shuichi and Yoshino with Yuki , but he sometimes does bold and unexpected things , such as grabbing Yoshino 's crotch when he first meets Yoshino because he feared that , because Yoshino was dressed as a boy at the time , Yuki might be having an illicit affair with Yoshino . 
 Fumiya Ninomiya ( <unk> <unk> , Ninomiya Fumiya ) 
 Voiced by : Kaoru Mizuhara 
 Fumiya is a talkative boy one year older than Saori whom she meets when she starts going to church . Saori is easily annoyed by him , especially when he brings her flowers from his parents ' flower shop . He takes an early interest in Saori and tries to become her boyfriend . After meeting Shuichi , Fumiya becomes jealous of Saori 's interest in Shuichi , and finds Shuichi 's cross @-@ dressing gross . While initially lying to Saori and Shuichi about having an interest in cross @-@ dressing , he is later seen dressed as a girl while out with Shuichi , and again at the cultural festival at Shuichi 's school . Fumiya enjoys the added attention that comes from cross @-@ dressing and admits that he likes being called cute . 
 = = Production = = 
 In an interview in August 2003 , Takako Shimura stated that the theme of Wandering Son is similar to the second half of her previous manga series <unk> no <unk> . Shimura took the junior high school teacher Kentarō Kaneda from <unk> no <unk> and inserted him into Wandering Son , where he teaches at Shuichi 's junior high school , because she really liked his character . Shimura originally planned to use a female high school student who wants to become a boy as the main character . However , she realized that a boy who wants to become a girl before entering into puberty would have many worries related to growing up , and changed the story accordingly . Shimura used her realization that the boy would go through significant changes as he grew up to deepen the development of the story and characters . The Japanese title , <unk> Musuko , is a pun on <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning " prodigal son " . 
 Shimura mainly found her characters ' names by looking through name dictionaries , although she also took the names of acquaintances and slightly changed them , and even used train station names for side characters appearing only once . Out of all the characters , Shimura is most pleased with Kanako Sasa . For the designs of clothes for the female characters , Shimura consulted various fashion magazines for girls in their early teens , especially Nicola . Shimura commented self @-@ deprecatingly in the afterword of volume one that , like her other series , her characters do not look very different from each other , her panels are too white , and there is much pathos . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 The manga Wandering Son is written and illustrated by Takako Shimura . It was serialized in the monthly seinen ( aimed at younger adult men ) manga magazine Comic Beam from the December 2002 to August 2013 issue . The individual chapters were collected and published in 15 tankōbon volumes by Enterbrain from July 25 , 2003 to August 28 , 2013 . Wandering Son was one of several manga titles included with the launch in December 2009 of the manga distribution service of the PlayStation Store for the Japanese PlayStation Portable handheld game console . 
 The series is licensed in English by Fantagraphics Books , which began releasing the series in North America in hardcover format starting with the first volume on July 5 , 2011 . Gary Groth of Fantagraphics Books said in an interview he licensed Wandering Son because " it 's not a typical choice for a manga title published in the U.S. and it 's not typical subject matter for comics in general , " saying that the subject is " perfectly legitimate ... for literature — or comics . " The series is also licensed by Ever Glory Publishing in Taiwan and by <unk> Culture Company in Korea . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 A 12 @-@ episode anime TV series adaptation produced by AIC Classic and Aniplex aired in Japan between January 13 and March 31 , 2011 on Fuji TV 's Noitamina programming block . Crunchyroll simulcasted the anime on their streaming website . Aniplex released the anime on six Blu @-@ ray and DVD compilation volumes in Japan between April 27 and September 21 , 2011 . Of the 11 episodes to be aired on TV , episodes 10 and 11 were edited into a single episode , and were released individually on their respective BD / DVD volumes . The anime adapts the story from the point where the characters enter junior high school . Following the arrest of Ai <unk> , the voice actress who played Maiko , for drug possession in October 2015 , Bandai Channel removed the series from its streaming catalog . 
 The anime is directed by Ei Aoki and the screenplay was written by Mari Okada . Chief animator <unk> Makino based the character design used in the anime on Takako Shimura 's original concept and the main animator is Michio Satō . The music was produced by Satoru <unk> and Keiichi Okabe , both from Monaca , and the sound director is Jin <unk> . The anime 's opening theme song is " <unk> . " ( <unk> 。 ) by Daisuke and the single was released on March 2 , 2011 . The ending theme is " For You " by Rie fu and the single was released on February 16 , 2011 . The original soundtrack was released on August 24 , 2011 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 It was reported in June 2013 that approximately 1 @.@ 05 million copies of the manga are in print in Japan . Wandering Son was selected as a recommended work by the awards jury of the tenth Japan Media Arts Festival in 2006 . The Young Adult Library Services Association nominated Wandering Son for its 2012 Great Graphic Novels for Teens list . The anime was awarded the honorable mention prize for technical achievement in broadcast animation at the 65th Motion Picture and Television Engineering Society of Japan Awards in 2012 . 
 In a review of the first volume by Rebecca Silverman of Anime News Network ( ANN ) , she praised the slow pace of the storytelling , which " gives it a more realistic feel . " Silverman praises Takako Shimura for making Shuichi into a " human protagonist " , but notes that " most of the children act much older than they are . " The second volume was featured in ANN 's Right Turn Only column in March 2007 as the Import of the Month , where Carlo Santos lauded the series for using gender reversal as the " actual heart of the story " in contrast to " every other series " involving cross @-@ dressing , which use " gender reversal as a goofy plot device . " The art was praised as " simple [ with ] few lines , but incredibly expressive " which Santos claimed is a " style that 's the most difficult and beautiful of all . " Santos criticized the " emotional realism " of the work for having the young characters ' " unrealistically mature attitude " towards " issues above their grade level . " 
 Matt Thorn , the English translator of the manga , wrote that fans of Anne of Green Gables or The Rose of Versailles would also enjoy Wandering Son , and Silverman compared Wandering Son to <unk> <unk> . Thorn described the art as " clean and lovely " and went on to cite Wandering Son as " sweet , thought @-@ provoking , funny , and moving , and I think it will resonate with readers regardless of their gender identity or sexual orientation . " The first manga volume as translated by Fantagraphics Books had an early debut at the May 2011 Toronto Comic Arts Festival and sold out within the first two hours of the event . 
 = Edward Scissorhands ( dance ) = 
 Edward Scissorhands is a contemporary dance adaptation of the 1990 American romance fantasy film Edward Scissorhands , created by Matthew Bourne , with music by Terry Davies . The screenwriter and composer of the film version , Caroline Thompson and Danny Elfman , helped to develop the dance version , which is set in the 1950s ( the film is set in the late 1980s ) . The story is told entirely through music and dance with no discourse although the plot is similar to the movie . 
 The piece debuted in London in 2005 and , despite mixed reviews , has subsequently toured in Britain , Asia , the U.S. ( earning a 2007 Drama Desk Award for Unique Theatrical Experience ) , Australia and Europe . The productions have been put on by Bourne 's New Adventures dance company . 
 = = Composition and development = = 
 Bourne 's all @-@ male 1995 version of Swan Lake has become the longest @-@ running ballet production and earned him the distinction as the only British director to become a winner of both the Tony Award for Best Direction of a Musical and the Tony Award for Best Choreography at the 53rd Tony Awards in 1999 . In 2002 , 2003 and 2005 , he earned the Laurence Olivier Award for Best Theatre Choreographer for My Fair Lady , Play Without Words and Mary Poppins , respectively . Eventually ( in 2008 ) , Time would begin an article on Bourne with the following summary : " Matthew Bourne is the world 's most popular living dance maker . " 
 Bourne was asked by composer friends to brainstorm about films that could be adapted into stage productions in his dance style . Thompson met Bourne in 1997 through Alan Cumming after already having seen Swan Lake . Bourne asked Thompson 's consent to adapt the Scissorhands film the following year , but it took another seven years to obtain the necessary funding and get the film 's director Tim Burton and composer Elfman to go along . The work , which Bourne choreographed , was developed as dance theatre instead of as a traditional musical and has no singing or speaking . The musical score is by Terry Davies , but it includes significant portions of Elfman 's film score . 
 Thompson claims Scissorhands is based on a pet dog of hers . She described her dog as follows : " he was the most soulful , yearning creature I ever met . She wanted to participate in everything . She didn ’ t need language to communicate . She communicated with her eyes . " She described the character as similar to Frankenstein 's monster and Pinocchio in the sense that he is " an outsider who wants to be an insider " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The work " tells the gothic story of a boy , created by an eccentric inventor , trying to adapt to suburban life with only scissors for hands . " The dance version is set in the 1950s , unlike the 1990 film , which was set in the late 1980s . 
 An inventor 's son was electrocuted in a dungeon @-@ like room while holding scissors . In his grief , the inventor creates another " son " with flashing scissors for hands . The creation is orphaned when unsavory characters frighten his father to death with some Halloween activities . He then ventures from his gothic origins into a suburban town where his loneliness is reinforced until he is taken in by Peg Boggs and adopted by both her family and the town . 
 In the promotional video for the American debut , Bourne highlights the juxtaposition of the gothic horror setting and the suburban settings of the adaptation . He also notes that San Francisco was a good place for the United States debut of the work in part because as a city it exhibits a tolerance similar to that of the suburbanites in the work . The piece has no spoken words . Like in the film , Edward is equipped with only scissors for hands because his inventor died in the middle of outfitting him . He is discovered in his castle by an Avon lady who brings him into her home . He then wanders into a town where a family takes him in . The theatrical adaptation has a more robust prologue than the film , but the additional backstory does not add content to the character . 
 = = Productions = = 
 The British New Adventures dance company raised $ 2 million that was augmented by $ 780 @,@ 000 from the Arts Council England to stage the original production at London 's Sadler 's Wells Theatre , which opened in November 2005 and closed on February 5 , 2006 . Eventually , the show was staged in Asia , the United States , Australia and Europe with New Adventures . The dance adaptation featured 30 members of the company . Marc Platt was the lead producer . 
 Sam Archer and Richard Winsor alternated in the main role , wearing a heavily <unk> costume with fiberglass blades and a thick leather forearm brace . They also starred in the following tour , with Archer staying on through the U.S. tour . Regular Bourne collaborators Scott Ambler and Etta <unk> were associate directors and co @-@ stars . Set and costume design were both by Lez Brotherston in a style described as a sort of Desperate Housewives suburbia of mild @-@ mannered characters . His 1950 's suburbia sets were inspired by Peggy Sue Got Married and Back to the Future . Howard Harrison designed lights and Paul Groothuis was sound designer . 
 Following its 11 @-@ week London run , it had a United Kingdom tour that lasted for 14 weeks and that was followed by performances in Japan , Korea and the United States , where it ran until Spring 2007 . In November and December 2006 , it played in San Francisco at the Orpheum Theatre , where it made its American debut with previews on November 11 and 12 and a November 14 opening . In February 2007 , it played at the Kennedy Center in Washington , D.C. It spent part of April and May at the 5th Avenue Theatre in Seattle . The New York run was held at the Brooklyn Academy of Music . Other venues on the United States tour included Ahmanson Theatre in Los Angeles , Belk Theatre in Charlotte , North Carolina , Benedum Center in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , Kimmel Center in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania and Fox Theatre in St. Louis , Missouri . By the time it played in Brooklyn , it had visited a dozen North American cities . 
 In May 2008 , an Australian national tour was launched at the Sydney Opera House . The piece returned to Europe for a 2008 – 09 tour that included performances in Britain for the 2008 Christmas season . Venues on the Europe tour included Théâtre du Châtelet in Paris , Hippodrome Theatre in Birmingham , New Wimbledon Theatre and Sadler 's Wells Theatre in London as well as stops in Salford , Athens and Antwerp . Among the cities that it sold out are New York , Los Angeles , San Francisco , Sydney , Melbourne and Paris . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The dance adaptation received mixed reviews . The earliest review of the London production by The New York Times in November 2005 said that like the film version , " doomed love story remains bittersweet " . Matt Wolf of The New York Times panned the original run with statements such as " a potential dance sensation seems peculiarly short on actual dance " and " But a dream ballet late in the first act and various set pieces later seem , in terms of actual choreography , oddly pro forma for Bourne . . . " He felt that overcoming the obstacle of choreographing dances around a lead with blades for fingers was too much to overcome . A fellow critic from The New York Times described it as " visually alluring " two weeks later . On its Christmas 2008 return to England , The Times gave the show a positive review : " Matthew Bourne 's adaptation of Tim Burton 's 1990 film is one of the biggest and brightest of this season 's glut of cultural ornaments . Indeed , so much skill has been lavished on this dance @-@ theatre show for Bourne 's company , New Adventures , that it almost feels churlish to withhold my affections . " The Independent 's reviewer was critical , saying " Edward is more kids ' cartoon than satire , with two @-@ dimensional characters that stand a hair 's breadth from cliché " . Another critic from The Independent opened her review as follows : " The best part of Matthew Bourne 's Edward Scissorhands is the curtain call . " However , contemporaneous reviews by The Guardian were a bit more positive saying that " Bourne is a natural storyteller , who never leaves his audience behind " . 
 The work 's American debut in San Francisco drew mixed reviews . Robert Hurwitt of the San Francisco Chronicle described it as a high point in his " Theatre Year in Review top 10 " , saying it was " invigoratingly choreographed and beguilingly designed " . However , when analyzing the year from the entire Arts and culture perspective the Steven Winn ( also with the San Francisco Chronicle ) described the work as lacking , noting that its November run " fell well short of this show 's [ Swan Lake ] ' s inspired high mark " from March in the arts and culture year end top 10 . Hurwitt stated at the beginning of the San Francisco run that " Where Bourne triumphs , with considerable help from Davies , Thompson and Brotherston , is in replicating Burton 's delicately bittersweet whimsy in a manner uniquely his own . " 
 Johnny Depp attended the December 30 , 2006 show danced by Archer and signed a souvenir program for Bourne with the following partial inscription : " <unk> on the verge of tears , mate . " At the time of its off @-@ Broadway debut , The New York Times described it as not " so much a dance enhanced by a famous story as a drama condensed by the removal of words . " It was further panned in a more detailed review the following week by The New York Times Jennifer Dunning , who said " Mr. Bourne 's " Edward Scissorhands " is mostly a candy @-@ coated bore . " In Time , he was praised for the uniqueness of his dancing hedges . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 The work received a nomination for the 2007 Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Choreography ( for Bourne ) and won the 2007 Drama Desk Award for Unique Theatrical Experience . Bourne was also nominated for Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Choreography that year for Mary Poppins . 
 = Russian battleship Dvenadsat Apostolov = 
 Dvenadsat Apostolov ( Russian : <unk> <unk> — " Twelve Apostles " ) was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the Imperial Russian Navy , the sole ship of her class . She served in the Black Sea Fleet and was built by Nikolayev Admiralty Dockyard . Laid down in February 1888 , and launched in September 1890 , she was commissioned in December 1892 . She became an immobile submarine depot ship in 1912 after she was decommissioned and disarmed the previous year . She was captured by the Germans in 1918 in Sevastopol and was handed over to the Allies in December 1918 . Lying immobile in Sevastopol , she was captured by both sides in the Russian Civil War before permanently falling into the hands of the Soviets when the White Russians evacuated the Crimea . She was used as a stand @-@ in for the title ship during the filming of The Battleship Potemkin and was finally scrapped in 1931 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Dvenadsat Apostolov was originally ordered as one of a pair of battleships for the Black Sea Fleet , but the second ship was awarded to a firm on the verge of bankruptcy and they made no significant progress . Her initial armament was planned to be eight 9 @-@ inch ( 230 mm ) guns , four in two twin @-@ gun turrets and four in the central casemate . However , the final form of the turrets and machinery layout was not decided upon , even after construction of the hull began in early 1888 . The following September the Naval Technical Committee decided to increase the thickness of the waterline armour belt from 13 inches ( 330 mm ) to 14 inches ( 356 mm ) at the cost of 75 long tons ( 76 t ) . It also decided to move the forward turret back 7 feet 8 inches ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) because it thought that the ship might be bow @-@ heavy . They also decided against the original armament and fixed on four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns in twin @-@ gun barbettes at each end of the ship with four 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) guns in a shortened central battery , although it added over 100 long tons ( 100 t ) of additional weight to the ship . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 She was 335 feet 6 inches ( 102 @.@ 3 m ) long at the waterline and 342 feet ( 104 @.@ 2 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 60 feet ( 18 @.@ 3 m ) and a draft of 27 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 4 m ) . Her exact displacement was never measured , but has been estimated at 8 @,@ 710 long tons ( 8 @,@ 850 t ) , over 600 long tons ( 610 t ) more than her designed displacement of 8 @,@ 076 long tons ( 8 @,@ 206 t ) . 
 Her hull was generally similar to that of the Imperator Aleksandr II class although her ram was 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) longer . It was subdivided by eleven transverse and one centreline longitudinal watertight bulkheads and she had a complete double bottom 35 @.@ 4 inches ( 900 mm ) deep . She had a metacentric height of 2 @.@ 62 feet ( 0 @.@ 80 m ) . She demonstrated better seagoing qualities than the older Ekaterina II class during a storm in October 1894 , although she rolled badly and leaked through her ports and hatches . She was assessed as a considerably better fighting ship that the Imperator Aleksandr II class . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Dvenadsat Apostolov had two 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion steam engines built by Baltic Works and had a total designed output of 8 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 6 @,@ 338 kW ) . Eight cylindrical boilers , four single @-@ ended and four double @-@ ended , provided steam to the engines , which drove two 5 @.@ 26 @-@ metre ( 17 ft ) screw propellers . On trials , the powerplant produced 8 @,@ 758 ihp ( 6 @,@ 531 kW ) and a top speed of 15 @.@ 15 knots ( 28 @.@ 06 km / h ; 17 @.@ 43 mph ) . After her initial engine trials her funnels were raised by 12 ft 6 in ( 3 @.@ 81 m ) to improve their draft and to keep the superstructure clear of funnel gases . She carried 710 long tons ( 720 t ) of coal at full load that provided a range of 1 @,@ 900 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 500 km ; 2 @,@ 200 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had six Siemens dynamos with a total output of 540 kW . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main armament of Dvenadsat Apostolov were two pairs of 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Obukhov Model 1877 30 @-@ caliber guns mounted in twin barbette mounts forward and aft . They had a maximum elevation of 15 ° and could depress to − 5 ° and could traverse 270 ° . 66 rounds per gun were carried . They fired a 731 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 331 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 870 ft / s ( 570 m / s ) to a range of 5 @,@ 570 yards ( 5 @,@ 090 m ) at an elevation of 6 ° . The rate of fire was one round every five minutes , but the loading machinery would not work if the ship was heeled more than 5 ° . 
 The four 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Model 1877 35 @-@ caliber guns were mounted on pivot mounts in the central casemate . The sides of the hull were recessed to give them axial fire . They could traverse a total of 100 ° . Each gun had an arc of fire of 130 ° . The ship carried 130 rounds for each gun . The guns could elevate to a maximum of 8 @.@ 5 ° and depress to − 8 ° . They fired a ' heavy ' shell that weighed 119 – 123 @.@ 5 lb ( 54 @.@ 0 – 56 @.@ 0 kg ) at a velocity of 1 @,@ 896 ft / s ( 578 m / s ) or a ' light ' shell that weighed 91 @.@ 5 lb ( 41 @.@ 5 kg ) with a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 329 ft / s ( 710 m / s ) . A ' light ' shell had a maximum range of 8 @,@ 170 yards ( 7 @,@ 470 m ) when fired at an elevation of 12 ° , although the casemate only permitted a maximum elevation of 8 @.@ 5 ° . The guns could fire one round per minute . 
 Her ten 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns were mounted in embrasures in the hull or superstructure . They fired a 3 @.@ 3 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 5 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 476 ft / s ( 450 m / s ) at a rate of 20 rounds per minute to a range of 2 @,@ 020 yards ( 1 @,@ 850 m ) . Two 37 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss revolving cannon were mounted at the forward end of the superstructure and two on the platform just abaft the second funnel . They fired a 1 @.@ 1 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 50 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 450 ft / s ( 440 m / s ) at a rate of 32 rounds per minute to a range of 3 @,@ 038 yards ( 2 @,@ 778 m ) . Six single @-@ barrelled versions , with a rate of fire of only twenty rounds per minute , were carried in the fighting top on the foremast and two were in small embrasures at the after end of the superstructure . The location of the other two guns is unknown . 
 Dvenadsat Apostolov carried six above @-@ water 15 in ( 381 mm ) torpedo tubes . One tube was in the bow , two tubes on each broadside and a tube in the stern . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 Compound armour was supplied by Charles Cammell of Sheffield , England and comprised the bulk of the armour used in Dvenadsat Apostolov . The main waterline belt had a maximum thickness of 14 inches ( 356 mm ) abreast the machinery spaces , but thinned to 12 inches abreast the magazine and was only 7 – 8 inches ( 178 – 203 mm ) thick at its lower edge . It was 228 feet 8 inches ( 70 m ) long and 5 ft 6 in ( 1 @.@ 68 m ) high , most of which ( 4 ft 3 in ( 1 @.@ 30 m ) ) was below the waterline as actually completed because she was overweight . The belt tapered to eight inches at the lower edge . Bulkheads nine to twelve inches thick provided transverse protection for the ship 's vitals . The lower casemate armour was 214 feet ( 65 m ) long and twelve inches thick . Above it was the casemate armour for the six @-@ inch guns that consisted of 5 inches ( 127 mm ) of steel armour . The barbette armour was 10 – 12 inches ( 254 – 305 mm ) thick . Initially the barbette was open @-@ topped , but a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 64 mm ) thick protective hood was added later , possibly in 1893 . The conning tower had eight @-@ inch sides of steel armour . 
 = = History = = 
 Dvenadsat Apostolov was built by the Nikolayev Admiralty Dockyard at Nikolayev . She was laid down on 21 August 1889 , launched on 13 September 1890 , and sailed to Sevastopol for fitting out on 11 May 1892 . She joined the fleet on 17 June 1893 , but she was not fully ready for service until 1894 . In 1895 she was used to test a new system of laying mines by rails that had been invented by Lieutenant A. P. <unk> and also to evaluate the proper dimensions for anti @-@ torpedo nets and their booms . For this last test torpedoes were fired at the ship with the anti @-@ torpedo nets deployed . One gun , of an unknown calibre , burst in 1903 , killing one man and wounding two others . 
 Dvenadsat Apostolov participated in the failed attempt to recapture the mutinous battleship Potemkin on 30 June 1905 . She attempted to ram Potemkin but sailors sympathetic to the mutiny reversed the engines and then prevented an attempt by Captain Kolands to blow his own ship by severing the detonating wires . 
 The Naval Technical Committee proposed to reboiler her in 1907 with new Belleville water @-@ tube boilers , but this was forestalled by a plan to reuse those of the Chesma . Simultaneously a proposal to rearm her with four ten @-@ inch guns in two turrets and several 6 @-@ inch guns in a new casemate was made by the Naval General Staff . This was estimated to cost 1 @,@ 275 @,@ 000 roubles and would only add 15 long tons ( 15 t ) to her displacement , but both proposals were rejected by the Naval Technical Committee which believed it was a waste of money given her obsolete layout . The General Staff made another proposal in 1909 to rearm her as with smaller guns as a guardship intended to defend Sevastopol from attacks by enemy light forces . This was initially approved by the Navy Minister , Admiral Ivan Grigorovich in June 1909 , but this was later reversed . 
 Dvenadsat Apostolov was transferred to the Sevastopol Port Authority on 1 April 1911 , stricken from the Navy List and disarmed on 15 April . She became a depot ship for submarines in 1912 . Renamed as Blokshiv ( hulk ) No. 8 on 4 September 1914 , she was used on various harbour duties . Immobile , she was captured by the Germans in Sevastopol in May 1918 and handed over to the Allies in December 1918 . She was captured by both sides during the Russian Civil War , but was abandoned by the White Russians when they evacuated the Crimea . Her machinery was removed in 1921 . She was used as a stand @-@ in for the Potemkin during the filming of The Battleship Potemkin , while reportedly serving as a mine storage hulk , before she was sold for scrap on 28 January 1931 . 
 = Sinthgunt = 
 Sinthgunt is a figure in Germanic mythology , attested solely in the Old High German 9th- or 10th @-@ century " horse cure " Merseburg Incantation . In the incantation , Sinthgunt is referred to as the sister of the personified sun , Sunna ( whose name is alliterative to Sinthgunt ) , and the two sisters are cited as both producing charms to heal Phol 's horse , a figure also otherwise unattested . The two are then followed by Friia and <unk> , also alliterative and stated as sisters . 
 As Sinthgunt is otherwise unattested , her significance is otherwise unknown , but some scholarly theories exist about her role in Germanic mythology based on proposed etymologies , and the potential significance of her placement within the incantation . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The etymology of Sinthgunt is unclear . Within the original manuscript , Sinthgunt is spelled " <unk> " ( emphasis added ) . Sticking directly to this reading has yielded interpretations such as " the night @-@ walking one " . As a result of the paring with Sunna , the personified sun , this etymology has been interpreted as a reference to the moon . However , this reading has yielded problems ; the moon in Germanic mythology is considered masculine , exemplified in the personification of the moon in Norse mythology , Máni , a male figure . Interpretations from the amended " Sinthgunt " have resulted in readings such as " the one moving into battle " or " heavenly body , star " . 
 = = Placement = = 
 The figures Fulla ( <unk> ) and Frigg ( Friia ) are attested together in later Old Norse sources ( though not as sisters ) , and theories have been proposed that the Fulla may at one time have been an aspect of Frigg . As a result , this notion has resulted in theory that a similar situation may have existed between the figures of Sinthgunt and Sól , in that the two may have been understood as aspects of one another rather than entirely separate figures . 
 = Benjamin Franklin Tilley = 
 Benjamin Franklin Tilley ( March 29 , 1848 – March 18 , 1907 ) , often known as B. F. Tilley , was a career officer in the United States Navy who served from the end of the American Civil War through the Spanish – American War . He is best remembered as the first Acting @-@ Governor of American Samoa , as well as the territory 's first Naval governor . 
 Tilley entered the United States Naval Academy during the height of the Civil War . Graduating after the conflict , he gradually rose through the ranks . As a lieutenant , he participated in the United States military 's crackdown against workers in the wake of the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 . During the 1891 Chilean Civil War , Tilley and a small contingent of sailors and marines defended the American consulate in Santiago , Chile . As a commander during the Spanish – American War , Tilley and his gunship , USS Newport , successfully captured two Spanish Navy ships . After the war , Tilley was made the first acting @-@ Governor of Tutuila and <unk> ( later called American Samoa ) and set legal and administrative precedents for the new territory . Near the conclusion of his 41 years of service , he was promoted to rear admiral , but died shortly afterwards from pneumonia . 
 = = Early life and Naval career = = 
 Benjamin Franklin Tilley was born March 29 , 1848 , the sixth of nine children , in Bristol , Rhode Island . During the American Civil War , Tilley enrolled in the United States Naval Academy on September 22 , 1863 , at the age of 15 . The war forced the school to relocate from Annapolis , Maryland ( then threatened by the Confederacy ) to Newport , Rhode Island . In 1866 he graduated first in his class , going on to serve as a midshipman first on board USS Franklin , and then USS Frolic . Tilley spent three years serving on board Frolic , eventually being promoted to ensign . His next assignment was on board USS Lancaster , where he was promoted twice : first to master in 1870 and then to lieutenant in 1871 . From 1872 to 1875 , Tilley served on board USS Pensacola in the South Pacific . After Pensacola , he served briefly on board USS New Hampshire and then spent two years serving on USS Hartford . 
 = = = Railroad strike of 1877 = = = 
 In July 1877 , a violent railroad strike began in Martinsburg , West Virginia , sparking riots in other American cities such as Pittsburgh and Philadelphia . In response , President Rutherford B. Hayes authorized the use of the military to put down the rioting . During the crisis , Tilley was temporarily transferred to USS Plymouth , sailing up the Potomac River to Washington , D.C. Military leaders feared rioters from Baltimore could travel to Washington to seize or damage vulnerable government targets . The troops defending Washington , including army , navy , and marines , were organized into a battalion of seven companies ( Naval Brigade ) , under the command of Captain Edward Barrett ; Tilley was placed in command of Company C. The precautions proved to be unnecessary , as the expected wave of rioters never materialized following the military 's suppression of the strikers in Baltimore . Within a short time , the riots in other cities were also quashed . 
 After the strike , Tilley was transferred to the flagship USS Powhatan , before requesting to take a six @-@ month leave so that he could marry . On June 6 , 1878 , Tilley married Emily <unk> Williamson , the daughter of a Navy surgeon and left with her on an extended honeymoon in Europe . On his return to duty , Tilley served in the United States Naval Academy and remained there , either in a classroom or on a training ship , until 1882 . For the next three years , Tilley served on board USS Tennessee . In 1885 , Tilley was promoted to lieutenant commander and returned to teach at the academy . During his tenure there , he was appointed head of two departments : first the Department of Astronomy , Navigation , and Surveying and then transferred to the Department of Mechanical Drawing . In September 1889 , he moved to the Washington Navy Yard to teach ordnance . 
 = = = Chilean Civil War = = = 
 In 1890 , Tilley was transferred to San Francisco , to help test the newly @-@ built USS San Francisco and to become her executive officer . During the 1891 Chilean Civil War , San Francisco transported troops to the port of Valparaíso , from where they could move on to protect the American consulate in the capital , Santiago . When insurgents captured the city , Tilley and a force of 100 men remained to defend the consulate . After the war , Tilley returned to the naval academy as head of the astronomy and navigation department . In 1896 , he took command of USS Bancroft and sailed on an inspection tour of naval yards along the east coast of the United States . That October , he was promoted to commander . The following year , Tilley was given command of USS Newport to sail to Nicaragua to evaluate the progress of the isthmus canal commission . 
 = = = Spanish – American War = = = 
 On April 23 , 1898 , Spain declared war on the United States in response to American efforts to support Cuban independence . Tilley , still in command of Newport , was in the Caribbean and in the heart of the conflict area . Two days after the United States responded with its own declaration of war against Spain , on April 27 , Tilley captured the Spanish Navy 's sloop <unk> and schooner <unk> . Tilley participated in the naval blockade of Santiago de Cuba , but missed the subsequent Battle of Santiago de Cuba as Newport was refueling at Guantánamo Bay when fighting broke out . Toward the end of the war , Tilley was responsible for shelling the Cuban port of Manzanillo . Over the months of fighting , Tilley and Newport assisted in the capture of nine Spanish vessels . At the conclusion of the war , he was transferred to the Newport Naval Yard , before being given the command of USS Vicksburg in October . 
 = = Commandant of U.S. Naval Station Tutuila = = 
 The United States first expressed interest in building a naval station at Pago Pago , Samoa , in 1872 at the behest of Henry A. Peirce , the United States Minister to Hawaii . A treaty to that effect was written and submitted , but it was not approved by the United States Senate . Six years later , on February 13 , 1878 , a separate treaty was ratified by the Senate that granted the Samoan government diplomatic recognition and reaffirmed permission to build a naval station in the country . Although there were no further political obstacles , funding for the station was not allocated and only a small coaling station was built on the island . Construction of the naval station did not begin until twenty years later , in 1898 , led by civilian contractors . In early 1899 , Tilley was assigned the task of overseeing the station construction and becoming its first commandant . He was also put in command of a collier , USS Abarenda , which would transport steel and coal to the construction site and to serve as the first station ship . After a long voyage , Tilley took on his new post on August 13 , 1899 . 
 Even before Tilley arrived in Samoa , the political situation there was shifting . The Second Samoan Civil War had recently ended , leaving the nation without a functioning central government . The United States , the United Kingdom , and Germany had competing strategic or economic interests in the region . On June 10 , 1899 , the Western powers signed the Treaty of Berlin , which partitioned Samoa in two . The eastern part , with Tutuila as its largest island , was placed under the control of the United States . The larger and historically dominant western part was given to Germany . Under this treaty , the British government relinquished its claims over the region in exchange for certain concessions from Germany . News of this arrangement did not reach Tilley and the islands until December 6 , 1899 . 
 After learning of the agreement , Tilley notified the local chiefs and asserted nominal United States control , but a formal decision on how the United States government would manage the territory had not yet been made . The construction of the naval base remained Tilley 's primary responsibility , and he was dispatched to pick up additional supplies and coal at Auckland , New Zealand . Less than a month after returning , on February 19 , 1900 , President William McKinley placed the territory under the control of the United States Navy . Assistant Secretary of the Navy Charles H. Allen named Tilley commandant of United States Naval Station Tutuila with a charter to " cultivate friendly relations with the natives " . 
 = = Acting Governor of Tutuila = = 
 Tilley 's first task in his new role was to negotiate a deed of cession with the local powers to ensure a formal and peaceful transfer of control to the United States . With the partitioning of Samoa , two regional governments remained on Tutuila , which had been subordinated to a government on the western ( and now German @-@ controlled ) island of Upolu . Both of these governments were favorable toward the cession . The inhabitants of the island of <unk> and the volcanic doublet of <unk> @-@ <unk> — together known as Manu 'a — 70 miles ( 110 km ) to the east , were politically separate from Tutuila . On March 12 , 1900 , Tilley traveled to <unk> to meet with the local king , Tui <unk> <unk> . Ultimately , the king agreed to cede some sovereignty to the United States , but refused to consider full cession . The deed of cession , signed on April 17 , 1900 , listed Manu 'a as part of the United States ' new territory , but without the signature of its representative . In it , Tilley was named Acting Governor ; the territory would not have an official governor until the title was given to Governor Edmund Beardsley Underwood in 1905 . Manu 'a would not agree to sign the deed until 1904 , after negotiating concessions from the United States . 
 As Acting Governor , Tilley 's first acts were to impose a duty on imports to the territory , ban the sale of alcohol to the local population ( but not Americans ) , and forbid the sale of Samoan lands to non @-@ Samoans . On May 1 , 1900 , he proclaimed that the laws of the United States were in force in the territory , but that Samoan laws that did not conflict with U.S. law would remain in effect . He partitioned the territory into three districts , along the historical divisions implicitly acknowledged in the deed of cession : the two governments on Tutuila and the third comprising the islands of Manu 'a , which still did not regard themselves as part of the territory . Over the next year , Tilley regulated firearms , enforced mandatory registrations of births , deaths , and marriages , levied taxes , and made the sabbath a public holiday . For defense and police , Tilley created a small militia of native Samoans , called the Fita Fita Guard . The native volunteers in this force were trained at the naval station by a sergeant of the United States Marine Corps . 
 During Tilley 's administration problems arose because of conflicting Samoan and American laws . In one case , a native had caught and eaten a skipjack , a sacred fish which , under Samoan law , could only be eaten with the permission of a local chief . Traditional punishment decreed that the offender 's house should be burned down , his crops uprooted , and he should be exiled from the territory . The native challenged his punishment under the American legal system however , resulting in the arrest of the chief responsible for ordering the destruction of his property . In a criminal proceeding on which Tilley sat as judge , the chief was sentenced to a year of house arrest and ordered to pay compensation for the destroyed property . There were similar issues with Samoan customs not blending well with the newly introduced American political divisions in the territory . For example , although the territory 's three district governors had equal authority , they were of differing Samoan social status . This disparity made decision @-@ making more difficult and caused social tensions . Despite these problems , Tilley was well @-@ considered by the locals . On December 18 , 1900 , the local chiefs sent a letter of congratulations on the re @-@ election of President McKinley . In this letter , they said of Tilley " ... you gave us a leader , a Governor , a High Chief , whom we have learned to love and respect " . 
 Tilley took leave in June 1901 to return to Washington , leaving E. J. Dorn in command . Dorn subsequently had medical issues and was replaced by J. L. Jayne in October . That month an anonymous complaint was made to Assistant Secretary of the Navy Frank W. Hackett against Commandant Tilley alleging immorality and drunkenness . Almost simultaneously , Tilley was promoted to captain by President Theodore Roosevelt . Tilley returned to Samoa on November 7 , 1901 with his wife , and two days later was given a court martial . The trial lasted four days and only one witness was called for the prosecution . Ultimately , Tilley was acquitted . Despite this , Captain Uriel Sebree was appointed as commandant on November 27 , 1901 . Tilley and his wife returned to the United States the following month . 
 Sebree later remarked of his predecessor that he had " great ability , kindness , tact and sound common sense " . Unlike Sebree , who was concerned that he did not have a legal mandate to govern , Tilley was not shy about enacting legislation and being the de facto leader of the territory . Although the deed of cession recognized his authority and gave him the title of Acting Governor , as far as the United States government was concerned , he was officially responsible only for the naval station . As the first naval governor , Tilley laid the groundwork for much of the future governance of the territory , which did not yet even have a formal name . The American Samoa government includes Tilley and the other pre @-@ 1905 station commandants in its list of territorial governors . 
 = = Later Career and Death = = 
 Tilley 's next assignment , in March 1902 , was as a captain of the Mare Island Naval Shipyard in Vallejo , California . He remained in this post for three years before being assigned to USS Iowa on January 11 , 1905 . Two years later , on February 23 , 1907 , Tilley was made commandant of League Island Naval Yard in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . He was promoted to rear admiral the following day . Less than a month later , on March 18 , 1907 , Tilley died of pneumonia . At the end of the year , Tilley was one of 322 men and women listed by The Washington Post as " foremost in their various callings " that had died in 1907 . Tilley was survived by one son and two daughters . His son , Benjamin Franklin Tilley , Jr . , also entered the Navy and retired with the rank of lieutenant commander . 
 = Japanese aircraft carrier Shinano = 
 Shinano ( <unk> ) , was an aircraft carrier built by the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) during World War II , the largest such built up to that time . Laid down in May 1940 as the third of the Yamato @-@ class battleships , Shinano 's partially complete hull was ordered to be converted to a carrier following Japan 's disastrous loss of four fleet carriers at the Battle of Midway in mid @-@ 1942 . Her conversion was still not finished in November 1944 when she was ordered to sail from the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal to Kure Naval Base to complete fitting out and transfer a load of 50 Yokosuka <unk> Ohka rocket @-@ propelled kamikaze flying bombs . Hastily dispatched , she had an inexperienced crew and serious design and construction flaws , lacked adequate pumps and fire @-@ control systems , and did not even carry a single carrier aircraft . She was sunk en route , 10 days after commissioning , on 29 November 1944 , by four torpedoes from the U.S. Navy submarine Archerfish . Over a thousand sailors and civilians were rescued and 1 @,@ 435 were lost , including her captain . She remains the largest warship ever sunk by a submarine . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 One of two additional Yamato @-@ class battleships ordered as part of the 4th Naval Armaments Supplement Program of 1939 , Shinano was named after the old province of Shinano , following the Japanese ship @-@ naming conventions for battleships . She was laid down on 4 May 1940 at the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal to a modified Yamato @-@ class design : her armor would be 10 – 20 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 39 – 0 @.@ 79 in ) thinner than that of the earlier ships , as it had proved to be thicker than it needed to be for the desired level of protection , and her heavy anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns would be the new 65 @-@ caliber 10 cm Type 98 dual @-@ purpose gun , as it had superior ballistic characteristics and a higher rate of fire than the 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 cm Type 89 guns used by her half @-@ sisters . 
 = = = Construction and conversion = = = 
 As with Shinano 's half @-@ sisters Yamato and Musashi , the new ship 's existence was kept a closely guarded secret . A tall fence was erected on three sides of the graving dock , and those working on the conversion were confined to the yard compound . Serious punishment — up to and including death — awaited any worker who mentioned the new ship . As a result , Shinano was the only major warship built in the 20th century to have avoided being officially photographed during its construction . The ship is only known to have been photographed twice : on 1 November 1944 , by a Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress reconnaissance aircraft from an altitude of 9 @,@ 800 meters ( 32 @,@ 000 ft ) , and ten days later , by a civilian photographer aboard a harbor tug during Shinano 's initial sea trials in Tokyo Bay . 
 In December 1941 , construction on Shinano 's hull was temporarily suspended to allow the IJN time to decide what to do with the ship . She was not expected to be completed until 1945 , and the sinking of the British capital ships Prince of Wales and Repulse by IJN bombers had called into question the viability of battleships in the war . The navy also wanted to make the large drydock in which the ship was being built available , which required either scrapping the portion already completed or finishing it enough to launch it and clear the drydock . The IJN decided on the latter , albeit with a reduced work force which was expected to be able to launch the ship in one year . 
 In the month following the disastrous loss of four fleet carriers at the June 1942 Battle of Midway , the IJN ordered the ship 's unfinished hull converted into an aircraft carrier . Her hull was only 45 percent complete by that time , with structural work complete up to the lower deck and most of her machinery installed . The main deck , lower side armor , and upper side armor around the ship 's magazines had been completely installed , and the forward barbettes for the main guns were also nearly finished . The navy decided that Shinano would become a heavily armored support carrier — carrying reserve aircraft , fuel and ordnance in support of other carriers — rather than a fleet carrier . 
 As completed , Shinano had a length of 265 @.@ 8 meters ( 872 ft 1 in ) overall , a beam of 36 @.@ 3 meters ( 119 ft 1 in ) and a draft of 10 @.@ 3 meters ( 33 ft 10 in ) . She displaced 65 @,@ 800 metric tons ( 64 @,@ 800 long tons ) at standard load , 69 @,@ 151 metric tons ( 68 @,@ 059 long tons ) at normal load and 73 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 72 @,@ 000 long tons ) at full load . Shinano was the largest aircraft carrier yet built , a record she held until the 81 @,@ 000 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 80 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ) USS Forrestal was launched in 1954 . She was designed for a crew of 2 @,@ 400 officers and enlisted men . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Shinano 's machinery was identical to that of her half @-@ sisters . The ships were fitted with four geared steam turbine sets with a total of 150 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 110 @,@ 000 kW ) , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by 12 Kampon water @-@ tube boilers . The ships had a designed speed of 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) , but Shinano never conducted full @-@ speed sea trials so her actual performance is unknown . She carried 9 @,@ 047 metric tons ( 8 @,@ 904 long tons ) of fuel oil which gave her an estimated range of 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 = = = Flight deck and hangar = = = 
 Shinano was designed to load and fuel her aircraft on deck where it was safer for the ship ; experiences in the Battles of Midway and the Coral Sea had demonstrated that the existing doctrine of fueling and arming their aircraft below decks was a real danger to the carriers if they were attacked while doing so . Much of Shinano 's hangar was left open for better ventilation , although steel shutters could close off most of the hangar sides if necessary . This also allowed ordnance or burning aircraft to be jettisoned into the sea , something that the earlier carriers could not do with their enclosed hangars . 
 The carrier 's 256 @-@ meter ( 839 ft 11 in ) flight deck was 40 @.@ 0 meters ( 131 ft 3 in ) wide and overhung her hull at both ends , supported by pairs of pillars . A large island , modeled on that fitted on Taihō , was sponsoned off the starboard side and integrated with the ship 's funnel . Much like the earlier Taihō design , Shinano 's armored flight deck ( they were the only Japanese carriers with armored flight decks ) functioned as the ship 's strength deck and copied British practice as seen in their Illustrious @-@ class carriers . Designed to resist penetration by 500 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) bombs dropped by a dive bomber , the flight deck consisted of 75 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) of armor plate laid over 20 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) of ordinary steel . It was equipped with 15 transverse arrestor wires and three crash barriers that could stop a 7 @,@ 500 @-@ kilogram ( 16 @,@ 500 lb ) aircraft ; five of these wires were positioned further forward to allow the ship to land aircraft over the bow in case the aft portion of the flight deck was unusable . 
 Unlike the British carriers , Taihō and Shinano had unarmored sides to their hangars . For stability reasons , the latter only had a single hangar that was 163 @.@ 4 by 33 @.@ 8 meters ( 536 by 111 ft ) , with a minimum width of 19 @.@ 8 meters ( 65 ft ) aft , and had a height of 5 @.@ 0 meters ( 16 ft 6 in ) . The forward area of the hangar was dedicated to maintenance and storage facilities . Aircraft were transported between the hangar and the flight deck by two elevators , one at each end of the hangar on the centerline of the flight deck . The larger of the two measured 15 @.@ 0 by 14 @.@ 0 meters ( 49 @.@ 25 by 45 @.@ 9 ft ) . They were capable of lifting aircraft weighing up to 7 @,@ 500 kilograms ( 16 @,@ 500 lb ) . The ship had an aviation gasoline ( avgas ) capacity of 720 @,@ 000 liters ( 160 @,@ 000 imp gal ; 190 @,@ 000 U.S. gal ) . Large ventilation fans were installed on the hangar deck to expel fumes in case of damage to the gasoline system ; Taihō had been sunk by an explosion of gasoline fumes . Canvas wind scoops could also be rigged over the elevator opening to force more air inside . 
 The ship 's organic air group was intended to consist of 18 Mitsubishi A7M <unk> ( Allied reporting name " Sam " ) fighters ( plus two in storage ) , 18 Aichi <unk> <unk> ( " Grace " ) torpedo @-@ dive bombers ( plus two in storage ) , and 6 Nakajima C6N <unk> ( " Myrt " ) reconnaissance aircraft ( plus one in storage ) . The remainder of the hangar space would have held up to 120 replacement aircraft for other carriers and land bases . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Shinano 's primary armament consisted of sixteen 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) Type 89 dual @-@ purpose guns in eight twin mounts , two at each corner of the hull . When firing at surface targets , the guns had a range of 14 @,@ 700 meters ( 16 @,@ 100 yd ) ; they had a maximum ceiling of 9 @,@ 440 meters ( 30 @,@ 970 ft ) at their maximum elevation of 90 degrees . Their maximum rate of fire was 14 rounds a minute ; their sustained rate of fire was around eight rounds per minute . 
 The ship also carried 105 Type 96 25 mm light AA guns in 35 triple @-@ gun mounts . These 25 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) guns had an effective range of 1 @,@ 500 – 3 @,@ 000 meters ( 1 @,@ 600 – 3 @,@ 300 yd ) , and an effective ceiling of 5 @,@ 500 meters ( 18 @,@ 000 ft ) at an elevation of + 85 degrees . The maximum effective rate of fire was only between 110 and 120 rounds per minute because of the frequent need to change the fifteen @-@ round magazines . This was the standard Japanese light AA gun during World War II , but it suffered from severe design shortcomings that rendered it largely ineffective . According to historian Mark Stille , the weapon had many faults including an inability to " handle high @-@ speed targets because it could not be trained or elevated fast enough by either hand or power , its sights were inadequate for high @-@ speed targets , it possessed excessive vibration and muzzle blast " .... These guns were supplemented by a dozen 28 @-@ round AA rocket launchers . Each 12 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) rocket weighed 22 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 50 lb ) and had a maximum velocity of 200 m / s ( 660 ft / s ) . Their maximum range was 4 @,@ 800 meters ( 5 @,@ 200 yd ) . 
 Four Type 94 high @-@ angle fire @-@ control directors were fitted to control the Type 89 guns . The two controlling the port @-@ side guns were adjacent to their guns while the starboard directors were mounted fore and aft on the island . They could control all of the forward and rear guns respectively as necessary . Type 22 and Type 13 air search radars may have been fitted . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The ship 's original waterline armor belt thickness of 400 millimeters ( 15 @.@ 7 in ) was only retained where it had already been installed abreast the magazines , and reduced to 160 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) elsewhere . Below it was a strake of armor that tapered in thickness from 200 millimeters ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) to 75 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) at its bottom edge . The flat portion of the armor deck over the machinery and magazine spaces , ranging from 100 to 190 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 to 7 @.@ 5 in ) , was retained , and the sloped portion that angled downward towards the bottom of the main armor belt was 230 millimeters ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) thick . Large external anti @-@ torpedo bulges below the waterline provided the main defense against torpedoes , backed up by an armored bulkhead extending down from the belt armor ; the bulkhead was intended to prevent splinters from piercing the main hull and , though not watertight , was backed by a second one which was . The joint between the upper and lower armor belts was weak and proved to be a serious problem when struck by torpedoes . 
 Even though Shinano 's avgas tanks were protected by armor that could resist a 155 @-@ millimeter ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) shell , the IJN attempted to isolate the tanks from the rest of the ship with a cofferdam . However the investigation into the loss of Taihō had revealed that her avgas tanks had sprung leaks after she was torpedoed . The resulting fumes then penetrated the cofferdam and exploded . Therefore , the IJN thought it prudent to fill the empty spaces between the tanks and the cofferdam with 2 @,@ 400 metric tons ( 2 @,@ 362 long tons ) of concrete to prevent any fumes from escaping . 
 = = = Launching = = = 
 The ship was originally scheduled for completion in April 1945 , but construction was expedited after the defeat at the Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944 as the IJN anticipated that the United States would now be able to bomb Japan with long @-@ range aircraft from bases in the Mariana Islands . The builder was unable to increase the number of workers on Shinano and could not meet the new deadline of October . Even so , the pressure to finish as quickly as possible led to poor workmanship by the workforce . 
 Shinano 's launch on 8 October 1944 , with Captain Toshio Abe in command , was marred by what some considered an ill @-@ omened accident . During the floating @-@ out procedure , one of the caissons at the end of the dock unexpectedly lifted as the water rose to the level of the harbor ( no one had checked to ensure that all the caissons were properly ballasted with seawater ) . The sudden inrush of water into the graving dock pushed the carrier into the forward end , damaging the bow structure below the waterline and requiring repairs in drydock . These were completed by 26 October . 
 = = Commissioning and sinking = = 
 = = = Departure from Yokosuka = = = 
 On 19 November 1944 , Shinano was formally commissioned at Yokosuka , having spent the previous two weeks fitting out and performing sea trials . Worried about her safety after a U.S. reconnaissance bomber fly @-@ over , the Navy General Staff ordered Shinano to depart for Kure by no later than 28 November , where the remainder of her fitting @-@ out would take place . Abe asked for a delay in the sailing date as the majority of her watertight doors had yet to be installed , the compartment air tests had not been conducted , and many holes in the compartment bulkheads for electrical cables , ventilation ducts and pipes had not been sealed . Importantly , fire mains and bailing systems lacked pumps and were inoperable ; even though most of the crew had sea @-@ going experience , they lacked training in the portable pumps on board . The escorting destroyers , Isokaze , Yukikaze and Hamakaze , had just returned from the Battle of Leyte Gulf and required more than three days to conduct repairs and to allow their crews to recuperate . 
 Abe 's request was denied , and Shinano departed as scheduled with the escorting destroyers at 18 : 00 on 28 November . Abe commanded a crew of 2 @,@ 175 officers and men . Also on board were 300 shipyard workers and 40 civilian employees . Watertight doors and hatches were left open for ease of access to machinery spaces , as were some manholes in the double and triple @-@ bottomed hull . Abe preferred a daylight passage , since it would have allowed him extra time to train his crew and given the destroyer crews time to rest . However , he was forced to make a nighttime run when he learned the Navy General Staff could not provide air support . Shinano carried six Shinyo suicide boats , and 50 Ohka suicide flying bombs ; her other aircraft were not planned to come aboard until later . Her orders were to go to Kure , where she would complete fitting out and then deliver the kamikaze craft to the Philippines and Okinawa . Traveling at an average speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , she needed sixteen hours to cover the 300 miles ( 480 km ) to Kure . As a measure of how important Shinano was to the naval command , Abe was slated for promotion to rear admiral once its fitting out was complete . 
 = = = Attacked = = = 
 At 20 : 48 , the American submarine Archerfish , commanded by Commander Joseph F. Enright , picked up Shinano and her escorts on her radar and pursued them on a parallel course . Over an hour and a half earlier , Shinano had detected the submarine 's radar . Normally , Shinano would have been able to outrun Archerfish , but the zig @-@ zagging movement of the carrier and her escorts — intended to avoid submarine attack — inadvertently turned the task group back into the sub 's path on several occasions . At 22 : 45 , the carrier 's lookouts spotted Archerfish on the surface and Isokaze broke formation , against orders , to investigate . Abe ordered the destroyer to return to the formation without attacking because he believed that the submarine was part of an American wolfpack and that Archerfish was being used as a decoy to lure away one of the escorts to allow the rest of the pack a clear shot at Shinano . He ordered his ships to turn away from the submarine with the expectation of outrunning it , counting on his 2 @-@ knot ( 3 @.@ 7 km / h ; 2 @.@ 3 mph ) margin of speed over the submarine . Around 23 : 22 , the carrier was forced to reduce speed to 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) , the same speed as Archerfish , to prevent damage to the propeller shaft when a bearing overheated . At 02 : 56 on 29 November , Shinano turned to the southwest and headed straight for Archerfish . Eight minutes later , Archerfish turned east and submerged in preparation to attack . Enright ordered his torpedoes set for a depth of 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in case they ran deeper than set ; he also intended to increase the chances of capsizing the ship by punching holes higher up in the hull . A few minutes later , she turned south , exposing her entire side to <unk> nearly ideal firing situation for a submarine . The escorting destroyer on that side passed right over Archerfish without detecting her . At 03 : 15 Archerfish fired six torpedoes before diving to 400 feet ( 121 @.@ 9 m ) to escape a depth charge attack from the escorts . 
 Four struck the Shinano , at an average depth of 4 @.@ 27 meters ( 14 ft 0 in ) . The first hit towards the stern , flooding refrigerated storage compartments and one of the empty aviation gasoline storage tanks , and killing many of the sleeping engineering personnel in the compartments above . The second hit the compartment where the starboard outboard propeller shaft entered the hull and flooded the outboard engine room . The third hit further forward , flooding the No. 3 boiler room and killing every man on watch . Structural failures caused the two adjacent boiler rooms to flood as well . The fourth flooded the starboard air compressor room , adjacent anti @-@ aircraft gun magazines , and the No. 2 damage @-@ control station , and ruptured the adjacent oil tank . 
 = = = Sinking = = = 
 Though severe , the damage to Shinano was at first judged to be manageable . The crew were confident in the ship 's armor and strength , which translated into lax initial efforts to save the ship . This overconfidence extended to Abe . He doubted the sub 's torpedoes could inflict serious damage , since he was well aware that American torpedoes were inferior to Japanese torpedoes in both potency and accuracy . He ordered the carrier to maintain its maximum speed even after the last torpedo hit . The resultant extensive flooding caused the carrier to list 10 degrees to starboard within a few minutes . Despite the crew pumping 3 @,@ 000 long tons ( 3 @,@ 000 t ) of water into the port bilges , the list increased to 13 degrees . When it became apparent the damage was more severe than first thought , Abe ordered a change of course towards <unk> Point . Progressively increasing flooding increased the list to 15 degrees by 03 : 30 . Fifty minutes later , Abe ordered the empty port outboard tanks to be counter @-@ flooded , reducing the list to 12 degrees for a brief time . After 05 : 00 he ordered the civilian workers to be transferred to the escorts as they were impeding the crew in their duties . 
 A half @-@ hour later , Shinano was making 10 knots with a 13 degree list . At 06 : 00 her list had increased to 20 degrees after the starboard boiler room flooded , at which point the valves of the port trimming tanks rose above the waterline and became ineffective . The engines shut down for lack of steam around 07 : 00 , and Abe ordered all of the propulsion compartments evacuated an hour later . He then ordered the three outboard port boiler rooms flooded in a futile attempt to reduce the carrier 's list . He also ordered Hamakaze and Isokaze to take her in tow . However , the two destroyers only displaced 5 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 900 long tons ) between them , about one @-@ fourteenth of Shinano 's displacement and not nearly enough to overcome her deadweight . The first tow cables snapped under the strain and the second attempt was aborted for fear of injury to the crews if they snapped again . The ship lost all power around 09 : 00 and was now listing over 20 degrees . At 10 : 18 , Abe gave the order to abandon ship ; by this time Shinano had a list of 30 degrees . As she heeled , her flight deck touched the water , which flowed into the open elevator well , sucking many swimming sailors back into the ship as she sank . A large exhaust vent below the flight deck also sucked many other sailors into the ship as it submerged . 
 At 10 : 57 Shinano finally capsized and sank stern @-@ first at coordinates ( 32 ° 07 ′ N 137 ° 04 ′ E ) , 65 miles ( 105 km ) from the nearest land , in approximately 4 @,@ 000 meters ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) of water , taking 1 @,@ 435 officers , men and civilians to their deaths . The dead included Abe and both of his navigators , who chose to go down with the ship . Rescued were 55 officers and 993 petty officers and enlisted men , plus 32 civilians for a total of 1 @,@ 080 survivors . After their rescue , the survivors were isolated on the island of Mitsuko @-@ jima until January 1945 to suppress the news of the carrier 's loss . The carrier was formally struck from the Naval Register on 31 August . 
 US Naval Intelligence did not initially believe Enright 's claim to have sunk a carrier . Shinano 's construction had not been detected through decoded radio messages or other means , and the American analysts believed that they had located all of Japan 's surviving carriers . Enright was eventually credited with sinking a 28 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 28 @,@ 000 t ) <unk> ( Hiyō @-@ class ) carrier by the acting commander of the Pacific Fleet 's submarine force on the basis of a drawing Enright submitted depicting the ship he had attacked . The Americans only learned about the existence of Shinano after the war ; following this discovery Enright was credited with her sinking and awarded the Navy Cross . 
 = = Post @-@ war analysis of the sinking = = 
 Post @-@ war analysis by the U.S. Naval Technical Mission to Japan noted that Shinano had serious design flaws . Specifically , the joint between the waterline armor belt on the upper hull and the anti @-@ torpedo bulge on the underwater portion was poorly designed ; Archerfish 's torpedoes all exploded along this joint . The force of the torpedo explosions also dislodged an I @-@ beam in one of the boiler rooms which punched a hole into another boiler room . In addition , the failure to test for water @-@ tightness in each compartment played a role as potential leaks could not be found and patched before Shinano put to sea . The executive officer blamed the large amount of water that entered the ship on the failure to air @-@ test the compartments for leaks . He reported hearing air rushing through gaps in the water @-@ tight doors just minutes after the last torpedo hit — a sign that seawater was rapidly entering the ship , proving the doors were unseaworthy . 
 = 2003 Sri Lanka cyclone = 
 In May 2003 , a tropical cyclone officially called Very Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 01 produced the worst flooding in Sri Lanka in 56 years . The first storm of the 2003 North Indian Ocean cyclone season , it developed over the Bay of Bengal on May 10 . Favorable environmental conditions allowed the system to intensify steadily while moving northwestward . The storm reached peak maximum sustained winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) on May 13 , making it a very severe cyclonic storm according to the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) , which is the official Regional Specialized Meteorological Center for the basin . The cyclone drifted north over the central Bay of Bengal , gradually weakening due to heightened wind shear . Turning eastward , the storm deteriorated to a deep depression on May 16 before it curved northeastward and re @-@ intensified into a cyclonic storm . It came ashore in western Myanmar and dissipated over land the following day . 
 In the wake of prolonged precipitation during the first half of May , the cyclone produced torrential rains across southwest Sri Lanka while stationary in the central Bay of Bengal . The storm drew extensive moisture that coalesced in the mountainous portion of the island . A station at Ratnapura recorded 366 @.@ 1 millimetres ( 14 @.@ 41 in ) of rainfall in 18 hours on May 17 , including 99 @.@ 8 mm ( 3 @.@ 93 in ) in one hour . In southwestern Sri Lanka , the rainfall caused flooding and landslides that destroyed 24 @,@ 750 homes and damaged 32 @,@ 426 others , displacing about 800 @,@ 000 people . Overall damage totaled about $ 135 million ( 2003 USD ) , and there were 260 deaths . The cyclone also produced some rainfall in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands of India and along the country 's eastern coast . The storm funneled moisture away from the mainland , which possibly contributed to a heat wave that killed 1 @,@ 900 people , and dropped heavy rainfall in Myanmar . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Around May 6 , the monsoon trough extended across the southern Bay of Bengal , producing a vast field of thunderstorm activity . A broad low @-@ pressure area formed by the next day and remained nearly stationary . Over the next few days , the convection varied in intensity until becoming more organized around the nascent surface low on May 10 . At 03 : 00 UTC on May 10 , the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) reported the formation of a depression about 535 km ( 330 mi ) west of Banda Aceh , Indonesia . Within nine hours , the depression further intensified into a deep depression . Around the same time , the system was classified as Tropical Cyclone 01B by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center . 
 With warm sea surface temperatures , a formidable anticyclone aloft , and low wind shear , the system continued to mature as it tracked northwestward . Early on May 11 , the deep depression strengthened into a cyclonic storm – marked by maximum sustained winds of at least 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) – and later in the day into a severe cyclonic storm . Simultaneously , the system was driven toward the north by a ridge of high pressure to the northeast . At the time , the cyclone was located about 700 km ( 430 mi ) east of Sri Lanka . The storm continued to intensify , becoming a very severe cyclonic storm on May 12 . That day , the JTWC upgraded Tropical Cyclone 01B to the equivalence of a minimal hurricane with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . In post @-@ season analysis , however , the agency revised the storm 's maximum winds to 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . At 06 : 00 UTC on May 13 , the IMD estimated that the storm attained peak winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . The intensity estimate was based on a satellite @-@ derived Dvorak number of 4 @.@ 5 , limited chiefly by the lack of an eye feature . 
 After peaking in intensity , the storm began weakening due to increasing easterly wind shear from the ridge to the north , displacing the center of circulation from the deepest convection . Early on May 14 , the IMD downgraded the storm to a severe cyclonic storm . Around this time , steering currents slackened , and the cyclone meandered northward over the central Bay of Bengal . By late on May 14 , convection had largely dissipated , with the exception of a small area near the center , and the system weakened to minimal cyclonic storm status . Thunderstorm activity continued to wax and wane as the storm turned to the southeastward , though persistent hostile conditions caused the storm to weaken further to a deep depression on May 16 . As the nearby ridge translated eastward , the depression was able to move more steadily to the east and later to the northeast , passing northwest of the Andaman Islands on May 18 . On the next day , the deep depression re @-@ intensified into a cyclonic storm , reaching a secondary peak with winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . At about 10 : 00 UTC on May 19 , the storm made landfall close to Kyaukpyu , Ramree Island , in western Myanmar . The storm rapidly weakened into a depression and later degenerated into a low pressure area on May 20 , and was no longer discernible on satellite imagery by the next day . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Sri Lanka = = = 
 Due to the significant distance between Sri Lanka and the Bay of Bengal storm , no cyclone warnings were posted . The India @-@ based National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting anticipated the flood event three days in advance . However , the Sri Lankan government did not issue the first flood warnings until May 17 , the same day that the flooding began . Many residents learned about the impending floods through loudspeakers and word of mouth , although some were alerted by television or radio . About 8 @,@ 000 people evacuated on May 18 , utilizing schools and public buildings as emergency shelters . The precipitation occurred in the wake of an already rainy period ; a station near the Kalu River reported over 600 mm ( 24 in ) of rainfall in the first 15 days of May . 
 While the storm was nearly stationary in the central Bay of Bengal , the southwesterly flow drew abundant moisture over Sri Lanka to produce severe flooding . In the island 's mountainous southwestern portion , the winds across the island produced heavy rainfall rates through a process known as orographic lift , mostly occurring on May 17 – 18 . Throughout May 2003 , the highest rainfall in the country was 899 mm ( 35 @.@ 4 in ) at <unk> <unk> Estate . A station at Ratnapura recorded 718 mm ( 28 @.@ 3 in ) of precipitation in the month , of which 366 @.@ 1 mm ( 14 @.@ 41 in ) fell over an 18 ‑ hour period on May 17 ; at the same station , there was a peak hourly rainfall total of 99 @.@ 8 mm ( 3 @.@ 93 in ) . These were the heaviest rains on the island since 1947 . Rainfall was primarily concentrated in southwestern Sri Lanka , with a rain shadow farther inland that resulted in minimal precipitation in and <unk> . After the Kalu River overflowed , floodwaters reached 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) deep in Ratnapura City , submerging the first floors of most homes and persisting for about three days . Landslides created a temporary natural dam on the river that washed away a bridge when it broke . Along the Gin River , flood waters inundated the surrounding terrain up to 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) deep , covered roadways , and complicated evacuations . In Hambantota District , the inundation occurred after an ongoing drought , which amplified flood @-@ related damage . Although the flooding was severe in the southwestern portion of Sri Lanka , effects were minimal in the central and north @-@ central regions , and there was no severe flooding in the capital city of Colombo . 
 Since the previously wet conditions had saturated soils , the rains related to the cyclone caused severe flooding and landslides , mostly in Ratnapura and Nuwara Eliya districts . A landslide in <unk> killed 81 people , and at least 125 people died in Ratnapura . The floods increased river levels in Hambantota , Matara , Galle , and Kalutara districts , persisting until May 30 in Matara . Many roads were damaged , including the one that links Ratnapura to Colombo . About 100 schools were destroyed and another 200 were damaged , and some health facilities lost their equipment . Flooding from the cyclone destroyed 53 @,@ 300 hectares ( 132 @,@ 000 acres ) of tea crops , representing an estimated 20 – 30 % loss for the year in the low country . Farmers in the affected areas also lost some of their rice paddies to the high waters , although only about 3 % of the rice crop in the region was damaged , so no impact on the rice harvest was expected . Many areas lost electricity and telephone service , and there were disruptions to food and water supplies . 
 Throughout Sri Lanka , the floods destroyed at least 24 @,@ 750 homes and damaged 32 @,@ 426 others , displacing about 800 @,@ 000 people , many of whom lost everything they owned . Total damage was estimated at $ 135 million ( 2003 USD ) , primarily to homes and roads . Across the island , floods related to the cyclone killed 260 people . Most of the deaths were along the nation 's southern coast where the floods occurred , primarily along the Kalu River , and were mainly farmers . Levees helped drain floodwaters where systems were already in place . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 In its formative stages , the storm produced moderate rainfall in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands , totaling 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) at <unk> . Later , as the storm was approaching Myanmar , it dropped 89 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) of rainfall on Hut Bay . Several stations in Tamil Nadu reported light precipitation , including a total of 98 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) at Adirampattinam . Along the coast of Odisha , the fringes of the cyclonic storm dropped light rainfall , reaching 53 mm ( 2 @.@ 1 in ) at <unk> . As the storm made landfall in Myanmar , it produced heavy rainfall in Rakhine State , signalling an early start to the monsoon season . 
 The slow movement of the storm altered the atmospheric flow over southeastern India . According to the IMD , the cyclone " might have caused the severe heat wave conditions prevailing over the coastal Andhra Pradesh " from May into early June , killing up to 1 @,@ 400 people , and increasing air temperatures to 50 ° C ( 122 ° F ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of the flooding in Sri Lanka , the country 's air force , army , and navy , as well as police forces , operated search and rescue missions . The navy and air force collected residents stranded in trees and on roofs , and were later assisted by the Indian military . However , the lack of electricity and the damaged infrastructure hampered relief work . In the hardest hit area of Ratnapura , there was a shortage of doctors , prompting officials to request help from adjacent towns . There were increased reports of diarrhea , viral flu , and typhoid in the aftermath of the floods . Mobile health crews treated over 44 @,@ 000 residents , which helped reduce the spread of disease . Residents in one village went without food for three days , and in the storm 's aftermath , many were also without access to clean water . By May 19 , flooding had begun to recede in the worst affected areas , allowing workers to repair roads . The government released <unk> million ( LKR , $ 62 @,@ 500 USD ) for immediate relief , and also provided <unk> ( LKR , $ 156 USD ) toward funeral expenses for each death . From May 22 – 25 , the country 's legislature had reduced sessions so members could return to their districts . By the end of May 2003 , the government had allocated <unk> million ( LKR , $ 180 @,@ 000 USD ) for relief measures , including <unk> ( LKR $ 280 USD ) for each family to rebuild houses . The Sri Lankan government also set up a four @-@ person task force to manage flood relief . The local Red Cross chapter utilized emergency supplies to distribute 10 @,@ 000 food packages while also deploying trained volunteers to assist in the disaster areas . The Red Cross ultimately distributed about 26 @,@ 000 loaves of bread , 862 kg ( 1 @,@ 900 lb ) of sugar , and 1 @,@ 775 kg ( 3 @,@ 913 lb ) of rice , among other supplies . By May 20 , the Sri Lankan air force had distributed 35 tons of food , using eight helicopters to airdrop parcels . Red Cross workers cleaned hundreds of contaminated wells in the region , thereby restoring clean water access ; this task was finished by August . By May 16 , or nine days after the floods began , power was restored to about 95 % of areas , and roads were gradually rebuilt . Road access to most villages was restored by May 26 , with the exception of Matara . There , the ongoing floods prompted officials to close schools to reduce the spread of disease . After the floods largely subsided , the World Socialist Web Site criticized the Sri Lankan government for not having better disaster management in place , as well as noting that deforestation and gem mining contributed to the landslides . A Red Cross report in August 2003 noted the swift work to bring relief to the affected citizens , while also commenting that the floods displayed the country 's problems with disaster mitigation . 
 On May 19 , the Red Cross launched an appeal to the international community for assistance . A day prior , the Red Cross allocated <unk> to buy relief supplies , while the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs provided a $ 50 @,@ 000 grant . In the days after the floods , the government of India sent a ship with inflatable dinghies and medical supplies . A total of 18 countries or local Red Crosses sent <unk> million CHF worth of cash to Sri Lanka . Sweden sent <unk> ( 2003 SEK ) toward relief transport and distribution . The government of Japan sent ¥ 19 @.@ 8 million yen worth of tents , sheets , and other supplies to the country , The Iranian Red Cross sent $ 65 @,@ 625 ( USD ) worth of blankets and tents to Sri Lanka , which helped about 240 families . Australia 's government sent about $ 400 @,@ 000 ( AUD ) to UNICEF to help rebuild the damaged schools and other social services . The European Community Humanitarian Aid Office donated about € 800 @,@ 000 ( $ 944 @,@ 000 USD ) to the country . The World Food Programme distributed meals to about 10 @,@ 000 families , while the World Health Organization provided water purification tablets , typhoid vaccines , and health kits to about 100 @,@ 000 people . During a peace agreement amid the ongoing civil war , the Tamil Tigers in Sri Lanka sent trucks with clothing and food to the affected areas . In July 2004 , the Asian Development Bank provided $ 12 @.@ 5 million of the $ 17 @.@ 5 million needed to repair the damaged infrastructure , while the Sri Lankan government provided the remaining $ 5 million . 
 = The Legend of Zelda : Oracle of Seasons and Oracle of Ages = 
 The Legend of Zelda : Oracle of Seasons and The Legend of Zelda : Oracle of Ages are two action @-@ adventure games in the Legend of Zelda series , developed by Flagship ( a subsidiary of Capcom ) . They were released on February 27 , 2001 in Japan , May 14 , 2001 in North America , and October 5 , 2001 in Europe for Nintendo 's Game Boy Color handheld console . Both games were re @-@ released on the Virtual Console for the Nintendo 3DS in Japan on February 27 , 2013 and in North America and Europe on May 30 , 2013 . The games feature a brighter color palette when played on a Nintendo Game Boy Advance in order to make up for the darkness of the screen , and a special shop is also made available . After experimenting with porting the original The Legend of Zelda to the Game Boy Color , the Flagship team , supervised by Yoshiki Okamoto , began developing three interconnected Zelda games that could be played in any order . The complexity of this system led the team to cancel one game . 
 The player controls Link from an overhead perspective , with the same control scheme from The Legend of Zelda : Link 's Awakening for the Game Boy . In Seasons , the Triforce transports Link to the land of Holodrum , where he sees Onox kidnap Din , the Oracle of Seasons . In Ages , the Triforce transports Link to Labrynna , where Veran possesses Nayru . The main plot is revealed once the player finishes both games . Link is armed with a sword and shield as well as a variety of secondary weapons and items for battling enemies and solving puzzles . The central items are the Rod of Seasons , which controls the seasons in Holodrum , and the Harp of Ages , which lets Link travel through time in Labrynna . Before he can infiltrate Onox 's castle and Veran 's tower , Link must collect the eight Essences of Nature and the eight Essences of Time , which are hidden in dungeons and guarded by bosses . 
 Taking roughly three years to develop , the game was a critical and commercial success , with the two games together selling eight million units . Critics complimented the gameplay , colorful designs and graphic quality , but criticized the inconsistent sound quality . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Oracle of Seasons = = = 
 Seasons begins as the Triforce calls out to Link from within Hyrule Castle . Link approaches it , and is transported to a dark forest where he encounters a traveling group led by a dancer named Din . After Din welcomes Link to Holodrum , the sky becomes covered in black clouds . A voice from the clouds calls Din the Oracle of Seasons and refers to himself as Onox , General of Darkness . A funnel cloud drops from the sky , taking Din into its dark heights . As the tornado dissipates , the seasons of Holodrum fall into disarray and change rapidly . 
 Din 's attendant , Impa , tells Link that they were headed for Hyrule ; she instructs him to see the Maku Tree in Horon Village , the capital of Holodrum . Link finds a sword in a cave and makes his way to the tree . The Maku Tree tells Link he will need the eight Essences of Nature and gives him the <unk> Key , which unlocks the dungeon holding the first Essence . Link retrieves the eight Essences , hidden in eight dungeons throughout Holodrum and Subrosia , and brings them to the Maku Tree . The Maku Tree uses them to create a Huge Maku Seed , a sacred seed that cleanses evil , which allows Link to enter Onox 's castle . Link enters the castle , defeats Onox , and rescues Din , who tells him that he is now a true hero and must face a new trial soon . Twinrova , watching the scene remotely , states that the Flame of Destruction has been powered by the havoc Onox has wrought . 
 = = = Oracle of Ages = = = 
 As with Seasons , the Triforce calls out to Link . Link is transported to a forest in the land of Labrynna , where he hears screaming . In a clearing , Link finds a woman encircled by monsters . When the monsters see Link , they scatter in all directions . The woman is Princess Zelda 's nurse , Impa , who asks Link to help her find a singer in the forest . Continuing through the forest , the two find Nayru , a young woman with blue hair singing on a tree stump , surrounded by forest creatures . A shadow emerges from Impa and reveals itself as Veran , Sorceress of Shadows . Veran soars into Nayru 's body and possesses her . Nayru was the Oracle of Ages ; her abduction causes a disruption in the time flow of Labrynna . 
 Link receives a sword from Impa and makes his way to the Maku Tree in <unk> City , the capital of Labrynna . The Maku Tree is killed in the past on Veran 's orders ; Link uses a time portal to travel to the past to prevent this . The Maku Tree tells Link he will need the eight Essences of Time to defeat Veran . Link sets out to retrieve the eight Essences , hidden in eight dungeons throughout Labrynna 's past and present . After getting the sixth Essence , Link is told he has the opportunity to save Nayru . He invades Queen Ambi 's castle and removes Veran 's spirit from Nayru , but Veran then possesses Queen Ambi . Link gathers the remaining Essences and brings them to the Maku Tree , who uses them to create a Huge Maku Seed that allows Link to enter Veran 's Black Tower . Link ascends the tower and defeats Veran . He rescues Queen Ambi , and Nayru tells him that all has returned to normal . Twinrova , watching the scene remotely , states that Veran has lit the Flame of Sorrow . 
 = = = Linked ending = = = 
 If one game is played as a sequel to the other by a linked password , Twinrova captures Princess Zelda , lighting the Flame of Despair . Link enters a warp point by the Maku Tree and faces Twinrova , who is attempting to use the three Flames to revive Ganon , the primary antagonist in the Zelda series . Link defeats both Twinrova and a mindless , poorly resurrected Ganon . He frees Zelda , whose sacrifice would have been the full resurrection of Ganon ; together , they exit the crumbling castle . After the credits , Link is seen waving to a crowd from a sailboat off the shore of a land with a castle in the background . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay of Oracle of Seasons and Ages is similar to that of The Legend of Zelda : Link 's Awakening , copying basic controls , graphics , and sounds from the Game Boy title . Like most The Legend of Zelda titles , exploration and combat take place from an overhead perspective . Link uses a sword for his primary attack , complemented by secondary weapons and items . Basic items , such as bombs and a boomerang , are common to both games . Some new items are exclusive to one game , usually with a counterpart in the other , with similar uses ( e.g. the slingshot in Seasons and the seed shooter in Ages both shoot seeds , while the magnetic gloves in Seasons and the switch hook in Ages are used to access otherwise unreachable areas via special targets ) . Unlike most Zelda titles , a sword and shield is not always equipped when the player possesses them ; they can be assigned like any other item into either of two available slots . Most of each of the games is spent finding the eight Essences ( Essences of Nature in Seasons and Essences of Time in Ages ) , each hidden in a dungeon — a large , usually underground , area containing enemies and puzzles . Each dungeon culminates with a boss that guards the Essence . 
 When not in a dungeon , Link explores the overworld . In Seasons , the overworld consists of Holodrum and the subterranean world of Subrosia . The two worlds are linked by several portals . In Ages , Link travels between present @-@ day Labrynna and the past , connected by Time Holes . In either game , some areas of one world are accessible only from portals from the other and vice versa . Holodrum , Subrosia , and Labrynna contain optional side quests and upgrades for Link and his equipment . One such side quest is ring collection ; rings provide Link with various bonuses and abilities , such as improved defense . Some rings do not have any practical uses , e.g. rings that weaken Link 's attack or defense , or transform Link into an enemy creature , or are awarded when certain criteria are met but do not have any effect . Another side quest is the optional trading game , in which Link receives and delivers special items to certain people throughout the land . Once completed , Link receives an upgraded sword . 
 In both games , there are many circumstances when a previous item can be upgraded into a more useful form . The latter three dungeons in both games will hold a more powerful version of an item received earlier in the game . Both the sword 's offensive power and the shield 's defensive abilities can be upgraded twice , once through passwords and again through side quests . If Link swings an enhanced sword at full health , a sword @-@ shaped beam will escape from the sword as a ranged attack . The number of bombs and Mystical Seeds that can be held can also be increased through the same ways as the shield and sword . Roc 's Feather and the Power Bracelet are special cases , as , while the two are in both games , the former can only be upgraded in Oracle of Seasons while the latter only in Oracle of Ages . 
 The central item of Oracle of Seasons is the Rod of Seasons . By standing on a stump and swinging the rod , Link can change the season and affect his surroundings . For example , to cross a body of water , Link can change the season to winter and walk on the ice . Changing the season to summer causes vines to flourish , which Link can use to scale cliffs . When Link obtains the rod , he initially cannot use it . In the course of the game , Link visits four towers that house the four spirits of the seasons ; each tower Link visits allows him to switch to an additional season . 
 In Oracle of Ages , the central item is the Harp of Ages , which Link uses to manipulate time and travel between the past and the present . In the course of the game , Link learns three tunes to play on the harp . The Tune of Echoes activates Time Portals at fixed locations ; the Tune of Currents enables Link to travel from the past to the present without a Time Portal ; the Tune of Ages allows Link to switch between the two time periods at almost any location on the map . 
 = = = Interaction = = = 
 Although the two are built on the same game engine , Oracle of Ages concentrates on puzzles , while Oracle of Seasons focuses on action . Each is a complete game capable of interacting with the other , via passwords or a Game Link Cable . 
 Upon completing either game , players receive a password that can be used to play an alternative version of the other . In this version , some characters mention passwords that can be given to characters in the first game in exchange for an item or upgrade . Then , by taking a new password back into the linked game , the item or upgrade can be transferred . Rings can be traded by this password system or randomly created by connecting two games with a Game Link Cable . 
 In the alternative version , plot points are changed or expanded upon to allow the game to serve as a sequel . It also features an extended ending in which Twinrova kidnaps Zelda , and lights the third Flame of Despair to revive Ganon . The player can then enter Twinrova 's lair and battle Twinrova and Ganon . Upon completing the alternative game , another password is shown that gives the player the Victory Ring , which commemorates the defeat of Ganon . 
 = = Development = = 
 In early 1999 , Yoshiki Okamoto , then head of Capcom 's screenwriter subsidiary Flagship , proposed his idea of remaking the original The Legend of Zelda for the Game Boy Color to Shigeru Miyamoto , the game designer at Nintendo who created the series . Okamoto was eventually asked to develop six Zelda games for the Game Boy Color : two based on earlier installments and four original entries into the series . Okamoto wanted to release them in quick succession of four to five months , and held on to his concept of bringing the first game to the handheld console to make young children experience the merits of the original Zelda , but also as a test for the development team to move on to a more ambitious sequel if it turned out to be successful . 
 Contrary to Miyamoto 's design mentality of creating the gameplay system first , development started out with the scenario writing , which Flagship was in charge of . Some of the staff members , the team led by director and designer Hidemaro Fujibayashi that was responsible for tasks other than the storyline , wanted to skip the remake and create an original Zelda title right away . As the first installment in the series was deemed too difficult for the new generation of players , more and more changes were applied to the point where it had an entirely different world map . As a result , the team ran into problems because the scenario and the maps had to be reworked constantly to make all the modifications match . The Game Boy Color 's screen presented an additional hurdle when attempting to rework the earlier Zelda title as it is narrower than that of a television ; players could not view an entire room without scrolling which made it easy to overlook stairways or clues on walls . 
 Dismayed by the rate at which the team had been spending money for a year without results , Okamoto asked Miyamoto for help , who then came up with the idea of a whole trilogy of games , each with a different focus on gameplay elements . This trilogy was referred to as the " Triforce Series " , named after a fictional holy relic known as the Triforce that plays a major role in many Zelda titles . The Triforce is composed of three parts : the <unk> of Power , Wisdom , and Courage ; each game in the trilogy was to be associated with a piece of the Triforce , one of the titles being the conversion of the original The Legend of Zelda . The first game of the three was demonstrated at Nintendo 's SpaceWorld trade show in 1999 , under the working title Zelda no Densetsu : Fushigi no <unk> – Chikara no Shō ( ゼルダの伝説 <unk> ～ <unk> ～ ) . This action @-@ oriented game concerned Ganon 's theft of Princess Zelda and the " Rod of the Seasons " , which threw the seasons of Hyrule into chaos — a precursor to the plot of Oracle of Seasons . In the playable demonstration , Link solved puzzles by using the Rod of the Seasons to manipulate the environment and change the current season . Chie no Shō , which focused on color @-@ based puzzles , and Yūki no Shō , which used the times of day to solve puzzles in a mechanic similar to the use of seasons , were not shown . In the US , the games became The Legend of Zelda : Mystical Seed of Power , Mystical Seed of Wisdom , and Mystical Seed of Courage . 
 The games interacted with each other : players could begin with any of the three titles and have the actions of the first game affect the story of the other two , a concept conceived by Okamoto . More than ten of Flagship 's <unk> , among them Resident Evil writer Junichi <unk> , worked simultaneously on the three stories . The developers considered using a cell phone adapter to transfer data , but later decided on a password system . The limitations of this system and the difficulty of coordinating three games proved too complicated , so the team scaled back to two titles at Miyamoto 's suggestion . Condensing the games into a single cartridge was never considered , as the prospect of multiple endings and the added replay value afforded by the ability to play the titles in either order was very attractive . Oracle of Seasons was adapted from Mystical Seed of Power , Oracle of Ages was adapted from Mystical Seed of Wisdom , and Mystical Seed of Courage was canceled . 
 These sweeping design changes pushed the release dates closer to the upcoming release of the Game Boy Advance ( GBA ) , the next system in the Game Boy line that is backward compatible with Game Boy Color games . The team considered adding special functionality to the game triggered only when played on a GBA , but was afraid that the additional development time required for the addition would cause the games to be released after the GBA . When the release date of the GBA was postponed , the team was able to incorporate GBA functionality and still release the games approximately a month before the GBA was released . Staggered releases were abandoned in favor of releasing the two games simultaneously . This made it easier for the team to test the interaction between the games and keep the style consistent . Each title was shipped on an 8 @-@ megabit ( 16 @-@ megabit in Europe ) cartridge . The music for the games was composed by two employees of the Japanese music and sound effect production company Pure Sound , credited under the pseudonyms " M @-@ Adachi " and " <unk> " . Nintendo artist and series regular Yusuke Nakano designed the characters for the two titles , and incorporated previous creations from Ocarina of Time into Oracle of Seasons and characters from Majora 's Mask into Oracle of Ages . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Oracle of Seasons and Ages were critical and commercial successes , selling nearly 4 million copies each . Reviews were strongly positive : Chris Carle of IGN said that Seasons and Ages were " the best games ever made for the Game Boy Color " , and Craig <unk> of Gaming Age called them " the two best games ever to grace a handheld system " . It was rated the 34th ( Seasons ) and 39th ( Ages ) best games made on a Nintendo System in Nintendo Power 's Top 200 Games list . In August 2008 , Nintendo Power listed Oracle of Seasons and Ages as the fourth and fifth best Game Boy / Game Boy Color video games respectively . The games placed joint 57th in Official Nintendo Magazine 's 100 greatest Nintendo games of all time . Game Informer 's Ben Reeves called them the 10th best Game Boy games collectively . The interconnection was seen as one of the highlight features of the titles . The ability to play the games in reverse order after completion increases the replay value , as does trading passwords between the two . GamesRadar listed The Legend of Zelda : Oracle of Seasons / Ages as one of the titles they want in the 3DS Virtual Console , both Oracle of Ages and Oracle of Seasons were later released on the platform May 30 , 2013 . 
 Critics enjoyed the graphics ; GamePro called Seasons " bright and colorful " with " surprisingly expressive and well @-@ designed " animations , and Gaming Target said Ages is " beautiful and creative " , with " meticulous attention to detail " . Gaming Age called both games " the pinnacle of good graphics on the Game Boy Color system " . Although the two share graphics to a large extent , Seasons is distinguished by swapping the color palette to reflect the current season . IGN felt that the expressive colors used for the changing seasons made Seasons the more graphically impressive of the two . 
 Reviews of the audio were mixed . Reviewers noted that the sound was hampered by the poor quality of the Game Boy Color 's speakers , although it fared favorably compared with other games for the system . The selection of songs was praised for complementing familiar Zelda songs and sounds with new music . The Zelda theme and the traditional sound effect played upon solving a puzzle were considered welcome additions , but other sound effects were criticized as simplistic " beeps " . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Two game books were released based on the games as part of the Nintendo You Decide on the Adventure series by Scholastic . Both were written by Craig Wessel and based on the events in the games with few minor differences . The first one , based on Oracle of Seasons , was published in October 2001 . The second , based on Oracle of Ages , was published in January 2002 . 
 = Babakotia = 
 Babakotia is an extinct genus of medium @-@ sized lemur , or strepsirrhine primate , from Madagascar that contains a single species , Babakotia radofilai . Together with Palaeopropithecus , Archaeoindris , and Mesopropithecus , it forms the family Palaeopropithecidae , commonly known as the sloth lemurs . The name Babakotia comes from the Malagasy name for the indri , babakoto , to which it and all other sloth lemurs are closely related . Due to its mix of morphological traits that show intermediate stages between the slow @-@ moving smaller sloth lemurs and the suspensory large sloth lemurs , it has helped determine the relationship between both groups and the closely related and extinct monkey lemurs . 
 Babakotia radofilai and all other sloth lemurs share many traits with living sloths , demonstrating convergent evolution . It had long forearms , curved digits , and highly mobile hip and ankle joints . Its skull was more heavily built than that of indriids , but not as much as in the larger sloth lemurs . Its dentition is similar to that of all other indriids and sloth lemurs . It lived in the northern part of Madagascar and shared its range with at least two other sloth lemur species , Palaeopropithecus ingens and Mesopropithecus dolichobrachion . Babakotia radofilai was primarily a leaf @-@ eater ( folivore ) , though it also ate fruit and hard seeds . It is known only from subfossil remains and may have died out shortly after the arrival of humans on the island , but not enough radiocarbon dating has been done with this species to know for certain . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name of the genus Babakotia derives from the Malagasy common name for the Indri , babakoto , a close relative of Babakotia . The species name , radofilai , was chosen in honor of French mathematician and expatriate Jean <unk> , an avid <unk> who mapped the caves where remains of Babakotia radofilai were first found . 
 = = Classification and phylogeny = = 
 Babakotia radofilai is the sole member of the genus Babakotia and belongs to the family Palaeopropithecidae , which includes three other genera of sloth lemurs : Palaeopropithecus , Archaeoindris , and Mesopropithecus . This family in turn belongs to the infraorder Lemuriformes , which includes all the Malagasy lemurs . 
 The first subfossil remains of Babakotia radofilai were discovered as part of a series of expeditions following upon discoveries of Jean <unk> and two Anglo @-@ Malagasy reconnaissance expeditions in 1981 and 1986 – 7 . The second wave of research was launched in the 1980s by biological anthropologist Elwyn L. Simons who unearthed in 1988 at a cave known as <unk> in the Ankarana Massif , northern Madagascar a nearly complete skeleton and skull in addition to the remains of roughly a dozen other individuals . Identified immediately as a sloth lemur ( <unk> ) upon its discovery , Babakotia along with Mesopropithecus helped to settle a debate about the relationship between the sloth lemurs , the monkey lemurs ( family Archaeolemuridae ) and the living indriids . The monkey lemurs had skulls that more closely resembled the indriids , but their teeth were very specialized and unlike those of the indriids . The larger sloth lemurs , on the other hand , retained a dentition similar to living indriids , yet differed by having more robust and specialized skulls . Babakotia and Mesopropithecus not only shared the indriid dentition , but also the indriid @-@ like skulls , providing evidence that sloth lemurs were most closely related to living indriids , with monkey lemurs as a sister group to both . Furthermore , the discovery of Babakotia helped to demonstrate that the ancestral indriids were not " <unk> leapers " ( bouncing rapidly from tree to tree ) like living indriids , but vertical climbers and hanging feeders , and possibly occasional leapers . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 Weighing between 16 and 20 kg ( 35 and 44 lb ) , Babakotia radofilai was a medium @-@ sized lemur and noticeably smaller than the large sloth lemurs ( Archaeoindris and Palaeopropithecus ) , but larger than the small sloth lemurs ( Mesopropithecus ) . In many ways , it had an intermediate level of adaptations for suspensory behavior between the large sloth lemurs and the small sloth lemurs . This includes its highly mobile hip and ankle joints , as well as other specializations in the vertebral column , pelvis , and limbs . Its forelimbs were 20 % longer than its hind limbs , giving it a higher intermembral index ( ~ 119 ) than Mesopropithecus ( ~ 97 to 113 ) , suggesting that it was convergently similar to arboreal sloths . It had a reduced tarsus and curved , elongated digits , adapted for grasping and suggesting suspensory behavior . Its hind feet were reduced , making it well @-@ adapted for climbing and hanging ( like in other <unk> ) , but not leaping ( like in indriids ) . Wrist bones found in 1999 further demonstrated that this species was a vertical climber . Additionally , analysis of its semicircular canals , lumbar vertebrae and its spinous processes indicate slow movement and climbing ( <unk> ) adaptations , but not necessarily sloth @-@ like hanging , vertical clinging , or leaping . Therefore , it was likely a slow climber like a loris and also exhibited some suspensory behavior like a sloth . 
 All sloth lemurs have relatively robust skulls compared to the indriids , yet despite shared cranial features with the larger sloth lemurs , its skull still resembles that of an indri . The cranial traits shared with the other sloth lemurs include relatively small orbits , robust zygomatic arches , and a mostly rectangular hard palate . The small orbits taken into consideration with the relative size of the optic canal suggest that Babakotia had low visual acuity , which is typical for lemurs . The skull length averages 144 mm ( 5 @.@ 7 in ) . 
 The dental formula of Babakotia radofilai was the same as the other sloth lemurs and indriids : either 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 31 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 3 or 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 32 @.@ 0 @.@ 2 @.@ 3 × 2 = 30 . It is unclear whether one of the teeth in the permanent dentition is an incisor or canine , resulting in these two conflicting dental formulae . Regardless , the lack of either a lower canine or incisor results in a four @-@ tooth toothcomb instead of the more typical six @-@ tooth strepsirrhine toothcomb . Babakotia radofilai differed slightly from indriids in having somewhat elongated premolars . Its cheek teeth had broad shearing crests and crenulated enamel . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Like all other lemurs , Babakotia radofilai was endemic to Madagascar . Its remains have only been found in limestone caves at the Ankarana Massif within the Ankarana Reserve and at Anjohibe , indicating a range across the extreme north and northwest of the island . The restricted range of this arboreal primate , particularly during a time when much of the island was blanketed in forest , might have been due to habitat specificity , competitive exclusion , or some other unknown factor . It was sympatric ( occurred together ) with Palaeopropithecus maximus and Mesopropithecus dolichobrachion . 
 Based on its size , the morphology of its molars , and microwear analysis on its teeth , Babakotia radofilai was likely a folivore , while supplementing its diet with fruit and hard seeds . In all sloth lemurs , including Babakotia radofilai , the permanent teeth erupted early , a trait seen in indriids that improves survivability of juveniles during the first dry season following weaning . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 Because it died out relatively recently and is only known from subfossil remains , it is considered to be a modern form of Malagasy lemur . Babakotia radofilai lived during the Holocene epoch and is thought to have disappeared shortly after the arrival of humans to the island , possibly within the last 1000 years . However , the only radiocarbon date that has been reported for it dates back to about 3100 – 2800 BCE . 
 = Howard Sims = 
 Howard " Sandman " Sims ( January 24 , 1917 – May 20 , 2003 ) was an African @-@ American tap dancer who began his career in vaudeville . He was skilled in a style of dancing that he performed in a wooden sandbox of his own construction , and acquired his nickname from the sand he sprinkled to alter and amplify the sound of his dance steps . " They called the board my Stradivarius , " Sims said of his sandbox . 
 From the 1950s to the year 2000 , Sims was a regular attraction — a " fixture " — at Harlem 's noted Apollo Theater , comedically ushering failed acts offstage with a hook , broom or other prop . He was also involved in New York City 's Hoofers Club , a venue primarily for Black tap dancers . 
 As part of the resurgence of interest in tap dancing in the 1980s , Sandman Sims served as a cultural ambassador , representing the United States with dance performances around the world . He was featured in the 1989 dance film Tap , along with Sammy Davis Jr . , Gregory Hines and Savion Glover , demonstrating classic challenge dancing . Sims also appeared in a 1990 episode of The Cosby Show as Rudy 's tap dancing teacher , facing off against Cliff ( Bill Cosby ) in a good @-@ natured tap challenge . 
 In her review of the play based on his life , New York Times critic Anna Kisselgoff wrote , " Sims is a virtuoso among virtuosos — in a class by himself . To say Mr. Sims dances on sand is like saying Philippe Petit is a tightrope walker . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Fort Smith , Arkansas on January 24 , 1917 , Sims was one of 12 children . The family soon relocated to Los Angeles , California , where he was raised . Describing his childhood , Sims said , " It was just a whole big dancing family . " He learned to dance from his father , and said he was dancing as soon as he could walk . He began tap @-@ dancing at the age of 3 . He attributed some of his early love for tap dancing in particular to his mother , exasperated that he kept wearing out the toes of his shoes , putting steel taps on the shoes . Along with his brothers , Sims was dancing on the sidewalks of Los Angeles from a young age . At the age of 14 , peeping in the windows of a dance school got Sims arrested for loitering , but he was able to dance his way to freedom , convincing a judge that his reason for being on that street was legitimate . 
 As a young man , despite his dance talent , Sims aspired to be not a professional dancer , but a professional boxer . After twice breaking his hand , he decided he needed a different means of making a living . Sims had noticed that boxing audiences reacted positively to the way he would dance in the rosin box before getting into the ring , and especially to the distinctive sound his dancing made moving the rosin granules around the wooden box . He began to consider dancing as a career alternative . Sims experimented with several different methods of reproducing the rosin box effect , gluing sandpaper to either his shoes or his dancing mat , but the sandpaper created too much wear on the other surface . Finally he found the solution : loose sand in a low @-@ lipped box . " People went for the scraping sound ... So I made a sound board by sprinkling sand on a flat platform . That was in 1935 . " His sandbox remained his trademark throughout his career , with some venues even telling Sims , " If you don 't bring your sandbox , don 't come at all . " 
 During this period , it was common for dancers to carry tap shoes with them and , when they encountered another dancer on the street , throw down their shoes by way of challenge . The culture of street dancing in the 1920s has been compared to the rise of break dancing six decades later . As the journal Jump Cut described it , " ' challenge dancing , ' in which each performer tries to outdo the other , is part of tap dancing 's heritage , something like the jazz solos in which musicians try to outshine one another . " Sims later described how the atmosphere of these dance challenges was at least as much collegial as combative , and how dancers learned from one another in what became essentially " open air dance schools " . Despite performing at various vaudeville venues , Sims found neither fame nor success as a dancer in Los Angeles . In 1947 , he tagged along on one of his professional @-@ boxer friend Archie Moore 's cross @-@ country drives , and settled in New York City . 
 = = Harlem = = 
 After arriving in Harlem , Sims began performing on the street as he had done in California , but faced stiff competition from other innovative dancers : " I knew people who danced on dinner plates ... There was a man who could dance on newspapers without tearing them . And another who constructed a gigantic xylophone to tap on . " He performed on corners in between working whatever jobs he could find , and then discovered the " Amateur Night " stage on Wednesdays at the Apollo Theater , where he soon gained local notoriety . He eventually won the Amateur Night competition a record @-@ breaking 25 times , after which a rule was instituted that performers could no longer compete once they had earned four first prizes . 
 When big name dancers played The Apollo , there was nothing in the audience but dancers with their shoes , " said Sandman Sims . " Up in the balcony dancers , and the first six rows , you saw nothing but tap @-@ dancers , want @-@ to @-@ be tap @-@ dancers , gonna @-@ be tap @-@ dancers , tried @-@ to @-@ be tap @-@ dancers . That 's the reason a guy would want to dance at The Apollo . 
 By the mid @-@ 1950s , he had been hired as the Apollo 's stage manager , and soon began his role as the Apollo 's famed " executioner " , chasing Amateur Night contestants the crowd disapproved of off the stage with a shepherd 's crook ( known since vaudeville times as " the hook " ) a broom , or other props , while dressed in a variety of wacky costumes , whether long underwear , a clown suit , or even a diaper . Backstage , however , he would console defeated contestants with the story of his having been booed off ten times before he finally got to finish his own act . Sims would play " executioner " until shortly after Time Warner took over the Apollo in 1999 . 
 Having found work dancing did not stop him from dancing on the street , however . " If I saw a dancer , I 'd challenge him . I didn 't care who it was . The way to get known in New York was to be the best . That 's what I strived to be . " Part of the culture of street challenges , as in Los Angeles , was that competing dancers would also learn from one another . 
 A significant change to Sims 's dancing style came about as a result of his interaction with Harlem 's hoofers , practitioners of a variation on the tap he had learned on the west coast . Sims would later define the main difference between tap and hoofing as being that tap focuses on the heel and toe whereas hoofers " use the whole foot " . As a result of the synergy between hoofing technique and his unique use of a sandbox , his routines were described as being " as rich in sounds and textures as they were in steps . " Sims himself put it , " The feet are a set of drums . " 
 Constance Valis Hill , in her 2009 survey Tap Dancing America : A Cultural History , described the hoofers ' mecca thusly : 
 At the Hoofers Club , rookie and veteran , mostly [ B ] lack male tap dancers assembled to share with , steal from , and challenge each other ; there , new standards were set for competition . These were nothing like the formalized buck @-@ dancing competitions of Tammany Hall , where judges sat beside , before , and beneath the stage to evaluate the [ dancers ' ] clarity , speed , and presentation . The Hoofers Club comprised a more informal panel of peers , whose judgments could be cruel and mocking and were driven by an insistence on innovation . " Survive or die " was the credo . In an eccentric fusion of imitation and innovation , young dancers were forced to find their style and rhythmic voice . It was said that on the wall of the Hoofers Club was written : " Thou shalt not copy each other 's steps — Exactly . " 
 Though he frequently took opportunities to explain the difference between tap and hoofing to the press in later years , and tended to refer to himself as a hoofer rather than a tap dancer , Sims did practice both forms of dance . In 1949 , motivated by the death of Bill " Bojangles " Robinson , Sims became a founding member of the Original <unk> , another fellowship of tap dancers that became a source of mentor @-@ student relationships and would help bring about the revival of tap in the 1970s and 1980s . 
 = = Decline and revival of tap = = 
 Tap dancing lost popularity with audiences beginning in the late 1940s . A number of causes factored into this decline , among them the going out of style of vaudeville @-@ style variety shows ; a new tax that forced many ballrooms to close and thus closed venues to the big bands with whom tap dancers had used to perform ; trends in music that favored smaller , more intimate groups of performers ; and concomitant increases in interest among audiences in watching formal modern dance and ballet performances . Sims was quoted as having said of the period that " [ t ] ap didn 't die ... It was just neglected . " 
 With paying gigs harder to find and paying less , Sims turned to other sources of income . Despite not having had any formal instruction himself , he taught dance , including to such later stars as Gregory Hines and Ben Vereen . He also taught footwork to boxing greats Sugar Ray Robinson and Muhammad Ali . Less glamorously , he ran a café , and even worked as a carpenter and a mechanic . Despite the lean times for hoofers , Sims was always able to put food on the table for his family , having married in 1959 . 
 The late 1960s brought the beginning of a wave of nostalgia for tap , and Sims found his dance skills in demand again . In 1969 , he was part of the all @-@ star cast of Tap Happening , a revue that played Off @-@ Broadway . Tap Happening was popular enough to run for several years . 
 The crescendo of interest in tap dancing continued , and in 1972 , Sims danced in the production Best of the Hoofers at the Orpheum Theatre . " <unk> is not a dying art form , " he asserted in 1977 , and subsequent events would prove him right . 
 1979 saw the release of No Maps on My Taps , which featured Sims facing off against fellow tap stars Chuck Green — who had served as Sims 's mentor during his early years in New York — and Bunny Briggs , in a three @-@ way dance challenge . The documentary also reunited him with bandleader Lionel Hampton , whom he had toured with in years past . 
 In 1980 , a far cry from the tiny venues he had been lucky to play just a few years earlier , Sims performed before a crowd of 2 @,@ 600 fans at the Lincoln Center during the Newport Jazz Festival . Later that year , Sims was one of the instructor @-@ performers of the By Word of Foot " teach @-@ in " series , spending a week demonstrating his hoofing techniques for a new generation of tap enthusiasts . 
 As part of New York 's leg of the 1981 Newport Jazz Festival ( which spanned both NYC and its home city of Newport , Rhode Island , that year ) , he performed with former Cotton Club bandleader Cab Calloway in a production called Stompin ' at the Savoy . A few weeks later , Sims was on stage at the American Dance Festival , dancing both with and without his sandbox . 
 By 1982 , Sims was part of a promotional tour reviving interest in No Maps on My Taps with co @-@ stars Bunny Briggs and Chuck Green , their pre @-@ screening performances backed by Cab Calloway . Even as booked performances were coming more regularly , Sims never stopped participating in street @-@ corner challenges , encouraging younger generations of dancers and inviting them to learn his moves . 
 The National Endowment for the Arts granted Sims a $ 5 @,@ 000 National Heritage Fellowship in 1984 . " I thought I was making noise all these years , " Sims said of the award . " Now they 're calling it culture . " He used the funds to teach dance to children in Harlem , using a parking lot in lieu of a formal dance studio , drawing on his own youth learning dance on the street . Sims would later explain , " most people wait [ to study dance ] until after they 've grown up — and then it 's too late . " That same year , <unk> Ira Bernstein received an NEA Folk Arts Apprenticeship grant " [ t ] o study traditional [ B ] lack tap dance with master dancer Howard ' Sandman ' Sims . " Sims loved to teach ; his son recounted how Sandman would " stop every kid he saw and show them a step and get them to copy a step . He enjoyed that more than performing in front of an audience . " 
 = = = The Apollo reopens = = = 
 Meanwhile , Harlem 's Apollo Theater , where Sims had served for years as Amateur Night 's " executioner " , had been closed for most of a decade . Then , following an extensive renovation , the venue reopened in 1985 , bringing increased attention to both the Apollo and his role there . " I 'm their protector , not the executioner , " he explained to The Washington Post . " Because that audience can get really hostile . " Sims described seeing displeased audiences throw bottles and even horseshoes at performers who he did not hustle off stage fast enough . When The New York Times interviewed him about his " executioner " role , he said of the acts that got booed off , " I tell them to work on their act and come back , " encouraging them to try again . 
 In 1986 , Sims starred in The Tap Tradition at Symphony Space New York ( which also hosted a showing of No Maps on My Taps ) , earning a rave review from The New York Times . He also made a brief appearance in a play based on his life , The Sand Dancer , which was written by poet Sandra Hochman and starred <unk> Gantt , and which received another rave review : " Sims is a virtuoso among virtuosos — in a class by himself . To say Mr. Sims dances on sand is like saying Philippe Petit is a tightrope walker . " And he traveled to Los Angeles to perform in a production called Essence of Rhythm with fellow tap stars including Charles " Honi " Coles and Jimmy <unk> . 
 Sandman Sims was the guest star of Late Night with David Letterman on May 14 , 1987 . It 's Showtime at the Apollo , a TV broadcast of the Apollo Theater 's Amateur Night performances , began broadcasting in September 1987 on NBC stations , bringing awareness of Sims 's " executioner " role to a wider audience . 
 A particularly busy year , 1988 saw Sims tour the world as a cultural ambassador on behalf of the U.S. State Department , traveling to over 50 countries in a span of 11 months . 
 By 1989 , Sims 's popularity was at an all @-@ time high , and he told the Associated Press , " I can 't fulfill all the work they give me . [ … ] I can 't walk out on the street without somebody showing me a time step . " Tap dancing 's popularity was nearing a new peak as well , with three major American cities ( Houston , Texas ; Portland , Oregon ; Washington , D.C. ) hosting tap @-@ dance festivals . In movie theaters , the dance drama Tap was introducing Sims 's footwork ( and that of his former student Gregory Hines ) to audiences who had never had the opportunity to see him perform before . 
 Playing a thinly @-@ fictionalized version of himself named " Mr. Sims " , Sims made a 1990 appearance on The Cosby Show , then one of the most popular programs on television . " Mr. Sims " was the dance instructor the <unk> signed their young daughter Rudy up with in order to help her prepare for a class assignment about the Harlem Renaissance . During the episode , Cliff Huxtable ( Bill Cosby ) challenged " Mr. Sims " to a dance @-@ off , part tribute to and part parody of Sims 's real @-@ life tap challenges , which Sims won handily . Later that same year , the Apollo Theater played host to Rat @-@ a @-@ Tat @-@ Tap , another tap @-@ dance festival , and the Sandman , " always a deserved audience favorite at tap festivals , " was a featured performer there alongside his Tap co @-@ stars Savion Glover and Gregory Hines . 
 Sims was a featured performer at the third annual celebration of National Tap Dance Day on May 30 , 1993 . 
 In 1998 , the New York Committee to Celebrate National Tap Dance Day and the Young People 's Tap Conference honored Sandman Sims for his contributions to the art of hoofing . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Sandman Sims , particularly in his role as Apollo Theater executioner , has been referenced frequently in African @-@ American culture . 
 On April 5 , 2000 , he was invoked by Huey Freeman in the long @-@ running comic strip The Boondocks , who responded to an ineptly @-@ told joke by saying , " Where is Sandman Sims when you need him ... " 
 Performance artist Holly Bass , along with other dancers , put on another play about Sims 's life at the Smithsonian Institution 's American History Museum ( which was then hosting an exhibit on the Apollo Theater ) on July 10 , 2010 . 
 President Barack Obama , referring to his own performance singing on the Apollo Theater stage ( albeit not on Amateur Night ) the evening before his 2012 State of the Union address , said , " Sandman did not come out ! " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 While Sims had a first marriage which produced his first child Diane Sims , he later married his second wife , Solange . They would have 1 son together , Howard Sims Jr . , as well as 5 grandchildren and 1 great @-@ grandchild . 
 Particularly in later years , Sims sometimes claimed not to be certain of his birth year , at times saying it was " a matter of opinion . " Asked by a fan how old he was , Sims once replied , " Any number can play . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Sims died on May 20 , 2003 in New York City . He had suffered from Alzheimer 's disease . 
 A memorial service for Sims was held May 28 , 2003 at the Apollo Theater . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 No Maps on My Taps ( 1979 ) — Himself 
 Uptown : A Tribute to the Apollo Theatre ( 1980 ) — Himself 
 The Cotton Club ( 1984 ) — <unk> 
 Motown Returns to the Apollo ( 1985 ) — Himself 
 The Kennedy Center Honors : A Celebration of the Performing Arts ( 1987 ) — Himself 
 It 's Showtime at the Apollo ( 1987 – 2000 ) — Himself / the " executioner " 
 Harlem Nights ( 1989 ) — <unk> 
 Tap ( 1989 ) — Sandman 
 Tap Dance in America ( 1989 ) — Himself 
 The Cosby Show ( 1990 ) — season 6 , episode 19 , " Mr. Sandman " — Mr. Sims 
 = Hoochie Coochie Man = 
 " Hoochie Coochie Man " ( originally titled " I 'm Your Hoochie <unk> Man " ) is a blues standard written by Willie Dixon and first recorded by Muddy Waters in 1954 . The song references hoodoo folk magic elements and makes novel use of a stop @-@ time musical arrangement . It became one of Waters ' most popular and identifiable songs and helped secure Dixon 's role as Chess Records ' chief songwriter . 
 The song is a classic of Chicago blues and one of Waters ' first recordings with a full backing band . Dixon 's lyrics build on Waters ' earlier use of braggadocio and themes of fortune and sex appeal . The stop @-@ time riff was " soon absorbed into the lingua franca of blues , R & B , jazz , and rock and roll " , according to musicologist Robert Palmer , and is used in several popular songs . When Bo Diddley adapted it for " I 'm a Man " , it became one of the most recognizable musical phrases in blues . 
 After the song 's initial success in 1954 , Waters recorded several live and new studio versions . The original appears on the 1958 The Best of Muddy Waters album and many compilations . Numerous musicians have recorded " Hoochie Coochie Man " in a variety of styles , making it one of the most interpreted Waters and Dixon songs . The Blues Foundation and the Grammy Hall of Fame recognize the song for its influence in popular music and the US Library of Congress ' National Recording Registry selected it for preservation in 2004 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Between 1947 and 1954 , Muddy Waters charted a number of hits recording for Chess Records and its <unk> predecessor . One of his first singles was " Gypsy Woman " , recorded in 1947 . The song shows Delta blues guitar @-@ style roots , but the lyrics place " emphasis on supernatural elements — gypsies , fortune telling , [ and ] luck " , according to musicologist Robert Palmer . 
 Waters expanded the theme in " Louisiana Blues " , which was recorded in 1950 with Little Walter accompanying on harmonica . He sings of traveling to New Orleans , Louisiana , to acquire a mojo hand , a hoodoo amulet or talisman ; with its magical powers , he hopes " to show all you good lookin ' women just how to treat your man " . Similar lyrics appeared in " Hoodoo Hoodoo " , a 1946 recording by John Lee " Sonny Boy " Williamson : " Well now I 'm goin ' down to Louisiana , and buy me another mojo hand " . Although Waters was ambivalent about hoodoo , he saw the music as having its own power : 
 When you 're <unk> ' them songs that are coming from down that way [ Mississippi Delta ] , you can 't leave out somethin ' about that mojo thing . Because this is what black people really believed in at that time ... even today [ circa 1980 ] , when you play the old blues like me , you can 't get from around that . 
 From 1946 to 1951 , Willie Dixon sang and played bass with the Big Three Trio . After the group disbanded , he worked for Chess Records as a recording session arranger and bassist . Dixon wrote several songs , but label co @-@ owner Leonard Chess failed to show any interest at first . Finally , in 1953 , Chess used two of Dixon 's songs : " Too Late " , recorded by Little Walter , and " Third Degree " , recorded by Eddie Boyd . " Third Degree " became Dixon 's first composition to enter the record charts . In September , Waters recorded his " Mad Love ( I Want You to Love Me ) " , which Dixon biographer Mitsutoshi Inaba calls " a test piece for the forthcoming ' Hoochie Coochie Man ' " because of its shared lyrical and musical elements . The song became Waters ' first record chart success in nearly two years . 
 The term " hoochie coochie " , with variations in the spelling , is used in different contexts . Appearing in the late 19th century , the hoochie coochie was a sexually provocative dance . Don <unk> identifies it as " a precursor of the striptease ... from the belly dance but punctuated with bumps and grinds and a combination of exposure , erotic movements , and teasing . " By one account , it first appeared at the Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition in 1876 and was a popular attraction at the 1893 Chicago World 's Fair . The dance is associated with entertainers Little Egypt and Sophie Tucker , but by the 1910s it declined in popularity . " Hoochie coochie " is also used to refer to a sexually attractive person or a practitioner of hoodoo . In his autobiography , I Am the Blues , Dixon included " hoochie coochie man " in his examples of a seer or a clairvoyant with a connection to folklore of the American South : " This guy is a hoodoo man , this lady is a witch , this other guy 's a hoochie coochie man , she 's some kind of voodoo person " . 
 = = Composition and recording = = 
 Not long after the success of " Mad Love " in November 1953 , Dixon approached Leonard Chess with " Hoochie Coochie Man " , a new song he felt was right for Waters . Chess responded , " if Muddy likes it , give it to him " . At the time , Waters was performing at the Club Zanzibar in Chicago . During an intermission , Dixon showed him the song . According to Dixon , Waters took to the tune immediately because it had so many familiar elements and he was able to learn enough to perform it that night . Jimmy Rogers , who was Waters ' second guitarist , remembered that it took a little longer : 
 Dixon came to the club and he would hum it to Muddy and write the lyrics out . Muddy would work them around for a while until he got it down where he could understand it and fool around with it . He would be onstage and try it out , do a few licks of it . We were building the arrangement , that 's what we were really doing . 
 On January 7 , 1954 , Waters entered the recording studio with his band to record the song . Considered the classic Chicago blues band , music critic Bill Janovitz described Waters ' group as " a who 's who of bluesmen " . Waters sings and plays electric guitar along with Rogers , blues harmonica virtuoso Little Walter , and drummer Elgin Evans , all of whom had been performing with Waters since 1951 . ( Fred Below , who replaced Evans during 1954 , is sometimes listed as the drummer . ) Pianist Otis Spann , who joined in 1953 , and Dixon , in his debut on double bass for Waters ' recording session , round out the group . Two takes of the song were recorded . Although there are some moments in the alternate take when a player 's timing rushes or drags perceptibly , because the band is so tight , the difference with the master is only six seconds ( for a nearly three @-@ minute song ) . 
 " Hoochie Coochie Man " follows a sixteen @-@ bar blues progression , which is an expansion of the well @-@ known twelve @-@ bar blues pattern . The first four bars are doubled in length so the harmony remains on the tonic for eight bars or one @-@ half of the sixteen bar progression . Dixon explained that expanding twelve @-@ bar blues was in response to amplification , which gave instruments more sustain . The extra bars also increase the contrasting effect of the repeating stop @-@ time musical figure or riff . For the second eight bars , the song reverts to the last eight of the twelve @-@ bar progression , which functions as a refrain or hook . The different textures provides the tune with a strong contrast , which helps underscore the lyrics . The song is performed at a moderate blues tempo ( 72 beats per minute ) in the key of A. It is notated in 128 time and contains three sixteen @-@ bar sections . 
 A key feature of the song is the use of stop time , or pauses in the music , during the first half of the progression . This musical device is commonly heard in New Orleans jazz , when the instrumentation briefly stops , allowing for a short instrumental solo before resuming . However , Waters ' and Dixon 's use of stop time serves to heighten the tension through repetition , followed by a vocal rather than an instrument fill . The accompanying riff , which Dixon described as a five @-@ note figure , is similar to that of " Mad Love " . He attributed it to the band and using such a phrase for eight bars was a new approach . Although Palmer comments that the entire group phrases the riff in unison , Boone describes it as a " heavy , unhurried counterpoint by all the instruments together " . Campbell identifies the opening as actually having " two competing riffs " or contrapuntal motion , with one played by Little Walter on an amplified harmonica and another by Waters on electric guitar . 
 For the second eight @-@ bars of the progression , the song follows the standard I – IV – V7 structure , which maintains its connection to traditional blues . The whole band plays it as a shuffle with a triplet rhythm , which Campbell describes as a " free @-@ for @-@ all [ with ] harmonica trills , guitar riffs , piano chords , thumping bass , [ and ] shuffle pattern on the drums " . He adds that this type of heavy sound was rarely heard in small music combos before rock . However , unlike the polyphony of New Orleans jazz , the instrumentation parallels Waters ' aggressive vocal approach and reinforces the lyrics . The players use of amplification , pushed to the point of distortion , is a key feature of Chicago blues and another rock precedent . In particular , Little Walters ' overdriven saxophone @-@ like harmonica playing weaves in and out of the vocal lines , which heightens the drama . 
 = = Lyrics and interpretation = = 
 " Hoochie Coochie Man " is characterized as a " self @-@ mythologizing testament " by Janovitz . The narrator boasts of his good fortune and his effect on women as aided by hoodoo . Waters explored similar themes in earlier songs , but his approach was more subtle . According to Palmer , Dixon upped the ante with more " flamboyance , macho posturing , and extra @-@ generous helping of hoodoo sensationalism " . Dixon claimed that the idea of a seer was inspired by history and the Bible . The verses in the song 's three sixteen @-@ bar sections proceed chronologically . The opening verse starts before the narrator is born and references Waters ' 1947 song " Gypsy Woman " : 
 As a boy in the South , Dixon recalled gypsies in covered wagons plying their trade from town to town . The fortune tellers would emphasize auspicious circumstances to enhance their earnings , especially when doing readings for pregnant women . In the second section , the narrative is in the present and several references are made to charms used by hoodoo conjurers . These include a black cat bone , a John the conqueror root , and a mojo , the last of which figured in " Louisiana Blues " . Their magical powers assure that the gypsy 's prophecy will be borne out : women and the rest of world will take notice . The song concludes with a final section which projects the good fortune into the future . The number seven is prominent : on the seventh hour , on the seventh day , etc . The stringing together of sevens is another good omen and is analogous to the seventh son of a seventh son of folklore . Dixon later expanded the theme in his 1955 song " The Seventh Son " . 
 Each section is linked by a refrain or recurring chorus . It functions as a hook and it differs from the usual " free @-@ associative aspect " of traditional blues . Writer Benjamin Filene sees this and Dixon 's desire to tell complete stories , with the verses building on each other , as sharing elements of pop music . The chorus , " But you know I 'm here , everybody knows I 'm here , Well you know I 'm the hoochie coochie man , everybody knows I 'm here " , confirms the narrator 's identity as both the subject of the gypsy 's prophecy as well as an omnipotent seer himself . Dixon felt that the lyrics expressed part of the audience 's unfulfilled desire to brag , while Waters later admitted that they were supposed to have a comic effect . Music historian Ted Gioia points to the underlying theme of sexuality and virility as sociologically significant . He sees it as challenge to the fear of miscegenation in the dying days of racial segregation in the United States . Record producer Marshall Chess took a simpler view : " It was sex . If you have ever seen Muddy then , the effect he had on women [ was clear ] . Because the blues , you know , has always been a women 's market " . 
 = = Releases and charts = = 
 In early 1954 , Chess Records issued " I 'm Your Hoochie <unk> Man " backed with " She 's So Pretty " on both the standard ten @-@ inch 78 rpm and the newer seven @-@ inch 45 rpm record single formats . It soon became the biggest hit of Waters ' career . The single entered Billboard magazine 's Rhythm & Blues Records charts on March 13 , 1954 , and reached number three on the Juke Box chart and number eight on the Best Seller chart . It remained on the charts for 13 weeks , making it Waters ' longest charting record up to that time ( two more Waters @-@ Dixon songs , " Just Make Love to Me ( I Just Want to Make Love to You " ) and " Close to You " , both later also lasted 13 weeks ) . 
 Chess included the song on Waters ' first album , the 1958 compilation The Best of Muddy Waters , but retitled it " Hoochie Coochie " . Numerous later Waters ' official compilations contain it , such as Sail On ; McKinley Morganfield a.k.a. Muddy Waters ; The Chess Box ; His Best : 1947 to 1955 ; The Best of Muddy Waters – The Millennium Collection ; The Anthology ( 1947 – 1972 ) ; Hoochie Coochie Man : The Complete Chess Masters , Vol . 2 : 1952 – 1958 ; and The Definitive Collection . Marshall Chess arranged for Waters to remake the song using psychedelic rock @-@ style instrumentation for the 1968 album Electric Mud , which was an attempt to reach a new audience . In 1972 , Waters recorded an " unplugged " rendition of the song , with Louis Myers on acoustic guitar and George " Mojo " Buford on <unk> harmonica . Chess released it in 1994 on the Waters <unk> collection One More Mile . He revisited the song with original guitarist Jimmy Rogers in 1977 . They re @-@ recorded it for I 'm Ready , the Grammy Award @-@ winning album produced by Johnny Winter . 
 Waters featured the song in his performances and several live recordings have been issued . His acclaimed At Newport 1960 , one of the first live blues albums , includes a rendition by his later band with Spann , Pat Hare , James Cotton , and Francis Clay . Other live albums have versions that span his career with different backup bands . These include Live in 1958 ( recorded in England in 1958 with Spann and Chris Barber 's trad jazz band , released in 1993 and re @-@ released as Collaboration in 1995 ) ; Authorized Bootleg : Live at the Fillmore Auditorium – San Francisco Nov 04 – 06 1966 ( released 2009 ) ; The Lost Tapes ( recorded 1971 , released 1999 ) ; Muddy " Mississippi " Waters – Live ( recorded 1977 , released 1979 ) ; and Live at the Checkerboard Lounge , Chicago 1981 with members of the Rolling Stones ( released 2012 ) . 
 = = Influence and recognition = = 
 " Hoochie Coochie Man " represents Waters ' recording transition from an electrified , but more traditional Delta @-@ based blues of the late 1940s – early 1950s to a newer Chicago blues ensemble sound . The song was important to Dixon 's career and signaled a change as well – Chess became convinced of Dixon 's value as a songwriter and secured his relationship as such with the label . Waters soon followed up with several variations on the sixteen @-@ bar stop @-@ time arrangement written by Dixon . These include " I Just Want to Make Love to You " , " I 'm Ready " , and " I 'm a Natural Born Lover " . All of these songs follow a similar lyrical theme and " helped shape Muddy Waters ' image as the testosterone king of the blues " , according to Gioia . 
 Bo Diddley modified the song 's signature riff for his March 1955 song " I 'm a Man " . He reworked it as a four @-@ note figure , which is repeated for the entire song without a progression to other chords . Music critic and writer Cub Koda calls it " the most recognizable blues lick in the world " . Waters , not to be outdone , responded two months later with an answer song to " I 'm a Man " , titled " Mannish Boy " . " Bo Diddley , he was tracking me down with my beat when he made ' I 'm a Man ' . That 's from ' Hoochie Coochie Man . ' Then I got on it with ' Mannish Boy ' and just drove him out of my way " , Waters recalled . Emphasizing the origin of Bo Diddley 's song , Waters sticks to the original first eight @-@ bar phrase from " Hoochie Coochie Man " and includes some of the hoodoo references . 
 According to Palmer , songwriters adapted the phrase for other artists and it was " soon absorbed into the lingua franca of blues , jazz , and rock and roll " . In 1955 , songwriters Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller used the riff for " Riot in Cell Block Number 9 " ( later reworked by the Beach Boys as " Student Demonstration Time " ) and " Framed " for the R & B group the Robins . " Trouble " , another Leiber and Stoller composition that uses the riff , was sung by Elvis Presley in the 1958 musical drama film King Creole . American composer Elmer Bernstein quoted the figure in another film , The Man with the Golden Arm , which received a nomination for an Academy Award for Best Original Score in 1955 . Dixon remarked , " we felt like this was a great achievement for one of these blues phrases to be used in a movie " . 
 As numerous artists recorded it in a variety of styles , " Hoochie Coochie Man " became a blues standard . Janovitz describes the song as " a vital piece of Chicago @-@ style electric blues that links the Delta to rock & roll " . Rock musicians are among the many who have interpreted it . In 1984 , Waters ' original " I 'm Your Hoochie Coochie Man " was inducted into the Blues Foundation Hall of Fame . The Foundation noted that " In addition to countless versions by Chicago blues artists , the song has been recorded by performers as diverse as Jimi Hendrix , Chuck Berry , and jazz organist Jimmy Smith " to which Grove adds B.B. King , Buddy Guy , John P. Hammond , the Allman Brothers Band , and Eric Clapton . A Grammy Hall of Fame Award followed in 1998 , which " honor [ s ] recordings of lasting qualitative or historical significance " . The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's list of the " 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll " recognizes the song 's influence on rock . Representatives of the music industry and press voted it number 226 for Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . In 2004 , the National Recording Preservation Board , advisors to the US Library of Congress , selected it for preservation in the National Recording Registry and noted the contributions of the band members . 
 = Soulmates ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Soulmates " is the tenth episode of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation 's third season , and the 40th overall episode of the series . In the episode , Leslie is disappointed when Ben rejects her romantic advances , and is surprised when she is matched with Tom in an online dating service . Meanwhile , Ron and Chris have a cook @-@ off to determine which is better : red or lean meat . The episode was written by Alan Yang and directed by Ken Whittingham . 
 After it aired , NBC launched a website for HoosierMate.com , the fictional online dating site featured in " Soulmates " . The episode featured a guest appearance by stand @-@ up comedian Kirk Fox as sewage department employee Joe , who previously appeared in the second season . Josh Pence , who appeared with Parks co @-@ star Rashida Jones in the 2010 film The Social Network , also appeared in " Soulmates " as a man wearing cowboy clothes who dates Ann . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 4 @.@ 89 million household viewers , a slight decrease from the previous original episode , " Andy and April 's Fancy Party " . It received generally positive reviews , with several commentators particularly praising the performance of Aziz Ansari as Tom Haverford . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Chris ( Rob Lowe ) enacts a government @-@ wide health initiative in Pawnee , starting by banning red meat from the city hall commissary , much to the displeasure of Ron ( Nick Offerman ) . He challenges Chris to a burger cook @-@ off to prove red meat is superior to Chris ' preferred lean meat , with red meat staying on the menu if Ron wins . Meanwhile , Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) invites Ben ( Adam Scott ) out to dinner , but he turns her down , leaving Leslie confused because she was sure Ben was attracted to her . Ann ( Rashida Jones ) , who is now dating multiple men after taking Donna 's ( Retta ) advice to be more adventurous , tells Leslie to join an online dating website called HoosierMate.com and helps set up her profile ( after Leslie 's original description of herself was " yellow haired female ; likes waffles and news " ) . 
 Leslie finds a match that is 98 percent compatible with her – a " soulmate " rating – but is horrified to discover that it is Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) . Additionally , the crude sewage department employee Joe ( Kirk Fox ) makes a romantic advance toward Leslie , prompting her to launch a " douche @-@ <unk> " to find out why she attracts the wrong type of man . Meanwhile , Chris takes Andy ( Chris Pratt ) , April ( Aubrey Plaza ) , and Ron to a health food market called Grain ' n Simple , where he gathers numerous ingredients for the perfect turkey burger , but Ron is unfazed , simply buying a pound of red meat from his favorite food market , Food and Stuff . 
 In her investigation , Leslie quickly learns Joe merely hits on any woman as long as she is not elderly . She takes Tom out to lunch to learn more about him . He responds to all of Leslie 's questions with his usual chauvinistic answers , annoying her to the point that she admits she took him out because they matched on <unk> . A delighted Tom teases Leslie the rest of the day by pretending they are a couple , but she finally silences him by kissing him . Chris notices the kiss and warns Leslie that he has a strict policy against workplace dating . 
 At the cook @-@ off , Chris prepares his meticulous turkey burgers for the judges : Tom , Donna , Jerry ( Jim O 'Heir ) , and Kyle ( Andy Forrest ) . They all love it , but give much higher praise to Ron 's simple hamburger on a bun . Initially surprised , even Chris comes to admit the burger is superior after trying it , so he agrees to reinstate red meat on the commissary menu . Chris later tells Leslie his dating policy has affected others , explaining that he earlier warned Ben not to ask out a co @-@ worker . Leslie realizes that is why Ben rejected her and is glad when Ben asks her to eat in front of her favorite city hall mural . Leslie deletes her profile on <unk> , and is relieved to learn that Tom has 26 different profiles on the site to match himself with any type of woman , although the one Leslie matched with was his " nerd " profile . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Soulmates " was written by Alan Yang and directed by Ken Whittingham . The idea of Chris ' no @-@ dating policy stemmed from real life policies in small town governments . Parks and Recreation co @-@ creator Michael Schur said although romantic obstacles between two characters are difficult to make effective and genuine , he believed the policy was realistic and fitting with the type of show . Schur said : " The ' no dating ' thing is a very big deal in government – these people are handling taxpayer money , so relationships are even more frowned upon than they are in the private sector . " 
 The episode features a fictional online dating service called HoosierMate.com , inspired by the nickname Hoosier for residents of Indiana , where Parks and Recreation is set . After the episode aired , NBC started a fake website on an actual HoosierMate.com domain , which included fake accounts for Leslie and Tom similar to those featured in " Soulmates " . Stand @-@ up comedian Kirk Fox made a guest appearance in " Soulmates " as Pawnee sewer department employee Joe , who he previously played in the second season episodes " The Camel " and " Telethon " . Josh Pence , who appeared with Parks co @-@ star Rashida Jones in the 2010 film The Social Network , also appeared in " Soulmates " as a man wearing cowboy clothes who dates Ann . 
 During one scene in " Soulmates " , Ron misunderstood a turkey burger to be " a fried turkey leg inside a grilled hamburger " . After the episode aired , the cooking website <unk> created and posted a recipe for that exact food . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Leslie asks Tom what he would ask for if given three wishes , one of them is to star in a remake of the 1991 action film Point Break playing the roles of both main characters , who are played by Keanu Reeves and Patrick Swayze . During one scene , while on hold during a telephone call , Tom sings badly out of tune to the hold music of " Forever Young " , by the German synthpop group Alphaville . At one point , Tom describes the nicknames he has for various foods , and describes sandwiches as " <unk> , <unk> or Adam <unk> " , the latter of which refers to the comedian and actor Adam Sandler . Andy tells Chris his favorite food is Skittles sandwiched between two Starburst , which he calls " Andy 's Mouth Surprise " . When Leslie describes her ideal date as a dark and mysterious man who can play the organ , Ann says she believes Leslie is describing the title character from The Phantom of the Opera , a story about a deformed man who haunts an opera hall . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Soulmates " was seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 89 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , with a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 5 share among all viewers and a 2 @.@ 4 rating / 6 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . A rating point represents one percent of the total number of television sets in American households , and a share means the percentage of television sets in use tuned to the program . The " Soulmates " rating constituted a slight decrease from the previous episode , " Andy and April 's Fancy Party " , which was seen by 5 @.@ 16 million households . 
 In its 9 : 30 p.m. timeslot , " Soulmates " was outperformed by the Fox crime drama series Bones , which was seen by 10 @.@ 96 million household viewers , and the CBS forensic crime series CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , which was seen by 8 @.@ 47 million households . It outperformed a repeat of the ABC medical drama series Grey 's Anatomy , which was seen by 3 @.@ 86 million household viewers , and an original episode of the CW Television Network drama series Nikita , which was seen by 2 @.@ 013 million households . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Soulmates " received generally positive reviews , with several commentators particularly praising the performance of Aziz Ansari . The Atlantic writer Scott Meslow said Ansari " has somehow found a way to make Tom petulant , sexist , and materialistic without ever being unlikable " . Meslow also complimented the " slight but charming " subplot about the burger cook @-@ off , and said Rob Lowe stood his own against the show 's reliable comedic stars Nick Offerman and Chris Pratt . Zap2it writer Rick Porter called " Soulmates " one of the " out @-@ and @-@ out funniest episodes of the season " and provided Ansari with the " best sustained bit of comedy he 's had in a long time " . Porter also said he appreciated how the script " wisely didn 't make much " over Ann 's dating many men , claiming the subtlety of the joke was effective . Andy Daglas of ChicagoNow also said Ansari " stole the show " and that " Soulmates " was an excellent showcase for his character , who had largely remained on the sidelines throughout the season . Daglas said the scenes with Tom mocking Leslie were effective not only due to Ansari 's performance , but also because of the genuine loyalty and admiration that had been built between the two characters . 
 The A.V. Club writer Steve Heisler called " Soulmates " one of the best Parks and Recreation episodes , and praised it for advancing its character relationships and finding " tons of natural , free @-@ flowing comedy in something incredibly mundane " , such as a conflict over burgers . Matt Fowler of IGN said he enjoyed seeing Offerman and Lowe pitted against each other , which he described as an " epic " pairing . Fowler also said he enjoyed that the script introduced " mini @-@ mysteries " that took some time to reveal , like why Ben seemed uncomfortable around Leslie , and why Leslie and Tom were a match on the dating website . Nick McHatton of TV Fanatic said he is enjoying the slow and deliberate pace at which the Leslie and Ben relationship is progressing . He also said Ansari " delivered just the right amount to creep out Leslie ( and ) keep me in fits of laughter " , and said Tom 's slang nicknames for food were " some of the funniest Tom @-@ isms he 's doled out yet " . New York magazine writer Steve Kandell said the episode demonstrates how , even several months after the addition of Lowe and Adam Scott to the cast , their presence allows for excellent new story opportunities , like the Ron and Chris cook @-@ off and Ben 's infatuation with Leslie . 
 Eric Sundermann of Hollywood.com said " Soulmates " demonstrates how Parks and Recreation is superior to other comedy shows because it " invests in its characters and really allows the audience time to get to know them " rather than depending solely on gags . Alan Sepinwall said he " laughed louder and more frequently at it than any episode so far this season " except for " Flu Season " and called the Ron and Chris subplot as " predictable as hell but perfectly @-@ executed " . Sepinwall objected to the introduction of a no @-@ dating policy simply to slow the budding romance between Leslie and Ben , and said " so much of this season has been so perfect that the rare imperfections stand out even more than they would on a weaker overall comedy " . Joel Keller of TV Squad said the no @-@ dating policy felt like a plot contrivance meant strictly to keep Ben and Leslie apart , which he felt was not good for the story . However , he complimented Leslie and Tom 's scenes together , and said the subplot was even funnier , which he called a " Ron Swanson classic " . Entertainment Weekly writer Hillary Busis said the episode was " a little too disjointed for me " , particularly because the two plots were barely associated with each other . However , she said the show included funny individual jokes , and enjoyed the moment when Leslie kissed Tom . 
 = M @-@ 87 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 87 is the designation of a former state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan , which prior to 1960 ran east – west between the towns of Fenton and Holly . The highway served as a connector between US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) and the former routing of US 10 , which ran along what is now the Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) corridor . The highway connected the downtown areas of each community as well as running through then @-@ rural areas of Genesee and Oakland counties . The trunkline was decommissioned in late 1960 , removing it from the system . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Immediately before decommissioning , M @-@ 87 began at a junction with Business US 23 ( Bus . US 23 , Leroy Street ) east of the Shiawassee River in the town of Fenton . From there the road traveled to the east along Main Street , where it crossed a branch rail line of the present @-@ day CSX <unk> and headed east out of town in Genesee County . After about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , the highway crossed into Oakland County and followed Grange Hall Road south of Seven Lakes State Park . The road then turned south in the town of Holly along Saginaw Street . Near Bevins Lake , the street curved to the east around the end of the lake . The highway turned east on Maple Street and ran south of Simonson Lake as it continued eastward out of Holly . The road crossed a branch line of the present day Canadian National Railway in Springfield Township . The trunkline continued to the east and southeast through rural areas before terminating at US 10 ( Dixie Highway ) . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 87 was assumed into the state trunkline system by July 1 , 1919 , when the system was first signed . At the time , the highway connected M @-@ 65 in Fenton with M @-@ 10 east of Holly . Later when the United States Numbered Highway System was created on November 11 , 1926 , those two highways were renumbered US 23 and US 10 respectively . The highway was fully paved in 1937 . In 1958 , Fenton was bypassed by the Fenton – Clio Expressway to the west of <unk> and the former route through downtown was redesignated Bus . US 23 . M @-@ 87 was removed from the state trunkline system and turned back to local control in late 1960 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = SMS Von der Tann = 
 SMS Von der Tann was the first battlecruiser built for the German Kaiserliche Marine , as well as Germany 's first major turbine @-@ powered warship . At the time of her construction , Von der Tann was the fastest dreadnought @-@ type warship afloat , capable of reaching speeds in excess of 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) . She was designed in response to the British Invincible class . While the German design had slightly lighter guns — 28 cm ( 11 in ) , compared to the 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 in ) Mark X mounted on the British ships — Von der Tann was faster and significantly better @-@ armored . She set the precedent of German battlecruisers carrying much heavier armor than their British equivalents , albeit at the cost of smaller guns . 
 Von der Tann participated in a number of fleet actions during the First World War , including several bombardments of the English coast . She was present at the Battle of Jutland , where she destroyed the British battlecruiser HMS Indefatigable in the opening minutes of the engagement . Von der Tann was hit several times by large @-@ caliber shells during the battle , and at one point in the engagement , the ship had all of her main battery guns out of action either due to damage or malfunction . Nevertheless , the damage was quickly repaired and the ship returned to the fleet in two months . 
 Following the end of the war in November 1918 , Von der Tann , along with most of the High Seas Fleet , was interned at Scapa Flow pending a decision by the Allies as to the fate of the fleet . The ship met her end in 1919 when German caretaker crews scuttled their ships to prevent their division among Allied navies . The wreck was raised in 1930 , and scrapped at Rosyth from 1931 to 1934 . 
 = = Development = = 
 The preceding German large cruiser design , Blücher , was an incremental increase over previous armored cruisers . Blücher was armed with twelve 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns , and designed to counter what the Germans knew about the British Invincible class , which were assumed to be larger iterations of the basic armored cruiser type . Once sufficient information about the new British cruisers became available , it was obvious that they were not simply an enlargement on previous designs but a whole new type of warship — the battlecruiser — to which Blücher was quite inferior . However , there were insufficient funds to alter Blücher 's layout , so the cruiser assigned for 1907 would have to be an entirely new design . 
 Design of Von der Tann began in August 1906 , under the name " Cruiser F " , amid disagreements over the intended role of the new ship . Admiral Tirpitz advocated a ship similar to the new British battlecruisers of the Invincible class : heavier guns , lighter armor , and higher speed with the intention of using the ship as a fleet scout and to destroy the opposing fleet 's cruisers . Tirpitz had no intention of using the ship in the main battle line . Kaiser Wilhelm II however , along with most of the Reichsmarineamt ( Imperial Navy Office ) , was in favor of incorporating the ship into the battle line after initial contact was made , which necessitated much heavier armor . This insistence upon the capability to fight in the battle line was a result of the numerical inferiority of the German High Seas fleet compared to the British Royal Navy . 
 Several design proposals were submitted , all calling for heavy main guns , between 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 in ) and 34 @.@ 3 cm ( 13 @.@ 5 in ) calibers . However , financial limitations dictated that smaller , less expensive weaponry would be used instead . The final design therefore used the same 28 cm ( 11 in ) double turret introduced for the last two Nassau @-@ class battleships — hydraulic elevated Drh LC / 1907 instead of electrical elevated Drh LC / 1906 . In compensation , the design was given a relatively heavy secondary armament . 
 At a conference in September 1906 , many of the disagreements over the ship 's design were resolved . The Naval Constructor , von <unk> , argued that since the explosive trials for the proposed protection systems for the new battlecruiser had not been completed , the construction should be postponed , to allow for any alterations to the design . He also argued that guns of 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) or 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) caliber would be sufficient to penetrate the armor of the new British battlecruisers . However , Admiral August von Heeringen , of the General Navy Department , stated that for the ship to be able to engage battleships , the 28 cm ( 11 in ) caliber guns were necessary . 
 Admiral Capelle , the deputy director of the Reichsmarineamt , stated that by mid November 1906 , the testing for the underwater protection designs would be complete . He suggested that if the torpedo bulkhead needed to be strengthened , the ship might be too heavy for the 28 cm ( 11 in ) guns , if the displacement of around 19 @,@ 000 t ( 21 @,@ 000 short tons ) was to be retained . Tirpitz refused to consider using smaller guns , even if it meant increasing the displacement of the ship . Von <unk> proposed employing a secondary battery of 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) guns instead of the 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) the design called for , but the increased weight would have made it impossible to mount eight main battery guns . 
 On 22 June 1907 , the Kaiser authorized construction of Cruiser F , to be named Von der Tann , after Ludwig Freiherr von und zu der Tann @-@ <unk> , a Bavarian general who fought in the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 . The contract was awarded to the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg , on 26 September 1907 . The keel was laid on 21 March 1908 , and the ship was launched nearly a year later , on 20 March 1909 . The source of the ship 's name was the subject of much gratitude from the Bavarian aristocracy . Newspapers at the time reported that Luitpold , the prince regent and de facto ruler of Bavaria , telegraphed a message of thanks to the German emperor , and the launch ceremony was overseen by one of Von der Tann 's descendants , also a general . He spoke to the assembled crowd , stating his hope that Von der Tann would , in his words , " go out to protect Germany 's might world @-@ trade , or , at the command of his Majesty the Emperor , to ward off an enemy who attacked the vital interests or the honour of the Empire . Might the ship acquit herself upon the ocean as the General whose name she bore had acquitted himself upon the blood @-@ drenched battlefield and bring her flag victorious out of the fight for the greatness and the honour of Germany . " The ship cost 36 @.@ 523 million Marks . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Von der Tann carried eight 28 cm ( 11 @.@ 02 in ) SK L / 45 guns , mounted in four twin turrets : one fore , one aft , and two staggered wing turrets . The guns were emplaced in the Drh.L C / 1907 turntable mount , which was traversed electrically , while the guns themselves used hydraulics to change elevation . The guns could be elevated up to 20 degrees , which enabled a maximum range of 18 @,@ 900 m ( 20 @,@ 700 yd ) . A refit in 1915 increased this to 20 @,@ 400 m ( 22 @,@ 300 yd ) . The main guns fired a 302 kg ( 670 lb ) armored @-@ piercing shell that had a muzzle velocity of 875 m / s ; the main propellant charges were encased in a brass cartridge . A total of 660 projectiles were stored in four shell rooms , each containing 165 shells . The wing turrets were staggered in such a way that all eight guns were able to fire on broadside on a very wide arc . 
 Unlike her British contemporaries , Von der Tann also carried a heavy secondary battery , consisting of ten 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 91 in ) SK L / 45 guns , casemated in MPL C / 06 pivot mounts , each with 150 high explosive and armor @-@ piercing shells . At construction , these guns could fire their 45 @.@ 3 kg ( 100 lb ) shells at targets up to 13 @,@ 500 m ( 14 @,@ 800 yd ) away ; after the 1915 refit , their maximum range was extended to 16 @,@ 800 m ( 18 @,@ 400 yd ) . She was also armed with sixteen 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 naval gun 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 46 in ) SK L / 45 guns , to defend against torpedo boats and destroyers . These were also emplaced in pivot mounts , of the MPL C / 01 @-@ 06 type , with a total of 3 @,@ 200 shells for these guns . These guns fired a 9 kg ( 20 lb ) shell at the high rate of 15 rounds per minute , up to a range of 10 @,@ 694 m ( 11 @,@ 695 yd ) , which was quite long for a smaller caliber weapon . In late 1916 , following repair work after the damage sustained during the Battle of Jutland , Von der Tann had her 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) guns removed and the firing ports welded shut . Two 8 @.@ 8 cm flak guns were installed on the aft superstructure . 
 As was customary for capital ships of the time , Von der Tann was equipped with four 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 72 in ) torpedo tubes , with a total of 11 torpedoes . These were located in the bow , the stern , and two on the broadside . The torpedoes carried a 110 kg ( 240 lb ) warhead , and had an effective range of 2 km ( 1 @.@ 04 nmi ) when set for a speed of 32 kn ( 59 km / h ) , and 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 81 nmi ) at 36 kn ( 67 km / h ) . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Because the Von der Tann was designed to fight in the battle line , her armor was much thicker than that of the British battlecruisers . Von der Tann weighed over 2 @,@ 000 tonnes more than the Indefatigable class , and used 10 % more of her weight for armor than the battlecruisers she faced at the Battle of Jutland . 
 Von der Tann 's armor consisted of Krupp cemented and nickel steel . The main belt armor was 80 – 120 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick forward , 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) thick over the ship 's citadel , and was 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick aft . The forward conning tower was protected by 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) , while the aft conning tower by 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) . The four turrets had 230 mm ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) faces , 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) sides , and 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) on the roofs . The horizontal armor measured 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick , and the sloping deck armor was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . Like the armored cruiser Blücher before her , she was protected by a torpedo bulkhead , 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick . It was set back a distance of 4 meters ( 13 ft ) from the outer hull skin , the space in between being used to store coal . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Von der Tann was powered by 18 naval coal @-@ fueled double boilers , separated into five boiler rooms . The boilers produced steam at a pressure of 235 psi ( 16 atmospheres ) . Von der Tann was the first large German warship to use turbine propulsion . The ship used two sets of turbines : high pressure turbines , which ran the outer two shafts , and low pressure turbines , which powered the inner two shafts . Each shaft had a propeller 3 @.@ 6 m ( 12 ft ) in diameter . The ship was designed to have a power output of 41 @,@ 426 shaft horsepower ( 30 @,@ 891 kW ) at a speed of 300 rpm , which enabled a rated top speed of 24 @.@ 8 kn ( 45 @.@ 9 km / h ) . However , as was the case with all later German battlecruisers , the ship could be run dramatically higher . During sea trials , the turbines provided 77 @,@ 928 shp ( 58 @,@ 111 kW ) at 339 rpm for a top speed of 27 @.@ 757 kn ( 51 @.@ 39 km / h ) . In one instance during a cruise from Tenerife to Germany , the ship averaged 27 kn ( 50 km / h ) , and reached a maximum speed of 28 kn ( 52 km / h ) . At the time of her launch , she was the fastest dreadnought afloat . The ship had two parallel rudders , which were controlled by steam @-@ powered engines . Von der Tann 's electrical plant consisted of six steam turbo generators that had a total output of 1 @,@ 200 @-@ kW ( 1 @,@ 600 @-@ hp ) . 
 Like many German capital ships , Von der Tann had chronic problems with the often low @-@ quality coal available for the ship 's boilers . Following the end of the raid on Scarborough , Von der Tann 's commander , Captain Max von Hahn , remarked that " the inadequacy of our coal and its burning properties results in heavy smoke clouds and signals our presence . " During the battle of Jutland , the ship was unable to maintain fires in all of her boilers after 16 : 00 , due to the poor quality coal . Many other German ships suffered the same difficulties during the battle , including Derfflinger and Seydlitz . After 1916 , the coal firing in the boilers was supplemented by spraying tar @-@ oil on the coal , which made the coal burn better . 
 = = = Other characteristics = = = 
 Frahm anti @-@ roll tanks were fitted during construction , but these proved to be ineffective ; the tanks only reduced rolling by 33 % . Bilge keels were later added to improve stability , and the space previously used for the anti @-@ roll tanks was instead used as extra fuel storage . The ship was able to carry an additional 180 t ( 200 short tons ) of coal in the anti @-@ roll tanks . Von der Tann 's hull consisted of 15 watertight compartments , and a double bottom extended for 75 % of the ship 's length . The ship was known to have good maneuvering characteristics , with a speed loss of 60 % and a heel of 8 degrees at full rudder . 
 The ship 's crew compartments were arranged such that the officers were accommodated in the forecastle . This arrangement was found to be unsatisfactory , and not repeated in later classes . Von der Tann was designed to be fitted with a lattice mast , but the ship received standard masts instead . In 1914 , spotting posts were attached to the masts in order to observe the fall of artillery fire . In 1915 , seaplane trials were conducted on Von der Tann , and a crane was attached on the aft deck to lift the seaplane aboard the ship . Von der Tann had originally been equipped with anti @-@ torpedo nets , but these were removed towards the end of 1916 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 In May 1910 , Von der Tann sailed from the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg to receive her final fitting @-@ out in the Imperial Dockyard at Kiel . The German Navy was chronically short of crews at the time , so dockyard workers had to bring the ship to Kiel . On 1 September 1910 , the ship was commissioned into the German Navy , with a crew composed largely of crewmembers from the dreadnought Rheinland . During trials , an average speed of 27 kn ( 50 km / h ) was attained over a six @-@ hour period , with a top speed of 28 @.@ 124 kn ( 52 @.@ 086 km / h ) with the engines at maximum output . 
 Von der Tann made several long @-@ distance voyages after completion . She visited Rio de Janeiro , Puerto Militar , and Bahía Blanca in South America in early 1911 , and returned to Kiel on 6 May 1911 . The primary purpose of the cruise was to obtain armament contracts from South American countries by impressing them with what was " widely advertised as the fastest and most powerful warship then afloat . " On 8 May 1911 , Von der Tann joined the Unit of Reconnaissance Ships . In June 1911 Von der Tann attended the Fleet Review at Spithead , for the coronation of King George V. 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 At the outbreak of the First World War , Von der Tann was serving as the flagship of the 3rd Admiral of Reconnaissance Forces , Konteradmiral Tapken . The ship was assigned to the I Scouting Group of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Franz Hipper . Von der Tann 's first major sortie during the war occurred when the ship took part in the unsuccessful search for British battlecruisers , after the Battle of Heligoland Bight , in August 1914 . During the Battle of Heligoland Bight , Von der Tann had been stationed in Wilhelmshaven Roads , and had been ordered to raise steam as early as 08 : 20 , to assist the German cruisers under attack in the Heligoland Bight . At 08 : 50 , Rear Admiral Hipper requested permission from Admiral von Ingenohl , the commander in chief of the High Seas Fleet , to send Von der Tann and Moltke to relieve the beleaguered German cruisers . 
 Von der Tann was ready to sail by 10 : 15 , more than an hour before the British battlecruisers arrived on the scene . However , the ship was held up by low tide , which prevented the battlecruisers from crossing the bar at the mouth of the Jade Estuary . At 14 : 10 , Von der Tann and Moltke were able to cross the Jade bar , and Hipper ordered the German light cruisers to fall back on the two heavy ships , while Hipper himself was about an hour behind in the battlecruiser Seydlitz . At 14 : 25 , the remaining light cruisers , Strassburg , Stettin , Frauenlob , Stralsund , and Ariadne , rendezvoused with the battlecruisers . Seydlitz arrived on the scene by 15 : 10 ; Ariadne succumbed to battle damage and sank . Hipper ventured forth cautiously to search for the two missing light cruisers , Mainz and Cöln . By 16 : 00 , the German flotilla began returning to the Jade Estuary , arriving at approximately 20 : 23 . 
 = = = = Bombardments of the English coast = = = = 
 Later that year Von der Tann was present at the Raid on Yarmouth , on 2 – 3 November . At 16 : 30 on the 2nd , Von der Tann , along with Seydlitz ( Hipper 's flagship ) , Moltke , the armored cruiser Blücher , and the four light cruisers Strassburg , Graudenz , Kolberg , and Stralsund , departed the Jade Estuary , bound for the English coast with the intent to lay minefields in British sea lanes . At 18 : 00 , two dreadnought battle squadrons of the High Seas Fleet departed to provide support . Hipper 's force veered north in an arc to avoid Heligoland and the British submarines stationed there , and then increased speed to 18 knots . At approximately 06 : 30 the following morning , Hipper 's battlecruisers spotted the British minesweeper Halcyon and opened fire , which drew the attention of the destroyer Lively . Hipper realized that he was wasting time , and that further pursuit would run his ships into a known minefield , so he ordered his ships back to sea . As the flotilla was turning away , the battlecruisers fired several salvos at Great Yarmouth , to little effect . By the time the British Admiralty was fully aware of the situation , the German force had retreated back to home waters . 
 Von der Tann also participated in the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby , on 15 – 16 December . The raid was another attempt to lure out a portion of the Grand Fleet and destroy it , with the whole of the High Seas Fleet standing by in support . Von der Tann delayed the raid itself by several days , because Admiral Ingenohl was unwilling to send forth the I Scouting Group at anything less than full strength , and Von der Tann was undergoing routine repairs in early December . The I Scouting Group , along with the II Scouting Group , composed of the four light cruisers Kolberg , Strassburg , Stralsund , and Graudenz , and two torpedo boat flotillas , left the Jade at 03 : 20 . Hipper 's ships sailed north , through the channels in the minefields , past Heligoland to the Horns Reef light vessel , at which point the ships turned westward , towards the English coast . The main battle squadrons of the High Seas Fleet left in the late afternoon of the 15th . During the night of 15 December , the main body of the High Seas Fleet encountered British destroyers , and fearing the prospect of a night @-@ time torpedo attack , Admiral Ingenohl ordered the ships to retreat . 
 Upon nearing the British coast , Hipper 's battlecruisers split into two groups . Seydlitz , Moltke , and Blücher went north to shell Hartlepool , while Von der Tann and Derfflinger went south to shell Scarborough and Whitby . The two ships destroyed the coast guard stations in both towns , along with the signalling station in Whitby . By 09 : 45 on the 16th , the two groups had reassembled , and began to retreat eastward . Hipper was unaware of Ingenohl 's withdrawal , and following the bombardment of the target cities , turned back to rendezvous with the German fleet . By this time , David Beatty 's battlecruisers were in position to block Hipper 's chosen egress route , while other forces were en route to complete the encirclement . At 12 : 25 , the light cruisers of the II Scouting Group began to pass the British forces searching for Hipper . One of the cruisers in the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron spotted Stralsund , and signaled a report to Beatty . At 12 : 30 , Beatty turned his battlecruisers towards the German ships . Beatty presumed that the German cruisers were the advance screen for Hipper 's ships , however , those were some 50 km ( 31 mi ) ahead . The 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron , which had been screening for Beatty 's ships , detached to pursue the German cruisers , but a misinterpreted signal from the British battlecruisers sent them back to their screening positions . This confusion allowed the German light cruisers to escape , and alerted Hipper to the location of the British battlecruisers . The German battlecruisers wheeled to the northeast of the British forces and made good their escape . 
 Von der Tann was being refitted at the time of the Battle of Dogger Bank , and so she missed this action . She was replaced by the armored cruiser Blücher , which was sunk during the battle . A detachment of men from Von der Tann had been sent to Blücher and went down with the ship . In 1915 the ship took part in operations in the North and Baltic Seas . On 10 August 1915 , Von der Tann shelled the island fortress at Utö , in the eastern Baltic , during which she took part in an artillery duel with the Russian armored cruiser Admiral Makarov . Von der Tann also engaged the Russian armored cruiser Bayan and five destroyers , during which Von der Tann was struck by a shell through the funnel , which caused no casualties . On 3 – 4 February 1916 , Von der Tann participated in the fleet advance to welcome home the commerce raider Möwe . The ship was also present during the fleet sorties of 5 – 7 March , 17 April , 21 – 22 April , and 5 May . 
 Von der Tann also took part in the bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24 – 25 April . Hipper was away on sick leave , so the German ships were under the command of Konteradmiral Friedrich Boedicker . The German battlecruisers Derfflinger , Lützow , Moltke , Seydlitz and Von der Tann left the Jade Estuary at 10 : 55 on 24 April , and were supported by a screening force of 6 light cruisers and two torpedo boat flotillas . The heavy units of the High Seas Fleet sailed at 13 : 40 , with the objective to provide distant support for Boedicker 's ships . The British Admiralty was made aware of the German sortie through the interception of German wireless signals , and deployed the Grand Fleet at 15 : 50 . 
 By 14 : 00 , Boedicker 's ships had reached a position off Norderney , at which point he turned his ships northward to avoid the Dutch observers on the island of Terschelling . At 15 : 38 , Seydlitz struck a mine , which tore a 50 @-@ ft ( 15 @-@ m ) hole in her hull , just abaft of the starboard broadside torpedo tube , which allowed 1 @,@ 400 @-@ t ( 1 @,@ 500 @-@ short tons ) of water to enter the ship . Seydlitz turned back , with the screen of light cruisers , at a speed of 15 knots . The four remaining battlecruisers turned south immediately in the direction of Norderney to avoid further mine damage . By 16 : 00 , Seydlitz was clear of imminent danger , so the ship stopped to allow Boedicker to disembark . The torpedo boat V28 brought Boedicker to Lützow . 
 At 04 : 50 on 25 April , the German battlecruisers were approaching Lowestoft when the light cruisers Rostock and Elbing , which had been covering the southern flank , spotted the light cruisers and destroyers of Admiral Tyrwhitt 's Harwich Force . Boedicker refused to be distracted by the British ships , and instead trained his ships ' guns on Lowestoft . The two 6 in ( 15 cm ) shore batteries were destroyed , along with other damage to the town . KzS Zenker , Von der Tann 's commanding officer , later wrote : 
 Mist over the sea and the smoke from the ships ahead made it difficult for us to make out our targets as we steered for Lowestoft . But after we turned [ to the north ] , the Empire Hotel offered us an ample landmark for effective bombardment . At 05 : 11 we opened fire with our heavy and medium calibers on the harbor works and swing bridges . After a few " shorts " the shooting was good . From the after @-@ bridge a fire in the town , and from another vantage point a great explosion at the entry [ to the harbor ] were reported . 
 At 05 : 20 , the German raiders turned north , towards Yarmouth , which they reached by 05 : 42 . The visibility was so poor that the German ships fired one salvo each , with the exception of Derfflinger , which fired fourteen rounds from her main battery . The German ships turned back south , and at 05 : 47 , encountered for the second time the Harwich Force , which had by then been engaged by the six light cruisers of the screening force . Boedicker 's ships opened fire from a range of 13 @,@ 000 yd ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) . Tyrwhitt immediately turned his ships around and fled south , but not before the cruiser Conquest sustained severe damage . Due to reports of British submarines and torpedo attacks , Boedicker broke off the chase , and turned back east towards the High Seas Fleet . At this point , Scheer , who had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's sortie from Scapa Flow , turned back towards Germany . 
 = = = = Battle of Jutland = = = = 
 Von der Tann participated in the Battle of Jutland , as part of Hipper 's First Scouting Group . Von der Tann was the rearmost of five battlecruisers in Hipper 's line . Shortly before 16 : 00 CET , Hipper 's force encountered Vice Admiral Beatty 's battlecruiser squadron . The German ships were the first to open fire , at a range of approximately 15 @,@ 000 yd ( 14 @,@ 000 m ) . At 16 : 49 , Von der Tann fired her first shot at Indefatigable . Fourteen minutes of firing later , Von der Tann had scored five hits on Indefatigable out of 52 heavy shells fired , one of which caused Indefatigable to explode and sink . An observer on the battlecruiser New Zealand , which was directly ahead of Indefatigable , later remarked that he saw " the Indefatigable hit by two shells from the Von der Tann , one on the fore turret . Both appeared to explode on impact . After an interval of thirty seconds , the ship blew up . Sheets of flame were followed by dense smoke which obscured her from view . " 
 Following the destruction of Indefatigable , Beatty turned his force away , while the British 5th Battle Squadron closed in on the German battlecruisers , opening fire from approximately 19 @,@ 000 yd ( 17 @,@ 000 m ) . Von der Tann and Moltke , the two rearmost of Hipper 's squadron , came under fire from the three lead British battleships of the 5th BS : Barham , Valiant , and Malaya . The German battlecruisers began zig @-@ zagging to avoid the gunfire from the British ships . At 17 : 09 , six minutes after sinking Indefatigable , Von der Tann was hit by one 15 in ( 38 cm ) shell from Barham , which struck beneath the waterline and dislodged a section of the belt armor , causing Von der Tann to take in 600 tons of water . This hit temporarily damaged the ship 's steering gear , and combined with Von der Tann 's zig @-@ zagging cause her to fall out of line to port . The German Official History commented that " the greatest calamity of a complete breakdown of the steering gear was averted , otherwise , Von der Tann would have been delivered into the hands of the oncoming battleships as in the case of Blücher during the Dogger Bank action . " 
 At 17 : 20 , a 13 @.@ 5 in ( 34 cm ) shell from the battlecruiser Tiger struck the barbette of Von der Tann 's A turret . A chunk of armor plate was dislodged from inside the turret , and struck the turret training gear , which jammed the turret at 120 degrees . This put the turret out of action for the duration of the engagement . At 17 : 23 , the ship was hit again by a 13 @.@ 5 in ( 34 cm ) shell from Tiger , which struck near the C turret and killed 6 men . The shell holed the deck and created enough wreckage that the turret was unable to traverse , and the starboard rudder engine room was damaged . The C turret was out of action until the wreckage could be cut away . Smoke from a fire caused by burning practice targets that had been stowed below the turret obscured the ship . Sections of the torpedo nets were knocked loose and trailed behind the ship . However , they were cut loose before they could catch in the propellers . New Zealand , which had been engaging Von der Tann following Indefatigable 's destruction , lost sight of her target and shifted fire to Moltke . At 17 : 18 , the range to Von der Tann from Barham had closed to 17 @,@ 500 yd ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) , at which point Von der Tann opened fire on the British battleship . Shortly thereafter , at 17 : 23 , Von der Tann registered a hit on Barham . However , after firing only 24 shells , Von der Tann had to return to her earlier target , New Zealand , because her fore and aft turrets had since been disabled , and her amidships turrets were no longer able to target Barham . 
 At 18 : 15 , the guns of the last active turret jammed in their mountings , leaving Von der Tann without any working main armament . Regardless , she remained in the battle line to distract the British gunners . Because she was no longer firing her main guns , Von der Tann was able to maneuver in an erratic manner , such that she could avoid British gunfire . By 18 : 53 , the ship 's speed fell from 26 kn ( 48 km / h ) to 23 kn ( 43 km / h ) . Over an hour and a half after having failed due to mechanical difficulties , D turret was repaired and again ready for action . Von der Tann sustained her fourth and final heavy shell hit at 20 : 19 , when one 15 in ( 38 cm ) shell from Revenge struck the aft conning tower . Shell splinters penetrated the conning tower , killing the Third Gunnery Officer and both rangefinder operators and wounding every other crewman in the tower . Shell fragments and other debris fell through the ventilating shaft and onto the condenser , which put out all the lights in the ship . Eleven minutes later , at 20 : 30 , B turret was again clear for action , and by 21 : 00 , C turret was also in working order . However , both of the amidships turrets suffered further mechanical difficulties that put them out of action later during the battle . 
 At approximately 22 : 15 , Hipper , with his flag now in Moltke , ordered his battlecruisers to increase speed to 20 knots , and to fall into the rear of the main German line . Neither Derfflinger , due to battle damage , nor Von der Tann , due to the dirtiness of her boiler fires , could steam at more than 18 knots . Derfflinger and Von der Tann took up positions astern of the II Squadron , and were later joined by the old pre @-@ dreadnoughts Schlesien and Schleswig @-@ Holstein at 00 : 05 . At 03 : 37 , the British destroyer Moresby fired a torpedo at the rear of the German line ; this passed closely across Von der Tann 's bow , and forced the ship to turn sharply to starboard to avoid being hit . Close to the end of the battle , at 03 : 55 , Hipper transmitted a report to Admiral Scheer , informing him of the tremendous damage his ships had suffered . By that time , Derfflinger and Von der Tann each had only two guns in operation , Moltke was flooded with 1 @,@ 000 tons of water , and Seydlitz was severely damaged . Hipper reported : " I Scouting Group was therefore no longer of any value for a serious engagement , and was consequently directed to return to harbor by the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , while he himself determined to await developments off Horns Reef with the battlefleet . " 
 During the course of the battle , two of Von der Tann 's main turrets were knocked out by British gunfire , while her other two turrets suffered mechanical failures . The ship was firing so fast that several of the main guns in the amidships turrets became overheated and jammed in their recoil slides , and could not be returned to working order . Von der Tann was without her main battery for 11 hours , although three turrets were restored to working order before the end of the battle ; D turret only after much cutting away of bent metal with oxyacetylene torches — afterwards the guns could be worked only by hand . Her casualties amounted to 11 dead and 35 wounded . During the battle Von der Tann fired 170 heavy shells and 98 secondary caliber shells . 
 = = = = Later actions = = = = 
 After Jutland , she underwent repairs from 2 June until 29 July . After returning to the fleet , Von der Tann took part in several unsuccessful raids into the North Sea in 1916 , including the advances on 18 – 19 August , 25 – 26 September , 18 – 19 October , 23 – 24 October , as well as the advance on 23 – 24 March 1917 . 
 During the fleet advance on 18 – 19 August , Von der Tann was one of two remaining German battlecruisers still in fighting condition ( along with Moltke ) , so three dreadnoughts were assigned to the I Scouting Group for the operation : Markgraf , Grosser Kurfürst , and Bayern . The I Scouting Group was to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland , in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . Admiral Scheer and the rest of the High Seas Fleet , with 15 dreadnoughts of its own , would trail behind , providing cover . The British were aware of the German plans , and sortied the Grand Fleet to meet them . By 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and , unwilling to engage the whole of the Grand Fleet just 11 weeks after the decidedly close call at Jutland , turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 Von der Tann served as the flagship of Rear Admiral von Reuter during the fleet advance to Norway on 23 – 25 April 1918 , as well as in the sortie on 8 – 9 July . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Von der Tann was to have taken part in a final fleet action at the end of October 1918 , days before the Armistice was to take effect . The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Grand Admiral ( Grossadmiral ) of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to retain a better bargaining position for Germany , despite the expected casualties . However , many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . While the High Seas Fleet was consolidating in Wilhelmshaven , sailors began deserting en masse . As Von der Tann and Derfflinger passed through the locks that separated Wilhelmshaven 's inner harbor and roadstead , some 300 men from both ships climbed over the side and disappeared ashore . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . Informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated " I no longer have a navy . " 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Prior to the departure of the German fleet , Admiral Adolf von Trotha made clear to von Reuter that he could not allow the Allies to seize the ships , under any conditions . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , which led the ships to the Allied fleet that was to escort the Germans to Scapa Flow . The massive flotilla consisted of some 370 British , American , and French warships . Once the ships were interned , their guns were disabled through the removal of their breech blocks , and their crews were reduced to 200 officers and enlisted men . Von der Tann was interned at Scapa Flow under the command of Kapitän @-@ Leutnant <unk> . While in Scapa Flow , a soldiers ' council was formed aboard the ship ; the council took complete , dictatorial control of the vessel for the duration of the interment . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Treaty of Versailles . Von Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . The ship sank in two hours and fifteen minutes . The task of raising Von der Tann was secured by Ernest Cox 's salvage company . During preparation work , three workers were nearly killed when their oxy @-@ acetylene cutters set off a major explosion . The blast tore holes in the still submerged vessel and allowed water into the compartment that had been emptied with compressed air ; by the time the men were rescued , the compartment had refilled almost completely and the men were up to their necks . Nevertheless , the ship was successfully brought up on 7 December 1930 , and scrapped at Rosyth by the Alloa Shipbreaking Company between 1931 and 1934 . 
 = The Day After Tomorrow ( TV special ) = 
 The Day After Tomorrow ( also known as Into Infinity in the United Kingdom ) is a 1975 British science @-@ fiction television drama produced by Gerry Anderson between the first and second series of Space : 1999 . Written by Johnny Byrne and directed by Charles Crichton , it stars Brian Blessed , Joanna Dunham and Nick Tate and is narrated by Ed Bishop . The Day After Tomorrow first aired in December 1975 in the United States on NBC , as an episode of an occasional series of after school specials for children , Special Treat . In the UK , it was broadcast on BBC1 as a TV special in December 1976 and December 1977 ; 37 years later , in November 2014 , a revised version was broadcast on BBC Four . The plot of The Day After Tomorrow concerns the interstellar mission of Altares , a science vessel of the future that can travel at the speed of light . From its initial destination of Alpha Centauri , the ship pushes deeper into space ; there , her crew of three adults and two children encounter such phenomena as a meteor shower , a red giant and , finally , a black hole , which pulls the ship into another universe . 
 Originally commissioned to create a child @-@ friendly introduction to Albert Einstein 's special relativity theory in the form of an exciting action @-@ adventure , Anderson and Byrne conceived The Day After Tomorrow as a television pilot for a potential series and gave it an alternative episode title of " Into Infinity " . Ultimately , Anderson 's limited budget prevented additional episodes from being made . With a cast and crew including veterans of earlier Anderson productions , filming on The Day After Tomorrow ran from July to September 1975 ; this comprised ten days of principal photography and six weeks of special effects shooting . The visuals of Space : 1999 provided inspiration for both Martin Bower , who designed the scale model effects for the special , and production designer Reg Hill , who re @-@ used set elements created for various episodes of that series to build the interiors of Altares . Newcomer Derek Wadsworth collaborated with Steve Coe to compose the theme and incidental music . 
 Critical reception to The Day After Tomorrow remains mixed . The model effects and music have been praised ; however , commentators have been both favourable and unfavourable in their comparisons of the special 's " psychedelic " images to the visual style employed by film director Stanley Kubrick . Although Byrne 's scriptwriting has been described as " lyrical " , and it has been suggested that The Day After Tomorrow contains homages to the 1960s TV series Lost in Space , the plot has been criticised for a lack of suspense , which critics have generally attributed to the fact that the special is primarily a science education programme . Further criticism has been directed at the acting , with Martin Lev 's performance attracting a particularly negative response . Home video releases of The Day After Tomorrow are limited to one VHS and one DVD , both of which are available only to members of Fanderson , the official Gerry Anderson appreciation society . Author Douglas R. Mason 's novelisation of the special remains unpublished . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the future , the survival of human civilisation is increasingly threatened by rising pollution , environmental damage and the depletion of the Earth 's natural resources . The narrator ( Ed Bishop ) introduces Space Station Delta and the " lightship " Altares – the latter of which is the first Earth spacecraft to " harness the limitless power of the photon " , allowing it to travel at the speed of light : " This could create the effects predicted by Einstein 's Theory of Relativity – effects that could shrink the very fabric of space , distort time , and perhaps alter the structure of the universe as we understand it . " 
 Altares is due to leave Delta on a mission beyond the Solar System to seek out Earth @-@ like planets for possible colonisation . Due to the effects of time dilation , by which astronauts travelling at near @-@ light speed age far more slowly than people on Earth , the ship will be crewed by two whole " family units " . Arriving in a United Nations shuttle , Doctors Tom and Anna Bowen ( Brian Blessed and Joanna Dunham ) board Altares with their son , David ( Martin Lev ) . Meanwhile , Jane Masters ( Katharine Levy ) leaves her dog , Spring , in the care of station commander Jim Forbes ( Don Fellows ) . Her father , Captain Harry Masters ( Nick Tate ) , engages Altares 's " photon drive " and the vessel starts its 4 @.@ 3 @-@ light @-@ year journey to the star Alpha Centauri , its first scheduled stop . As Altares nears the edge of the Solar System , Jane and David observe how Pluto appears to change colour from blue to red due to the shortening and lengthening of light waves caused by the Doppler effect . Arriving at Alpha Centauri , the crew launch a series of satellites to relay data back to Earth . Having completed their primary objective , the Masters and Bowen families then agree to push deeper into space . 
 When Altares encounters a star cluster , Anna tells Jane of Einstein 's accomplishments in the areas of special relativity and unified field theory . Shortly after , the ship is hit by a meteor shower that damages various systems and causes the photon drive to re @-@ activate , hurling Altares through space at such velocity that the travellers are knocked out . A fail @-@ safe brings the vessel , now powerless , to a halt within the gravitational field of a red giant on the brink of supernova . Donning a heat suit , Captain Masters risks his life by entering the reactor core in a bid to repair the drive . He succeeds , and Anna and Jane pilot the ship outside the blast radius of the star before it explodes . 
 Detecting a signal from Delta , which has taken the equivalent of 15 Earth years to reach them , the travellers are able to plot their position and lay in a course home . However , disaster strikes when Altares is caught in the gravity of a black hole that has formed from a collapsed star . The photon drive is unable to provide the faster @-@ than @-@ light speeds necessary to break free ; nevertheless , Anna urges the crew not to give up hope , for she suspects that the object may be a gateway to another universe . Her theory is proven correct when , sustaining the various space @-@ time distortions at the event horizon , Altares safely emerges from the black hole – intact , albeit with no way of returning to Earth . As the vessel and its intrepid crew approach a planet , the narrator concludes , " One thing is sure – this is not the final word . Not the end , but the beginning . A new universe , a new hope ? Only time will tell . " 
 = = Production = = 
 In the spring of 1975 , after filming on " Year One " of Space : 1999 had been completed , NBC agent George Heinemann contacted Group Three producer Gerry Anderson with an idea for a new science @-@ fiction TV series . This would comprise seven one @-@ hour episodes designed to teach children about scientific subjects in the format of an entertaining action @-@ adventure . To publicise the series , NBC undertook to distribute information leaflets to schools . Heinemann hired Anderson to produce a TV special that would discuss , as its main topic , the physicist Albert Einstein 's theory of special relativity , which holds that the speed of light cannot be exceeded and remains constant whether an object is still or in motion . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 By 1975 , Group Three Productions had received no assurance from its distributor , ITC Entertainment , that a second series of Space : 1999 would be commissioned . With the possibility of cancellation looming , Anderson and his scriptwriter , Space : 1999 script editor Johnny Byrne , conceived the special that would become The Day After Tomorrow as the pilot episode of a prospective new series . If successful , the pilot , titled " Into Infinity " , would be followed by additional episodes – the series itself to be named The Day After Tomorrow . Ultimately , Anderson was unsuccessful in securing the funding needed to make a full series , and The Day After Tomorrow : " Into Infinity " remains a self @-@ contained science @-@ fiction drama . 
 In preparation for his work on the special , Anderson researched Einstein 's achievements ; in his authorised biography , he admitted that he did not understand any of the physicist 's theories . Byrne 's script directed that E = mc2 – the <unk> formula that relates mass to energy – appear on @-@ screen at intervals . Of the ending , it commented that , " it 's a universe not only stranger than we imagine , but stranger than we can imagine . " Although special relativity provides the main scientific and educational focus of the programme , The Day After Tomorrow also examines time dilation – an effect whereby time decelerates at a rate proportional to that of the acceleration of an object . For the crew of Altares , a ship capable of travelling at the speed of light , the mission to Alpha Centauri is measured in years , while whole decades pass on Earth . To encourage children to explore the topics in their own time ( and thereby develop their research skills ) , Byrne wrote the characters in such a way that they provide only partial explanations of special relativity and related subjects . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Most of the cast of The Day After Tomorrow had appeared in or otherwise contributed to earlier Anderson productions . Nick Tate , who had appeared as the supporting character of Alan Carter in Year One of Space : 1999 , played the Captain of Altares , Harry Masters . His contract awarded him third place in the credits . Brian Blessed and Joanna Dunham , starring as the husband @-@ and @-@ wife duo of Doctors Tom and Anna Bowen , and billed above Tate , had both appeared in guest roles – Blessed in the episode " Death 's Other Dominion " , Dunham in " Missing Link " . 
 In the role of Space Station Delta Commander Jim Forbes was Don Fellows , who had played an uncredited voice part in Space : 1999 's first episode , " Breakaway " . Ed Bishop had voiced the character of Captain Blue in Anderson 's late @-@ 1960s puppet series Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons before taking on in the lead role of Commander Ed Straker in the live @-@ action UFO . Neither Martin Lev nor Katherine Levy had any previous acting experience , although the filming of The Day After Tomorrow at Pinewood Studios coincided with that of Alan Parker 's musical comedy Bugsy Malone , in which Lev played the role of gangster Dandy Dan . Byrne 's dog , Bones , appeared as the Masters ' pet , Spring . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography was conducted over ten days in July 1975 at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire on a budget of £ 105 @,@ 000 . The special effects sequences required a further six weeks ' filming at Bray Studios in Berkshire ; production ended in September . During the filming of Space : 1999 's " Year Two " , Group Three re @-@ used a number of props from The Day After Tomorrow as a cost @-@ saving measure . The production staff included several Anderson regulars who had contributed to the earlier series – among them effects director Brian Johnson , editor David Lane and cinematographer Frank Watts . Charles Crichton , whose credits included eight episodes of Space : 1999 , returned to direct The Day After Tomorrow . As Barry Gray was busy with other commitments , the task of composing the theme music fell to newcomer Derek Wadsworth , who also collaborated with Steve Coe to produce the incidental music and would subsequently compose for Year Two of Space : 1999 . Professor John Taylor served as scientific adviser on the production . 
 In the absence of Bob Bell and Keith Wilson , who were working on The New Avengers and Star Maidens , the role of production designer was taken up by Reg Hill . The set designs for the Altares interiors were the first that Hill had presented to Anderson since the making of the Supermarionation series Fireball XL5 in 1961 . To realise Hill 's concepts , the production team adapted parts of the Ultra Probe set created for the Space : 1999 episode " Dragon 's Domain " , along with various set elements that had appeared in other episodes . Working on the mistaken assumption that his commissions were to appear in Space : 1999 , uncredited effects technician Martin Bower took inspiration from the appearance of spaceships featured in the earlier series in designing and building scale models of the lightship Altares . A small , three @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) model appears in long shots ; a larger , six @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) version , fitted with gas @-@ powered rocket jets to simulate exhaust and a high @-@ powered light to represent the photon drive , was used for close @-@ ups . To construct the 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) model of Space Station Delta , Bower revamped the SS Daria prop first seen in " Mission of the <unk> " . The United Nations shuttle model was 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) long . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 In the United States , The Day After Tomorrow aired on 9 December 1975 on NBC as the third episode of Special Treat . In the United Kingdom , it was first broadcast on 11 December 1976 on BBC1 . 
 Fearing that the use of both the " Day After Tomorrow " and " Into Infinity " titles would confuse British audiences ( as The Day After Tomorrow was to air not as a pilot , but as a special on UK television ) , the BBC edited the opening titles to delete the former . In any case , the removal of the episode title , " Into Infinity " , would have been more difficult ; while the series title appears against a simple starfield , the episode title is superimposed on a moving model shot of the lift that transfers the Bowen and Masters families from Space Station Delta to Altares during the programme 's opening scenes . Consequently , The Day After Tomorrow was listed in Radio Times magazine and other British media exclusively under the title of " Into Infinity " . 
 The Day After Tomorrow had its first UK repeat on BBC1 on 6 December 1977 . In 1997 , the BBC deleted the master tape from its archives but retained an edited copy for possible future repeats . Clips of The Day After Tomorrow ( as well as the Space : 1999 episode " Black Sun " ) were featured in " Black Holes " , a 1997 edition of the Channel 4 documentary series Equinox . 
 Under the title of The Day after Tomorrow : Into Infinity , a new version was screened in the UK on 9 November 2014 on BBC Four . This revised version ( with edited end credits to facilitate the inclusion of the Anderson Entertainment logo ) was introduced by Professor Brian Cox of the University of Manchester , who stated that he had been a fan of The Day after Tomorrow since childhood and praised the programme for its scientific accuracy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chris Bentley , author of The Complete Gerry Anderson : The Authorised Episode Guide , notes similarities between The Day After Tomorrow and the Fireball XL5 episode " Faster Than Light " , whose plot concerns the problems encountered by the crew of spacecraft when it accelerates to light speed . Elizabeth Howell , a science journalist , argues that the programme is remarkable for its depiction of space exploration " in the colonisation sense , rather than Star Wars and its descendants who show space as a spot to be conquered . " She comments further that the themes are " strangely timeless ... the true , unknown part hits you at the very end . " In a review published in TV Zone magazine in 2002 , Andrew Pixley praised the acting , music and direction in general , writing that the film " oozes with the charm associated with the golden era of Anderson . " However , criticising other aspects , he argued that " it is the fundamental concept that falls flat . Rather than making physics a palatable piece of escapist hokum , the format is dragged down to the level of a scantily @-@ illustrated physics textbook ... something isn 't quite right . " 
 Vincent Law , in a review published in the Gerry Anderson @-@ centric fanzine Andersonic , considers The Day After Tomorrow an " oddity " and an " uncharacteristically lacklustre entry in the Anderson canon " , commenting that the programme " cracks along at a fair old pace , but the educational content does tend to <unk> the first half of the story and limits the room for character development . " Although he credits the production for " getting its science lesson across in a superficial way " , he expresses a negative view of the narration , remarking that " at times Ed [ Bishop ] comes across like a presenter of one of those old schools programmes from the 70s , just imparting a string of dry facts . " He believes that Jane is the only character who develops over the course of the special . The adults , by contrast , are " pretty much peripheral " , while David can be considered a " miniature Spock " who " lurks around the ship either brandishing his slide rule , threatening to calculate something , or staring out of the porthole ( a nice touch ! ) dribbling about pulsars . " 
 Law believes that the general standard of production design and special effects is lower than that of Space : 1999 , expressing satisfaction with the scale models but suggesting that " the slow @-@ motion filming and wobbly mirror effects are more in keeping with Blake 's 7 . " He views the " info dump " opening titles as a weak imitation of the Space : 1999 introduction , and the multiple appearances of the E = mc2 equation as confusing . Certain props ( such as the slide rule ) and design elements ( such as punched cards ) also come under criticism from Law , who questions whether a futuristic " lightship " would be equipped with such relatively primitive technology . Although he suggests that the plot device of the accident @-@ prone Altares reflects the shifting public perception of space exploration in the 1970s ( " a time when optimism in the space programme was on the wane " ) , Law regards such design elements as indicative of the manner in which The Day After Tomorrow " has stood the test of time less well than other series . " 
 Commenting on his online blog , literary critic John Kenneth Muir praises Johnny Byrne 's " lyrical " scriptwriting , judges Brian Johnson 's effects to be " top @-@ notch for the era " , and deems Frank Watts ' filming " stunning " . For Muir , the message of the special implies a " high @-@ tech , science @-@ minded update of the whole Lost in Space format " , while the plot effectively mixes elements of the " claustrophobic " and " action @-@ packed " with " psychedelic " elements such as the descent into the black hole , a subject on which he alludes to the work of Stanley Kubrick : the sequence is " a <unk> wonder , a montage dominated by double images , slow @-@ motion photography and the use of a creepy distortion lens . Pretty powerful stuff for a kids ' show . " Law , meanwhile , considers the faster @-@ than @-@ light shots to be the special 's best effects , and compares the black hole sequence unfavourably to the closing act of Kubrick 's 1968 film 2001 : A Space Odyssey : " Kubrick 's Star @-@ Gate it is not . " 
 Arguing that The Day After Tomorrow is " kinda like Kubrick 's 2001 : A Space Odyssey ... for kids " , science @-@ fiction writer and reviewer Christopher Mills expresses disappointment with the effect of the black hole itself , but describes the fall into the anomaly as " very colourful " . However , in contrast with Muir , he views the sequences set inside Altares during the descent as " a bit of a hoot " , directing particular criticism at the actors ' exaggerated gesticulations . Commenting that the plot contains " plenty of wonky pseudo @-@ science and insanely improbable coincidences " , Mills also recalls his fascination at " how ' British ' ... the characters [ are ] , facing each new peril with remarkable calm and ' stiff upper lip ' stoicism . By the time they 're caught in the clutches of the ominous black hole , they 're apparently so resigned to being jerked around by the universe that they just hold hands and calmly await their fate . " 
 Muir suggests that the feel of The Day After Tomorrow is " a little more colourful ( less minimalist ) in colour and costume than Space : 1999 's sterling Year One " , with such elements as Wadsworth 's " hard @-@ hitting , hard @-@ driving musical score " livening up the proceedings . The music has also received praise from Law , who notes a " dynamic pace " , as well as Anderson himself . Muir summarises the final product as a " Year One @-@ style ' awe and mystery of space ' narrative , but one conveyed in the more colourful @-@ looking or -sounding Year Two fashion " , and a " time capsule of once @-@ state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art science fiction " . To Law , it is " half @-@ forgotten experiment which is now perhaps only of interest to aficionados " , but " an interesting look at what might have been " if Anderson had been able to produce a full series . Mills interprets it as a " solid little piece of 70s juvenile sci @-@ fi " that is perhaps " not quite as ' scientifically accurate ' as it pretends to be , but fun " . 
 = = Other media = = 
 In 1997 , the British Board of Film Classification ( BBFC ) awarded The Day After Tomorrow a U certificate . Fanderson , the official Gerry Anderson fan club , retains the home video distribution rights . Licensed releases of The Day After Tomorrow are limited to a 1997 VHS and a 2002 DVD , both of which are exclusive merchandise available to Fanderson members only . Space Police ( a pilot that inspired the series Space Precinct ) is also included on the DVD , which presents both films in digitally remastered form . In addition to Region 0 and dual PAL @-@ NTSC coding , it contains special features such as production and design photographs . Both the VHS and the DVD include the opening titles as originally presented prior to the 1976 BBC edits . In his 2002 review , Andrew Pixley praised Fanderson for the professionalism of the release , describing it as " excellent " . 
 Science @-@ fiction writer Douglas R. Mason , an author of several Space : 1999 novels , wrote a novelisation of Johnny Byrne 's script for The Day After Tomorrow . Mason 's publisher , Futurama Publications , had originally intended to release additional books , since Anderson had conceived The Day After Tomorrow as the pilot episode for a prospective TV series . When Anderson abandoned this idea , Futurama cancelled Mason 's novelisation , which currently remains unpublished . 
 = Richard Cordray = 
 Richard Cordray ( born May 3 , 1959 ) is an American lawyer and Democratic Party politician who currently serves as the first Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau . Prior to his appointment in January 2012 , Cordray served in various positions in the State of Ohio . 
 A Marshall Scholar at the University of Oxford from 1981 to 1983 , Cordray was editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the University of Chicago Law Review and subsequently served as a law clerk for Judge Robert Bork on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit , and after that , Justice Anthony Kennedy of the Supreme Court of the United States . In 1987 he became an undefeated five @-@ time Jeopardy ! champion . 
 Cordray was elected to the Ohio House of Representatives in 1990 . After redistricting , Cordray decided to run for the United States House of Representatives in 1992 but was defeated . The following year he was appointed by the Ohio Attorney General as the first Solicitor General of Ohio . His experience as Solicitor led to his appearance before the United States Supreme Court to argue six cases , where he had previously clerked . Following Republican victories in Ohio statewide elections in 1994 , Cordray left his appointed position and entered the private practice of law . While in private practice he unsuccessfully ran for Ohio Attorney General in 1998 and the United States Senate in 2000 . He was elected Franklin County treasurer in 2002 and re @-@ elected in 2004 before being elected Ohio State Treasurer in 2006 . 
 Cordray was elected Ohio Attorney General in November 2008 to fill the remainder of the unexpired term ending January 2011 . In 2010 , Cordray lost his bid for re @-@ election to former U.S. Senator Mike DeWine . On July 17 , 2011 , President Barack Obama announced he would nominate Cordray to lead the United States Consumer Financial Protection Bureau . On January 4 , 2012 , the White House announced that it would make a recess appointment of Cordray to the post . On July 16 , 2013 , the U.S. Senate confirmed Cordray to a five @-@ year term as Director in a 66 – 34 vote . 
 = = Early life , education , and early law career = = 
 Cordray was raised in Grove City , Ohio , where he attended public schools . While attending Grove City High School , Cordray became a champion on the high school quiz show In The Know and worked for minimum wage at McDonald 's . He graduated from high school in 1977 as co @-@ valedictorian of his class . His first job in politics was as an intern for United States Senator John Glenn as a junior at Michigan State University 's James Madison College . Cordray earned Phi Beta Kappa honors and graduated summa cum laude with a BA in Legal & Political Theory in 1981 . As a Marshall Scholar , he earned an MA with first class honours in Economics from the University of Oxford and earned a Varsity Blue in basketball in 1983 . At the University of Chicago Law School , where he earned his Juris Doctor with honors in 1986 , he served as editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the University of Chicago Law Review . After starting work as a law clerk at the U.S. Supreme Court , he came back to his high school to deliver the commencement speech for the graduating class in 1988 . 
 Cordray began his career clerking for Judge Robert Bork and Supreme Court associate justices Byron White and Anthony Kennedy . After clerking for White in 1987 – 1988 , he was hired by the international law firm Jones Day to work in its Cleveland office . 
 = = Early political career ( 1990 – 1995 ) = = 
 He also taught various courses at The Ohio State University Moritz College of Law and at Georgetown University . 
 = = = Ohio House of Representatives = = = 
 In 1990 Cordray ran for an Ohio State House of Representatives seat , in the 33rd District ( southern and western Franklin County ) , against six @-@ term incumbent Republican Don Gilmore . Unopposed for the Democratic nomination , he defeated Gilmore by an 18 @,@ 573 – 11 @,@ 944 ( 61 – 39 % ) margin . 
 = = = 1992 congressional election = = = 
 In 1991 the state Apportionment Board , controlled by a 3 – 2 Republican majority despite the party 's 61 – 38 minority in the state House of Representatives , redrew state legislative districts following the results of the 1990 Census , in the hope of retaking control of the state House . The new boundaries created nine districts each with two resident incumbent Democrats , pairing Cordray with the twenty @-@ two @-@ year incumbent Mike <unk> . Unable to be elected in another district due to a one @-@ year residency requirement , Cordray opted not to run for re @-@ election . Instead , he decided to run for Ohio 's 15th congressional district in the 1992 U.S. House of Representatives elections , a seat being vacated by retiring thirteen @-@ term Republican Chalmers Wylie , and being challenged by Republican Deborah D. Pryce . 
 Cordray won the Democratic nomination over Bill <unk> by an 18 @,@ 731 – 5 @,@ 329 ( 78 – 22 % ) margin , following the withdrawal of another candidate , Dave Sommer . Cordray 's platform included federal spending cuts , term limits for Congress and a line @-@ item veto for the president . When Pryce announced that she would vote to support abortion rights , Linda S. <unk> entered the race as an independent . Thus , the general election was a three @-@ way affair , with Pryce taking a plurality of 110 @,@ 390 votes ( 44 @.@ 1 % ) , Cordray taking 94 @,@ 907 votes ( 37 @.@ 9 % ) and Linda <unk> taking 44 @,@ 906 votes ( 17 @.@ 9 % ) . 
 = = = Ohio Solicitor General = = = 
 While in private practice in 1993 , Cordray co @-@ wrote a legal brief for the Anti @-@ Defamation League , in a campaign supported by Ohio 's attorney general , for the reinstatement of Ohio 's hate crime laws . This was considered by the U.S. Supreme Court , but not ruled on because of its similarity to a previous Wisconsin ruling . 
 In 1993 the government of Ohio created the office of state solicitor general to handle the state 's appellate work . The state solicitor , appointed by the Ohio attorney general , is responsible for cases that are to be argued before the Ohio Supreme Court and the United States Supreme Court . Until 1998 , the Solicitor worked without any support staff . Cordray , who had earlier worked for a summer in the office of the United States solicitor general , was the first Solicitor to be appointed , in September 1993 . He held the position until he resigned after Ohio Attorney General Lee Fisher was defeated by Betty Montgomery in 1994 . His cases before the Supreme Court included Wilson v. Layne ( 526 U.S. 603 ( 1999 ) ) and Hanlon v. Berger ( 526 U.S. 808 ( 1999 ) ) . Though he lost his first case , he won his second case , which garnered a substantial amount of media attention for its consideration of the constitutionality of media ride @-@ alongs with police . Other cases included Household Credit Services v. <unk> ( 541 U.S. 232 ( 2004 ) ) , Brown v. Legal Foundation of Washington ( 538 U.S. 216 ( 2003 ) ) , Demore v. Kim ( 538 U.S. 510 ( 2003 ) ) , and Groh v. Ramirez ( 540 U.S. 551 ( 2004 ) ) . 
 Cordray contested the Ku Klux Klan 's right to erect a cross at the Ohio Statehouse after the state 's Capitol Square Review and Advisory Board denied the Klan 's request during the 1993 Christmas holiday . He argued that the symbolic meaning of the cross was different from the Christmas tree and menorah , which the state permits . The Klan prevailed in the 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals on December 21 , 1993 , and erected a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 m ) cross the following day . The same board denied the Klan a permit to rally on Martin Luther King Day ( January 15 , 1994 ) due to the group 's failure to pay a $ 15 @,@ 116 bill from its Oct. 23 rally and its refusal to post a bond to cover expenses for the proposed rally . When the same 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals overturned the decision to deny the 1994 permit , the state chose not to appeal . The following year the Klan again applied to erect a cross for the Christmas holiday season , and the 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals concurred with the prior ruling . The United States Supreme Court did not agree to hear arguments on the topic until a few weeks after Cordray resigned from his solicitor general position . After his resignation in 1994 he several times represented the federal government in the U.S. Supreme Court : two of Cordray 's appearances before were by appointment of the Democratic Bill Clinton Justice Department and two were by the Republican George W. Bush Justice Department . 
 Cordray was granted a ruling by the Ohio Supreme Court that lower courts could not grant a stay of execution for a death row inmate . At the same time , Fisher , Cordray 's boss , sought a referendum to mandate that appeals in death penalty cases be made directly to the Supreme Court . In 1994 the 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Steffen v. Tate ( 39 F.3d 622 1994 ) limited death row inmates to a single federal appeal and said that federal courts cannot stay an execution if the case is still in a state court . 
 = = Latter political career ( 1995 – 2007 ) = = 
 In early 1996 , Cordray was elected to the Ohio Democratic Party Central Committee from the 15th district by a 5 @,@ 472 – 1 @,@ 718 margin over John J. <unk> . 
 In late 1996 Cordray , who was in private practice at the time , was a leading contender and finalist for a United States Attorney position during the second term of the Clinton Administration , along with Kent Markus and Sharon <unk> . <unk> was eventually selected . 
 = = = 1998 Ohio Attorney General election = = = 
 During the 1998 election for Ohio attorney general , Cordray ran unopposed in the Democratic primary but was defeated , 62 % – 38 % , by one @-@ term Republican incumbent Betty Montgomery . 
 = = = 2000 U.S. Senate election = = = 
 Cordray entered the U.S. Senate elections in a race that began as a three @-@ way contest for the Democratic nomination to oppose first @-@ term Republican incumbent Mike DeWine . The three @-@ way race was unusual since the three candidates ( Cordray , Rev. Marvin <unk> , and Ted Celeste ) were encouraged to campaign together in order to promote name recognition , conserve resources and lessen infighting . Ohio Democratic party leaders believed Cordray was better suited for an Ohio Supreme Court seat and urged him to drop out of the Senate race . Despite the Ohio Democrats not endorsing any candidate in the primary election , the entry of Dan Radakovich as a fourth competitor , and the anticipated entry of former Mayor of Cincinnati and television personality Jerry Springer , Cordray persisted in his campaign . Celeste , the younger brother of former Ohio governor Dick Celeste , won with 369 @,@ 772 votes . He was trailed by <unk> ( the only black Senate candidate in the country in 2000 ) with 204 @,@ 811 votes , Cordray with 200 @,@ 157 , and Radakovich with 69 @,@ 002 . 
 = = = Franklin County Treasurer = = = 
 Cordray was unopposed in the May 7 , 2002 , primary election for the Democratic nomination as Franklin County treasurer . He defeated Republican incumbent Wade Steen , who had been appointed in May 2001 to replace Bobbie M. Hall . The election was close , unofficially 131 @,@ 199 – 128 @,@ 677 ( 50 @.@ 5 % – 49 @.@ 5 % ) , official margin of victory 3 @,@ 232 . Cordray was the first Democrat to hold the position since 1977 , and he assumed office on December 9 , 2002 , instead of after January 1 because he was filling Hall 's unexpired term . 
 In the 2004 race for re @-@ election , the Franklin County Republican party made no endorsement , but Republican Jim <unk> challenged Cordray . Cordray defeated him and was elected to a four @-@ year term by a 272 @,@ 593 – 153 @,@ 625 ( 64 % – 36 % ) margin . 
 As Franklin County treasurer , Cordray focused on four major initiatives : collection of delinquent tax revenue through a tax lien certificate sale , creation of a land bank , personal finance education , and the development of a community outreach program . He managed a portfolio that averages $ 650 million and consistently beat its benchmarks , and he set new records for delinquent tax collection in Franklin County , which was the only Ohio county with a AAA credit rating . He also served as president of the Board of Revision and chair of the Budget Commission . In 2005 , Cordray was named the national " County Leader of the Year " by American City & County magazine . 
 = = Statewide office ( 2007 – 2011 ) = = 
 = = = Ohio Treasurer = = = 
 In the 2006 Democratic party primary election for state treasurer he was set to face Montgomery County Treasurer Hugh Quill who filed an entry , but in the end , he was unopposed . He defeated Republican nominee Sandra O 'Brien for state treasurer in the 2006 election . Cordray succeeded <unk> Bradley in a near @-@ statewide sweep by the Democratic Party . Cordray noted that when he assumed statewide office , Ohio was challenged with restoring public trust after the misdeeds of former Ohio Governor Bob Taft . Referring to what in a similar way would be required to follow Ohio Attorney General Marc Dann and his interim successor Nancy Rogers he said : " ... we have been patiently rebuilding the public trust there [ in the state government ] and I think it would be a very similar task there in the Attorney General 's office . " 
 = = = Ohio Attorney General = = = 
 = = = = 2008 election = = = = 
 Cordray announced his 2008 candidacy for Ohio state attorney general on June 11 , 2008 . He was endorsed by Ohio Governor Ted Strickland . The vacancy in the office of the attorney general was created by the May 14 , 2008 , resignation of Marc Dann who was embroiled in a sex scandal . Several leading Republican party contenders such as Montgomery , Jim Petro , DeWine , Maureen O 'Connor , and Rob Portman declined to enter the race . Cordray 's opponents in the race were Michael Crites ( Republican ) , and Robert M. Owens ( Independent ) . Cordray had a large financial advantage over his opponents with approximately 30 times as much campaign financing as Crites . Crites ' campaign strategies included attempts to link Cordray with Dann — an association The Columbus Dispatch called into question — and promoting himself as having more years of prosecutorial experience . Cordray asserted that he managed the state 's money safely despite the turbulence of the financial crisis of 2007 – 2008 . 
 Ohio statewide offices are regularly contested every four years in the midterm election years . 2008 is Class 2 senatorial election year , and Ohio is a state with class 1 and class 3 senators . Thus , the Attorney General race was the only non @-@ presidential race in the 2008 election aside from contests for two seats on the Ohio Supreme Court . Cordray defeated Republican Mike Crites , 57 % -38 % . 
 = = = = Tenure = = = = 
 Bank of America 
 In July 2009 , Denny Chin , a judge on the United States district court for the Southern District of New York , granted lead plaintiff status to a group of five public pension funds for investor class @-@ action lawsuits against the Bank of America Corporation over its acquisition of Merrill Lynch & Company . The claim is that Bank of America misled investors about Merrill 's financial well @-@ being prior to the January 1 , 2009 acquisition despite awareness that Merrill was headed toward a significant loss that amounted to $ 15 @.@ 84 billion in its fourth quarter . The suit also alleges that significant bonus payments were concealed . 
 The curious dealings led to congressional hearings about why the merger commenced without any disclosures . In September 2009 , Cordray , on behalf of Ohio 's largest public employee pension funds ( State Teachers Retirement System of Ohio and the Ohio Public Employees Retirement System ) , the Teacher Retirement System of Texas and pension funds from Sweden and the Netherlands , filed suit alleging that Bank of America , its directors and four executives ( Bank of America Chief Executive Kenneth Lewis , Bank of America Chief Financial Officer Joe Price , accounting chief Neil Cotty and former Merrill chairman and CEO John Thain ) acted to conceal Merrill 's growing losses from shareholders voted to approve the deal the prior December . 
 Prior to the filing the five funds had filed individual complaints , but the September filing of an amended complaint joined the actions with Cordray representing the lead plaintiff . The amended complaint includes details about conversations and communications between Bank of America and Merrill Lynch executives that were revealed in media reports , congressional testimony and investigations by the Securities and Exchange Commission . The filing is an attempt to recover losses endured when Bank of America 's share price fell after the transaction . The damages are sought from Bank of America , individual executives , the bank 's board of directors , including any insurers that cover directors ' legal liabilities . Among the specifics of the claim are that Bank of America agreed to allow Merrill Lynch to pay as much as $ 5 @.@ 8 billion in undisclosed year @-@ end discretionary bonuses to executives and employees and that Bank of America and Merrill Lynch executives were aware of billions of dollars in losses suffered by Merrill Lynch in the two months before the merger vote but failed to disclose them . 
 Bid rigging case 
 In April 2010 , he reached a 1 billion dollar settlement with American International Group ( AIG ) , one of four remaining named defendants ( along with Marsh & McLennan , Hartford Financial Services and Chubb Corp. ) , in a 2007 antitrust case regarding business practices between 2001 and 2004 . The settlement is to be divided among 26 Ohio universities , cities and schools . Zurich Financial Services settled in 2006 . Cordray believes that Marsh was the organizing company for the illegal practices and notes that a trial could commence in 2011 . AIG admitted no wrongdoing and that the settlement was to avoid risks and prolonged expenses . 
 = = = = 2010 election = = = = 
 On November 2 , 2010 , Cordray lost his re @-@ election bid to former U.S. senator Mike DeWine by two points . 
 Cordray was repeatedly mentioned as a potential 2014 candidate for Governor of Ohio . However , he upon being confirmed to a five @-@ year term to head the CFPB , he was effectively eliminated from contention . 
 = = Consumer Financial Protection Bureau ( 2012 – present ) = = 
 On Wednesday , December 15 , 2010 , Special Advisor to President Barack Obama , Elizabeth Warren announced that she had selected Richard Cordray to lead the enforcement arm of the newly created United States Consumer Financial Protection Bureau ( CFPB ) . She added that " Richard Cordray has the vision and experience to help us build a team that ensures every lender in the marketplace is playing by the rules . " In announcing his appointment to this position Cordray also stated that he intends to once again run for statewide office in Ohio in 2014 . Cordray described the opportunity to The Wall Street Journal as a chance to resume " ... in many ways doing on a 50 @-@ state basis the things I cared most about as a state attorney general , with a more robust and a more comprehensive authority . " 
 On July 17 , 2011 , Cordray was selected over Warren as the head of the entire CFPB . However , his nomination was immediately in jeopardy because 44 Senate Republicans had previously vowed to derail any nominee in order to push for a decentralized structure to the organization . This was part of a pattern of conflict between Republicans in the Senate and the Obama administration that had led to record numbers of blocked and failed nominations . On July 21 , 2011 , Senator Richard Shelby wrote an op @-@ ed article for The Wall Street Journal affirming continued opposition ( that went back to a May 5 letter to the President ) to a centralized structure , noting that both the Securities Exchange Commission and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation had executive boards and that the CFPB should be no different . Politico interpreted Shelby 's statements as saying that Cordray 's nomination was " Dead on Arrival " . In October , as the nomination continued to be on hold , the National Association of Attorneys General endorsed Cordray . On December 8 , 2011 , the Senate failed to secure cloture on Cordray 's nomination . The final vote was 53 @-@ 45 , with 50 out of 51 Democrats voting for cloture , and 45 out of 47 Republicans voting against . 
 On January 4 , 2012 , a White House communications director announced in a tweet that President Obama would be giving Cordray a recess appointment to the post , bypassing the Senate . The move was criticized by Republican senators , who argued that Congress had not officially been in recess , and that Obama did not have the authority to bypass Congressional approval . Writing for The New Republic , Timothy Noah , a supporter of Cordray , wrote , " As someone who strongly supported a recess appointment for Richard Cordray to run the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau , I 'm confused as to why President Obama chose to act today . ... The trouble is that the Senate isn 't in recess . " 
 The United States Supreme Court unanimously vacated Cordray 's recess appointment as unconstitutional as the U.S. Senate was not in recess . On January 24 , 2013 , Obama renominated Cordray to the Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau position . 
 Amid a push by Senate Democrats in July 2013 to eliminate the filibuster for all executive @-@ branch nominees , senators struck a deal to pave the way for a final , up @-@ or @-@ down vote on Cordray 's nomination . With that senators voted 71 – 29 on July 16 , 2013 to invoke cloture on Cordray 's nomination . The U.S. Senate confirmed Cordray in a 66 – 34 vote on July 16 , 2013 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Cordray was born in Columbus , Ohio , the middle child between brothers Frank , Jr. and Jim . He was married in 1992 to Margaret " Peggy " Cordray , a law professor at Capital University Law School . The <unk> have twins , a daughter and son , and currently reside near Grove City , Ohio . His father retired as an Orient Developmental Center program director for mentally retarded residents after 43 years of service . His mother , from Dayton , Ohio , died in 1980 @.@ was a social worker , teacher and founder of Ohio 's first foster grandparent program for individuals with developmental disabilities . Richard Cordray carried the Olympic Flame through Findlay , Ohio , as part of the nationwide torch relay to the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta , Georgia and has served as a member of the Advisory Board for the Friends of the Homeless and part of Al Gore 's select group known as Leadership ' 98 . 
 = = = Appearances on Jeopardy ! = = = 
 Cordray has the distinction of being an undefeated five @-@ time champion and Tournament of Champions semifinalist on Jeopardy ! In 1987 , he won $ 45 @,@ 303 from the show , which he used to pay law school debt , to pay taxes and to buy a used car . The total winnings came from $ 40 @,@ 303 in prize money during his five @-@ contest streak and $ 5 @,@ 000 for a first round win on the Tournament of Champions . His campaign for public office in 1990 precluded him from participating in the Super Jeopardy ! elimination tournament of champions . ABC , the network that carried the tournament , had a policy against political contestants appearing on the show ( excluding Celebrity Jeopardy ! ) . He did , however , compete in the Battle of the Decades tournament , appearing in the show aired February 5 , 2014 , but finished second to aerospace consultant Tom <unk> . Because of his duties as a federal employee , however , he turned down the $ 5 @,@ 000 consolation money he won in the match . 
 = Merritt A. Edson = 
 Major General Merritt Austin Edson ( April 25 , 1897 – August 14 , 1955 ) , known as " Red Mike " , was a general in the United States Marine Corps . Among the decorations he received were the Medal of Honor , two Navy Crosses , the Silver Star , and two Legions of Merit . He is best known by Marines for the defense of Lunga Ridge during the Guadalcanal Campaign in World War II . 
 He received a commission as a second lieutenant in the Marines in October 1917 , and served in France and Germany in World War I. After the war he held several positions until going to flight school in 1922 . After graduating flight school and being designated a Naval Aviator , he performed several assignments in Central America and China . It was in Central America where he received his first Navy Cross and the Nicaraguan Medal of Merit with Silver Star . 
 When World War II started Edson was sent as the Commanding officer of the Marine Raiders and earned his second Navy Cross on Tulagi . When his unit was sent to fight on Guadalcanal , Edson led his men in fighting for which he would later receive the Medal of Honor . 
 After World War II Edson held several commands until retiring from the Marine Corps August 1 , 1947 . After retirement he had several jobs including the Director of the National Rifle Association . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Edson was born in Rutland , Vermont but grew up in Chester , Vermont and after graduating from high school he attended the University of Vermont for two years . On June 27 , 1916 he left college as a member of the First Vermont National Guard Regiment and was sent to Eagle Pass , Texas , for duty on the Mexican border . He returned to the University in September 1916 , but joined the Marine Corps Reserve on June 26 , the following year . 
 = = Early career = = 
 He was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Marine Corps on October 9 , 1917 and in September of the next year he sailed for France with the 11th Marines . This regiment saw no combat , but during the last six months of his European tour , he commanded Company D , 15th Separate Marine Battalion , which had been organized for the express purpose of assisting in the holding of a plebiscite in Schleswig @-@ Holstein , Germany . Owing to the failure of the United States to ratify the Treaty of Versailles , this mission , however , was never carried out . 
 Following the end of World War I , he was assigned to several positions that would qualify him for the high commands he was to hold in later years . He was promoted to first lieutenant on June 4 , 1920 and spent two years at Marine Barracks , Quantico , Virginia , as the Adjutant @-@ Registrar of the Marine Corps Institute , after which he was sent on a short tour in Louisiana guarding the mail . His interest in military aviation prompted him to apply for flight training at NAS Pensacola , Florida and he earned his gold wings as a Naval Aviator in 1922 . Soon after , he was ordered to the Marine Air Station at Guam where he had his introduction to the semitropical islands of the Marianas with which his name was later to become so closely linked . 
 Upon returning to the United States in 1925 , he first took an extensive course in advanced aviation tactics with the U.S. Army Air Service at Kelly Field , Texas , and then attended the Company Officers ' Course at Marine Corps Base Quantico , Virginia . He graduated with the highest grades ever attained by any student up to that time . For physical reasons , however , he had to give up his flying status in 1927 and continue his career as a ground officer . He was then assigned to duty as Ordnance Officer at the Philadelphia Navy Yard . 
 = = Central America and China = = 
 Late in the same year , he was ordered to sea duty as Commanding Officer of the Marine Detachment on the USS Denver ( CL @-@ 16 ) and was promoted to captain on December 21 , 1927 . During service in Central American waters , his detachment was ashore in Nicaragua during the period February 1928 - 1929 . In command of 160 hand picked and specially trained Marines , he fought twelve separate engagements with the Sandino @-@ led bandits and denied them the use of the Poteca and Coco River valleys . Here , he received his first Navy Cross for actions in which " his exhibition of coolness , intrepidity , and dash so inspired his men that superior forces of bandits were driven from their prepared positions and severe losses inflicted upon them . " From a grateful Nicaraguan government , he was also awarded the Nicaraguan Medal of Merit with Silver Star . 
 In September 1929 , he returned to the United States and was assigned as tactics instructor to fledgling Marine lieutenants at The Basic School in Philadelphia . Upon detachment from that duty , he became Ordnance and War Plans Officer at the Philadelphia Depot of Supplies for the next four years . 
 This ordnance duty was not new to him since he had been closely associated with the development of small arms marksmanship within the Marine Corps . In 1921 , he had been a firing member of the winning Marine Corps Team at the National Matches at Camp Perry , Ohio . In 1927 , 1930 , and 1931 , he served with the rifle and pistol teams as assistant coach . During the regional matches of 1932 and 1933 , he acted as team coach and captain , respectively . Upon the resumption of the National Matches in 1935 , he was captain of the Marine Corps national rifle and pistol teams of 1935 and 1936 , winning the national trophies in both years . 
 After short tours at Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island and Marine Corps Headquarters in Washington , D.C. , he was enrolled in the Senior Officers ' Course at the Marine Corps Schools , Quantico , Virginia in 1936 . He was promoted to major on February 9 , 1936 . Foreign duty as operations officer with the 4th Marines in Shanghai , China from 1937 to 1939 , enabled him to observe closely Japanese military operations . 
 His second tour of duty at Marine Corps Headquarters began in May 1939 when , as Inspector of Target Practice , he was in a position to stress the importance of every Marine being highly skilled with his own individual arm . He was promoted to lieutenant colonel on April 1 , 1940 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Raider Battalion = = = 
 In June 1941 , he was again transferred to Quantico , to command the 1st Battalion , 5th Marines , which was redesignated the 1st Separate Battalion in January 1942 . The training exercises which he conducted in the succeeding months with Navy high speed transports ( APDs ) led to the organization of the 1st Marine Raider Battalion in early 1942 . This unit was the prototype of every Marine Raider battalion formed throughout the war . He was promoted to colonel on May 21 , 1942 . 
 Colonel Edson 's introduction to the Pacific theater of operations began with the overseas training of his raider command in American Samoa . On August 7 , 1942 , his raiders , together with the 2nd Battalion , 5th Marines , landed on Tulagi , British Solomon Islands . Two days of severe fighting secured this strategic island in the Battle of Tulagi . After his battalion relocated to Guadalcanal they conducted raids on Savo Island and at Tasimboko , on Guadalcanal . He was awarded a Gold Star in lieu of a second Navy Cross for his successful conduct of the Tulagi operation . 
 = = = Guadalcanal = = = 
 The battle he is best known for was the defense of Lunga Ridge on Guadalcanal September 13 – 14 , 1942 . His Raider Battalion , with two companies of the 1st Parachute Battalion attached , were sent to a ridge line a short distance south of Henderson Field . Here , they were supposed to get a short rest but Japanese forces unexpectedly attacked the position on the first evening , penetrating the left center of his line of resistance , forcing a withdrawal to a reserve position . 
 Approximately 800 Marines withstood the repeated assaults of more than 2 @,@ 500 Japanese on the " Bloody Ridge " , as it came to be called . To the men of the 1st Raider Battalion , however , who sustained 256 casualties , it became " Edson 's Ridge " , in high honor of the officer who " was all over the place , encouraging , cajoling , and correcting as he continually exposed himself to enemy fire . " His nickname , " Red Mike " , originating from his red beard worn in Nicaragua days , was also his code name during this battle . From then on he was known by all as " Red Mike " . It was for this action — the Battle of Edson 's Ridge — that he received the Medal of Honor . 
 After Edson 's Ridge , he was placed in command of the 5th Marine Regiment . In this capacity , he was one of the primary leaders in the Matanikau actions from September 23 to October 9 , 1942 . He also commanded the 5th Marines during the Battle for Henderson Field and until the regiment was withdrawn from Guadalcanal , along with the rest of the 1st Marine Division , in November 1942 . Shortly after , another officer stated " that officers and men would willingly follow him anywhere — the only problem was to keep up with him " . A combat correspondent testified that " he is not a fierce Marine . In fact he appears almost shy . Yet Colonel Edson is probably among the five finest combat commanders in all the United States armed forces . " It was also said that he was not readily given to a show of emotion but when his personal runner of several months ' service was killed at the Matanikau River on Guadalcanal , witnesses said he " cried like a baby " , and later stated that the man could never be replaced . 
 = = = Higher commands & more battles = = = 
 In August 1943 , he was named Chief of Staff of the 2nd Marine Division , which was then preparing for the invasion of Tarawa . He prepared an estimate of the situation for this operation which proved to be surprisingly accurate and has since become a classic in Marine Corps military literature . For this action , he received the Legion of Merit and was promoted to brigadier general ( December 1 , 1943 ) . Later , he was appointed Assistant Division Commander of the 2d Marine Division and participated in this capacity in the capture of Saipan and Tinian . The Silver Star was awarded him for these operations . 
 Brigadier General Edson became Chief of Staff , Fleet Marine Force , Pacific and in October 1944 was awarded a Gold Star in lieu of a second Legion of Merit . Duty as Commanding General , Service Command , Fleet Marine Force , Pacific , rounded out 44 months of continuous service in the war zone . When a young officer asked him when he might expect to be rotated back to the United States , <unk> Edson replied , " When the war 's over ; when the job 's done . " 
 = = Retirement = = 
 In December 1945 , he was assigned to the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations and , in February 1947 , to Marine Corps Headquarters . Retirement from active duty came at the age of 50 years and after more than 30 years in the military service of his country . He was promoted to major general at the time of his retirement on August 1 , 1947 . 
 Following retirement from the Marine Corps he became the first Commissioner of the Vermont State Police , organizing the force partially from an older organization of motor vehicle officers . He established the organization on a semi @-@ military basis which has since been adopted by other states . 
 In July 1951 , after returning to Washington , D.C. he became Executive Director of the National Rifle Association where his major efforts in that post were stimulating the interest of Americans in rifle marksmanship . Concurrently , he campaigned vigorously for a Marine Corps adequate both in size and strength for its many commitments . 
 He died on August 14 , 1955 , in Washington , D.C. , by his own hand , having committed suicide by carbon monoxide poisoning in the garage next to his Washington , D.C. home while serving in the NRA post . At the time of his death , in addition to his duties at the Rifle Association , he was the Navy representative on the Defense Advisory Committee on Prisoner of War Problems . This group recommended the standards of conduct for American prisoners of war that were later adopted and issued as the Code of Conduct for all American servicemen . 
 He was buried at Arlington National Cemetery and his grave can be found in section 2 , lot <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Major General Edson 's decorations included : 
 = = = Medal of Honor citation = = = 
 The President of the United States takes pleasure in presenting the MEDAL OF HONOR to 
 <unk> <unk> A. <unk> 
 UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS 
 for service as set forth in the following CITATION : 
 For extraordinary heroism and conspicuous intrepidity above and beyond the call of duty as Commanding Officer of the 1st Marine Raider Battalion , with Parachute Battalion attached , during action against enemy Japanese forces in the Solomon Islands on the night of 13 – 14 September 1942 . After the airfield on Guadalcanal had been seized from the enemy on August 8 , Col. Edson , with a force of 800 men , was assigned to the occupation and defense of a ridge dominating the jungle on either side of the airport . Facing a formidable Japanese attack which , augmented by infiltration , had crashed through our front lines , he , by skillful handling of his troops , successfully withdrew his forward units to a reserve line with minimum casualties . When the enemy , in a subsequent series of violent assaults , engaged our force in desperate hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat with bayonets , rifles , pistols , grenades , and knives , Col. Edson , although continuously exposed to hostile fire throughout the night , personally directed defense of the reserve position against a fanatical foe of greatly superior numbers . By his astute leadership and gallant devotion to duty , he enabled his men , despite severe losses , to cling tenaciously to their position on the vital ridge , thereby retaining command not only of the Guadalcanal airfield , but also of the 1st Division 's entire offensive installations in the surrounding area . 
 / S / Franklin D. Roosevelt 
 = = = First Navy Cross citation = = = 
 Citation : 
 The Navy Cross is presented to Merritt Austin Edson , Captain , U.S. Marine Corps , for extraordinary heroism on August 7 , 1928 , while in command of a Marine patrol on the Coco River , en route to Poteca . Captain Edson upon encountering a force of bandits entrenched upon both sides of the river , personally led his advance guard against the enemy , engaging in hand @-@ to @-@ hand conflict with them , and by his exhibition of coolness , intrepidity , and dash , so inspired his men that the superior force of bandits were driven from their prepared position , and severe losses inflicted upon them . 
 = = = Second Navy Cross citation = = = 
