 Before the start of 1976 – 77 , Keegan revealed Liverpool 's primary aim was to flourish in Europe : " There 's a tremendous ambition among all the lads to win the European Cup . We 've won everything else in the last five years and there 's a feeling that the European Cup is going to be next . " Liverpool started the season in good form , losing only 2 of their first 16 games in the League , a run that put them top by September 1976 . A blip during the Christmas period , which included a 5 – 1 defeat to Aston Villa , did not prevent Liverpool from winning their tenth League championship . Liverpool were again successful in Europe , reaching the final of the European Cup for the first time and beating Borussia Mönchengladbach 3 – 1 to become the champions of Europe . Paisley 's team were denied a treble of trophies when they lost the FA Cup final to Manchester United . 
 Keegan had been sold to German club Hamburg for a £ 500 @,@ 000 fee before the start of 1977 – 78 . Paisley signed Kenny Dalglish from Celtic as Keegan 's replacement . His impact was immediate , as he scored 20 goals in 42 league games . Dalglish scored the winning goal in Liverpool 's 1 – 0 victory over Club Brugge in the 1978 European Cup Final , as the club retained the trophy , becoming the first British team to do so . Despite their success in Europe , Liverpool were unsuccessful in domestic competitions . They finished seven points behind Nottingham Forest in the League , who were also their opponents in the 1978 Football League Cup Final . After ending 0 – 0 the match went to a replay , which Nottingham Forest won 1 – 0 . 
 Liverpool began 1978 – 79 in contrasting fashion . They were drawn against Nottingham Forest in the first round of the European Cup and were eliminated after a 2 – 0 aggregate defeat . There was also an early exit from the League Cup , as they lost 1 – 0 to Sheffield United in the second round . But those setbacks were offset by Liverpool 's start in the League ; they won their first six games and did not lose until their twelfth — a 1 – 0 loss to Everton . Their form continued over the season and they won the League , finishing eight points ahead of Nottingham Forest . Their performance in the League broke several records ; the 68 points they gained surpassed the 67 earned by Leeds United in 1968 – 69 . The 16 goals conceded was another record . 
 Liverpool retained the League championship in the following season . Despite early defeats to Southampton and Nottingham Forest , they were top by January 1980 and stayed there for the remainder of the season . A 4 – 1 victory over Aston Villa in the penultimate game of the season secured the League championship . Key to the club 's success was their home form ; they were unbeaten at Anfield all season , and only conceded eight goals . Their impressive form in the League did not translate to Europe , as Liverpool were knocked out in the first round of the European Cup by Soviet team Dinamo Tbilisi . They fared better in the FA Cup and League Cup , but were unable to progress past the semi @-@ final stage in either competition . During the season , Liverpool became the first British club to wear the name of a sponsor , Hitachi , on their shirts . Chairman John Smith was clear about the club 's need for extra income : " The days are gone when a club like ours can control its destiny on the money coming through the turnstiles . " 
 The 1980 – 81 season was a contrast to previous seasons as the club struggled in the League , but excelled in cup competitions . Despite losing 8 games , the same as eventual winners Aston Villa , Liverpool drew 17 to finish in fifth place , their worst position for 16 years . Liverpool 's form in the cups was much better ; an early elimination in the FA Cup withstanding , they reached the finals of the Football League Cup and European Cup . They won the Football League Cup for the first time , beating West Ham United 2 – 1 in a replay after the final ended in a draw . Real Madrid were Liverpool 's opponents in the 1981 European Cup Final , and they won the competition for the third time , courtesy of an Alan Kennedy goal in a 1 – 0 victory . 
 = = 1981 – 85 : Triumph and tragedy = = 
 Following their fifth @-@ place League finish the previous season , Liverpool were eager to regain the League championship . Their goalkeeper , Clemence , had signed for Tottenham Hotspur , and was replaced by Bruce Grobbelaar . Liverpool did not perform well in their early games , losing their first match and drawing several others . Their poor form continued , and by the end of December 1981 they had won only 6 of 17 games , and were in the bottom half of the League . Their form in the second half of the season improved , and a run of 11 successive wins towards the end of the season meant they won the League with four points more than Ipswich Town . Liverpool retained the League championship in 1982 – 83 , winning the title 11 points ahead of Watford . Liverpool were eliminated from the FA Cup and European Cup in the fifth round and quarter @-@ final respectively , but were successful in the Football League Cup . A 2 – 1 victory over Manchester United in the final meant Liverpool won the competition for the third year in succession . Before the start of the season , Paisley had announced his intention to retire from management aged 64 . Paisley had won six League championships , three European Cups and League Cups during his reign , making him the most successful manager in the club 's history . He was replaced by his assistant Joe Fagan . 
 Liverpool continued their success into 1983 – 84 , as they won three competitions to secure a unique treble . The club began the campaign indifferently , but by November 1983 they were top of the table and stayed there to win the League three points ahead of Southampton . As a result , they equalled the record of three consecutive League championships held by Huddersfield Town and Arsenal . Key to their success was striker Ian Rush , who scored 32 goals over the league campaign , and a further 13 in other competitions . Liverpool again reached the final of the Football League Cup , where they faced Everton . A 0 – 0 draw in the first match at Wembley Stadium meant that the match was replayed at Maine Road the following week . A Graeme Souness goal secured a 1 – 0 victory and the club 's fourth successive League Cup triumph . Liverpool performed well in Europe , reaching the final of the European Cup . They faced Italian team Roma at their home stadium , the Stadio Olimpico . A 1 – 1 draw after 90 minutes and extra time meant the match went to a penalty shoot @-@ out , which Liverpool won . Alan Kennedy scored the winning penalty after Grobbelaar had distracted Roma player Francesco Graziani , causing him to miss his own penalty . 
 Fagan 's second season in charge was less successful , as Liverpool failed to win trophy for the first time in nine years . The defence of their League championship was all but over in October 1984 when Liverpool were in the relegation places . The club 's form picked up afterwards , but they were unable to catch Everton and finished 13 points behind in second place . Their defence of the Football League Cup ended in the third round and Fagan 's team played no further part in the FA Cup , after defeat to Manchester United at the semi @-@ final . Liverpool did fare better in Europe , reaching their fifth European Cup final . Before the match against Juventus at the Heysel Stadium commenced , Liverpool fans had breached a fence separating the two sets of supporters . As the Juventus fans fled to safety , the accumulation of people against a perimeter wall caused it to collapse , killing 39 fans , most of whom were Italians . The collapse of the wall led to rioting by Juventus fans at the other end of the ground . As a result , the match was delayed by two hours , but was played regardless , as it was feared its abandonment would lead to further violence . Juventus won the final 1 – 0 . 
 In the aftermath of the match , the blame for the Heysel Stadium disaster was laid on the Liverpool fans . UEFA official Günter Schneider stated , " Only the English fans were responsible . Of that , there is no doubt . " As a result , The Football Association withdrew English clubs from European competition , and two days later UEFA banned English clubs for " an indeterminate period of time " . A condition was added , stipulating that Liverpool would serve another three @-@ year ban once the ban on English clubs was lifted . Fagan had decided to retire before the match ; he felt the team needed rebuilding and he was not the ideal man to do this with his 64th birthday approaching . He was replaced by Dalglish , who became the club 's first player @-@ manager . 
 = Gregor MacGregor = 
 General Gregor MacGregor ( 24 December 1786 – 4 December 1845 ) was a Scottish soldier , adventurer and confidence trickster who from 1821 to 1837 attempted to draw British and French investors and settlers to " Poyais " , a fictional Central American territory he claimed to rule as " Cazique " . Hundreds invested their savings in supposed Poyaisian government bonds and land certificates , while about 250 emigrated to MacGregor 's invented country in 1822 – 23 to find only an untouched jungle ; over half of them died . MacGregor 's Poyais scheme has been called one of the most brazen confidence tricks in history . 
 From the Clan Gregor , MacGregor was an officer in the British Army from 1803 to 1810 , and served in the Peninsular War . He joined the republican side in the Venezuelan War of Independence in 1812 , quickly became a general and over the next four years operated against the Spanish on behalf of both Venezuela and its neighbour New Granada — his successes included a difficult month @-@ long fighting retreat through northern Venezuela in 1816 . Under a mandate from revolutionary agents to conquer Florida from the Spanish , MacGregor captured Amelia Island in 1817 and there proclaimed a short @-@ lived " Republic of the Floridas " . He then oversaw two calamitous operations in New Granada during 1819 that each ended with him abandoning British volunteer troops under his command . 
 On his return to Britain in 1821 , MacGregor claimed that King George Frederic Augustus of the Mosquito Coast in the Gulf of Honduras had created him Cazique of Poyais , which he described as a developed colony with an existing community of British settlers . When the British press reported on MacGregor 's deception following the return of fewer than 50 survivors in late 1823 , some of his victims leaped to his defence , insisting that the general had been let down by those he had put in charge of the emigration party . A French court tried MacGregor and three others for fraud in 1826 after he attempted a variation on the scheme there , but convicted only one of his associates . Acquitted , MacGregor attempted lesser Poyais schemes in London over the next decade . In 1838 he moved to Venezuela , where he was welcomed back as a hero . He died in Caracas in 1845 , aged 58 , and was buried with full military honours in Caracas Cathedral . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family and childhood = = = 
 Gregor MacGregor was born on Christmas Eve 1786 at his family 's ancestral home of Glengyle , on the north shore of Loch Katrine in Stirlingshire , Scotland , the son of Daniel MacGregor , an East India Company sea captain , and his wife Ann ( née Austin ) . The family was Roman Catholic and part of the Clan Gregor , whose proscription by King James VI and I in 1604 had been repealed only in 1774 . During the proscription the MacGregors had been legally ostracised to the extent that they were forbidden to use their own surname — many of them , including Gregor 's celebrated great @-@ great @-@ uncle Rob Roy , had participated in the Jacobite risings of 1715 and 1745 . MacGregor would assert in adulthood that a direct ancestor of his had survived the Darien scheme of 1698 , the ill @-@ fated Scottish attempt to colonise the Isthmus of Panama . Gregor 's grandfather , also called Gregor and nicknamed " the Beautiful " , served with distinction in the British Army under the surname Drummond , and subsequently played an important role in the clan 's restoration and rehabilitation into society . 
 Little is recorded of MacGregor 's childhood . After his father 's death in 1794 , he and his two sisters were raised primarily by his mother with the help of various relatives . MacGregor 's biographer David Sinclair speculates that he would probably have spoken mainly Gaelic during his early childhood , and learned English only after starting school around the age of five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half . MacGregor would claim in later life to have studied at the University of Edinburgh between 1802 and 1803 ; records of this do not survive as he did not take a degree , but Sinclair considers it plausible , citing MacGregor 's apparent sophistication and his mother 's connections in Edinburgh . 
 = = = British Army = = = 
 MacGregor joined the British Army at 16 , the youngest age it was possible for him to do so , in April 1803 . His family purchased him a commission as an ensign in the 57th ( West Middlesex ) Regiment of Foot , probably for around £ 450 . MacGregor 's entrance to the military coincided with the start of the Napoleonic Wars following the breakdown of the Treaty of Amiens . Southern England was fortified to defend against a possible French invasion ; the 57th Foot was at Ashford , Kent . In February 1804 , after less than a year in training , MacGregor was promoted without purchase to lieutenant — an advancement that usually took up to three years . Later that year , after MacGregor had spent some months in Guernsey with the regiment 's 1st Battalion , the 57th Foot was posted to Gibraltar . 
 MacGregor was introduced to Maria <unk> , the daughter of a Royal Navy admiral , around 1804 . Maria commanded a substantial dowry and , apart from her by @-@ now @-@ deceased father , was related to two generals , a member of parliament and the botanist Aylmer Bourke Lambert . Gregor and Maria married at St Margaret 's Church , Westminster in June 1805 and set up home in London , at the residence of the bride 's aunt . Two months later , having rejoined the 57th Foot in Gibraltar , MacGregor bought the rank of captain for about £ 900 , choosing not to wait the seven years such a promotion might take without purchase . The 57th Foot remained in Gibraltar between 1805 and 1809 . During this time MacGregor developed an obsession with dress , rank insignia and medals that made him unpopular in the regiment ; he forbade any enlisted man or non @-@ commissioned officer to leave his quarters in anything less than full dress uniform . 
 In 1809 the 57th Foot was sent to Portugal as reinforcements for the Anglo @-@ Portuguese Army under the Duke of Wellington , during his second attempt to drive the French out of Spain during the Peninsular War . MacGregor 's regiment disembarked at Lisbon about three months into the campaign , on 15 July . By September it was garrisoning Elvas , near the frontier with Spain . Soon thereafter MacGregor was seconded to the 8th Line Battalion of the Portuguese Army , where he served with the rank of major from October 1809 to April 1810 . According to Michael Rafter , author of a highly critical 1820 biography of MacGregor , this secondment came after a disagreement between MacGregor and a superior officer , " originally of a trivial nature " , that intensified to such an extent that the young captain was forced to request discharge . This was promptly granted . MacGregor formally retired from the British service on 24 May 1810 , receiving back the £ 1 @,@ 350 he had paid for the ranks of ensign and captain , and returned to Britain . The 57th Foot 's actions at the Battle of Albuera on 16 May 1811 would earn it considerable prestige and the nickname " the Die @-@ Hards " — MacGregor would thereafter make much of his association . 
 = = = Edinburgh to Caracas = = = 
 On his return to Britain the 23 @-@ year @-@ old MacGregor and his wife moved into a house rented by his mother in Edinburgh . There he assumed the title of " Colonel " , wore the badge of a Portuguese knightly order and toured the city in an extravagant and brightly @-@ coloured coach . After failing to attain high social status in Edinburgh , MacGregor moved back to London in 1811 and began styling himself " Sir Gregor MacGregor , Bart. " , falsely claiming to have succeeded to the MacGregor clan chieftainship ; he also alluded to family ties with a selection of dukes , earls and barons . This had little bearing on reality but MacGregor nevertheless created an air of credible respectability for himself in London society . 
 In December 1811 , Maria MacGregor died . At a stroke MacGregor lost his main source of income and the support of the influential <unk> family . His choices were , Sinclair suggests , limited : announcing his engagement to another heiress so soon after Maria 's death might draw embarrassing public protests from the <unk> , and returning home to farm the MacGregor lands in Scotland would be in his mind unacceptably dull . His only real experience was military , but the manner of his exit from the British Army would make a return there awkward at best . 
 MacGregor 's interest was aroused by the colonial revolts against Spanish rule in Latin America , particularly Venezuela , where seven of the ten provinces had declared themselves an independent republic in July 1811 , starting the Venezuelan War of Independence . The Venezuelan revolutionary General Francisco de Miranda had been feted in London society during his recent visit , and may have met MacGregor . Noting the treatment London 's highest circles gave to Miranda , MacGregor formed the idea that exotic adventures in the New World might earn him similar celebrity on his homecoming . He sold the small Scottish estate he had inherited from his father and grandfather and sailed for South America in early 1812 . On the way he stopped in Jamaica , where according to Rafter he was tempted to settle among the planters and traders , but " having no introductory letters to that place , he was not received into society " . After a comfortable sojourn in Kingston , he sailed for Venezuela and disembarked there in April 1812 . 
 = = South America = = 
 = = = Venezuela , under Miranda = = = 
 MacGregor arrived in the Venezuelan capital Caracas a fortnight after much of the city had been destroyed by an earthquake . With swathes of the country under the control of advancing royalist armies , the revolutionary government was losing support and starting to fracture . MacGregor dropped his pretended Scottish baronetcy , reasoning that it might undermine the republican credentials he hoped to establish , but continued to style himself " Sir Gregor " on the basis that he was , he claimed , a Knight of the Portuguese Order of Christ . He offered his services directly to Miranda in Caracas . As a former British Army officer — from the famous " Die @-@ Hards " , no less — he was received with alacrity and given command of a cavalry battalion with the rank of colonel . In his first action , MacGregor and his cavalry routed a royalist force west of <unk> , between Valencia and Caracas . Subsequent engagements were less successful , but the republican leaders were still pleased with the glamour they perceived this dashing Scottish officer to give their cause . 
 MacGregor married Doña Josefa Antonia Andrea <unk> y <unk> , daughter of a prominent Caracas family and a cousin of the revolutionary Simón Bolívar , in <unk> on 10 June 1812 . By the end of that month Miranda had promoted MacGregor to brigadier @-@ general , but the revolutionary cause was failing ; in July , after the royalists took the key port of Puerto Cabello from Bolívar , the republic capitulated . In the chaos that ensued Miranda was captured by the Spanish while the remnants of the republican leadership , including MacGregor with Josefa in tow , were evacuated to the Dutch island of Curaçao aboard a British brig , the Sapphire . Bolívar joined them there later in the year . 
 = = = New Granada ; defence of Cartagena = = = 
 With Miranda imprisoned in Spain , Bolívar emerged as the new leader of the Venezuelan independence movement . He resolved that they would have to take some time to prepare before returning to the mainland . Growing bored in Curaçao , MacGregor decided to offer his services to General Antonio Nariño 's republican armies in Venezuela 's western neighbour , New Granada . He escorted Josefa to lodgings in Jamaica , then travelled to Nariño 's base at <unk> in the eastern Andes . Miranda 's name won the Scotsman a fresh commission in the service of New Granada , with command of 1 @,@ 200 men in the Socorro district near the border with Venezuela . There was little action in this sector ; Nariño 's forces were mainly engaged around <unk> in the south @-@ west , where the Spanish had a large garrison . Rafter reports positively on MacGregor 's conduct in Socorro , writing that " by the introduction of the European system of tactics , [ he ] considerably improved the discipline of the troops " , but some under his command disliked him . An official in <unk> , the district capital , expressed utter contempt for MacGregor in a letter to a friend : " I am sick and tired of this <unk> , or Quixote , or the devil knows what . This man can hardly serve us in New Granada without heaping ten thousand embarrassments upon us . " 
 While MacGregor was in the New Granadian service , Bolívar raised a force of Venezuelan exiles and local troops in the port of Cartagena , and captured Caracas on 4 August 1813 . The royalists quickly rallied and crushed Bolívar 's second republic in mid @-@ 1814 . Nariño 's New Granadian nationalists surrendered around the same time . MacGregor withdrew to Cartagena , which was still in revolutionary hands , and at the head of native troops destroyed hamlets , local infrastructure and produce to prevent the Spanish from using them . A Spanish force of about 6 @,@ 000 landed in late August 1815 and , after repeatedly failing to overcome the 5 @,@ 000 defenders , deployed to subdue the fortress by blockade . Sinclair records that MacGregor played an " honourable , though not conspicuous " part in the defence . By November there remained in Cartagena only a few hundred men capable of fighting . The defenders resolved to use the dozen gunboats they had to break through the Spanish fleet to the open sea , abandoning the city to the royalists ; MacGregor was chosen as one of the three commanders of this operation . On the night of 5 December 1815 the gunboats sailed out into the bay , blasted their way through the smaller Spanish vessels and , avoiding the frigates , made for Jamaica . All the gunboats escaped . 
 = = = Venezuela , under Bolívar = = = 
 The British merchant class in Jamaica that had shunned MacGregor on his first arrival in 1812 now welcomed him as a hero . The Scotsman entertained many dinner parties with embellished accounts of his part in the Cartagena siege , leading some to understand that he had personally headed the city 's defence . One Englishman toasted the " Hannibal of modern Carthage " . Around New Year 1816 , MacGregor and his wife made their way to Santo Domingo ( today the Dominican Republic ) , where Bolívar was raising a new army . Bolívar received MacGregor back into the Venezuelan Army with the rank of brigadier @-@ general , and included him in an expeditionary force that left Aux Cayes ( now Les Cayes ) on 30 April 1816 . MacGregor took part in the capture of the port town of Carúpano , as second @-@ in @-@ command of Manuel Piar 's column , but is not mentioned in the record of the battle prepared by Bolívar 's staff . After the Spanish were driven from many central Venezuelan towns , MacGregor was sent to the coast west of Caracas to recruit native tribesmen in July 1816 . On 18 July , eight days after the numerically superior royalists countered and broke Bolívar 's main force at La Cabrera , MacGregor resolved to retreat hundreds of miles east to Barcelona . 
 Two pursuing royalist armies harried MacGregor constantly as he retreated across country , but failed to break his rearguard . With no carts and only a handful of horses , the Scotsman was forced to leave his wounded where they fell . Late on 27 July MacGregor 's way east was obstructed by a royalist force at Chaguaramas , south of Caracas and about a third of the distance to Barcelona . MacGregor led his men in a furious charge that prompted a Spanish retreat back into Chaguaramas , then continued towards Barcelona . The Spanish remained in the town until 30 July , giving MacGregor two days ' head start , and caught up with him only on 10 August . The Scotsman deployed his 1 @,@ 200 men , mostly native archers , behind a marsh and a stream — the Spanish cavalry were bogged down in the marsh , while the archers repelled the infantry with volleys of arrows . After three hours MacGregor charged and routed the royalists . MacGregor 's party was helped the rest of the way east to Barcelona by elements of the main revolutionary army . They arrived on 20 August 1816 , after 34 days ' march . 
 In Rafter 's view , this marked " the zenith of MacGregor 's celebrity " in South America . He had , according to his biographer Frank Griffith Dawson , " led his troops with brilliant success " ; Sinclair agrees , calling the march a " remarkable feat " demonstrating " genuine military skill " . With Bolívar back in Aux Cayes , overall command of the republican armies in Venezuela had been given to Piar . MacGregor and Piar had several disagreements over the next two months regarding the strategic conduct of the war — according to the American historian David Bushnell , the Scottish general probably " r [ an ] afoul of personal and factional rivalries within the patriot camp " . In early October 1816 MacGregor left with Josefa for Margarita Island , about 24 miles ( 39 km ) off eastern Venezuela , where he hoped to enter the service of General Juan Bautista Arismendi . Soon afterwards he received an <unk> letter from Bolívar : " The retreat which you had the honour to conduct is in my opinion superior to the conquest of an empire ... Please accept my congratulations for the prodigious services you have rendered my country " . MacGregor 's march to Barcelona would remain prominent in the South American revolutionary narrative for years . 
 = = = Florida republic ; Amelia Island affair = = = 
 Arismendi proposed to MacGregor that capturing one of the ports in East or West Florida , which were then Spanish colonies , might provide an excellent springboard for republican operations elsewhere in Latin America . MacGregor liked the idea and , after an abortive attempt to recruit in Haiti , sailed with Josefa to the United States to raise money and volunteers . In early 1817 , soon after he left , a further congratulatory letter from Bolívar arrived in Margarita , promoting MacGregor to divisional general , awarding him the Orden de los Libertadores ( Order of the Liberators ) and asking him to return to Venezuela . MacGregor remained ignorant of this for two years . On 31 March 1817 , in Philadelphia , MacGregor received a document from three men calling themselves the " deputies of free America " — Lino de Clemente , Pedro <unk> and Martin Thompson , each of whom claimed to speak for one or more of the Latin American republics — in which the Scottish general was called upon to take possession of " both the Floridas , East and West " as soon as possible . Florida 's proposed fate was not specified ; MacGregor presumed that the Floridians , who were mostly of non @-@ Spanish origin , would seek US annexation and that the US would quickly comply . He thus expected at least covert support from the US government . 
 In the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , South Carolina and particularly Savannah , Georgia , MacGregor raised not only several hundred armed men for this enterprise , but also $ 160 @,@ 000 by the sale of " scripts " to investors , promising them fertile acres in Florida or their money back with interest . He determined to first attack Amelia Island , an anarchic community of pirates and other criminals containing about 40 % of East Florida 's population ( recorded as 3 @,@ 729 in 1815 ) . Expecting little to no resistance from the tiny Spanish garrison there , MacGregor left Charleston with fewer than 80 men , mostly US citizens , in one ship . He led the landing party personally on 29 June 1817 , with the words : " I shall sleep either in hell or Amelia tonight ! " The Spanish commander at Fort San Carlos , with 51 men and several cannon , vastly overestimated the size of MacGregor 's force and surrendered without either side firing a shot . 
 Few of Amelia 's residents came out to support MacGregor , but at the same time there was little resistance ; most simply left for mainland Florida or Georgia . MacGregor raised a flag showing a green cross on a white field — the " Green Cross of Florida " — and issued a proclamation on 30 June urging the island 's inhabitants to return and support him . This was largely ignored , as was a second proclamation in which MacGregor congratulated his men on their victory and exhorted them to " free the whole of the Floridas from Tyranny and oppression " . Morale among the troops plummeted when MacGregor prohibited looting . MacGregor announced a " Republic of the Floridas " under a government headed by himself , attempted to tax the local pirates ' booty at an " admiralty court " , and tried to raise money by seizing and selling dozens of slaves found on the island . Most of his recruits were still in the US ; American authorities prevented most of them from leaving port , and MacGregor was able to muster only 200 on Amelia . His officers clamoured for an invasion of mainland Florida , but he insisted they did not have enough men , arms or supplies . Bushnell suggests that MacGregor 's backers in the US may have promised him more support in these regards than they ultimately provided . Eighteen men sent to reconnoitre around St Augustine in late July 1817 were variously killed , wounded or captured by the Spanish . Discipline among MacGregor 's troops — paid first in " Amelia dollars " he had printed , and later not at all — disintegrated . 
 As Spanish forces congregated on the mainland opposite Amelia , MacGregor and most of his officers decided on 3 September 1817 that the situation was hopeless and that they would abandon the venture . MacGregor announced to the men that he was leaving , explaining vaguely that he had been " deceived by my friends " , and turned command over to one of his subordinates , a former Pennsylvania congressman called Jared Irwin . With an angry crowd looking on and hurling insults at him , MacGregor boarded the <unk> with his wife on 4 September . He waited offshore for a few days , then left on the schooner Venus on 8 September 1817 . Two weeks later the MacGregors arrived at Nassau in the Bahamas , where MacGregor arranged the striking of commemorative medallions bearing the Green Cross motif and the Latin inscriptions Amalia Veni Vidi Vici ( " Amelia , I Came , I Saw , I Conquered " ) and Duce Mac Gregorio Libertas <unk> ( " Liberty for the Floridas under the leadership of MacGregor " ) . He made no attempt to repay those who had funded the Amelia expedition . Irwin 's troops defeated two Spanish assaults and were then joined by 300 men under Louis @-@ Michel Aury , who held Amelia for three months before surrendering to American forces who held the island " in trust for Spain " until the Florida Purchase in 1819 . 
 Press reports of the Amelia Island affair were wildly inaccurate , partly because of misinformation disseminated by MacGregor himself — his sudden departure , he claimed , was because he had sold the island to Aury for $ 50 @,@ 000 . Josefa gave birth to her and MacGregor 's first child , a boy named Gregorio , in Nassau on 9 November 1817 . The owner of the Venus , an ex @-@ captain of the British Corps of Colonial Marines called George Woodbine , pointed to the British Legions being raised by the Latin American revolutionaries in London , and suggested that MacGregor could recruit and command such a force himself . Excited by the idea of leading British troops again after years in command of colonials , tribesmen and miscellaneous adventurers , MacGregor sailed for home with Josefa and Gregorio and landed in Dublin on 21 September 1818 . He thence made his way back to London . 
 = = = Porto Bello = = = 
 The third Venezuelan republic 's envoy in the British capital borrowed £ 1 @,@ 000 for MacGregor to engage and transport British troops for service in Venezuela , but the Scotsman squandered these funds within a few weeks . A London financier , an old friend of MacGregor 's called Thomas <unk> , took responsibility for the envoy 's debt on the condition that the general instead take troops to New Granada . MacGregor funded his expedition through the sale of commissions at rates cheaper than those offered by the British Army , and assembled enlisted men through a network of recruiters across the British Isles , offering volunteers huge financial incentives . MacGregor sailed for South America on 18 November 1818 aboard a former Royal Navy brigantine , renamed the Hero ; 50 officers and over 500 troops , many of them Irish , followed the next month . They were critically under @-@ equipped , having virtually no arms or munitions . 
 The men came close to mutiny at Aux Cayes in February 1819 when MacGregor failed to produce the 80 silver dollars per man on arrival promised by his recruiters . MacGregor persuaded South American merchants in Haiti to support him with funds , weapons and ammunition , but then procrastinated and gave the order to sail for the island of San Andrés , off the Spanish @-@ controlled Isthmus of Panama , only on 10 March . Going first to Jamaica to arrange accommodation for Josefa and Gregorio , MacGregor was almost arrested there on charges of gun @-@ running . He joined his troops on San Andrés on 4 April . The delay had led to renewed dissension in the ranks that the stand @-@ in commander Colonel William Rafter had difficulty containing . MacGregor restored morale by announcing that they would set out to attack Porto Bello on the New Granadian mainland the following day . 
 Colonel Rafter disembarked with 200 men near Porto Bello on 9 April , outflanked a roughly equal force of Spanish defenders during the night , and marched into Porto Bello without a fight on 10 April . MacGregor , watching from one of the ships with Woodbine — to whom he had given the rank of colonel — quickly came ashore when he sighted Rafter 's signal of victory , and , as usual , issued a flowery proclamation : " Soldiers ! Our first conquest has been glorious , it has opened the road to future and additional fame . " Rafter urged MacGregor to march on Panama , but MacGregor did not make much in the way of plans to continue the campaign . He devoted most of his attention to the particulars of a new chivalric order of his design , the emblem of which would be a Green Cross . The troops became mutinous again after more promised money failed to materialise — MacGregor eventually paid each man $ 20 , but this did little to restore discipline . 
 The lack of patrolling by MacGregor 's troops allowed the Spanish to march straight into Porto Bello early on 30 April 1819 . MacGregor was still in bed when the Spaniards found his riflemen drilling in the main square and opened fire . <unk> by the noise , MacGregor threw his bed and blankets from the window onto the beach below and jumped out after them , then attempted to paddle out to his ships on a log . He passed out and would probably have drowned had he not been picked up and brought aboard the Hero by one of his naval officers . MacGregor would claim that on regaining consciousness he immediately raised his standard over the Hero , then despatched runners to Rafter ordering him not to surrender . The version of events favoured by Sinclair is that Rafter received orders to this effect only after he had himself contacted MacGregor on the Hero . Rafter , in the fort with 200 men , kept up a steady barrage and waited for his commander to fire on the royalists from the ships — but to the colonel 's astonishment MacGregor instead ordered his fleet to turn about and made for the high seas . Abandoned , Colonel Rafter and the remnants of MacGregor 's army had no choice but to surrender ; most of the surviving officers and troops entered miserable existences in captivity . Rafter was ultimately shot with 11 other officers for conspiring to escape . 
 = = = Rio de la Hacha = = = 
 Making his way first to San Andrés , then Haiti , MacGregor conferred invented decorations and titles on his officers and planned an expedition to Rio de la Hacha in northern New Granada . He was briefly delayed in Haiti by a falling @-@ out with his naval commander , an officer called Hudson . When the naval officer fell ill , MacGregor had him put ashore , seized the Hero — which Hudson owned — and renamed her El MacGregor , explaining to the Haitian authorities that " drunkenness , insanity and mutiny " by his captain had forced him to take the ship . MacGregor steered the hijacked brigantine to Aux Cayes , then sold her after she was found to be unseaworthy . Waiting for him in Aux Cayes were 500 officers and enlisted men , courtesy of recruiters in Ireland and London , but he had no ships to carry them and little in the way of equipment . This was remedied during July and August 1819 , first by the arrival of his Irish recruiter Colonel Thomas Eyre with 400 men and two ships — MacGregor gave him the rank of general and the Order of the Green Cross — and then by the appearance of war materiel from London , sent by Thomas <unk> on a schooner named Amelia . 
 MacGregor <unk> announced his intention to liberate New Granada , but then hesitated . The lack of action , rations or pay for weeks prompted most of the British volunteers to go home . MacGregor 's force , which had comprised 900 men at its peak ( including officers ) , had dwindled to no more than 250 by the time he directed the Amelia and two other vessels to Rio de la Hacha on 29 September 1819 . His remaining officers included Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Michael Rafter , who had bought a commission with the hope of rescuing his brother William . After being driven away from Rio de la Hacha harbour by cannon on 4 October , MacGregor ordered a night landing west of the town and said that he would take personal command once the troops were ashore . Lieutenant @-@ Colonel William Norcott led the men onto the beach and waited there two hours for MacGregor to arrive , but the general failed to appear . Attacked by a larger Spanish force , Norcott countered and captured the town . MacGregor still refused to leave the ships , convinced that the flag flying over the fort must be a trick ; even when Norcott rowed out to tell him to come into port , MacGregor would not step ashore for over a day . When he did appear , many of his soldiers swore and spat at him . He issued another lofty proclamation , recalled by Rafter as an " aberration of human intellect " , at the foot of which MacGregor identified himself as " His Majesty the Inca of New Granada " . 
 Events went largely as they had done earlier in the year at Porto Bello . MacGregor abstained from command in all but name , and the troops descended into a state of confused drunkenness . " General MacGregor displayed so palpable a want of the requisite qualities which should distinguish the commander of such an expedition , " Rafter wrote , " that universal astonishment prevailed amongst his followers at the reputation he had for some time maintained . " As Spanish forces gathered around the town , Norcott and Rafter decided the situation was hopeless and left on a captured Spanish schooner on 10 October 1819 , taking with them five officers and 27 soldiers and sailors . MacGregor convened his remaining officers the next day and , giving them promotions and Green Cross decorations , exhorted them to help him lead the defence . Immediately afterwards he went to the port , ostensibly to escort Eyre 's wife and two children to safety on a ship . After putting the <unk> on the Lovely Ann , he boarded the Amelia and ordered the ships out to sea just as the Spanish attacked . General Eyre and the troops left behind were all killed . 
 MacGregor reached Aux Cayes to find news of this latest debacle had preceded him , and he was shunned . A friend in Jamaica , Thomas Higson , informed him through letters that Josefa and Gregorio had been evicted , and until Higson 's intervention had sought sanctuary in a slave 's hut . MacGregor was wanted in Jamaica for piracy and so could not join his family there . He similarly could not go back to Bolívar , who was so outraged by MacGregor 's recent conduct that he accused the Scotsman of treason and ordered his death by hanging if he ever set foot on the South American mainland again . MacGregor 's whereabouts for the half year following October 1819 are unknown . Back in London in June 1820 , Michael Rafter published his highly censorious account of MacGregor 's adventures , Memoirs of Gregor M <unk> , dedicating the book to his brother Colonel William Rafter and the troops abandoned at Porto Bello and Rio de la Hacha . In his summary Rafter speculated that following the latter episode MacGregor was " politically , though not naturally dead " — " to suppose " , he wrote , " that any person could be induced again to join him in his desperate projects , would be to conceive a degree of madness and folly of which human nature , however fallen , is incapable " . 
 = = Poyais scheme = = 
 = = = Cazique of Poyais = = = 
 MacGregor 's next known location is at the court of King George Frederic Augustus of the Mosquito Coast , at Cape Gracias a Dios on the Gulf of Honduras in April 1820 . The Mosquito people , descendants of shipwrecked African slaves and indigenous people , shared the historic British antipathy towards Spain , and the British authorities in the region had crowned their most powerful chieftains as " kings " since the 17th century . These were kings in little more than name , with no effective control over the country they ostensibly led ; Britain crowned and protected them simply so they could declare the area to be under Mosquito sovereignty and thereby obstruct Spanish claims . There had been a modest British settlement on the coast around the Black River ( now the Río <unk> ) , but this had been evacuated following the Anglo @-@ Spanish Convention of 1786 . By the 1820s the most visible sign of prior colonisation was a small graveyard overgrown by the jungle . 
 On 29 April 1820 , George Frederic Augustus signed a document granting MacGregor and his heirs a substantial swathe of Mosquito territory — 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 12 @,@ 500 square miles ; 32 @,@ 375 square kilometres ) , an area larger than Wales — in exchange for rum and jewellery . The land was pleasing to the eye but unfit for cultivation and could sustain little in the way of livestock . Its area was roughly a triangle with corners at Cape Gracias a Dios , Cape Camarón and the Black River 's headwaters . MacGregor dubbed this area " Poyais " after the natives of the highlands around the Black River 's source , the Paya or " Poyer " people ( today called the Pech ) , and in mid @-@ 1821 appeared back in London calling himself the Cazique of Poyais — " Cazique " , a Spanish @-@ American word for a native chief , being equivalent in MacGregor 's usage to " Prince " . He claimed to have been created such by the Mosquito king , but in fact both the title and Poyais were of his own invention . 
 Despite Rafter 's book , London society remained largely unaware of MacGregor 's failures over the past few years , but remembered successes such as his march to Barcelona ; similarly his association with the " Die @-@ Hards " of the 57th Foot was recalled , but his dubious early discharge was not . In this climate of a constantly shifting Latin America , where governments rose , fell and adopted new names from year to year , it did not seem so implausible that there might be a country called Poyais or that a decorated general like MacGregor might be its leader . The Cazique became " a great adornment for the dinner tables and ballrooms of sophisticated London " , Sinclair writes — rumours abounded that he was partially descended from indigenous royalty . His exotic appeal was enhanced by the arrival of the striking " Princess of Poyais " , Josefa , who had given birth to a girl named Josefa Anna Gregoria at MacGregor 's sister 's home in Ireland . The MacGregors received countless social invitations , including an official reception at Guildhall from the Lord Mayor of London . 
 MacGregor said that he had come to London to attend King George IV 's coronation on the Poyers ' behalf , and to seek investment and immigrants for Poyais . He claimed to have inherited a democratic system of government there , with a basic civil service and military . To those interested MacGregor showed what he said was a copy of a printed proclamation he had issued to the Poyers on 13 April 1821 . He therein announced the 1820 land grant , his departure for Europe to seek investors and colonists — " religious and moral instructors ... and persons to guide and assist you " — and the appointment of Brigadier @-@ General George Woodbine to be " Vice @-@ Cazique " during his absence . " <unk> ! " , the document concluded , " I now bid you farewell for a while ... I trust , that through the kindness of Almighty Providence , I shall be again enabled to return amongst you , and that then it will be my pleasing duty to hail you as affectionate friends , and yours to receive me as your faithful Cazique and Father . " There is no evidence that such a statement was ever actually distributed on the Mosquito Coast . 
 So began what has been called one of the most brazen confidence tricks in history — the Poyais scheme . MacGregor devised a <unk> parliament and other convoluted constitutional arrangements for Poyais , drew up commercial and banking mechanisms , and designed distinctive uniforms for each regiment of the Poyaisian Army . His imaginary country had an honours system , landed titles , a coat of arms — doubly supported by Poyers and unicorns — and the same Green Cross flag he had used in Florida . By the end of 1821 Major William John Richardson had not only accepted MacGregor 's fantasy as true but become an active ally , providing his attractive estate at Oak Hall , Wanstead to be a British base for the supposed Poyaisian royal family . MacGregor gave Richardson the Order of the Green Cross , commissioned him into the Poyaisian " Royal Regiment of Horse Guards " and appointed him chargé d 'affaires of the Poyaisian legation at <unk> Hill in the City of London — the top representative of Poyais in Britain . Richardson 's letter of credence from " Gregor the First , Sovereign Prince of the State of Poyais " was presented to George IV . MacGregor had Poyaisian offices set up in London , Edinburgh and Glasgow to sell impressive @-@ looking land certificates — initially hand @-@ written , but later printed — to the general public , and to co @-@ ordinate prospective emigrants . 
 = = = Land of opportunity = = = 
 The consensus among MacGregor 's biographers is that Britain in the early 1820s could hardly have suited him and his Poyais scheme better . Amid a general growth in the British economy following the Battle of Waterloo and the end of the Napoleonic Wars , interest rates were dropping and the British government bond , the " <unk> " , offered rates of only 3 % per annum on the London Stock Exchange . Those wanting a higher return invested in more risky foreign debt . After continental European bonds were popular in the immediate post @-@ Waterloo years , the Latin American revolutions brought a raft of new alternatives to the London market , starting with the £ 2 million loan issued for Gran Colombia ( incorporating both New Granada and Venezuela ) in March 1822 . Bonds from Colombia , Peru , Chile and others , offering interest rates as high as 6 % per annum , made Latin American securities extremely popular on the London market — a trend on which a nation like the Poyais described by MacGregor would be ideally positioned to capitalise . 
 MacGregor mounted an aggressive sales campaign . He gave interviews in the national newspapers , engaged publicists to write advertisements and leaflets , and had Poyais @-@ related ballads composed and sung on the streets of London , Edinburgh and Glasgow . His proclamation to the Poyers was distributed in handbill form . In mid @-@ 1822 there appeared in Edinburgh and London a 355 @-@ page guidebook " chiefly intended for the use of settlers " , Sketch of the Mosquito Shore , Including the Territory of Poyais — ostensibly the work of a " Captain Thomas Strangeways " , aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the Cazique , but actually written either by MacGregor himself or by accomplices . 
 The Sketch mostly comprised long , reprinted tracts from older works on the Mosquito Coast and other parts of the region . The original material ranged from misleading to outright made up . MacGregor 's publicists described the Poyaisian climate as " remarkably healthy ... agree [ ing ] admirably with the constitution of Europeans " — it was supposedly a spa destination for sick colonists from the Caribbean . The soil was so fertile that a farmer could have three maize harvests a year , or grow cash crops such as sugar or tobacco without hardship ; detailed projections at the Sketch 's end forecast profits of millions of dollars . Fish and game were so plentiful that a man could hunt or fish for a single day and bring back enough to feed his family for a week . The natives were not just co @-@ operative but intensely pro @-@ British . The capital was St Joseph , a flourishing seaside town of wide paved boulevards , colonnaded buildings and mansions , inhabited by as many as 20 @,@ 000 . St Joseph had a theatre , an opera house and a domed cathedral ; there was also the Bank of Poyais , the Poyaisian houses of parliament and a royal palace . Reference was made to a " projected Hebrew colony " . The Sketch went so far as to claim the rivers of Poyais contained " globules of pure gold " . 
 This was almost all fiction , but MacGregor 's calculation that official @-@ looking documents and the printed word would convince many people proved correct . The meticulous detail in the leather @-@ bound Sketch , and the cost of having it printed , did much to dispel lingering doubts . Poyaisian land certificates at two shillings and threepence per acre , roughly equivalent to a working man 's daily wage at the time , were perceived by many as an attractive investment opportunity . There was enough demand for the certificates that MacGregor was able to raise the price to two shillings and sixpence per acre in July 1822 , then gradually to four shillings per acre , without diminishing sales ; according to MacGregor , about 500 had bought Poyaisian land by early 1823 . The buyers included many who invested their life savings . MacGregor became , to quote one 21st @-@ century financial analyst , the " founding father of securities fraud " . 
 Alongside the land certificate sales , MacGregor spent several months organising the issue of a Poyaisian government loan on the London Stock Exchange . As a precursor to this he registered his 1820 land grant at the Court of Chancery on 14 October 1822 . Sir John Perring , Shaw , Barber & Co . , a London bank with a fine reputation , underwrote a £ 200 @,@ 000 loan , secured on " all the revenues of the Government of Poyais " including the sale of land , and offered provisional certificates or " scrip " for the Poyaisian bonds on 23 October . The bonds were in denominations of £ 100 , £ 200 and £ 500 , and offered at a marked @-@ down purchase price of 80 % . The certificate could be acquired for 15 % , with the rest due over two instalments on 17 January and 14 February 1823 . The interest rate was 6 % per annum . If the Poyaisian issue successfully emulated its Colombian , Peruvian and Chilean counterparts , MacGregor stood to amass a fortune . 
 = = = Eager settlers = = = 
 For settlers , MacGregor deliberately targeted his fellow Scots , assuming that as a Scotsman himself they would be more likely to trust him . Their emigration served to reassure potential investors in the Poyaisian bonds and land certificates firstly that the country was real , and secondly that it was being developed and would provide monetary returns . In Sinclair 's assessment , this aspect of the scheme " turn [ ed ] what would have been an inspired hoax into a cruel and deadly one " . Tamar Frankel posits in her analysis that , at least to some degree , MacGregor " probably believed his own story " and genuinely hoped to forge these people into a Poyaisian society . MacGregor told his would @-@ be colonists that he wished to see Poyais populated with Scots as they possessed the necessary hardiness and character to develop the new country . Alluding to the rivalry with England and the Darien episode — which , he stressed , had involved a direct ancestor of his — MacGregor suggested that in Poyais they might right this historic wrong and salvage Scottish pride . Skilled tradesmen and artisans were promised free passage to Poyais , supplies , and lucrative government contracts . Hundreds , mostly Scots , signed up to emigrate — enough to fill seven ships . They included a City of London banker named Mauger ( who was to head the Bank of Poyais ) , doctors , civil servants , young men whose families had bought them commissions in the Poyaisian Army and Navy , and an Edinburgh cobbler who accepted the post of Official Shoemaker to the Princess of Poyais . 
 Leadership of the Cazique 's first emigration party was given to an ex @-@ British Army officer , Hector Hall , who was commissioned into the Poyaisian " 2nd Native Regiment of Foot " with the rank of lieutenant @-@ colonel , and created " Baron Tinto " with a supposed 12 @,@ 800 @-@ acre ( 20 @-@ square @-@ mile ; 52 @-@ square @-@ kilometre ) estate . Hall would sail with 70 emigrants on the Honduras Packet , a vessel MacGregor had encountered in South America . MacGregor saw them off from London on 10 September 1822 , entrusting to Mauger 5 @,@ 000 Bank of Poyais dollar notes produced by the Bank of Scotland 's official printer . " The new world of their dreams suddenly became a very real world as the men accepted the Cazique 's dollar notes , " Sinclair writes . " The people who had bought land , and who had planned to take their savings with them in coin , were also delighted to exchange their gold for the legal currency of Poyais . " After MacGregor spoke briefly to each of the settlers to wish them luck , he and Hall exchanged salutes and the Honduras Packet set sail , flying the Green Cross flag . 
 A second emigrant ship — the Kennersley Castle , a merchantman docked at Leith , near Edinburgh — was hired by MacGregor in October 1822 , and left Leith on 22 January 1823 with almost 200 emigrants aboard . MacGregor again saw the settlers off , coming aboard to see that they were well quartered ; to their delight , he announced that since this was the maiden emigrant voyage from Scotland to Poyais , all the women and children would sail free of charge . The Cazique was rowed back to shore to rousing cheers from his colonists . The ship 's captain Henry Crouch fired a six @-@ gun broadside salute , hoisted the supposed flag of Poyais , then steered the ship out of port . 
 While claiming royal status as Cazique , MacGregor attempted to dissociate himself from the Latin American republican movement and his former comrades there , and from late 1822 made discreet overtures towards the Spanish government regarding co @-@ operation in Central America . The Spanish paid him little notice . The Poyaisian bonds ' price remained fairly steady until they were crippled by developments elsewhere in the market during November and December 1822 . Amid the general instability in South America , the Colombian government suggested that its London agent might have exceeded his authority when he arranged the £ 2 million loan . When this representative suddenly died , the frantic buying of South American securities was abruptly replaced by equally restless selling . The Cazique 's cash flow was all but wiped out when most of those who had bought the Poyaisian scrip did not make the payments due in January . While the price of the Colombian bonds steadied and eventually rose again , the Poyaisian securities never recovered ; by late 1823 they were traded for less than 10 % of their face value . 
 = = = Disappointment = = = 
 The Honduras Packet reached the Black River in November 1822 . <unk> to find a country rather different from the Sketch 's descriptions , and no sign of St Joseph , the emigrants set up camp on the shore , assuming that the Poyaisian authorities would soon contact them . They sent numerous search parties inland ; one , guided by natives who recognised the name St Joseph , found some long @-@ forgotten foundations and rubble . Hall quickly came to the private conclusion that MacGregor must have duped them , but reasoned that announcing such concerns prematurely would only demoralise the party and cause chaos . A few weeks after their arrival , the captain of the Honduras Packet abruptly and unilaterally sailed away amid a fierce storm ; the emigrants found themselves alone apart from the natives and two American hermits . Comforting the settlers with vague assurances that the Poyaisian government would find them if they just stayed where they were , Hall set out for Cape Gracias a Dios , hoping to make contact with the Mosquito king or find another ship . Most of the emigrants found it impossible to believe that the Cazique had deliberately misled them , and posited that blame must lie elsewhere , or that there must have been some terrible misunderstanding . 
 The second set of colonists disembarked from the Kennersley Castle in late March 1823 . Their optimism was quickly extinguished . Hall returned in April with disheartening news : he had found no ship that could help and , far from considering them any responsibility of his , King George Frederic Augustus had not even been aware of their presence . The Kennersley Castle having sailed , MacGregor 's victims could count on no assistance in the near future . The emigrants had brought ample provisions with them , including medicines , and had two doctors among them , so they were not in a totally hopeless situation , but apart from Hall none of the military officers , government officials or civil servants appointed by MacGregor made any serious attempt to organise the party . 
 Hall returned to Cape Gracias a Dios several times to seek help , but did not explain his constant absences to the settlers — this exacerbated the general confusion and anger , particularly when he refused to pay the wages promised to those supposedly on Poyaisian government contracts . With the coming of the rainy season insects infested the camp , diseases such as malaria and yellow fever took hold , and the emigrants sank into utter despair . James Hastie , a Scottish <unk> who had brought his wife and three children with him , later wrote : " It seemed to be the will of Providence that every circumstance should combine for our destruction . " The would @-@ be royal shoemaker , who had left a family in Edinburgh , shot himself . 
 The settlers were discovered in early May 1823 by the Mexican Eagle , a schooner from British Honduras carrying the Chief Magistrate of Belize , Marshal Bennet , to the Mosquito king 's court . Seven adult male colonists and three children had died , and many more were sick . Bennet informed them that Poyais did not exist and that he had never heard of this Cazique they spoke of . He advised them to return with him to British Honduras , as they would surely die if they stayed where they were . The majority preferred to wait for Hall to come back , hopefully with news of passage back to Britain . About half a week later Hall returned with the Mosquito king , who announced that MacGregor 's land grant was revoked forthwith . He had never granted MacGregor the title of Cazique , he said , nor given him the right to sell land or raise loans against it ; the emigrants were in fact in George Frederic Augustus 's territory illegally and would have to leave unless they pledged allegiance to him . All the settlers left except for about 40 who were too weakened by disease to make the journey . 
 Transported aboard the cramped Mexican Eagle — the lack of space necessitated three trips — the emigrants were in miserable shape when they reached Belize , and in most cases had to be carried from the ship . The weather in British Honduras was even worse than that at the Black River , and the colony 's authorities , doctors and residents could do little to help the new arrivals . Disease spread rapidly among the settlers and most of them died . The colony 's superintendent , Major @-@ General Edward Codd , opened an official investigation to " lay open the true situation of the imaginary State of Poyais and ... the unfortunate emigrants " , and sent word to Britain of the Poyais settlers ' fate . By the time the warning reached London , MacGregor had five more emigrant ships on the way ; Royal Navy vessels intercepted them . The surviving colonists variously settled in the United States , remained in British Honduras , or sailed for home aboard the Ocean , a British vessel that left Belize on 1 August 1823 . Some died during the journey back across the Atlantic . Of the roughly 250 who had sailed on the Honduras Packet and the Kennersley Castle , at least 180 had perished . Fewer than 50 ever returned to Britain . 
 = = = Poyais scheme in France = = = 
 MacGregor left London shortly before the small party of Poyais survivors arrived home on 12 October 1823 — he told Richardson that he was taking Josefa to winter in Italy for the sake of her health , but in fact his destination was Paris . The London press reported extensively on the Poyais scandal over the following weeks and months , stressing the colonists ' travails and charging that MacGregor had orchestrated a massive fraud . Six of the survivors — including Hastie , who had lost two of his children during the ordeal — claimed that they were misquoted in these articles , and on 22 October signed an affidavit insisting that blame lay not with MacGregor but with Hall and other members of the emigrant party . " [ W ] e believe that Sir Gregor MacGregor has been worse used by Colonel Hall and his other agents than was ever a man before , " they declared , " and that had they have done their duty by Sir Gregor and by us , things would have turned out very differently at Poyais " . MacGregor asserted that he himself had been defrauded , alleged embezzlement by some of his agents , and claimed that covetous merchants in British Honduras were deliberately undermining the development of Poyais as it threatened their profits . Richardson attempted to console the Poyais survivors , vigorously denied the press claims that the country did not exist , and issued libel writs against some of the British newspapers on MacGregor 's behalf . 
 In Paris , MacGregor persuaded the Compagnie de la Nouvelle Neustrie , a firm of traders that aspired to prominence in South America , to seek investors and settlers for Poyais in France . He concurrently intensified his efforts towards King Ferdinand VII of Spain — in a November 1823 letter the Cazique proposed to make Poyais a Spanish protectorate . Four months later he offered to lead a Spanish campaign to reconquer Guatemala , using Poyais as a base . Spain took no action . MacGregor 's " moment of greatest hubris " , Matthew Brown suggests in his biographical portrait , came in December 1824 when , in a letter to the King of Spain , he claimed to be himself " descendent of the ancient Kings of Scotland " . Around this time Josefa gave birth to the third and final MacGregor child , Constantino , at their home in the Champs @-@ Élysées . Gustavus Butler Hippisley , a friend of Major Richardson and fellow veteran of the British Legions in Latin America , accepted the Poyais fantasy as true and entered MacGregor 's employ in March 1825 . Hippisley wrote back to Britain refuting " the bare @-@ faced <unk> of a hireling press " ; in particular he admonished a journalist who had called MacGregor a " penniless adventurer " . With Hippisley 's help , MacGregor negotiated with the Nouvelle Neustrie company , whose managing director was a Frenchman called Lehuby , and agreed to sell the French company up to 500 @,@ 000 acres ( 781 square miles ; 2 @,@ 023 square kilometres ) in Poyais for its own settlement scheme ; " a very clever way of distancing himself " , Sinclair comments , as this time he would be able to say honestly that others were responsible and that he had merely made the land available . 
 Lehuby 's company readied a ship at Le Havre and began to gather French emigrants , of whom about 30 obtained passports to travel to Poyais . Discarding the idea of co @-@ operation with Spain , MacGregor published a new Poyaisian constitution in Paris in August 1825 , this time describing it as a republic — he remained head of state , with the title Cazique — and on 18 August raised a new £ 300 @,@ 000 loan through Thomas Jenkins & Company , an obscure London bank , offering 2 @.@ 5 % interest per annum . No evidence survives to suggest that the relevant bonds were issued . The Sketch was condensed and republished as a 40 @-@ page booklet called Some Account of the Poyais Country . French government officials became suspicious when an additional 30 people requested passports to travel to this country they had never heard of , and ordered the Nouvelle Neustrie company 's ship to be kept in port . Some of the would @-@ be emigrants became concerned themselves and made complaints to the police , which led to the arrest of Hippisley and MacGregor 's secretary Thomas Irving in Paris in the early hours on 4 September 1825 . Lehuby 's ship never left Le Havre , and his colonists gradually dispersed . 
 = = = 1826 acquittal of fraud = = = 
 MacGregor went into hiding in the French provinces , while Lehuby fled to the southern Netherlands . Hippisley and Irving were informed on 6 September that they were being investigated for conspiracy to defraud , and to sell titles to land they did not own . Both insisted that they were innocent . They were taken that evening to La Force Prison . MacGregor was arrested after three months and brought to La Force on 7 December 1825 . He speculated to his confederates that the charges against them must be the result of some abrupt change of policy by France , or of some Spanish intrigue calculated to undermine Poyaisian independence . The three men remained imprisoned without trial while the French attempted to extradite Lehuby from the Netherlands . Attempting to re @-@ associate himself and Poyais with the republican movement in Latin America , MacGregor issued a French @-@ language declaration from his prison cell on 10 January 1826 , claiming that he was " contrary to human rights , held prisoner ... for reasons of which he is not aware " and " suffering as one of the founders of independence in the New World " . This attempt to convince the French that he might have some kind of diplomatic immunity did not work . The French government and police simply ignored the announcement . 
 The three Britons were brought to trial on 6 April 1826 . Lehuby , still in the Netherlands , was tried in absentia . The Crown prosecution 's case was seriously hampered by his absence , particularly because many key documents were with him in the Netherlands . The prosecutor alleged a complex conspiracy between MacGregor , Lehuby and their associates to profit personally from a fraudulent land concession and loan prospectus . MacGregor 's lawyer , a Frenchman called Merilhou , asserted that if anything untoward had occurred , the missing managing director should be held culpable ; there was no proof of a conspiracy , he said , and MacGregor could have been himself defrauded by Lehuby . The prosecutor conceded that there was insufficient evidence to prove his case , complimented MacGregor for co @-@ operating with the investigation fairly and openly , and withdrew the charges . The three judges confirmed the defendants ' release — " a full and perfect acquittal " , Hippisley would write — but days later the French authorities succeeded in having Lehuby extradited , and the three men learned they would have to stand trial again . 
 The fresh trial , scheduled for 20 May , was postponed when the prosecutor announced that he was not ready . The delay gave MacGregor and Merilhou time to prepare an elaborate , largely fictional 5 @,@ 000 @-@ word statement purporting to describe the Scotsman 's background , activities in the Americas , and total innocence of any endeavour to defraud . When the trial finally began on 10 July 1826 , Merilhou was present not as MacGregor 's defence counsel but as a witness for the prosecution , having been called as such because of his links with the Nouvelle Neustrie company . Merilhou entrusted MacGregor 's defence to a colleague called Berville , who read the 5 @,@ 000 @-@ word submission in full before the court . " Maître Merilhou , as the author of the address the court had heard , and Maître Berville , as the actor who read the script , had done their work extremely well , " Sinclair writes ; Lehuby was convicted of making false representations regarding the sale of shares , and sentenced to 13 months ' imprisonment , but the Cazique was found not guilty on all charges , while the imputations against Hippisley and Irving were stricken from the record . 
 = = = Return to Britain ; lesser Poyais schemes = = = 
 MacGregor quickly moved his family back to London , where the furore following the Poyais survivors ' return had died down . In the midst of a serious economic downturn , some investors had subscribed to the £ 300 @,@ 000 Poyais loan issued by Thomas Jenkins & Company — apparently believing the assertion of the Cazique 's publicists that the previous loans had defaulted only because of embezzlement by one of his agents . MacGregor was arrested soon after his arrival back in Britain , and held at Tothill Fields Bridewell in Westminster for about a week before being released without charge . He initiated a new , less ornate version of the Poyais scheme , describing himself simply as the " Cacique of the Republic of Poyais " . The new Poyaisian office at 23 Threadneedle Street made none of the claims to diplomatic status the old Poyaisian legation at <unk> Hill had done . 
 MacGregor persuaded Thomas Jenkins & Company to act as brokers for an £ 800 @,@ 000 loan , issued on 20 @-@ year bonds at 3 % interest , in mid @-@ 1827 . The bonds , produced at nominal values of £ 250 , £ 500 and £ 1 @,@ 000 , did not become popular . An anonymous handbill was circulated in the City of London , describing the previous Poyais loans and warning readers to " Take Care of your Pockets — Another Poyais Humbug " . The loan 's poor performance compelled MacGregor to pass most of the unsold certificates to a consortium of speculators for a small sum . Sinclair stresses that the Poyais bonds were perceived as " humbug " not because MacGregor 's hoax had been fully unravelled , but simply because the prior securities had failed to deliver profitable returns . " Nobody thought to question the legitimacy of Poyais itself " , he elaborates . " Some investors had begun to understand that they were being fleeced , but almost none realised how comprehensively . " 
 Other variants on the Poyais scheme were similarly unsuccessful . In 1828 MacGregor began to sell certificates entitling the holders to " land in Poyais Proper " at five shillings per acre . Two years later King Robert Charles Frederic , who had succeeded his brother George Frederic Augustus in 1824 , issued thousands of certificates covering the same territory and offered them to lumber companies in London , directly competing with MacGregor . When the original investors demanded their long @-@ overdue interest , MacGregor could only pay with more certificates . Other charlatans soon caught on and set up their own rival " Poyaisian offices " in London , offering land debentures in competition with both MacGregor and the Mosquito king . By 1834 MacGregor was back in Scotland and living in Edinburgh . He paid some unredeemed securities by issuing yet another series of Poyaisian land certificates . Two years later he published a constitution for a smaller Poyaisian republic , centred on the region surrounding the Black River , and headed by himself as President . It was clear , however , that " Poyais had had its day , " as Sinclair puts it . An attempt by MacGregor to sell some land certificates in 1837 marks the last record of any Poyais scheme . 
 = = Return to Venezuela , and death = = 
 Josefa MacGregor died at <unk> , near Edinburgh , on 4 May 1838 . MacGregor almost immediately left for Venezuela , where he resettled in Caracas and in October 1838 applied for citizenship and restoration to his former rank in the Venezuelan Army , with back pay and a pension . He stressed his travails on Venezuela 's behalf two decades earlier and asserted that Bolívar , who had died in 1830 , had effectively deported him ; he described several unsuccessful requests to return and being " [ forced to ] remain outside the Republic ... by causes and obstacles out of my control " while losing his wife , two children and " the best years of my life and all my fortune " . 
 The Defence Minister Rafael Urdaneta , who had served alongside MacGregor during the Aux Cayes expedition of 1816 , asked the Senate to look upon the Scotsman 's application favourably as he had " enlisted in our ranks from the very start of the War of Independence , and ran the same risks as all the patriots of that disastrous time , meriting promotions and respect because of his excellent personal conduct " — MacGregor 's contributions had been " heroic with immense results " . President José Antonio Páez , another former revolutionary comrade , approved the application in March 1839 . 
 MacGregor was duly confirmed as a Venezuelan citizen and divisional general in the Venezuelan Army , with a pension of one @-@ third of his salary . He settled in the capital and became a respected member of the local community . After his death at home in Caracas on 4 December 1845 , he was buried with full military honours in Caracas Cathedral , with President Carlos <unk> , Cabinet ministers and the military chiefs of Venezuela marching behind his coffin . Obituaries in the Caracas press extolled General MacGregor 's " heroic and triumphant retreat " to Barcelona in 1816 and described him as " a valiant champion of independence " . " There was not a word about Amelia Island , Porto Bello or Rio de la Hacha , and there was no reference to the Cazique of Poyais , " Sinclair concludes . The part of today 's Honduras that was supposedly called Poyais remains undeveloped in the 21st century . Back in Scotland , at the MacGregor graveyard near Loch Katrine , the clan memorial stones make no mention of Gregor MacGregor or the country he invented . 
 = Elle Bishop = 
 Eleanor Zoe Bishop , mostly known as Elle , is a fictional character on the NBC series Heroes . She is portrayed by Kristen Bell . Elle appeared as one of the new characters introduced in Season Two and according to contract , would continue on the series for at least 13 episodes into Season Three . 
 Elle is introduced in the episode " Fight or Flight " as an agent of the Company , an organization whose primary purpose is to identify , monitor and study those individuals with special abilities . The daughter of Company head Bob Bishop , she possesses the power to generate and manipulate electricity . Elle is portrayed as mentally unstable , which is attributed to extensive " testing " condoned by her father to research her abilities when she was young . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 In 2007 , following the cancellation of Veronica Mars , actress Kristen Bell had voiced interest in appearing on Heroes because she was a fan . In July 2007 , during a train ride back from the San Diego Comic Con with Heroes actors Zachary Quinto and Masi Oka , and writers from the series , the writers had mentioned that if Bell " ever want [ ed ] to come on Heroes , give us [ writers ] a call " , to which Bell said she would love to . Announced in August 2007 , Bell was to portray Elle , a " mysterious young lady " with an " awesome power " for a total of thirteen episodes . Heroes creator Tim Kring and the writers had created the character of Elle with the idea that she was a " cautionary tale " of what could happen if the other characters had known of their abilities for the duration of their lives as Elle did . Kring pitched Bell the idea for the character " which she loved " and soon they were " off and running . " The casting of Bell , as Kring explains , " was not easy to pull off , " but because of the large ensemble cast of the series and multiple story arcs , " we found a way to jump into a small window in [ Bell ’ s ] schedule . " 
 The character Elle was created long before Bell was cast ; however , Kring noted " when you do cast an actor ... you try to tailor that character a little closer to who the actor is . So it 's hard to know when one starts to influence the other " . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Main series = = = 
 = = = = Generations = = = = 
 Elle 's first chronological appearance is in " Four Months Ago ... " . During this time , the Company made Peter Petrelli their willing prisoner and in those months he was held , Elle seems to have developed a cute crush on him . Peter confesses that he likes the little jolts which Elle gives him as a tease and kisses her . She confides in Peter that she has lived in the Company 's holding facility for 16 years . She also admits to being diagnosed as a sociopath ; she explains at age six , she accidentally set her grandmother 's house on fire and , at age eight , caused a major blackout in Ohio . She also says that she spent her ninth birthday in a glass room with an IV of lithium in her arm . She also explains that she has never been on a date and has never been swimming . When he escapes from the facility , Elle is upset and angry to the point that she blasts Peter , setting him ablaze during his escape . She then chases after Adam Monroe while the Haitian goes after Peter . 
 Elle first appears in the episode " Fight or Flight " searching for Peter in Ireland . Peter has no recollection of his past and is staying with the owner of Wandering Rocks Pub , Ricky . Elle questions Rick about Peter 's whereabouts and when he pretends not to know Peter , she kills him with a large bolt of electricity on her way out the door . Later on , during a telephone conversation with Bob Bishop , her father and Company head , she dismisses the murder as trivial and insists she can find Peter . However , she is pulled off the assignment , much to her frustration . 
 In " Cautionary Tales " , Elle comes back to the United States . Former Company employee Noah Bennet captures Elle for collateral , as Bob had captured his daughter , Claire . He ties Elle 's hands to a chair and ties her bare feet together and puts them in a metal dog bath which is full with water . Elle tries to use her abilities while in the dog bath , but she shocks herself . During this time , Noah tells Elle that Bob allowed the Company to perform tests on her which had begun as early as the age of seven . This included subjecting her to high doses of electricity , which scarred her emotionally for life . Elle has no recollection of the tests , and Noah suggests the Haitian had a role in causing Elle to forget her experiences . After an agreement is made , she is reunited with Bob and Claire momentarily reunited with Noah . However , Elle attacks Claire and West as they leave . She tries to attack Noah , but he shoots Elle in the arm before she can hurt him or anyone else . As it seems Noah is going to kill Bob , Mohinder Suresh , a scientist working with Noah and the Company , shoots and kills Noah . Elle leaves with Bob and Mohinder , giving Bob a look of distrust . 
 In the episode " Truth & Consequences " , Bob chastises Elle for allowing West and Claire to escape . He then assigns Elle to perform surveillance on Claire and her family as they prepare to leave town . Claire , however , spots Elle from a distance , leading to a physical confrontation , which leads Claire to threaten to expose the Company 
 Elle 's last appearance in season two is in " Powerless " . Her father reprimands her for her mistakes ; to redeem herself , she attempts to re @-@ capture the now powerless Sylar for the Company . She uses her ability to confront Sylar in Mohinder 's research lab , but Sylar is armed with a gun and shoots at Elle . Sylar manages to slip away , leaving Elle unharmed . She comes out somewhat defeated , but is informed by Mohinder that if not for her arrival , Sylar would have killed him , Maya Herrera and Molly Walker . He says the three of them owe her their lives , to which she replies , " Cool " . 
 The episode marked Bell 's previously expressed interest in performing in scenes with the character Sylar , as she and Zachary Quinto had been good friends for almost ten years . Bell had said that she " would love to see him and Elle face off one day " . In November 2007 , Bell and Quinto filmed scenes at a restaurant in Los Angeles , which was set as a " New Jersey Diner " and had involved police and paramedics . The filmed scenes are part of the untold stories which are a special feature of the season 2 DVD set . 
 = = = = Villains = = = = 
 Returning in the episode , " The Butterfly Effect " , following her failure to stop Sylar , Elle seeks assistance from Noah Bennet . He is detained in Level 5 , a high security ward for the Company 's most dangerous prisoners . However , Sylar is already there , having killed her father . He attempts to take her ability , but the pain of being scalped causes her to involuntarily release a massive electrical surge . This knocks Sylar out , but also disables security for the entire facility , allowing the prisoners to escape . Elle is later fired by Angela Petrelli , the new head of the Company , who tells Elle that the only reason the Company kept her was because of her father 's influence . 
 In the episode " Eris Quod Sum " , Elle makes her way to Claire 's house to seek help from Noah , having lost control of her ability . She attacks Claire out of anger , but is subdued when Lyle throws water on her . She is told that an organization called Pinehearst could help her with her condition , so Claire agrees to escort her there . They reach Pinehearst just in time to see Peter Petrelli thrown from a seventh story window . Claire takes him away from the building , but Elle refuses to leave after learning from Peter that they can take her powers away . 
 In the episode " Villains " , Elle 's life a year earlier is explored , revealing that she had been partnered with Noah Bennet at one point . The two are assigned to watch Sylar ( still Gabriel Gray ) in order to discover how he transfers abilities . Elle saves Gabriel after he attempts to kill himself out of guilt for killing his first victim . She is told to befriend him , and Gabriel develops an attraction to her that suppresses his hunger . Using a list of people with abilities Gabriel had compiled , Noah arranges to introduce Gabriel to one of them to see his power in action . However , Elle does not agree with the plan , revealing she has developed feelings for Gabriel . She reluctantly goes along with it when Noah threatens to fire <unk> then introduce Gabriel to Trevor , an evolved human with a kinetic projection ability . Her repeated references to Trevor being " special " anger Gabriel , and he orders her to leave while he kills Trevor . Elle is left with guilt as she caused an event that helped to create " Sylar " . 
 In the following episode , " It 's Coming " , set in the present , Arthur Petrelli , head of Pinehearst , arranges for Sylar to speak with Elle . His aim is to have Sylar use his latent empathic abilities to take powers , rather than doing so through killing . Elle is chained to the floor in a metal room , still in pain from her ability . She repeatedly attacks him , furious at Sylar for her father 's murder , eventually begging him to kill her so that her pain will go away . He forgives her for turning him into a monster and convinces her to forgive herself for her crimes , wanting to take away her pain without killing her . At that moment , Elle 's pain disappears and she regains control of her ability . Likewise , Sylar is able to absorb her power . The two appear to rekindle their old feelings for each other as Elle teaches Sylar how to use her ability . 
 In " The Eclipse Part I " , she and Sylar are sent to retrieve Claire who is revealed to be the catalyst , the unknown part of the formula that would allow someone to produce abilities . On assignment , Elle challenges Sylar and he shows her that he can still be a killer , and not just a " daddy 's boy " by killing a rental car assistant . Eventually , they find Claire and Noah , and a fight ensues , however , Elle and Sylar find themselves powerless ; the result of the eclipse . Elle aims a gun at Noah but Claire jumps in and takes the bullet . Noah knocks Elle out and dislocates Sylar 's arm , while he escapes with injured Claire . After awakening , Sylar explains to a shocked Elle that losing his abilities is a bit of a relief . She tells him that they can 't just take what they want anymore , then Sylar retorts and grabs Elle , kissing her passionately . Outside , Noah aims a rifle at them . 
 In " The Eclipse Part II " , Sylar and Elle sleep together but then are confronted by Noah . Elle is shot in the thigh in the ensuing struggle . Both Elle and Sylar flee while Noah follows Elle 's blood trail to a grocery store . There , Elle and Sylar plan to ambush Noah in the rear of the store . Sylar pushes Elle into a cargo elevator , in an attempt to hide her from Noah . Elle watches as Noah slits Sylar 's throat with a box cutter . When the eclipse ends , their abilities are returned and Sylar is revived . He and Elle go to the Bennet residence and overcome Noah and Claire while holding Claire 's mother , Sandra , hostage . Suddenly , Hiro teleports in and takes both Sylar and Elle to Coste Verde beach , leaving them there before disappearing . Sylar and Elle kiss , and he explains that he and Elle are " damaged goods " and that they will " never change " . Sylar then begins to slice Elle 's skull open . 
 In the following episode " Our Father " , Sylar , covered in Elle 's blood , is shown pouring lighter fluid on Elle 's body . He painfully says , " Goodbye Elle , " then sets her ablaze with the electric ability he inherited from her . 
 = = = = Redemption = = = = 
 In the episode " Tabula Rasa " , Elle is seen in flashbacks as Sylar witnesses his real memories reflecting in the Hall of Mirrors . 
 In " The Art of Deception " , Matt reverts Sylar 's memories of his kills , including the ones of Elle . 
 = = = In Heroes graphic novels = = = 
 Elle also appears in the Heroes webcomics . Her appearances in the online series occur before her introduction on the television series . Elle 's first webcomic appearance is in " Elle 's First Assignment , Part 1 " , which reveals her first assignment for the Company . Elle monitors Claire Bennet , posing as a student at Union Wells High School . After following Claire home , Elle ends up confronting Eden McCain . The incident is broken up by Noah Bennet , who informs Elle that he doesn 't " want [ Elle ] hanging around [ his ] daughter any more " . In Part 2 , she finds out about the tape of Claire testing her power and tries to take it from Zach . She is stopped by the Haitian and Mr Bennet , who find out about the tape as well . Elle also appears in " The Man With Too Much Brains " to recruit the original webcomic character Matt <unk> to the Company . She also was teamed up with Thompson Jr. to capture Donna Dunlap , a woman with enhanced vision in " Donna 's Big Date , Part 1 " , and she was among the agents that try to capture Echo DeMille at Lake Arrowhead , where he managed to convert Elle 's electricity into soundwaves , in " Going Postal " . She is also referred in " Faces , Part 1 " to have helped Thompson Jr. and Penny Logan taking down The Croatian . 
 In " Sum Quod Sum " , it is revealed that she has lost control of her ability since leaving the Company , so she has gone to London to find help from Claude . After she tracks him down , he confronts her but then runs away . It begins raining , and Elle decides to take advantage of it . She releases an electrical charge , which travels through the water on the ground and into Claude , but she , too , is knocked unconscious in the process . Claude and his friends , Abigail and Lee , carry her to his place and he begins to show Elle the source of her problem . Things get ugly when Elle accidentally shocks Abigail , which leads them to fight each other ; Abigail 's force field redirects Elle 's lightning towards Lee , so Elle stops and then is asked to leave the place . Although Claude asks her to stay , she prefers to look for the help of Noah , so she goes to Costa Verde and attacks Lyle while waiting for his father . 
 In " From the Files of Primatech : 1991 " , the childhood 's background of Elle is further explained : how she started a blackout in Athens , Ohio that took out three other counties . Elle 's mother sent her to his father , Bob , to New York to deal with her . Bob asked the help of Charles Deveaux , who recommended taking a fatherly approach , but ended up taking Dr. Zimmerman 's advice : treat Elle as any other posthuman and test her abilities . During one of these tests , Bob tried to calm the weeping Elle turning her drinking straw into gold , but this backfired as it allowed Elle to accidentally shock her father . After this , Elle escaped and Bob enlisted Noah Bennet to go after her . Noah eventually found Elle at an arcade and anticipating her attack , he wore latex gloves . Elle quickly electrified a machine making it toss balls at Noah , so she could escape . When Noah followed Elle through a mini @-@ golf course , she electrified a mini @-@ windmill , making it throw blades at Noah . Finally , Elle was cornered ; Noah promised her Bob would be proud if she came back with him . Once back at Primatech , Bob locked Elle up while discussing the situation with Kaito and Noah . Angela brought a young Haitian to mind @-@ wipe Elle to forget what just happened and enjoy her 9th birthday cake . 
 = = Powers and abilities = = 
 Elle has the ability to generate and manipulate electricity , discharging and directing it as electrical arcs . She has been shown being able to weld a lock , blast objects , knock people unconscious , and even kill a man . She is not entirely immune to the electricity she produces , however , as shown when she is drenched in water and attempts to create electricity — she gives herself an electric shock , causing great pain . 
 Elle has endured a series of testing by the Company during her childhood that measured the extent of her power . Bob had stated that Elle was in a " different league " when comparing her to Claire . When inquiring about her abilities , Elle was able to learn from Noah Bennet that the Company had wanted to record the extent of her abilities ( whether she could power a flashlight , a street lamp , or an entire city block ) and Bob had often prompted to continue the tests further , even after Elle had passed out . 
 Her ability is shown to respond to her emotions . After Bob 's death , mourning Elle loses control over her ability and her body starts to produce electricity at any time ( Sum Quod Sum graphic novels ) ; this makes Elle unable to stay close to electrical devices such as computers and even a plane . She claims to live in constant pain ( Eris Quod Sum ) . This ends when Sylar helps her forgive herself ( It 's Coming ) . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 When Kristen Bell was cast , she noted that with Elle it would be " unclear whether she 's good or bad " . In " Four Months Ago ... " , Elle admits to being diagnosed as a sociopath and previous to that , she had displayed sadistic behavior as a result of testing done to her as a child . Bell explains , " Bodies are not able to take that much electricity and pain , and so Elle 's psychologically a little off her rocker . " She is able to kill without apparent remorse , although in one instance , she reacts defensively when Mohinder asks her how many have died by her hand . 
 During an interview with <unk> , Tim Kring described Elle as " a little off " , and Bell added that Elle is " a little messed up in the head " and a highly conflicted individual who does not have the ability to decipher between right and wrong . Because of that , Bell explains that Elle comes off as more of a victim . Bell also explains that Elle is one of the few characters with abilities that embrace their power and is almost on the verge of being addicted to her ability . Elle " enjoys the emotional power it gives her over other people " . She is described as one who is " always out to get what she wants " and someone who " doesn ’ t have many boundaries " . Bell describes Elle as a vixen who " feels like she has a romantic connection to everybody " , and in a few episodes , Elle is shown displaying a great deal of affection to men and flirting with both Peter Petrelli and Mohinder Suresh . 
 Bell noted the similarities between Elle and the character Claire Bennet , saying that they " relate to each other " and " are two sides of the same coin " because , while Elle 's father sanctioned testing on her , supposedly causing her mental instability , Noah kept Claire hidden , preventing Claire from experiencing the same childhood that " really messed [ Elle ] up " . Bell has said in interviews that in later episodes of Heroes , " You 'll find out that Elle holds the key to Claire 's future " and that Elle has " a [ present ] with Peter and a past with Claire 's dad and a future with Claire " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 With the cancellation of Veronica Mars , Variety reported that attaining Bell was a " major , major coup for NBC " because of how in @-@ demand the actress was . Universal Media Studios ' Katherine Pope noted that " many studios [ were ] chasing [ Bell ] in both film and TV " and that Pope was happy that Bell " chose to star in our show . " When Bell was cast , Tim Kring explained that because she had known several of the cast members for years as well as some of the writers , it " was already like part of the family by the time we cast her . " 
 In an interview with Bell , Eric Goldman of IGN commented on Bell 's " eagerly awaited debut " on the series . Matt Roush of TV Guide reported on Bell becoming a series regular on Heroes , and stated he " like [ s ] her more and more , especially as we see the tragic dimension of how Elle has been so cruelly used by her ' daddy , ' Bob , and is much more than the flirty assassin we first met . " Bruce Fretts , also of TV Guide , said that Bell 's portrayal of Elle was responsible for " sparking Heroes to life . " He explains that " [ i ] n just a few scenes ... [ Bell is able to ] juice up the slumping sophomore drama " and her " live @-@ wire performance turned Chapter 5 into this season 's strongest episode yet . " However , because of the large ensemble cast , Matthew Gilbert of Slate.com commented that Season Two of Heroes was " even more overpopulated than the last , expanding from a rabble to a veritable global riot of <unk> Gifted Ones . " 
 = 1932 Florida – Alabama hurricane = 
 The 1932 Florida – Alabama hurricane was a tropical cyclone that made two separate landfalls on the United States , causing devastation in affected areas . The third named storm and hurricane of the 1932 Atlantic hurricane season , it developed from a tropical disturbance north of Hispaniola on August 26 . Slowly moving towards the west @-@ northwest , the system intensified to tropical storm strength before making landfall on South Florida early on August 30 . After crossing the Florida peninsula and entering the Gulf of Mexico , the system reached peak intensity as a Category 1 hurricane , before subsequently making its final landfall near the Mississippi – Alabama border on September 1 . Over land , the hurricane weakened , and after becoming an extratropical cyclone on September 2 , merged with another extratropical system over Quebec on September 4 . 
 At the storm 's initial landfall in southern Florida , heavy rains and strong winds caused extensive damage to crops , particularly to avocado and citrus . As the strengthening hurricane moved to the northwest through the Gulf of Mexico , it generated strong surf that caused severe damage to coastal areas across western Florida . At its second landfall , hurricane force winds were produced across a wide swath of the coast . Agricultural lands in coastal regions of Mississippi and Alabama were damaged by strong winds and heavy rain . The hurricane caused one indirect death and $ 228 @,@ 500 in total damages across its path . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical disturbance was first noted southeast of Puerto Rico on September 24 . Moving to the northwest at 10 mph ( 15 km / h ) , the area of disturbed weather eventually crossed the island . The Atlantic HURDAT database first lists the system as a tropical depression at 1800 UTC on September 26 while located north of Haiti , with maximum sustained winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . Steadily intensifying , the depression intensified to tropical storm strength at 1800 UTC on August 27 . The strengthening tropical storm passed to the south of Andros Island during the evening of August 29 , before making its first landfall 35 mi ( 55 km ) south of Miami , Florida on Key Largo at 0400 UTC the next day as a strong , compact tropical storm with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . A weather station located at the Fowey Rocks Light recorded a peak wind gust of 89 mph ( 143 km / h ) . In the Atlantic hurricane reanalysis project , it was evidenced that the storm may have been a hurricane upon landfall on Florida . After slightly weakening over land , the tropical storm entered the Gulf of Mexico in the early morning hours of August 30 , while located 30 mi ( 48 km ) south of Fort Myers . 
 After entering the gulf , the tropical storm proceeded to organize , strengthening into hurricane intensity early on August 31 . As it curved more towards the north , the hurricane eventually made landfall near the Mississippi – Alabama border , west of Fort Morgan , Alabama , with maximum sustained winds of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) , a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale . A ship located offshore of Mobile , Alabama recorded a minimum barometric pressure of 979 mbar ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) . After making landfall , the hurricane gradually weakened over land as it curved towards the northeast , weakening to tropical storm strength at 1200 UTC on September 1 . The weakening system transitioned into an extratropical cyclone over northern Mississippi the following day , after subsequently developing frontal boundaries . The extratropical system strengthened slightly as it accelerated towards the northeast , but was later absorbed by a larger extratropical system over Quebec by 1800 UTC on September 4 . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 Prior to the storm 's first landfall in southern Florida , the Weather Bureau issued hurricane warnings beginning on August 29 for areas of Florida 's east coast from Palm Beach south to Key West , while storm warnings were issued from Key West to Boca Grande on the peninsula 's western coast . Electrical power was purposely stopped in Miami as a precautionary measure prior to the storm 's landfall . Two Red Cross officials were sent to Miami to monitor the area during the storm 's passage . Other relief agencies were also preparing supplies in the event of an emergency . In Pahokee and Belle Glade , an estimated 2 @,@ 000 people evacuated to Okeechobee , fearing a repeat of the 1928 Okeechobee hurricane . 
 Most of the damage associated with the tropical storm 's first landfall in Florida was confined south of 27 ° N. Recently planted seed beds were washed away by heavy rains associated with the storm . A Miami weather station reported 10 @.@ 24 in ( 260 mm ) of rain in a 24 @-@ hour period ending on August 30 , setting a record for that station . A portion of the MacArthur Causeway , which connects Miami to Miami Beach , was washed out due to the winds , but did not affect traffic . Rainfall in St. Petersburg measured 3 @.@ 79 in ( 96 mm ) , while Fort Myers measured 6 @.@ 52 in ( 166 mm ) of rain . The heavy rains also flooded streets in parts of Sarasota , Florida , and strong winds caused minor power outages . Communication lines between Fort Myers and Everglades , Florida also went down during the storm . Strong winds were responsible for destroying 2 – 25 % of avocado and citrus trees along the path of the tropical storm . Grapefruit crops also suffered loses due to strong winds . Firefighters in Hollywood were forced to stop extinguishing a fire after winds damaged their equipment . The fire would eventually cause $ 20 @,@ 000 in damages . Offshore , a 60 ft ( 18 m ) long boat that was towed out of Biscayne Bay for dredging operations partially sank due to the rough seas . 
 Before the hurricane 's second landfall , another hurricane warning was issued for portions of the state , for areas of the coast from Panama City westward . Boats from Naval Air Station Pensacola were taken to nearby bayous ahead of the storm . Other ships were also sheltered as a precautionary measure . As the hurricane moved towards the Gulf Coast region , the hurricane caused strong storm surge and generated rough seas , disrupting coastal and marine activities . In Madeira Beach , the passing hurricane caused above @-@ average tides that moved 15 – 20 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 – 6 @.@ 1 m ) further inland than normal . Offshore , two fishing boats attempting to cross Tampa Bay had to be rescued after they became stranded in the rough seas generated by the tropical storm . In Dog Island , nine people were rescued from the Cuban schooner Asturias after it washed up on the island shore . Off of Apalachicola , nine fishing boats sunk due to the waves . The tide height offshore Apalachicola at the time was 4 @.@ 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) above average , causing damage to small craft moored at the wharves . The strong surf alone was responsible for about $ 1 @,@ 000 in damages . Strong storm surge off of Pensacola caused water levels that were the highest in the area in several years . Sections of a pier at Pensacola Beach were washed away by the strong waves . Five fishermen were initially reported drowned after their fishing boat struck a reef and was swamped by the storm surge in Pensacola Bay . However , the men were later reported safe at a coast guard life saving station . The <unk> was likely due a lack of communication with the station . Another three men went missing after they departed in a small boat in aid of another boat offshore Pensacola . 
 Inland effects of the hurricane 's second landfall in Florida were mostly confined to areas of the Florida Panhandle west of Apalachicola . Cotton crops in Okaloosa and Escambia counties were damaged due to the wind and rain effects of the hurricane . Numerous pears were also blown off of trees by the strong winds . The highest rainfall totals in the panhandle region were concentrated around the Panama City area , where rain totals were estimated to be in excess of 5 in ( 130 mm ) . Property damage in Pensacola was relatively minor , and was limited to awnings , windows , and signboards . In Pensacola Beach , communications were disrupted due to the storm . A 12 – year old boy in Pensacola died after touching an active electric wire that had fallen during the storm . Total damages in the Pensacola area were estimated to amount to around $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Mississippi and Alabama = = = 
 Hurricane warnings were posted by the Weather Bureau for the entire Alabama coast , and portions of the Mississippi coast from Biloxi eastward prior to the storm . Merchants in potentially affected areas prepared their stores ahead of the hurricane . The potential storm surge threat forced boats in Biloxi to be taken to shelter in a nearby landlocked harbor . 
 Hurricane force winds were felt in both states when the storm made landfall . Pear and pecan trees were severely damaged by the strong winds caused by the hurricane , while orange trees were defoliated along coastal regions . Winds also extensively damaged cotton and corn crops . Heavy rains also helped to damage crops . Rainfall peaked at 9 @.@ 1 in ( 230 mm ) in Mobile , Alabama . Other reports of at least 3 in ( 76 mm ) of rain were common along the Mississippi – Alabama border . Sections of the Mobile waterfront were submerged by the hurricane 's storm surge . The high surf also flooded Bayou <unk> and Bayou Coden in Mobile . Total property damage in the city amounted to $ 105 @,@ 000 in damages . In Gulfport , Mississippi , damage was confined primarily to trees , communication lines , and small craft . Further inland , the hurricane spawned an F2 tornado 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) southwest of Troy , Alabama on September 1 . The tornado destroyed two homes and several barns and injured four people in its 6 mi ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) path , causing $ 2 @,@ 500 in damages . 
 = Architecture in modern Scotland = 
 Architecture in modern Scotland encompasses all building in Scotland , between the beginning of the twentieth century and the present day . The most significant architect of the early twentieth century was Charles Rennie Mackintosh , who mixed elements of traditional Scottish architecture with contemporary movements . Estate house design declined in importance in the twentieth century . In the early decades of the century , traditional materials began to give way to cheaper modern ones . After the First World War modernism and the office block began to dominate building in the major cities and attempts began to improve the quality of urban housing for the poor , resulted in a massive programme of council house building . The Neo @-@ Gothic style continued in to the twentieth century but the most common forms in this period were plain and massive Neo @-@ Romanesque buildings . 
 After the Second World War , brutalist tower blocks were adopted as a solution and this period saw the building of new towns , including Glenrothes and Cumbernauld , but the social and building problems of these constructions soon became apparent . The creation of new towns and council house estates necessitated the rapid supply of new churches . From the 1980s Scottish architecture began to recover its reputation , with new buildings like that created to house the Burrell Collection in Glasgow and more recently the Scottish Parliament Building in Edinburgh . There has also been urban regeneration , involving the replacement and renovation of existing buildings and landscapes . The 1980s saw the growth of speculative house building by developers and the introduction of English brick and half @-@ timbered vernacular styles to Scotland . As the production of state sponsored housing subsided in the 1970s there was a return to conservatism in church design , but there were some original and post @-@ modern designs from the 1980s . 
 = = Glasgow style and the early twentieth century = = 
 The most significant Scottish architect of the early twentieth century , having a considerable influence on European architecture , was Charles Rennie Mackintosh ( 1868 – 1928 ) . He mixed elements of the Scots baronial , Arts and Crafts Movement and the Art Nouveau to produce elegant modern buildings . His major work included The Willow Tearooms in Sauchiehall Street , Glasgow ( 1903 ) , Glasgow School of Art ( 1897 – 1909 ) and Hill House , Helensburgh ( 1902 – 04 ) . The influence of Mackintosh 's Glasgow style can be seen in the work of architects like James Salmon ( 1873 – 1924 ) , whose designs included the heavily glass @-@ fronted , Art Nouveau " <unk> " ( 1899 – 1902 ) on Vincent Street and the Lion Chambers , Hope Street ( 1904 – 05 ) , an early example of reinforced concrete construction . 
 Estate house design declined in importance in the twentieth century . An exception was the work undertaken by John Kinross ( 1855 – 1955 ) . Beginning with the reconstruction of Thurston House , Dunbar , from 1890 , he undertook a series of major country house designs . The most important was <unk> House ( 1901 – 03 ) , built for James Miller in the Adam style . Skibo Castle was rebuilt for industrialist Andrew Carnegie ( 1899 – 1903 ) by Ross and Macbeth . English architect C. H. B. Quennell designed a neo @-@ Georgian mansion at <unk> ( 1912 – 14 ) for the owner of a Moscow department store . There was a lull in building after the First World War and social change undermined the construction of rural country houses . 
 In the twentieth century the distinctive Scottish use of stone architecture declined as it was replaced by cheaper alternatives such as Portland cement , concrete , and mass @-@ production brick . Stone would however be retained as a material for some housing stock in Edinburgh , Aberdeen and Dumfries , and would undergo revivals . In the twentieth century private architecture was increasingly client driven . James Robert Rhind ( 1854 – 1918 ) , the son of David Rhind , was successful in the competition for new libraries to be constructed in Glasgow following Andrew Carnegie 's gift of £ 100 @,@ 000 to the city in 1901 . His designs were selected for seven libraries , allowing him to demonstrate his individual interpretation of Edwardian Baroque architecture . Rhind 's libraries were all built with locally quarried sandstone , which blended in with the existing tenement neighbourhoods . His landmark buildings were greatly enhanced by his liberal use of columns , domes and sculpted features . James Miller ( 1860 – 1947 ) is noted for his Scottish railway stations , such as his 1901 – 05 extensions to Glasgow Central railway station , and the spectacular Wemyss Bay railway station on the Firth of Clyde . 
 = = Early modernism = = 
 After the First World War , Miller and his chief designer Richard Gunn ( 1889 – 1933 ) along with others , adapted to the growing needs of the office block . In Glasgow , with its central gridiron plan , this followed the practice in the United States of filling up entire blocks and building steel framed buildings as high as the fire marshal would allow , as in the heavily American @-@ influenced Union Bank building ( 1924 ) at St Vincent Street . From the mid @-@ twentieth century , public architecture became more utilitarian , as part of the impulse to produce a comprehensive welfare state . Thomas S. Tait ( 1882 – 1954 ) was among the most important modernist architects of the era , using pyramidal stepped designs for buildings like the St Andrew 's House , Edinburgh ( 1935 – 39 ) built for the Scottish Office , and the 1939 " Tower of Empire " for the Empire Exhibition , Scotland 1938 , held in <unk> Park , Glasgow . There was a lull in building after the First World War and social change undermined the construction of rural country houses . Isolated examples included the houses that combined modern and traditional elements , designed by Basil Spence and built at Broughton Place ( 1936 ) and <unk> ( 1937 – 9 ) . After World War Two a shortage of building materials further reduced the number of large luxury houses . Isolated examples included Logan House , designed by David Style in the 1950s . In the 1960s there was Basil Hughes 's design at <unk> for the earl of Cadogan and the remodelling of Gask House by Claude Phillimore . This period also saw considerable restoration of existing houses . 
 During the First World War the government became increasingly aware of Scotland 's housing problems , particularly after the Glasgow rent strike of 1915 . A royal commission of 1917 reported on the " unspeakably filthy privy @-@ middens in many of the mining areas , badly constructed incurably damp labourers ' cottages on farms , whole townships unfit for human occupation in the crofting counties and islands ... groups of lightless and unventilated houses in the older burghs , clotted masses of slums in the great cities " . The result was a massive programme of council house building . Many early council houses were built on greenfield sites away from the pollution of the city , often constructed of semi @-@ detached homes or terraced cottages . Knightswood , north @-@ west of Glasgow , was built as a show piece from 1923 – 29 , with a library , social centre and seven shopping " parades " . In the 1930s schemes tended to be more cheaply built , like Blackhill , Glasgow , with a thousand houses built as two and three story tenements . These building schemes were designed to rehouse those displaced by urban slum clearance , by which thousands of tenements were demolished . However , often crammed into poor land near railways or gasworks , they soon became notorious . A survey of 1936 found that almost half of Scotland 's houses were still inadequate . 
 The Neo @-@ Gothic style that had become almost universal for church building in the late nineteenth century continued in to the twentieth , with examples including L. G. Thomson 's Reid Memorial Church , Edinburgh ( 1929 – 33 ) . However , the most common forms in this period were plain and massive Neo @-@ Romanesque buildings . Protestant examples included H. O. Tarbolton 's Bangour Village Church ( 1924 – 30 ) and Roman Catholic examples included Reginald Fairlie 's Immaculate Conception Church , Fort William ( 1933 – 34 ) . The reunification of the Church of Scotland in 1929 removed much of the need for new Presbyterian church @-@ building , which was replaced by a tendency towards renovating nineteenth @-@ century churches . The main tendency in church design in the 1930s was a move towards classicism . There were isolated large classical Protestant commissions , such as Bristo Baptist Church , Edinburgh ( 1933 – 35 ) , but the major buildings in this form were in the Catholic Church where there was a movement towards worshipper @-@ centred basilican plans , after the pontificate of Pius X ( 1903 – 14 ) . This movement reached its peak in the 1960s after the Second Vatican Council . The leading figure in pursuing this style was Giacomo Antonio ( Jack ) Coia of Gillespie , Kidd & Coia . From the later 1920s he pursued a brick style of Catholic architecture . Coia 's first church , St Anne 's , Dennistoun ( 1931 ) , utilised the engineering techniques of Beaux @-@ Arts architecture , resulting in a broad , centralised space , with narrow arcades rather than aisles , with a monumental facade of red @-@ brick . He used a more linear plan in subsequent designs , including St Patrick , Greenock ( 1934 – 35 ) . Coia 's partner T. <unk> Kennedy 's temporary , open @-@ roofed Catholic chapel at the Empire Exhibition ( 1938 ) was fronted by a Mackintosh @-@ like grid of metalwork , and with his St Peter in Chains Church , Ardrossan ( 1938 ) , with austere walls and towers , showed the influence of the " abstract compositions " of contemporary Swedish architecture and pointed to the future influence of modernism . 
 = = Post @-@ war brutalism = = 
 In the post @-@ war period Scotland continued to produce important architects , including James Stirling ( 1926 – 92 ) , who , with James Gowan ( 1923 – ) designed the Flats at Ham Common , London ( 1955 – 58 ) , considered a landmark in the development of modernist , brutalist residential planning , a style which would have a profound impact in Scotland . Their later work , almost all of it outside Scotland , would be highly influential on an international scale . 
 The main thrust of post @-@ war planning would be one of clearance and rebuilding , beginning in Paisley , where from 1955 the populations of districts were decanted , the buildings demolished and rebuilding began , resulting , in the first district , George Street / Canal Street , in low flats in render and reused rubble around landscaped courtyards , with a 15 @-@ storey tower at one end . As the post @-@ war desire for urban regeneration gained momentum it would focus on the tower block , championed in Glasgow by David Gibson , convener of the city housing committee . Projects like the brutalist Red Road Flats originally offered hope of a new beginning and an escape from the overcrowded nineteenth @-@ century tenements of the city , but lacked a sufficient infrastructure and soon deteriorated . They also made extensive use of asbestos as a fire retardant , leading to long term health problems for builders and residents . Robert Matthew ( 1906 – 75 ) and Basil Spence ( 1907 – 76 ) were responsible for redeveloping the Gorbals in Glasgow , for demolitions at the University of Edinburgh and the stark rebuilding typified by the David Hume Tower ( 1960 – 63 ) . The new confidence of this period can also be seen in infrastructure projects , of which the Forth Road Bridge ( opened 1962 ) was a key example . 
 Another solution adopted in Scotland was the building of new towns like Glenrothes ( 1948 ) and Cumbernauld ( 1956 ) , designed to take excess population from the cities . These used a new low , dense pattern of community design , with terraced cottages and low flats . Cumbernauld was praised for its architecture when first built , but the uncompleted centre and the layout of the town in general , were receiving heavy criticism by the twenty @-@ first century : its modernist architecture described by one resident as " the lego fantasy of an unhappy child " . The brutalist tendency in comprehensive Scottish urban planning would be derided by critics for its " tabula rasa planning " and " architect 's arrogance " . 
 The creation of new towns and council house estates necessitated the rapid supply of new churches . The austerity , shortage of materials and need for rapid building , discouraged the development of innovative design . This was accompanied by the rejection by most architects of traditional forms in favour of " international modernism " , characterised by simple outlines , uncluttered internal spaces , absence of colour , and flat roofs . The Catholic Church , whose traditional membership was most affected by the changes in housing , was the first to react to this situation , creating 76 new parishes between 1845 and 1960 in the west of the country alone . The Baptist and Episcopalian churches followed close behind , particularly in the new towns . Within the Church of Scotland , the closeness of congregation and clergy was expressed in the domestic plainness of 1950s dual @-@ use hall churches , as at <unk> 's <unk> Parish Church , Cumbernauld ( completed 1962 ) , a steel framed building , clad in timber and brick with a flat roof . Of 129 buildings erected by the Church of Scotland between 1948 and 1959 , 108 were on this basic pattern . 
 = = Postmodernism : 1980s to the present = = 
 From the 1980s there was a backlash against the statism and compressive nature of modernist architecture . Instead there was a move towards a form of post @-@ modernism that looked to a clash of styles with a renewed emphasis on visual aesthetics that invoked classicism . There was also a combination of the private and the public . This movement against modernism also included renewed influence by the Scots baronial and Mackintosh @-@ inspired designs ; these can be seen respectively in the Scandic Crown Hotel ( 1988 – 89 ) in the Old Town in Edinburgh and the National Library <unk> Building ( 1985 – 87 , extended 1993 – 94 ) . The most significant figure in the development of architecture in Scotland from the 1980s was the academic Charles McKean . He was secretary and treasurer of the Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland ( RIAS ) from 1979 to 1995 . He argued against motorway expansion and the production of grey , colourless monoliths . Early private works influenced by these ideas included the D. & D. Warehouse , Centre Street and the Bank of Pakistan in Sauchiehall Street , both in Glasgow . Public structures included the building to house the Burrell Collection in Glasgow ( 1981 ) and the Glasgow Sheriff Court ( 1980 – 86 ) . 
 Since the 1990s there has been a return to some elements of modernism , particularly in major public building projects . Recent major public buildings include the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre , Glasgow ( 1997 ) , designed by Norman Foster ( 1935 – ) and known for its segmented , curving roof as " the Armadillo " , and the many striking modern buildings along the side of the River Clyde , such as the Glasgow Science Centre , IMAX Cinema and Glasgow Tower ( 2001 ) , which is the highest in Scotland . The most important public building of the early twenty @-@ first century is the Scottish Parliament Building in Edinburgh , designed by Enric Miralles ( 1955 – 2000 ) and opened in 2004 , with a design that recalls upturned fishing boats . There have been increasing attempts to preserve much of what survives from Scotland 's architectural heritage , including the great buildings and monuments , but also the classically influenced houses of towns like Edinburgh and Glasgow and the surviving tenements , many of which have been renovated , restored from the black fronts created by pollution to their original pink and honeyed sandstone , and brought up to modern standards of accommodation . Urban regeneration has also been attempted in areas of post @-@ industrial decline , like the Merchant City in Glasgow , which was returned to housing from the 1980s , with warehouse loft conversions , and , more recently , the waterfront in Edinburgh , resulting in a return of resident populations to major urban centres . 
 The 1980s saw the growth of speculative house building by developers . These introduced English brick and half @-@ timbered vernacular styles to Scotland , which had been largely unknown before this period . Many were small and built to minimum standards with little regard to energy or environmental issues . Sales of council houses were popular in Scotland and until the mid @-@ 1990s as , unlike in England , local authorities could use the whole of their capital receipts for development . Under the Scottish Assembly , Scottish Homes was abolished and replaced by Communities Scotland in 2001 , which had a responsibility to provide affordable housing and environmental improvement . In 2011 it was in turn replaced by the Scottish Housing Regulator , whose remit includes Scottish local authority landlords . 
 As the production of state sponsored housing subsided in the 1970s , there was a return to conservatism in church design , which may have reflected a loss of confidence in the churches as attendances rapidly declined . M. Glendinning , R. MacInnes and A. <unk> have identified a " post @-@ Coia " style emerging in this period . The limited number of new buildings , some replacing existing churches , tended to be produced by building companies using laminated timber beams , exposed brickwork and pyramidal roofs to produce utilitarian , if aesthetically unadventurous , constructions . From the late 1980s there were some original designs , including St Mary the Virgin , in Port Glasgow ( 1984 ) by Frank Burnet , Bell and Partners ; St Anthony 's Catholic church in <unk> ( 1987 ) , by James F. Stephen Architects ; and the replacement church at St Joseph 's Catholic Church , <unk> ( 1997 ) by Jacobsen and French . There was also the postmodern design of St John <unk> Catholic Church , Irvine ( 1982 ) , and the nearby Girdle Toll parish church ( 1992 ) , which was converted from a farmhouse . 
 = Ankylosaurus = 
 Ankylosaurus ( / <unk> / ANG @-@ kə @-@ lo @-@ SAWR @-@ əs ) is a genus of armored dinosaur . Fossils of Ankylosaurus have been found in geological formations dating to the very end of the Cretaceous Period , between about 68 – 66 million years ago , in western North America , making it among the last of the non @-@ avian dinosaurs . It was named by Barnum Brown in 1908 , and the only species classified in the genus is A. magniventris . The genus name means " fused lizard " and the specific name means " great belly " . A handful of specimens have been excavated to date , but a complete skeleton has not been discovered . Though other members of Ankylosauria are represented by more extensive fossil material , Ankylosaurus is often considered the archetypal member of its group . 
 The largest known ankylosaurid , Ankylosaurus measured up to 6 @.@ 25 m ( 20 @.@ 5 feet ) in length , 1 @.@ 7 m ( 5 @.@ 6 feet ) in height , and weighed 6 tonnes ( 13 @,@ 000 lb ) . It was a quadrupedal animal , with a broad , robust body . It had a wide , low skull , with two horns pointing backwards from the back of the head , and two horns below these that pointed backwards and down . The front part of the jaws were covered in a beak , with rows of small , leaf @-@ shaped teeth further behind it . It was covered in armor plates , or osteoderms , with bony half @-@ rings covering the neck , and had a large club on the end of its tail . Bones in the skull and other parts of the body were fused , increasing their strength , and this feature is the source of the genus name . 
 Ankylosaurus is a member of the family Ankylosauridae , and its closest relatives appear to be Anodontosaurus and Euoplocephalus . Ankylosaurus is thought to have been a slow moving animal , able to make quick movements when necessary . Its broad muzzle indicates it was a non @-@ selective browser . Sinuses and nasal chambers in the snout may have been for heat and water balance or played a role in vocalization . The tail club is thought to have been used in defense against predators or in intraspecific combat . Ankylosaurus has been found in the Hell Creek , Lance , and Scollard formations , but appears to have been rare in its environment . Although it lived alongside a nodosaurid ankylosaur , their ranges and ecological niches do not appear to have overlapped , and Ankylosaurus may have inhabited upland areas . Ankylosaurus also lived alongside dinosaurs such as Tyrannosaurus , Triceratops , and Edmontosaurus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Ankylosaurus is the largest known ankylosaurid dinosaur , estimated to have been up to 6 @.@ 25 m ( 20 @.@ 5 feet ) long , 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 feet ) wide , and 1 @.@ 7 m ( 5 @.@ 6 feet ) tall at the hip . This length has been proposed by American palaeontologist Kenneth Carpenter , and is based on the largest known skull ( specimen NMC 8880 ) , which is 64 @.@ 5 cm ( 25 @.@ 4 inches ) long and 74 @.@ 5 cm ( 29 @.@ 3 inches ) wide . The smallest known skull ( specimen AMNH 5214 ) is 55 @.@ 5 cm ( 21 @.@ 9 inches ) long and 64 @.@ 5 cm ( 25 @.@ 4 inches ) wide , and this specimen is estimated to have been 5 @.@ 4 m ( 17 @.@ 7 feet ) long and around 1 @.@ 4 m ( 4 @.@ 6 feet ) tall . Other authors have proposed a body length of 7 m ( 23 feet ) , 8 – 9 m ( 26 @.@ 2 – 29 @.@ 5 ft ) , or more than 9 m ( 29 @.@ 5 feet ) . The weight of the animal has been estimated at 6 tonnes ( 13 @,@ 000 lb ) . 
 The structure of much of the skeleton of Ankylosaurus , including most of the pelvis , tail and feet , is still unknown . It was quadrupedal , and its hind limbs were longer than the forelimbs . The scapula ( shoulder blade ) and coracoid ( a rectangular bone connected to the lower end of the scapula ) of specimen AMNH 5895 were fused , and had <unk> ( connective tissue ) for various muscle attachments . The scapula was 61 @.@ 5 cm ( 24 @.@ 2 inches ) long . The humerus ( upper arm bone ) was short and very broad , and about 54 cm ( 21 inches ) long in specimen AMNH 5214 . The femur ( thigh bone ) was very robust , and 67 cm ( 26 inches ) long in AMNH 5214 . While the feet of Ankylosaurus are incompletely known , the hindfeet probably had three toes , as is the case in related animals . 
 The cervical vertebrae of the neck had broad neural spines that increased in height towards the body . The front part of the neural spines had well developed <unk> , which was common among adult dinosaurs , and indicates the presence of large ligaments which helped support the massive head . The dorsal vertebrae of the back had centra ( or bodies ) that were short relative to their width , and their neural spines were short and narrow . The dorsal vertebrae were tightly spaced , which limited the downwards movement of the back . The neural spines had ossified ( turned to bone ) tendons , which also overlapped some of the vertebrae . The ribs of the last four back vertebrae were fused to them , and the ribcage was very broad in this part of the body . The ribs had scars that show where muscles attached to them . The caudal vertebrae of the tail had centra that were slightly amphicoelous , meaning they were concave on both sides . The interlocked zygapophyses ( articular processes ) of the caudal vertebrae formed a V @-@ shape when seen from above . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 The three known Ankylosaurus skulls differ in various details , but this is thought to be the result of taphonomy ( changes happening during fossilisation of the remains ) and individual variation . The skull was low and triangular in shape , wider than it was long . It had a broad beak on the premaxillae . The orbits ( eye sockets ) were almost round to slightly oval and did not face directly sideways , because the skull tapered towards the front . Crests above the orbits merged into the upper squamosal horns ( their shape has been described as " pyramidal " ) , which pointed backwards to the sides from the back of the skull . The crest and horn were probably separate elements originally , as seen in the related Pinacosaurus and Euoplocephalus . Below the upper horns , jugal horns were present , which pointed backwards and down . The horns may have originally been osteoderms ( armor plates ) that fused to the skull . However , the scale pattern on the skull surface was instead the result of remodelling of the skull . This obliterated the sutures between skull elements , which is common for adult ankylosaurs . The scale pattern of the skull was variable between specimens , though some details are shared ; it had a diamond @-@ shaped scale ( <unk> scale ) at the font of the snout , two squamosal osteoderms above the orbit , and a ridge of scales at the back of the skull . 
 The snout of Ankylosaurus was arched and truncated at the front , and the nostrils were ellipse @-@ shaped and faced sideways , unlike in many other ankylosaurids where they faced the front or upwards . This was because the sinuses were expanded to the sides of the premaxilla bone , to a larger extent than seen in other ankylosaurs . The nostrils also had an <unk> septum , which separated the nasal passage from the sinus . Each side of the snout had five sinuses , four of which expanded in to the maxilla bone . The nasal cavities or chambers of Ankylosaurus were elongated and separated by a septum at the midline , which divided the inside of the snout in two mirrored halves . The septum had two openings , including the <unk> ( internal nostrils ) . 
 The maxillae expanded to the sides , giving the impression of a bulge , which may have been due to the sinuses inside . The maxillae had a ridge which may have been the attachment site for fleshy cheeks ; the presence of cheeks in ornithischians is controversial , but some nodosaurid ankylosaurs had armor plates that covered the cheek region , which may have been embedded in the flesh . Specimen AMNH 5214 has 34 @-@ 35 dental alveoli ( tooth sockets ) in the maxilla , which was more teeth than any other ankylosaurid . The tooth rows in the maxillae of this specimen are about 20 cm ( 8 inches ) long . Each <unk> had a foramen ( opening ) near its side wherein a replacement tooth could be seen . The back of the skull was broad and low . 
 Compared to other ankylosaurs , the mandible of Ankylosaurus was low in proportion to its length , and the tooth row was almost straight instead of arched , when seen from the side . The mandibles are only completely preserved in the smallest specimen ( AMNH 5214 ) and are about 41 cm ( 16 inches ) long . The incomplete mandible of the largest specimen ( NMC 8880 ) is the same length . AMNH 5214 has 35 dental alveoli in the left dentary and 36 in the right . The predentary bone of the tip of the mandibles has not yet been found . Like other ankylosaurs , Ankylosaurus had small , <unk> ( leaf @-@ shaped ) teeth , which were compressed sideways . The teeth were mostly taller than they were wide , and were very small in relation to the size of the skull . Some teeth from behind in the tooth row curved backwards , and tooth crowns were usually flatter on one side than the other . Ankylosaurus teeth are diagnostic and can be distinguished from the teeth of other ankylosaurids based on their smooth sides . The denticles were large , their number ranging from six to eight on the front part of the tooth , and five to seven behind . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 A prominent feature of Ankylosaurus was its armor , consisting of knobs and plates of bone known as osteoderms or scutes embedded in the skin . These have not been found in articulation , so their exact placement on the body is unknown , though inferences can be made based on related animals . The osteoderms ranged from 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 inches ) in diameter to 35 @.@ 5 cm ( 14 @.@ 0 inches ) in length , and also varied in shape . The osteoderms of Ankylosaurus were generally thin walled and hollowed on the underside . Compared to Euoplocephalus , the osteoderms of Ankylosaurus were smoother in texture . The osteoderms covering the body were very flat , though with a low keel at one margin . In contrast , the nodosaurid Edmontonia had high keels , stretching from one margin to the other on the midline of its osteoderms . Ankylosaurus had some smaller osteoderms with a keel across the midline . Some osteoderms without keels may have been placed above the hip region , as in Euoplocephalus . Flattened , pointed plates resemble those on the sides of the tail of <unk> . Osteoderms with oval keels could have been placed on the upper side of the tail or the side of the limbs . Small osteoderms and ossicles likely occupied the space between the larger ones . 
 Like other ankylosaurids , Ankylosaurus had cervical half @-@ rings ( armor plates on the neck ) , but these are only known from fragments , making their exact arrangement uncertain . Carpenter suggested that when seen from above , the plates would have been paired , and created an inverted V @-@ shape across the neck , with the midline gap probably being filled with small ossicles ( round bony scutes ) to allow for movement . He believed the width of this armor belt was too wide to have fitted solely on the neck , and that it covered the base of the neck and continued onto the shoulder region . Paleontologists Victoria M. Arbour and Philip J. Currie disagreed with Carpenter 's interpretation , and pointed out that the cervical half @-@ ring fragments of specimen AMNH 5895 did not fit together in the way proposed by Carpenter ( though this could be due to breakage ) . They instead suggested that the fragments represented the remains of two cervical half @-@ rings , which formed two semi @-@ circular plates of armor around the upper part of the neck , as in the closely related Anodontosaurus and Euoplocephalus . 
 The tail club of Ankylosaurus was composed of two large osteoderms , with a row of small osteoderms at the midline , and two small osteoderms at the tip . As only the tail club of specimen AMNH 5214 is known , the range of variation between individuals is unknown . The tail club of AMNH 5214 is 450 mm ( 18 in ) wide . The last seven tail vertebrae formed the " handle " of the tail club . These vertebrae were in contact , with no cartilage between them , and sometimes co @-@ ossified , which made them immobile . Ossified tendons attached to the vertebrae in front of the tail club , and these features together helped strengthen it . 
 = = History of discovery = = 
 In 1906 , an American Museum of Natural History expedition led by paleontologist Barnum Brown discovered the type specimen of Ankylosaurus magniventris ( AMNH 5895 ) in the Hell Creek Formation , near Gilbert Creek , Montana . The specimen ( found by collector Peter Kaisen ) consisted of the upper part of a skull , two teeth , part of the shoulder girdle , cervical , dorsal , and caudal vertebrae , ribs , and more than thirty osteoderms . Brown scientifically described the animal in 1908 ; the genus name is derived from the Greek words ' <unk> / <unk> ( ' bent ' or ' crooked ' ) , referring to the medical term ankylosis , the stiffness produced by the fusion of bones in the skull and body , and σαυρος / sauros ( ' lizard ' ) . The name can be translated as " fused lizard " , " stiff lizard " , or " curved lizard " . The type species name magniventris is derived from the Latin magnus ( ' great ' ) and venter ( ' belly ' ) , referring to the great width of the animal 's body . 
 The skeletal reconstruction accompanying the 1908 description restored the missing parts in a fashion similar to Stegosaurus , and Brown likened the result to the extinct armored mammal Glyptodon . Contrary to modern depictions , Brown 's reconstruction showed a strongly arched back , while the tail club was missing as it was unknown at the time . Brown also reconstructed the armor plates in parallel rows running down the back ; this arrangement , however , was purely hypothetical . In a 1908 review of Brown 's Ankylosaurus description , American palaeontologist Samuel Wendell Williston criticised the skeletal reconstruction as being based on too scanty remains , and claimed that Ankylosaurus was merely a synonym of the genus Stegopelta , which Williston had named in 1905 . Williston also stated that a skeletal reconstruction of the related Polacanthus by Hungarian palaeontologist Franz Nopcsa was a better example of how ankylosaurs would have appeared in life . The claim of synonymy was not accepted by other researchers , and the two genera are now considered distinct . 
 Brown had collected seventy @-@ seven osteoderms while excavating a Tyrannosaurus specimen in the Lance Formation of Wyoming in 1900 . He mentioned these osteoderms ( specimen AMNH <unk> ) in his description of Ankylosaurus , but thought they belonged to the Tyrannosaurus instead . Palaeontologist Henry Fairfield Osborn also expressed this view when he described the Tyrannosaurus specimen as the now invalid genus Dynamosaurus in 1905 . Later examination has shown them to be similar to those of Ankylosaurus , and that Brown had compared them with some Euoplocephalus osteoderms , which had been erroneously catalogued as belonging to Ankylosaurus at the AMNH . 
 In 1910 , another AMNH expedition led by Brown discovered an Ankylosaurus specimen ( AMNH 5214 ) in the Scollard Formation by the Red Deer River in Alberta , Canada . This specimen included a complete skull , mandibles , the first and only tail club known of this genus , as well as ribs , vertebrae , limb bones , and armor . In 1947 , fossil collectors Charles M. Sternberg and T.P. <unk> collected a skull and mandible ( specimen NMC 8880 ) , a kilometre ( 0 @.@ 6 miles ) north of where the 1910 specimen was found . This is the largest known Ankylosaurus skull , but is badly preserved . A section of caudal vertebrae ( specimen CCM <unk> ) was discovered in the 1960s , in the Powder River drainage , Montana , also part of the Hell Creek Formation . In addition to these five incomplete specimens , many other isolated osteoderms and teeth have been found . 
 In 1990 , American palaeontologist Walter P. Coombs pointed out that the teeth of two skulls referred to A. magniventris differed from those of the holotype specimen in some details , and though he expressed a " considerate temptation " to name a new species of Ankylosaurus for these , he refrained from doing so , as the range of variation in the species was not completely documented . He also raised the possibility that the two teeth associated with the holotype specimen perhaps did not belong to it , as they were found in matrix within the nasal chambers . Kenneth Carpenter accepted the teeth as belonging to A. magniventris and that all specimens belonged to the same species , noting that the teeth of other ankylosaurs are highly variable . 
 Most of the known Ankylosaurus specimens were not scientifically described at length , though several palaeontologists planned to do so , until Carpenter redescribed the genus in 2004 . Carpenter noted that Ankylosaurus has become the archetypal member of its group , and the best known ankylosaur in popular culture , perhaps due to a life @-@ sized reconstruction of the animal being featured at the 1964 World 's Fair in New York City . Many traditional popular depictions show Ankylosaurus in a squatting posture and with a huge tail club being dragged over the ground . Modern reconstructions , however , show the animal with a more upright limb posture and with the tail being held clear off the ground . Likewise , large spines projecting sidewards from the body are present in many traditional depictions , but are actually only known in nodosaurids while being unknown in ankylosaurids . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Brown considered Ankylosaurus so distinct that he made it the type genus of a new family , Ankylosauridae ( members of which are called ankylosaurids ) , typified by massive , triangular skulls , short necks , stiff backs , broad bodies , and osteoderms . He also classified Palaeoscincus ( only known from teeth ) , and Euoplocephalus ( then only known from a partial skull and osteoderms ) as part of the family . Due to the fragmentary remains , Brown was unable to fully distinguish between Euoplocephalus and Ankylosaurus . Only having few , incomplete members of the family to compare with , he believed the group was part of the suborder Stegosauria . In 1923 , Osborn coined the name Ankylosauria ( members of which are called ankylosaurs or ankylosaurians ) , thereby placing the ankylosaurids in their own suborder . 
 Ankylosauria and Stegosauria are now grouped together within the clade Thyreophora . This group first appeared in the Sinemurian age , and survived for 135 million years , until disappearing in the Maastrichtian . They were widespread and inhabited a broad range of environments . As more complete specimens and new genera have been discovered , theories about ankylosaurian interrelatedness have become more complex , and hypotheses have often changed between studies . In addition to Ankylosauridae , Ankylosauria has been divided into the families Nodosauridae , and sometimes <unk> ( these families lacked tail clubs ) . Ankylosaurus is considered part of the subfamily <unk> ( members of which are called <unk> ) within Ankylosauridae . Ankylosaurus appears to be most closely related to Anodontosaurus and Euoplocephalus . The following cladogram is based on a 2015 phylogenetic analysis of the <unk> conducted by Arbour and Currie : 
 Since Ankylosaurus and other Late Cretaceous North American ankylosaurids grouped with Asian genera ( in a tribe the authors named <unk> ) , Arbour and Currie suggested that earlier North American ankylosaurids had gone extinct by the late Albian or Cenomanian ages of the Middle Cretaceous . <unk> thereafter recolonised North America from Asia during the Campanian or Turonian ages of the Late Cretaceous , and diversified there again , leading to genera such as Ankylosaurus , Anodontosaurus , and Euoplocephalus . This explains a 30 million year gap in the fossil record of North American ankylosaurids between these ages . 
 = = Palaeobiology = = 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Like other ornithischians , Ankylosaurus was herbivorous . Its wide muzzle was adapted for non @-@ selective low @-@ browse cropping . The teeth of Ankylosaurus were worn on the face of the crowns , rather than on the tip of the crowns , as in nodosaurid ankylosaurs . In 1982 , Carpenter ascribed two very small teeth to baby Ankylosaurus , which originate from the Lance and Hell Creek Formations and measure 3 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 3 mm in length , respectively . The smaller tooth is heavily worn , leading Carpenter to suggest that ankylosaurids in general or at least the babies did not swallow their food whole but employed some sort of chewing . 
 A specimen of Pinacosaurus preserves large <unk> ( triangular bones or cartilages located in the tongue ) which show signs of muscular stress , and it is thought this was a common feature of ankylosaurs . Some researchers have suggested that ankylosaurs relied heavily on muscular tongues and <unk> ( tongue bones ) when feeding , since their teeth were fairly small and were replaced at a relatively slow rate . Some modern salamanders have similar tongue bones , and use prehensile tongues to pick up food . 
 In 1969 , Austrian paleontologist Georg Haas concluded that despite the large size of ankylosaur skulls , the associated musculature was relatively weak . He also thought jaw movement was limited to up and down movements . Extrapolating from this , Haas suggested that ankylosaurs ate relatively soft non @-@ abrasive vegetation . However , later research on Euoplocephalus indicates that forward and sideways jaw movement was possible in these animals , the skull being able to withstand considerable forces . Though ankylosaurs may not have fed on fibrous and woody plants , they may have had a more varied diet , including tough leaves and pulpy fruits . Based on the broadness of the ribcage , Ankylosaurus may have digested through a hindgut fermentation system like modern herbivorous lizards , which have several chambers in their enlarged colon . 
 = = = <unk> and senses = = = 
 In 1977 , Polish paleontologist Teresa Maryańska proposed that the complex sinuses and nasal cavities of ankylosaurs may have lightened the weight of the skull , housed a nasal gland , or acted as a chamber for vocal resonance . Carpenter rejected these hypotheses , arguing that tetrapod animals make sounds through the larynx , not the nostrils , and that reduction in weight was minimal , as the spaces only accounted for a small percent of the skull volume . He also considered a gland unlikely , and noted that the sinuses may not have had any specific function . 
 A 2011 study of the nasal passages of Euoplocephalus supported their function as a heat and water balancing system , noting the extensive blood vessel system and an increased surface area for the mucosa membrane ( used for heat and water exchange in modern animals ) . The researchers also supported the loops acting as a resonance chamber , comparable to the <unk> nasal passages of saiga antelope and looping trachea of cranes and swans . Reconstructions of the inner ear suggest adaptation to hearing at low frequencies , such as the low @-@ toned resonant sounds possibly produced by the nasal passages . They disputed the possibility that the looping is related to olfaction ( sense of smell ) as the <unk> region is pushed to the sides of the main airway . 
 The shape of the nasal chambers of Ankylosaurus indicate that airflow was unidirectional , ( looping through the lungs during inhalation and exhalation ) , although it may also have been bidirectional in the posterior nasal chamber , which directed air past the olfactory lobes . The enlarged olfactory region of ankylosaurids indicates a well @-@ developed sense of smell , and the position of the orbits of Ankylosaurus suggest some stereoscopic vision . 
 = = = Limb movements = = = 
 Reconstructions of ankylosaur forelimb musculature made by Coombs in 1978 suggest that the forelimbs bore the majority of the animal 's weight , and were adapted for high force delivery on the front feet , possibly for food gathering . In addition , Coombs suggested that ankylosaurs may have been capable diggers , though the hoof @-@ like structure of the manus would have limited fossorial activity . <unk> were likely to have been slow @-@ moving and sluggish animals , though they may have been capable of quick movements when necessary . 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 The osteoderms of ankylosaurids were thin in comparison to those of other ankylosaurs , and appear to have been strengthened by randomly distributed cushions of collagen fibers . These were structurally similar to <unk> 's fibers , and were embedded directly into the bone tissue , a feature unique to ankylosaurids . This would have provided the ankylosaurids with an armor covering which was both lightweight and highly durable , being resistant to breakage and penetration by the teeth of predators . In addition to protection , Carpenter suggested in 1982 that the heavily @-@ vascularized armor may have had a role in thermoregulation as in modern crocodilians . 
 The tail club of Ankylosaurus seems to have been an active defensive weapon , capable of producing enough of an impact to break the bones of an assailant . The tendons of the tail were partially ossified and were not very elastic , allowing great force to be transmitted to the club when it was used as a weapon . Coombs suggested in 1979 that several hindlimb muscles would have controlled the swinging of the tail , and that violent thrusts of the club would have been able to break the metatarsal bones of large theropods . 
 A 2009 study estimated that ankylosaurids could swing their tails at 100 degrees laterally and the mainly cancellous clubs would have a lowered moment of inertia and been effective weapons . However , the study also found that while large ankylosaurid tail clubs were capable of breaking bones , medium and small clubs were not . Despite the feasibility of tail swinging , the researchers could not determine whether ankylosaurids used their clubs for defense against potential predators , in intraspecific combat or both . In 1993 , Tony Thulborn proposed that the tail club of ankylosaurids primarily acted as a decoy for the head , as he thought the tail too short and inflexible to have an effective reach ; the " dummy head " would lure a predator close to the tail , where it could be stricken . Carpenter has rejected this idea , as tail club shape is highly variable among ankylosaurids , even in the same genus . 
 = = Palaeoecology = = 
 Ankylosaurus existed between 68 and 66 million years ago , in the final , or Maastrichtian , stage of the Late Cretaceous Period . It was among the last dinosaur genera that appeared before the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event . The type specimen is from the Hell Creek Formation of Montana , while other specimens have been found in the Lance Formation of Wyoming and the Scollard Formation in Alberta , Canada , all of which date to the end of the Cretaceous . Fossils of Ankylosaurus are rare in these sediments , and the distribution of its remains suggest that it was restricted to the uplands of the formations , rather than the coastal lowlands . Another ankylosaur , an indeterminate nodosaur ( formerly referred to as Edmontonia sp . ) , is also found in the same formations , but the range of the two genera does not seem to have overlapped . Their remains have so far not been found in the same localities , and the nodosaur appears to have inhabited the lowlands . The narrow muzzle of the nodosaur suggests it had a more selective diet than Ankylosaurus , further indicating ecological separation . 
 The Hell Creek , Lance and Scollard Formations represent different sections of the western shore of the Western Interior Seaway that divided western and eastern North America during the Cretaceous . They represent a broad coastal plain , extending westward from the seaway to the newly formed Rocky Mountains . These formations are composed largely of sandstone and mudstone , which have been attributed to floodplain environments . The Hell Creek is the best studied of these ancient environments . At the time , this region was subtropical , with a warm and humid climate . Many plant species were supported , primarily angiosperms , with less common conifers , ferns and cycads . An abundance of fossil leaves found at dozens of different sites indicates that the area was largely forested by small trees . Ankylosaurus shared its environment with dinosaurs including the ceratopsids Triceratops and Torosaurus , the hypsilophodont Thescelosaurus , the hadrosaurid Edmontosaurus , an indeterminate nodosaur , the pachycephalosaurian Pachycephalosaurus , and the theropods Struthiomimus , Ornithomimus , Troodon , and Tyrannosaurus . 
 = Ryse : Son of Rome = 
 Ryse : Son of Rome is a third @-@ person action @-@ adventure hack and slash video game developed by Crytek Frankfurt and published by Microsoft Studios . It was released on November 22 , 2013 as an exclusive launch title for the Xbox One , but was released on October 10 , 2014 for Microsoft Windows by Crytek and Deep Silver . Set in an alternate version of Rome , Ryse follows the life of the Roman centurion Marius Vitus as he becomes one of the leaders in the Roman Legion . Gameplay revolves around Marius using his sword to strike enemies and shield to deflect attacks . Execution sequences are also featured in the game , which are quick @-@ time events that serve as an extension to combat . The game 's combat emphasizes on " flow " , a term referring to a player 's ability to move on to fight against another enemy upon defeating an enemy with few limitations in between . The game features a cooperative multiplayer mode , which tasks players to fight against waves of enemies in maps that are changing dynamically . 
 The game 's development began in 2006 . Originally it was set to be a first @-@ person Kinect @-@ only title for the Xbox 360 . However , the team later made three new prototypes , and redesigned to become a third @-@ person hack and slash game , with Kinect serving a diminished role . The development of the game was originally handled by Crytek Budapest , but was later transferred to Crytek 's headquarters in Frankfurt , Germany . Revealed as Codename : Kingdom at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2010 , the game was reintroduced as Ryse : Son of Rome at E3 2013 . It was among one of the six projects developed simultaneously by Crytek . 
 Ryse : Son of Rome received a mixed critical reaction from reviewers upon launch , being praised for its visuals , story and high production values but criticized for its repetitive and simple gameplay . Cevat Yerli , CEO of Crytek , added that he was not satisfied with the sales of the game . Upon launch , the game was supported with several multiplayer @-@ focused downloadable content , but the originally planned Challenge Editor was cancelled . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Ryse : Son of Rome is an action @-@ adventure hack and slash game played in a third @-@ person perspective . Players assume control of Marius Vitus , a Roman general who is on a quest to avenge his murdered family . Throughout the game , players gain access to weapons that can be used to assault enemies or defend themselves . For instance , players are equipped with a sword that can be used to strike and kill enemies , and a shield that can be used to deflect enemies ' attack and break their defense . The strength of each attack can be decided by players . In addition to melee @-@ based combat , the game features spears and javelins , which serve as ranged weapons . 
 The game 's combat puts emphasis on " flow " , a term referring to a player 's ability to move on to fight against another enemy upon defeating and killing an enemy with few limitations in between . Combat is combo @-@ based , and rewards are given to players who are able to build a long combo . Marius can block attacks to break enemy combos to counterattack . 
 When players deal enough damage to an enemy , they can activate an execution sequence . Once the execution sequence has been initiated , enemies involved in the execution are highlighted automatically with colors by the game , and players can perform a series of quick time events by pressing the appropriate buttons . These execution sequences serve to grant additional resources to players , depending on how well the execution is performed . At any time prior to initiating an execution , the player can select one of four categories of executions to perform upon weakened enemies ; the selected type of execution determines the type of resource that will be granted when an enemy is executed . Upon completing a successful execution sequence , players are granted the type of execution that was selected . There are four perks available for players . One boosts the player 's damage for a short period after the execution ; one refills the player 's Focus bar ; one allows players to regain lost health , and the last significantly boosts the amount of experience points received from the kill . These experience points can be used to purchase upgrades for various attributes , such as health , damage , or Focus bar capacity , and to unlock additional execution moves . The game still automatically completes and finishes these execution sequences when players fail to press the highlighted buttons , but provides a much smaller reward . Lining up two or more weakened enemies in close proximity allows the player to perform a double execution sequence , which greatly increases the reward granted . 
 In several segments of the game , Marius is involved in large @-@ scale battles . Players are tasked to co @-@ operate with , or command , other non @-@ playable characters to defeat large numbers of enemies . The game features Kinect voice integration , in which players can issue commands to other characters to provide assistance , such as calling in arrows or catapults . 
 There is also a co @-@ operative multiplayer mode , in which two players team up to accomplish various challenges and fight against waves of increasingly difficult enemies in the Roman Colosseum , a gladiator arena setting . The environments of the Colosseum change dynamically in a match to add variety to the mode . Players can gain access to increasingly advanced armor and weapons as they progress through these multiplayer matches . <unk> are also featured , allowing players to purchase in @-@ game upgrades with real @-@ life currency . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ryse : Son of Rome is set in an alternate version of Rome . The game 's tutorial section depicts Marius leading the defense of Rome against oncoming Celtic barbarians led by Boudica . Marius hands a small , nondescript sack to a subordinate with the instructions to display it from an elevated position , then helps secure the Roman emperor , Nero , in a private safe room . At the emperor 's behest he begins to tell his story ; the rest of the game is an extended flashback depicting Marius ' story up to this point . 
 Marius begins his story as a soldier having just successfully completed his training , who is about to leave Rome to serve his duty in the relatively sedate II Legion , holding a post in peaceful Alexandria . Just before his deployment , he enjoys a return to his family in Rome and the adulation of his father Leontius , a former general and current member of the Roman Senate . Marius ' visit is cut short by a barbarian incursion ; a running battle through the streets of Rome results in the death of his parents and younger sister . Commander Vitallion , a friend and former comrade of the slain Leontius , transfers Marius to his XIV Legion , and promises Marius vengeance for his murdered family . Vitallion leads the XIV Legion to Britain , but the fleet is ambushed off the coast ; Marius leads the counter @-@ attack , rallying the surviving Roman troops and nearly single @-@ handedly preventing the destruction of the remainder of the fleet , which impresses Vitallion . Marius is promoted to Centurion . 
 After receiving reports of a rebellion at York , Marius heads north to aid the defeated legion stationed there . Upon capturing King Oswald and his daughter Boudica , Basilius , the son of the Emperor , reveals that his brother Commodus has been captured by the barbarians , whose whereabouts are unknown . Basilius , threatens and forces King Oswald into revealing the location of Commodus , who has been traded to the fearsome men north of Hadrian 's Wall . Basilius orders Vitallion and Marius to retrieve him . After crossing the border into Caledonia , the party is ambushed , Vitallion is taken hostage by barbarians , and Marius is separated from his legion . Marius makes his way into the enemy camp , freeing and rallying captured Roman soldiers along the way . He kills the barbarian leader <unk> and rescues Commodus and Vitallion from being burned inside a giant Wicker man . 
 Commodus continues to intimidate Oswald and murders him , causing a breakdown in negotiations . Meanwhile , Marius realizes that the band of barbarians he encountered years ago had invaded Rome and slain his father at Nero 's instigation as a means of eliminating a political rival . Furthermore , the Celts , led by a just @-@ escaped Boudica , lay siege to York , with XIV Legion tasked with defending it until Commodus can escape . In the end , Marius sacrifices himself to buy time for the final ships to sail , but is resurrected by the goddess Summer , who tasks him with taking on the mantle of Damocles , a legendary Roman general who was abandoned to his enemies for political expediency . In that guise , Summer tells him to avenge his family and comrades , and save Rome . 
 " Damocles " takes advantage of Emperor Nero and his sons ' interest in the gladiator sports , and enters the gladiatorial ludi to confront Nero and his sons directly . His demonstration of martial skill gains him the sponsorship of Nero 's son Basilius , and Marius is then able to slay Basilius during a private audience , where he is also informed by a captive Oracle Priestess that Nero can only be killed by his own sword . After this , Marius confronts Commodus in the Colosseum itself , emerging victorious after a series of unfair battles . As " Damocles " and Nero jointly call for each other 's deaths , Marius escapes , meeting up with Vitallion . According to Vitallion , Boudica has gathered enough barbarian support to storm Rome itself . Vitallion agrees to help Marius put an end to Nero 's destructive rule . Their efforts are successful , but Vitallion is slain by Boudica during the attack . Marius takes up the command and defeats her in turn , though his victory is tempered by their shared realization that they are both victims in Nero 's power plays . 
 This brings Marius to the " present day " of the game 's narrative : he gives the small sack , containing Boudica 's severed head , to his subordinate , escorts Nero to his safe room , and tells his tale . Nero , who has since deduced that Marius is Damocles , flees deeper into his bolt hole . As Marius gives chase , he is temporarily distracted by <unk> , the god of the north wind , who has been aiding Nero and whose stated goal is to cause the collapse of Rome . However , Summer helps Marius claim the victory , and Marius tosses both Nero and himself off a parapet , where Nero is impaled on the sword of his own statue , fulfilling the Oracle 's prophecy . Marius falls to the ground and dies from his wounds as Summer and <unk> both vanish . 
 The story ends with the barbarians retreating from Rome , disheartened by the loss of their leader , and with Marius being posthumously hailed as a hero for his efforts to fend off their attacks . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ryse : Son of Rome was originally developed by Crytek Budapest . In 2004 , Crytek released its debut title Far Cry , and in 2006 , Microsoft Studios released Xbox 360 and was working on a prototype for Kinect called " Project Natal " . Ideas for Ryse originated in 2006 by Crytek 's CEO Cevat Yerli , who was eager to expand the studio , and wanted the studio to work on multiple projects simultaneously . Early work and concept development began shortly afterwards , with Crytek working on a pair of fantasy games that were set in the same Medieval universe . They were Kings , a massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing game , and Kingdoms , a first @-@ person action role @-@ playing game . They hoped that with Kingdoms , they could create an " up @-@ close " and " visceral " experience . 
 Crytek then pitched the game to different publishers , and eventually , in 2009 , the company pitched the two projects to Microsoft . According to Nick Button @-@ Brown , the general manager at Crytek , the game was not functional at that time , and only served to prove to the publisher that a first @-@ person melee game was fun for players . The representative from Microsoft , Phil Spencer , admired Crytek 's intention to expand , and thought that Microsoft 's games line up for the Xbox 360 was lacking a first @-@ person melee @-@ combat game . As a result , they accepted to publish Kingdoms , and rejected Kings . The two companies agreed that the project would be a natural fit for Microsoft 's yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ announced Kinect . 
 It was originally revealed as Codename : Kingdoms during Microsoft 's E3 2010 press conference , along with the announcement that the game was being developed by Crytek . During the Microsoft Press Conference at E3 2011 , Ryse was announced as a Kinect @-@ only title . The announcement entailed a prerendered trailer with minor gameplay footage . The gameplay footage featured players using their own body gestures to control the protagonist to fight against enemies , and perform actions like sword wielding , blocking attacks with a shield , and head @-@ butting . The trailer served as a test for Crytek to see whether the general audience liked the Kinect features or not . 
 In early 2011 , the game 's direction was shifted from building a world of " high fantasy " to building a realistic ancient Rome , and the development of the game was shifted from Crytek Budapest to Crytek 's headquarter in Frankfurt , Germany . The Budapest office was significantly downsized afterwards , and its focus was shifted to develop smartphone games . It became one of six projects the company was working on . Development of the game continued after its E3 2011 reveal . Different experiments were carried out for the game to see what elements would work and what would not . A team at Crytek Frankfurt proposed to turn the game to an on @-@ rail interactive movie , which the team believed was suitable for Kinect 's features and would able to showcase the power of CryEngine . The idea was later scrapped . 
 During the game 's development , the team worried that the game may be too tiring for players , and that Kinect may not able to detect their movements accurately , leading to frustration . As a result , the team developed three prototypes for the game . The first prototype allowed players to play the entire game with Kinect , the second one tasks players to play the game with a Xbox 360 controller , with Kinect features , while the third one completely removed the Kinect features . Crytek eventually chose the second prototype , and shifted the game 's perspective to become a third @-@ person video game . In June 2012 , Phil Spencer , corporate VP of Microsoft Studios , maintained that the game was still in <unk> and added that Kinect will only be " part of the game " . With the changes in the game 's control scheme , the game 's focus also changed , with the team aiming to create a cinematic and character @-@ focused experience for players . The change also extended the game 's development process , and eventually , in May 2013 , Ryse was confirmed to be a launch title for Microsoft 's next game console , Xbox One . In June 2013 at the E3 Microsoft Conference , Crytek showed a gameplay video . Kinect was no longer part of the active battle but had a diminished role by providing squad commands through speech and gesture . The team at Crytek decided to make it a launch title instead of delaying it for further polishing , as they considered the launch of Xbox One an " emotional " event and wanted to be a part of it . 
 Ryse 's combat puts lots of focuses on " flow " and crowd control . As a result , the team introduced a rhythm @-@ styled combat which is similar to that of Batman : Arkham Asylum . The flow was described to be one of the most important part in the game 's mechanics , and the artificial intelligence of enemies were designed to break and disrupt players ' flow . The team later chose to introduce the execution mechanics as they found that the combat was proven to be too difficult for players , and that the execution mechanics provided an easier way for players to defeat enemies . The game also focused on precision and timing , tasking players to hit enemies at the correct time and position to gain greater rewards . The developer also hoped that players will use creativity when dealing with enemies . A concept called " mashing to mastery " was introduced in Ryse , in which the game 's combat was designed to be accessible for newcomers and be challenging for hardcore players . In order to achieve the " mashing to mastery " mechanic , the team introduced the execution mechanic , which is a series of quick @-@ time events , as the team at Crytek hoped that it would make these scene more rewarding to players , as well as allowing the flow of combat to continue . 
 Ryse 's intention was to build a cinematic story . The team put emphasis on building the game 's protagonist , Marius Vitus , who was described as a character with three different sides . The game 's cinematic director , Peter Gornstein , considered that adding personalities to characters as one of the most important features in creating a good story , as it allows players to care for and emphasize the character . He also hoped that the character is consistent throughout the game . As a result , the team developed transition sequences , in which gameplay can fluidly transit to cinematic . The game also put emphasis on the protagonist 's motion capture . To achieve this , the team collaborated with The Imaginarium Studios to develop the cinematic and motion @-@ capture technology for the game . According to Yerli , having good motion capture technology can help " create the ultimate emotion " . The game 's camera was originally set to be controlled by artificial intelligence , drawing inspirations from Seven Samurai and Children of Men , but the idea was later scrapped and a dynamic camera was designed to replace it . The camera was also made closer to the playable character than other hack and slash games , as they hoped that they could show a " claustrophobic brutality " from it . According to Crytek , having a close up camera has always been the game 's core element . 
 The developers claim to have drawn much of the inspiration for the game 's combat and tactics from " ... the innumerable Roman campaigns that led to the modern concept of total war " . Fifteen hero level characters were given full motion capture with the same detail as Marius . Unlike Crytek 's previous projects , the game is set in ancient Rome , a place which the developer thought was underrepresented in video games . The game also features different Renaissance @-@ inspired imagery . In order to create an accurate environment , the team visited different locations in Rome . While the game is set in Rome , its story is not entirely historically accurate . Crytek described it as a " historical mash @-@ up " , in which the team selected their favourite historical events and put them together into the game . 
 Crytek contracted Ruffian Games to develop a competitive multiplayer mode for Ryse , but the feature was later cut from the final game . Despite that , a co @-@ operative multiplayer mode was introduced , and tasked players to fight against waves of increasingly difficult human enemies . The team originally hoped to add sea battles and animals to the game , but after internal testing , these features were removed . A Xbox SmartGlass feature called the Challenge Editor was set to be introduced to the game after its launch . It allowed players to create custom challenges for the game 's co @-@ operative multiplayer . However , Crytek announced that the development of this feature had been ceased in February 2014 . 
 The game 's music is composed by Borislav Slavov and Peter <unk> , Crytek 's in @-@ house composers . Slavov had previously led the soundtrack development of Crysis 3 and <unk> . The soundtrack development began in February 2013 , right after the completion of Crysis 3 . Slavov considered composing the music for Ryse a great challenge for him , as he had to compose 250 minutes of music within a short time frame . Crytek also hired an external composer , Tilman <unk> , to help compose the music for the game . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Ryse was originally revealed as a Xbox 360 title that was set to be released in early 2011 . Revealed at E3 2010 as Codename Kingdom , the game missed its release window , and its official name was revealed during E3 2011 as Ryse . It was reintroduced as Ryse : Son of Rome at Microsoft 's press conference at E3 2013 with a gameplay demo . The game served as a launch title for the Xbox One , and was released on November 22 , 2013 . The season pass , featuring different in @-@ game bonuses and items , was released on the same day . The game was supported with downloadable content upon launch . Mars ’ Chosen , Morituri Pack , Duel of Fates Pack , and Colosseum Pack were released from 2013 to 2014 and featured new maps and modes for the multiplayer portion of the game . A Legendary Collection , which featured the base game , the game 's seasonal pass , and all the additional content released for the game , was released on October 7 , 2014 . 
 On August 7 , 2014 , Crytek announced that Ryse would be released for the PC platform in the fall of 2014 . This version of the game is stated to support 4K resolution and included previously released downloadable content . The PC version was released on October 10 , 2014 . Crytek published the digital version of the PC version of the game , while Deep Silver published the retail version . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ryse : Son of Rome received mixed reviews . Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the Xbox One version 64 @.@ 30 % based on 47 reviews and 60 / 100 based on 77 reviews and the Microsoft Windows version 63 @.@ 20 % based on 10 reviews and 61 / 100 based on 27 reviews . 
 The game 's visuals received critical acclaim . Brian Albert from IGN thought that Ryse would be the perfect title for people to show off their console due to its high graphical quality . He also praised the game 's wide variety of environments and fluid character animation . However , he criticized the game 's boss @-@ design . Hollander Cooper from GamesRadar strongly praised the game 's graphics and the level of detail . Simon Miller from VideoGamer.com thought that the game fulfilled its purpose as an Xbox One launch title , and demonstrated the power of the console . Andrew Reiner from Game Informer considered that the game 's cinematic as " towering achievements of visual design " . Brad Shoemaker from Giant Bomb thought that the graphics had successfully surprised players . 
 The game 's gameplay received polarized reception . Marc Camron from Electronic Gaming Monthly called it " basic " , and thought that despite the fluid and smooth combat , and the addition of the reward system which added a layer of strategy to the game , the game 's execution system hindered the flow of the game by slowing down the overall pace of combat . He added that the game 's combat lacked complexity and depth , and was too repetitive for players to enjoy . Albert also thought that the combat system was too basic . In addition , he noted the repetitive pattern of enemies . He also criticized the game 's over @-@ emphasis on graphics , which led to the simple gameplay . Cooper thought that the game 's combat was satisfying , and thought that the game 's swordplay had successfully captured the sense of weight and impact . However , he also considered the system repetitive . Reiner criticized the execution sequences , which he considered excessive and over @-@ simplistic . Shoemaker also thought that the game lacked both variety and depth . Mark Walton from GameSpot thought that the game design was too linear , and that the game discouraged any form of exploration . 
 The game 's story also received praise from critics . Camron praised the game 's voice @-@ acting and setting , which he thought was " intriguing " . However , he thought that the narrative was too basic , and missed many details that could have further improved the game 's story . Albert admired the game 's story , and thought that it was handled with great care . He added that the game 's plot was easy for players to follow , even though the game features multiple unexpected twists . Cooper described the game 's narrative as surprising , adding that the later part of the game successfully added personalities to both the game 's heroes and villains . However , Walton called the game 's script as " laughable " and said that the dialogue made the plot unbelievable for players . 
 Critics had divided opinions on the game 's multiplayer . Camron thought that it was a nice addition to the game , even though he thought it lacked the complexity a multiplayer mode should have , and that it failed to extend the game 's longevity . Miller echoed this statement , and thought that the multiplayer mode failed to hook players . Walton thought that players would not return the mode after experiencing it once , and he described the mode as " bland " . Albert , in contrast , considered the mode a unique addition to the game , and thought that it had successfully added some strategy elements to the game . Chris Carter from Destructoid thought that the multiplayer mode was better than the game 's main campaign . He described it as a " pleasant surprise " . 
 The amount of content featured in the game received mixed reviews . Miller thought that the game only revolved around one idea , which led to its simplistic gameplay . Camron and Cooper thought that the campaign was too short for most players . Shoemaker thought that for a full @-@ priced game , it lacked content . Reiner furthered criticized the game 's low replay value . Carter advocated that players purchase the game when its price dropped . He added that while the game features lots of ideas , most of them failed to deliver . 
 While no exact sales figure was revealed , Yerli expressed his disappointment with the sales of Ryse for the Xbox One in August 2014 , blaming the low sales of the Xbox One . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 A Federal Trade Commission investigation uncovered an undisclosed paid endorsement deal between Microsoft Studios and Machinima Inc . Microsoft Studios paid for fake organic reviews , and bound Machinima Inc. to “ not portray [ Microsoft ] , the Xbox One , or the Launch Titles in a negative manner ” . Ryse : Son of Rome was specifically listed in the FTC document as being one of the titles to receive fake reviews , and price quotes for these reviews range between $ 15 @,@ 000 and $ 30 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 According to Yerli , Ryse : Son of Rome is not a " one @-@ off " title and will serve as the beginning of a new franchise . However , several reports claimed that Ryse 2 was cancelled because of a conflict between Crytek and Microsoft over who would own the rights to the franchise . In exchange for funding Ryse 2 's development , Microsoft wanted to take over the Ryse intellectual property . Crytek would not agree to these terms , so the project was cancelled . Cevat Yerli , however , denied that the game was cancelled in an interview with Eurogamer , adding that the relationship between Microsoft and Crytek remained strong and positive . Ryse was among one of the last titles developed by Crytek before the company entered financial crisis and re @-@ construction . The new Crytek is focused on developing free @-@ to @-@ play games and being a " game service " instead of a video game developer . Despite this , Ryse is still an intellectual property owned by Crytek . 
 = Zong massacre = 
 The Zong massacre was the mass murder of 133 enslaved Africans by the crew of the slave ship Zong in the days following 29 November 1781 . The ship was owned by the Gregson slave @-@ trading syndicate , based in Liverpool , which participated in the Atlantic slave trade . As was common business practice , they had taken out insurance on the lives of the slaves as cargo . When the ship ran low on potable water following navigational mistakes , the crew threw slaves overboard into the sea to drown , partly in order to ensure the survival of the rest of the ship 's inhabitants , and in part to cash in on the insurance on the slaves , thus not losing money on the slaves which would have died from the lack of drinking water . 
 After the slave ship reached port at Black River , Jamaica , the owners of the Zong made a claim to their insurers for the loss of the slaves . When the insurers refused to pay , the resulting court cases ( Gregson v Gilbert ( 1783 ) 3 Doug . KB 232 ) held that in some circumstances , the deliberate killing of slaves was legal and that insurers could be required to pay for the slaves ' deaths . The judge , Lord Chief Justice , the Earl of Mansfield , ruled against the syndicate owners in this case , due to new evidence being introduced suggesting the captain and crew were at fault . 
 Following the first trial , freed slave Olaudah Equiano brought news of the massacre to the attention of the anti @-@ slavery campaigner Granville Sharp , who worked unsuccessfully to have the ship 's crew prosecuted for murder . Because of the legal dispute , reports of the massacre received increased publicity , stimulating the abolitionist movement in the late 18th and early 19th centuries ; the Zong events were increasingly cited as a powerful symbol of the horrors of the Middle Passage of slaves to the New World . 
 The non @-@ denominational Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade was founded in 1787 . The next year Parliament passed the first law regulating the slave trade , to limit the number of slaves per ship . The massacre has also inspired works of art and literature . It was commemorated in London in 2007 , among events to mark the bicentenary of the British Slave Trade Act 1807 , which abolished the African slave trade . A monument to the killed slaves of the Zong was installed at Black River , Jamaica , their intended port . 
 = = The Zong = = 
 The Zong was originally named Zorg ( meaning " Care " in Dutch ) by its owners , the <unk> <unk> Compagnie . It operated as a slave ship based in Middelburg , Netherlands , and made a voyage in 1777 , delivering slaves to the coast of Suriname , South America . The Zong was a " square stern ship " of 110 tons burden . It was captured by a British 16 @-@ gun ship named Alert on 10 February 1781 . By 26 February , the Alert and Zong arrived at Cape Coast Castle , in modern @-@ day Ghana , which was maintained and staffed , along with other forts and castles , by the Royal African Company . The Castle was used as the regional headquarters of the RAC . 
 In early March 1781 , the Zong was purchased by the master of the William , on behalf of a syndicate of Liverpool merchants . The members of the syndicate were Edward Wilson , George Case , James Aspinall and William , James and John Gregson . William Gregson had an interest in 50 slaving voyages between 1747 and 1780 . He served as mayor of Liverpool in 1762 . By the end of his life , vessels in which Gregson had a financial stake had carried 58 @,@ 201 enslaved people from Africa to slavery in the Americas . 
 The Zong was paid for with bills of exchange , and the 244 slaves already on board were part of the transaction . The ship was not insured until after it started its voyage . The insurers , a syndicate from Liverpool , underwrote the ship and slaves for up to £ 8 @,@ 000 , approximately half the slaves ' potential market value . The remaining risk was borne by the owners . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 The Zong was the first command of Luke Collingwood , formerly the surgeon on the William . While Collingwood lacked experience in navigation and command , ship 's surgeons were typically involved in selecting slaves for purchase in Africa , so their medical expertise supported the determination of " commodity value " for a captive . If the surgeon rejected a captive , that individual suffered " commercial death , " being of no value and was liable to be killed by African handlers . Sometimes these killings happened in the presence of the surgeon . It is likely that Collingwood had already witnessed the mass @-@ murder of slaves . As the historian Jeremy Krikler commented , this may have prepared him psychologically to condone the massacre which took place on the Zong . The Zong 's first mate was James Kelsall , who had also served on the William . 
 The vessel 's only passenger , Robert Stubbs , was a former captain of slave ships . In early 1780 he was appointed by the African Committee of the Royal African Company , as the governor of Anomabu , a British fortification near Cape Coast Castle in Ghana . This position made him also vice @-@ president of the RAC Council of the Castle . Due to his ineptitude and enmity incurred with John Roberts , governor of the Castle , Stubbs was forced out of the governorship of Anomabu by the RAC Council after nine months . Witness statements gathered by the African Committee of the RAC , accused him of being a semi @-@ literate drunkard who mismanaged the slave @-@ trading activities of the fort . Stubbs was aboard to return to Britain ; Collingwood may have thought his earlier experience on slave ships would be useful . 
 The Zong had a 17 @-@ man crew when it left Africa , which was far too small to maintain adequate sanitary conditions on the ship . Mariners willing to risk disease and slave rebellions on slave ships were difficult to recruit within Britain and were harder to find for a vessel captured from the Dutch off the coast of Africa . The Zong was manned with remnants of the previous Dutch crew , the crew of the William and with unemployed sailors hired from the settlements along the African coast . 
 = = The Middle Passage = = 
 The Zong had taken on more than twice the number of people that it could safely transport , when it sailed from Accra with 442 enslaved people on 18 August 1781 . In the 1780s , British @-@ built ships typically carried 1 @.@ 75 enslaved people per ton of the ship 's capacity ; on the Zong , the ratio was 4 @.@ 0 per ton . A British slave ship of the period would carry around 193 enslaved and it was extremely unusual for a ship of the Zong 's relatively small size to carry so many . 
 After taking on drinking water at São Tomé , the Zong began its voyage across the Atlantic Ocean to Jamaica on 6 September . On 18 or 19 November , the ship neared Tobago in the Caribbean but failed to stop there to replenish its water supplies . 
 It is unclear who , if anyone , was in charge of the ship at this point . The captain Luke Collingwood had been gravely ill for some time . The man who would normally have replaced him , first mate James Kelsall , had been previously suspended from duty following an argument on 14 November . Robert Stubbs had captained a slave ship several decades earlier and he temporarily commanded the Zong in Collingwood 's absence but he was not a registered member of the vessel 's crew . According to historian James Walvin , the breakdown of the command structure on the ship might explain why subsequent navigational errors were committed and why checks on supplies of drinking water were not made . 
 = = = Massacre = = = 
 On 27 or 28 November , the crew sighted Jamaica at a distance of 27 nautical miles ( 50 km ; 31 mi ) but misidentified it as the French colony of Saint @-@ Domingue on the island of Hispaniola . The Zong continued on its westward course , leaving Jamaica behind . This mistake was recognised only after the ship was 300 miles ( 480 km ) leeward of the island . Overcrowding , malnutrition , accidents and disease had already killed several mariners and approximately 62 enslaved Africans . James Kelsall later claimed that there was only four days ' water remaining on the ship , when the navigational error was discovered and Jamaica was still 10 – 13 sailing days away . 
 If the enslaved died onshore , the Liverpool ship @-@ owners would have had no redress from their insurers . Similarly , if the slaves died a " natural death " ( as the contemporary term put it ) at sea , then insurance could not be claimed . If some slaves were jettisoned in order to save the rest of the " cargo " or the ship , then a claim could be made under the notion of " general average " . The ship 's insurance covered the loss of slaves at £ 30 a head . 
 On 29 November , the crew assembled to consider the proposal that some of the slaves should be thrown overboard . James Kelsall later claimed that he had disagreed with the plan at first but it was soon unanimously agreed . On 29 November , 54 women and children were thrown through cabin windows into the sea . On 1 December , 42 male slaves were thrown overboard ; 36 slaves followed in the next few days . Another ten , in a display of defiance at the inhumanity of the slavers , jumped into the sea . Having heard the shrieks of the victims as they were thrown into the water , one slave requested that the remaining Africans be denied all food and drink rather than be thrown into the sea . This request was ignored by the crew . The account of the King 's Bench trial reports that one slave managed to climb back onto the ship . 
 The crew claimed that the slaves had been jettisoned because the ship did not have enough water to keep all the slaves alive for the rest of the voyage . This claim was later disputed , as the ship had 420 imperial gallons ( 1 @,@ 900 l ) of water left when it arrived in Jamaica on 22 December . An affidavit later made by Kelsall , stated that on 1 December , when 42 slaves were killed , it rained heavily for more than a day , allowing six casks of water ( sufficient for eleven days ) to be collected . 
 = = = Subsequent history of the Zong = = = 
 On 22 December 1781 , the Zong arrived at Black River , Jamaica , with 208 enslaved people on board , less than half the number taken from Africa . The enslaved people sold for an average price of £ 36 each . The Jamaican Vice @-@ Admiralty court upheld the legality of the British capture of the Zong from the Dutch , and the syndicate renamed the ship Richard of Jamaica . Luke Collingwood died three days after the Zong reached Jamaica , two years before the 1783 court proceedings about the case . 
 = = Legal proceedings = = 
 When the news of the Zong 's voyage reached Britain , the ship 's owners claimed compensation from their insurers for the loss of the slaves . The insurers refused to honour the claim and were taken to court by the Liverpool syndicate . The logbook of the Zong went missing after the ship reached Jamaica , two years before the hearings started . The legal proceedings provide almost all the documentary evidence about the massacre but there is no formal record of the first trial other than what is referred to in the appeals hearing . The ship 's insurers claimed that the log had been deliberately destroyed , which the Gregson syndicate denied . 
 Almost all the surviving source material is of questionable reliability . The two witnesses who gave evidence , Robert Stubbs and James Kelsall , were strongly motivated to exonerate themselves from blame . It is possible that the figures concerning the number of slaves killed , the amount of water that remained on the ship and the distance beyond Jamaica that the Zong had mistakenly sailed are inaccurate . 
 = = = First trial = = = 
 Legal proceedings began when the insurers refused to compensate the owners of the Zong . The dispute was initially tried at the Guildhall in London on 6 March 1783 , with the Lord Chief Justice , the Earl of Mansfield , overseeing the trial before a jury . Mansfield was previously the judge in Somersett 's Case in 1772 , which concerned the legality of keeping slaves in Britain . He had ruled that slavery had never been established by statute in Britain and was not supported by common law . 
 Robert Stubbs was the only witness in the first Zong trial and the jury found in favour of the owners , under an established protocol in maritime insurance that considered slaves as cargo . On 19 March 1783 , Olaudah Equiano , a freed slave , told the anti @-@ slave @-@ trade activist Granville Sharp of the events aboard the Zong and a newspaper soon carried a lengthy account , reporting that the captain had ordered the slaves killed in three batches . Sharp sought legal advice the next day , about the possibility of prosecuting the crew for murder . 
 = = = King 's Bench appeal = = = 
 The insurers of the Zong applied to the Earl of Mansfield to have the previous verdict set aside and for the case to be tried again . A hearing was held at the Court of King 's Bench in Westminster Hall from 21 – 22 May 1783 , before Mansfield and two other King 's Bench judges , Mr Justice Buller and Mr Justice Willes . The Solicitor General , John Lee , appeared on behalf of the Zong 's owners , as he had done previously in the Guildhall trial . Granville Sharp was also in attendance , together with a secretary he had hired to take a written record of the proceedings . 
 Summing up the verdict reached in the first trial , Mansfield said that the jury , 
 had no doubt ( though it shocks one very much ) that the Case of Slaves was the same as if Horses had been thrown over board ... The Question was , whether there was not an Absolute Necessity for throwing them over board to save the rest , [ and ] the Jury were of opinion there was ... 
 Collingwood had died in 1781 soon after the ship reached Jamaica and the only witness of the Zong massacre to appear at Westminster Hall was passenger Robert Stubbs , although a written affidavit by first mate James Kelsall was made available to the lawyers . Stubbs claimed that there was " an absolute Necessity for throwing over the Negroes " , because the crew feared all the slaves would die if they did not throw some into the sea . The insurers of the Zong argued that Collingwood had made " a Blunder and Mistake " in sailing beyond Jamaica and that the slaves had been killed so their owners could claim compensation . They alleged that Collingwood did this , because he did not want his first voyage as a slave ship captain to be unprofitable . 
 John Lee responded by saying that the slaves " perished just as a Cargo of Goods perished " and were jettisoned for the greater good of the ship . The insurers ' legal team replied that Lee 's argument could never justify the killing of innocent people ; each of the three addressed issues of humanity in the treatment of the slaves and said that the actions of the Zong 's crew were nothing less than murder . As historian James Walvin has argued , it is possible that Granville Sharp directly influenced the strategy of the insurers ' legal team . 
 At the hearing , new evidence was heard , that heavy rain had fallen on the ship on the second day of the killings but a third batch of slaves was killed after that . This led Mansfield to order another trial , because the rainfall meant that the killing of those slaves , after the water shortage had been eased , could not be justified in terms of the greater necessity of saving the ship and the rest of its human cargo . One of the justices in attendance also said that this evidence invalidated the findings of the jury in the first trial , as the jury had heard testimony that the water shortage resulted from the poor condition of the ship , brought on by unforeseen maritime conditions , rather than from errors committed by its captain . Mansfield concluded that the insurers were not liable for losses resulting from errors committed by the Zong 's crew . 
 There is no evidence that another trial was held on this issue . Despite Granville Sharp 's efforts , no member of the crew was prosecuted for the murder of the slaves . A summary of the appeal on the Zong case , was eventually published in the nominate reports prepared from the contemporaneous manuscript notes of Sylvester Douglas , Baron Glenbervie , and others . It was published in 1831 as Gregson v Gilbert ( 1783 ) 3 Doug . KB 232 . 
 = = = Mansfield 's motivations = = = 
 Jeremy Krikler has argued that Mansfield wanted to ensure that commercial law remained as helpful to Britain 's overseas trade as possible and as a consequence was keen to uphold the principle of " general average " , even in relation to the killing of humans . This principle holds that a captain who jettisons part of his cargo in order to save the rest can claim for the loss from his insurers . For Mansfield to have found in favour of the insurers would have greatly undermined this idea . The revelation that rain had fallen during the period of the killings enabled Mansfield to order a retrial , while leaving the notion of " general average " intact . He emphasised that the massacre would have been legally justified and the owners ' insurance claim would have been valid , if the water shortage had not arisen from mistakes made by the captain . 
 Krikler comments that Mansfield 's conclusions ignored the ruling precedent of his predecessor , Matthew Hale , that the killing of innocents in the name of self @-@ preservation was unlawful . This ruling was to prove important a century later in R v Dudley and Stephens , which also concerned the <unk> of acts of murder at sea . Mansfield also failed to acknowledge another important legal principle — that no insurance claim can be legal if it arose from an illegal act . 
 = = Effect on the abolitionist movement = = 
 Granville Sharp campaigned to raise awareness of the massacre , writing letters to newspapers , the Lords Commissioners of Admiralty and the Prime Minister ( the Duke of Portland ) . Neither Portland nor the Admiralty sent him a reply . The first Zong trial in March 1783 , had been reported only by a single London newspaper but it provided details of events . Little about the massacre appeared in print before 1787 . The newspaper article in March 1783 was the first public report of the massacre , and it was published nearly 18 months after the event . 
 Despite these setbacks , Sharp 's efforts did have some success . In April 1783 , he sent an account of the Zong massacre to William Dillwyn , a Quaker , who had asked to see evidence that was critical of the slave trade . The London Yearly Meeting of the Society of Friends decided shortly after to begin campaigning against slavery , and a petition signed by 273 Quakers was submitted to parliament in July 1783 . Sharp also sent letters to Anglican bishops and clergy and to those already sympathetic to the abolitionist cause . 
 The immediate effect of the Zong massacre on public opinion was limited , demonstrating — as the historian of abolitionism Seymour Drescher has noted — the challenge that the early abolitionists faced . Following Sharp 's efforts , the Zong massacre became an important topic in abolitionist literature and the massacre was discussed in works by Thomas Clarkson , <unk> <unk> , James Ramsay and John Newton . These accounts often omitted the names of the ship and its captain , thereby creating , in the words of <unk> Swaminathan , " a portrait of abuse that could be mapped onto any ship in the Middle Passage " . 
 The Zong killings offered a powerful example of the horrors of the slave trade , stimulating the development of the abolitionist movement in Britain , which dramatically expanded in size and influence in the late 1780s . In 1787 , the Society for the Abolition of the Slave Trade was founded . 
 Parliament received numerous petitions against the slave trade and examined the issue in 1788 . With strong support by Sir William Dolben , who had toured a slave ship , it passed the Slave Trade Act 1788 ( Dolben 's Act ) , which was its first legislation to regulate the slave trade . It restricted the number of slaves that could be transported , to reduce problems of overcrowding and poor sanitation . Its renewal in 1794 included an amendment that limited the scope of insurance policies concerning slaves , rendering illegal such generalised phrases that promised to insure against " all other Perils , Losses , and Misfortunes . " ( The Zong owners ' representatives had highlighted such a phrase in seeking their claim at the King 's Bench hearing . ) The act had to be renewed annually and Dolben led these efforts , speaking frequently to parliament in opposition to slavery . The Slave Trade Act of 1799 was passed to make these provisions permanent . 
 <unk> , notably William Wilberforce , continued their effort to end the slave trade . Britain passed the Slave Trade Act 1807 , which prohibited the Atlantic slave trade , and the Royal Navy enforced the Blockade of Africa . The United States also prohibited the Atlantic slave trade in 1808 and helped intercept illegal slave ships at sea , predominately after 1842 . 
 In 1823 , the Anti @-@ Slavery Society was founded in Britain , dedicated to abolishing slavery throughout the British Empire , later achieved through the Slavery Abolition Act 1833 . The massacre on the Zong was frequently cited in abolitionist literature in the 19th century ; in 1839 , Thomas Clarkson published his History of the Rise , Progress , and Accomplishment of the Abolition of the African Slave Trade , which included an account of the Zong killings . 
 Clarkson 's book had an important influence on the artist J. M. W. Turner , who displayed a painting at the Royal Academy summer exhibition in 1840 entitled The Slave Ship . The painting depicts a vessel , from which a number of manacled slaves have been thrown into the sea , to be devoured by sharks . Some of the details in the painting , such as the shackles worn by the slaves , appear to have been influenced by the illustrations in Clarkson 's book . The painting was shown at an important time in the movement to abolish slavery worldwide , as the Royal Academy exhibition opened one month before the first World Anti @-@ Slavery Convention in London . The painting was admired by its owner , John Ruskin . It has been described by the 20th @-@ century critic Marcus Wood as one of the few truly great depictions in Western art of the Atlantic slave trade . 
 = = In modern culture = = 
 The Zong has inspired several works of literature . Fred D <unk> 's novel Feeding the Ghosts ( 1997 ) tells the story of an enslaved African who survives being thrown overboard from the Zong . In the novel , the journal of the slave — <unk> — is lost , unlike that of Granville Sharp . According to the cultural historian Anita Rupprecht , this signifies the silencing of African voices about the massacre . 
 M. <unk> Philip 's 2008 poetry book , Zong ! is based on the events surrounding the massacre and uses the account of the King 's Bench hearing as its source . 
 Margaret Busby 's play An African Cargo , staged by Nitro theatre company at Greenwich Theatre in 2007 , dealt with the massacre and the 1783 trials , making use of the legal transcripts . 
 An episode of the television programme Garrow 's Law ( 2010 ) is loosely based on the legal events arising from the massacre . The historical William Garrow did not take part in the case , and because the Zong 's captain died shortly after arriving in Jamaica , his appearance in court for fraud is also fictional . 
 = = = 2007 abolition commemorations = = = 
 In 2007 , a memorial stone was erected at Black River , Jamaica , near where the Zong would have landed . A sailing ship representing Zong was sailed to Tower Bridge in London in March 2007 to commemorate the 200th anniversary of the Abolition of the Slave Trade Act , at a cost of £ 300 @,@ 000 . The vessel housed depictions of the Zong massacre and the slave trade . It was accompanied by HMS Northumberland , with an exhibition on board commemorating the role of the Royal Navy in the suppression of the slave trade after 1807 . 
 = Einsteinium = 
 Einsteinium is a synthetic element with symbol Es and atomic number 99 . It is the seventh transuranic element , and an actinide . 
 Einsteinium was discovered as a component of the debris of the first hydrogen bomb explosion in 1952 , and named after Albert Einstein . Its most common isotope einsteinium @-@ 253 ( half life 20 @.@ 47 days ) is produced artificially from decay of californium @-@ 253 in a few dedicated high @-@ power nuclear reactors with a total yield on the order of one milligram per year . The reactor synthesis is followed by a complex process of separating einsteinium @-@ 253 from other actinides and products of their decay . Other isotopes are synthesized in various laboratories , but at much smaller amounts , by bombarding heavy actinide elements with light ions . Owing to the small amounts of produced einsteinium and the short half @-@ life of its most easily produced isotope , there are currently almost no practical applications for it outside of basic scientific research . In particular , einsteinium was used to synthesize , for the first time , 17 atoms of the new element mendelevium in 1955 . 
 Einsteinium is a soft , silvery , paramagnetic metal . Its chemistry is typical of the late actinides , with a preponderance of the + 3 oxidation state ; the + 2 oxidation state is also accessible , especially in solids . The high radioactivity of einsteinium @-@ 253 produces a visible glow and rapidly damages its crystalline metal lattice , with released heat of about 1000 watts per gram . Difficulty in studying its properties is due to einsteinium @-@ 253 's conversion to berkelium and then californium at a rate of about 3 % per day . The isotope of einsteinium with the longest half life , einsteinium @-@ 252 ( half life 471 @.@ 7 days ) would be more suitable for investigation of physical properties , but it has proven far more difficult to produce and is available only in minute quantities , and not in bulk . Einsteinium is the element with the highest atomic number which has been observed in macroscopic quantities in its pure form , and this was the common short @-@ lived isotope einsteinium @-@ 253 . 
 Like all synthetic transuranic elements , isotopes of einsteinium are very radioactive and are considered highly dangerous to health on ingestion . 
 = = History = = 
 Einsteinium was first identified in December 1952 by Albert Ghiorso and co @-@ workers at the University of California , Berkeley in collaboration with the Argonne and Los Alamos National Laboratories , in the fallout from the Ivy Mike nuclear test . The test was carried out on November 1 , 1952 at Enewetak Atoll in the Pacific Ocean and was the first successful test of a hydrogen bomb . Initial examination of the debris from the explosion had shown the production of a new isotope of plutonium , 244 
 94Pu , which could only have formed by the absorption of six neutrons by a uranium @-@ 238 nucleus followed by two beta decays . 
 <formula> 
 At the time , the multiple neutron absorption was thought to be an extremely rare process , but the identification of 244 
 94Pu indicated that still more neutrons could have been captured by the uranium nuclei , thereby producing new elements heavier than californium . 
 Ghiorso and co @-@ workers analyzed filter papers which had been flown through the explosion cloud on airplanes ( the same sampling technique that had been used to discover 244 
 94Pu ) . Larger amounts of radioactive material were later isolated from coral debris of the atoll , which were delivered to the U.S. The separation of suspected new elements was carried out in the presence of a citric acid / ammonium buffer solution in a weakly acidic medium ( pH ≈ 3 @.@ 5 ) , using ion exchange at elevated temperatures ; fewer than 200 atoms of einsteinium were recovered in the end . Nevertheless , element 99 ( einsteinium ) , namely its 253Es isotope , could be detected via its characteristic high @-@ energy alpha decay at 6 @.@ 6 MeV . It was produced by the capture of 15 neutrons by uranium @-@ 238 nuclei followed by seven beta @-@ decays , and had a half @-@ life of 20 @.@ 5 days . Such multiple neutron absorption was made possible by the high neutron flux density during the detonation , so that newly generated heavy isotopes had plenty of available neutrons to absorb before they could disintegrate into lighter elements . Neutron capture initially raised the mass number without changing the atomic number of the nuclide , and the concomitant beta @-@ decays resulted in a gradual increase in the atomic number : 
 <formula> 
 Some 238U atoms , however , could absorb another two neutrons ( for a total of 17 ) , resulting in 255Es , as well as in the 255Fm isotope of another new element , fermium . The discovery of the new elements and the associated new data on multiple neutron capture were initially kept secret on the orders of the U.S. military until 1955 due to Cold War tensions and competition with Soviet Union in nuclear technologies . However , the rapid capture of so many neutrons would provide needed direct experimental confirmation of the so @-@ called r @-@ process multiple neutron absorption needed to explain the cosmic nucleosynthesis ( production ) of certain heavy chemical elements ( heavier than nickel ) in supernova explosions , before beta decay . Such a process is needed to explain the existence of many stable elements in the universe . 
 Meanwhile , isotopes of element 99 ( as well as of new element 100 , fermium ) were produced in the Berkeley and Argonne laboratories , in a nuclear reaction between nitrogen @-@ 14 and uranium @-@ 238 , and later by intense neutron irradiation of plutonium or californium : 
 <formula> 
 These results were published in several articles in 1954 with the disclaimer that these were not the first studies that had been carried out on the elements . The Berkeley team also reported some results on the chemical properties of einsteinium and fermium . The Ivy Mike results were declassified and published in 1955 . 
 In their discovery of the elements 99 and 100 , the American teams had competed with a group at the Nobel Institute for Physics , Stockholm , Sweden . In late 1953 – early 1954 , the Swedish group succeeded in the synthesis of light isotopes of element 100 , in particular 250Fm , by bombarding uranium with oxygen nuclei . These results were also published in 1954 . Nevertheless , the priority of the Berkeley team was generally recognized , as its publications preceded the Swedish article , and they were based on the previously undisclosed results of the 1952 thermonuclear explosion ; thus the Berkeley team was given the privilege to name the new elements . As the effort which had led to the design of Ivy Mike was codenamed Project <unk> , element 99 had been jokingly nicknamed " <unk> " but the official names suggested by the Berkeley group derived from two prominent scientists , Albert Einstein and Enrico Fermi : " We suggest for the name for the element with the atomic number 99 , einsteinium ( symbol E ) after Albert Einstein and for the name for the element with atomic number 100 , fermium ( symbol Fm ) , after Enrico Fermi . " Both Einstein and Fermi died before the names were announced . The discovery of these new elements was announced by Albert Ghiorso at the first Geneva Atomic Conference held on 8 – 20 August 1955 . The symbol for einsteinium was first given as " E " and later changed to " Es " by IUPAC . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 Einsteinium is a synthetic , silvery @-@ white , radioactive metal . In the periodic table , it is located to the right of the actinide californium , to the left of the actinide fermium and below the lanthanide holmium with which it shares many similarities in physical and chemical properties . Its density of 8 @.@ 84 g / cm3 is lower than that of californium ( 15 @.@ 1 g / cm3 ) and is nearly the same as that of holmium ( 8 @.@ 79 g / cm3 ) , despite atomic einsteinium being much heavier than holmium . The melting point of einsteinium ( 860 ° C ) is also relatively low – below californium ( 900 ° C ) , fermium ( 1527 ° C ) and holmium ( 1461 ° C ) . Einsteinium is a soft metal , with the bulk modulus of only 15 GPa , which value is one of the lowest among non @-@ alkali metals . 
 Contrary to the lighter actinides californium , berkelium , curium and americium which crystallize in a double hexagonal structure at ambient conditions , einsteinium is believed to have a face @-@ centered cubic ( fcc ) symmetry with the space group Fm3m and the lattice constant a 
 = 575 pm . However , there is a report of room @-@ temperature hexagonal einsteinium metal with a = 
 398 pm and c = 650 pm , which converted to the fcc phase upon heating to 300 ° C. 
 The self @-@ damage induced by the radioactivity of einsteinium is so strong that it rapidly destroys the crystal lattice , and the energy release during this process , 1000 watts per gram of 253Es , induces a visible glow . These processes may contribute to the relatively low density and melting point of einsteinium . Further , owing to the small size of the available samples , the melting point of einsteinium was often deduced by observing the sample being heated inside an electron microscope . Thus the surface effects in small samples could reduce the melting point value . 
 The metal is divalent and has a noticeably high volatility . In order to reduce the self @-@ radiation damage , most measurements of solid einsteinium and its compounds are performed right after thermal annealing . Also , some compounds are studied under the atmosphere of the reductant gas , for example H2O + HCl for EsOCl so that the sample is partly regrown during its decomposition . 
 Apart from the self @-@ destruction of solid einsteinium and its compounds , other intrinsic difficulties in studying this element include scarcity – the most common 253Es isotope is available only once or twice a year in sub @-@ milligram amounts – and self @-@ contamination due to rapid conversion of einsteinium to berkelium and then to californium at a rate of about 3 @.@ 3 % per day : 
 <formula> 
 Thus , most einsteinium samples are contaminated , and their intrinsic properties are often deduced by extrapolating back experimental data accumulated over time . Other experimental techniques to circumvent the contamination problem include selective optical excitation of einsteinium ions by a tunable laser , such as in studying its luminescence properties . 
 Magnetic properties have been studied for einsteinium metal , its oxide and fluoride . All three materials showed Curie – Weiss paramagnetic behavior from liquid helium to room temperature . The effective magnetic moments were deduced as 10 @.@ 4 ± 0 @.@ 3 µB for Es2O3 and 11 @.@ 4 ± 0 @.@ 3 µB for the EsF3 , which are the highest values among actinides , and the corresponding Curie temperatures are 53 and 37 K. 
 = = = Chemical = = = 
 Like all actinides , einsteinium is rather reactive . Its trivalent oxidation state is most stable in solids and aqueous solution where it induced pale pink color . The existence of divalent einsteinium is firmly established , especially in solid phase ; such + 2 state is not observed in many other actinides , including protactinium , uranium , neptunium , plutonium , curium and berkelium . Einsteinium ( II ) compounds can be obtained , for example , by reducing einsteinium ( III ) with samarium ( II ) chloride . The oxidation state + 4 was postulated from vapor studies and is yet uncertain . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Nineteen nuclides and three nuclear isomers are known for einsteinium with atomic weights ranging from 240 to 258 . All are radioactive and the most stable nuclide , <unk> , has a half @-@ life of 471 @.@ 7 days . Next most stable isotopes are 254Es ( half @-@ life 275 @.@ 7 days ) , 255Es ( 39 @.@ 8 days ) and 253Es ( 20 @.@ 47 days ) . All of the remaining isotopes have half @-@ lives shorter than 40 hours , and most of them decay within less than 30 minutes . Of the three nuclear isomers , the most stable is <unk> with half @-@ life of 39 @.@ 3 hours . 
 = = = Nuclear fission = = = 
 Einsteinium has a high rate of nuclear fission that results in a low critical mass for a sustained nuclear chain reaction . This mass is 9 @.@ 89 kilograms for a bare sphere of 254Es isotope , and can be lowered to 2 @.@ 9 by adding a 30 centimeter thick steel neutron reflector , or even to 2 @.@ 26 kilograms with a 20 cm thick reflector made of water . However , even this small critical mass greatly exceeds the total amount of einsteinium isolated thus far , especially of the rare 254Es isotope . 
 = = = Natural occurrence = = = 
 Because of the short half @-@ life of all isotopes of einsteinium , any primordial einsteinium , that is einsteinium that could possibly be present on the Earth during its formation , has decayed by now . Synthesis of einsteinium from naturally occurring actinides uranium and thorium in the Earth crust requires multiple neutron capture , which is an extremely unlikely event . Therefore , most einsteinium is produced on Earth in scientific laboratories , high @-@ power nuclear reactors , or in nuclear weapons tests , and is present only within a few years from the time of the synthesis . The transuranic elements from americium to fermium , including einsteinium , occurred naturally in the natural nuclear fission reactor at Oklo , but no longer do so . Einsteinium was observed in Przybylski 's Star in 2008 . 
 = = Synthesis and extraction = = 
 Einsteinium is produced in minute quantities by bombarding lighter actinides with neutrons in dedicated high @-@ flux nuclear reactors . The world 's major irradiation sources are the 85 @-@ megawatt High Flux Isotope Reactor ( HFIR ) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee , U.S. , and the SM @-@ 2 loop reactor at the Research Institute of Atomic Reactors ( NIIAR ) in Dimitrovgrad , Russia , which are both dedicated to the production of transcurium ( Z > 96 ) elements . These facilities have similar power and flux levels , and are expected to have comparable production capacities for transcurium elements , although the quantities produced at NIIAR are not widely reported . In a " typical processing campaign " at Oak Ridge , tens of grams of curium are irradiated to produce decigram quantities of californium , milligram quantities of berkelium ( 249Bk ) and einsteinium and picogram quantities of fermium . 
 The first microscopic sample of 253Es sample weighing about 10 nanograms was prepared in 1961 at HFIR . A special magnetic balance was designed to estimate its weight . Larger batches were produced later starting from several kilograms of plutonium with the einsteinium yields ( mostly 253Es ) of 0 @.@ 48 milligrams in 1967 – 1970 , 3 @.@ 2 milligrams in 1971 – 1973 , followed by steady production of about 3 milligrams per year between 1974 and 1978 . These quantities however refer to the integral amount in the target right after irradiation . Subsequent separation procedures reduced the amount of isotopically pure einsteinium roughly tenfold . 
 = = = Laboratory synthesis = = = 
 Heavy neutron irradiation of plutonium results in four major isotopes of einsteinium : 253Es ( α @-@ emitter with half @-@ life of 20 @.@ 03 days and with a spontaneous fission half @-@ life of 7 × 105 years ) ; <unk> ( β @-@ emitter with half @-@ life of 38 @.@ 5 hours ) , 254Es ( α @-@ emitter with half @-@ life of about 276 days ) and 255Es ( β @-@ emitter with half @-@ life of 24 days ) . An alternative route involves bombardment of uranium @-@ 238 with high @-@ intensity nitrogen or oxygen ion beams . 
 Einsteinium @-@ 247 ( half @-@ life 4 @.@ 55 minutes ) was produced by irradiating americium @-@ 241 with carbon or uranium @-@ 238 with nitrogen ions . The latter reaction was first realized in 1967 in Dubna , Russia , and the involved scientists were awarded the Lenin Komsomol Prize . 
 The isotope <unk> was produced by irradiating 249Cf with deuterium ions . It mainly decays by emission of electrons to 248Cf with a half @-@ life of 25 ( ± 5 ) minutes , but also releases α @-@ particles of 6 @.@ 87 MeV energy , with the ratio of electrons to α @-@ particles of about 400 . 
 <formula> 
 The heavier isotopes <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> were obtained by bombarding 249Bk with α @-@ particles . One to four neutrons are liberated in this process making possible the formation of four different isotopes in one reaction . 
 <formula> 
 Einsteinium @-@ 253 was produced by irradiating a 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 2 milligram 252Cf target with a thermal neutron flux of ( 2 – 5 ) × 1014 neutrons · cm − 2 · s − 1 for 500 – 900 hours : 
 <formula> 
 = = = Synthesis in nuclear explosions = = = 
 The analysis of the debris at the 10 @-@ megaton Ivy Mike nuclear test was a part of long @-@ term project . One of the goals of which was studying the efficiency of production of transuranium elements in high @-@ power nuclear explosions . The motivation for these experiments was that synthesis of such elements from uranium requires multiple neutron capture . The probability of such events increases with the neutron flux , and nuclear explosions are the most powerful man @-@ made neutron sources , providing densities of the order 1023 neutrons / cm2 within a microsecond , or about 1029 neutrons / ( cm2 · s ) . In comparison , the flux of the HFIR reactor is 5 × 1015 neutrons / ( cm2 · s ) . A dedicated laboratory was set up right at Enewetak Atoll for preliminary analysis of debris , as some isotopes could have decayed by the time the debris samples reached the mainland U.S. The laboratory was receiving samples for analysis as soon as possible , from airplanes equipped with paper filters which flew over the atoll after the tests . Whereas it was hoped to discover new chemical elements heavier than fermium , none of these were found even after a series of megaton explosions conducted between 1954 and 1956 at the atoll . 
 The atmospheric results were supplemented by the underground test data accumulated in the 1960s at the Nevada Test Site , as it was hoped that powerful explosions conducted in confined space might result in improved yields and heavier isotopes . Apart from traditional uranium charges , combinations of uranium with americium and thorium have been tried , as well as a mixed plutonium @-@ neptunium charge , but they were less successful in terms of yield and was attributed to stronger losses of heavy isotopes due to enhanced fission rates in heavy @-@ element charges . Product isolation was problematic as the explosions were spreading debris through melting and vaporizing the surrounding rocks at depths of 300 – 600 meters . Drilling to such depths to extract the products was both slow and inefficient in terms of collected volumes . 
 Among the nine underground tests that were carried between 1962 and 1969 , the last one was the most powerful and had the highest yield of transuranium elements . <unk> of einsteinium that would normally take a year of irradiation in a high @-@ power reactor , were produced within a microsecond . However , the major practical problem of the entire proposal was collecting the radioactive debris dispersed by the powerful blast . Aircraft filters adsorbed only about 4 × 10 − 14 of the total amount , and collection of tons of corals at Enewetak Atoll increased this fraction by only two orders of magnitude . Extraction of about 500 kilograms of underground rocks 60 days after the Hutch explosion recovered only about 1 × 10 − 7 of the total charge . The amount of transuranium elements in this 500 @-@ kg batch was only 30 times higher than in a 0 @.@ 4 kg rock picked up 7 days after the test which demonstrated the highly non @-@ linear dependence of the transuranium elements yield on the amount of retrieved radioactive rock . <unk> were drilled at the site before the test in order to accelerate sample collection after explosion , so that explosion would expel radioactive material from the epicenter through the shafts and to collecting volumes near the surface . This method was tried in two tests and instantly provided hundreds kilograms of material , but with actinide concentration 3 times lower than in samples obtained after drilling . Whereas such method could have been efficient in scientific studies of short @-@ lived isotopes , it could not improve the overall collection efficiency of the produced actinides . 
 Although no new elements ( apart from einsteinium and fermium ) could be detected in the nuclear test debris , and the total yields of transuranium elements were disappointingly low , these tests did provide significantly higher amounts of rare heavy isotopes than previously available in laboratories . 
 = = = Separation = = = 
 Separation procedure of einsteinium depends on the synthesis method . In the case of light @-@ ion bombardment inside a cyclotron , the heavy ion target is attached to a thin foil , and the generated einsteinium is simply washed off the foil after the irradiation . However , the produced amounts in such experiments are relatively low . The yields are much higher for reactor irradiation , but there , the product is a mixture of various actinide isotopes , as well as lanthanides produced in the nuclear fission decays . In this case , isolation of einsteinium is a tedious procedure which involves several repeating steps of cation exchange , at elevated temperature and pressure , and chromatography . Separation from berkelium is important , because the most common einsteinium isotope produced in nuclear reactors , 253Es , decays with a half @-@ life of only 20 days to 249Bk , which is fast on the timescale of most experiments . Such separation relies on the fact that berkelium easily oxidizes to the solid + 4 state and precipitates , whereas other actinides , including einsteinium , remain in their + 3 state in solutions . 
 Separation of trivalent actinides from lanthanide fission products can be done by a cation @-@ exchange resin column using a 90 % water / 10 % ethanol solution saturated with hydrochloric acid ( HCl ) as eluant . It is usually followed by anion @-@ exchange chromatography using 6 molar HCl as eluant . A cation @-@ exchange resin column ( <unk> @-@ 50 exchange column ) treated with ammonium salts is then used to separate fractions containing elements 99 , 100 and 101 . These elements can be then identified simply based on their elution position / time , using α @-@ hydroxyisobutyrate solution ( α @-@ HIB ) , for example , as eluant . 
 Separation of the 3 + actinides can also be achieved by solvent extraction chromatography , using bis- ( 2 @-@ ethylhexyl ) phosphoric acid ( abbreviated as HDEHP ) as the stationary organic phase , and nitric acid as the mobile aqueous phase . The actinide elution sequence is reversed from that of the cation @-@ exchange resin column . The einsteinium separated by this method has the advantage to be free of organic complexing agent , as compared to the separation using a resin column . 
 = = = Preparation of the metal = = = 
 Einsteinium is highly reactive and therefore strong reducing agents are required to obtain the pure metal from its compounds . This can be achieved by reduction of einsteinium ( III ) fluoride with metallic lithium : 
 EsF3 + 3 Li → Es + 3 LiF 
 However , owing to its low melting point and high rate of self @-@ radiation damage , einsteinium has high vapor pressure , which is higher than that of lithium fluoride . This makes this reduction reaction rather inefficient . It was tried in the early preparation attempts and quickly abandoned in favor of reduction of einsteinium ( III ) oxide with lanthanum metal : 
 Es2O3 + 2 La → 2 Es + La2O3 
 = = Chemical compounds = = 
 = = = Oxides = = = 
 Einsteinium ( III ) oxide ( Es2O3 ) was obtained by burning einsteinium ( III ) nitrate . It forms colorless cubic crystals , which were first characterized from microgram samples sized about 30 nanometers . Two other phases , monoclinic and hexagonal , are known for this oxide . The formation of a certain Es2O3 phase depends on the preparation technique and sample history , and there is no clear phase diagram . <unk> between the three phases can occur spontaneously , as a result of self @-@ irradiation or self @-@ heating . The hexagonal phase is isotypic with lanthanum ( III ) oxide where the Es3 + ion is surrounded by a 6 @-@ coordinated group of O2 − ions . 
 = = = Halides = = = 
 Einsteinium halides are known for the oxidation states + 2 and + 3 . The most stable state is + 3 for all halides from fluoride to iodide . 
 Einsteinium ( III ) fluoride ( EsF3 ) can be precipitated from einsteinium ( III ) chloride solutions upon reaction with fluoride ions . An alternative preparation procedure is to exposure einsteinium ( III ) oxide to chlorine trifluoride ( <unk> ) or F2 gas at a pressure of 1 – 2 atmospheres and a temperature between 300 and 400 ° C. The EsF3 crystal structure is hexagonal , as in californium ( III ) fluoride ( <unk> ) where the Es3 + ions are 8 @-@ fold coordinated by fluorine ions in a bicapped trigonal prism arrangement . 
 Einsteinium ( III ) chloride ( <unk> ) can be prepared by annealing einsteinium ( III ) oxide in the atmosphere of dry hydrogen chloride vapors at about 500 ° C for some 20 minutes . It crystallizes upon cooling at about 425 ° C into an orange solid with a hexagonal structure of <unk> type , where einsteinium atoms are 9 @-@ fold coordinated by chlorine atoms in a tricapped trigonal prism geometry . Einsteinium ( III ) bromide ( <unk> ) is a pale @-@ yellow solid with a monoclinic structure of AlCl3 type , where the einsteinium atoms are octahedrally coordinated by bromine ( coordination number 6 ) . 
 The divalent compounds of einsteinium are obtained by reducing the trivalent halides with hydrogen : 
 2 <unk> + H2 → 2 <unk> + 2 HX , X = F , Cl , Br , I 
 Einsteinium ( II ) chloride ( <unk> ) , einsteinium ( II ) bromide ( <unk> ) , and einsteinium ( II ) iodide ( <unk> ) have been produced and characterized by optical absorption , with no structural information available yet . 
 Known oxyhalides of einsteinium include EsOCl , <unk> and <unk> . They are synthesized by treating a <unk> with a vapor mixture of water and the corresponding hydrogen halide : for example , <unk> + H2O / HCl to obtain EsOCl . 
 = = = <unk> compounds = = = 
 The high radioactivity of einsteinium has a potential use in radiation therapy , and organometallic complexes have been synthesized in order to deliver einsteinium atoms to an appropriate organ in the body . Experiments have been performed on injecting einsteinium citrate ( as well as fermium compounds ) to dogs . Einsteinium ( III ) was also incorporated into beta @-@ diketone chelate complexes , since analogous complexes with lanthanides previously showed strongest UV @-@ excited luminescence among <unk> compounds . When preparing einsteinium complexes , the Es3 + ions were 1000 times diluted with <unk> + ions . This allowed reducing the radiation damage so that the compounds did not disintegrate during the period of 20 minutes required for the measurements . The resulting luminescence from Es3 + was much too weak to be detected . This was explained by the unfavorable relative energies of the individual constituents of the compound that hindered efficient energy transfer from the chelate matrix to Es3 + ions . Similar conclusion was drawn for other actinides americium , berkelium and fermium . 
 Luminescence of Es3 + ions was however observed in inorganic hydrochloric acid solutions as well as in organic solution with di ( 2 @-@ ethylhexyl ) <unk> acid . It shows a broad peak at about 1064 nanometers ( half @-@ width about 100 nm ) which can be resonantly excited by green light ( ca . 495 nm wavelength ) . The luminescence has a lifetime of several microseconds and the quantum yield below 0 @.@ 1 % . The relatively high , compared to lanthanides , non @-@ radiative decay rates in Es3 + were associated with the stronger interaction of f @-@ electrons with the inner Es3 + electrons . 
 = = Applications = = 
 There is almost no use for any isotope of einsteinium outside of basic scientific research aiming at production of higher transuranic elements and transactinides . 
 In 1955 , mendelevium was synthesized by irradiating a target consisting of about 109 atoms of 253Es in the 60 @-@ inch cyclotron at Berkeley Laboratory . The resulting 253Es ( α , n ) 256Md reaction yielded 17 atoms of the new element with the atomic number of 101 . 
 The rare isotope einsteinium @-@ 254 is favored for production of <unk> elements because of its large mass , relatively long half @-@ life of 270 days , and availability in significant amounts of several micrograms . Hence einsteinium @-@ 254 was used as a target in the attempted synthesis of ununennium ( element 119 ) in 1985 by bombarding it with calcium @-@ 48 ions at the superHILAC linear accelerator at Berkeley , California . No atoms were identified , setting an upper limit for the cross section of this reaction at 300 <unk> . 
 <formula> 
 Einsteinium @-@ 254 was used as the calibration marker in the chemical analysis spectrometer ( " alpha @-@ scattering surface analyzer " ) of the Surveyor 5 lunar probe . The large mass of this isotope reduced the spectral overlap between signals from the marker and the studied lighter elements of the lunar surface . 
 = = Safety = = 
 Most of the available einsteinium toxicity data originates from research on animals . Upon ingestion by rats , only about 0 @.@ 01 % einsteinium ends in the blood stream . From there , about 65 % goes to the bones , where it remains for about 50 years , 25 % to the lungs ( biological half @-@ life about 20 years , although this is rendered irrelevant by the short half @-@ lives of einsteinium isotopes ) , 0 @.@ 035 % to the testicles or 0 @.@ 01 % to the ovaries – where einsteinium stays indefinitely . About 10 % of the ingested amount is excreted . The distribution of einsteinium over the bone surfaces is uniform and is similar to that of plutonium . 
 = True Blue ( Madonna album ) = 
 True Blue is the third studio album by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna , released on June 30 , 1986 , by Sire Records . She co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced the entire album with Stephen Bray and Patrick Leonard . Deemed Madonna 's most girlish album , True Blue deals with her visions of love , work , dreams as well as disappointments , and was inspired by her then husband Sean Penn , to whom Madonna dedicated the album . Musically , the songs on the album took a different direction from her previous endeavours , incorporating classical music in order to engage an older audience who had been skeptical of her music . 
 The album features instrumentation from acoustic guitars , drums , synthesizers and Cuban musical instruments . The topic for the songs range from love , freedom , and in the case of " Papa Don 't Preach " , social issues like teenage pregnancy . After its release , True Blue received generally positive reviews from critics , who complimented the album as the archetype of the late 1980s and early 1990s pop albums . They also praised the fact that Madonna 's voice sounded stronger than it did on her previous efforts , while commending Madonna 's skills as a singer , songwriter and entertainer . 
 True Blue was an immediate global success , reaching number one in then record @-@ breaking 28 countries across the world , including Australia , Canada , France , Germany , the United Kingdom and the United States . It spent 34 consecutive weeks at the top of the European Top 100 Albums chart , longer than any other album in history . It became the world 's top @-@ selling album of 1986 , as well as the best @-@ selling album of the 1980s by a female artist . With estimated sales of over 25 million copies worldwide , True Blue remains one of the best @-@ selling albums of all time . All five singles released from the album reached the top five on the Billboard Hot 100 , with " Live to Tell " , " Papa Don 't Preach " , and " Open Your Heart " peaking at number one . 
 The album was promoted on Madonna 's second concert tour , the Who 's That Girl World Tour , which visited cities of North America , Europe and Asia in 1987 . True Blue is credited as being the album which established Madonna 's position as the biggest female artist of the 1980s , rivaling male musicians Michael Jackson and Prince . The album 's singles and their accompanying music videos have sparked debates among scholars and social groups . She became the first female artist to receive the Video Vanguard Award at the 1986 MTV Video Music Awards in recognition of her impact on popular culture . The album also gave her first appearance on the Guinness Book of World Records . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 On March 6 , 1986 , at the Kensington Roof Gardens in London , during a press conference for Shanghai Surprise , Madonna confirmed that she was working on a new album named Live to Tell , which would be later changed to True Blue . She again collaborated with Stephen Bray who had worked on her previous album Like a Virgin , and began to work with Patrick Leonard for the first time . Madonna wrote or co @-@ wrote every song on the album , although writing involvement on some songs such as " Papa Don 't Preach " and " Open Your Heart " was limited to adding lyrics . She was also credited with co @-@ producing every track . The album was recorded from December 1985 to April 1986 , during the first year of Madonna 's marriage to American actor Sean Penn . She dedicated the album to Penn saying , " This is dedicated to my husband , the coolest guy in the universe . " With this album Madonna tried to appeal to an older audience who had previously been sceptical of her music by experimenting with her image , adopting a more ' traditional ' look , and incorporating classical music in her songs . 
 Deemed Madonna 's most girlish album yet , True Blue deals with Madonna 's view of love , work and dreams as well as disappointments . According to Madonna , True Blue takes its title from a favorite expression of her then husband Sean Penn and his very pure vision of love . The album was a direct tribute to him as well and was inspired by her " unabashed valentine " for Penn . Most of the songs on the album reflect this idea . Each song on True Blue was developed separately . The album 's first track , " Papa Don 't Preach " , was written by Brian Elliot , who described it as " a love song , maybe framed a little bit differently " . The song is based on teenage gossip Elliot heard outside his studio , which had a large front window that doubled as a mirror where schoolgirls from the North Hollywood High School in Los Angeles regularly stopped to fix their hair and chat . 
 " Open Your Heart " was the first recorded cut for the album , as early as December 1985 and ultimately made it to the final released tracklist ; it was originally intended for Cyndi Lauper . The third track " White Heat " was dedicated to actor James Cagney and named after the film of the same name from 1949 . Two quotations from the original soundtrack were included in the song . The fourth track " Live to Tell " was originally written by Patrick Leonard for the soundtrack of Paramount 's romantic drama film Fire with Fire , but after the company declined it , Leonard showed the song to Madonna . She decided to use it for At Close Range , the new film of her then @-@ husband , actor Sean Penn . Madonna made a demo of the song and , when the film 's director , James Foley , heard it he asked Leonard to write the score for the film , as suggested by Madonna . 
 True Blue was the first album where Madonna included Spanish themes as evident in the song " La Isla Bonita " . The song was previously written for Michael Jackson 's Bad album , but he had turned it down . While working with Leonard on the album , Madonna accepted it in Jackson 's place and re @-@ wrote the song 's lyrics , thus earning herself a co @-@ writing credit . Madonna described the song as her tribute to the " beauty and mystery of Latin American people " . Originally intended as the first single , " Love Makes the World Go Round " closes the album and was first performed at Live Aid a year earlier in July 1985 . The song recalled the antiwar music of the sixties . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically True Blue was a different direction for Madonna . Her previous efforts had her singing in a high pitched voice . With this album , Madonna toned it down for a more bubblegum @-@ pop voice . The songs on the album reflect this and a number of instruments were used in the songs to bring out the different moods which the lyrics emphasized . " Papa Don 't Preach " features acoustic , electric , and rhythm guitars , keyboards , and string arrangements . The song samples Beethoven 's Appassionata sonata . A continuous percussion filled structure was used in " Open Your Heart " . " White Heat " ' s sampling of the film 's quotation was included with speech and gunshots . It is an uptempo dance song with synth bass and double @-@ tracked vocals supported by male voices in the chorus . 
 On ballads like " Live to Tell " there is background instrumentation from a keyboard , a synthesizer , a funk guitar and a mix of synthesized and real drumming . " Where 's the Party " is a standard Madonna dance track with arrangements of bass drums , synthesizer , clattering rhythms and a remixed approach to the whole composition . The title track featured instrumentation from a rhythm guitar , a synthesizer , keyboards , and drums for the bassline , with a backing track that employed a chord progression commonly used in doo @-@ wop Cuban drums and Spanish guitar , maracas and harmonicas are used in " La Isla Bonita " . " Jimmy Jimmy " has an early sixties pop influence and the lyrics were a tribute to pop star James Dean . 
 Lyrically True Blue reflects Madonna 's ideas about love . " Where 's the Party " tells about a working girl enjoying her day on the dance @-@ floor after work . " Jimmy Jimmy " talks about Madonna 's admiration for the neighbourhood bad boy . Other songs like the Spanish " La Isla Bonita " and " Love Makes the World Go Round " have lyrics dealing with escapism from normal life with the latter talking about anti @-@ war and anti @-@ poverty and using Latin drums and samba influenced rhythms . The lyrics of " White Heat " deal with firmness and Madonna included Clint Eastwood 's infamous " make my day " quote in the song . " Papa Don 't Preach " , dealt with lyrics talking about a young woman who tells her father that she is pregnant out of wedlock , but is going to keep her baby . 
 " Live to Tell " portraits the complexity of deceit and mistrust . The song also is about childhood scars and had an extreme emotional pitch , achieving it in a divine sense . The title track had Madonna talking about romance and 1950s inspired girl group pop . The lyrics of " True Blue " are constructed in a verse @-@ chorus form , with the theme being Madonna 's feelings for Sean Penn ; she even uses the 1929 archaic love word " dear " in the line " Just think back and remember , dear " . Madonna expressed her sexual desires in the lyrics of the song " Open Your Heart " and described the beauty of a Latin paradise in " La Isla Bonita " . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The album cover , shot by photographer Herb Ritts , is one of Madonna 's most recognizable pictures . It features a picture of Madonna from the neck up . The main colors in the picture are gray , white and various shades of blue to reinforce the album 's title . Madonna positioned herself in an elegant pose while wearing pale make up with red lips , tilting back her neck in a swan like pose . Jeri Heiden , who was working at Warner Bros. art department , was given the task of editing the photos and making them compatible for appearance in an album cover . She had to work with a total of 60 rolls of photos , each of size 35 mm . Heiden ordered about 30 to 40 test prints from Ritts ' studio and made recommendations based on it . Several images from the photo shoot were considered for the album cover , some of which later became the single covers for " Papa Don 't Preach " , " True Blue " and " Open Your Heart " . The final photo was selected by Madonna , Heiden and Jeff Ayeroff , creative director of Warner Bros. at that time . 
 After the final photo was selected , Heiden commissioned two different versions of the album cover . The original image was taken in black @-@ and @-@ white , and Heiden experimented with a variety of treatments of the photo , to go along with the album 's title , and finally arrived at the blue toned , hand tinted version of the image . The LP and CD album cover is a cropped image of a longer picture including torso , more of which is seen in the cover of the cassette tape edition , and was also included as a fold @-@ out poster in the initial pressings of the LP . A poster of Madonna , mirroring the cover art , was included within the vinyl versions of the album . 
 In the US and Canada , the cover did not have any logo , but in the European nations , they were sold with Madonna 's name and album title on the cover . Heiden explained in an interview with Aperture magazine that they thought it would be " cool " to use a shrink wrap on the US covers , so that when one took it off , there would only be the photo of Madonna . For the European nations , Warner felt that the name was needed on the cover , as they did not want to take chance with Madonna 's popularity there . The back sleeve and the booklet inside featured the song titles in Heiden 's own handwriting . About cropping the image for the cassette and the vinyl versions , Heiden said : " I think the image became more interesting cropped into a square — and at that time we always started with the album cover configuration . It was like she was floating — her clothing was not visible . She took on the appearance of a marble statue — Goddess like . In the vertical cropping you see her leather jacket and the wall , and it becomes more typical , editorial , earthly . " 
 According to Lucy O 'Brien , author of Madonna : Like an Icon , the album artwork was on @-@ par with Andy Warhol 's concept of pop art . She felt that the image was a mixture of innocence and idealism , while incorporating 1950s @-@ style Technicolor and hand tinted color , characteristic of Warhol 's silkscreen printed design , prevalent in the 1960s . Jeri Heiden , the album 's cover designer , commented , " She was already highly aware of the value of her image and was in control of it . After I took the photo , it appeared as if she was floating — her clothing was not visible . She took on the appearance of a marble statue , goddess @-@ like . " O 'Brien felt that the artwork heralded the arrival of a new Madonna , while drawing on the enduring appeal of her celluloid icon Marilyn Monroe . " With this picture , Madonna made explicit the connection between Warhol and herself , the vivid nexus between pop art and commerce . The late 1980s marked a new era of the pop artist as a brand , and Madonna became the first one to exploit this . " 
 Erica Wexler from Spin described Madonna on the cover as " like a cobra basking in the hot sun , Madonna on the cover of her new album stretches her profile lasciviously . " Author J. Randy Taraborrelli commented in Madonna : An Intimate Biography , that the album cover indicated how True Blue was a vehicle of growth for Madonna . He felt that the " washed out color photograph " of her with head tilted back and eyes closed was " understated " , especially when compared to the sexier poses she had been associated in the past . The album 's inner sleeve did not feature any photographs , and instead was dedicated to album credits and the song lyrics , since Madonna wanted to be represented by her songs on True Blue , not her image . Billboard listed the cover at rank 34 on their article about the " 50 Greatest Album Covers " , describing it as a striking image of the singer . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Live performance = = = 
 Prior to the album 's release , Madonna premiered " Love Makes the World Go Round " at the 1985 Live Aid concert . The rest of the album 's tracks were included on the setlist of her 1987 Who 's That Girl World Tour except " Jimmy Jimmy " which remains still the only song from the album Madonna did not perform on any live appearance . It was her second concert tour and promoted True Blue alongside the film project Who 's That Girl . It was Madonna 's first world tour , reaching Asia , North America and Europe . Musically and technically superior to her previous Virgin Tour , the Who 's That Girl tour incorporated multimedia components to make the show more appealing . 
 Madonna trained herself physically with aerobics , jogging and weight @-@ lifting , to cope with the choreography and the dance routines . For the costumes , she collaborated with designer Marlene Stewart , expanding on the idea of bringing her popular video characters to life onstage , reworking scenes from " True Blue " , " Open Your Heart " , " Papa Don 't Preach " and " La Isla Bonita " . The stage was huge , with four video screens , multimedia projectors and a flight of stairs in the middle . Leonard became the music director and encouraged Madonna to go with the idea of rearranging her older songs and presenting them in a new format . Madonna named the tour ' Who 's That Girl ' , after looking up at a gigantic image of herself projected on a screen on the stage during rehearsals . 
 The show consisted of seven costume changes , with song @-@ and @-@ dance routines and theatrics with an encore consisting of the title song " Who 's That Girl " and " Holiday " . The tour also addressed social causes like AIDS , during " Papa Don 't Preach " . Who 's That Girl was critically appreciated , with reviewers commenting on the extravagant nature of the concert and complimenting Madonna for her dancing , costume changes and dynamic pacing . Who 's That Girl was a commercial success , grossing a total of U.S. $ 25 million , with Madonna playing in front of 1 @.@ 5 million people over the course of the tour . According to Pollstar , it was the second top female concert tour of 1987 , behind Tina Turner 's Break Every Rule Tour . 
 Two concerts from the tour were later released on music video , Who 's That Girl : Live in Japan ( 1987 ) , which was exclusive to the Japanese market and Ciao Italia : Live from Italy ( 1988 ) which was released internationally . Taraborrelli commented that " Many female artists behave like a diva for a period when they reach superstar status , and the ' Who 's That Girl ? ' tour marked the beginning of Madonna 's . " The tour is also noted for giving rise to the new Madonna persona , a stronger and more intelligent sexual image of her former self which had given rise to the term Madonna wannabe . A statue of Madonna , wearing a conical bra was erected in her name , at the center of the town of Pacentro in Italy , where her ancestors used to live . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Live to Tell " was the first single released from the album in March 1986 . The song was the second ballad for Madonna after " Crazy for You " , and was used in the film At Close Range which starred her then husband Sean Penn . The song was received positively by critics with most of them calling it " her best ballad to date " as well as a " tremendous ballad that rewrites the rules of adult contemporary crossover " . " Live to Tell " became Madonna 's third number one single on the Billboard Hot 100 and her second number @-@ one that is featured in a film after " Crazy for You " . It also became a success internationally reaching the top ten in Canada , France , the Netherlands , Switzerland , and the United Kingdom . 
 " Papa Don 't Preach " was released as the second single in June 1986 . It was critically appreciated with most of them declaring it as " the stand @-@ alone song " from the album , also that " with songs like ' Papa Don 't Preach ' , Madonna made the transition from pop tart to consummate artist , joining the ranks of 80s icons like Michael Jackson and Prince . " The song became Madonna 's fourth number @-@ one single in the U.S. and also reached the top spot in Canada , Ireland , Italy , and the United Kingdom . 
 " True Blue " was released as the album 's third single in September 1986 . It is a dance @-@ pop song inspired by the Motown 's girl groups from the 1960s . Critics generally received the song as a light @-@ hearted , fun track having a 50 's feeling to it , although some critics believed that it was " <unk> and neutered " as compared to the other songs on the record , and that " True Blue " is " a song that is merely cute and not really up to being the title track of an album " . The song became another top ten hit for Madonna reaching number three on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , and peaked at number one in Ireland and the United Kingdom . 
 " Open Your Heart " was the fourth single from the album released in November 1986 . The song was appreciated critically with critics comparing it with sweeter post @-@ Motown valentine songs , and " perfect " for dancefloor strut . The song became Madonna 's fifth number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . Internationally , it became a top ten hit in several European countries including Belgium , Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands , and the United Kingdom . 
 " La Isla Bonita " was released as the fifth and final single in February 1987 . The song describes Madonna as a tourist who prays " that the days would last , they went so fast " . The first line refers to an island called San Pedro although this has not been clearly stated by Madonna in any interview . The song received positive response with critics calling it one of Madonna 's greatest , most influential songs as well as the best song on the album . " La Isla Bonita " was a worldwide hit , reaching number one in Canada , France , Germany , and the United Kingdom , while reaching a peak of four on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 True Blue received generally positive reviews from music critics . Jon Pareles , in a review for The New York Times , said that True Blue reprised the themes of fidelity in its songs and complimented her addition of a tinge of real world storytelling in her songs , making her reach the " fringes of the permissible " . Stephen Holden in another review complimented the album and said that " Madonna goes heavy on heart in this record " . In a Rolling Stone review , Davitt Sigerson stated that Madonna was " singing better than ever " . The album 's songs were described as " catchy " , but Sigerson also commented on the lack of " outstanding tracks " . He ultimately stated that True Blue is a " sturdy , dependable , lovable new album " which " remains faithful to her past while shamelessly rising above it " . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine , in a review for AllMusic , declared it as " one of the great dance @-@ pop albums , a record that demonstrates Madonna 's true skills as a songwriter , record @-@ maker , provocateur , and entertainer through its wide reach , accomplishment , and sheer sense of fun . " He also felt that Madonna 's endeavors in True Blue made it " [ brilliant ] , using the music to hook in critics . " Erlewine found that the songs on the album had a poignant mixture of topics , which further <unk> its popularity . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine called the album " the supreme archetype for late ' 80s and early ' 90s pop music . [ ... ] Time stamped with ' 80s @-@ era keyboard and drum synths , True Blue , though <unk> of hits , is the most dated of Madonna 's albums . " He praised the album 's songs for being more mature than " Material Girl " , and said that the album " includes some of Madonna 's greatest , most influential hits ( the robust " Open Your Heart " and the timeless " La Isla Bonita " ) , but it 's also home to some of her biggest clunkers . " Michael Paoletta from Billboard commented in 2001 that nearly 20 years after its debut , the album is still irresistible . 
 Entertainment Weekly reviewer Jim Farber said " Though Madonna 's third project finds her adding to her palette with Spanish pop ( " La Isla Bonita " ) and messing with our heads with its seeming anti @-@ abortion song ( " Papa Don 't Preach " ) . Also notable for ' Live to Tell , ' her best ballad to date " . Robert Christgau was less impressed , accusing Madonna of pandering to the " lowest common denominator " of young listeners with ambiguous lyrics and over @-@ promotion . Robert Hilburn from Los Angeles Times stated that " True Blue isn 't revolutionary music , but it is imaginative , highly energized pop that recognizes the limitations and pleasures of Top 40 fare . " Erica Wexler from Spin commented that " True Blue is Madonna 's rite of passage between pop adolescence and a harsher adult world . With all her contrivances and the delighted tunes that I can 't exorcise from my head , her mystique is still explained by the young beefcake who told me , ' I love to pump iron to Madonna ' . " 
 = = Commercial response = = 
 In the United States , True Blue debuted at number 29 on the Billboard 200 and reached number one on the issue dated August 16 , 1986 . It stayed on the top position for five consecutive weeks and on the chart for a total of 82 weeks . The album also reached a peak of number 47 on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . True Blue was certified seven times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of over seven million units , making it Madonna 's third best @-@ selling album in the United States , behind Like a Virgin ( 1984 ) and The Immaculate Collection ( 1990 ) . After the advent of the Nielsen SoundScan era in 1991 , the album sold a further 404 @,@ 000 copies . In Canada , the album debuted at number 73 on the RPM albums chart for the issue of July 5 , 1986 . The album climbed rapidly upwards and reached number one on the issue dated August 9 , 1986 . It stayed at the top for nine weeks and was present on the chart for 77 weeks . True Blue was certified diamond by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for shipment of one million copies . 
 True Blue was also a commercial success in Asia and Oceania . In Japan , the album peaked at number two on the Oricon LP chart . At the 1987 Japan Gold Disc Awards held by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) , True Blue received " Album of the Year Pop Solo " and " Grand Prix Album of the Year " , which was given for the year 's best @-@ selling international album , while Madonna was honored the " Artist of the Year " for the year 's best @-@ selling international artist . In Hong Kong , True Blue was certified platinum by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry . In Australia , the album topped the Kent Music Report albums chart on the issue date of August 4 , 1986 , staying there for two weeks . It was certified four times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 280 @,@ 000 copies . It also reached number one in New Zealand albums chart and was certified five times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipment of 75 @,@ 000 copies . 
 True Blue achieved its biggest commercial reception in European countries , where it topped the European Top 100 Albums chart for 34 consecutive weeks — a record that has yet to be broken — from issue dated July 19 , 1986 to March 7 , 1987 . In the United Kingdom , True Blue opened at the top of the UK Albums Chart on July 12 , 1986 , making it the first album by American artist to debut at number one in British chart history . It remained at the summit for six weeks and on the chart for a total of 85 weeks . True Blue was the best @-@ selling album of 1986 in the United Kingdom . The British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) certified it seven times platinum for shipment of 2 @.@ 1 million copies and as of October 2014 , it has sold 1 @.@ 997 million copies , the highest sales for any of Madonna 's studio albums . True Blue also topped the albums chart in France and was certified diamond by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) for shipment of one million copies . Actual sales of the album in the country stand at 1 @,@ 353 @,@ 100 copies . In Germany , the album peaked at number one for eight weeks and was certified two times platinum by the Bundesverband Musikindustrie ( BVMI ) for shipment of one million copies . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine noted that " True Blue is the album where Madonna truly became ' Madonna the Superstar ' — the endlessly ambitious , fearlessly provocative entertainer that knew how to outrage , spark debates , get good reviews — and make good music while she 's at it . " Mark Savage from BBC stated that True Blue is the album which cemented Madonna 's reputation as the ' First Lady of Pop ' . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine said that with the album " Madonna made the transition from pop tart to consummate artist , joining the ranks of ' 80s icons like Michael Jackson and Prince . " Similarly , Robert C. Sickels , the author of 100 Entertainers Who Changed America : An Encyclopedia of Pop Culture Luminaries , wrote that the album " cemented Madonna 's place as the most popular female musical star of the 1980s , shining alongside male pop icons like Prince and Michael Jackson . " 
 Regarding Madonna 's influence on the record industry and younger artists , Debbie Gibson 's then manager Doug Breitbart commented : " Madonna has brought back a really strong , melodic component to pop music . She has a very youth @-@ oriented , up , bubbly , fun sound . " Slant Magazine listed the album at number 60 on their list of " The 100 Best Albums of the 1980s " and stated that " True Blue was the album on which it became readily apparent that Madonna was more than just a flash @-@ in @-@ the @-@ pan pop star . " They added , " It 's when she began manipulating her image — and her audience — with a real sense of clarity and purpose and made sure she had quality songs to back up her calculation and world @-@ dominating ambition . " 
 The global success of True Blue marked the first time Madonna entering the Guinness Book of World Records in its 1988 edition , where she was dubbed as the most successful singer for 1986 . The album also held the record for number one in the most countries , topping the album charts in a total of 28 countries around the world . True Blue was later included in the 1991 edition of Guinness Book of World Records as the biggest selling album by a woman , with copies sold of more than 17 million until October 1990 . Becoming the world 's top @-@ selling album of 1986 and the biggest selling album of the 1980s by woman , True Blue also remains one of the best @-@ selling albums of all time with sales of more than 25 million copies worldwide . 
 The second single from the album , " Papa Don 't Preach " faced criticism as well as support from groups concerned with pregnancy and abortion for its theme of a girl getting pregnant and then deciding to continue the pregnancy rather than ending it . Alfred Moran who was the executive director of Planned Parenthood of New York City , criticized the song , fearing that it would undermine efforts to promote birth control among adolescents and that it would encourage teenage pregnancy . Susan Carpenter @-@ McMillan who was the president of Feminists for Life ( FFL ) in the U.S. , accepted the song 's theme as being pro @-@ life and said that " abortion is readily available on every street corner for young women . Now what Madonna is telling them is , hey , there 's an alternative . " In a New York Times interview , Madonna commented on the events happening surrounding the song : 
 " Papa Don 't Preach " is a message song that everyone is going to take the wrong way . Immediately they 're going to say I am advising every young girl to go out and get pregnant . When I first heard the song , I thought it was silly . But then I thought , wait a minute , this song is really about a girl who is making a decision in her life . She has a very close relationship with her father and wants to maintain that closeness . To me it 's a celebration of life . It says , ' I love you , father , and I love this man and this child that is growing inside me ' . Of course , who knows how it will end ? But at least it starts off positive . " 
 True Blue also made social impact through its music videos , as author John E. <unk> observed in his book <unk> Sex that Madonna pushed the envelope of what could be shown on television which resulted in increase of her popularity . The music video for " Open Your Heart " was a subject of analysis among scholars for its concept of the stereo @-@ typical male gaze and voyeurism . She appeared as a stripper in the video , who escapes with a young boy from the strip parlour in the end . MTV had some reservations initially before airing the video , which was later resolved after a meeting with Warner Officials . Feminist writer Susan Bordo reacted negatively to the video , saying that the leering and pathetic men in the cubicles and Madonna 's escape with the boy is " cynically and mechanically tacked on [ as ] a way of claiming trendy status for what is just cheesecake — or , perhaps , pornography " . Author Donn Welton pointed out that the usual power relationship between the " voyeuristic male gaze and object " is destabilized by the portrayal of the male patrons of the peep show as leering and pathetic . 
 Author Douglas Kellner noted that the multiculturalism in her music videos and her culturally transgressive moves " turned out to be highly successful moves that endeared her to large and varied youth audiences . " In the fall of 1986 , Sire Records held Madonna 's " Make My Video " contest that involved MTV viewers to make their own videos for " True Blue " . Thousands of viewers submitted their recorded tapes which were mainly made using home @-@ made video equipment and featured themselves or relatives as the actors . MTV publicist Peter Danielson said that many of the submissions featured teenagers imitating Madonna . Her Spanish look in the music video for " La Isla Bonita " became popular and appeared in the fashion trends at that time in the form of boleros and layered skirts accessorizing with rosary beads and crucifix like the video . In recognition of her impact on popular culture through her music videos , Madonna was honored with the Video Vanguard Award at the 1986 MTV Video Music Awards , only four years into her career . She became the first female artist to receive such career achievement from MTV . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies a remixer and additional producer 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = Banat Bulgarians = 
 The Banat Bulgarians ( Banat Bulgarian : <unk> or <unk> <unk> ; common Bulgarian : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ; Romanian : Bulgari <unk> ; Serbian : <unk> <unk> , Banatski <unk> ) are a distinct Bulgarian minority group which settled in the 18th century in the region of the Banat , which was then ruled by the Habsburgs and after World War I was divided between Romania , Serbia , and Hungary . Unlike most other Bulgarians , they are Roman Catholic by confession and stem from groups of Paulicians and Roman Catholics from modern northern and northwestern Bulgaria . 
 Banat Bulgarians speak a distinctive codified form of the Eastern Bulgarian vernacular with much lexical influence from the other languages of the Banat . Although strongly acculturated to the Central European region , they have preserved their Bulgarian identity . Since the Liberation of Bulgaria in 1878 , many have returned to Bulgaria and founded separate villages there . 
 = = Population = = 
 The official Romanian census states that 6 @,@ 468 people of Bulgarian origin inhabit the Romanian part of the Banat . The Serbian census of 2002 recognized 1 @,@ 658 Bulgarians in Vojvodina , the autonomous province that covers the Serbian part of the Banat . Bulgarian researchers estimate that 12 @,@ 000 Banat Bulgarians live in Romania and 3 @,@ 000 in Serbia . 
 The earliest and most important centres of the Banat Bulgarian population are the villages of <unk> Vechi ( Stár Bišnov ) and Vinga , both today in Romania , but notable communities also exist in Romania in <unk> ( <unk> ) , Colonia <unk> ( <unk> ) and Denta ( <unk> ) , and the cities of Timişoara ( <unk> ) and Sânnicolau Mare ( <unk> ) , as well as in Serbia in the villages of Ivanovo , <unk> ( Kanak ) , <unk> Tomić ( <unk> ) , and <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 In Bulgaria , returning Banat Bulgarians populated the villages of <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , among others , in some of which they coexist or coexisted with Banat Swabians , other Bulgarian Roman Catholics , and Eastern Orthodox Bulgarians . 
 = = = Historical population = = = 
 According to various censuses and estimates , not always accurate , the number of the Banat Bulgarians varied as follows : 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin and migration north of the Danube = = = 
 The Bulgarian Roman Catholic community in the north @-@ western ore @-@ mining town of Chiprovtsi and surrounding villages was possibly established in the Middle Ages by " Saxon " miners , who later migrated elsewhere or were assimilated . In 1688 , the members of the community organized the unsuccessful Chiprovtsi Uprising against the Ottoman rule of Bulgaria . The uprising was suppressed due to organizational flaws and the halting of the Austrian offensive against the Ottomans . Around 300 families of the surviving Catholics fled north of the Danube to Oltenia , initially settling in Craiova , Râmnicu Vâlcea , and other cities , where their existing rights were confirmed by Wallachian Prince Constantin <unk> . Some moved to south @-@ western Transylvania , founding colonies in Vinţu de Jos ( 1700 ) and Deva ( 1714 ) and receiving privileges such as civil rights and tax exemption . 
 After Oltenia was occupied by Austria in 1718 , the status of the Bulgarians in the region improved again , as an imperial decree of 1727 allowed them the same privileges as their colonies in Transylvania . This attracted another wave of migration of Bulgarian Catholics , about 300 families from the formerly Paulician villages of central northern Bulgaria . They settled in Craiova between 1726 and 1730 , but did not receive the same rights as the colonists from Chiprovtsi . 
 The Habsburgs were forced to withdraw from Oltenia in 1737 in the wake of a new war with the Ottoman Empire . The Bulgarians fled from this new Ottoman occupation and settled in the Austrian @-@ ruled Banat to the northwest . The Austrian authorities allowed them to found the villages of Stár Bišnov in 1738 and Vinga ( or <unk> ) in 1741 . In 1744 , a decree of Maria Theresa of Austria again confirmed their privileges received in Oltenia . 
 = = = Austrian and Hungarian rule = = = 
 Around a hundred Paulicians from the region of Svishtov and Nikopol migrated to the Banat from 1753 to 1777 . The existing Bulgarian population quickly spread throughout the region from the late 18th to the second quarter of the 19th century . They settled in around 20 villages and towns in search of better economic conditions , specifically their need for arable land . Such colonies include those in <unk> ( 1779 ) , Kanak and Stari <unk> ( 1820 ) , Belo <unk> ( 1885 ) , <unk> , <unk> , and Banatski Dvor ( 1842 ) , <unk> ( 1846 ) , <unk> ( 1866 ) , and Ivanovo ( 1867 ) . 
 After they settled , the Banat Bulgarians began to take care of their education and religion . The Neo @-@ Baroque church in Stár Bišnov was built in 1804 and the imposing Neo @-@ Gothic church in Vinga in 1892 . Until 1863 , Banat Bulgarians held liturgies in Latin and " Illyric " . Illyric was a strain of Croatian which had spread in the communities before they migrated to the Banat . However , with their cultural revival in the mid @-@ 19th century , their vernacular was gradually introduced in the church . The revival also led to the release of their first printed book , <unk> <unk> za <unk> <unk> , in 1851 . " Illyric " was also substituted with Banat Bulgarian in education in 1860 ( officially in 1864 ) . In 1866 , <unk> Rill codified the dialect with his essay <unk> <unk> . 
 After the Ausgleich of 1867 , the Hungarian authorities gradually intensified the Magyarization of the Banat . Until World War I , they imposed Hungarian as the main language of education . 
 = = = Interwar Romanian and Serbian Banat = = = 
 After World War I , Austria @-@ Hungary was dissolved and Banat was divided between Romania and Serbia . Most Banat Bulgarians became citizens of the Kingdom of Romania , but many fell inside the Kingdom of Yugoslavia . 
 In Greater Romania , the Banat Bulgarians ' identity was distinguished in censuses and statistics . The main language of education was changed to Romanian and the Bulgarian schools were nationalized . A Romanian geography book of 1931 describes the Bulgarians in the county of Timiș @-@ <unk> as " foreigners " , and their national dress as " not as beautiful " as the Romanian one , but in general the Banat Bulgarians were more favourably treated than the larger Eastern Orthodox Bulgarian minority in interwar Romania . 
 The Kingdom of Yugoslavia denied the existence of any Bulgarian minority , whether in the Vardar Banovina , the Western Outlands , or the Banat . Official post @-@ World War I statistics provide no data about the number of the Banat Bulgarians . In comparison with the Eastern Orthodox Bulgarians in Yugoslavia , the Banat Bulgarians were treated better by the Yugoslav authorities , although Serbo @-@ Croatian was the only language of education . 
 In the 1930s , the Banat Bulgarians in Romania entered a period of cultural revival led by figures such as Ivan <unk> , Anton Lebanov , and Karol <unk> ( Telbizov ) . These new cultural leaders emphasized the Bulgarian identity at the expense of the identification as Paulicians and Roman Catholics , establishing contacts with the Bulgarian government and other Bulgarian communities in Romania , particularly that in Dobruja . The organs of this revival were the newspaper Banatsći balgarsći <unk> ( Banat Bulgarian Voice ) , issued between 1935 and 1943 , and the annual Banatsći balgarsći <unk> ( Banat Bulgarian Calendar ) , issued from 1936 to 1940 . There was a plan to celebrate the 200th anniversary of the settlement in the Banat which was the most significant manifestation by Banat Bulgarians in that period . It was partially spoiled by the Romanian authorities , but still attracted much attention among intellectuals in Bulgaria . The Bulgarian Agrarian Party , a section of the National Peasants ' Party , was founded in 1936 on the initiative of Karol Telbizov and Dr. Karol <unk> of Stár Bišnov , with Petar Telbisz as its chairman , and the Bulgarian National Society in the Banat , also headed by Telbisz , was established in 1939 . 
 Bulgaria and Yugoslavia improved their relations in the 1930s , leading to indirect recognition of the Banat Bulgarian minority by the Yugoslav government . Still , the Banat Bulgarian revival was much less perceivable in the Serbian Banat . The Banat Bulgarian population in Yugoslavia was only partially affected by the work of Telbizov , Lebanov , and the other cultural workers in the Romanian Banat . 
 = = = Emigration to Hungary , the United States and Bulgaria = = = 
 Some Banat Bulgarians migrated again , mainly to Hungary and the United States . According to Bulgarian data from 1942 , 10 @,@ 000 Banat Bulgarians lived in Hungary , mainly in the major cities , but this number is most likely overestimated . Members of the Banat Bulgarian community in Hungary include several deputies to the National Assembly , such as Petar Dobroslav , whose son László Dobroslav ( László <unk> ) was a diplomat , and Georgi <unk> . 
 During the Interwar period , the Banat Bulgarian communities in Romania were among those experiencing the greatest emigration to the USA , particularly in the 1920s and 1930s . An organized Bulgarian community was established in Lone Wolf , Oklahoma , where the Banat Bulgarians were mostly farmers . 
 A significant number of Banat Bulgarians returned to Bulgaria , beginning in the 1880s and 1890s . They founded several villages in Pleven Province , Vratsa Province and Veliko Tarnovo Province and received privileges , as per the law of 1880 , for the settlement of unpopulated lands . They introduced superior agricultural technologies to the country and fully applied their farming experience . Their religious life was partly determined by the clashes between the dominant Eastern Orthodoxy and the minority Catholicism , and cultural conflicts with other Roman Catholic communities which they lived with in several villages , such as the Banat Swabians and the Bulgarian Paulicians from Ilfov . 
 = = = World War II and later = = = 
 On the eve of World War II , the authoritarian regime of Carol II of Romania and the fascist government under Ion Antonescu widely discriminated against the Bulgarian minority in the Romanian Banat . Bulgarians were often deprived of property and land , subjected to anti @-@ Bulgarian propaganda , and their villages had to shelter Romanian and Aromanian refugees from Northern Transylvania and Southern Dobruja . 
 In May 1941 , the Bulgarians in the Romanian Banat contributed to the release of ethnic Bulgarian prisoners of war from the Yugoslav Army , captured by the Axis , from a camp near Timișoara . Communicating with the Bulgarian state , Banat Bulgarian leaders headed by Anton Lebanov negotiated the prisoners ' release and transportation to Bulgaria , after the example of the release of captured Hungarian soldiers from the Yugoslav Army . They temporarily accommodated these Bulgarians from Vardar Macedonia and the Serbian Banat and provided them with food until they could be taken to Bulgaria . 
 The Serbian Banat was conquered by Nazi Germany on 12 April 1941 , and was occupied for much of the war . In late 1942 , the German authorities allowed Bulgarian minority classes to be created in the Serbian schools in Ivanovo , <unk> , <unk> , Belo <unk> , and <unk> Tomić . However , the sudden change in the war and German withdrawal from the Banat forced education in Bulgarian to be discontinued after the 1943 – 44 school year . 
 After the war , Banat Bulgarians in Romania and Yugoslavia were ruled by communist regimes . In the Romanian Banat , some were deported in the <unk> deportations in 1951 , but most of those were allowed to return in 1956 – 57 . A Bulgarian school was founded in <unk> Vechi in 1948 , and in Vinga in 1949 . Others followed in <unk> , Colonia <unk> , and Denta , but these were briefly closed or united with the Romanian schools after 1952 , and Bulgarian remained an optional subject . 
 The Constitution of Romania of 1991 allowed Bulgarians in the Romanian Banat parliamentary representation through the minority party of the Bulgarian Union of the Banat — Romania ( <unk> <unk> ud <unk> — <unk> ) , led formerly by Karol @-@ Matej <unk> and as of 2008 by Nikola <unk> , and Bulgarian remained an optional subject in the schools . 
 In post @-@ war Yugoslavia , the existence of a Banat Bulgarian minority was formally recognized , but they were not given the same rights as the larger Bulgarian minority in eastern Serbia . Unlike other minorities in Vojvodina , they were not allowed education in their mother tongue , only Serbo @-@ Croatian . 
 = = Language = = 
 The vernacular of the Bulgarians of Banat can be classified as a Paulician dialect of the Eastern Bulgarian group . A typical feature is the " <unk> " ( * y ) vowel , which can either take an etymological place or replace " i " . Other characteristic phonological features are the " ê " ( wide " e " ) reflex of the Old Church Slavonic <unk> and the reduction of " o " into " u " and sometimes " e " into " i " : <unk> instead of pole ( " field " ) , <unk> instead of <unk> ( " village " ) , <unk> instead of <unk> ( " fireplace " ) . Another characteristic feature is the palatalization of final consonants , which is typical for other Slavic languages , but found only in non @-@ standard dialects in Bulgarian ( Bulgarian den ( " day " ) sounds like and is written as <unk> ) . 
 Lexically , the language has borrowed many words from languages such as German ( such as <unk> from <unk> , " wire " ; <unk> from Gang , " anteroom , corridor " ) , Hungarian ( <unk> from villany , " electricity " ; <unk> , " cinema " ) , Serbo @-@ Croatian ( <unk> from <unk> , " item , matter " ; <unk> from <unk> , " account " ) , and Romanian ( <unk> from <unk> , " conference " ) due to the close contacts with the other peoples of the <unk> Banat and the religious ties with other Roman Catholic peoples . Banat Bulgarian also has some older loanwords from Ottoman Turkish and Greek , which it shares with other Bulgarian dialects ( e.g. <unk> from Turkish <unk> , " unmarried man , bachelor " ; <unk> from Greek <unk> <unk> , " rose " ) . Loanwords constitute around 20 % of the Banat Bulgarian vocabulary . The names of some Banat Bulgarians are also influenced by Hungarian names , as the Hungarian ( eastern ) name order is sometimes used ( family name followed by given name ) and the female ending " -a " is often dropped from family names . Thus , Marija <unk> would become <unk> Marija . 
 Besides loanwords , the lexis of Banat Bulgarian has also acquired calques and neologisms , such as <unk> ( " icon " , formerly used <unk> and influenced by German <unk> ) , <unk> ( " bullet " , from the word meaning " grain " ) , <unk> ( " volcano " , literally " fire <unk> " ) , and <unk> ( " foreword " ) . 
 The Banat Bulgarian language uses its own script , largely based on the Croatian version of the Latin alphabet ( Gaj 's Latin Alphabet ) , and preserves many features that are archaic in the language spoken in Bulgaria . The language was codified as early as 1866 and is used in literature and press , which distinguishes it from plain dialects . 
 = = = Alphabet = = = 
 The following is the Banat Bulgarian Latin alphabet : 
 = = = Examples = = = 
 = = Culture = = 
 Banat Bulgarians have engaged in literary activity since they settled in the Banat . Their earliest preserved literary work is the historical record Historia Domus ( Historia <unk> <unk> Ó @-@ <unk> , in <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , written in Latin in the 1740s . The codification of the Banat Bulgarian vernacular in 1866 enabled the release of a number of school books and the translation of several important religious works in the mid @-@ 19th century . There was a literary revival in the 1930s , centred around the Banatsći balgarsći <unk> newspaper . Today , the Bulgarian Union of the Banat – Romania issues the biweekly newspaper <unk> <unk> and the monthly magazine <unk> <unk> . 
 The music of the Banat Bulgarians is classed as a separate branch of Bulgarian folk music , with several verbal and musical peculiarities . While the typically Bulgarian bars have been preserved , a number of melodies display Romanian , Serbian , and Hungarian influences , and the specific Bulgarian Christmas carols have been superseded by urban @-@ type songs . Roman Catholicism has exerted considerable influence , eliminating certain types of songs and replacing them with others . Similarly , Banat Bulgarians have preserved many Bulgarian holidays but also adopted others from other Roman Catholic peoples . One of the most popular holidays is <unk> , or the Carnival . In terms of dances , Banat Bulgarians have also heavily borrowed from the neighbouring peoples , for example Hungarian <unk> . 
 The women 's national costume of the Banat Bulgarians has two varieties . The costume of Vinga is reminiscent of those of sub @-@ Balkan cities in Bulgaria ; the one of Stár Bišnov is characteristic of northwestern Bulgaria . The Vinga costume has been particularly influenced by the dress of Hungarians and Germans , but the Stár Bišnov costume has remained more conservative . The Banat Bulgarian women 's costume is perceived as particularly impressive with its crown @-@ like headdress . 
 = = Notable figures = = 
 Colonel Stefan <unk> ( 1815 – 1889 ) – revolutionary , participant in the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 , and member of Giuseppe Garibaldi 's forces during the Italian unification 
 Eusebius <unk> ( 1845 – 1897 ) – historian , high @-@ ranking Franciscan cleric , theologian , polyglot , and active member of the Yugoslav Academy of Sciences and Arts 
 Leopold <unk> ( 1850 – 1940 ) – teacher and writer 
 <unk> Rill – 19th @-@ century teacher and internationally acclaimed textbook writer ; codified the Banat Bulgarian orthography and grammar in 1866 
 Carol Telbisz ( 1853 – 1914 ) – long @-@ time mayor of Timişoara ( 1885 – 1914 ) 
 Anton Lebanov ( 1912 – 2008 ) – lawyer , journalist , and poet 
 Karol Telbizov ( 1915 – 1994 ) – lawyer , journalist , and scientist 
 Luis <unk> ( b . 1933 ) — Academy Award @-@ winning Argentine composer 
 = Ring of Pietroassa = 
 The Ring of Pietroassa ( or Buzău torc ) is a gold <unk> @-@ like necklace found in a ring barrow in Pietroassa ( now Pietroasele ) , Buzău County , southern Romania ( formerly Wallachia ) , in 1837 . It formed part of a large gold hoard ( the Pietroasele treasure ) dated to between 250 and 400 CE . The ring itself is generally assumed to be of Roman @-@ Mediterranean origin , and features a Gothic language inscription in the Elder Futhark runic alphabet . 
 The inscribed ring remains the subject of considerable academic interest , and a number of theories regarding its origin , the reason for its burial and its date have been proposed . The inscription , which sustained irreparable damage shortly after its discovery , can no longer be read with certainty , and has been subjected to various attempts at reconstruction and interpretation . Recently , however , it has become possible to reconstruct the damaged portion with the aid of rediscovered depictions of the ring in its original state . Taken as a whole , the inscribed ring may offer insight into the nature of the pre @-@ Christian pagan religion of the Goths . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The original hoard , discovered within a large ring barrow known as <unk> hill near Pietroasele , Romania , consisted of 22 pieces , comprising a wide assortment of gold vessels , plates and cups as well as jewelry , including two rings with inscriptions . When first uncovered , the objects were found stuck together by an unidentifiable black mass , leading to the assumption that the hoard might have been covered in some kind of organic material ( e.g. cloth or leather ) prior to being interred . The total weight of the find was approximately 20 kg ( 44 lb . ) . 
 Ten objects , among them one of the inscribed rings , were stolen shortly after the find was made , and when the remaining objects were recovered , it was discovered that the other ring had been cut into at least four pieces by a Bucharest goldsmith , whereby one of the inscribed characters had become damaged to the point of illegibility . Fortunately , detailed drawings , a cast , and a photograph made by London 's Arundel Society of the ring before it was damaged survive , and the nature of the lost character can be established with relative certainty . 
 The remaining objects in the collection display a high quality of craftsmanship such that scholars doubt an indigenous origin . Taylor ( 1879 ) , in one of the earliest works discussing the find , speculates that the objects could represent a part of the plunder acquired by Goths in the raids made on the Roman provinces of Moesia and Thrace ( 238 - 251 ) . Another early theory , probably first proposed by Odobescu ( 1889 ) and picked up again by <unk> ( 1976 ) , identifies Athanaric , pagan king of the Gothic Thervingi , as the likely owner of the hoard , presumably acquired through the conflict with the Roman Emperor Valens in 369 . The <unk> catalogue ( 1994 ) suggests that the objects could also be viewed as having been gifts made by Roman leaders to allied Germanic princes . 
 Recent mineralogical studies performed on the objects indicate at least three geographically disparate origins for the gold ore itself : the Southern Ural Mountains , Nubia ( Sudan ) , and Persia . An indigenous Dacian origin for the ore has been ruled out . Though <unk> ( 1999 ) rejects the possibility of Roman imperial coins having been melted down and used for some of the objects , Constantinescu ( 2003 ) comes to the opposite conclusion . 
 A comparison of mineralogical composition , smelting and forging techniques , and earlier typological analysis indicates that the gold used to make the inscribed ring , classified as Celto @-@ Germanic , is neither as pure as that of the Graeco @-@ Roman , nor as alloyed as that found in the Polychrome Germanic objects . These results seem to indicate that at least part of the hoard — including the inscribed ring — was composed of gold ore mined far north of Dacia , and could therefore represent objects that had been in Gothic possession prior to their southward migration ( see Wielbark culture , Chernyakhov culture ) . While this may cast some doubt on the traditional theory regarding a Roman @-@ Mediterranean origin for the ring , further research is necessary before the origin of the material used in its manufacture can be identified conclusively . 
 = = = Burial = = = 
 As with most finds of this type , it remains unclear as to why the objects were placed within the barrow , though several plausible reasons have been proposed . Taylor argues that the ring @-@ barrow in which the objects were found was likely the site of a pagan temple , and that , based on an analysis of the surviving inscription ( see below ) , they were part of a votive hoard indicative of a still @-@ active paganism . Though this theory has been largely ignored , later research , notably that of Looijenga ( 1997 ) , has observed that all of the remaining objects in the hoard possess a " definite ceremonial character " . Particularly noteworthy in this connection is the Patera , or libation dish , which is decorated with depictions of ( probably Germanic ) deities . 
 Those in favour of viewing the objects as the personal hoard of Athanaric suggest that the gold was buried in an attempt to hide it from the Huns , who had defeated the Gothic Greuthungi north of the Black Sea and began moving down into <unk> Dacia around 375 . However , it remains unclear why the gold would have remained buried , as Athanaric 's treaty with Theodosius I ( 380 ) enabled him to bring his tribesmen under the protection of Roman rule prior to his death in 381 . Other researchers have suggested that the hoard was that of an Ostrogothic king , with Rusu ( 1984 ) specifically identifying <unk> , a Gothic general in the Roman army who was killed by the Huns around 400 , as the owner of the hoard . Although this would help explain why the hoard remained buried , it fails to account for the conspicuous ring @-@ barrow having been chosen as the site to hide such a large and valuable treasure . 
 = = = Date = = = 
 Various dates for the burial of the hoard have been proposed , largely derived from considerations regarding the origin of the objects themselves and their manner of burial , though the inscription has also been an important factor ( see below ) . Taylor suggests a range from 210 to 250 . In more recent studies , scholars have proposed slightly later dates , with supporters of the Athanaric theory suggesting the end of the 4th century , the date also proposed by Constantinescu , and <unk> suggesting the early 5th century . 
 = = Inscription = = 
 = = = Reconstruction and interpretation = = = 
 The gold ring bears an Elder Futhark runic inscription of 15 characters , with the 7th ( probably ᛟ / o / ) having been mostly destroyed when the ring was cut in half by thieves . The damaged rune has been the object of some scholarly debate , and is variously interpreted as indicating ᛃ / j / ( Reichert 1993 , <unk> 1993 ) or possibly ᛋ / s / ( Looijenga 1997 ) . If the photograph of the Arundel Society is to be taken as a guide , then the inscription originally read as follows : 
 <unk> hailag 
 <unk> <unk> 
 This reading was followed by early scholars , notably Taylor , who translates " dedicated hailag to the temple ō @-@ wī ( h ) of the Goths <unk> " , and <unk> ( 1923 ) , who translates " sacred ( hailag ) to the Jove ( <unk> , i.e. Thor ) of the Goths <unk> ( ī ) " . Düwel ( 2001 ) , commenting upon the same reading , suggests interpreting ᛟ as indicative of ō [ þal ] thus : 
 gutanī ō [ þal ] wī [ h ] hailag 
 This , following Krause ( 1966 ) , translates as " sacred wī ( h ) ( and ) inviolable hailag inheritance ō ( þal ) of the Goths gutanī " . Other scholars have interpreted the ᛟ as indicative of a feminine ending : Johnsen ( 1971 ) translates " the holy hailag relic wī ( h ) ( = the [ altar ] ring ) of Gothic priestesses <unk> " ; <unk> ( 1978 ) , reading <unk> / m / for <unk> / wi / , translates " dedicated hailag to the Gothic Mothers <unk> ( = female guardian spirits of the Goths ) " ; <unk> ( 2002 ) translates " <unk> wī ( h ) hailag of gothic women / female warriors <unk> " . <unk> the damaged rune as ᛋ / s / , Looijenga ( 1997 ) reads : 
 <unk> wī [ h ] hailag 
 She comments that <unk> should be understood as an early form of Gothic <unk> , " Gothic " , and wī [ h ] as early Gothic <unk> , " sanctuary " . Following this reading , she translates the whole inscription " Gothic ( object ) . <unk> . " Reichert ( 1993 ) suggests that it is also possible to read the damaged rune as ᛃ / j / , and interprets it as representative of j [ <unk> ] , thus : 
 gutanī j [ era ] wī [ h ] hailag 
 Reichert translates this as " ( good ) year j ( era ) of the Goths gutanī , sacred wī ( h ) ( and ) inviolable hailag " . Though Düwel ( 2001 ) has expressed doubts regarding the meaning of such a statement , Nordgren ( 2004 ) supports Reichert 's reading , viewing the ring as connected to a sacral king in his role of ensuring an abundant harvest ( represented by ᛃ <unk> ) . Pieper ( 2003 ) reads the damaged rune as <unk> / ŋ / , thus : 
 gutanī [ i ( ng ) ] wi [ n ] hailag 
 He translates this " [ to ] <unk> of the Goths . Holy . " 
 = = = Meaning = = = 
 Despite the lack of consensus regarding the exact import of the inscription , scholars seem to agree that its language is some form of Gothic and that the intent behind it was religious . Taylor interprets the inscription as being clearly pagan in nature and indicative of the existence of a temple to which the ring was a votive offering . He derives his date for the burial ( 210 to 250 ) from the fact that the Christianizing of the Goths along the Danube is generally considered to have been almost complete within a few generations after their having arrived there in 238 . Though paganism among the Goths did survive the initial conversion phase of 250 to 300 - as the <unk> of the converted Christian Goths <unk> , <unk> ( 370 ) and <unk> ( 372 ) at the hands of the indigenously pagan Goths ( in the latter case Athanaric ) shows - it was weakened considerably in the following years , and the likelihood of such a deposit being made would have been greatly diminished . 
 MacLeod and Mees ( 2006 ) , following Mees ( 2004 ) , interpret the ring as possibly representing either a " temple @-@ ring " or a " sacred oath @-@ ring " , the existence of which in pagan times is documented in Old Norse literature and archaeological finds . Furthermore , they suggest that the inscription could be proof of the existence of ' mother goddess ' worship among the Goths - echoing the well @-@ documented worship of ' mother goddesses ' in other parts of the Germanic North . MacLeod and Mees also propose that the appearance of both of the Common Germanic terms denoting " holiness " ( <unk> and hailag ) may help to clarify the distinction between the two concepts in the Gothic language , implying that the ring was considered holy , not only for its being connected to one or more divinities , but also in and of itself . 
 = Itanium = 
 Itanium ( / <unk> / eye @-@ TAY @-@ nee @-@ əm ) is a family of 64 @-@ bit Intel microprocessors that implement the Intel Itanium architecture ( formerly called IA @-@ 64 ) . Intel markets the processors for enterprise servers and high @-@ performance computing systems . The Itanium architecture originated at Hewlett @-@ Packard ( HP ) , and was later jointly developed by HP and Intel . 
 Itanium @-@ based systems have been produced by HP ( the HP Integrity Servers line ) and several other manufacturers . As of 2008 , Itanium was the fourth @-@ most deployed microprocessor architecture for enterprise @-@ class systems , behind x86 @-@ 64 , Power Architecture , and SPARC . The Poulson processor was released on November 8 , 2012 . While Intel said in April 2015 that it continued to work on Poulson 's successor , Kittson , as of February 2016 Poulson was the most recent processor available , Hewlett @-@ Packard was the only customer ; even HP had introduced Xeon @-@ based machines , and it appeared that Kittson would be the last Itanium . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development : 1989 – 2000 = = = 
 In 1989 , HP determined that Reduced Instruction Set Computing ( RISC ) architectures were approaching a processing limit at one instruction per cycle . HP researchers investigated a new architecture , later named Explicitly Parallel Instruction Computing ( EPIC ) , that allows the processor to execute multiple instructions in each clock cycle . EPIC implements a form of very long instruction word ( <unk> ) architecture , in which a single instruction word contains multiple instructions . With EPIC , the compiler determines in advance which instructions can be executed at the same time , so the microprocessor simply executes the instructions and does not need elaborate mechanisms to determine which instructions to execute in parallel . The goal of this approach is twofold : to enable deeper inspection of the code at compile time to identify additional opportunities for parallel execution , and to simplify processor design and reduce energy consumption by eliminating the need for runtime scheduling circuitry . 
 HP believed that it was no longer cost @-@ effective for individual enterprise systems companies such as itself to develop proprietary microprocessors , so it partnered with Intel in 1994 to develop the IA @-@ 64 architecture , derived from EPIC . Intel was willing to undertake a very large development effort on IA @-@ 64 in the expectation that the resulting microprocessor would be used by the majority of enterprise systems manufacturers . HP and Intel initiated a large joint development effort with a goal of delivering the first product , Merced , in 1998 . 
 During development , Intel , HP , and industry analysts predicted that IA @-@ 64 would dominate in servers , workstations , and high @-@ end desktops , and eventually supplant RISC and Complex Instruction Set Computing ( CISC ) architectures for all general @-@ purpose applications . Compaq and Silicon Graphics decided to abandon further development of the Alpha and MIPS architectures respectively in favor of migrating to IA @-@ 64 . 
 Several groups developed operating systems for the architecture , including Microsoft Windows , OpenVMS , Linux , and UNIX variants such as HP @-@ UX , Solaris , <unk> UNIX , and Monterey / 64 ( the last three were canceled before reaching the market ) . By 1997 , it was apparent that the IA @-@ 64 architecture and the compiler were much more difficult to implement than originally thought , and the delivery of Merced began slipping . Technical difficulties included the very high transistor counts needed to support the wide instruction words and the large caches . There were also structural problems within the project , as the two parts of the joint team used different methodologies and had slightly different priorities . Since Merced was the first EPIC processor , the development effort encountered more unanticipated problems than the team was accustomed to . In addition , the EPIC concept depends on compiler capabilities that had never been implemented before , so more research was needed . 
 Intel announced the official name of the processor , Itanium , on October 4 , 1999 . Within hours , the name Itanic had been coined on a Usenet newsgroup , a reference to Titanic , the " unsinkable " ocean liner that sank in 1912 . " Itanic " has since often been used by The Register , and others , to imply that the multibillion @-@ dollar investment in Itanium — and the early hype associated with it — would be followed by its relatively quick demise . 
 = = = Itanium ( Merced ) : 2001 = = = 
 By the time Itanium was released in June 2001 , its performance was not superior to competing RISC and CISC processors . Itanium competed at the low @-@ end ( primarily 4 @-@ CPU and smaller systems ) with servers based on x86 processors , and at the high end with IBM 's POWER architecture and Sun Microsystems ' SPARC architecture . Intel repositioned Itanium to focus on high @-@ end business and HPC computing , attempting to duplicate x86 's successful " horizontal " market ( i.e. , single architecture , multiple systems vendors ) . The success of this initial processor version was limited to replacing PA @-@ RISC in HP systems , Alpha in Compaq systems and MIPS in SGI systems , though IBM also delivered a supercomputer based on this processor . POWER and SPARC remained strong , while the 32 @-@ bit x86 architecture continued to grow into the enterprise space , building on economies of scale fueled by its enormous installed base . 
 Only a few thousand systems using the original Merced Itanium processor were sold , due to relatively poor performance , high cost and limited software availability . Recognizing that the lack of software could be a serious problem for the future , Intel made thousands of these early systems available to independent software vendors ( <unk> ) to stimulate development . HP and Intel brought the next @-@ generation Itanium 2 processor to market a year later . 
 = = = Itanium 2 : 2002 – 2010 = = = 
 The Itanium 2 processor was released in 2002 , and was marketed for enterprise servers rather than for the whole gamut of high @-@ end computing . The first Itanium 2 , code @-@ named McKinley , was jointly developed by HP and Intel . It relieved many of the performance problems of the original Itanium processor , which were mostly caused by an inefficient memory subsystem . McKinley contained 221 million transistors ( of which 25 million were for logic ) , measured 19 @.@ 5 mm by 21 @.@ 6 mm ( 421 mm2 ) and was fabricated in a 180 nm , bulk CMOS process with six layers of aluminium <unk> . 
 In 2003 , AMD released the Opteron , which implemented its own 64 @-@ bit architecture ( AMD64 ) . Opteron gained rapid acceptance in the enterprise server space because it provided an easy upgrade from x86 . Intel responded by implementing x86 @-@ 64 in its Xeon microprocessors in 2004 . 
 Intel released a new Itanium 2 family member , codenamed Madison , in 2003 . Madison used a 130 nm process and was the basis of all new Itanium processors until Montecito was released in June 2006 . 
 In March 2005 , Intel announced that it was working on a new Itanium processor , codenamed Tukwila , to be released in 2007 . Tukwila would have four processor cores and would replace the Itanium bus with a new Common System Interface , which would also be used by a new Xeon processor . Later that year , Intel revised Tukwila 's delivery date to late 2008 . 
 In November 2005 , the major Itanium server manufacturers joined with Intel and a number of software vendors to form the Itanium Solutions Alliance to promote the architecture and accelerate software porting . The Alliance announced that its members would invest $ 10 billion in Itanium solutions by the end of the decade . 
 In 2006 , Intel delivered Montecito ( marketed as the Itanium 2 9000 series ) , a dual @-@ core processor that roughly doubled performance and decreased energy consumption by about 20 percent . 
 Intel released the Itanium 2 9100 series , codenamed Montvale , in November 2007 . In May 2009 , the schedule for Tukwila , its follow @-@ on , was revised again , with release to OEMs planned for the first quarter of 2010 . 
 = = = Itanium 9300 ( Tukwila ) : 2010 = = = 
 The Itanium 9300 series processor , codenamed Tukwila , was released on February 8 , 2010 , with greater performance and memory capacity . 
 The device uses a 65 nm process , includes two to four cores , up to 24 MB on @-@ die caches , Hyper @-@ Threading technology and integrated memory controllers . It implements double @-@ device data correction , which helps to fix memory errors . Tukwila also implements Intel QuickPath <unk> ( <unk> ) to replace the Itanium bus @-@ based architecture . It has a peak <unk> bandwidth of 96 GB / s and a peak memory bandwidth of 34 GB / s . With QuickPath , the processor has integrated memory controllers and interfaces the memory directly , using <unk> interfaces to directly connect to other processors and I / O hubs . QuickPath is also used on Intel processors using the Nehalem microarchitecture , making it probable that Tukwila and Nehalem will be able to use the same chipsets . Tukwila incorporates four memory controllers , each of which supports multiple DDR3 DIMMs via a separate memory controller , much like the Nehalem @-@ based Xeon processor code @-@ named Beckton . 
 = = = Itanium 9500 ( Poulson ) : 2012 = = = 
 The Itanium 9500 series processor , codenamed Poulson , is the follow @-@ on processor to Tukwila and was released on November 8 , 2012 . According to Intel , it skips the 45 nm process technology and uses a 32 nm process technology ; it features eight cores , has a 12 @-@ wide issue architecture , multithreading enhancements , and new instructions to take advantage of parallelism , especially in virtualization . The Poulson L3 cache size is 32 MB . L2 cache size is 6 MB , 512 I KB , 256 D KB per core . Die size is 544 mm ² , less than its predecessor Tukwila ( 698 @.@ 75 mm ² ) . 
 At <unk> 2011 , Intel presented a paper called , " A <unk> 3 @.@ 1 Billion Transistor 12 @-@ Wide @-@ Issue Itanium Processor for Mission Critical Servers . " Given Intel 's history of disclosing details about Itanium microprocessors at <unk> , this paper most likely refers to Poulson . Analyst David Kanter speculates that Poulson will use a new microarchitecture , with a more advanced form of multi @-@ threading that uses as many as two threads , to improve performance for single threaded and multi @-@ threaded workloads . Some new information was released at Hot Chips conference . 
 New information presents improvements in multithreading , <unk> improvements ( Intel Instruction Replay RAS ) and few new instructions ( thread priority , integer instruction , cache <unk> , data access hints ) . 
 In Intel 's Product Change Notification ( <unk> ) <unk> @-@ 01 , it listed 4 models of Itanium 9500 series CPU , which was later removed in a revised document . The parts were later listed in Intel 's Material Declaration Data Sheets ( <unk> ) database . Intel later posted Itanium 9500 reference manual . 
 The models are : 
 = = = Kittson = = = 
 Rumours of a successor to Poulson coded @-@ name Kittson began to circulate in 2012 – 13 , at first associated with a forthcoming 22 nm shrink , later walked @-@ back in the face of declining Itanium sales to a less @-@ ambitious 32 nm node . Intel has never confirmed the formal specifications for Kittson , but has confirmed that it continues to work on the project as recently as April 2015 . Meanwhile , the aggressively <unk> Xeon E7 platform has begun to displace Itanium @-@ based solutions in the Intel <unk> on 2016 @-@ 07 @-@ 21 <unk> announced in Computer World that Kittson would be released mid @-@ 2017 
 = = Market share = = 
 In comparison with its Xeon family of server processors , Itanium has never been a high @-@ volume product for Intel . Intel does not release production numbers . One industry analyst estimated that the production rate was 200 @,@ 000 processors per year in 2007 . 
 According to Gartner Inc . , the total number of Itanium servers ( not processors ) sold by all vendors in 2007 , was about 55 @,@ 000 . ( It is unclear whether clustered servers counted as a single server or not . ) This compares with 417 @,@ 000 RISC servers ( spread across all RISC vendors ) and 8 @.@ 4 million x86 servers . IDC reports that a total of 184 @,@ 000 Itanium @-@ based systems were sold from 2001 through 2007 . For the combined POWER / SPARC / Itanium systems market , IDC reports that POWER captured 42 % of revenue and SPARC captured 32 % , while Itanium @-@ based system revenue reached 26 % in the second quarter of 2008 . According to an IDC analyst , in 2007 , HP accounted for perhaps 80 % of Itanium systems revenue . According to Gartner , in 2008 , HP accounted for 95 % of Itanium sales . HP 's Itanium system sales were at an annual rate of $ <unk> at the end of 2008 , and declined to $ <unk> by the end of 2009 , compared to a 35 % decline in UNIX system revenue for Sun and an 11 % drop for IBM , with an x86 @-@ 64 server revenue increase of 14 % during this period . 
 In December 2012 , IDC released a research report stating that Itanium server shipments would remain flat through 2016 , with annual shipment of 26 @,@ 000 systems ( a decline of over 50 % compared to shipments in 2008 ) . 
 = = Hardware support = = 
 = = = Systems = = = 
 By 2006 , HP manufactured at least 80 % of all Itanium systems , and sold 7 @,@ 200 in the first quarter of 2006 . The bulk of systems sold were enterprise servers and machines for large @-@ scale technical computing , with an average selling price per system in excess of US $ 200 @,@ 000 . A typical system uses eight or more Itanium processors . 
 By 2012 , only a few manufacturers offered Itanium systems , including HP , Bull , NEC , <unk> and Huawei . In addition , Intel offered a chassis that could be used by system <unk> to build Itanium systems . 
 By 2015 , only HP supplied Itanium @-@ based systems . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The Itanium bus interfaces to the rest of the system via a chipset . Enterprise server manufacturers differentiate their systems by designing and developing chipsets that interface the processor to memory , interconnections , and peripheral controllers . The chipset is the heart of the system @-@ level architecture for each system design . Development of a chipset costs tens of millions of dollars and represents a major commitment to the use of the Itanium . IBM created a chipset in 2003 , and Intel in 2002 , but neither of them developed chipsets to support newer technologies such as DDR2 or PCI Express . Currently chipsets for Itanium supporting such technologies are manufactured by HP , Fujitsu , SGI , NEC , and Hitachi . 
 The " Tukwila " Itanium processor model had been designed to share a common chipset with the Intel Xeon processor EX ( Intel 's Xeon processor designed for four processor and larger servers ) . The goal was to streamline system development and reduce costs for server OEMs , many of which develop both <unk> and Xeon @-@ based servers . However , in 2013 this goal was pushed back to " evaluated for future implementation opportunities " . 
 = = Software support = = 
 Itanium is or was supported by the following operating systems : 
 Windows family 
 Windows XP 64 @-@ Bit Edition ( unsupported ) 
 Windows Server 2003 ( unsupported ) 
 Windows Server 2008 ( only " Mainstream support " has ended ) 
 Windows Server 2008 R2 ( only " Mainstream support " has ended , but means can 't be bought ; not supported in successor : Windows Server 2012 ) 
 Linux distributions 
 Debian ( dropped in 8 " Jessie " ) 
 Gentoo 
 <unk> 's <unk> ( dropped support in <unk> 12 ) 
 Red Hat Enterprise Linux ( dropped support in <unk> 6 ) 
 <unk> 
 FreeBSD ( support status : " Tier 2 through FreeBSD 10 . Unsupported after . " ) 
 NetBSD ( Development branch only ) 
 HP @-@ UX <unk> , an Intel 64 ( x86 @-@ 64 ) port was proposed , but later canceled . 
 OpenVMS <unk> , an Intel 64 ( x86 @-@ 64 ) port is being developed . 
 <unk> OS , an Intel 64 ( x86 @-@ 64 ) port was developed . 
 Bull <unk> 8 
 NEC <unk> @-@ 4 
 Microsoft announced that Windows Server 2008 R2 would be the last version of Windows Server to support the Itanium , and that it would also discontinue development of the Itanium versions of Visual Studio and SQL Server . Likewise , Red Hat Enterprise Linux 5 ( first released in March 2007 ) was the last Itanium edition of Red Hat Enterprise Linux and Canonical 's Ubuntu 10 @.@ 04 <unk> ( released in April 2010 , now discontinued ) was the last supported Ubuntu release on Itanium . HP will not be supporting or certifying Linux on Itanium 9300 ( Tukwila ) servers . 
 In late September 2012 , NEC announced a return from <unk> to the previous NOAH line of proprietary mainframe processors , now produced in a quad @-@ core variant on 40 nm , called NOAH @-@ 6 . 
 HP sells a virtualization technology for Itanium called Integrity Virtual Machines . 
 To allow more software to run on the Itanium , Intel supported the development of compilers optimized for the platform , especially its own suite of compilers . Starting in November 2010 , with the introduction of new product suites , the Intel Itanium <unk> were no longer bundled with the Intel x86 compilers in a single product . Intel offers Itanium tools and Intel x86 tools , including compilers , independently in different product bundles . GCC , <unk> and Microsoft Visual Studio 2005 ( and later ) are also able to produce machine code for Itanium . According to the Itanium Solutions Alliance over 13 @,@ 000 applications were available for Itanium @-@ based systems in early 2008 , though Sun has contested Itanium application counts in the past . The ISA also supported Gelato , an Itanium HPC user group and developer community that ported and supported open source software for Itanium . 
 = = = Emulation = = = 
 Emulation is a technique that allows a computer to execute binary code that was compiled for a different type of computer . Before IBM 's acquisition of <unk> in 2009 , application binary software for <unk> / MIPS and Solaris / SPARC could run via type of emulation called " dynamic binary translation " on Linux / Itanium . Similarly , HP implemented a method to execute PA @-@ RISC / HP @-@ UX on the Itanium / HP @-@ UX via emulation , to simplify migration of its PA @-@ RISC customers to the radically different Itanium instruction set . Itanium processors can also run the mainframe environment <unk> from Groupe Bull and several x86 operating systems via instruction set simulators . 
 = = Competition = = 
 Itanium is aimed at the enterprise server and high @-@ performance computing ( HPC ) markets . Other <unk> and HPC @-@ focused processor lines include Oracle 's and Fujitsu 's SPARC processors and IBM 's POWER microprocessors . Measured by quantity sold , Itanium 's most serious competition comes from x86 @-@ 64 processors including Intel 's own Xeon line and AMD 's Opteron line . Since 2009 , most servers were being shipped with x86 @-@ 64 processors . 
 In 2005 , Itanium systems accounted for about 14 % of HPC systems revenue , but the percentage has declined as the industry shifted to x86 @-@ 64 clusters for this application . 
 An October 2008 Gartner report the Tukwila processor stated that " ... the future roadmap for Itanium looks as strong as that of any RISC peer like Power or SPARC . " 
 = = Supercomputers and high @-@ performance computing = = 
 An Itanium @-@ based computer first appeared on the list of the TOP500 supercomputers in November 2001 . The best position ever achieved by an Itanium 2 based system in the list was # 2 ( while now all systems have dropped off the list ) , achieved in June 2004 , when Thunder ( LLNL ) entered the list with an <unk> of 19 @.@ 94 <unk> . In November 2004 , Columbia entered the list at # 2 with 51 @.@ 8 <unk> , and there was at least one Itanium @-@ based computer in the top 10 from then until June 2007 . The peak number of Itanium @-@ based machines on the list occurred in the November 2004 list , at 84 systems ( 16 @.@ 8 % ) ; by June 2012 , this had dropped to one system ( 0 @.@ 2 % ) , and no Itanium system remained on the list in November 2012 . 
 = = Processors = = 
 = = = Released processors = = = 
 The Itanium processors show a progression in capability . Merced was a proof of concept . McKinley dramatically improved the memory hierarchy and allowed Itanium to become reasonably competitive . Madison , with the shift to a 130 nm process , allowed for enough cache space to overcome the major performance bottlenecks . Montecito , with a 90 nm process , allowed for a dual @-@ core implementation and a major improvement in performance per watt . Montvale added three new features : core @-@ level lockstep , demand @-@ based switching and front @-@ side bus frequency of up to 667 MHz . 
 = = = Future processors = = = 
 During the HP vs. Oracle support lawsuit , court documents unsealed by Santa Clara County Court judge revealed in 2008 , Hewlett @-@ Packard had paid Intel Corp. around $ 440 million to keep producing and updating Itanium microprocessors from 2009 to 2014 . In 2010 , the two companies signed another $ 250 million deal , which obliged Intel to continue making Itanium central processing units for HP 's machines until 2017 . Under the terms of the agreements , HP has to pay for chips it gets from Intel , while Intel launches Tukwila , Poulson , Kittson and Kittson + chips in a bid to gradually boost performance of the platform . 
 = = = = Kittson = = = = 
 Kittson is planned to follow Poulson . Kittson , like Poulson , will be manufactured using Intel 's 32 nm process . Few other details are known beyond the existence of the codename and the binary and socket compatibility with Poulson and Tukwila , though moving to a common socket with x86 Xeon " will be evaluated for future implementation opportunities " after Kittson . 
 = = Market reception = = 
 = = = High @-@ end server market = = = 
 When first released in 2001 , Itanium 's performance was disappointing compared to better @-@ established RISC and CISC processors . Emulation to run existing x86 applications and operating systems was particularly poor , with one benchmark in 2001 reporting that it was equivalent at best to a 100 MHz Pentium in this mode ( 1 @.@ 1 GHz Pentiums were on the market at that time ) . Itanium failed to make significant inroads against IA @-@ 32 or RISC , and suffered further following the arrival of x86 @-@ 64 systems which offered greater compatibility with older x86 applications . 
 In a 2009 article on the history of the processor — " How the Itanium Killed the Computer Industry " — journalist John C. Dvorak reported " This continues to be one of the great fiascos of the last 50 years " . Tech columnist Ashlee Vance commented that the delays and underperformance " turned the product into a joke in the chip industry . " In an interview , Donald Knuth said " The Itanium approach ... was supposed to be so terrific — until it turned out that the wished @-@ for compilers were basically impossible to write . " 
 Both Red Hat and Microsoft announced plans to drop Itanium support in their operating systems due to lack of market interest ; however , other Linux distributions such as Gentoo and Debian remain available for Itanium . On March 22 , 2011 , Oracle Corporation announced that it would no longer develop new products for HP @-@ UX on Itanium , although it would continue to provide support for existing products . Following this announcement , HP sued Oracle for breach of contract , arguing that Oracle had violated conditions imposed during settlement over Oracle 's hiring of former HP CEO Mark Hurd as its co @-@ CEO , requiring the vendor to support Itanium on its software " until such time as HP <unk> the sales of its Itanium @-@ based servers " , and that the breach had harmed its business . In 2012 , a court ruled in favor of HP , and ordered Oracle to resume its support for Itanium . In June 2016 , Hewlett @-@ Packard Enterprise ( the corporate successor to HP 's server business ) was awarded $ 3 billion in damages from the lawsuit . 
 A former Intel official reported that the Itanium business had become profitable for Intel in late 2009 . By 2009 , the chip was almost entirely deployed on servers made by HP , which had over 95 % of the Itanium server market share , making the main operating system for Itanium HP @-@ UX . On March 22 , 2011 , Intel reaffirmed its commitment to Itanium with multiple generations of chips in development and on schedule . 
 = = = Other markets = = = 
 Although Itanium did attain limited success in the niche market of high @-@ end computing , Intel had originally hoped it would find broader acceptance as a replacement for the original x86 architecture . 
 AMD chose a different direction , designing the less radical x86 @-@ 64 , a 64 @-@ bit extension to the existing x86 architecture , which Microsoft then supported , forcing Intel to introduce the same extensions in its own x86 @-@ based processors . These designs can run existing 32 @-@ bit applications at native hardware speed , while offering support for 64 @-@ bit memory addressing and other enhancements to new applications . This architecture has now become the predominant 64 @-@ bit architecture in the desktop and portable market . Although some Itanium @-@ based workstations were initially introduced by companies such as SGI , they are no longer available . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 1989 : 
 HP begins investigating EPIC . 
 1994 : 
 June : HP and Intel announce partnership . 
 1995 : 
 September : HP , Novell , and SCO announce plans for a " high volume UNIX operating system " to deliver " 64 @-@ bit networked computing on the HP / Intel architecture " . 
 1996 : 
 October : Compaq announces it will use IA @-@ 64 . 
 1997 : 
 June : IDC predicts IA @-@ 64 systems sales will reach $ <unk> / yr by 2001 . 
 October : Dell announces it will use IA @-@ 64 . 
 December : Intel and Sun announce joint effort to port Solaris to IA @-@ 64 . 
 1998 : 
 March : SCO admits HP / SCO Unix alliance is now dead . 
 June : IDC predicts IA @-@ 64 systems sales will reach $ <unk> / yr by 2001 . 
 June : Intel announces Merced will be delayed , from second half of 1999 to first half of 2000 . 
 September : IBM announces it will build Merced @-@ based machines . 
 October : Project Monterey is formed to create a common UNIX for IA @-@ 64 . 
 1999 : 
 February : Project Trillian is formed to port Linux to IA @-@ 64 . 
 August : IDC predicts IA @-@ 64 systems sales will reach $ <unk> / yr by 2002 . 
 October : Intel announces the Itanium name . 
 October : the term Itanic is first used in The Register . 
 2000 : 
 February : Project Trillian delivers source code . 
 June : IDC predicts Itanium systems sales will reach $ <unk> / yr by 2003 . 
 July : Sun and Intel drop Solaris @-@ on @-@ Itanium plans . 
 August : AMD releases specification for x86 @-@ 64 , a set of 64 @-@ bit extensions to Intel 's own x86 architecture intended to compete with IA @-@ 64 . It will eventually market this under the name " AMD64 " . 
 2001 : 
 June : IDC predicts Itanium systems sales will reach $ <unk> / yr by 2004 . 
 June : Project Monterey dies . 
 July : Itanium is released . 
 October : IDC predicts Itanium systems sales will reach $ <unk> / yr by the end of 2004 . 
 November : IBM 's 320 @-@ processor Titan NOW Cluster at National Center for Supercomputing Applications is listed on the TOP500 list at position # 34 . 
 November : Compaq delays Itanium Product release due to problems with processor . 
 December : Gelato is formed . 
 2002 : 
