 = = = Failure to pay rental fees = = = 
 The contents of a storage unit are put up for auction if the rental fees are not paid for sixty days . Although the TV show Storage Wars created increased interest in the auctions , most units do not contain anything of substantial economic value . Sometimes auctioning the renter 's property can result in disputes between Public Storage and the renter . In 2007 , a customer 's belongings were auctioned for non @-@ payment while he was serving the US military in Iraq . After receiving negative publicity , Public Storage apologized and gave him $ 8 @,@ 000 as compensation for his sold belongings . 
 = = = Theft , insurance and damages = = = 
 In 2005 , Public Storage said in a public filing that there had been " an increasing number of claims and litigation against owners and managers of rental properties relating to moisture infiltration , which can result in mold or other property damage . " The company 's rental contract says it is not responsible for the storage unit 's contents , even if damage is caused by defects in the unit , and The Wall Street Journal reported that there were " surprisingly few remedies " for theft or property damage at self @-@ storage facilities . 
 Many Public Storage customers have filed complaints with the Better Business Bureau regarding insurance policies sold by Public Storage representatives , after experiencing burglaries of their storage units then having their insurance claims denied . Investigative journalists from TV news stations in California , Kansas , and Washington have reported on difficulties consumers had when filing insurance claims for burglaries with Willis and The New Hampshire Insurance Company , which are affiliated with Public Storage . For example , claims have been denied because the storage unit had an intact lock ; affiliated insurance companies cited insufficient evidence of forced entry , though burglars often replace the unit 's lock in an attempt to conceal the burglary . Insurance commissioners in two states have criticized the practices of insurance companies affiliated with Public Storage . An ongoing class action lawsuit alleges Public Storage misleads consumers into thinking that insurance premiums are charged at cost , whereas a substantial amount of those premiums are retained as profits by Public Storage . Sales of these insurance policies do have a high profit , but generate less than five percent of the company 's total revenue . 
 = = Financials = = 
 Public Storage is a " self @-@ administered , self @-@ managed " real estate investment trust ( REIT ) . A REIT is an organization that primarily purchases and operates real estate investments and returns at least 90 percent of its incomes to investors . It combines the capital of a large number of investors for real estate projects . As of 2008 , Public Storage was the largest of four publicly traded self @-@ storage REITs . As of 2013 , it had a profit margin of 50 percent , the third @-@ highest in the S & P 500 . Public Storage has risen 17 % annually , including dividends over the past 20 years ( as of Q1 2016 ) . This is a growth rate which is double the S & P 500 . 
 More than 90 percent of Public Storage 's revenues are from its self @-@ storage operations ; it also provides insurance , packing products , and has a 44 percent interest in PS Business Parks . In 1984 , PS Reinsurance was formed to sell insurance for a storage unit 's contents . In 1995 , PS <unk> was created as a subsidiary , selling boxes , packaging , truck rentals , and other moving supplies . 
 = WAVES = 
 The United States Naval Reserve ( Women 's Reserve ) , better known under the acronym WAVES for Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service , was the World War II women 's branch of the United States Naval Reserve . It was established on 21 July 1942 by the U.S. Congress and signed into law by the president on 30 July 1942 . This authorized the U.S. Navy to accept women into the Naval Reserve as commissioned officers and at the enlisted level , effective for the duration of the war plus six months . The purpose of the law was to release officers and men for sea duty and replace them with women in shore activities . Mildred H. McAfee became the first director of the WAVES . She was commissioned a lieutenant commander in the Navy on 3 August 1942 , and was the first woman commissioned as an officer in the U.S. Naval Reserve ( she was later promoted to commander and then to captain ) . McAfee , on leave as President of Wellesley College , was an experienced educator and highly respected in her field . 
 The notion of women serving in the Navy was not widely supported in the Congress or by the Navy , although some members did support the need for uniformed women during wartime . Nonetheless , the persistence of several women laid the groundwork for success . The Women 's Armed Services Integration Act allowing women to serve in the Navy became a reality , in large measure , through the efforts of the Navy 's Women 's Advisory Council , Margaret Chung , and Eleanor Roosevelt , the First Lady of the United States who would later become the United States Representative to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights . 
 The age for officer candidates was between 20 and 49 , with a college degree , or two years of college and two years of equivalent professional or business experience . The enlisted age requirements were between 20 and 35 , with a high school or business diploma , or equivalent experience . WAVES were primarily white , but 72 African @-@ American women did eventually serve on a fully integrated basis . The Navy 's indoctrination of most WAVE officer candidates took place at Smith College , Northampton , Massachusetts , and was designated the U.S. Naval Reserve Midshipmen 's School . Specialized training for officers was held on several college campuses and at various naval facilities . Most enlisted members received recruit training at Hunter College , in The Bronx , and became the U.S. Naval Training Center ( WR ) , the Bronx . After recruit training , some women attended specialized training courses on college campuses and at naval facilities . 
 WAVES served at 900 shore stations in the United States , to include Alaska , Hawaii , and Puerto Rico and many entered fields previously held by men . As general line officers , Officer WAVES initially served in administrative and support roles , although many later served as attorneys ( the Navy 's JAG Corps was not established until 1967 ) and engineers . Many enlisted women became aviation mechanics , <unk> , air traffic controllers , parachute riggers , hospital corpsmen and radiomen , but most worked in the administrative / clerical and supply fields such as yeomen , <unk> , disbursing clerks and storekeepers . The WAVES ' peak strength was 86 @,@ 291 members . 
 The WAVES left behind a legacy of accomplishment . Upon demobilization , accolades came from many sources . The Secretary of the Navy , James Forrestal , Fleet Admiral Ernest King , and Fleet Admiral Chester Nimitz all commended the WAVES for their contributions to the war effort . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In May 1941 , Representative Edith Nourse Rogers of Massachusetts introduced the bill in the U.S. Congress to establish a Women 's Auxiliary Army Corps ( WAAC ) . " As the word auxiliary suggests , women would serve not in the Army , but with it . " As such , women were deprived of full military status and denied the benefits of their male counterparts . Opposition delayed the passage of the bill until May 1942 . At the same time , the U.S. Navy 's Bureau of Aeronautics believed the Navy would eventually need women in uniform , and had asked the Bureau of Naval Personnel , headed by Rear Admiral Chester W. Nimitz , to propose legislation , as it had done during World War I , authorizing women to serve in the Navy . Nimitz was not considered an advocate for bringing women into the Navy , nor was he about to change course . Soon , the Navy Department began receiving inquires whether WAAC legislation for the Navy might be imminent . In response , the head of the U.S. Naval Reserve expressed the view that the Civil Service would be able to supply any extra personnel that might be needed . 
 The response did not put the questions to rest . On 9 December 1941 , Representative Rogers telephoned Nimitz and asked him whether the Navy was interested in a bill that would allow the Navy to use women similar to that of the WAAC legislation . In her book , Lady in the Navy , Joy Bright Hancock quotes his reply : " I advised Mrs. Rogers that at the present time I saw no great need for such a bill ... " Nevertheless , within days Nimitz was in touch with all Navy Department bureaus asking them to assess their needs for an equivalent to the WAAC . With few exceptions , the responses were negative . Yet , Congressional inquiries continued to increase about the Navy 's plan for women . 
 Then on 2 January 1942 , the Bureau of Personnel , in an about face , recommended to the Secretary of the Navy , Frank Knox , that Congress be asked to authorize a women 's organization . The following month , Knox recommended a women 's branch as part of the Naval Reserve . The director of the Bureau of the budget said no , but would agree to the Navy adapting legislation similar to the WAAC – where women were with , but not in the Navy . This was unacceptable to Knox and the standoff began . Still , the Bureau of Aeronautics continued to believe there was a place for women in the Navy , and appealed to an influential friend of naval aviation , Margaret Chung . In Crossed Currents , the authors describe Chung and her involvement . " ... Dr. Margaret Chung of San Francisco , a physician and surgeon , had a long time interest in aviation , particularly naval aviation ... She had many naval aviation friends who referred to themselves as " sons of Mom Chung . " Having learned of the stalemate , she asked Representative Melvin Maas of Minnesota , who had served in the aviation branch of the U.S. Marine Corps in World War I , and was one of her " sons " , to introduce legislation independently of the Navy . On 18 March 1942 he did just that , ... " 
 Maas 's House bill was essentially the same as the Knox proposal , which would make a women 's branch part of the Naval Reserve . At the same time , Senator Raymond E. Willis of Indiana introduced a similar bill in the Senate . On 16 April 1942 , the House Naval Affairs Committee reported favorably on the bill . It was passed by the House the same day and sent to the Senate . The Senate Naval Affairs Committee was opposed to the bill ; especially chairman Senator David I. Walsh of Massachusetts . He did not want women in the Navy because it " would tend to break @-@ up American homes and would be a step backwards in the progress of civilization . " The Senate committee eventually proposed a naval version of the WAAC , and the president , Franklin D. Roosevelt , approved it . But Knox asked the president to reconsider . 
 = = = Creation of program = = = 
 It was apparent that women would eventually be allowed to serve in the Navy : the question was , in what form ? The quandary for the Navy was how to administer a woman 's program , yet fashion it to its own liking . Then they did what they had often done before , turn to academia for help . This time the Navy asked women educators for assistance , first contacting Dr. Virginia C. Gildersleeve , dean of Barnard College . She suggested that Professor Elizabeth Reynard , also of Barnard , become a special assistant to Rear Admiral Randall Jacobs , Chief of Naval Personnel . Reynard was well known for the academic work she had done on women in the work place . But her first @-@ rate performance as Jacob 's assistant silenced any fears the Navy may have had about women educators . Reynard quickly formed the Women 's Advisory Council to meet with Navy officials . Gildersleeve became the chairperson . Because of her efforts eight prominent women agreed to serve on the council . They included : 
 Dr. Meta Glass of Sweet Briar College 
 Dr. Lillian Gilbreth , a national authority on efficiency in the workplace 
 Dr. Ada Comstock , President of Radcliffe College 
 Dean Alice Crocker Lloyd of the University of Michigan 
 Mrs. Malbone Graham , a noted lecturer from the West Coast 
 Marie Rogers Gates wife of Thomas Sovereign Gates , president of the University of Pennsylvania 
 Harriet Elliott , dean of women at the University of North Carolina 
 Dean Elliot later resigned and was replaced by Dr. Alice Baldwin , dean of women at Duke University . 
 The council knew the success of a fledging program would depend on the woman chosen to lead it . A prospective candidate would need to possess proven managerial skills , command respect , and have an ability to get along well with others . Their recommendation was Mildred H. McAfee , president of Wellesley College , as the future director . The Navy agreed . Yet , the task of convincing <unk> to accept and to persuade the Wellesley Board of Trustees to release her was difficult but successful . Mildred McAfee was an experienced and respected academician , whose background would provide a measure of <unk> to the idea of women serving in the Navy . 
 They also recognized the importance of a name : agreeing it should be one suitable for the organization envisioned . To Reynard fell the task of finding such a name . In explaining how she came up with the nautical name , Reynard said : " I realized that there were two letters which had to be in it : W for women and V for volunteer , because the Navy wants to make it clear that this is a voluntary service and not a drafted service . So I played with those two letters and the idea of the sea and finally came up with Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service – WAVES . I figured the word Emergency would comfort the older admirals because it implies that we 're only a temporary crisis and won 't be around for keeps . " Raynard was later commissioned a lieutenant in the WAVES . 
 Then on 25 May 1942 , the Senate Naval Affairs Committee recommended to the president that the legislation to create a women 's reserve correspond with the WAAC legislation . He called on Knox to reconsider his position , but Knox , who did not favor the WAAC concept , stood his ground . Another deadlock , but council members Gildersleeve and Elliot took it on themselves to write the president 's wife , Eleanor Roosevelt . They explained their objections to the WAAC legislation and reasons for it . Eleanor showed Elliot 's letter to her husband , the president , and she sent <unk> 's letter on to the Undersecretary of the Navy , James V. Forrestal , a former naval aviator . Within days Forrestal replied , saying that Secretary Knox had asked the president to reconsider . Then , on 16 June 1942 Knox informed Jacobs that the president had given him authority to proceed with a women 's reserve . 
 Days later , Knox informed Senator Walsh of the president 's decision , and on 24 June the Senate Naval Affairs Committee reported favorably on the bill . By 21 July , the bill had passed both houses of Congress and sent to the president , who signed it on 30 July 1942 as Public Law 689 . This created the Women 's branch of the Navy reserve , as amended under Title V of the U.S. Naval Reserve Act of 1938 . Less than a year later , 1 July 1943 , Congress refashioned the WAAC into the Women 's Army Corps ( WAC ) , providing its members with similar military status as the WAVES . 
 The idea behind the law was to free @-@ up officers and men for duty at sea , with women standing in for them at shore stations on the home front . Women could now serve in the Navy as an officer or at an enlisted level , with a rank or rating consistent with that of the regular Navy . Volunteers could only serve for the duration of the war , plus six months , but just in the continental United States . They were prohibited from boarding naval ships or combat aircraft , and were without command authority , except within the women 's branch . 
 Mildred H. McAfee became the first director of the WAVES . She was commissioned a lieutenant commander on 3 August 1942 , and was the first woman officer commissioned in the U.S. Naval Reserve . McAfee was later promoted to the rank of captain . In More Than a Uniform , Winifred Quick Collins ( former WAVE officer ) described Director McAfee as a born diplomat , handling difficult matters with finesse . She also said McAfee played an important decision making role on how women of the WAVES should be treated compared to men , what kind of assignments women would take , housing conditions , and supervision and discipline standards . 
 In establishing the office of director , the Bureau of Personnel did not define the responsibilities of the office , nor establish clear lines of authority . " ... Lieutenant Commander McAfee was simply told that she was to " run " the women 's reserve and she was to go directly to the Chief of Naval Personnel for answers to her questions . Unfortunately , the decision was not made known to the operating divisions of he bureau . " No plans existed to help guide her : in fact , no planning had been done , by anyone , in anticipation of the Women 's Reserve act . For insights , McAfee turned to Joy Bright Hancock , a Navy Yeoman ( F ) during World War I , and a career writer and editor for the Navy 's Bureau of Aeronautics . She was asked to examine the procedures employed by the Women 's Division of the Royal Canadian Air Force , which had a complement of 6 @,@ 000 members . Many of her findings were later used by the WAVES . 
 August and September 1942 saw 108 more women commissioned as officers in the Women 's Reserve ; selected because of their educational and business backgrounds . They were drawn to the program by the good standing of McAfee and the Advisory Council . Four of these women would later become directors of the WAVES and another the director of the SPARS ( U.S. Coast Guard Women 's Reserve ) . The new officers began their work routine with no grasp of Navy traditions , or training in the operating methods in use , resulting in some difficult times . However , on 16 September 1942 the Bureau of Personnel issued a memorandum for the organization of the Women 's Reserve . It said the director would administer the program , set policies , and coordinate work within the bureau 's operating divisions . Soon , McAfee was able to bring together a capable staff , building a sound internal organization . 
 = = = Recruiting = = = 
 WAVE officers were first assigned to recruiting stations in the different U.S. naval districts , later they were joined by enlisted personnel with recruiter training . The primary sources of publicity used were radio , newspapers , posters , brochures , and personal contacts . The focus of their advertising campaign was patriotism and the need for women . McAfee demanded good taste in all advertising . At the end of 1942 , there were 770 officers and 3 @,@ 109 enlisted women in the WAVES . By 3 July 1945 their ranks had risen to 86 @,@ 291 , which included 8 @,@ 475 officers , 73 @,@ 816 enlisted , and about 4 @,@ 000 in training . 
 The age for officer candidates was between 20 and 49 , with a college degree , or two years of college and two years of equivalent professional or business experience . The enlisted age requirements were between 20 and 35 , with a high school or business diploma , or equivalent experience . United States citizenship was required in each case . WAVES were primarily white , middle class , and represented every state in the country . New York , California , Pennsylvania , Illinois , Massachusetts and Ohio led the way . 
 Little or no attempt was made to recruit African @-@ American or other women minorities until October 1944 , when President Roosevelt approved of accepting African @-@ American women into the women 's reserve , under pressure to do so by African @-@ American organizations . Harriet Ida Pickens and Frances Wills were the first African @-@ American women to become WAVE officers . By September 1945 , there were 72 African @-@ American women in the WAVES and integrated . 
 = = = Uniforms = = = 
 'The WAVES looked professional and attractive in stylish uniforms created especially for them " . The noted New York fashion house of Mainbocher designed the uniforms . Their design services were secured , without cost , through the efforts of Mrs. James V. Forrestal , wife of the Assistant Secretary of the Navy . The winter uniform was made from navy blue wool , worn with a white shirt and dark blue tie . The jacket was single breasted and <unk> , with a six @-@ gored skirt . Included were black oxfords and plain black pumps ; a brimmed hat ; black gloves ; black leather purse , and rain and winter coats . The summer uniform was much the same as the winter uniform , however , it was lighter in weight , made of white material and worn with white shoes . Later , a gray and white striped , <unk> work uniform for summer was added , along with the wearing of slacks and dungarees when appropriate . 
 = = = Training of officers = = = 
 The Navy chose Smith College at Northampton , Massachusetts , as the site for the training of WAVE officers . The facility offered much of what the Navy needed , and the college setting provided the proper training ground . The nickname for Smith was the U.S.S. Northampton . Captain H. W. Underwood , USN ( Retired ) was recalled to active duty and ordered to serve as the commanding officer of the United States Naval Reserve Midshipmen 's School at Smith College , 13 August 1942 . Underwood had a distinguished naval career and received the Navy Cross during World War I. In Lady in the Navy , Joy Bright Hancock described Underwood as intelligent , enthusiastic , and good humored , and serious of purpose . 
 Underwood and his staff quickly developed the indoctrination curriculum that would hasten the transformation of civilian women into naval officers . The curriculum would include : organization ; personnel ; naval history and law ; ships and aircraft ; naval communications and correspondence . There would be two @-@ months of intense training , yet too short a period to produce an overall naval officer . Still , the rationale was to teach the fundamentals of life and work in the naval service , focusing on administrative procedures . It was the type of work that most officers would eventually be doing . The curriculum did not change much over the life of the training program . 
 Following their two @-@ months of training , the midshipmen were commissioned as ensigns or lieutenants ( junior grade ) in the U.S. naval reserve . The school closed in December 1944 , after accepting 10 @,@ 181 women and graduating 9 @,@ 477 of them . It also trained 203 SPARS ( United States Coast Guard Women 's Reserve ) and 295 women of the United States Marine Corps Women 's Reserve . Many of these commissioned officers were sent to specialized schools for training in communications , supply , the Japanese language , meteorology , and engineering . The courses of study were held on the college campuses of Mount Holyoke College ; Harvard University ; University of Colorado ; Massachusetts Institute of Technology , University of California ; and the University of Chicago . The Bureau of Ordinance also opened its schools to WAVE officers , where some of them studied aviation ordinance . Other officers attended the Naval Technical Training Command School , while others trained to become aviation instructors . Unlike the training on the college campuses , the training offered at these facilities was coeducational . 
 = = = Training of enlisted = = = 
 The campuses of Oklahoma A & M , Indiana University , and the University of Wisconsin were selected by the Navy for both recruit and specialized training of enlisted WAVES . Training for the initial groups of enlisted women began on 9 October 1942 . But it soon became clear that these arrangements were unsuitable for recruit training , because of dispersed training facilities , inexperienced instructors , and the lack of esprit de corps . As a result , the Navy quickly made the decision to establish one recruit @-@ training center on the campus of the Iowa State Teachers College . The specialized training remained at the original locations . 
 Iowa State Teachers College , Cedar Falls , Iowa , became the new basic training center for enlisted WAVES . ( The school 's original assignment was the training of yeomen ) . Captain Randall Davis was named commanding officer . He arrived on 1 December , two weeks before the first class of 1 @,@ 050 enlisted recruits were to start their five @-@ weeks of basic training . The recruit training routine began each weekday with Reveille at 5 : 30 or 6 : 00 A.M. ; breakfast at 6 : 30 A.M. ; classes and drill for four hours before lunch , and classes and drill for another four hours in the afternoon . Followed by an hour of free time , dinner , and two hours of study or instruction , lights out at 10 : 00 P.M. Captain 's inspection on Saturday morning , then free time until taps . On Sunday , reveille was at 7 : 00 A.M. , with breakfast at 7 : 30 A.M. Then church services and free time until 7 : 30 P.M. , when study hours began . Recruits received immunization shots and were given a series of job aptitude tests . The first class was to graduate in early January 1943 , but on 30 December 1942 the Navy announced that future WAVES recruits would be trained at Hunter College in the Bronx , a borough of the City of New York . The change came because of the Navy 's reassessment of how many more women would be needed , and the kinds of work they would be effective in doing . Iowa State Teachers College would return to training yeomen . 
 Hunter College became the main recruit @-@ training center for enlisted WAVES : chosen because of its space ; location ; ease of transportation , and the willingness of the college to make its facilities available . Captain William F. <unk> , also a recipient of the Navy Cross in World War I , was named the commanding officer . On 8 February 1943 the college was commissioned the U.S. Naval Training Center ( WR ) , the Bronx , and became known as U.S.S. Hunter . Nine days later , approximately 2 @,@ 000 recruits began their six @-@ weeks of indoctrination . The training objectives were meant to be similar to those of the boot camp for men . In Lady in the Navy , Joy Hancock described the indoctrination of the recruits in this way : " Each recruit went through a balanced training program . She was instructed in Navy ranks and ratings ; ships and aircraft of the fleet ; naval traditions and customs ; and of course , naval history . Physical training and fitness were stressed . As the women marched in platoons to classes , medical examinations , and drills , their approach was signaled by singing , their voices providing the cadence for marching feet . " Between 17 February 1943 and 10 October 1945 , some 80 @,@ 936 WAVES , 1 @,@ 844 SPARS , and 3 @,@ 190 women Marines completed the training course . The SPARS and Marine reservists used the Navy 's training center until the summer of 1943 , at which time they established their own training centers . 
 Of the graduating classes at Hunter , 83 % went on to specialized schools to train as yeomen ; radiomen ; storekeepers , and cooks and bakers . In addition to the college campuses , enlisted WAVES also trained at Georgia State College for Women in Milledgeville ; Burdett College in Boston , and Miami University in Oxford , Ohio . The Bureaus of Aeronautics and Medicine opened their doors to enlisted WAVES . The training in aeronautics took place at naval air stations and training centers ; the training for medical technicians was held at the National Medical and Great Lakes Training Centers . Unlike the training on the college campuses , the training at these facilities was coeducational . 
 = = = Assignments = = = 
 The WAVES served in 900 shore stations in the continental United States . Initially , they were prohibited from serving in commands afloat and outside the country . But in September 1944 , Congress amended the law allowing WAVES to volunteer for service in the territories of Alaska and Hawaii . Hawaii became the only overseas station staffed with WAVES on a permanent basis . By the end of the war , 18 % of the naval personnel assigned to shore stations were women . Officers served in many professional capacities , including doctors ; attorneys ; engineers and mathematicians , and chaplains . One WAVE mathematician was assigned to Harvard University to work on the computation project with the Mark I computer . Another became the only female nautical engineer in the entire U.S. Navy . Enlisted WAVES worked in jobs such as aviation machinist ; aviation <unk> ; parachute rigger ; control tower operator ; radiomen ; yeomen ; statistician ; administration ; personnel , and health care . Although some enlisted women had the opportunity to work in fields previously held by men , most of them actually worked in secretarial and clerical positions . 
 The WAVES enjoyed many successes in the work place , but they also suffered from intolerance . Some of the problems sprang from contradictory attitudes of men who supervised women . Often , the women were underutilized in relation to their training , with others it was assignments beyond their physical abilities , and in some cases women were utilized only out of dire need . The mission of the WAVES was to replace men in shore stations for sea duty . Still , certain men were hostile to WAVES because being replaced meant sea duty . The Navy 's lack of clear @-@ cut policies early on also contributed to the difficulties . 
 = = = Women of the WAVES = = = 
 Wanting to serve their country in time of need was a strong incentive for young women during World War II . And thousands of them saw fit to join the WAVES . With some , it was for adventure , for others it was professional development , and still others joined for the chance to experience life on college campuses . Some followed family traditions and others yearned for a life other than as a civilian . 
 Ruby Messer Barber had this to say about joining the WAVES , " It was a choice of adventure . I didn 't have any brothers , and I thought that 's something I can do , one way I can make a contribution . My sisters thought it was great , but they were not interested . There was too much discipline and routine involved . I felt like it would be a challenge , to step forth and do it , to see what it was all about . It gave a sense of confidence . At the time girls just didn 't join the WAVES or go into the military . But my Dad , he said , you 'll be OK " . 
 Lieutenant Lillian Pimlott wrote to her mother , after being deployed to Pearl Harbor , and said , " I was fascinated by the ships which are making history in every battle . I 've talked to seamen and I 've met flyers @-@ from Iwo ( Iwo Jima ) , from Okinawa , heroes from every encounter . I know now what war means and my heart goes out to every one of them . Among them I am making , I hope , life long friends , for their experiences mean everything to my self @-@ satisfaction ... As long as they fight on , I have no desire to return home , for I feel I belong here ... I have learned much in these brief three months about life and living . And I know I have already changed in many ways and many viewpoints ... It is truly a most broadening experience and I shall never outlive it " . 
 During the course of the war , seven WAVE officers and 62 enlisted women died of unspecified causes . Numerous WAVES were acknowledged for their contributions to the country . The Distinguished Service Medal was awarded to Captain Mildred McAfee for her efforts as Director of the WAVES , and Commander Elisabeth Raynard received a letter of commendation from the Secretary of the Navy for her work in developing the WAVES training program . Two WAVES received the Legion of Merit , three the Bronze Star , eighteen the Secretary of the Navy 's letter of commendation , and one , the Army Commendation Ribbon . Almost all WAVES looked upon their service as beneficial and many said they would serve again under the same situation . 
 = = = Demobilization = = = 
 The Navy established five separation centers for the demobilization of the WAVES and Navy nurses , one in Washington , D.C. , Memphis , San Francisco , Chicago , and New York . The separation process began on 1 October 1945 , and within a month about 9 @,@ 000 WAVES had been separated . By the end of 1946 , almost 21 @,@ 000 more had been discharged . It soon became apparent that more centers were needed and ten additional centers were soon opened . By September 1946 , demobilization of the WAVES was all but completed . Most women spent two or three days at separation centers before being discharged , having physical exams ; orientation on rights as veteran ; final settlement of pay , and then the price of a ticket home . At the time , it was not clear whether demobilization meant phasing women out of the military services altogether . 
 Although a small contingent of WAVES was retained to help with the Navy 's over @-@ all demobilization plan , many of these women had volunteered to remain on active duty . At that point , Vice Admiral Louis Denfeld , chief of the Bureau of Personnel , announced , " Our plan is to keep a WAVE component in the Naval Reserve . Further , if Congress approves , we will seek to retain on active duty reasonable number of WAVES who wish to do so and who may be needed in certain specialties ... " On 30 July 1948 , the Women 's Armed Services Integration Act ( Public Law 625 ) was signed into law , allowing women to serve in the regular Navy . The wartime assumptions that prohibited women from duty in any unit designated as having a combat mission carried over with the 1948 Act , which effectively incorporated women into service organizations ; legally keeping them from being integrated into the heart of the military and naval professions for more than a quarter of a century . Even though the WAVES no longer existed , the obsolete acronym continued in popular and official usage until the 1970s . " 
 With demobilization , the WAVES received accolades from the highest sources . Secretary of the Navy Forrestal wrote , " Your conduct , discharge of military responsibilities , and skillful work are in the highest tradition of the naval service . " Fleet Admiral King said , The Navy has learned to appreciate the women ... for their discipline , their skill , and their contribution to high morale ... Our greatest tribute to these women is the request for more WAVES " . Fleet Admiral Nimitz went on to say , they have demonstrated qualities of competence , energy and loyalty " . The WAVES left behind a legacy of accomplishment , which helped to secure a place for women in the regular Navy . 
 = = Song of the WAVES = = 
 Elizabeth Ender and Betty St. Clair wrote WAVES of the Navy in 1943 . It was written to harmonize with Anchors Away . 
 WAVES of the Navy 
 WAVES of the Navy , 
 There 's a ship sailing down the bay 
 And she won 't slip into port again 
 Until that Victory Day . 
 Carry on for that gallant ship 
 And for every hero brave 
 Who will find ashore , his man @-@ sized chore 
 Was done by a Navy WAVE . 
 = Albert Ball = 
 Albert Ball , VC , DSO & Two Bars , MC ( 14 August 1896 – 7 May 1917 ) was an English fighter pilot during the First World War . At the time of his death he was the United Kingdom 's leading flying ace , with 44 victories , and remained its fourth @-@ highest scorer behind Edward Mannock , James McCudden , and George McElroy . 
 Raised in Nottingham , Ball joined the Sherwood Foresters at the outbreak of the First World War and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in October 1914 . He transferred to the Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) the following year , and gained his pilot 's wings on 26 January 1916 . Joining No. 13 Squadron RFC in France , he flew reconnaissance missions before being posted in May to No. 11 Squadron , a fighter unit . From then until his return to England on leave in October , he accrued many aerial victories , earning two Distinguished Service Orders and the Military Cross . He was the first ace to become a British national hero . 
 After a period on home establishment , Ball was posted to No. 56 Squadron , which deployed to the Western Front in April 1917 . He crashed to his death in a field in France on 7 May , sparking a wave of national mourning and posthumous recognition , which included the award of the Victoria Cross for his actions during his final tour of duty . The famous German flying ace Manfred von Richthofen , remarked upon hearing of Ball 's death that he was " by far the best English flying man " . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Albert Ball was born on 14 August 1896 at 301 Lenton Boulevard in Lenton , Nottingham . After a series of moves throughout the area , his family settled at Sedgley , 43 Lenton Road . His parents were Albert Ball , a successful businessman who rose from employment as a plumber to become Lord Mayor of Nottingham , and who was later knighted , and Harriett Mary Page . Young Albert had two siblings , a brother and a sister . His parents were considered loving and indulgent . In his youth , Ball had a small hut behind the family house where he tinkered with engines and electrical equipment . He was raised with a knowledge of firearms , and conducted target practice in Sedgley 's gardens . Possessed of keen vision , he soon became a crack shot . He was also deeply religious . This did not curb his daring in such boyhood pursuits as steeplejacking ; on his 16th birthday , he accompanied a local workman to the top of a tall factory chimney and strolled about unconcerned by the height . 
 Ball studied at the Lenton Church School , Grantham Grammar School and Nottingham High School before transferring to Trent College in January 1911 , at the age of 14 . As a student he displayed only average ability , but was able to develop his curiosity for things mechanical . His best subjects were carpentry , modelling , violin and photography . He also served in the Officers ' Training Corps . When Albert left school in December 1913 , aged 17 , his father helped him gain employment at Universal Engineering Works near the family home . 
 = = First World War = = 
 = = = Initial war service = = = 
 Following the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 , Ball enlisted in the British Army , joining the 2 / 7th ( Robin Hood ) Battalion of the Sherwood Foresters ( Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment ) . Soon promoted to sergeant , he gained his commission as a second lieutenant on 29 October . He was assigned to training recruits , but this rear @-@ echelon role irked him . In an attempt to see action , he transferred early the following year to the North Midlands Cyclist Company , Divisional Mounted Troops , but remained confined to a posting in England . On 24 February 1915 , he wrote to his parents , " I have just sent five boys to France , and I hear that they will be in the firing line on Monday . It is just my luck to be unable to go . " 
 In March 1915 , Ball began a short @-@ lived engagement to Dot <unk> ( or <unk> ) , though he was still interested in other girls such as Thelma Starr . In June , he decided to take private flying lessons at Hendon Aerodrome , which would give him an outlet for his interest in engineering and possibly help him to see action in France sooner . He paid to undertake pilot training in his own time at the Ruffy @-@ Baumann School , which charged £ 75 to £ 100 for instruction ( £ 5 @,@ 580 to £ 7 @,@ 440 in 2010 prices ) . 
 Ball would wake at 3 : 00 am to ride his motorcycle to Ruffy @-@ Baumann for flying practice at dawn , before beginning his daily military duty at 6 : 45 am . His training at Ruffy @-@ Baumann was not unique ; Edwin Cole was learning to fly there at the same time . In letters home Ball recorded that he found flying " great sport " , and displayed what Peter de la Billière described as " almost brutal " detachment regarding accidents suffered by his fellow trainees : 
 Yesterday a ripping boy had a smash , and when we got up to him he was nearly dead , he had a two @-@ inch piece of wood right through his head and died this morning . If you would like a flight I should be pleased to take you any time you wish . 
 = = = Military flight training and reconnaissance work = = = 
 Although considered an average pilot at best by his instructors , Ball qualified for his Royal Aero Club certificate ( no . 1898 ) on 15 October 1915 , and promptly requested transfer to the Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) . He was seconded to No. 9 ( Reserve ) Squadron RFC on 23 October , and trained at <unk> Heath aerodrome near Norwich . In the first week of December , he soloed in a Maurice Farman Longhorn after standing duty all night , and his touchdown was rough . When his instructor commented sarcastically on the landing , Ball angrily exclaimed that he had only 15 minutes experience in the plane , and that if this was the best instruction he was going to get , he would rather return to his old unit . The instructor relented , and Ball then soloed again and landed successfully in five consecutive flights . His rough landing was not the last Ball was involved in ; he survived two others . He completed his training at Central Flying School , Upavon , and was awarded his wings on 22 January 1916 . A week later , he was officially transferred from the North Midlands Cyclist Company to the RFC as a pilot . 
 On 18 February 1916 , Ball joined No. 13 Squadron RFC at <unk> in France , flying a two @-@ seat Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2c on reconnaissance missions . He survived being shot down by anti @-@ aircraft fire on 27 March . Three days later , he fought the first of several combats in the B.E.2 ; he and his observer , Lieutenant S. A. Villiers , fired a drum and a half of Lewis gun ammunition at an enemy two @-@ seater , but were driven off by a second one . After this inconclusive skirmish , Ball wrote home in one of his many letters , " I like this job , but nerves do not last long , and you soon want a rest " . In letters home to his father , he discouraged the idea of his younger brother following him into the RFC . Ball and Villiers tried unsuccessfully to shoot down an enemy observation balloon in their two @-@ seater on 10 April . Ball 's burgeoning skills and aggressiveness gained him access to the squadron 's single @-@ seat Bristol Scout fighter later that month . April 1916 also saw Ball 's first mention in a letter home of plans for " a most wonderful machine ... heaps better than the Hun Fokker " . It is now generally believed that these " plans " were unconnected with the design of the Austin @-@ Ball <unk> , with which he later became involved . 
 = = = Initial fighter posting = = = 
 On 7 May 1916 , Ball was posted to No. 11 Squadron , which operated a mix of fighters including Bristol Scouts , Nieuport 16s , and Royal Aircraft Factory <unk> " pushers " . After his first day of flying with his new unit , he wrote a letter home complaining about fatigue . He was unhappy with the hygiene of his assigned billet in the nearest village , and elected to live in a tent on the flight line . Ball built a hut for himself to replace the tent and cultivated a garden . 
 Throughout his flying service Ball was primarily a " lone @-@ wolf " pilot , stalking his prey from below until he drew close enough to use his top @-@ wing Lewis gun on its Foster mounting , angled to fire upwards into the enemy 's fuselage . According to fellow ace and Victoria Cross recipient James McCudden , " it was quite a work of art to pull this gun down and shoot upwards , and at the same time manage one 's machine accurately " . Ball was as much a loner on the ground as in the air , preferring to stay in his hut on the flight line away from other squadron members . His off @-@ duty hours were spent tending his small garden and practising the violin . Though not unsociable per se , he was extremely sensitive and shy . Ball acted as his own mechanic on his aircraft and , as a consequence , was often untidy and dishevelled . His singularity in dress extended to his habit of flying without a helmet and goggles , and he wore his thick black hair longer than regulations generally permitted . 
 While flying a Bristol Scout on 16 May 1916 , Ball scored his first aerial victory , driving down a German reconnaissance plane . He then switched to Nieuports , bringing down two <unk> on 29 May and a Fokker Eindecker on 1 June . On 25 June he became a balloon buster and an ace by destroying an observation balloon with phosphor bombs . During the month he had written to his parents admonishing them to try and " take it well " if he was killed , " for men tons better than I go in hundreds every day " . He again achieved two victories in one sortie on 2 July , shooting down a Roland <unk> and an <unk> to bring his score to seven . 
 Ball then requested a few days off but , to his dismay , was temporarily reassigned to aerial reconnaissance duty with No. 8 Squadron , where he flew B.E.2s from 18 July until 14 August . During this posting , Ball undertook an unusual mission . On the evening of 28 July , he flew a French espionage agent across enemy lines . Dodging an attack by three German fighters , as well as anti @-@ aircraft fire , he landed in a deserted field , only to find that the agent refused to get out of the aircraft . While he was on reconnaissance duties with No. 8 Squadron , the London Gazette announced that he had been awarded the Military Cross " for conspicuous skill and gallantry on many occasions , " particularly for " one occasion [ when ] he attacked six in one flight " . This was not unusual ; throughout his career , Ball generally attacked on sight and heedless of the odds . He professed no hatred for his opponents , writing to his parents " I only scrap because it is my duty ... Nothing makes me feel more rotten than to see them go down , but you see it is either them or me , so I must do my duty best to make it a case of them " . 
 Ball 's 20th birthday was marked by his promotion to temporary captain and his return to No. 11 Squadron . He destroyed three Roland <unk> in one sortie on 22 August 1916 , the first RFC pilot to do so . He ended the day by fighting 14 Germans some 15 miles ( 24 km ) behind their lines . With his plane badly damaged and out of fuel , he struggled back to Allied lines to land . He transferred with part of No. 11 Squadron to No. 60 Squadron RFC on 23 August . His new commanding officer gave Ball a free rein to fly solo missions , and assigned him his own personal aircraft and maintenance crew . One of the squadron mechanics painted up a non @-@ standard red propeller boss ; <unk> became the first of a series of Ball 's aeroplanes to have such a colour scheme . He found that it helped his fellow squadron members identify his plane and confirm his combat claims . By end of the month , he had increased his tally to 17 enemy aircraft , including three on 28 August . 
 Ball then took leave in England . His feats in France had received considerable publicity . He was the first British ace to become a household name , and found that his celebrity was such that he could not walk down the streets of Nottingham without being stopped and congratulated . Prior to this the British government had suppressed the names of its aces — in contrast to the policy of the French and Germans — but the losses of the Battle of the Somme , which had commenced in July , made politic the publicising of its successes in the air . Ball 's achievements had a profound impact on budding flyer Mick Mannock , who would become the United Kingdom 's top @-@ scoring ace and also receive the Victoria Cross . 
 Upon return to No. 60 Squadron in France , Ball scored morning and evening victories on 15 September , flying two different Nieuports . On the evening mission , he armed his plane with eight Le <unk> rockets on the outer struts , set to fire electrically . He intended to use them on an observation balloon . As it happened , he spotted three German Roland <unk> and broke their formation by <unk> his rockets at them , then picked off one of the confused pilots with machine @-@ gun fire . After this he settled into an improved aeroplane , Nieuport 17 no . A213 . He had it rigged to fly tail @-@ heavy to facilitate his changing of ammunition drums in the machine @-@ gun , and had a holster built into the cockpit for the Colt automatic that he habitually carried . Three times during September he scored triple victories in a day , ending the month with his total score standing at 31 , making him Britain 's top @-@ scoring ace . By this time he had told his commanding officer that he had to have a rest and that he was taking unnecessary risks because of his nerves . On 3 October , he was sent on leave , en route to a posting at the Home Establishment in England . A French semi @-@ official report of Ball 's successes was issued the same day ; it was picked up and repeated in the British aviation journal Flight nine days later . 
 = = = Home front = = = 
 Ball had been awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) and bar simultaneously on 26 September 1916 . The first award was " for conspicuous gallantry and skill " when he took on two enemy formations . The bar was also " for conspicuous skill and gallantry " when he attacked four enemy aircraft in formation and then , on another occasion , 12 enemy machines . He was awarded the Russian Order of St. George the same month . Now that Ball had been posted back to England , he was lionised as a national hero with a reputation as a fearless pilot and expert marksman . A crowd of journalists awaited him on his family 's doorstep . In an interview , he mentioned being downed six times in combat . On 18 November , he was invested with his Military Cross and both DSOs by King George V at Buckingham Palace . A second bar to the DSO , for taking on three enemy aircraft and shooting one down , followed on 25 November , making him the first three @-@ time recipient of the award . Ball was promoted to the substantive rank of lieutenant on 8 December 1916 . 
 Instead of returning to combat after his leave , Ball was posted to instructional duties with No. 34 ( Reserve ) Squadron RFC , based at Orford Ness , Suffolk . It was while serving on the home front that he was able to lobby for the building and testing of the Austin @-@ Ball <unk> fighter . He hoped to be able to take an example of the type to France with him , but the prototype was not completed until after his death in action . In November he was invited to test fly the prototype of the new Royal Aircraft Factory S.E.5 scout ( single @-@ seat fighter ) , apparently the first service pilot to do so . He was unimpressed , finding the heavier , more stable fighter less responsive to the controls than the Nieuports he was used to . His negative assessment of other aspects of the S.E. ' s performance , on the other hand , contrasted markedly with the reactions of fellow pilots who tested the prototype about this time . Ball was to maintain his opinion of the S.E. as a " dud " , at least until he had scored several victories on the type after his return to France . 
 On 19 February 1917 , in a tribute from his native city , Ball became an Honorary Freeman of Nottingham . Around this time he met James McCudden , also on leave , who later reported his impressions in most favourable terms . In London , Ball also encountered Canadian pilot Billy Bishop , who had not as yet seen combat . He immediately liked Bishop , and may have helped the latter secure a posting to No. 60 Squadron . On 25 March , while off @-@ duty , Ball met 18 @-@ year @-@ old Flora Young . He impulsively invited her to fly with him , and she promptly accepted , wearing a leather flying coat that they had borrowed . On 5 April , they became engaged ; she wore his silver identification wrist bracelet in lieu of an engagement ring . 
 = = = Second fighter posting = = = 
 Inaction chafed Ball , and he began agitating for a return to combat duty . He finally managed to obtain a posting as a flight commander with No. 56 Squadron RFC , considered to be as close to an elite unit as any established by the RFC . Ball was still first among Britain 's aces , and some documents hint that his attachment to No. 56 Squadron was planned to be temporary . According to one account he had been slated to serve with the unit for only a month to mentor novice pilots . 
 The latest type from the Royal Aircraft Factory , the S.E.5 , had been selected to equip the new squadron . This choice was viewed with some trepidation by the RFC high command , and Ball himself was personally far from happy with the S.E.5. After some intense lobbying he was allowed to retain his Nieuport 17 no . <unk> when the unit went to France ; the Nieuport was for his solo missions , and he would fly an S.E.5 on patrols with the rest of the squadron . This arrangement had the personal approval of General Hugh Trenchard , who went on to become the first Chief of the Air Staff of the Royal Air Force . No. 56 Squadron moved to the Western Front on 7 April 1917 . On arrival Ball wrote to his parents , " <unk> , am just about to start the great game again " . 
 S.E.5 no . A4850 , fresh from its packing crate , was extensively modified for Ball : in particular he had the synchronised Vickers machine gun removed , to be replaced with a second Lewis gun fitted to fire downwards through the floor of the cockpit . He also had a slightly larger fuel tank installed . On 9 April , A4850 was refitted , and the downward @-@ firing Lewis gun removed and replaced by the normal Vickers gun mounting . In a letter to Flora Young on 18 April , Ball mentioned getting his own hut on the flight line , and installing the members of his flight nearby . 
 On 23 April 1917 , Ball was under strict orders to stay over British lines , but still engaged the Germans five times in his Nieuport . In his first combat that day , using his preferred belly shot , he sent an Albatros into a spin , following it down and continuing to fire at it until it struck the ground . It was No. 56 Squadron 's first victory . Regaining an altitude of 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) , he tried to dive underneath an Albatros two @-@ seater and pop up under its belly as usual , but he overshot , and the German rear gunner put a burst of 15 bullets through the Nieuport 's wings and spars . Ball coaxed the Nieuport home for repairs , returning to battle in an S.E.5. In his third combat of the day , he fired five rounds before his machine gun jammed . After landing to clear the gun , he took off once more , surprising five Albatros fighters and sending one down in flames . His fifth battle , shortly thereafter , appeared inconclusive , as the enemy plane managed to land safely . However , its observer had been mortally wounded . 
 Three days later , on 26 April , Ball scored another double victory , flying S.E.5 no . A4850 , and one more on 28 April . This last day 's fighting left the S.E.5 so battered by enemy action that it was dismantled and sent away for repair . The following month , despite continual problems with jamming guns in the S.E.5s , Ball shot down seven <unk> in five days , including two reconnaissance models on 1 May , a reconnaissance plane and an Albatros D.III fighter on 2 May ; a D.III on 4 May , and two <unk> the next day , 5 May . The second of these victims nearly rammed Ball as they shot it out in a head @-@ on firing pass . As they sped past one another , Ball was left temporarily blinded by oil spraying from the holed oil tank of his craft . Clearing the oil from his eyes , he flew his S.E.5 home with zero oil pressure in an engine on the brink of seizure . He was so overwrought that it was some time after landing before he could finish thanking God , then dictating his combat report . 
 While squadron armourers and mechanics repaired the faulty machine @-@ gun synchroniser on his most recent S.E.5 mount , <unk> , Ball had been sporadically flying the Nieuport again , and was successful with it on 6 May , destroying one more Albatros D.III in an evening flight to raise his tally to 44 . He had continued to undertake his habitual lone patrols , but had of late been fortunate to survive . The heavier battle damage that Ball 's aircraft were now suffering bore witness to the improved team tactics being developed by his German opponents . Some time on 6 May , Ball had visited his friend Billy Bishop at the latter 's aerodrome . He proposed that the pair attack the Red Baron 's squadron at its airfield at dawn , catching the German pilots off guard . Bishop agreed to take part in the daring scheme at the end of the month , after he returned from his forthcoming leave . That night , in his last letter to his father , Ball wrote " I do get tired of always living to kill , and am really beginning to feel like a murderer . Shall be so pleased when I have finished " . 
 = = = Final flight and aftermath = = = 
 On the evening of 7 May 1917 , near Douai , 11 British aircraft from No. 56 Squadron led by Ball in an S.E.5 encountered German fighters from Jasta 11 . A running dogfight in deteriorating visibility resulted , and the aircraft became scattered . Cecil Arthur Lewis , a participant in this fight , described it in his memoir Sagittarius Rising . Ball was last seen by fellow pilots pursuing the red Albatros D.III of the Red Baron 's younger brother , Lothar von Richthofen , who eventually landed near <unk> with a punctured fuel tank . Cyril Crowe observed Ball flying into a dark thundercloud . A German pilot officer on the ground , Lieutenant Hailer , then saw Ball 's plane falling upside @-@ down from the bottom of the cloud , at an altitude of 200 feet ( 61 m ) , with a dead prop . Brothers Franz and Carl Hailer and the other two men in their party were from a German reconnaissance unit , Flieger @-@ Abteilung <unk> . Franz Hailer noted , " It was leaving a cloud of black smoke ... caused by oil leaking into the cylinders . " The engine had to be inverted for this to happen . The Hispano engine was known to flood its inlet manifold with fuel when upside down and then stopped running . Franz Hailer and his three companions hurried to the crash site . Ball was already dead when they arrived . The four German airmen agreed that the crashed craft had suffered no battle damage . No bullet wounds were found on Ball 's body , even though Hailer went through Ball 's clothing to find identification . Hailer also took Ball to a field hospital . A German doctor subsequently described a broken back and a crushed chest , along with fractured limbs , as the cause of death . 
 The Germans credited Richthofen with shooting down Ball , but there is some doubt as to what happened , especially as Richthofen 's claim was for a Sopwith Triplane , not an S.E.5 , which was a biplane . Given the amount of propaganda the German high command generated touting the younger Richthofen , a high @-@ level decision may have been taken to attribute Ball 's death to him . It is probable that Ball was not shot down at all , but had become disoriented and lost control during his final combat , the victim of a form of temporary vertigo that has claimed other pilots . Ball 's squadron harboured hopes that he was a prisoner of war , and the British government officially listed him as " missing " on 18 May . There was much speculation in the press ; in France , the Havas news agency reported : " Albert Ball , the star of aviators ... has been missing since the 7th May . Is he a prisoner or has he been killed ? If he is dead , he died fighting for his forty @-@ fifth victory . " It was only at the end of the month that the Germans dropped messages behind Allied lines announcing that Ball was dead , and had been buried in Annoeullin with full military honours two days after he crashed . Over the grave of the man they dubbed " the English Richthofen " , the Germans erected a cross bearing the inscription In <unk> <unk> für sein Vaterland Engl . Flieger Hauptmann Albert Ball , Royal Flying Corps ( " Fallen in air combat for his fatherland English pilot Captain Albert Ball " ) . 
 Ball 's death was reported world @-@ wide in the press . He was lauded as the " wonder boy of the Flying Corps " in Britain 's Weekly Dispatch , the " Ace of English Aces " in Portugal , the " <unk> <unk> " in South America , and the " super @-@ airman " in France . On 7 June 1917 , the London Gazette announced that he had received the Croix de Chevalier , Legion d 'Honneur from the French government . The following day , he was awarded the Victoria Cross for his " most conspicuous and consistent bravery " in action from 25 April to 6 May 1917 . On 10 June 1917 , a memorial service was held for Ball in the centre of Nottingham at St Mary 's Church , with large crowds paying tribute as the procession of mourners passed by . Among those attending were Ball 's father Albert , Sr. and brother Cyril , now also a pilot in the RFC ; his mother Harriett , overwhelmed with grief , was not present . Ball was posthumously promoted to captain on 15 June . His Victoria Cross was presented to his parents by King George V on 22 July 1917 . The following year he was awarded a special medal by the Aero Club of America . 
 = = = Posthumous tributes = = = 
 In 1918 , Walter A. Briscoe and H. Russell Stannard released a seminal biography , Captain Ball VC , reprinting many of Ball 's letters and prefaced with encomiums by Prime Minister David Lloyd George , Field Marshal Sir Douglas Haig , and Major General Sir Hugh Trenchard . Lloyd George wrote that " What he says in one of his letters , ' I hate this game , but it is the only thing one must do just now ' , represents , I believe , the conviction of those vast armies who , realising what is at stake , have risked all and endured all that liberty may be saved " . Haig spoke of Ball 's " unrivalled courage " and his " example and incentive to those who have taken up his work " . In Trenchard 's opinion , Ball had " a wonderfully well @-@ balanced brain , and his loss to the Flying Corps was the greatest loss it could sustain at that time " . 
 In the book proper , Briscoe and Stannard quote Ball 's most notable opponent , Manfred von Richthofen . The Red Baron , who believed in his younger brother 's victory award , considered Ball " by far the best English flying man " . Elsewhere in the book , an unidentified Royal Flying Corps pilot who flew with Ball in his last engagement was quoted as saying , " I see they have given him the V.C. Of course he won it a dozen times over — the whole squadron knows that . " The authors themselves described the story of Ball 's life as that of " a young knight of gentle manner who learnt to fly and to kill at a time when all the world was killing ... saddened by the great tragedy that had come into the world and made him a terrible instrument of Death " . 
 Linda Raine Robertson , in The Dream of <unk> Warfare , noted that Briscoe and Stannard emphasised " the portrait of a boy of energy , pluck , and humility , a loner who placed his skill in the service of his nation , fought – indeed , invited – a personal war , and paid the ultimate sacrifice as a result " , and that they " struggle to paste the mask of cheerful boyishness over the signs of the toll taken on him by the stress of air combat and the loss of friends " . 
 Alan Clark , in Aces High : The War in the Air Over the Western Front , found Ball the " perfect public schoolboy " with " the enthusiasms and all the eager intelligence of that breed " and that these characteristics , coupled with a lack of worldly maturity , were " the ingredients of a perfect killer , where a smooth transition can be made between the motives that drive a boy to ' play hard ' at school and then to ' fight hard ' against the King 's enemies " . Biographer Chaz Bowyer considered that " to label Albert Ball a ' killer ' would be to do him a grave injustice " , as his " sensitive nature suffered in immediate retrospect whenever he succeeded in combat " . 
 = = Post @-@ war legacy = = 
 After the war the British discovered Ball 's grave , which had been behind enemy lines , in the Annoeullin Cemetery . In December 1918 , personnel of No. 207 Squadron RAF erected a new cross in place of the one left by the Germans . The Imperial War Graves Commission ( now Commonwealth War Graves Commission ) were working at the time to consolidate the British war graves into fewer cemeteries ; 23 British bodies in graves in the location where Ball was buried were moved to the Cabaret Rouge British Cemetery , but at his father 's request Ball 's grave was allowed to remain . Albert Sr. paid for a private memorial to be erected over Ball 's grave , No. 643 , in what later became the Annoeullin Communal Cemetery and German Extension . Ball 's is the only British grave from the First World War in this extension , the rest being German . Ball 's father also bought the French field where his son had died and erected a memorial stone on the crash site . 
 Memorials to Ball in his native Nottingham include a monument and statue in the grounds of Nottingham Castle . The monument , which was commissioned by the city council and funded by public subscription , consists of a bronze group on a carved pedestal of Portland stone and granite . The bronze group , by the sculptor Henry Poole , shows a life @-@ size figure of Ball with an allegorical female figure at his shoulder . The monument was unveiled on 8 September 1921 by Air Marshal Trenchard , with military honours including a flypast by a squadron of RAF aircraft . In 1929 the bronze model for Ball 's statue was presented by his father to the National Portrait Gallery in London , where it is on display . In further remembrance of his son , Albert Ball , Sr. commissioned the building of the Albert Ball Memorial Homes in Lenton to house the families of local servicemen killed in action . The Lenton War Memorial , located in front of the homes , includes Ball 's name and was also paid for by the Ball family . The homes were Grade @-@ II listed for historic preservation in 1995 . 
 A memorial to Ball , along with his parents , and a sister who died in infancy , appears on the exterior wall of the southwest corner of Holy Trinity Church in Lenton . Another memorial tablet is present inside the same church , mounted on the north wall and bearing the RFC and RAF motto Per <unk> ad Astra , along with decorations of medals and royal arms . In 1967 , the Albert Ball VC Scholarships were instituted at his alma mater , Trent College . A propeller from one of Ball 's aircraft and the original cross from his grave in France are displayed at the college 's library and chapel , respectively . One of the houses at Nottingham High 's Junior School is also named after Ball . 
 In 2006 , Ball was one of six recipients of the Victoria Cross to be featured on a special commemorative edition of Royal Mail stamps marking the 150th anniversary of the award . His Victoria Cross is displayed at the Nottingham Castle Museum along with his other medals and memorabilia , including a bullet @-@ holed Avro windshield , a section of engine piping from one of his damaged Nieuports , his Freedom of Nottingham Scroll and Casket , and various letters and other papers . A portrait study by Noel Denholm Davis is in the collection of Nottingham City Museums and Galleries . 
 = = Award citations = = 
 Victoria Cross 
 Lt. ( temp . Capt. ) Albert Ball , D.S.O. , M.C. , late <unk> and Derby . R. , and R.F.C. 
 For most conspicuous and consistent bravery from the 25th of April to the 6th of May , 1917 , during which period Capt. Ball took part in twenty @-@ six combats in the air and destroyed eleven hostile aeroplanes , drove down two out of control , and forced several others to land . 
 In these combats Capt. Ball , flying alone , on one occasion fought six hostile machines , twice he fought five and once four . When leading two other British aeroplanes he attacked an enemy formation of eight . On each of these occasions he brought down at least one enemy . 
 Several times his aeroplane was badly damaged , once so seriously that but for the most delicate handling his machine would have collapsed , as nearly all the control wires had been shot away . On returning with a damaged machine he had always to be restrained from immediately going out on another . 
 In all , Capt. Ball has destroyed forty @-@ three German aeroplanes and one balloon , and has always displayed most exceptional courage , determination and skill . 
 Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) 
 For conspicuous gallantry and skill . Observing seven enemy machines in formation , he immediately attacked one of them and shot it down at 15 yards range . The remaining machines retired . Immediately afterwards , seeing five more hostile machines , he attacked one at about 10 yards range and shot it down , flames coming out of the fuselage . He then attacked another of the machines , which had been firing at him , and shot it down into a village , when it landed on the top of a house . He then went to the nearest aerodrome for more ammunition , and , returning , attacked three more machines , causing them to dive under control . Being then short of petrol he came home . His own machine was badly shot about in these fights . 
 Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) Bar 
 For conspicuous skill and gallantry . When on escort duty to a bombing raid he saw four enemy machines in formation . He dived on to them and broke up their formation , and then shot down the nearest one , which fell on its nose . He came down to about 500 feet to make certain it was wrecked . On another occasion , observing 12 enemy machines in formation , he dived in among them , and fired a drum into the nearest machine , which went down out of control . Several more hostile machines then approached , and he fired three more drums at them , driving down another out of control . He then returned , crossing the lines at a low altitude , with his machine very much damaged . 
 Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) Bar 
 For conspicuous gallantry in action . He attacked three hostile machines and brought one down , displaying great courage and skill . He has brought down eight hostile machines in a short period , and has forced many others to land . 
 Military Cross ( MC ) 
 For conspicuous skill and gallantry on many occasions , notably when , after failing to destroy an enemy kite balloon with bombs , he returned for a fresh supply , went back and brought it down in flames . He has done great execution among enemy aeroplanes . On one occasion he attacked six in one flight , forced down two and drove the others off . This occurred several miles over the enemy 's lines . 
 = = List of victories = = 
 Confirmed victories numbered ; unconfirmed victories marked " u / c " . Except where noted , data from Shores et al . 
 = 2000 French Grand Prix = 
 The 2000 French Grand Prix ( formally the LXXXVI Mobil 1 Grand Prix de France ) was a Formula One motor race held on 2 July 2000 at the Circuit de Nevers Magny @-@ Cours , Magny @-@ Cours , Burgundy , France . It was the ninth race of the 2000 Formula One season and the 86th French Grand Prix . The 72 @-@ lap race was won by McLaren driver David Coulthard after starting from second position . His teammate Mika Häkkinen finished second with Rubens Barrichello third for the Ferrari team . 
 Coulthard started the race alongside Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher who began from pole position . Barrichello began from third on the grid and overtook Coulthard going into the first corner . Michael Schumacher maintained his start line advantage and kept the lead after the first round of pit stops . During the course of the second stint of the race , Michael Schumacher began to struggle with tyre wear , allowing Coulthard to close the gap and passed him on lap 40 . Coulthard maintained his lead through the second round of pit stops and won the race . Michael Schumacher retired on lap 59 with an engine failure promoting Häkkinen into second position . Barrichello took third , ahead of BAR driver Jacques Villeneuve in fourth . 
 The race was Coulthard 's third victory of the season , his first at Magny @-@ Cours , and the result meant that he reduced Michael Schumacher 's points advantage in the Drivers ' Championship to twelve points . Häkkinen remained third on 38 points , six ahead of Barrichello . In the Constructors ' Championship , McLaren 's one @-@ two finish allowed them to narrow the gap to Ferrari to be six points behind , with eight races of the season remaining . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by eleven teams , each of two drivers . The teams , also known as constructors were , McLaren , Ferrari , Jordan , Jaguar , Williams , Benetton , Prost , Sauber , Arrows , Minardi and BAR . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought two different tyre types to the race : the Soft and the Medium dry compound tyres . 
 Going into the race , Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher led the Drivers ' Championship with 56 points , ahead of David Coulthard on 34 points and Mika Häkkinen on 32 . Rubens Barrichello was fourth with 28 points while Giancarlo Fisichella was fifth on 18 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari were leading with 84 points , McLaren and Benetton were second and third with 66 and 18 points respectively , while Williams with 15 and Jordan with ten contended for fourth place . Ferrari and McLaren had so far dominated the Championship , winning the previous eight races . Championship competitors Fisichella and Barrichello had gained second @-@ place finishes while Ralf Schumacher and Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen had achieved third place podium finishes . 
 Following the Canadian Grand Prix on 18 June , the teams conducted testing sessions at the Circuit de Nevers Magny @-@ Cours between 21 – 23 June to prepare for the upcoming French Grand Prix . Coulthard set the fastest times on the first day , ahead of McLaren test driver Olivier Panis . Arrows driver Jos Verstappen lost control of his car after suffering a mechanical problem and crashed into the barriers at turn two . Verstappen sustained neck strain and withdrew from testing . He was later passed fit to compete in the Grand Prix . Coulthard remained fastest on the second day . Fisichella damaged the underside of his car 's chassis , limiting his testing time as Benetton made repairs to his car . Häkkinen was quickest on the final day of testing . Michael Schumacher stopped on circuit as his Ferrari engine failed , causing his team to fit a new engine into the chassis . Ferrari went to their private testing facility , the Fiorano Circuit , on 27 June where test driver Luca Badoer shook down three Ferrari F1 @-@ 2000 cars and also took part in pit stop practices . 
 After a poor race in Canada , where he stalled on the grid before the formation lap before receiving a ten @-@ second stop @-@ go penalty as his mechanics worked on his car 15 seconds before the race started , Coulthard said that Ferrari could still be caught in the season 's nine remaining races : " We have to look towards Magny @-@ Cours and put this ( Montreal ) race behind us . The championship is not over yet and although we cannot change what happened in Canada , we can try to close the gap . " Former World Champion and President of the British Racing Drivers Club ( BRDC ) Jackie Stewart backed Coulthard to clinch the title after Häkkinen 's continuing run of poor results . Michael Schumacher came into the race confident that his car would perform well at the circuit . Benetton team principal Flavio Briatore played down his team 's chances saying , " We need a miracle to finish on the podium . " 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Four practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — two on Friday , and two on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted an hour . The third and final practice sessions were held on Saturday morning and lasted 45 minutes . The Friday morning and afternoon practice sessions were held in dry and hot weather conditions . Michael Schumacher set the fastest time in the first practice session , a 1 : 16 @.@ 474 , two @-@ tenths of a second quicker than Häkkinen . Prost driver Nick Heidfeld was third fastest , ahead of Ralf Schumacher . The two Jaguar drivers were fifth and seventh , Eddie Irvine ahead of Johnny Herbert . The pair were separated by Fisichella in sixth . Jean Alesi , Pedro de la Rosa and Jenson Button completed the top ten fastest drivers in the session . Four drivers did not set lap times : Coulthard 's car developed an mechanical fuel pump problem , Barrichello drove one installation lap to conserve tyres and both Jordan drivers decided to sit out the session . In the second practice session , Coulthard had a trouble @-@ free session and was fastest with a time of 1 : 16 @.@ 253 ; Häkkinen finished with the second fastest time . The Ferraris were second and fourth , Michael Schumacher was faster than Barrichello . Sauber 's Mika Salo was fifth quickest , ahead of Fisichella . Trulli , Heidfeld , Ralf Schumacher and Frentzen followed in the top ten . 
 The weather remained dry and hot for the Saturday morning practice sessions . Coulthard set the fastest time of the third practice session , a 1 : 15 @.@ 965 . Häkkinen was second fastest , almost two @-@ tenths of a second off Coulthard 's pace . The two Jordan drivers were running quicker ; Trulli in third and Frentzen in fourth . Both Jaguars continued to be quick with Irvine fifth and Herbert eighth . The two were separated by Michael Schumacher and Button . Barrichello and de la Rosa rounded out the top ten . In the final practice session , Coulthard was unable to improve his time because of an engine failure though he remained fastest . Häkkinen managed to set a quicker time and remained with the second quickest lap . Barrichello ran quicker and was third fastest , in front of Ralf Schumacher . The Jordan drivers remained fastest – Trulli was fifth and Frentzen sixth – their best times two thousands of a second apart . Irvine was seventh quickest , ahead of Michael Schumacher who concentrated on qualifying set @-@ up . Button and Herbert completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . 
 Saturday 's afternoon qualifying session lasted for an hour . Each driver was limited to twelve laps , with the grid order decided by the drivers ' fastest laps . During this session , the 107 % rule was in effect , which necessitated each driver set a time within 107 % of the quickest lap to qualify for the race . The qualifying session was held in dry and hot weather conditions . The air temperature ranged between 27 – 28 ° C ( 81 – 82 ° F ) and the track temperature ranged from 33 – 35 ° C ( 91 – 95 ° F ) . Michael Schumacher clinched his fourth pole position of the season , his third at the circuit , with a time of 1 : 15 @.@ 632 . He was joined on the front row of the grid by Coulthard with his fastest time was 0 @.@ 102 seconds slower and used his team 's spare monocoque while the McLaren mechanics fitted his race car with a new fuel pump . Barrichello secured third having changed his car 's set @-@ up during the session which garnered confusion over changes in the ride height . Häkkinen took fourth and was pushed down to his position by Barrichello with the Finn struggling in the slow speed corners . Ralf Schumacher qualified fifth and was happy with his starting position . Irvine was pushed down by Ralf Schumacher to sixth in the closing stages of qualifying . BAR driver Jacques Villeneuve managed seventh . The Jordan drivers of Trulli and Frentzen took seventh and eighth positions respectively although both drivers were disappointed with their performance . Button rounded out the top ten fastest qualifiers . Herbert , who took eleventh , missed out in qualifying in the top ten by nearly three @-@ tenths of a second . Salo captured twelfth on the grid with his fastest time set when air and track temperatures were lowered by cloud cover . He was ahead of de la Rosa in the faster of the two Arrows . Fisichella started from 14th position , nearly one @-@ tenth of a second in front of Benetton teammate Alexander Wurz ; both drivers complained that their cars had balance and grip issues . The two were split by Pedro Diniz in the other Sauber and Heidfeld . Alesi followed up in 18th . Ricardo Zonta set the 19th fastest time and used BAR 's spare car when an engine failure on his race car occurred . Verstappen and the two Minardi drivers Marc Gené and Gastón Mazzacane qualified at the rear of the grid , covering positions 20 to 22 . After the qualifying session , but before the warm @-@ up period , the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) safety delegate , Charlie Whiting announced that he had banned practice starts at the pit lane exit after observing the drivers ' behaviour in the area during the Saturday free practice sessions . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The drivers took to the track at 09 : 30 CEST ( UTC + 2 ) for a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up session . Both McLaren cars maintained their good pace from qualifying ; Häkkinen had the fastest time of 1 : 19 @.@ 329 . Coulthard was second in the other McLaren car . Michael Schumacher set the third fastest time with Trulli rounding out the top four . Michael Schumacher drove the spare Ferrari car and his race car , making adjustments to the changeable weather conditions . 
 The race started at 14 : 00 local time . The conditions on the grid were dry before the race . The air temperature ranged from 27 – 28 ° C ( 81 – 82 ° F ) and the track temperature was between 38 – 39 ° C ( 100 – 102 ° F ) ; conditions were expected to remain consistent throughout the race . All drivers started on the Extra Soft dry compound tyres . Coulthard managed to achieve a better start of the front runners off the line , though Michael Schumacher moved into the McLaren driver 's path to defend his lead . Coulthard then moved to his right allowing Barrichello to pass him for second position . Salo made the best start in the field moving from twelfth to ninth by the end of the first lap , while Irvine lost four positions over the same distance as Ralf Schumacher dropped from fifth to seventh . At the completition of the first lap , the order was Michael Schumacher , Barrichello , Coulthard , Häkkinen , Villeneuve , Frentzen , Ralf Schumacher , Trulli , Salo , Irvine , Button , Herbert , de la Rosa , Heidfeld , Alesi , Fisichella , Verstappen , Zonta , Diniz , Wurz , Gené and Mazzacane . 
 Michael Schumacher began to pull clear from the rest of the field and set consecutive fastest laps . Barrichello began to hold up the McLaren drivers to allow his teammate to extend his lead . Further down the field , Trulli passed Ralf Schumacher to take seventh position on lap two . Heidfeld was overtaken by Alesi for 14th on the same lap . On the following lap , Ralf Schumacher retook seventh position from Trulli . Heidfeld lost a further position to Fisichella on lap four . Ralf Schumacher started to challenge Frentzen for sixth position on the fifth lap . At the front of the pack , Michael Schumacher was in control , extending his lead over Barrichello to five seconds by lap ten . Button took tenth position from Irvine on lap twelve , while Heidfeld collided with Alesi , sending his teammate into a spin who rejoined down in 18th . Button moved into ninth place when he passed Salo on lap 13 . Zonta , who was running 17th , suffered brake problems on lap 17 and collided with the tyre barriers which caused him to retire from the Grand Prix . 
 By the 18th lap , Michael Schumacher had extended his lead over Barrichello by 6 @.@ 2 seconds , who in turn was continuing to hold up Coulthard in third . Häkkinen was a further 1 @.@ 4 seconds behind his teammate but was drawing ahead of Villeneuve in fifth . Herbert made an unscheduled pit stop due to a gearbox issue and retired two laps later . Meanwhile , on the same lap , Alesi became the first driver to pit for tyres on the same lap . Trulli became the first front runner to pit on lap 21 , followed by Villeneuve , Frentzen and Ralf Schumacher . Coulthard managed to take Barrichello on lap 22 for second place at turn five . Häkkinen , Button , Michael Schumacher , Coulthard and Barrichello all made pit stops over the following three laps . Verstappen pulled onto the side of the pit straight to retire with gearbox problems on lap 26 . Coulthard was able to close the gap on Michael Schumacher to under a second by lap 32 , having set the fastest lap of the race in the process , a 1 : 19 @.@ 479 on the 28th lap . He attempted to overtake his rival two laps later but the Ferrari driver defended his position . Coulthard lifted off the throttle to avoid a collision and made a hand gesture towards Michael Schumacher . The manoeuvre allowed Häkkinen to close up on the two leading drivers . On the previous lap , Mazzacane spun off at the third corner and retired . 
 Wurz locked his brakes going into turn 15 , causing him to beach his car in the gravel trap and retired on lap 36 . Button became the first driver to pit twice on lap 39 . Coulthard replicated his manoeuvre into turn five on Michael Schumacher on lap 40 , with the Ferrari driver pushed to the side of the track by Coulthard who took the lead . Michael Schumacher 's right front wheel made slight contact with Coulthard 's left front tyre in the process . Michael Schumacher then immediately withstood Häkkinen 's attempts to overtake him . Frentzen and de la Rosa became the next two drivers to make pit stops on the same lap . Michael Schumacher and Häkkinen made pit stops for the second time on lap 43 and both emerged in third and fourth respectively . Barrichello 's pit stop on the 44th lap saw him drop to fifth after his team had issues with fitting his right front tyre . Coulthard and Ralf Schumacher made pit stops over the next two laps . At the completition of lap 48 , with the frontrunners completing their pit stops , the order was Coulthard , Michael Schumacher , Häkkinen , Barrichello , Villeneuve , Trulli , Ralf Schumacher , Frentzen , Button , Fisichella , Salo , Diniz , Heidfeld , Irvine , Alesi and Gené . 
 At the tail @-@ end of the field , Gené and Alesi made contact on lap 52 and both drivers were sent spinning sideways . Both drivers continued in their respective positions . Further up , Ralf Schumacher passed Trulli to clinch sixth position at turn five . Häkkinen , meanwhile , was less than one second behind Michael Schumacher by lap 53 and continued to battle the Ferrari driver for second position as his tyres degraded quicker than the McLarens . Irvine overtook Diniz for twelfth position two laps later . Michael Schumacher pulled over to the side of the track with an blown engine on lap 59 . Häkkinen was promoted to second place as a result of Michael Schumacher 's retirement . Coulthard crossed the finish line on lap 72 to take his third victory of the season in a time of 1 ' 38 : 05 @.@ 538 , at an average speed of 116 @.@ 330 miles per hour ( 187 @.@ 215 km / h ) . Häkkinen finished second 14 @.@ 7 seconds behind , ahead of Barrichello in third , Villeneuve in fourth , Ralf Schumacher in fifth and Trulli rounded out the points scoring positions in sixth . Frentzen , Button , Fisichella , Salo , Diniz and Heidfeld followed in the next six positions , with Irvine , Alesi and Gené the last of the classified finishers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared on the podium to collect their trophies and in the subsequent press conference . Coulthard described his race weekend as " exhausting " because of the problems his team encountered during the event . He also apologised for the hand gestures he made towards Michael Schumacher after his first overtaking manoeuvre on the Ferrari driver . Häkkinen stated that he was happy with his second @-@ place result and praised his team 's efforts . He also spoke of how he watched Michael Schumacher 's racing lines and believed he would have passed him had he not retired with an engine failure . Barrichello revealed that he was ordered by Ferrari to reduce his pace in the race 's closing stages as he held a large gap of 35 seconds to Villeneuve . 
 After Ferrari 's victory at the previous race , their team principal Jean Todt , said that " we seemed to be in a strong position but , of course , it is the order at the finish that counts " , while Michael Schumacher said that his car 's tyres dropped in performance after taking his first pit stop . McLaren technical director Adrian Newey said that the pit stop strategy was crucial in winning the race : " The tyre wear did not spring any surprises on us and we were able to trust our estimations and co @-@ ordinate the pit @-@ stops to our best advantage . " Villeneuve was happy with his strong finish and was surprised by his good start . Heidfeld , who made contact with his teammate Alesi during the race , apologised for the collision . Ralf Schumacher said that he reduced his pace to secure his fifth position . Trulli described his race as " difficult " because of the hot temperatures though he praised his mechanics for their work . 
 The overtaking manoeuvres made by Coulthard on Michael Schumacher received much media attention after the race . Coulthard accused the Ferrari driver of unsporting behaviour and dangerous driving , saying : " I had a clean run at Michael on the outside and equally I felt he drove me wide . You could say he had the right to do that because he had the track position , but I think it was a deliberate gesture in trying to run someone wide like that and I was very angry . " Michael Schumacher later denied any wrongdoing and <unk> an similar incident at the 1999 Japanese Grand Prix where Coulthard pushed him wide although no objections were made . He also admitted that he did not see Coulthard 's hand gesture . Coulthard sought clarification with the FIA over such overtakes with a source from Formula One 's governing body noting : " It was hard racing -- they are racing drivers aren 't they ? " GrandPrix.com said that Coulthard 's overtake meant that " He is ready to stand up to Michael and he is not afraid of what will happen if Michael does not lift . " 
 The race result meant that Coulthard narrowed the gap to Michael Schumacher in the Drivers ' Championship to twelve points . Häkkinen remained in third place , six points ahead of Barrichello . Fisichella behind them maintained fifth position . In the Constructors ' Championship , McLaren 's one @-@ two finish reduced the lead of Ferrari to six points . Williams made up two points on the Benetton team , although they were still one point behind . Jordan retained fifth on eleventh points , with eight races of the season remaining . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Xin Fengxia = 
 Xin Fengxia ( Chinese : <unk> ; Wade – Giles : Hsin Feng @-@ <unk> ; 1927 – 12 April 1998 ) was a Chinese pingju opera performer , known as the " Queen of Pingju " . She was also a film actress , writer , and painter . She starred in the highly popular films Liu Qiao 'er ( 1956 ) and Flowers as Matchmakers ( 1964 ) , both adapted from her operas . 
 Xin was married to Wu Zuguang , a prominent playwright and an outspoken critic of government policies . When Wu was denounced as a " rightist " in Mao Zedong 's Anti @-@ Rightist Movement , Xin refused to divorce him and was herself denounced as a result . She was later severely persecuted during the Cultural Revolution , becoming disabled after a beating and was later paralyzed due to a stroke . No longer able to perform , she dedicated the remainder of her life to teaching , writing , and painting . She studied painting with her godfather Qi <unk> , a master of Chinese painting , and studied writing with her husband . She published a two @-@ million @-@ word memoir , which has been translated into English and Urdu . 
 Xin Fengxia pioneered her own style of pingju , now called the " Xin " ( which also means " new " ) style . It has become one of the most important styles of the opera . In 2014 , the China Pingju Institute created the new pingju opera Xin Fengxia to commemorate her life . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Xin Fengxia was born in Suzhou , Jiangsu , China . When she was a toddler she was sold by human smugglers to Tianjin in northern China , and was given the name Yang <unk> ( <unk> ) . She was trained as an opera performer from a young age . At that time , the theatrical world in China was controlled by gangsters . Actors , even renowned performers , had little personal freedom . She originally trained for Peking opera under her " older sister " Yang <unk> , but later changed to pingju . She toured extensively , and by the 1940s , her fame had rivalled well known female stars such as Liu <unk> , Bai <unk> , and Fu <unk> . 
 After the establishment of the People 's Republic of China in 1949 , Xin moved to Beijing . Her first performance , in the modern pingju Little <unk> 's Marriage , was well liked and attracted the attention of the original novelist Zhao <unk> and the well known writer Lao She . Her next performance , in Liu Qiao 'er , was even more successful , making her a household name in China . In the opera Flowers as Matchmakers ( Hua Wei Mei ) , she transformed the traditional melancholy tunes of pingju into joyous ones , and enriched the pingju repertoire by creating many new melodies . It is now considered a classic of the Xin style pingju . Liu Qiao 'er was made into a film in 1956 , which was followed by Flowers as Matchmakers in 1964 . Both starred Xin and were extremely popular . Premier Zhou Enlai and his wife Deng Yingchao were both her fans . Zhou once said : " I can live without tea for three days , but not without watching Xin Fengxia . " 
 = = Marriage and persecution = = 
 In 1951 , Lao She introduced Xin Fengxia to the famous playwright Wu Zuguang . Like many intellectuals at the time , Wu held high hopes for the new People 's Republic and returned to China from British Hong Kong . Xin , who had acted in one of Wu 's plays , admired his talent . They married that year , despite the fact that they were from differing socioeconomic backgrounds ; she had no formal education and was nearly illiterate , while he was from a prominent family of scholars . Wu helped her to study reading , writing , and calligraphy . She also studied painting with Qi <unk> , one of the most celebrated masters of Chinese painting , who took her as his goddaughter . 
 Wu Zuguang , an outspoken critic of government cultural policies , was denounced in 1957 as a " rightist " in Mao Zedong 's Anti @-@ Rightist Movement , and was sent to the Great Northern Wilderness in Heilongjiang to be " reformed through labour . " Xin was pressured to divorce her husband , but refused . Citing a legendary love story from one of her operas , she said " Wang <unk> waited 18 years for Xue <unk> , and I will wait 28 years for Wu Zuguang . " As a result , she was herself labeled a rightist and went through struggle sessions . 
 Wu returned to Beijing after three years of hard labour , but six years later , China fell into the even greater turmoil of the Cultural Revolution , which began in 1966 . Xin Fengxia and Wu Zuguang were both denounced at the beginning of the period . She was severely beaten by a junior actor of the China Pingju Institute ; her left knee was broken and she never fully recovered from the injury . The couple 's friend Lao She drowned himself after being similarly tortured . After her beating Xin served seven years of forced labour . In December 1975 , she became paralyzed after suffering a stroke . Wu took care of her for the rest of her life . 
 = = Post @-@ Cultural Revolution = = 
 After the Cultural Revolution , Xin Fengxia was politically rehabilitated in 1979 , but was unable to return to the stage because of her disability . Her performance in Flowers as Matchmakers in 1964 proved to be her last . She devoted her energy to writing , painting , and training the younger generation of pingju performers . In 1997 , she published her two @-@ million @-@ word memoir , which has been translated into English and Urdu . Ye <unk> , the renowned writer and publisher , greatly encouraged her to write . He composed two poems praising her courage and talent . Her paintings , which were decorated with her husband 's calligraphy , were also popular , and an exhibition of them was held at the China Military Museum in 1994 . She was elected as a member of the Chinese People 's Political Consultative Conference . 
 In April 1998 , while visiting Changzhou , her husband 's hometown , she suffered a cerebral hemorrhage . She was sent to Changzhou No. 1 People 's Hospital , where she died after a week , on 12 April 1998 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Xin Fengxia and Wu Zuguang had three children . Their son , Wu Huan , is also a writer , painter , and calligrapher . After the deaths of Xin in 1998 and of Wu Zuguang in 2003 , he organized the exhibition " A Hundred Years of the Wu Family " at the Poly Art Museum in Beijing . It was also shown in France , Hong Kong , and Taiwan . 
 The " Xin " style of pingju pioneered by Xin Fengxia has become one of the most important styles of the opera . In 2014 , the China Pingju Institute created a new opera entitled Xin Fengxia to commemorate her life , with focuses on her reformation of the opera , and the love story of Xin and Wu . It is written by Huang <unk> ( <unk> ) , and directed by Guo <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 = United States Senate election in Massachusetts , 2012 = 
 The 2012 United States Senate election in Massachusetts took place on November 6 , 2012 , concurrently with the U.S. presidential election and elections to the U.S. Senate in other states , as well as elections to the House of Representatives and various state and local elections . 
 Incumbent Republican Senator Scott Brown ran for re @-@ election to a first full term . He had been elected in a special election in 2010 following the death of incumbent Democratic Senator Ted Kennedy . Brown faced no challengers from his own party . For the Democrats , an initial wide field of prospective candidates narrowed after the entry of Harvard Law School Professor Elizabeth Warren , the architect of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau . Warren clinched near @-@ unanimous party support , with all but one of the other Democratic candidates withdrawing following her entrance . After winning her party 's nomination , eliminating any need for a primary , she faced Brown in the general election . 
 The election was one of the most @-@ followed races in 2012 and cost approximately $ 82 million , which made it the most expensive election in Massachusetts history and the second @-@ most expensive in the entire 2012 election cycle , next to that year 's presidential election . This was despite the two candidates ' having agreed not to allow outside money to influence the race . Opinion polling indicated a close race for much of the campaign , though Warren opened up a small but consistent lead in the final few weeks . She went on to defeat Brown by over 236 @,@ 000 votes , 54 % to 46 % . 
 = = Background = = 
 Democratic U.S. Senator Ted Kennedy was re @-@ elected in 2006 , and died on August 25 , 2009 from a malignant brain tumor . On September 24 , 2009 , Massachusetts Governor Deval Patrick appointed longtime friend of Kennedy and former Democratic National Committee Chairman Paul G. Kirk to succeed Kennedy until a special election could be held . Kirk 's appointment was especially controversial , as the Governor 's ability to appoint an interim Senator was removed during the Romney administration by the Democratic @-@ controlled legislature , as a precaution if Senator and presidential nominee John Kerry was elected President in 2004 . Laws surrounding Senate appointment were quickly changed following Kennedy 's death . The Massachusetts Republican Party sued in an attempt to halt Kirk 's appointment , but it was rejected by Suffolk Superior Court Judge Thomas Connolly . 
 In the special election held on January 19 , 2010 , Republican State Senator Scott Brown defeated Democratic State Attorney General Martha Coakley in an upset victory . Brown thus became the first Republican to be elected from Massachusetts to the United States Senate since Edward Brooke in 1972 and he began serving the remainder of Kennedy 's term on February 4 , 2010 . 
 = = Republican primary = = 
 Incumbent Scott Brown faced no challenges from within his party . The political action committee National Republican Trust , a group integral to Brown 's election in 2010 , vowed to draft a challenger for Brown but were unable to find one . 
 = = = Candidates = = = 
 Scott Brown , incumbent U.S. Senator 
 = = = Polling = = = 
 = = = Results = = = 
 = = Democratic primary = = 
 The Massachusetts Democratic Convention was held on June 2 , 2012 , where Warren received 95 @.@ 77 % of delegate votes . As the only candidate with 15 % of delegate votes necessary to qualify for the primary ballot , Warren eliminated her challenger Marisa DeFranco , becoming the de facto nominee . The Democratic primary was held September 6 , 2012 , with Warren running unopposed . 
 = = = Candidates = = = 
 = = = = Declared = = = = 
 Nominee : Elizabeth Warren , Harvard Law School professor and architect of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
 Eliminated at convention : Marisa DeFranco , immigration lawyer 
 = = = = Withdrew = = = = 
 Tom Conroy , State Representative ( Withdrew December 12 , 2011 ) 
 Alan <unk> , founder of City Year ( Withdrew October 26 , 2011 ) 
 James Coyne King , corporate lawyer ( Withdrew March 21 , 2012 ) 
 Bob Massie , entrepreneur and nominee for Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts 1994 ( Withdrew October 7 , 2011 ) 
 Herb Robinson , engineer ( Withdrew December 15 , 2011 ) 
 <unk> Warren , Mayor of Newton ( Withdrew September 29 , 2011 ) 
 = = = = Declined = = = = 
 Mike Capuano , U.S. Representative 
 Kim Driscoll , Mayor of Salem 
 Barney Frank , U.S. Representative 
 Joseph P. Kennedy II , former U.S. Representative 
 Victoria Reggie Kennedy , Ted Kennedy 's widow 
 Stephen Lynch , U.S. Representative 
 Rachel Maddow , television host , and political commentator 
 Marty Meehan , former U.S. Representative 
 Thomas Menino , Mayor of Boston 
 Deval Patrick , Governor of Massachusetts 
 John F. Tierney , U.S. Representative 
 Warren Tolman , former State Senator and former State Representative 
 = = = Polling = = = 
 = = = Results = = = 
 = = General election = = 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 Brown ran as a moderate , stressing his ability to cross party lines and highlighting his votes for the Dodd @-@ Frank financial reform law and to repeal " don 't ask , don 't tell " . Warren campaigned on a platform championing the middle class , and supporting Wall Street regulation . Warren criticized Brown for continually voting with Republican leadership , and argued that he was not the bipartisan moderate he claimed to be . A staple of Brown 's attack tactics against Warren was his consistent reference to her as " Professor Warren " , in attempt to portray her as an elitist academic . Brown faced blowback after the second debate , during which he claimed conservative Antonin Scalia was a " model " Supreme Court Justice , prompting boos from the debate audience . 
 Warren spoke at the 2012 Democratic National Convention immediately before Bill Clinton on the penultimate night of the convention . Warren contrasted President Obama 's economic plan with Mitt Romney 's in the 2012 election and rebuked the Republican Party 's economic policy stating : " Their vision is clear : ' I 've got mine , and the rest of you are on your own . ' " Warren positioned herself as a champion of a beleaguered middle class that , as she said , " has been chipped , squeezed and hammered . " Brown attended the 2012 Republican National Convention , but was not a speaker there . According to Brown , he had rejected an offer to play a larger role , and limited his attendance to a single day because of scheduling demands . 
 Following Todd Akin 's controversial " legitimate rape " comments , Brown was the first sitting Senator to demand he drop out of the Missouri U.S. Senate race . He also called on his Party to " recognize in its platform that you can be pro @-@ choice and still be a good Republican . " Brown 's campaign had been endorsed by many Massachusetts Democrats , many of whom were prominently featured in his campaign ads . 
 In September 2011 , a video of Warren explaining her approach to economic policy gained popularity on the internet . In the video , Warren rebuts the charge that asking the rich to pay more taxes is " class warfare " , pointing out that no one grew rich in America without depending on infrastructure paid for by the rest of society . On July 13 , President Obama sparked a controversy when he echoed her thoughts in a campaign speech saying , " Somebody helped to create this unbelievable American system that we have that allowed you to thrive . Somebody invested in roads and bridges . If you 've got a business — you didn 't build that . Somebody else made that happen . " 
 On September 14 , 2011 , Warren declared her intention to run for the Democratic nomination for the 2012 election in Massachusetts for the United States Senate . The seat had been won by Republican Scott Brown in a 2010 special election after the death of Ted Kennedy . A week later , a video of Warren speaking in Andover became popular on the internet . In it , Warren replies to the charge that asking the rich to pay more taxes is " class warfare , " pointing out that no one grew rich in America without depending on infrastructure paid for by the rest of society , stating : 
 There is nobody in this country who got rich on his own . Nobody . ... You moved your goods to market on the roads the rest of us paid for ; you hired workers the rest of us paid to educate ; you were safe in your factory because of police forces and fire forces that the rest of us paid for . You didn 't have to worry that marauding bands would come and seize everything at your factory , and hire someone to protect against this , because of the work the rest of us did . Now look , you built a factory and it turned into something terrific , or a great idea . God bless . Keep a big hunk of it . But part of the underlying social contract is , you take a hunk of that and pay forward for the next kid who comes along . 
 President Barack Obama later echoed her sentiments in a 2012 election campaign speech . 
 Warren won the Democratic nomination on June 2 , 2012 , at the state Democratic convention with a record 95 @.@ 77 % of the votes of delegates . She was endorsed by the Governor of Massachusetts , Deval Patrick . Warren and her opponent Scott Brown agreed to engage in four televised debates , including one with a consortium of media outlets in Springfield and one on WBZ @-@ TV in Boston . 
 Warren encountered significant opposition from business interests . In August 2012 , Rob Engstrom , political director for the United States Chamber of Commerce , claimed that " no other candidate in 2012 represents a greater threat to free enterprise than Professor Warren . " She nonetheless raised $ 39 million for her campaign , the most of any Senate candidate in 2012 . 
 Warren received a primetime speaking slot at the 2012 Democratic National Convention , immediately before Bill Clinton , on the evening of September 5 , 2012 . Warren positioned herself as a champion of a beleaguered middle class that " has been chipped , squeezed , and hammered . " According to Warren , " People feel like the system is rigged against them . And here 's the painful part : They 're right . The system is rigged . " Warren said that Wall Street CEOs " wrecked our economy and destroyed millions of jobs " and that they " still strut around congress , no shame , demanding favors , and acting like we should thank them . " 
 = = = = Native American ancestry controversy = = = = 
 In April 2012 , the Boston Herald sparked an election controversy when it drew attention to Warren 's Association of American Law Schools ( AALS ) directory entries from 1986 to 1995 , which listed her as a minority professor . According to the AALS , the directory was compiled by information supplied by law school deans , based on questionnaires filled out by individual teachers . Warren stated that she had self @-@ identified as having Native American ancestry in order to meet others with a similar background . Harvard Law School had listed her as a minority professor in response to criticisms about a lack of faculty diversity , but Warren said that she was unaware of this until she read about it in a newspaper during the 2012 election . 
 Her opponent Scott Brown speculated that she had fabricated a native ancestry to gain an advantage in the employment market ; the Brown campaign used Warren 's lineage in several attack ads . In response , Warren 's brothers issued a joint statement stating that they " grew up listening to our mother and grandmother and other relatives talk about our family ’ s Cherokee and Delaware heritage " . Brian Leiter of the Chicago Law School dismissed the allegations against Warren , noting that law schools have " no pressure to hire Native Americans for affirmative action reasons " , and that Warren 's record of scholarship was " clearly sufficient to get her appointed at Harvard " . 
 According to the New England Historical Genealogical Society , several members of Warren 's maternal family claim Cherokee heritage ; the Society found a family newsletter that alluded to a marriage license application that listed Elizabeth Warren ’ s great @-@ great @-@ great grandmother as a Cherokee , but could not find the primary document and found no proof of Warren 's Native American heritage . The Oklahoma Historical Society stated that finding a definitive answer about Native American heritage can be difficult because of intermarriage and deliberate avoidance of registration . Some members of the Cherokee Nation protested her claim to Native American ancestry and questioned whether she benefitted from it . Former colleagues and supervisors at the universities where she had worked ( including Charles Fried , former Solicitor General under President Ronald Reagan ) said Warren 's ancestry was either not mentioned , or played no role in her hiring . 
 The question of Warren 's ancestry was pressed by the Brown campaign throughout the election . However , polls showed that most voters said that the controversy would not impact their vote in the election . Warren ’ s 2014 autobiography devoted a section to the allegations , describing them as untrue and hurtful . 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 = = = Debates = = = 
 Both candidates agreed to four televised debates , three of which were held . The candidates agreed to a fourth debate which was to be held on October 30 in WGBH @-@ TV 's studio , hosted by a Boston <unk> consortium , and moderated by John King , but the day before both pulled out due to Hurricane Sandy . Victoria Kennedy , widow of Ted Kennedy , had proposed an additional debate with Tom Brokaw as moderator , however Brown would only accept the invitation if she pledged not to endorse Brown 's opponent ; which she refused . 
 Debate 1 : September 20 at WBZ @-@ TV studio , hosted by WBZ and WBZ Newsradio 1030 . Moderated by the station 's political reporter Jon Keller . 
 Complete video and transcript available at C @-@ SPAN . 
 Debate 2 : October 1 at UMass Lowell , co @-@ hosted by UMass and The Boston Herald . Moderated by David Gregory . 
 Complete video and transcript available at C @-@ SPAN . 
 Debate 3 : October 10 at Springfield Symphony Hall , hosted by a Western <unk> consortium . Moderated by <unk> @-@ TV 's Jim Madigan . 
 Complete video and transcript available at C @-@ SPAN . 
 = = Fundraising = = 
 The election cost approximately $ 82 million , making it the most expensive election in Massachusetts ' history and of any Congressional race in history as well as the second @-@ most expensive election in the 2012 election cycle , behind only the 2012 presidential election . 
 = = = The People 's Pledge = = = 
 Both Warren and Brown stated early in the race that they would not accept television advertisement assistance from Super PACs and interest groups . On January 23 , 2012 , both candidates signed the agreement , or People 's Pledge . While no outside groups were obligated by the agreement , both candidates agreed to donate a sum equal to 50 % of an advertisement run by any groups to a charity of the other candidate 's choice . The pledge was broken twice , by Brown supporters . In March the American Petroleum Institute and Coalition of Americans for Political Equality launched ads supporting Brown , and as a result , the Brown campaign agreed to make donations of $ 1 @,@ 000 and $ 34 @,@ 545 , respectively , to the charity of Warren 's choice : the Autism Consortium . 
 = = = Top donors = = = 
 Contributions by <unk> 
 Source : Center for Responsive Politics 
 Contributions by industry 
 Source : Center for Responsive Politics 
 = = = Polling = = = 
 * RV = Registered voters ; LV = Likely voters 
 = = Results = = 
 Despite President Obama 's winning the state easily , and winning all of the states counties , this race was fairly close . As expected , Warren performed very well in Suffolk County , which is home to the state 's largest city and its capital Boston . Brown performed well in the southern part of the state near Cape Cod . Warren made history by becoming the first woman elected to the U.S. Senate in the state of Massachusetts . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The People 's Pledge was a popular concept , which Common Cause proposed being implemented in other races . The pledge also resulted in fewer attack ads on the airwaves . 
 Less than two months after the election , President Barack Obama nominated Senator John Kerry to become United States Secretary of State . Kerry was sworn in on February 1 , making newly inaugurated Warren the state 's senior Senator , and the Senate 's most @-@ junior senior senator . In the Senate special election to replace Kerry the following year , Democratic nominee Ed Markey asked his Republican rival Gabriel E. Gomez to sign a similar pledge with him , although Gomez refused . 
 The election was a critical event in both candidate 's political careers , with Warren becoming a political icon after entering the Senate , and being drafted to run for President in 2016 . After the election loss , Brown was considered the most prominent Republican in Massachusetts and heavily favored to run in the Senate special election the following year or for Governor in 2014 , though he declined to do either . He instead moved to New Hampshire and ran for the Senate there in 2014 against Democratic incumbent Jeanne Shaheen . He lost , 51 % to 48 % , becoming the first man to lose two Senate races to women . 
 = TNA World Heavyweight Championship = 
 The TNA World Heavyweight Championship is a professional wrestling world heavyweight championship owned by Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) . It is currently the highest ranked championship in TNA and is primarily defended in TNA 's heavyweight division . It was unveiled on May 14 , 2007 , at the taping of TNA 's primary television program , TNA Impact ! ; this episode of Impact ! did not air until May 17 , 2007 . The inaugural champion was Kurt Angle . 
 Like most professional wrestling championships , the title is won via the result of a scripted match . Before the TNA World Heavyweight Championship was created , TNA held control over the NWA World Heavyweight Championship due to an agreement between TNA and the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) , the organization which owned the NWA Championship . In 2007 , the agreement between TNA and the NWA ended , leading to the creation of the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = History = = 
 The Total Nonstop Action Wrestling promotion formed in May 2002 . Later that same year TNA was granted control over the NWA World Heavyweight and World Tag Team Championships by the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) governing body ; subsequently becoming an official NWA territory as NWA – TNA . On June 19 , 2002 , NWA – TNA held its first show ; a weekly pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event . The main event of the telecast was a twenty @-@ man Gauntlet for the Gold match in which twenty men trying to throw each other over the top rope and down to the floor in order to eliminate them , until there were two men left who wrestle a standard match to become the first ever TNA @-@ era NWA World Heavyweight Champion . Ken Shamrock defeated Malice to win the vacant championship with Ricky Steamboat as Special Guest Referee at the event . 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 The NWA World Heavyweight and World Tag Team Championships were contested for in TNA until the morning of May 13 , 2007 . On that day , NWA 's Executive Director Robert Trobich announced that the NWA were ending their five – year agreement with TNA , which had allowed them full control over both titles . Trobich went on to state that effective that morning , then @-@ NWA World Heavyweight Champion Christian Cage and the Team 3D pairing of Brother Ray and Brother Devon , then @-@ NWA World Tag Team Champions , were stripped of their respective championships . The alleged motivation behind these actions was because Cage refused to defend the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against wrestlers from NWA territories . That same day , TNA were scheduled to produce their Sacrifice 2007 PPV event , in which both Cage and Team 3D were to defend their respective championships . On the card , Cage was scheduled to defend the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against Kurt Angle and Sting in a match involving three competitors , also known as a Three Way match . 
 That night , the onscreen graphic used to refer to the champions and their respective championships credited both Cage and Team 3D as still being NWA Champions . However , the ring announcers for the encounters proclaimed the matches as being strictly for the " World Heavyweight Championship " and the " World Tag Team Championship " . Angle defeated Cage and Sting to win the " World Heavyweight Championship " . 
 TNA held a set of tapings for the next two episodes of TNA Impact ! on May 14 , with the episodes set to air on tape delay on May 17 and May 24 , 2007 . At the first taping , Angle came to the ring with the new TNA World Heavyweight Championship belt and announced that he was the " new TNA World Heavyweight Champion " . TNA commentator Mike Tenay announced when Angle made his way to the ring that Management Director Jim Cornette , TNA 's on @-@ screen authority figure at the time , " made the decision that due to TNA 's growing worldwide exposure , the company needed to have its own TNA title belts " ; thereby not acknowledging the NWA ending their agreement with TNA and giving a storyline explanation as to why the championship was created . Later on during the broadcast , Cornette stripped Angle of the TNA World Heavyweight Championship due to a controversial finish to the match at Sacrifice . Cornette then announced the championship would be contested for at TNA 's Slammiversary PPV event on June 17 , 2007 in a King of the Mountain match — a match which involves five participants racing to gain a pinfall or submission to become eligible to hang a championship belt to win . On May 15 , 2007 Jeremy Borash unveiled the TNA World Heavyweight Championship belt on that day 's edition of TNA 's online podcast TNA Today . 
 The five participants for the King of the Mountain match were determined in a series of standard wrestling matches that took place on Impact ! leading up to the event . Angle defeated Rhino in the first bout to gain entry on the May 17 episode of Impact ! . On May 24 episode of Impact ! , Samoa Joe defeated Sting to become the second participant . The third qualification match was held on the May 31 episode of Impact ! between AJ Styles and Tomko , which Styles won . The next bout pitted Chris Harris against James Storm on the June 7 episode Impact ! , which ended in a double disqualification ; neither man advanced to the King of the Mountain match . The final qualification match was won by Christian Cage over Abyss on the June 14 episode of Impact ! . Angle ended up winning the King of the Mountain match at Slammiversary over Joe , Cage , Styles , and Harris , who was a mystery participant chosen by Cornette , to become the " undisputed TNA World Heavyweight Champion " . 
 = = Belt design = = 
 During the championship 's history , it has had three designs . The original belt , unveiled in May 2007 , had on its center plate an imprint of an eagle with its wings extended . The word " World " was placed above the eagle 's head on a ribbon . The ribbon was wrapped around the bird 's wings and body . Five stars were engraved on the ribbon when it passed over each of the bird 's wings and the word " Champion " as it passed over the bird 's talons . The words " Heavyweight Wrestling " were printed across the bird 's chest . At the top of the center plate , was TNA 's logo . Four smaller side plates had an imprint of a globe centered with TNA 's logo at the top and bottom of each . At each end of the belt was a small plate that covered the belt snaps with TNA 's logo engraved on each . [ 1 ] 
 At the November 8 , 2010 , tapings of the November 11 edition of Impact ! , TNA introduced a new design for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship belt , which the champion Jeff Hardy dubbed the " Immortal Championship " . The new design consisted of a purple strap with a silver center plate depicting a masked head ( designed to resemble Hardy 's face with face paint ) , the TNA logo on the forehead and blue lines along the mask . There are four irregular <unk> side plates on the belt , shaped like stars with rounded edges on two of the sides of these plates . 
 The Immortal belt was replaced by the third design of the belt at the March 14 , 2011 , tapings of the March 17 edition of Impact ! , introduced by the reigning champion at the time , Sting . The new design features seven gold plates over a black leather strap . The largest plate is the center plate with faux diamonds aligned along its multiple rounded edges , similar to that of the Big Gold Belt . Over the center plate is a large TNA Wrestling logo and below it the words " Heavyweight Champion " are engraved in silver . On each side of the center plate is a group of three smaller plates , one with a TNA logo engraved while the other two feature separate corresponding halves of a globe , on either side of the TNA logo side plate . 
 = = Reigns = = 
 Overall , there have been 33 reigns shared among 18 wrestlers . The inaugural champion was Kurt Angle , who won the championship by defeating Christian Cage and Sting in a Three Way match on May 13 , 2007 , at TNA 's Sacrifice event . Angle 's first reign also holds the record for shortest reign in the title 's history at 1 day . Angle also holds the record for the most reigns at six . At 256 days , Bobby Roode 's first reign is the longest in the title 's history . The title has been vacated three different times . 
 Lashley is the current champion in his third reign . He defeated Drew Galloway to win the title on June 12 , 2016 , in Orlando , Florida at Slammiversary . 
 = Milton Bradley ( baseball ) = 
 Milton <unk> Bradley , Jr . ( born April 15 , 1978 ) is a retired Major League Baseball ( MLB ) outfielder . Standing 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) and weighing 215 pounds ( 98 kg ) , Bradley is a switch hitter who throws right @-@ handed . Over his 11 @-@ year MLB career , Bradley played with the Montreal Expos ( 2000 – 2001 ) , Cleveland Indians ( 2001 – 2003 ) , Los Angeles Dodgers ( 2004 – 2005 ) , Oakland Athletics ( 2006 – 2007 ) , San Diego Padres ( 2007 ) , Texas Rangers ( 2008 ) , Chicago Cubs ( 2009 ) , and Seattle Mariners ( 2010 – 2011 ) . His career was also marred by legal troubles and several notable on @-@ field incidents . 
 Born in Harbor City , California , Bradley attended Long Beach Polytechnic High School before he was drafted by the Expos in the 1996 Major League Baseball draft . After playing four seasons of minor league baseball for the organization , he made his major league debut on July 19 , 2000 . In 2001 , Bradley was traded to the Cleveland Indians in exchange for pitching prospect Zach Day ; he was again traded in 2004 to the Los Angeles Dodgers . After playing in 216 games for the Dodgers , the most among all teams he has played for , Bradley was traded to the Oakland Athletics for Andre Ethier . Bradley was traded to the Padres in 2007 , was granted free agency after one season with the team , and signed with the Texas Rangers in 2007 . He was voted to the 2008 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game with the Rangers , and led the American League with a .436 on @-@ base percentage and a .999 on @-@ base plus slugging percentage . For the year , Bradley finished 17th in American League Most Valuable Player Award voting . 
 After becoming a free agent , Bradley signed with the Chicago Cubs in January 2009 , who traded him in December of that year to the Seattle Mariners . In Seattle , Bradley batted .205 in 2010 and .218 in 2011 before he was released by the club . He has a career batting average of .271 with 135 home runs and 481 runs batted in ( RBI ) in over 1 @,@ 042 games played , and was described as having " power , speed , a strong arm and star qualities " , although " his temper … has never allowed him to fulfill his immense potential . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bradley was born on April 15 , 1978 , in Harbor City , California . His mother , <unk> Rector , worked as a clerk at a local Safeway supermarket , while his father , Milton Bradley Sr. , was a veteran of the Vietnam War , and was awarded a Purple Heart for his service . Bradley was named Milton Bradley Jr. when Milton Bradley Sr. filled out his son 's birth certificate without Rector 's permission . According to Bradley Jr . ' s mother , Bradley Sr. was addicted to cocaine , physically abused her , and was homeless for several years . Growing up , Bradley had four half @-@ siblings from Rector 's previous marriage . 
 Bradley played baseball at Long Beach Polytechnic High School , and was a teammate of Chase Utley . After graduating high school with a 3 @.@ 7 grade point average , he committed to California State University , Long Beach , but instead signed with the Expos on July 1 , 1996 after being drafted by the team in the second round of the 1996 Major League Baseball draft . 
 = = Major League Baseball career = = 
 = = = Montreal Expos ( 1996 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Bradley began his professional baseball career with the GCL Expos of the Gulf Coast League in 1996 ; in 32 games , he batted .241 with 27 hits . The following season , he played nine games for the GCL Expos and 50 for the Vermont Expos , a short season affiliate of the Montreal Expos . For the Expos , he was named to the postseason New York – Penn League All @-@ Star team . In 1998 , he played for the Cape Fear Crocs and the Jupiter Hammerheads , tying for the Croc team lead in doubles with 21 while hitting .302 for the Crocs and .287 for the Hammerheads . While playing for the Harrisburg Senators the next season , he was suspended seven games for starting a fight after he had been hit by a pitch . He also played for the silver @-@ medal @-@ winning United States in the 1999 Pan American Games . 
 Finishing 76 – 66 , the Senators played the Norwich Navigators for the Eastern League championship . The series was tied two games to two in a best @-@ of @-@ five series . In the final game , Bradley hit a walk @-@ off grand slam with two outs and a full count , in the bottom of the ninth inning , to give the Senators a 12 – 11 win . During the next season , after playing in 88 games for the Ottawa Lynx , he was promoted to the major league club and made his MLB debut on July 19 , 2000 . In his debut , he hit three straight singles against the New York Mets ; and for the season , he batted .221 with 15 RBI over 42 games played . 
 For the 2001 Expos , Bradley played 67 games , including one on April 26 in which he walked to give the Expos the go @-@ ahead run against Rick Ankiel of the St. Louis Cardinals in the top of the 15th inning . On July 31 of that year , he was traded to the Cleveland Indians to serve as a possible replacement for Kenny Lofton ; in exchange , the Expos received right @-@ handed pitcher Zach Day . Speaking to the Associated Press about the trade , Indians General Manager John Hart stated : 
 = = = Cleveland Indians ( 2001 – 2003 ) = = = 
 After the deal , Bradley was assigned to the Triple @-@ A Buffalo Bisons and reported to the team on August 2 . In addition to the 30 games he played for the Bisons , he also played 10 games for the major league Indians . 
 On April 15 , 2002 , he was placed on the disabled list ( DL ) following an appendectomy a day earlier at St. Anthony 's Hospital in St. Petersburg , Florida . He went on the disabled list again on May 2 with a broken orbital bone and a scratched iris after a batted ball had bounced off the outfield wall and hit him below his left eye while he was trying to make a catch ; up to that point , he was hitting .266 in 23 games . After a rehabilitation stint of six games with the Bisons , he was reactivated by the Indians on June 4 and finished the season with a .249 batting average , 38 RBIs and nine home runs . 
 Bradley spent the entire 2003 campaign with the Indians . Despite being placed on the 15 @-@ day DL with a strained right hamstring and missing the final six weeks of the season with a lower back injury , he led the team in stolen bases , with 17 . On August 30 , while on the DL with a back injury , he was ticketed for speeding in Cuyahoga Falls , Ohio . After being stopped , he refused the ticket and sped away . He pleaded not guilty to speeding and fleeing charges on September 12 , but was sentenced to a three @-@ day jail term . The ruling was upheld by the Supreme Court of Ohio in December 2004 . 
 On November 19 , 2003 he signed a one @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 73 million contract with the Indians in order for the Indians to avoid salary arbitration with him . During spring training , he was banned from the Indians ' training camp after not running out a popup a game earlier . On April 3 , 2004 , he was traded to the Dodgers for Franklin Gutiérrez and a player to be named later ( Andrew Brown ) ; the Akron Beacon Journal later reported that manager Eric Wedge had insisted that Bradley be traded . 
 = = = Los Angeles Dodgers ( 2004 – 2005 ) = = = 
 In his first game with the Dodgers , playing center field , Bradley went 2 @-@ for @-@ 3 , with two singles and two walks . On June 1 , he was ejected from a game by home plate umpire Terry Craft for arguing over balls and strikes . After being restrained by manager Jim Tracy , he returned to the dugout and threw a ball bag onto the field . Bradley was suspended for four games and Tracy for one game . On September 19 , he hit a 479 @-@ foot home run against the Colorado Rockies in Coors Field . On September 28 , during a home game against the Rockies , Bradley mishandled a line drive and was charged with an error . A fan threw a bottle at Bradley , who left his position in right field , picked up the bottle and threw it into the stands , yelling at the fan . Bradley was immediately ejected from the game . The next day , MLB suspended him for the remainder of the season and fined him an undisclosed amount . In postseason play , he hit .273 with a home run while the Dodgers lost the National League Division Series to the St. Louis Cardinals three games to one . He finished the 2004 season batting .267 with 19 home runs and 67 RBIs , but was caught stealing 11 times , tying for eighth most in MLB . 
 During the offseason , Bradley went through anger management counseling . In a game against the San Francisco Giants on April 12 , 2005 , he drove in two runs with a single to tie the game in the bottom of the ninth inning with two outs , the winning run then scoring on Jason Ellison 's error in the same play . On August 25 , 2005 , after hitting .290 with 38 RBIs in 75 games , he was put on the 15 @-@ day DL with a torn patellar tendon and anterior cruciate ligament which rendered him inactive for the remainder of the season . On December 13 , 2005 , the Dodgers traded him to the Oakland Athletics along with infielder Antonio Pérez for outfielder prospect Andre Ethier . 
 = = = Oakland Athletics ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = 
 In his first season with the Oakland Athletics , Bradley posted a .276 batting average with 14 home runs and 52 runs batted in a part @-@ time role . He went on the 15 @-@ day DL on May 11 , 2006 for a strained oblique muscle and a sprained right knee . On July 30 , he hit a three @-@ run walk @-@ off home run to beat the Toronto Blue Jays with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning . During game four of the 2006 American League Championship Series versus the Detroit Tigers , Bradley became the third player in MLB history to hit home runs from each side of the plate in a postseason game , joining Bernie Williams and Chipper Jones . For the series , he went nine @-@ for @-@ eighteen with two home runs and five RBIs . 
 On June 21 , 2007 , the Athletics designated him for assignment . A trade completed the next day , which would have sent Bradley to the Kansas City Royals for Leo Núñez was voided by the Royals because he had sustained an oblique injury in his last game as an Athletic . He was then traded to the San Diego Padres on June 29 , with cash , in exchange for Andrew Brown ; it was the second time those two players had been traded for each other . 
 = = = San Diego Padres ( 2007 ) = = = 
 Bradley started his tenure with the Padres on the 15 @-@ day DL , but came off it on July 7 ; in July , he batted .364 with four home runs and 12 RBI in 18 games . On September 23 , 2007 , however , he tore his right ACL while being restrained by Padres manager Bud Black during an altercation with first base umpire Mike Winters . Home plate umpire Brian Runge reportedly told Bradley that Winters said that he had tossed his bat in Runge 's direction in a previous at @-@ bat . After Bradley reached first base , he questioned Winters about the alleged bat throwing and subsequent communication with Runge . According to Bradley and Padres first base coach Bobby Meacham , Winters addressed Bradley with a barrage of profanity . Bradley then moved towards Winters . While restrained by Black , Bradley fell to the ground and injured himself . He missed the final week of the regular season in 2007 , during which the Padres lost to the Colorado Rockies in a one game playoff for the National League wild card on October 1 . 
 Winters was suspended for the remainder of the season and also spent the postseason on the restricted list for the incident , after MLB determined that he had indeed directed obscene language toward Bradley . Bradley was not suspended , MLB finding no need for such discipline since he did not make physical contact with Winters . 
 = = = Texas Rangers ( 2008 ) = = = 
 After the 2007 season , Bradley agreed to a one @-@ year contract with the Texas Rangers . He announced in early January 2008 that he expected to be healthy and ready to play in the season opener . 
 As the Rangers designated hitter , he led the AL in on @-@ base plus slugging with a .999 mark . He was third in batting average ( .321 ) , and led the league in on @-@ base percentage ( .443 ) . On making the All @-@ Star game , he stated , " If I somehow miraculously made it to the All @-@ Star Game , I would be floored . I 'd really be totally humbled by that . I 'm just happy right now to play , to produce and to be with a good group of guys . " He was selected to play in his first All @-@ Star Game in 2008 as a designated hitter ( DH ) after being officially selected as a DH reserve , but due to an injury to David Ortiz he became the starting DH in the 2008 MLB All @-@ Star Game . 
 According to The Dallas Morning News Bradley attempted to confront Kansas City Royals television announcer Ryan Lefebvre in the press box following a June 2008 game for what he believed were unfair comments made on the air . As the Rangers ' designated hitter , Bradley watched the broadcast when he was not batting and took offense to a comparison Lefebvre made between him and Josh Hamilton . Manager Ron Washington and general manager Jon Daniels chased after him and stopped him before he got to Lefebvre , at which point he returned to the clubhouse in tears and said : 
 He was quoted by Rangers radio broadcasters as saying that he never intended to physically harm Lefebvre but did want to speak to him ; Daniels said he was upset that someone he didn 't know was judging him . 
 = = = Chicago Cubs ( 2009 ) = = = 
 On January 8 , 2009 , Bradley signed a three @-@ year , $ 30 million deal with the Chicago Cubs . He was issued a two @-@ game suspension for supposedly making contact with umpire Larry <unk> while arguing a strike call on April 16 , which was reduced to one game on appeal . During an interleague game against the Minnesota Twins on June 12 , he caught a routine fly in right field and threw it into the stands , believing it was the third out of the inning when there were only two outs . The umpire allowed each of the Twins ' baserunners to advance two bases as a result . 
 Later that month , Cub manager Lou Piniella told Bradley to leave the dugout and go home after he " went after " a Gatorade cooler in frustration after flying out in another interleague game , against the Chicago White Sox . Piniella and Bradley later confronted each other in the locker room and exchanged words . Piniella later apologized to Bradley , and reinserted him back into the line @-@ up during the team 's next start . 
 On September 20 , 2009 , the Cubs announced that Bradley would be suspended for the remainder of the season after an interview in which Bradley talked about " negativity " on the part of the Cub organization and declared , " You understand why they [ the Cubs ] haven 't won in 100 years here . " He also said he was uncomfortable just being on the Cubs . General Manager Jim Hendry felt the comments were disrespectful . Bradley later apologized to the Cubs organization for his remarks . For the Cubs , Bradley hit .257 with 12 home runs and 40 RBIs before being traded to the Seattle Mariners for Carlos Silva and cash on December 18 , 2009 . 
 = = = Seattle Mariners ( 2010 – 2011 ) = = = 
 Bradley was part of a flurry of offseason moves by the Mariners in hopes of returning to the playoffs , having not reached the postseason since 2001 . On May 4 , 2010 , he removed himself from a game and left the stadium . He asked the Mariners for help with a personal problem , and the organization responded . He was placed on the restricted list , and returned to the team on May 18 after undergoing treatment of an undisclosed nature . He ended the season on the DL after having been placed on it on July 31 prior to right knee arthroscopic surgery on August 17 . He finished the 2010 season batting .205 , with eight home runs and 29 RBIs over 73 games played . 
 On May 9 , 2011 , the Mariners designated Bradley for assignment after starting the 2011 season hitting .218 with two home runs and 13 RBI in 28 games . Unable to trade Bradley , the Mariners released him on May 16 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 In 2005 , Bradley was the Dodgers ' nominee for the Roberto Clemente Award for working with the Dodgers Dream Foundation , Children 's Hospital Los Angeles , and the Long Beach Boys & Girls Clubs , among other charities . Bradley has also opened two baseball academies , one in Long Beach and another in Baldwin Hills . In August 2005 , Redondo Beach police received three domestic @-@ violence @-@ related calls from Bradley 's house . No charges were filed . In 2006 , Bradley filed for divorce but the petition was never finalized . 
 On January 18 , 2011 , Bradley was arrested at his home in Encino , California and charged with making criminal threats to his wife , Monique . When he agreed to participate in an out @-@ of @-@ court hearing process , no charges were filed against him . However , his wife subsequently filed for divorce . 
 On June 3 , 2013 , Bradley was convicted by a jury of nine counts of physically attacking and threatening his wife including four counts of spousal battery , two counts of criminal threats , one count of assault with a deadly weapon , one count of vandalism and one count of brandishing a deadly weapon . On July 2 , 2013 , he was sentenced to 32 months in prison and 52 weeks of domestic violence and anger @-@ management classes , and was released on $ 250 @,@ 000 bail . 
 On September 14 , 2013 , at the age of 33 , Monique Bradley died at Encino Hospital Medical Center . A death certificate dated October 10 lists the causes as cryptogenic cirrhosis of the liver , hemorrhagic shock and cardiac arrest . 
 On January 21 , 2015 , a Los Angeles appellate court rejected Bradley 's appeal . Sports Illustrated reported in April 2015 that Bradley is free pending a second appeal , and has not yet spent a day in jail . He has sole custody of his and Monique 's two sons . 
 = Nasir al @-@ Dawla = 
 Abu Muhammad al @-@ Hasan ibn Abu 'l @-@ Hayja ' Abdallah ibn Hamdan Nasir al @-@ Dawla al @-@ Taghlibi ( Arabic : أبو محمد <unk> ابن أبو <unk> عبدالله ابن <unk> <unk> الدولة <unk> ; died 968 or 969 ) , more commonly known simply by his laqab ( honorific epithet ) of Nasir al @-@ Dawla ( " Defender of the [ Abbasid ] Dynasty " ) , was the second Hamdanid ruler of the Emirate of Mosul , encompassing most of the Jazira . 
 As the senior member of the Hamdanid dynasty , he inherited the family power base around Mosul from his father , and was able to secure it against challenges by his uncles . Hasan became involved in the court intrigues of the Abbasid Caliphate in Baghdad , and , between 942 and 943 , he , with the assistance of his brother Ali ( known as Sayf al @-@ Dawla ) , established himself as amir al @-@ umara , or de facto regent for the Abbasid caliph . He was driven back to Mosul by Turkish troops , however , and subsequent attempts to challenge the Buyids who seized control of Baghdad and lower Iraq ended in repeated failure . Twice , his capital Mosul was captured by Buyid forces , which were , however , unable to defeat local opposition to their rule . As a result of his failures to retain power , Nasir al @-@ Dawla declined in influence and prestige . He was eclipsed by the actions of his brother Ali , who established his rule more firmly over Aleppo and northern Syria . After 964 , Nasir al @-@ Dawla 's eldest son Abu Taghlib exercised de facto rule over his domains , and in 967 , Abu Taghlib and his brothers deposed and imprisoned their father , who died in captivity a year or two later . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Origin and family = = = 
 Nasir al @-@ Dawla was born al @-@ Hasan ibn Abdallah , the eldest son of Abu 'l @-@ Hayja Abdallah ibn Hamdan ( died 929 ) , son of Hamdan ibn Hamdun ibn al @-@ Harith , who gave his name to the Hamdanid dynasty . The Hamdanids were a branch of the Banu Taghlib , an Arab tribe resident in the area of the Jazira ( Upper Mesopotamia ) since pre @-@ Islamic times . The <unk> had traditionally controlled Mosul and its region until the late 9th century , when the Abbasid government tried to impose firmer control over the province . Hamdan ibn Hamdun was one of the most determined Taghlibi leaders in opposing this move . Notably , in his effort to fend off the Abbasids , he secured the alliance of the Kurds living in the mountains north of Mosul , a fact which would be of considerable importance in his family 's later fortunes . Family members intermarried with Kurds , who were also prominent in the Hamdanid military . 
 Hamdan 's possessions were captured in 895 by the Abbasid Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tadid , and Hamdan himself was forced to surrender near Mosul after a long chase . He was put in prison , but his son Husayn ibn Hamdan , who had surrendered the fortress of Ardumusht to the Caliph 's forces , managed to secure the family 's future . He raised troops among the Taghlib in exchange for tax remissions , and established a commanding influence in the Jazira by acting as a mediator between the Abbasid authorities and the Arab and Kurdish population . It was this strong local base which allowed the family to survive its often strained relationship with the central Abbasid government in Baghdad during the early 10th century . Husayn was a successful general , distinguishing himself against the Kharijites and the Tulunids , but was disgraced after supporting the failed usurpation of Ibn al @-@ Mu 'tazz in 908 . His younger brother Ibrahim was governor of Diyar Rabi 'a ( the province around Nasibin ) in 919 and after his death in the next year he was succeeded by another brother , Dawud . Hasan 's father Abdallah served as emir ( governor ) of Mosul in 905 / 6 – 913 / 4 , was repeatedly disgraced and rehabilitated as the political situation changed in <unk> , until re @-@ assuming control of Mosul in 925 / 6 . Enjoying firm relations with the powerful commander of the caliphal army , Mu 'nis al @-@ Khadim , in 929 he played a leading role in the short @-@ lived usurpation of Al @-@ Qahir ( who would later reign as caliph in 932 – 934 ) against Al @-@ Muqtadir ( r . 908 – 932 ) , and was killed during its suppression . According to the researcher Marius Canard , Abdallah established himself as the most prominent member of the first generation of the Hamdanid dynasty , and was essentially the founder of the Hamdanid Emirate of Mosul . 
 = = = Consolidation of control over the Jazira = = = 
 During his absence in Baghdad in his final years from 920 / 921 on , Abdallah relegated authority over Mosul to Hasan . After Abdallah 's death , however , al @-@ Muqtadir took the opportunity to avenge himself upon the Hamdanids , and appointed an unrelated governor over Mosul , while Abdallah 's domains were divided among his surviving brothers . Faced with the claims of his uncles , Hasan was left in charge of a small portion , on the left bank of the Tigris . In 930 , after the caliph 's governor died , Hasan managed to regain control over Mosul , but his uncles Nasr and Sa 'id soon removed him from power and confined him to the western parts of the Diyar Rabi 'a . In 934 , Hasan again recovered Mosul , but Sa 'id , residing in Baghdad and supported by the caliphal government , evicted him again . Hasan fled to Armenia , from where he orchestrated Sa 'id 's murder . Only then did his troops occupy Mosul and establish him permanently as its ruler . Finally , after defeating caliphal forces under the wazir Ibn <unk> and the Banu Habib , his rivals among the Taghlib , in late 935 the Caliph al @-@ Radi was forced to formally recognize him as governor of Mosul and the entire Jazira , in exchange for an annual tribute of 70 @,@ 000 gold dinars and supplies of flour for the two caliphal capitals of Baghdad and Samarra . 
 Resistance to Hasan 's rule outside of his family 's core region around Mosul remained , however — in Diyar Bakr , the governor of Mayyafariqin , Ali ibn Ja 'far , rebelled against Hasan , and in Diyar Mudar , the Qaysi tribes of the region around Saruj also revolted . Hasan subdued them and secured control over the entire Jazira by the end of 936 , due to the efforts of his brother Ali , who was given the governorship of the two provinces as a reward . In the meantime , the defeated Banu Habib , some 10 @,@ 000 strong and under the leadership of al @-@ Ala ibn al @-@ Mu <unk> , left their lands and fled to territory controlled by the Byzantine Empire . This unprecedented move may be explained by the fact that a significant portion of the tribe still practised Christianity , or by pressure upon their grazing lands by tribes from the south , but the primary goal of the move was to escape from Hamdanid authority and taxation . Hasan also attempted to extend his control to Sajid @-@ ruled Azerbaijan in 934 and 938 , but his efforts failed . 
 = = = Struggle for control of the Caliphate = = = 
 While he tried to consolidate his rule over Mosul , Hasan showed himself conspicuously loyal to the Abbasid regime , and refused to support the revolt of Mu 'nis al @-@ Khadim against the Caliph al @-@ Muqtadir in 932 . Mu 'nis succeeded in overthrowing and killing al @-@ Muqtadir , but over the next few years the Abbasid government all but collapsed , until in 936 the powerful governor of Wasit , Muhammad ibn Ra 'iq , assumed the title of amir al @-@ umara ( " commander of commanders " ) and with it de facto control of the Abbasid government . The Caliph al @-@ Radi was reduced to a figurehead role , while the extensive civil bureaucracy was cut down dramatically both in size and power . Ibn Ra 'iq 's position was anything but secure , however , and soon a convoluted struggle for control of his office , and the Caliphate with it , broke out among the various local rulers and the Turkish and Daylamite military chiefs , which ended in 946 with the ultimate victory of the Buyids . 
 Thus , in the late 930s , Hasan , encouraged by his control over a large and rich domain , entered the intrigues of the Abbasid court , and became one of the main contenders for the title of amir al @-@ umara . At first , Hasan tried to exploit the weakness of the Abbasid government to withhold his payment of tribute , but the Turk Bajkam , who had ousted Ibn Ra 'iq in 938 , quickly forced him to back down . Hasan then supported Ibn Ra 'iq in the latter 's quest to regain his lost position . Bajkam tried to forcefully evict Hasan from his Jaziran domains , but in vain , and was eventually killed in a skirmish with Kurdish brigands in early 941 . Hasan 's great chance came in early 942 , when the Caliph al @-@ Muttaqi ( r . 940 – 944 ) and his closest aides fled Baghdad to escape the city 's imminent fall to the <unk> of Basra and sought refuge at Mosul . Hasan now made a direct bid for power : he had Ibn Ra 'iq assassinated and succeeded him as amir al @-@ umara , receiving the honorific laqab of Nasir al @-@ Dawla ( " Defender of the Dynasty " ) . He then escorted the Caliph back to Baghdad , which they entered on 4 June 942 . To secure his position further , Nasir al @-@ Dawla married his daughter to the Caliph 's son . Along with their cousin , Husayn ibn Sa 'id , Nasir al @-@ Dawla 's brother Ali was instrumental in the Hamdanid enterprise , taking the field against the Baridis , who still controlled the rich province of Basra and were determined to regain Baghdad . After scoring a victory over them , Ali was awarded the laqab of Sayf al @-@ Dawla ( " Sword of the Dynasty " ) , by which he became famous . This double award marked the first time that a laqab incorporating the prestigious element al @-@ Dawla were granted to anyone other than the wazir , the Caliphate 's chief minister , and was a symbolic affirmation of the military 's predominance over the civil bureaucracy . 
 The Hamdanids ' success and rule over the Abbasid capital lasted for little more than a year . They lacked funds and were politically isolated , finding little support among the Caliphate 's most powerful vassals , the Samanids of Transoxiana and the Ikhshidids of Egypt . Consequently , when in late 943 a mutiny broke out among their troops ( mostly composed of Turks , Daylamites , <unk> and only a few Arabs ) over pay issues , under the leadership of the Turkish general Tuzun , they were forced to quit Baghdad and return to their base , Mosul . Caliph al @-@ Muttaqi now appointed Tuzun as amir al @-@ umara , but the Turk 's overbearing manner induced al @-@ Muttaqi to once again seek refuge in the Hamdanid court . The Hamdanid forces under Sayf al @-@ Dawla took the field against Tuzun 's army , but were defeated . The Hamdanids now concluded an agreement with Tuzun which allowed them to keep the Jazira and even gave them nominal authority over northern Syria ( which at the time was not under Hamdanid control ) , in exchange for an annual tribute of 3 @.@ 6 million dirhams . 
 In the meantime , the Caliph was brought to al @-@ Raqqah for greater safety , while Husayn ibn Sa 'id tried to secure control over northern Syria and pre @-@ empt Egypt 's ruler Muhammad ibn Tughj al @-@ Ikhshid taking control of the region . The attempt failed , as al @-@ Ikhshid himself advanced into Syria , took Aleppo and marched to Raqqah , where he met the Caliph . Al @-@ Ikhshid tried to persuade al @-@ Muttaqi to come to Egypt under his protection , but the Caliph refused , and al @-@ <unk> returned to Egypt . Instead , al @-@ Muttaqi , persuaded by Tuzun 's assurances of loyalty and safety , returned to Baghdad , where Tuzun deposed and blinded him , replacing him with al @-@ Mustakfi ( r . 944 – 946 ) . At the news of this crime , Nasir al @-@ Dawla again refused payment of tribute , but Tuzun marched against him and forced his compliance . Henceforth , Nasir al @-@ Dawla would be tributary to Baghdad , but he would find it difficult to resign himself to his loss of power over the city he once ruled , and the subsequent years would feature several attempts to regain it . 
 = = = Wars with the Buyids = = = 
 In late 945 , Tuzun died . His death weakened the Abbasid government 's ability to maintain its independence against the rising power of the Buyids , who under Ahmad ibn <unk> had already consolidated control over Fars and Kerman , and secured the cooperation of the <unk> . Al @-@ Mustakfi 's secretary , Ibn <unk> , tried to confront the Buyids by calling upon Nasir al @-@ Dawla , but Ahmad advanced on Baghdad with his troops , and in January 946 he obtained his appointment as amir al @-@ umara with the honorific Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla ( " <unk> of the State " ) . To secure their position , the Buyids immediately marched against the Hamdanids . Nasir al @-@ Dawla countered by marching down the eastern bank of the Tigris river and blockading Baghdad . In the end , however , the Buyids defeated the Hamdanids in battle and forced Nasir al @-@ Dawla to retire to <unk> . From there , Nasir al @-@ Dawla began negotiations with the Buyids , aiming to secure recognition of Hamdanid control over the Jazira , Syria and even Egypt as tributaries of the Caliphate , with the boundary between Buyid and Hamdanid spheres placed at Tikrit . Negotiations were disrupted by a rebellion among the Hamdanids ' Turkish troops , but Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla , who for the moment preferred a stable Hamdanid state to anarchy on his northern border , helped Nasir al @-@ Dawla suppress it . The peace was agreed on the terms outlined above , and was affirmed by one of Nasir al @-@ Dawla 's sons being taken as a hostage to Baghdad . 
 Conflict between the two rivals was renewed in 948 , when Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla again marched against Mosul , but was forced to cut off his campaign to assist his brother Rukn al @-@ Dawla , who was having trouble in Persia . In exchange , Nasir al @-@ Dawla agreed to recommence the payment of tribute for the Jazira and Syria , as well as to add the names of the three Buyid brothers after that of the Caliph in the Friday prayer . Another round of warfare erupted in 956 – 958 . While the Buyids were preoccupied with the rebellion of their Daylamite troops under <unk> ibn <unk> @-@ Khurshid in southern Iraq , Nasir al @-@ Dawla the opportunity to advance south and capture Baghdad . After the suppression of the Daylamite revolt , however , the Hamdanids were not able to maintain their position in the face of the <unk> counteroffensive , and abandoned the city . Peace was renewed in exchange for the recommencement of tribute and an additional indemnity , but when Nasir al @-@ Dawla refused to send the second year 's payment , the Buyid ruler advanced north . Unable to confront the Buyid army in the field , Nasir al @-@ Dawla abandoned Mosul and fled to Mayyafariqin and then to his brother Sayf al @-@ Dawla in Aleppo . The Buyids captured Mosul and Nasibin , but the Hamdanids and their supporters withdrew to their home territory in the mountains of the north , taking with them their treasures as well as all government records and tax registers . As a result , the Buyid army was unable to support itself in the conquered territory , all the more since the predominantly Daylamite troops were resented by the local people , who launched guerrilla attacks on them . Sayf al @-@ Dawla tried to mediate with Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla , but his first approaches were rebuffed . Only when he agreed to assume the burden of paying his brother 's tribute for the entire Diyar Rabi 'a , did the Buyid ruler agree to peace . This agreement marks the reversal of roles between the two Hamdanid brothers , and the establishment of the predominance of the family 's Syrian branch . 
 In 964 , Nasir al @-@ Dawla tried to renegotiate the terms of the arrangement , but also to secure Buyid recognition for his eldest son , Fadl Allah Abu Taghlib al @-@ Ghadanfar , as his successor . Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla refused Nasir al @-@ Dawla 's demands , and again invaded Hamdanid territory . Once again Mosul and Nasibin were captured , while the Hamdanids fled to the mountain fortresses . As in 958 , the Buyids were unable to maintain themselves for long in the Jazira , and soon an agreement was reached which allowed the Hamdanids to return to Mosul . This time , however , Abu Taghlib emerged as the effective leader in his father 's place : it was with him , rather than the aged Nasir al @-@ Dawla , that Mui <unk> al @-@ Dawla concluded a treaty . The end of Nasir al @-@ Dawla 's rule came in 967 , in the same year that saw the deaths of his brother Sayf al @-@ Dawla and his great rival Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla . Nasir al @-@ Dawla was reportedly so much affected by his brother 's death that he lost interest in life and became remote and avaricious . In the end , Abu Taghlib , already the de facto governor of the emirate , deposed him with the aid of his Kurdish mother , Fatima bint Ahmad . Nasir al @-@ Dawla tried to counter them by turning to one of his other sons , Hamdan , but he was seized and imprisoned in the fortress of Ardumusht , where he died in 968 or 969 . 
 = = = Domestic policies = = = 
 Nasir al @-@ Dawla was heavily criticized by contemporaries for his oppressive fiscal policies and the suffering they caused among the population . The traveller Ibn Hawqal , who visited Nasir al @-@ Dawla 's domains , reports in length on his seizure of private land in the most fertile regions of the Jazira , on flimsy legal charges , until he became the greatest landowner in his province . This was linked with the practice of a monoculture of cereals , destined to feed the growing population of Baghdad , and coupled with heavy taxation , so that Sayf al @-@ Dawla and Nasir al @-@ Dawla are said to have become the wealthiest princes in the Muslim world . Nevertheless , the Hamdanid administrative machinery seems to have been fairly rudimentary , and the tribute paid to the Buyids — estimated at somewhere between two and four million dirhams , when it was paid at all — was a heavy burden on the treasury . 
 = Willie Irvine = 
 William John " Willie " Irvine ( born 18 June 1943 ) is a former professional footballer who played as a centre forward . Born in Eden , County Antrim , into a large family , he grew up in the nearby town of Carrickfergus . He did well at school , but chose to pursue a career in professional football and initially played for local club Linfield . After a spell in amateur football , Irvine travelled to England for a trial with Burnley at the age of 16 . He was offered a professional deal and spent three years playing for the youth and reserve teams , before making his senior debut at the end of the 1962 – 63 season . Over the following seasons , Irvine became a regular feature of the Burnley team and in the 1965 – 66 campaign , he scored 29 goals and was the highest goalscorer in the Football League First Division . 
 Irvine lost his place in the Burnley team after suffering a broken leg during a cup tie in 1967 , and never properly regained his form for the club . He was later transfer listed , and joined local rivals Preston North End in March 1968 . In the Football League Second Division , he began to score goals again and was Preston 's top goalscorer in the 1968 – 69 season despite suffering a serious leg injury which forced him to miss much of the campaign . When Alan Ball was named Preston manager in the summer of 1970 , Irvine found himself out of the team . He joined Brighton & Hove Albion in July 1971 after impressing during a loan spell earlier in the year . He moved to Halifax Town midway through the 1972 – 73 season , but left the club after six months . Irvine ended his football career with a spell at semi @-@ professional Great Harwood , before retiring at the age of 29 . 
 In addition to playing club football , Irvine also represented the Northern Ireland national football team . He won 23 caps for his country , scoring eight goals . After retiring from football , he ran his own do @-@ it @-@ yourself shop but suffered from severe depression when the business collapsed . Irvine spent time in hospital after taking an overdose of medication , but recovered and later worked as a community worker before becoming a window cleaner . As of 2010 , he works full @-@ time in an aerospace factory , and also gives guided tours of Burnley 's stadium , Turf Moor , on matchdays . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Willie Irvine was born on 18 June 1943 in the village of Eden , County Antrim , on the east coast of Northern Ireland . He was born to Alex and Agnes Irvine , and had 17 half @-@ brothers and half @-@ sisters from his mother 's previous marriages . Irvine was 11 months old when his father , who had played football for Distillery , died after being involved in a motorcycle accident . He came from a poor background and when he was young the family resided in a small wooden bungalow that had neither electricity nor running water . His mother worked often , and Irvine was looked after by his elder siblings . At the age of one , he started to attend Eden School so that he could be looked after by the teachers while his sisters earned money . When he was seven years old , the family moved to the Sunnylands estate in nearby Carrickfergus after his mother was sent to Omagh Prison for falsely claiming benefits . 
 Irvine soon warmed to his new neighbourhood ; he enjoyed visiting Carrickfergus Castle and often spent time at the harbour . In 1950 , he moved to Sunnylands Primary School and began to play football seriously . He initially concentrated on playing as a goalkeeper for the school team . In 1953 , the team reached the final of the County Cup , but were defeated 0 – 3 by an older side from Carrick Technical School . Irvine 's elder brother Bobby , who went on to represent Stoke City and was also a Northern Ireland international , played for the opposition . Along with his schoolmate William Donnelly , Irvine often frequented Windsor Park to watch the Northern Ireland national team , and he idolised players such as Jimmy McIlroy and Danny Blanchflower . 
 At 14 , Irvine enrolled at Carrick Technical School , where he studied German , physics , chemistry and woodwork . He excelled in his studies and was urged to go to university , but his family could not afford the fees . His interest in football increasing , he started to play in a midfield position for the Carrickfergus @-@ based Barn United and was selected to represent the East Antrim Schoolboys as well as the Irish Schools team . His performances while playing for Northern Ireland in the Victory Shield led to him signing junior terms with Belfast @-@ based club Linfield , where his brother Bobby was the first @-@ team goalkeeper . Several months later , Irvine left Linfield and joined local men 's team Barn United , who competed in the Northern Ireland Amateur League . Several clubs , including Manchester United , Arsenal and Wolverhampton Wanderers showed an interest in him and in 1959 , Jimmy McIlroy invited Irvine to a trial at English side Burnley . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Burnley = = = 
 Irvine joined the Burnley youth team initially on a month 's trial , along with other young players including Brian O 'Neil and Willie Morgan . He suffered an injury to his ankle but recovered in time for the final trial match against local rivals Blackburn Rovers . His performances during the month had sufficiently impressed manager Harry Potts , and Irvine was offered a permanent contract . He became a full member of the youth team and was an understudy to the team that won the Football League First Division in the 1959 – 60 season . As an apprentice footballer he earned a basic wage of £ 7 per week . While in the youth squad , Irvine was converted into a centre forward and in his first match in the position scored a hat @-@ trick for the Burnley C team . He scored more than 40 goals for the A team in the Lancashire League during the 1961 – 62 season , including 6 in an 8 – 3 win against a Blackburn Rovers representative team . On 14 October 1961 , Irvine made his debut for the Burnley reserve side , scoring a hat @-@ trick in the 6 – 1 victory over Barnsley . Both the A team and the reserves were crowned champions of their respective divisions at the end of the season , and Potts singled out Irvine for particular praise , stating that Burnley had not " had a more consistent goal getter than Willie for a very long time . " 
 Going into the 1962 – 63 campaign , Irvine returned to the Burnley A team and scored a hat @-@ trick against Bury early in the season . After Andy Lochhead was promoted to the first team in October 1962 , Irvine became the reserve side 's first @-@ choice centre forward . He continued to score regularly , netting 8 goals in 15 appearances , although he was forced to stop playing for a period in the winter of 1963 when adverse weather caused the postponement of several matches . After his Northern Ireland debut in April that year , he made several more appearances for the reserves , and his goal against Blackpool was described by journalist Keith McNee as " the finest goal [ he had ] seen " . On 11 May 1963 , Irvine was asked by manager Potts to travel with the first team for their final away fixture of the season at Arsenal . He was a boot boy , and was originally only intended to assist Ray Bennion in transporting the team kit to and from the game . It was reported in the Burnley Express the day before the match that he would be making his professional debut against Arsenal , although Irvine himself only found out just before the match . He started at centre forward in place of Lochhead , who was unable to play because of a leg injury . Irvine had a successful introduction to senior football and scored a headed goal after 20 minutes of play , the first goal in a 3 – 2 win for Burnley . He was again selected three days later for the last game of the campaign at home to Birmingham City and scored a hat @-@ trick as Burnley ended the season with a 3 – 1 victory . 
 Irvine started the first match of the 1963 – 64 campaign , a 1 – 3 defeat away to Ipswich Town . However , he suffered a broken hand during the game , which left him unable to play throughout the following months . Even after recovery , he remained sidelined , unable to regain his place in the starting eleven . Irvine did not play again for Burnley until 30 March 1964 , when he was chosen to play at inside @-@ right in the away tie against Bolton Wanderers . Despite Irvine 's fifth goal in four league starts , Burnley were beaten 1 – 2 . He retained his place in the team for the next two matches , before returning to his more preferred centre forward position for the 0 – 3 loss at home to Liverpool on 14 April 1964 . He scored three more goals in the final two matches of the season , including two in the 7 – 2 win against Tottenham Hotspur . His frequent goalscoring led to him becoming a more integral part of the Burnley side during the following campaign , in which he scored three goals in the first six matches , although the team achieved only four draws and two losses . He was dropped from the starting line @-@ up for the away match at Birmingham City on 12 September 1964 . The team suffered three defeats in the following four fixtures , and Irvine was reinstated to the team for the trip to West Bromwich Albion two weeks later . He immediately marked his return with both Burnley goals in a 2 – 1 win , the team 's first away victory of the season . Irvine retained his place in the side for most of the remainder of the campaign , and in December he scored seven goals in four games , including a hat @-@ trick in the 4 – 0 win over Fulham . Despite missing a small portion of the campaign through injury , Irvine ended the season with a total of 22 goals in 37 league and cup matches , one more goal than centre forward partner Lochhead . 
 The Irvine – Lochhead partnership continued into the 1965 – 66 campaign . Irvine scored a goal in a 2 – 1 win against Lausanne Sports on a pre @-@ season tour of Switzerland , and his first competitive goal of the season came on 24 August 1965 in the 3 – 1 home victory against Blackpool . He scored two in the return match at Bloomfield Road the following week , and two matches later he netted a hat @-@ trick in the 4 – 1 defeat of Northampton Town . Between the 1 – 1 draw away at Leeds United on 30 October 1965 and the 5 – 2 win against Fulham on 11 December 1965 , Irvine scored in seven consecutive league matches . In the 3 – 1 win against West Ham United , Irvine and Lochhead both scored in the same match for the first time , despite having played together for almost three seasons . Irvine took his goalscoring form into the cup competitions , netting five times in three FA Cup ties , and scoring the winning goals against Southampton and Stoke City as the team reached the fifth round of the Football League Cup before being knocked out by Peterborough United . During the second half of the season , he went through a somewhat barren spell , failing to score in the league between 8 January 1966 and 26 March 1966 . He ended his poor run of form with a hat @-@ trick in the 4 – 1 win over Nottingham Forest at Turf Moor . He subsequently got on the scoresheet in the next six league games , including two goals against Sheffield Wednesday which took him to 27 league goals , the joint @-@ highest total since George <unk> 's 30 in the 1928 – 29 season . Irvine 's 29th and final goal of the season came on 23 April 1966 in the 2 – 0 home victory against Liverpool . He was the highest scorer in the Football League First Division that season , the first , and to date only , time a Burnley player had achieved the feat . 
 In June 1966 , Irvine had an altercation with Burnley chairman Bob Lord after returning late from a Northern Ireland match . Nevertheless , he retained his place in the starting line @-@ up at the start of the 1966 – 67 campaign , and scored in the first match of the season against Sheffield United . After a pre @-@ season tour of Austria , throughout which Burnley remained undefeated , the team were confident of a successful season and especially looked forward to European competition in the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup . On 20 September 1966 , Irvine scored the sole Burnley goal in the 1 – 1 draw against German side VfB Stuttgart . The following month , he scored in consecutive league matches against Leicester City and Manchester City at Turf Moor . Irvine was on the scoresheet again in the next round of the Fairs Cup as Swiss team Lausanne Sports were beaten 5 – 0 in Burnley on 25 October 1966 . By the middle of the season , Irvine had scored 13 goals in the league , four fewer than the same stage of the previous campaign . He scored his first goal of the new year on 31 January 1967 in the FA Cup third round replay against Everton at Goodison Park . However , early in the second half , Irvine was tackled by Everton defender Johnny Morrissey . The challenge — not deemed a foul by the referee — broke his shin bone , and Irvine was immediately substituted and replaced by fellow Irishman Sammy Todd . The injury meant that he did not play again for Burnley for the remainder of the season . He was forced to remain on the sidelines as Burnley finished 14th in the First Division and reached the fourth round of the Fairs Cup before being knocked out by Eintracht Frankfurt . 
 Irvine regained his place in the Burnley team at the start of the 1967 – 68 campaign , and scored in the first two league matches of the season . However , he was dropped from the starting eleven after four games . On 7 October 1967 , in the 1 – 1 draw with Nottingham Forest , he became the first ever Burnley player to score after coming on as a substitute , after replacing Martin Dobson . Irvine made six consecutive starts throughout October and November 1967 , before again being dropped following the 2 – 0 home win against Newcastle United . After this , he played less often and scored his final goal for the club on 5 December 1967 in the 1 – 2 defeat to Arsenal in the fifth round of the League Cup . Just over two months later , on 24 February 1968 , Irvine made his last appearance for Burnley when he played in an unfamiliar inside @-@ right position in the 0 – 1 loss away at Nottingham Forest . In the same month , he formally requested to be placed on the transfer list after becoming increasingly unhappy at Burnley . The request was granted by Potts , who set a price of £ 60 @,@ 000 for Irvine . Altogether , he had scored 97 goals in a total of 148 first @-@ team matches for Burnley during his eight years with the club . 
 = = = Preston North End = = = 
 In March 1968 , Irvine signed for Preston North End , who were struggling at the bottom of the Football League Second Division , for a transfer fee of £ 45 @,@ 000 and a signing @-@ on fee of £ 5 @,@ 000 . He was one of five Burnley first @-@ team players to leave the club during that year . Irvine made his debut for Preston North End on 14 March 1968 in the 0 – 4 defeat away at Ipswich Town . He scored his first goal for the club in the following match , a 2 – 1 win against Aston Villa at Deepdale . The team subsequently went on a run of eight games without defeat in the league , including a 3 – 1 win over Huddersfield Town in which Irvine scored a hat @-@ trick . On the morning of 27 April 1968 , the Preston North End team were each offered £ 2 @,@ 500 to purposely lose the match against Bristol City in order that Bristol City could improve their chances of avoiding relegation . Irvine , along with team @-@ mate Derek Temple , refused , saying : " I 'm a professional . I want no part of this " . Irvine scored the team 's only goal in a 1 – 4 defeat that day , and by the end of the 1967 – 68 season he had scored six times in eleven matches for his new side . He carried his goalscoring form into the new campaign , scoring the winner against Oldham Athletic in the first round of the League Cup , and netting a consolation goal in the 1 – 3 defeat to Crystal Palace . 
 After 16 matches of the 1968 – 69 season , Irvine had scored 13 goals . However , he suffered a knee injury midway through the season in the FA Cup fourth round tie against Chelsea . He was injured ten minutes into the match but played for most of the first half before being substituted . He had a chipped bone and ligament damage , requiring him to undergo an operation in February 1969 that forced him to miss the rest of the campaign . Despite missing many games , he was Preston 's top scorer that season with 20 goals in all competitions . Irvine never fully recovered from the injury , and played only 16 games the following season , scoring five goals . Preston North End were relegated to the Football League Third Division in 1970 after finishing bottom of the league . Manager Bobby Seith was dismissed following the relegation , and replaced by former Halifax Town coach Alan Ball in May 1970 . Ball was reluctant to play Irvine after discovering the knee injury from the previous season . Nevertheless , he appeared in the first three matches of the 1970 – 71 campaign , scoring in the 1 – 0 win against Stockport County in the first round of the League Cup . He was dropped from the team after missing several chances in the 1 – 3 defeat to Torquay United on 22 August 1970 . After this , Irvine did not feature regularly for Preston North End and from October 1970 , he played mostly for the reserve team . He made his final senior appearance for the club on 26 December 1970 in the 3 – 3 draw with Tranmere Rovers at Deepdale . During a three @-@ year spell , he played 81 league games for Preston North End , scoring 27 goals in the process . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 In March 1971 , Ball offered Irvine the opportunity of a three @-@ month loan spell at fellow Third Division side Brighton & Hove Albion . Irvine made his debut for Brighton on 10 March 1971 in the 3 – 2 win against Fulham . He scored in the match , and manager Pat Saward was effusive in his praise of his new signing . Irvine became a regular starter for Brighton , and scored again in the 1 – 1 draw with Plymouth Argyle at the Goldstone Ground on 28 April 1971 . During the loan spell , he played 14 league games and scored six goals . At the end of the season , Irvine temporarily returned to Preston but a transfer fee of £ 7 @,@ 000 took him to Brighton on a permanent deal in July 1971 . Irvine became known as " late @-@ goal Willie " after scoring a succession of last @-@ minute goals . On 11 December 1971 , he scored against Walsall in the second round of the FA Cup to take the tie to a replay . He scored the equaliser in the 2 – 2 draw away at Bristol Rovers on 22 January 1972 , followed by a late winner in the 2 – 1 defeat of Wrexham two weeks later . 
 Irvine added to his tally with home and away goals against Halifax Town , where he would go on to play the next season , and a strike against Aston Villa that was named as runner @-@ up in a Goal of the Season competition by television programme Match of the Day . With the forward partnership of Irvine and Kit Napier , Brighton performed better than expected in the 1971 – 72 season . At the end of the campaign , following a 1 – 1 draw with Rochdale the team was promoted to the Second Division , after finishing as runners @-@ up behind Aston Villa . Irvine continued to score in a higher division , netting five times in the first eleven matches of the season . However , he was then dropped from the team and never regained his place in the starting line @-@ up . Several clubs became interested in his services , including West Ham United , a number of American teams , and Scottish side Heart of Midlothian , where Bobby Seith was the manager . Irvine played his last match for Brighton on 18 November 1972 , when the team lost 0 – 1 at home to his former club Burnley . 
 After turning down potential transfers to West Ham and Torquay , because neither he nor his wife wanted to live in either place , Irvine decided to sign for Third Division outfit Halifax Town in December 1972 . Despite taking a considerable pay cut , he chose Halifax to enable his family to return to live near Burnley . Irvine made a total of 11 first @-@ team appearances for Halifax Town , scoring one goal for the club . He played his last competitive game for the club in the 1 – 0 win against York City on 13 March 1973 , after manager George Mulhall accused Irvine of not trying and not deserving his wage . At the end of the 1972 – 73 season , the team avoided relegation to the Fourth Division on goal difference . After failing to report for the away game at Walsall on 1 May 1973 , to play in a testimonial match for Burnley defender John Angus , he was fined two weeks ' wages and forced into extra training sessions . In the summer of 1973 , Irvine left Halifax Town by mutual consent , his professional football career over at the age of 29 . Despite having the option to sign for Rochdale , he joined semi @-@ professional side Great Harwood , who played in the Northern Premier League . At Great Harwood , he played alongside two former Burnley team @-@ mates ; goalkeeper Adam <unk> and midfielder Les Latcham . Irvine remained at the club for a number of months , before leaving midway through the 1973 – 74 season and retiring from football altogether . 
 = = International career = = 
 Irvine 's first taste of international football came in 1958 , when he represented the Northern Ireland schoolboy team in the Victory Shield . Five years later , he made his debut for the Northern Ireland national under @-@ 23 football team , when he played alongside his brother Bobby in the 1 – 5 defeat to Wales on 27 February 1963 . During the next two years , he played twice more for the under @-@ 23 team , scoring three goals for the side . Irvine received his first call @-@ up to the Northern Ireland senior team in April 1963 , one month before he made his professional debut for Burnley . He went straight into the team and won his first cap on 3 April 1963 in the 1 – 4 loss to Wales in the British Home Championship . He received his next cap the following month and scored his first international goal on 30 May 1963 in the 1 – 1 draw with Spain in the first round of the 1964 European Nations Cup . It was over a year before Irvine was selected to represent his country again , when he was included in the squad for the 1 – 2 defeat to Switzerland in a qualification match for the 1966 FIFA World Cup . On 25 November 1964 , he scored his second Northern Ireland goal in the loss to Scotland in the British Home Championship . Irvine was involved in his first win with the Northern Ireland team when they defeated the Netherlands in a World Cup qualifying game on 17 March 1965 . During the remainder of the 1964 – 65 season , he won a further three caps for his country . 
 Between 2 October 1965 and 30 March 1966 , Irvine scored in four consecutive international fixtures . The run started with a goal against Scotland in the British Home Championship , followed by a goal in the 1 – 2 loss to England on 10 November 1965 . Two weeks later , he netted in a World Cup qualifier against Albania before scoring in the 4 – 1 win against Wales to complete the run . Irvine continued to play for Northern Ireland , winning caps against Mexico , England and Scotland , but it was almost two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years before he scored again in international football . His two goals in a friendly match against Israel were his last for Northern Ireland , although he did win another five caps for his country . After leaving Burnley in 1968 , his inclusion in the Northern Ireland squad became less frequent and between 1969 and 1972 he did not make an appearance for the team . After three years out of the side , he returned for the 0 – 2 loss to Scotland on 20 May 1972 . He played against England three days later before winning his 23rd and final cap in the goal @-@ less draw with Wales , the team against which he had made his international debut , on 27 May 1972 . 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 = = = = Under – 23 = = = = 
 Scores and results list Northern Ireland U23 's goal tally first . 
 = = = = Senior team = = = = 
 Scores and results list Northern Ireland 's goal tally first . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 As a youngster , Irvine played as a goalkeeper until his elder brother Bobby , who went on to keep goal for the Northern Ireland national team , threatened to " batter " him . He subsequently moved into a midfield position , before becoming a centre forward during his time in the Burnley youth team . Described as a natural and instinctive goalscorer , Irvine stated that one of his main strengths as a striker was the ability to anticipate where the ball was going to land . 
 = = Outside football = = 
 Irvine is married to wife Rita , whom he met in a public house in Burnley . The couple were wed on 3 October 1966 and have three sons ; Darren , Stephen and Jonathan , who played semi @-@ professional football for Nelson and Colne . He has lived in the village of Worsthorne since retiring from football in 1974 . Following his retirement he rented a warehouse from a friend and started a do @-@ it @-@ yourself retail business in the centre of Burnley . The shop was reasonably successful , and Irvine opened a second branch in Keighley , West Yorkshire . However , the business became untenable after several years and left Irvine owing £ 44 @,@ 000 to the bank after a potential buyer for the shop pulled out of the deal . Following the collapse of the business , Irvine suffered severe depression and at one stage attempted suicide by taking an overdose of paracetamol tablets . He was discovered in time by his wife and admitted to Burnley General Hospital , where he underwent an emergency procedure to pump his stomach . After the attempt , he got a part @-@ time job with Burnley Borough Council , working with young people at local community centres . He later worked as a window cleaner for 12 months before selling the round for a profit . Irvine then took a job in an engineering factory , where he worked for 14 years , before joining electrical firm LED . From there , he moved to <unk> , an aircraft parts manufacturer , where he has worked as a stores manager ever since . On matchdays at Turf Moor , he gives guided tours of the ground to supporters . 
 = Oklahoma State Highway 132 = 
 State Highway 132 , also known as SH @-@ 132 , is a state highway in north @-@ central Oklahoma . It connects State Highway 51 west of Hennessey to the Kansas state line near Manchester , and is 65 @.@ 3 miles ( 105 @.@ 1 km ) long . It has no lettered spur routes . 
 SH @-@ 132 was originally added to the state highway system in 1956 , when it ran between Carrier and U.S. Route 64 ( US @-@ 64 ) east of Nash . It was extended further northward to the Kansas state line in 1958 , and southward , to its current southern terminus , in 1962 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SH @-@ 132 begins at State Highway 51 in rural Kingfisher County three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east of the unincorporated community of Lacey . It heads north from there , passing through unincorporated Cato before crossing into Garfield County . Approximately 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) north of the county line , the highway cuts through Barr . Five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north of Barr , the road skirts the east edge of Drummond , where it crosses a <unk> Corporation railroad track . The highway then meets U.S. Highway 60 / 412 west of Enid . 
 SH @-@ 132 turns east and overlaps the U.S. routes for one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , before splitting back off to the north . In Carrier , it briefly overlaps State Highway 45 . North of Carrier , the highway crosses another railroad track , this one operated by Burlington Northern Santa Fe , before running to the west of Hillsdale . At the Garfield – Grant County line , the highway curves to the northwest before turning back to a due north heading in order to line up with Grant County 's road grid . 
 SH @-@ 132 's first numbered highway junction in Grant County is with US @-@ 64 . SH @-@ 132 turns to the west , overlapping US @-@ 64 for two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) before splitting off to the north in Nash . North of Nash , the highway passes through two sharp curves before crossing over the Salt Fork of the Arkansas River , and through two more sharp curves after the crossing . SH @-@ 132 then passes one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the west of unincorporated Hawley . Its final highway junction in Oklahoma is with State Highway 11 . From here , the highway continues due north , passing west of Sand Creek , <unk> , and Gibbon en route to Manchester . After passing through Manchester , the highway turns west along the Oklahoma – Kansas state line . The road then curves back to the north , fully entering the state of Kansas , and becomes K @-@ 179 . 
 = = History = = 
 SH @-@ 132 was first designated on July 14 , 1956 . Initially , the highway began at what was then SH @-@ 38 ( present @-@ day SH @-@ 45 ) in Carrier , proceeding north along its present @-@ day route to end at US @-@ 64 east of Nash . On May 8 , 1958 , the portion of the route concurrent with US @-@ 64 into Nash , and from Nash to the Kansas state line north of Manchester , was added . The route did not appear on the official state highway map until the 1959 edition . At this time , portions of the route in Grant County , including from the Garfield – Grant county line to US @-@ 64 and a segment between Nash and Manchester , were unpaved . By 1961 , the segment of highway north of SH @-@ 11 had been paved . 
 On July 2 , 1962 , SH @-@ 132 was extended to the south , reaching its present @-@ day southern terminus . A minor realignment to the highway occurred in southern Grant County on January 7 , 1963 , the final change to SH @-@ 132 's route . By 1963 , the portion of highway in Grant County south of US @-@ 64 was paved , leaving only a section extending from north of Nash to SH @-@ 11 as unpaved . This section was paved by 1967 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = Peter Dawson ( politician ) = 
 Peter Dawson ( April 11 , 1892 – March 24 , 1963 ) was a Canadian minister , politician and member of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta . 
 Dawson was born in 1892 in Scotland . After attending schools and briefly working as a labourer and an apprentice to a butcher in Maybole , Dawson immigrated to Canada at the age of 18 with his brother , James Dawson . Shortly after arriving , he took up residence in Ontario where he worked in the automobile profession for 7 years until moving west to Alberta in 1918 . 
 Following his decision to settle in Calgary , he found employment as a butcher and interest in missionary work . His residence in Calgary , however , didn 't last long , as 5 years later , he moved to the nearby capital city of Edmonton , where he attended <unk> schooling . Ordained as a minister of the United Church in 1927 , he soon was called in 1928 to Sedgewick , where he remained for two years , before getting called to Champion . Although not intending to have a career in politics , a group of citizens persuaded him to run in the 1935 election , in which he defeated United Farmers Member of the Legislative Assembly ( MLA ) Oran McPherson by 66 % of the vote . 
 In 1937 , Dawson was appointed Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta . During his 26 @-@ year tenure , from 1937 until his death in 1963 , he witnessed and presided over many events , such as the first instance of crossing the floor in Alberta and naming a fellow MLA for remarks made at a provincial official . He also witnessed 2 royal visits to Alberta from two different monarchs , King George IV in 1939 , and Queen Elizabeth II 20 years later , in which he presided over the installation of a fountain in the Legislature 's rotunda . After dying in office in 1963 , Dawson was honoured with a state funeral , attended by many prominent citizens of Alberta . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Dawson was born in <unk> , Ayrshire , Scotland , on April 11 , 1892 to John and Jane Dawson ( née McMurray ) . Along with a twin sister who died at the age of 5 months , Peter Dawson had 8 other siblings . John Dawson died in 1900 , when Peter was only 8 years old . Prior to his death , he had worked as a police constable and blacksmith . 
 Peter Dawson attended public schools and attended the Carrick Academy in Maybole . After finishing school , he worked as farm labourer and a butcher 's apprentice back in Scotland , shortly before coming to Canada . In 1911 , Dawson and his brother , James sailed on the SS Ionian deporting from Glasgow and arriving in Halifax 9 days later . After his arrival , Dawson settled in Ontario and worked at an automobile manufacturer , Tudhope @-@ Anderson in Simcoe County . 7 years later , in 1918 , he moved to Calgary , Alberta , where he found work for " several years " as a butcher . 
 After 5 years in Calgary , he decided to relocate to Edmonton , where he enrolled in a <unk> seminary , Robertson College . He then studied arts and theology at the United Theological College , which would later become the St. Stephen 's College , on the University of Alberta campus , where he was the first president of the student council , as well as , in 1927 , one of the first graduates . He was ordained as a United Church Minister later in the year at Knox United Church in Calgary . 
 = = Politics = = 
 Dawson , initially having no interest in politics , ran in the 1935 election as a Social Credit candidate for the riding of Little Bow , at the request and pressure of a citizens ' group . He would go on to handily win the seat , defeating United Farmers of Alberta candidate and former speaker Oran McPherson by 66 % of the vote . Dawson would continue to get re @-@ elected seven consecutive times in that riding , which he held for over 30 years . 
 = = = Speaker of the Legislative Assembly = = = 
 Dawson was elected as Speaker of the Legislative Assembly in 1937 . In February of the same year , as Speaker @-@ Designate , Dawson arranged the Opening Session of the Legislature to be broadcast over <unk> radio , given the large number of public wanting to attend the session . Dawson and his family frequently took up residence at the Speaker 's suite during the time while the Legislature was in session , therefore creating him readily accessible as speaker . He was also responsible for many other things , amongst those , though not a part of his official duties , writing the Speech from the Throne , which he compiled from various information from the government departments , which was later read by the Lieutenant Governor of Alberta to open each session . 
 Dawson 's time as speaker saw many firsts in Alberta legislative history , such as , in 1937 , when Social Credit MLAs and former cabinet ministers William N. Chant and John Hugill left their respective party caucus to sit as independents . This was first instance of crossing the floor in the province 's legislative history . In June 1939 , Dawson played a major role in ceremonies at the Legislature during royal visits of King George VI and Princess ( later Queen ) Elizabeth . He , along with his wife , acted as their hosts during their respective visits . 
 He was re @-@ nominated as speaker by Premier William Aberhart in 1941 and subsequently in 1945 , 1949 , 1953 , 1955 , and 1960 , these times at the nomination of premier Ernest Manning . The 1945 nomination was seconded by Leader of the Opposition J. Percy Page , making this the first instance that a nomination had been supported by the Official Opposition . In a 1949 session , Dawson ruled comments of Alberta Liberal Leader James Harper Prowse , made during a debate on child welfare , unparliamentary . Prowse had remarked : " Members of the Government , not content with hiding behind the skirts of unfortunate women , now cloak themselves behind the diapers of more unfortunate babies . " Dawson had also deemed other terms , such as " trickery " and " deaf " unparliamentary during his time as speaker . 
 He was chosen to chair a committee set up in 1951 to revise the rules of the Assembly . During a session on March 21 , 1952 , Dawson was pushed to name MLA for Banff @-@ Cochrane Arthur Wray after Wray made remarks towards a provincial official at a committee meeting . <unk> asked by Dawson to take back the remarks , Wray refused , prompting Dawson to name him and order his removal from the chamber . A unanimous motion was later passed to have Wray suspended for two sitting days , or until he was ready to withdraw his remarks and issue an apology to the chamber . Wray returned on 4 days later , issuing an apology and revoking his remarks . 
 On February 9 , 1956 , at the opening of the Second Session of the 13th Legislature , Dawson accepted a new Mace from the Civil Service Association of Alberta on the occasion of the province 's 50th anniversary . On the occasion of another royal visit in 1959 , this time of Prince Philip and Queen Elizabeth , Dawson had a permanent fountain in the rotunda of the Legislature installed . Upon Dawson 's 25th anniversary as Speaker , John <unk> , MLA from Wetaskiwin presented him with a silver @-@ banded gavel on behalf of all members . He continued to serve in the position of Speaker until his unexpected death in 1963 , right before the 1963 election . He had served for 26 years in total as Speaker preceding his death , the longest one has ever served in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta . 
 = = Church career = = 
 During his time in Calgary , Dawson became interested in missionary work . After being ordained as a minister in 1927 , his first call , in 1928 , was to Sedgewick , Alberta , where he remained for two years before being called to the United Church in Champion on October 10 , 1930 , mostly conducting services in schoolhouses . Later , in 1954 , he came to <unk> , Alberta in 1954 to serve as a resident minister . He conducted services in various places in Alberta during his 30 years as a minister , ranging from schoolhouses to churches . In some services , he also participated in duets and sometimes made solo performances , with a strong baritone voice . On top of his duties as Speaker and MLA , Dawson continued his service as a minister . He retired as an active minister in 1960 , after 33 years of service . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In Calgary , on December 26 , 1923 , Dawson married Hildegarde " Hilde " Christina <unk> , whom he had met while serving as a missionary during the summer of that same year . Hilde was the daughter of Swedish immigrants Johannes and Hanna <unk> . Her father , Johannes , or John , as he was more commonly known , worked helping new Swedish families who had just immigrated to Canada settle in the Manitoba area , and later became a foreman for the Canadian Pacific Railway . Peter and Hilde had two sons , Earland " Earl " McMurray ( 1928 – 2008 ) and David Gilmour ( born 1933 ) . Both went on to be successful professional engineers in Ontario . 
 In his spare time , Dawson enjoyed a wide range of recreational activities , including golf , curling , badminton and tending the gardens at his home in Vulcan . He was a vital part in the planning and establishment of Little Bow Provincial Park , near Champion . Also an active member of the Grand Lodge of Alberta , a fraternal association , he served in the office of " Worshipful Master " of Champion Lodge in 1947 , grand chaplain of the Grand Lodge in 1949 and 1950 , and finally , Grand Master in 1954 and 1955 . Additionally , Dawson also was active in Shrine and Scottish Rite Lodges . Dawson and his wife moved to Vulcan , Alberta in 1960 , purchasing their first house ever during their marriage . 
 Dawson received many honours during his time as speaker , including a life membership in the Alberta Legislative Press Gallery Association , in which he had served as an honorary president . One year after his death , in 1964 , the Vulcan Senior Citizens Centre was named " Peter Dawson Lodge " in his memory , after receiving many entries in a contest to name the facility . 
 = = Death and funeral = = 
 On March 24 , 1963 , after a speaking engagement in Red Deer , to the Masons at Lodge Perfection , Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite , titled " We know not the hour ! " , Dawson suffered a heart attack in the Speaker 's Suite in the Legislature Building . Attended by health minister Joseph Donovan Ross , he was rushed to the University of Alberta Hospital , when he died on the way , becoming the only speaker in the history of the Alberta Legislative Assembly who had died while still in session . His death was announced the next day by Clerk Raymond A. A. <unk> . After paying tribute to Dawson , the session was quickly adjourned . 
 In the morning of March 28 , his body lay in state in the chamber , the first lying @-@ in @-@ state of a Speaker ever held . Several hundred people gathered in the chamber to pay their last respects . After lying in state , his body was taken to Robertson United Church for the state funeral , with several church , judiciary , and government officials from across the province in the general attendance of about 300 , with Premier Manning acted as an officiating clergy , delivering the eulogy . Notably in attendance , along with Premier Manning , were Lieutenant Governor J. Percy Page and Edmonton mayor Elmer Roper . His body was later transported by train to Vulcan , where , after a second service , he was interred in the Vulcan Cemetery . Soon after his death , Hilde Dawson moved to Lethbridge . Upon her death on June 15 , 1987 , she was interred beside her husband . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Upon his death , Premier Manning stated on Dawson : " In his passing not only Alberta , but all of Canada has lost one of its outstanding figures . The reputation he built with his fair judgments and honest ability won him the confidence and respect of all members of the Assembly and extended beyond the borders of Alberta . " Former Mayor of Edmonton and MLA Elmer E. Roper said : " I doubt if there has ever been anyone who occupied the Speaker 's chair in Canada who was more fair and efficient in chairmanship over an assembly then the late speaker " Dawson 's son , David recalled his father 's <unk> in that he " talked easily with complete strangers " and his ability to start up a conversation with anyone he met , regardless of where . Future Lieutenant Governor and MLA for Calgary Grant MacEwan compared sitting in the Assembly under Dawson " like attending the school of a strict but well @-@ qualified and kindly teacher . " 
 = Thomas Beecham = 
 Sir Thomas Beecham , 2nd Baronet , CH ( 29 April 1879 – 8 March 1961 ) was an English conductor and impresario best known for his association with the London Philharmonic and the Royal Philharmonic orchestras . He was also closely associated with the Liverpool Philharmonic and Hallé orchestras . From the early 20th century until his death , Beecham was a major influence on the musical life of Britain and , according to the BBC , was Britain 's first international conductor . 
 Born to a rich industrial family , Beecham began his career as a conductor in 1899 . He used his access to the family fortune to finance opera from the 1910s until the start of the Second World War , staging seasons at Covent Garden , Drury Lane and His Majesty 's Theatre with international stars , his own orchestra and a wide repertoire . Among the works he introduced to England were Richard Strauss 's Elektra , Salome and Der Rosenkavalier and three operas by Frederick Delius . 
 Together with his younger colleague Malcolm Sargent , Beecham founded the London Philharmonic , and he conducted its first performance at the Queen 's Hall in 1932 . In the 1940s he worked for three years in the United States where he was music director of the Seattle Symphony and conducted at the Metropolitan Opera . After his return to Britain , he founded the Royal Philharmonic in 1946 and conducted it until his death in 1961 . 
 Beecham 's repertoire was eclectic , sometimes favouring lesser @-@ known composers over famous ones . His specialities included composers whose works were neglected in Britain before he became their advocate , such as Delius and Berlioz . Other composers with whose music he was frequently associated were Haydn , Schubert , Sibelius and the composer he revered above all others , Mozart . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Beecham was born in St Helens , Lancashire , in a house adjoining the Beecham 's Pills laxative factory founded by his grandfather , Thomas Beecham . His parents were Joseph Beecham , the elder son of Thomas , and Josephine , née Burnett . In 1885 , with the family firm flourishing financially , Joseph Beecham moved his family to a large house in <unk> , Huyton , near Liverpool . Their former home was demolished to make room for an extension to the pill factory . 
 Beecham was educated at Rossall School between 1892 and 1897 , after which he hoped to attend a music conservatoire in Germany , but his father forbade it , and instead Beecham went to Wadham College , Oxford , to read Classics . He did not find university life to his taste and successfully sought his father 's permission to leave Oxford in 1898 . He studied as a pianist , but had difficulty because of his small hands , and any career as a soloist was ruled out by a wrist injury in 1904 . He studied composition privately with Frederic Austin in Liverpool , Charles Wood in London , and Moritz Moszkowski in Paris . As a conductor , he was self @-@ taught . 
 = = = First orchestras = = = 
 Beecham first conducted in public in St Helens in October 1899 , with an ad hoc ensemble comprising local musicians and players from the Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra and the Hallé in Manchester . A month later , he stood in at short notice for the celebrated conductor Hans Richter at a concert by the Hallé to mark Joseph Beecham 's inauguration as mayor of St Helens . Soon afterwards , Joseph Beecham secretly committed his wife to a mental hospital . Thomas and his elder sister Emily helped to secure their mother 's release and to force their father to pay annual alimony of £ 4 @,@ 500 . For this , Joseph disinherited them . Beecham was estranged from his father for ten years . 
 Beecham 's professional début as a conductor was in 1902 at the Shakespeare Theatre , Clapham , with Balfe 's The Bohemian Girl , for the Imperial Grand Opera Company . He was engaged as assistant conductor for a tour and was allotted four other operas , including Carmen and Pagliacci . A Beecham biographer calls the company " grandly named but decidedly ramshackle " , though Beecham 's Carmen was <unk> de Lussan , a leading exponent of the title role . Beecham was also composing music in these early years , but he was not satisfied with his own efforts and instead concentrated on conducting . 
 In 1906 Beecham was invited to conduct the New Symphony Orchestra , a recently formed ensemble of 46 players , in a series of concerts at the Bechstein Hall in London . Throughout his career , Beecham frequently chose to programme works to suit his own tastes rather than those of the paying public . In his early discussions with his new orchestra , he proposed works by a long list of barely known composers such as Étienne <unk> , Nicolas <unk> and Ferdinando <unk> . During this period , Beecham first encountered the music of Frederick Delius , which he at once loved deeply and with which he became closely associated for the rest of his life . 
 Beecham quickly concluded that to compete with the two existing London orchestras , the Queen 's Hall Orchestra and the recently founded London Symphony Orchestra ( LSO ) , his forces must be expanded to full symphonic strength and play in larger halls . For two years starting in October 1907 , Beecham and the enlarged New Symphony Orchestra gave concerts at the Queen 's Hall . He paid little attention to the box office : his programmes were described by a biographer as " even more certain to deter the public then than it would be in our own day " . The principal pieces of his first concert with the orchestra were d 'Indy 's symphonic ballad La <unk> <unk> , Smetana 's symphonic poem Šárka , and Lalo 's little @-@ known Symphony in G minor . Beecham retained an affection for the last work : it was among the works he conducted at his final recording sessions more than fifty years later . 
 In 1908 Beecham and the New Symphony Orchestra parted company , disagreeing about artistic control and , in particular , the deputy system . Under this system , orchestral players , if offered a better @-@ paid engagement elsewhere , could send a substitute to a rehearsal or a concert . The treasurer of the Royal Philharmonic Society described it thus : " A , whom you want , signs to play at your concert . He sends B ( whom you don 't mind ) to the first rehearsal . B , without your knowledge or consent , sends C to the second rehearsal . Not being able to play at the concert , C sends D , whom you would have paid five shillings to stay away . " Henry Wood had already banned the deputy system in the Queen 's Hall Orchestra ( provoking rebel players to found the London Symphony Orchestra ) , and Beecham followed suit . The New Symphony Orchestra survived without him and subsequently became the Royal Albert Hall Orchestra . 
 In 1909 , Beecham founded the Beecham Symphony Orchestra . He did not poach from established symphony orchestras , but instead he recruited from theatre <unk> , local symphony societies , the palm courts of hotels , and music colleges . The result was a youthful team – the typical age of his players was 25 . They included names that would become celebrated in their fields , such as Albert Sammons , Lionel Tertis , Eric Coates and Eugene Cruft . 
 Because he persistently programmed works that did not attract the public , Beecham 's musical activities at this time consistently lost money . As a result of his estrangement from his father between 1899 and 1909 , his access to the Beecham family fortune was strictly limited . From 1907 he had an annuity of £ 700 left to him in his grandfather 's will , and his mother subsidised some of his loss @-@ making concerts , but it was not until father and son were reconciled in 1909 that Beecham was able to draw on the family fortune to promote opera . 
 = = = 1910 – 1920 = = = 
 From 1910 , subsidised by his father , Beecham realised his ambition to mount opera seasons at Covent Garden and other houses . In the Edwardian opera house , the star singers were regarded as all @-@ important , and conductors were seen as ancillary . Between 1910 and 1939 Beecham did much to change the balance of power . 
 In 1910 , Beecham either conducted or was responsible as impresario for 190 performances at Covent Garden and His Majesty 's Theatre . His assistant conductors were Bruno Walter and Percy Pitt . During the year , he mounted 34 different operas , most of them either new to London or almost unknown there . Beecham later acknowledged that in his early years the operas he chose to present were too obscure to attract the public . During his 1910 season at His Majesty 's , the rival Grand Opera Syndicate put on a concurrent season of its own at Covent Garden ; London 's total opera performances for the year amounted to 273 performances , far more than the box @-@ office demand could support . Of the 34 operas that Beecham staged in 1910 , only four made money : Richard Strauss 's new operas Elektra and Salome , receiving their first , and highly publicised , performances in Britain , and The Tales of Hoffmann and Die Fledermaus . 
 In 1911 and 1912 , the Beecham Symphony Orchestra played for Sergei Diaghilev 's Ballets Russes , both at Covent Garden and at the <unk> in Berlin , under the batons of Beecham and Pierre Monteux , Diaghilev 's chief conductor . Beecham was much admired for conducting the complicated new score of Stravinsky 's Petrushka , at two days ' notice and without rehearsal , when Monteux became unavailable . While in Berlin , Beecham and his orchestra , in Beecham 's words , caused a " mild stir " , scoring a triumph : the orchestra was agreed by the Berlin press to be an elite body , one of the best in the world . The principal Berlin musical weekly , Die <unk> , asked , " Where does London find such magnificent young instrumentalists ? " The violins were credited with rich , noble tone , the woodwinds with lustre , the brass , " which has not quite the dignity and amplitude of our best German brass " , with uncommon delicacy of execution . 
 Beecham 's 1913 seasons included the British premiere of Strauss 's Der Rosenkavalier at Covent Garden , and a " Grand Season of Russian Opera and Ballet " at Drury Lane . At the latter there were three operas , all starring Feodor Chaliapin , and all new to Britain : Mussorgsky 's Boris Godunov and Khovanshchina , and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's Ivan the Terrible . There were also 15 ballets , with leading dancers including Vaslav Nijinsky and Tamara Karsavina . The ballets included Debussy 's Jeux and his controversially erotic L 'après @-@ midi d 'un faune , and the British premiere of Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring , six weeks after its first performance in Paris . Beecham shared Monteux 's private dislike of the piece , much preferring Petrushka . Beecham did not conduct during this season ; Monteux and others conducted the Beecham Symphony Orchestra . The following year , Beecham and his father presented Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's The Maid of Pskov and Borodin 's Prince Igor , with Chaliapin , and Stravinsky 's The Nightingale . 
 During the First World War , Beecham strove , often without a fee , to keep music alive in London , Liverpool , Manchester and other British cities . He conducted for , and gave financial support to , three institutions with which he was connected at various times : the Hallé Orchestra , the LSO and the Royal Philharmonic Society . In 1915 he formed the Beecham Opera Company , with mainly British singers , performing in London and throughout the country . In 1916 , he received a knighthood in the New Year Honours and succeeded to the baronetcy on his father 's death later that year . 
 After the war , there were joint Covent Garden seasons with the Grand Opera Syndicate in 1919 and 1920 , but these were , according to a biographer , pale confused echoes of the years before 1914 . These seasons included forty productions , of which Beecham conducted only nine . After the 1920 season , Beecham temporarily withdrew from conducting to deal with a financial problem that he described as " the most trying and unpleasant experience of my life " . 
 = = = Covent Garden estate = = = 
 Influenced by an ambitious financier , James White , Sir Joseph Beecham had agreed , in July 1914 , to buy the Covent Garden estate from the Duke of Bedford and float a limited company to manage the estate commercially . The deal was described by The Times as " one of the largest ever carried out in real estate in London " . Sir Joseph paid an initial deposit of £ 200 @,@ 000 and covenanted to pay the balance of the £ 2 million purchase price on 11 November . Within a month , however , the First World War broke out , and new official restrictions on the use of capital prevented the completion of the contract . The estate and market continued to be managed by the Duke 's staff , and in October 1916 , Joseph Beecham died suddenly , with the transaction still uncompleted . The matter was brought before the civil courts with the aim of disentangling Sir Joseph 's affairs ; the court and all parties agreed that a private company should be formed , with his two sons as directors , to complete the Covent Garden contract . In July 1918 , the Duke and his trustees conveyed the estate to the new company , subject to a mortgage of the balance of the purchase price still outstanding : £ 1 @.@ 25 million . 
 Beecham and his brother Henry had to sell enough of their father 's estate to discharge this mortgage . For more than three years , Beecham was absent from the musical scene , working to sell property worth over £ 1 million . By 1923 enough money had been raised . The mortgage was discharged , and Beecham 's personal liabilities , amounting to £ 41 @,@ 558 , were paid in full . In 1924 the Covent Garden property and the pill @-@ making business at St Helens were united in one company , Beecham Estates and Pills . The nominal capital was £ 1 @,@ 850 @,@ 000 , of which Beecham had a substantial share . 
 = = = London Philharmonic = = = 
 After his absence , Beecham first reappeared on the rostrum conducting the Hallé in Manchester in March 1923 , in a programme including works by Berlioz , Bizet , Delius and Mozart . He returned to London the following month , conducting the combined Royal Albert Hall Orchestra ( the renamed New Symphony Orchestra ) and London Symphony Orchestra in April 1923 . The main work on the programme was Richard Strauss 's Ein Heldenleben . No longer with an orchestra of his own , Beecham established a relationship with the London Symphony Orchestra that lasted for the rest of the 1920s . Towards the end of the decade , he negotiated inconclusively with the BBC over the possibility of establishing a permanent radio orchestra . 
 In 1931 , Beecham was approached by the rising young conductor Malcolm Sargent with a proposal to set up a permanent , salaried orchestra with a subsidy guaranteed by Sargent 's patrons , the Courtauld family . Originally Sargent and Beecham envisaged a reshuffled version of the London Symphony Orchestra , but the LSO , a self @-@ governing co @-@ operative , balked at weeding out and replacing underperforming players . In 1932 Beecham lost patience and agreed with Sargent to set up a new orchestra from scratch . The London Philharmonic Orchestra ( LPO ) , as it was named , consisted of 106 players including a few young musicians straight from music college , many established players from provincial orchestras , and 17 of the LSO 's leading members . The principals included Paul Beard , George Stratton , Anthony Pini , Gerald Jackson , Léon Goossens , Reginald Kell , James Bradshaw and Marie Goossens . 
 The orchestra made its debut at the Queen 's Hall on 7 October 1932 , conducted by Beecham . After the first item , Berlioz 's Roman Carnival Overture , the audience went wild , some of them standing on their seats to clap and shout . During the next eight years , the LPO appeared nearly a hundred times at the Queen 's Hall for the Royal Philharmonic Society alone , played for Beecham 's opera seasons at Covent Garden , and made more than 300 gramophone records . Berta <unk> , his secretary from 1936 , wrote , " The relations between the Orchestra and Sir Thomas were always easy and cordial . He always treated a rehearsal as a joint undertaking with the Orchestra . … The musicians were entirely unselfconscious with him . Instinctively they accorded him the artistic authority which he did not expressly claim . Thus he obtained the best from them and they gave it without reserve . " 
 By the early 1930s , Beecham had secured substantial control of the Covent Garden opera seasons . Wishing to concentrate on music @-@ making rather than management , he assumed the role of artistic director , and Geoffrey Toye was recruited as managing director . In 1933 , Tristan und Isolde with Frida Leider and Lauritz Melchior was a success , and the season continued with the Ring cycle and nine other operas . The 1934 season featured Conchita <unk> in La <unk> , and Lotte Lehmann and Alexander Kipnis in the Ring . Clemens Krauss conducted the British première of Strauss 's Arabella . During 1933 and 1934 , Beecham repelled attempts by John Christie to form a link between Christie 's new Glyndebourne Festival and the Royal Opera House . Beecham and Toye fell out over the latter 's insistence on bringing in a popular film star , Grace Moore , to sing Mimi in La bohème . The production was a box @-@ office success , but an artistic failure . Beecham manoeuvred Toye out of the managing directorship in what their fellow conductor Sir Adrian Boult described as an " absolutely beastly " manner . 
 From 1935 to 1939 , Beecham , now in sole control , presented international seasons with eminent guest singers and conductors . Beecham conducted between a third and half of the performances each season . He intended the 1940 season to include the first complete performances of Berlioz 's Les Troyens , but the outbreak of the Second World War caused the season to be abandoned . Beecham did not conduct again at Covent Garden until 1951 , and by then it was no longer under his control . 
 Beecham took the London Philharmonic on a controversial tour of Germany in 1936 . There were complaints that he was being used by Nazi propagandists , and Beecham complied with a Nazi request not to play the Scottish Symphony of Mendelssohn , who was a Christian by faith but a Jew by birth . In Berlin , Beecham 's concert was attended by Adolf Hitler , whose lack of punctuality caused Beecham to remark very audibly , " The old bugger 's late . " After this tour , Beecham refused renewed invitations to give concerts in Germany , although he honoured contractual commitments to conduct at the Berlin State Opera , in 1937 and 1938 , and recorded The Magic Flute for EMI in the <unk> in Berlin in the same years . 
 As his sixtieth birthday approached , Beecham was advised by his doctors to take a year 's complete break from music , and he planned to go abroad to rest in a warm climate . The Australian Broadcasting Commission had been seeking for several years to get him to conduct in Australia . The outbreak of war on 3 September 1939 obliged him to postpone his plans for several months , striving instead to secure the future of the London Philharmonic , whose financial guarantees had been withdrawn by its backers when war was declared . Before leaving , Beecham raised large sums of money for the orchestra and helped its members to form themselves into a self @-@ governing company . 
 = = = 1940s = = = 
 Beecham left Britain in the spring of 1940 , going first to Australia and then to North America . He became music director of the Seattle Symphony in 1941 . In 1942 he joined the Metropolitan Opera as joint senior conductor with his former assistant Bruno Walter . He began with his own adaptation of Bach 's comic cantata , Phoebus and Pan , followed by Le Coq d 'Or . His main repertoire was French : Carmen , Louise ( with Grace Moore ) , Manon , Faust , Mignon and The Tales of Hoffmann . In addition to his Seattle and New York posts , Beecham was guest conductor with 18 American orchestras . 
 In 1944 , Beecham returned to Britain . Musically his reunion with the London Philharmonic was triumphant , but the orchestra , now ( after his help in 1939 ) a self @-@ governing co @-@ operative , attempted to hire him on its own terms as its salaried artistic director . " I emphatically refuse " , concluded Beecham , " to be wagged by any orchestra ... I am going to found one more great orchestra to round off my career . " When Walter Legge founded the Philharmonia Orchestra in 1945 , Beecham conducted its first concert . But he was not disposed to accept a salaried position from Legge , his former assistant , any more than from his former players in the LPO . 
 In 1946 , Beecham founded the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra ( RPO ) , securing an agreement with the Royal Philharmonic Society that the new orchestra should replace the LPO at all the Society 's concerts . Beecham later agreed with the Glyndebourne Festival that the RPO should be the resident orchestra at Glyndebourne each summer . He secured backing , including that of record companies in the US as well as Britain , with whom lucrative recording contracts were negotiated . As in 1909 and in 1932 , Beecham 's assistants recruited in the freelance pool and elsewhere . Original members of the RPO included James Bradshaw , Dennis Brain , Leonard Brain , Archie Camden , Gerald Jackson and Reginald Kell . The orchestra later became celebrated for its regular team of woodwind principals , often referred to as " The Royal Family " , consisting of Jack Brymer ( clarinet ) , Gwydion Brooke ( bassoon ) , Terence MacDonagh ( oboe ) and Gerald Jackson ( flute ) . 
 Beecham 's long association with the Hallé Orchestra as a guest conductor ceased after John Barbirolli became the orchestra 's chief conductor in 1944 . Beecham was , to his great indignation , ousted from the honorary presidency of the Hallé Concerts Society , and Barbirolli refused to " let that man near my orchestra " . Beecham 's relationship with the Liverpool Philharmonic , which he had first conducted in 1911 , was resumed harmoniously after the war . A manager of the orchestra recalled , " It was an unwritten law in Liverpool that first choice of dates offered to guest conductors was given to Beecham . ... In Liverpool there was one over @-@ riding factor – he was adored . " 
 = = = 1950s and later years = = = 
 Beecham , whom the BBC called " Britain 's first international conductor " , took the RPO on a strenuous tour through the United States , Canada and South Africa in 1950 . During the North American tour , Beecham conducted 49 concerts in almost daily succession . In 1951 , he was invited to conduct at Covent Garden after a 12 @-@ year absence . State @-@ funded for the first time , the opera company operated quite differently from his pre @-@ war regime . Instead of short , star @-@ studded seasons , with a major symphony orchestra , the new director David Webster was attempting to build up a permanent ensemble of home @-@ grown talent performing all the year round , in English translations . Extreme economy in productions and great attention to the box @-@ office were essential , and Beecham , though he had been hurt and furious at his exclusion , was not suited to participate in such an undertaking . When offered a chorus of eighty singers for his return , conducting Die Meistersinger , he insisted on augmenting their number to 200 . He also , contrary to Webster 's policy , insisted on performing the piece in German . In 1953 at Oxford , Beecham presented the world premiere of Delius 's first opera , Irmelin , and his last operatic performances in Britain were in 1955 at Bath , with Grétry 's <unk> et Azor . 
 Between 1951 and 1960 , Beecham conducted 92 concerts at the Royal Festival Hall . Characteristic Beecham programmes of the RPO years included symphonies by Bizet , Franck , Haydn , Schubert and Tchaikovsky ; Richard Strauss 's Ein Heldenleben ; concertos by Mozart and Saint @-@ Saëns ; a Delius and Sibelius programme ; and many of his favoured shorter pieces . He did not stick uncompromisingly to his familiar repertoire . After the sudden death of the German conductor Wilhelm Furtwängler , Beecham in tribute conducted the two programmes his colleague had been due to present at the Festival Hall ; these included Bach 's Third Brandenburg Concerto , Ravel 's Rapsodie espagnole , Brahms 's Symphony No. 1 , and Barber 's Second Essay for Orchestra . 
 In the summer of 1958 , Beecham conducted a season at the Teatro Colón , Buenos Aires , Argentina , consisting of Verdi 's Otello , Bizet 's Carmen , Beethoven 's Fidelio , Saint @-@ Saëns 's Samson and Delilah and Mozart 's The Magic Flute . These were his last operatic performances . It was during this season that Betty Humby died suddenly . She was cremated in Buenos Aires and her ashes returned to England . Beecham 's own last illness prevented his operatic debut at Glyndebourne in a planned Magic Flute and a final appearance at Covent Garden conducting Berlioz 's The Trojans . 
 Sixty @-@ six years after his first visit to America , Beecham made his last , beginning in late 1959 , conducting in Pittsburgh , San Francisco , Seattle , Chicago and Washington . During this tour , he also conducted in Canada . He flew back to London on 12 April 1960 and did not leave England again . His final concert was at Portsmouth Guildhall on 7 May 1960 . The programme , all characteristic choices , comprised the Magic Flute Overture , Haydn 's Symphony No. 100 ( the Military ) , Beecham 's own Handel arrangement , Love in Bath , Schubert 's Symphony No. 5 , On the River by Delius , and the Bacchanale from Samson and Delilah . 
 Beecham died of a coronary thrombosis at his London flat , aged 81 , on 8 March 1961 . He was buried two days later in Brookwood Cemetery , Surrey . Owing to changes at Brookwood , his remains were exhumed in 1991 and reburied in St Peter 's Churchyard at Limpsfield , Surrey , close to the joint grave of Delius and his wife Jelka Rosen . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Beecham was married three times . In 1903 he married Utica Celestina Welles , daughter of Dr Charles S. Welles , of New York , and his wife Ella Celeste , née Miles . Beecham and his wife had two sons : Adrian , born in 1904 , who became a composer and achieved some celebrity in the 1920s and 1930s , and Thomas , born in 1909 . After the birth of his second child , Beecham began to drift away from the marriage . By 1911 , no longer living with his wife and family , he was involved as co @-@ respondent in a much @-@ publicised divorce case . Utica ignored advice that she should divorce him and secure substantial alimony ; she did not believe in divorce . She never remarried after Beecham divorced her ( in 1943 ) , and she outlived her former husband by sixteen years , dying in 1977 . 
 In 1909 or early 1910 , Beecham began an affair with Maud Alice ( known as Emerald ) , Lady Cunard . Although they never lived together , it continued , despite other relationships on his part , until his remarriage in 1943 . She was a tireless fund @-@ raiser for his musical enterprises . Beecham 's biographers are agreed that she was in love with him , but that his feelings for her were less strong . During the 1920s and 1930s , Beecham also had an affair with Dora <unk> , a soprano sometimes known as Lisa <unk> , with whom he had a son , Paul Strang , born in March 1933 . 
 In 1943 Lady Cunard was devastated to learn ( not from Beecham ) that he intended to divorce Utica to marry Betty Humby , a concert pianist 29 years his junior . Beecham married Betty in 1943 , and they were a devoted couple until her death in 1958 . On 10 August 1959 , two years before his death , he married in Zurich his former secretary , Shirley Hudson , who had worked for the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra 's administration since 1950 . She was 27 , he 80 . 
 = = Repertoire = = 
 = = = Handel , Haydn , and Mozart = = = 
 The earliest composer whose music Beecham regularly performed was Handel , whom he called , " the great international master of all time . ... He wrote Italian music better than any Italian ; French music better than any Frenchman ; English music better than any Englishman ; and , with the exception of Bach , <unk> all other Germans . " In his performances of Handel , Beecham ignored what he called the " professors , <unk> , pedagogues " . He followed Mendelssohn and Mozart in editing and <unk> Handel 's scores to suit contemporary tastes . At a time when Handel 's operas were scarcely known , Beecham knew them so well that he was able to arrange three ballets , two other suites and a piano concerto from them . He gave Handel 's oratorio Solomon its first performance since the 18th century , with a text edited by the conductor . 
 With Haydn , too , Beecham was far from an <unk> , using unscholarly 19th @-@ century versions of the scores , avoiding the use of the harpsichord , and phrasing the music romantically . He recorded the twelve " London " symphonies , and regularly programmed some of them in his concerts . Earlier Haydn works were unfamiliar in the first half of the 20th century , but Beecham conducted several of them , including the Symphony No. 40 and an early piano concerto . He programmed The Seasons regularly throughout his career , recording it for EMI in 1956 , and in 1944 added The Creation to his repertoire . 
 For Beecham , Mozart was " the central point of European music , " and he treated the composer 's scores with more deference than he gave most others . He edited the incomplete Requiem , made English translations of at least two of the great operas , and introduced Covent Garden audiences who had rarely if ever heard them to Così fan tutte , Der <unk> and Die Entführung aus dem Serail ; he also regularly programmed The Magic Flute , Don Giovanni and The Marriage of Figaro . He considered the best of Mozart 's piano concertos to be " the most beautiful compositions of their kind in the world " , and he played them many times with Betty Humby @-@ Beecham and others . 
 = = = German music = = = 
 Beecham 's attitude towards 19th @-@ century German repertoire was equivocal . He frequently disparaged Beethoven , Wagner and others , but regularly conducted their works , often with great success . He observed , " Wagner , though a tremendous genius , gorged music like a German who <unk> . And Bruckner was a <unk> who had no style at all ... Even Beethoven thumped the tub ; the Ninth symphony was composed by a kind of Mr. Gladstone of music . " Despite his criticisms , Beecham conducted all the Beethoven symphonies during his career , and he made studio recordings of Nos. 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 and 8 , and live recordings of No. 9 and Missa Solemnis . He conducted the Fourth Piano Concerto with pleasure ( recording it with Arthur Rubinstein and the LPO ) but avoided the Emperor Concerto when possible . 
 Beecham was not known for his Bach but nonetheless chose Bach ( arranged by Beecham ) for his debut at the Metropolitan Opera . He later gave the Third Brandenburg Concerto in one of his memorial concerts for Wilhelm Furtwängler ( a performance described by The Times as " a travesty , albeit an invigorating one " ) . In Brahms 's music , Beecham was selective . He made a speciality of the Second Symphony but conducted the Third only occasionally , the First rarely , and the Fourth never . In his memoirs he made no mention of any Brahms performance after the year 1909 . 
 Beecham was a great Wagnerian , despite his frequent expostulation about the composer 's length and <unk> : " We 've been rehearsing for two hours – and we 're still playing the same bloody tune ! " Beecham conducted all the works in the regular Wagner canon with the exception of Parsifal , which he presented at Covent Garden but never with himself in the pit . The chief music critic of The Times observed : " Beecham 's Lohengrin was almost Italian in its lyricism ; his Ring was less heroic than Bruno Walter 's or Furtwängler 's , but it sang from beginning to end " . 
 Richard Strauss had a lifelong champion in Beecham , who introduced Elektra , Salome , Der Rosenkavalier and other operas to England . Beecham programmed Ein Heldenleben from 1910 until his last year ; his final recording of it was released shortly after his death . Don Quixote , Till Eulenspiegel , the Bourgeois <unk> music and Don Juan also featured in his repertory , but not Also Sprach Zarathustra or Tod und <unk> . Strauss had the first and last pages of the manuscript of Elektra framed and presented them to " my highly honoured friend ... and distinguished conductor of my work . " 
 = = = French and Italian music = = = 
 In the opinion of the jury of the Académie du Disque Français , " Sir Thomas Beecham has done more for French music abroad than any French conductor " . Berlioz featured prominently in Beecham 's repertoire throughout his career , and in an age when the composer 's works received little exposure , Beecham presented most of them and recorded many . Along with Sir Colin Davis , Beecham has been described as one of the two " foremost modern interpreters " of Berlioz 's music . Both in concert and the recording studio , Beecham 's choices of French music were characteristically eclectic . He avoided Ravel but regularly programmed Debussy . Fauré did not feature often , although his orchestral Pavane was an exception ; Beecham 's final recording sessions in 1959 included the Pavane and the Dolly Suite . Bizet was among Beecham 's favourites , and other French composers favoured by him included Gustave Charpentier , Delibes , Duparc , Grétry , Lalo , Lully , Offenbach , Saint @-@ Saëns and Ambroise Thomas . Many of Beecham 's later recordings of French music were made in Paris with the Orchestre National de la Radiodiffusion Française . " C 'est un dieu " , their concertmaster said of Beecham in 1957 . 
 Of the more than two dozen operas in the Verdi canon , Beecham conducted eight during his long career : Il trovatore , La traviata , Aida , Don Carlos , Rigoletto , Un ballo in maschera , Otello and Falstaff . As early as 1904 , Beecham met Puccini through the librettist Luigi Illica , who had written the libretto for Beecham 's youthful attempt at composing an Italian opera . At the time of their meeting , Puccini and Illica were revising Madama Butterfly after its disastrous première . Beecham rarely conducted that work , but he conducted Tosca , Turandot and La bohème . His 1956 recording of La bohème , with Victoria de los Ángeles and Jussi Björling , has seldom been out of the catalogues since its release and received more votes than any other operatic set in a 1967 symposium of prominent critics . 
 = = = Delius , Sibelius and " Lollipops " = = = 
 Except for Delius , Beecham was generally antipathetic to , or at best lukewarm about , the music of his native land and its most acclaimed composers . Beecham 's championship of Delius promoted the composer from relative obscurity . Delius 's amanuensis , Eric Fenby , referred to Beecham as " excelling all others in the music of Delius ... Groves and Sargent may have matched him in the great choruses of A Mass of Life , but in all else Beecham was matchless , especially with the orchestra . " In an all @-@ Delius concert in June 1911 Beecham conducted the premiere of Songs of Sunset . He put on Delius Festivals in 1929 and 1946 and presented his concert works throughout his career . He conducted the British premieres of the operas A Village Romeo and Juliet in 1910 and Koanga in 1935 , and the world premiere of Irmelin in 1953 . However , he was not an uncritical Delian : he never conducted the Requiem , and he detailed his criticisms of it in his book on Delius . 
 Another major 20th @-@ century composer who engaged Beecham 's sympathies was Sibelius , who recognised him as a fine conductor of his music ( although Sibelius tended to be lavish with praise of anybody who conducted his music ) . In a live recording of a December 1954 concert performance of Sibelius 's Second Symphony with the BBC Symphony Orchestra in the Festival Hall , Beecham can be heard uttering encouraging shouts at the orchestra at climactic moments . 
 Beecham was dismissive of some of the established classics , saying for example , " I would give the whole of Bach 's Brandenburg Concertos for Massenet 's Manon , and would think I had vastly profited by the exchange " . He was , by contrast , famous for presenting slight pieces as encores , which he called " lollipops " . Some of the best @-@ known were Berlioz 's Danse des <unk> ; Chabrier 's Joyeuse Marche and Gounod 's Le <unk> de Juliette . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 The composer Richard Arnell wrote that Beecham preferred making records to giving concerts : " He told me that audiences got in the way of music @-@ making – he was apt to catch someone 's eye in the front row . " The conductor and critic Trevor Harvey wrote in The Gramophone , however , that studio recordings could never recapture the thrill of Beecham performing live in the concert hall . 
 Beecham began making recordings in 1910 , when the acoustical process obliged orchestras to use only principal instruments , placed as close to the recording horn as possible . His first recordings , for HMV , were of excerpts from Offenbach 's The Tales of Hoffmann and Johann Strauss 's Die Fledermaus . In 1915 , Beecham began recording for the Columbia Graphophone Company . Electrical recording technology ( introduced in 1925 – 26 ) made it possible to record a full orchestra with much greater frequency range , and Beecham quickly embraced the new medium . Longer scores had to be broken into four @-@ minute segments to fit on 12 @-@ inch 78 @-@ rpm discs , but Beecham was not averse to recording piecemeal – his well @-@ known 1932 disc of Chabrier 's España was recorded in two sessions three weeks apart . Beecham recorded many of his favourite works several times , taking advantage of improved technology over the decades . 
 From 1926 to 1932 , Beecham made more than 70 discs , including an English version of Gounod 's Faust and the first of three recordings of Handel 's Messiah . He began recording with the London Philharmonic Orchestra in 1933 , making more than 150 discs for Columbia , including music by Mozart , Rossini , Berlioz , Wagner , Handel , Beethoven , Brahms , Debussy and Delius . Among the most prominent of these was the first complete recording of Mozart 's The Magic Flute , supervised by Walter Legge in Berlin in 1937 – 38 , a set described by Alan Blyth in Gramophone magazine in 2006 as having " a legendary status " . In 1936 , during his German tour with the LPO , Beecham conducted the world 's first orchestral recording on magnetic tape , made at Ludwigshafen , the home of BASF , the company that developed the process . 
 During his stay in the US and afterwards , Beecham recorded for American Columbia Records and RCA Victor . His RCA recordings include major works that he did not subsequently re @-@ record for the gramophone , including Beethoven 's Fourth , Sibelius 's Sixth and Mendelssohn 's Reformation Symphonies . Some of his RCA recordings were issued only in the US , including Mozart 's Symphony No. 27 , <unk> , the overtures to Smetana 's The Bartered Bride and Mozart 's La clemenza di Tito , the Sinfonia from Bach 's Christmas Oratorio , a 1947 – 48 complete recording of Gounod 's Faust , and an RPO studio version of Sibelius 's Second Symphony . Beecham 's RCA records that were released on both sides of the Atlantic were his celebrated 1956 complete recording of Puccini 's La bohème and an extravagantly rescored set of Handel 's Messiah . The former remains a top recommendation among reviewers , and the latter was described by Gramophone as " an irresistible outrage … huge fun " . 
 For the Columbia label , Beecham recorded his last , or only , versions of many works by Delius , including A Mass of Life , Appalachia , North Country Sketches , An Arabesque , Paris and Eventyr . Other Columbia recordings from the early 1950s include Beethoven 's Eroica , Pastoral and Eighth symphonies , Mendelssohn 's Italian symphony , and the Brahms Violin Concerto with Isaac Stern . 
 From his return to England at the end of the Second World War until his final recordings in 1959 , Beecham continued his early association with HMV and British Columbia , who had merged to form EMI . From 1955 , his EMI recordings made in London were recorded in stereo . He also recorded in Paris , with his own RPO and with the Orchestra National de la Radiodiffusion Française , though the Paris recordings were in mono until 1958 . For EMI , Beecham recorded two complete operas in stereo , Die Entführung aus dem Serail and Carmen . His last recordings were made in Paris in December 1959 . Beecham 's EMI recordings have been continually reissued on LP and CD . In 2011 , to mark the 50th anniversary of Beecham 's death , EMI released 34 CDs of his recordings of music from the 18th , 19th and 20th centuries , including works by Haydn , Mozart , Beethoven , Brahms , Wagner , Richard Strauss and Delius , and many of the French " lollipops " with which he was associated . 
 = = Relations with others = = 
 Beecham 's relations with fellow British conductors were not always cordial . Sir Henry Wood regarded him as an upstart and was envious of his success ; the scrupulous Sir Adrian Boult found him " repulsive " as a man and a musician ; and Sir John Barbirolli mistrusted him . Sir Malcolm Sargent worked with him in founding the London Philharmonic and was a friend and ally , but he was the subject of unkind , though witty , digs from Beecham who , for example , described the image @-@ conscious Herbert von Karajan as " a kind of musical Malcolm Sargent " . Beecham 's relations with foreign conductors were often excellent . He did not get on well with Arturo Toscanini , but he liked and encouraged Wilhelm Furtwängler , admired Pierre Monteux , fostered Rudolf Kempe as his successor with the RPO , and was admired by Fritz Reiner , Otto Klemperer and Herbert von Karajan . 
 Despite his lordly drawl , Beecham remained a Lancastrian at heart . " In my county , where I come from , we 're all a bit vulgar , you know , but there is a certain heartiness – a sort of bonhomie about our vulgarity – which tides you over a lot of rough spots in the path . But in Yorkshire , in a spot of bother , they 're so damn @-@ set @-@ in @-@ their @-@ ways that there 's no doing anything with them ! " 
 Beecham has been much quoted . In 1929 , the editor of a music journal wrote , " The stories gathered around Sir Thomas Beecham are innumerable . Wherever musicians come together , he is likely to be one of the topics of conversation . Everyone telling a Beecham story tries to imitate his manner and his tone of voice . " A book , Beecham Stories , was published in 1978 consisting entirely of his bons mots and anecdotes about him . Some are variously attributed to Beecham or one or more other people , including Arnold Bax and Winston Churchill ; Neville Cardus admitted to inventing some himself . Among the Beecham lines that are reliably attributed are , " A musicologist is a man who can read music but can 't hear it " ; his maxim , " There are only two things requisite so far as the public is concerned for a good performance : that is for the orchestra to begin together and end together ; in between it doesn 't matter much " ; and his remark at his 70th birthday celebrations after telegrams were read out from Strauss , Stravinsky and Sibelius : " Nothing from Mozart ? " 
 He was completely indifferent to mundane tasks such as correspondence , and was less than responsible with the property of others . On one occasion , during bankruptcy proceedings , two thousand unopened letters were discovered among his papers . Havergal Brian sent him three scores with a view to having them performed . One of them , the Second English Suite , was never returned and is now considered lost . 
 = = Honours and commemorations = = 
 Beecham was knighted in 1916 and succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his father later that year . In 1938 the President of France , Albert Lebrun , invested him with the Légion d 'honneur . In 1955 , Beecham was presented with the Order of the White Rose of Finland . He was a Commendatore of the Order of the Crown of Italy and was made a Companion of Honour in the 1957 Queen 's Birthday Honours . He was an honorary Doctor of Music of the universities of Oxford , London , Manchester and Montreal . 
 Beecham , by Caryl Brahms and Ned Sherrin , is a play celebrating the conductor and drawing on a large number of Beecham stories for its material . Its first production , in 1979 , starred Timothy West in the title role . It was later adapted for television , starring West , with members of the Hallé Orchestra taking part in the action and playing pieces associated with Beecham . 
 In 1980 the Royal Mail put Beecham 's image on the 13 ½ p postage stamp in a series portraying British conductors ; the other three in the series depicted Wood , Sargent and Barbirolli . The Sir Thomas Beecham Society preserves Beecham 's legacy through its website and release of historic recordings . 
 In 2012 , Beecham was voted into the inaugural Gramophone magazine " Hall of Fame " . 
 = = Books by Beecham = = 
 Beecham 's published books were : 
 John Fletcher ( The Romanes Lecture for 1956 ) . Oxford : Clarendon Press . 1956 . OCLC <unk> . 
 A <unk> Chime – Leaves from an Autobiography . London : Hutchinson . 1959 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Frederick Delius . London : Hutchinson . 1959 . OCLC <unk> . 
 The last of these was reissued in 1975 by Severn House , London , with an introduction by Felix Aprahamian and a discography by Malcolm Walker , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 = 55 Cancri c = 
 55 Cancri c ( abbreviated 55 Cnc c ) , also named Brahe , is an extrasolar planet in an eccentric orbit around the Sun @-@ like star 55 Cancri A , making one revolution every 44 @.@ 34 days . It is the third known planet in order of distance from its star . 55 Cancri c was discovered on June 13 , 2002 and has a mass roughly half of Saturn . 
 In July 2014 the International Astronomical Union launched a process for giving proper names to certain exoplanets and their host stars . The process involved public nomination and voting for the new names . In December 2015 , the IAU announced the winning name was Brahe for this planet . The winning name was submitted by the Royal Netherlands Association for Meteorology and Astronomy of the Netherlands . It honors the astronomer Tycho Brahe . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Like the majority of known extrasolar planets , 55 Cancri c was detected by observing changes in its star 's radial velocity . This was achieved by making sensitive measurements of the Doppler shift of the star 's spectrum . At the time of discovery , 55 Cancri A was already known to possess one planet ( 55 Cancri b ) ; however , there was still a drift in the radial velocity measurements which was unaccounted for . 
 In 2002 , further measurements revealed the presence of a long @-@ period planet in an orbit at around 5 AU from the star . Even when both of the two planets were accounted for , there was still a periodicity at around 43 days . However , this period is close to the rotation period of 55 Cancri A , which led to the possibility that the 43 @-@ day period was caused by stellar rotation rather than a planet . Both the 43 @-@ day planet ( designated 55 Cancri c ) and the 5 AU planet ( designated 55 Cancri d ) were announced in the same paper , labeled in order of increasing distance from the star . 
 Further measurements which led to the discovery of the inner planet 55 Cancri e in 2004 lent support to the planet hypothesis . Photometric measurements of the star over 11 years show no activity with the same period as 55 Cancri c 's radial velocity variations , and furthermore the period is stable over long timescales , which is inconsistent with the hypothesis of stellar activity causing the radial velocity variations . The amplitude of the radial velocity signal is inconsistent with stellar variations on stars with 55 Cancri A 's low level of chromospheric activity . 
 = = Orbit and mass = = 
 In the 5 @-@ planet solution for the 55 Cancri system , the orbit of 55 Cancri c is mildly eccentric : at <unk> the planet is about 19 % further from the star than it is at periastron . It is located closer to 55 Cancri A than Mercury is to our sun , though it has a longer orbital period than the hot Jupiters . The planet is located close to a 3 : 1 resonance with the inner planet 55 Cancri b ; however , simulations indicate that the two planets are not actually in this resonance . 
 A limitation of the radial velocity method used to discover the planet is that only a lower limit on the mass can be obtained . Further astrometric observations with the Hubble Space Telescope on the outer planet 55 Cancri d suggest that planet is inclined at 53 ° to the plane of the sky ; but innermost b and e are inclined at 85 ° . Planet c 's inclination is unknown . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Since the planet was detected indirectly through observations of its star , properties such as its radius , composition , and temperature are unknown . With a mass similar to that of Saturn , 55 Cancri c is likely to be a gas giant with no solid surface . 
 = USS Maryland ( BB @-@ 46 ) = 
 USS Maryland ( BB @-@ 46 ) , also known as " Old Mary " or " Fighting Mary " to her crewmates , was a Colorado @-@ class battleship . She was the third ship of the United States Navy to be named in honor of the seventh state . She was commissioned in 1921 and , serving as the flagship of the fleet , cruised to Australia , New Zealand and Brazil . 
 She is most notable for her service in World War II . She was present on Battleship Row during the Attack on Pearl Harbor , and was lightly damaged by Japanese bombs . Returning to duty in 1942 , she saw service in the Pacific War , first supporting the rest of the fleet at the Battle of Midway , and then patrolling the Fiji Islands to guard against Japanese incursion . Next , she went on the offensive , commencing shore bombardments in the Battle of Tarawa and later in the Battle of Kwajalein . During the Battle of Saipan she took torpedo damage to her bow , necessitating repairs and refits . She then participated in the Battle of Leyte Gulf where she was hit by a kamikaze . She took another kamikaze hit at the Battle of Okinawa , and was under repair at the end of World War II . 
 After service in Operation Magic Carpet , she was decommissioned in 1947 and sold for scrap in 1959 . She received seven battle stars for World War II service . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Maryland was one of four dreadnought battleships of the Colorado class to be constructed . Her keel was laid down on 24 April 1917 by Newport News Shipbuilding Company of Newport News , Virginia . She was launched on 20 March 1920 , and sponsored by Mrs. E. Brook Lee daughter @-@ in @-@ law of U.S. Senator from Maryland Blair Lee ; she was commissioned on 21 July 1921 , with Captain C.F. Preston in command . She was the third ship named for the state of Maryland , the first Maryland was a sloop commissioned in 1799 and the second Maryland was an armored cruiser commissioned in 1905 . 
 Maryland had an overall length of 624 feet ( 190 m ) . She had an extreme beam of 97 @.@ 5 feet ( 29 @.@ 7 m ) and a mean draft of 30 @.@ 5 feet ( 9 @.@ 3 m ) . She displaced 32 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 31 @,@ 000 long tons ; 35 @,@ 000 short tons ) . Her armor was 18 inches ( 460 mm ) at its maximum thickness . Her designed speed was 21 knots . Her crew complement consisted of 58 officers and 1 @,@ 022 men . 
 Maryland 's main battery consisted of eight 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) / 45 caliber Mark 1 guns in four double turrets ( two in a superfiring pair forward , two in a superfiring pair mounted aft of the main superstructure ) that were capable of firing 2 @,@ 110 pounds ( 960 kg ) armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) Mark 3 shells , later upgraded to 2 @,@ 240 pounds ( 1 @,@ 020 kg ) Mark 5 . Her secondary battery consisted of twelve 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) / 51 <unk> guns as well as four 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) / 23 caliber guns . She was also armed with a pair of 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) submerged torpedo tubes . She was outfitted with a new type of seaplane catapult and the first 16 in ( 410 mm ) guns mounted on a U.S. ship . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Inter @-@ war period = = = 
 Following her commissioning , Maryland undertook an East Coast shakedown cruise . Shortly thereafter , Maryland was made flagship of Admiral Hilary P. Jones . Maryland found herself in great demand for special occasions . She appeared at Annapolis , Maryland , for the 1922 United States Naval Academy graduation and at Boston , Massachusetts , for the anniversary of the battle of Bunker Hill and the Fourth of July . From 18 August to 25 September , she paid her first visit to a foreign port transporting Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes to Rio de Janeiro for Brazil 's Centennial Exposition . The next year , after fleet exercises off the Panama Canal Zone , Maryland transited the canal in the latter part of June to join the battle fleet stationed on the west coast . She continued to be a flagship until 1923 when the flag was shifted to Pennsylvania . 
 She made another voyage to a foreign port in 1925 , this time to Australia and New Zealand . Several years later , in 1928 , she transported President @-@ elect Herbert Hoover on the Pacific leg of his tour of Latin America . She was overhauled in 1928 – 1929 , and the eight 3 in ( 76 mm ) anti @-@ aircraft guns were replaced by eight 5 in ( 130 mm ) / 25 cal guns . Throughout these years and the 1930s , she served as a mainstay of fleet readiness through tireless training operations . She conducted numerous patrols in the 1930s . 
 In 1940 , Maryland and the other battleships of the battle force changed their bases of operations to Pearl Harbor . She was present at Battleship Row along Ford Island during the Japanese attack on 7 December 1941 . 
 = = = Attack on Pearl Harbor = = = 
 On the morning of 7 December , Maryland was moored along Ford Island , with Oklahoma to port , connected by lines and a gangway . To her fore was California , while Tennessee and West Virginia were astern . Further aft were Nevada and Arizona . The seven battleships , in what is now known as " Battleship Row , " had recently returned from maneuvers . Many of Maryland 's crew were preparing for shore leave at 09 : 00 or eating breakfast when the Japanese attack began . As the first Japanese aircraft appeared and explosions rocked the outboard battleships , Maryland ' s bugler blew general quarters . 
 Seaman Leslie Short — addressing Christmas cards near his machine gun — brought the first of his ship 's guns into play , shooting down one of two torpedo bombers that had just released against Oklahoma . Inboard of Oklahoma , and thus protected from the initial torpedo attack , Maryland managed to bring all her antiaircraft ( AA ) batteries into action . The devastating initial attack sank Oklahoma , and she capsized quickly , with many of her surviving men climbing aboard Maryland to assist her with anti @-@ aircraft defenses . 
 Maryland was struck by two armor @-@ piercing bombs which detonated low on her hull . The first struck the forecastle awning and made a hole about 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) by 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . The second exploded after entering the hull at the 22 ft ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) water level at Frame 10 . The latter hit caused flooding and increased the draft forward by 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) . Maryland continued to fire and , after the attack , sent firefighting parties to assist her compatriots , especially attempting to rescue survivors from the capsized Oklahoma . The men continued to muster the AA defenses in case the Japanese returned to attack . In all , two officers and two men were killed in the attack . 
 The Japanese erroneously announced that Maryland had been sunk , but on 30 December , the damaged ship entered Puget Sound Navy Yard for repairs just behind Tennessee . Two of the original twelve 5 in / 51 cal guns were removed and the 5 in / 25 cal guns were replaced by an equal number of 5 in / 38 cal dual purpose guns . Over the course of several months , she was repaired and overhauled , receiving new fighting equipment . Repairs were complete on 26 February 1942 . She then underwent a series of shakedown cruises to West Coast ports and the Christmas Islands . She was sent back into action in June 1942 , the first ship damaged at Pearl Harbor to return to duty . 
 = = = Supporting patrols = = = 
 During the important Battle of Midway , Maryland played a supporting role . Like the other older battleships , she was not fast enough to accompany the aircraft carriers , so she operated with a backup fleet . Maryland stood by on security , awaiting call from other ships if she was needed , until the end of the battle . At the end of the action around Midway , Maryland was sent to San Francisco . 
 Thereafter , Maryland engaged in almost constant training exercises with Battleship Division 2 , Battleship Division 3 , and Battleship Division 4 until 1 August , when she returned to Pearl Harbor for repairs , her first time in the harbor since the Japanese attack . She departed Pearl Harbor in early November with Colorado , bound for the forward area . On 12 November , the pig mascot King Neptune came aboard Maryland to initiate her " <unk> " for the line @-@ crossing ceremony . Maryland steamed for the Fiji Islands where she patrolled against Japanese incursion . The two battleships acted as sentinels to guard against Japanese advance to prevent Japanese forces from threatening Australia . During this duty , the two battleships conducted frequent sweeps for Japanese forces . 
 In early 1943 , with the success of the Solomon Islands campaign , Allied forces went on the offensive . In February 1943 , Maryland and Colorado moved to New Hebrides , operating off of Efate . Intense heat there proved difficult and unpleasant for the crew . She then moved to Espiritu Santo to guard against Japanese incursion , but heat and heavy rains plagued this tour of duty . Maryland and Colorado stood out of <unk> Island Harbor in August . During a five @-@ week overhaul at Pearl Harbor 's shipyard , several 40 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) AA guns were installed on the top decks and foremast as protection against anticipated Japanese air raids in future operations . 
 = = = Battle of Tarawa = = = 
 Departing the Hawaiian Islands on 20 October 1943 for the South Pacific , Maryland became flagship for Rear Admiral Harry W. Hill 's V Amphibious Force and Southern Attack Force in the Gilbert Islands Invasion . Also aboard her were Major General Julian C. Smith , commander of 2nd Marine Division , General " Howling Mad " Smith , commander of the Marine landing forces , and Colonel Evans Carlson , commander of Carlson 's Raiders . Maryland returned to Efate Island staging area , where she joined a large task force preparing for an assault on Tarawa . 
 The battle of Tarawa commenced on 20 November . In her first offensive action of the war , Maryland 's guns opened fire at 05 : 00 , destroying a shore battery with five salvos on the southwestern point of Betio Island in the Tarawa Atoll . At 06 : 00 she commenced a scheduled shore bombardment to soften up Japanese defenses ahead of the landings . Maryland moved closer to shore to attract Japanese fire and locate artillery emplacements , in the process raking Japanese gun emplacements , control stations , pillboxes and any Japanese installations she could spot . At 09 : 00 as Marine landing forces encountered heavy Japanese resistance and began taking casualties to emplaced crossfire , Maryland provided covering fire to eliminate several Japanese machine gun nests . Her scouting plane then began to cover the progress of the Marines ' assault , with Maryland providing artillery support . The plane was damaged and pilot wounded in this action . 
 After three days of covering the offensive on Betio Island , she moved to Apamama Island to guard Marine landings there . Marines met with only light resistance from 30 Japanese soldiers there , and two prisoners were brought to Maryland . On 7 December , Maryland left Apamama Island for Pearl Harbor . After a brief stopover there , Maryland left for San Francisco for repairs . 
 = = = Battle of Kwajalein Atoll = = = 
 Maryland steamed from San Pedro , California on 13 January 1944 , rendezvoused with Task Force 53 at Lahaina Roads for two days of loading ammunition , refueling , and provisioning ahead of a new operation supporting the Marshall Islands campaign . On 30 January 1944 , she moved to support landings on Roi Island , along with Santa Fe , Biloxi , and Indianapolis , which formed the Northern Support Group of TF 35 . 
 In the predawn hours of 31 January , the ships began a bombardment of Kwajalein Atoll , the opening moves of the battle of Kwajalein . Maryland destroyed numerous Japanese stationary guns and pillboxes . In the course of the battle , she fired so much that she split the liners in the guns of Turret No. 1 , putting it out of action for the rest of the day . On 1 February , she continued her attack on Japanese positions as the U.S. landing forces advanced . She became the flagship for Admiral Connally for the next two weeks , resupplying and refueling many of the smaller ships in the operation until she departed with a task unit of carriers and destroyers on 15 February 1944 , steaming for Bremerton Navy Yard , where she underwent another overhaul , with her guns being replaced . 
 = = = Battle of Saipan = = = 
 Two months later , Maryland sailed westward on 5 May , joining Task Force 52 headed for Saipan . Vice Admiral Richmond K. Turner allotted TF 52 three days to soften up the island 's defenses ahead of the assault . Firing commenced at 05 : 45 on 14 June . They quickly destroyed two coastal guns , then began bombarding <unk> , destroying ammunition dumps , gun positions , small boats , storage tanks , blockhouses and buildings . She then turned her guns to <unk> , leveling it in heavy bombardment . The invasion commenced 15 June , and Maryland provided fire support for the landing forces . 
 The Japanese attempted to counter the battleships through the air . On 18 June , the ship 's guns shot down their first Japanese aircraft , but on 22 June , a Mitsubishi <unk> " Betty " medium bomber flew low over the still @-@ contested Saipan hills and found Maryland and Pennsylvania . The Japanese plane dropped a torpedo , opening a large hole in Maryland 's portside bow . The attack caused light casualties , and in 15 minutes she was underway for Eniwetok , and from there she steamed for the repair yards at Pearl Harbor ( in reverse the whole time so as not to do further damage to her bow ) , escorted by two destroyers . Two men were killed in the attack . 
 With an around @-@ the @-@ clock effort by the shipyard workers , Maryland was repaired in 34 days , departing on 13 August . She then embarked for the Solomon Islands with a large task force , anchoring in Purvis Bay off Florida Island for two weeks before steaming for the Palau Islands on 6 September . She then joined Rear Admiral Jesse B. Oldendorf 's Western Fire Support Group ( Task Group 32 @.@ 5 ; TG 32 @.@ 5 ) . Firing first on 12 September to cover minesweeping operations and underwater demolition teams at the opening of the Battle of Peleliu , Maryland again conducted shore bombardment supporting the landing craft as they approached the beaches on 15 September . Four days later , organized resistance collapsed , permitting the fire support ships to retire to the Admiralty Islands at the end of the month . 
 = = = Battle of Leyte Gulf = = = 
 Maryland steamed for Seeadler Harbor , Manus where she was assigned to the 7th Fleet under Admiral Kincaid . The fleet sortied 12 October and Maryland joined Task Group 77 @.@ 2 , which was the gunfire and covering force for the invasion of Leyte . She , along with four other battleships and numerous cruisers and destroyers , steamed into Leyte Gulf on the morning of 18 October . Maryland took position between Red and White Beaches and began bombarding them ahead of the invasion , which began at 10 : 00 20 October . Securing the beaches quickly , Maryland then took up a sentinel position in Leyte Gulf to guard the beaches against Japanese counterattack by sea . 
 For the next several days , Japanese forces launched air raids to counter the incursion . These included the first widespread use of the kamikaze suicide attack . Several days later , U.S. submarines in the South China Sea spotted two Japanese forces on approach : five battleships steaming toward San Bernardino Strait , and another force of four Japanese carriers in northern Luzon . 
 On 24 October , Maryland , West Virginia , Mississippi , Tennessee , California , and Pennsylvania sailed to the southern end of Leyte Gulf to protect Surigao Strait with several cruisers , destroyers , and PT Boats . Early on 25 October , during the Battle of Surigao Strait , Japanese battleships Fusō and Yamashiro , with their screens , led the Japanese advance into the Strait . At 03 : 55 , the waiting Americans ships launched an ambush of the two Japanese battleships , pounding them with torpedoes and main guns . Torpedoes from the destroyers sunk Fusō . Continued attacks by the task force also claimed Yamashiro . A few of the remaining Japanese ships then fled to the Mindanao Sea , pursued by Allied aircraft . 
 Following the victory , Maryland patrolled the southern approaches to Surigao Strait until 29 October ; she then steamed for the Admiralty Isles for brief replenishment and resumed patrol duty around Leyte on 16 November , protecting the landing forces from continued Japanese air attacks . On 29 November , during another Japanese air attack , a kamikaze aircraft surprised and struck Maryland . The aircraft crashed into Maryland between Turrets No. 1 and 2 , piercing the forecastle , main , and armored decks and blowing a hole in the 4 inch steel , causing extensive damage and starting fires . In all , 31 men were killed and 30 wounded in the attack , and the medical department was destroyed but still functional . 
 The battleship continued her patrols until relieved on 2 December , when she sailed with two heavily damaged destroyers for repairs . She reached Pearl Harbor on 18 December , and was extensively repaired and refitted over the next several months . 
 = = = Battle of Okinawa = = = 
 After refresher training , Maryland headed for the western Pacific on 4 March 1945 , arriving Ulithi on 16 March . There she joined the 5th Fleet and Rear Admiral Morton Deyo 's Task Force 54 ( TF 54 ) , which was preparing for the invasion of Okinawa . The fleet departed on 21 March , bound for Okinawa . 
 Maryland was assigned targets on the southern coast of Okinawa to support a diversionary landing , which would distract Japanese forces away from the main landing on the west coast . Japanese forces responded with several air raids , with two of Maryland 's radar picket destroyers being struck by kamikaze planes , with Luce sinking . On 3 April , she was moved to the west coast invasion beaches to assist Minneapolis in destroying several shore batteries . Following the land invasion , she remained with the support force off Bolo Point providing artillery support for the invading troops . 
 Maryland continued fire support duty until 7 April , when she steamed north to intercept a Japanese surface force with TF 54 . The Japanese ships , including the Yamato , came under constant U.S. air attacks that day , and planes of the Fast Carrier Task Force sank six of the 10 ships in the force . At dusk , a kamikaze loaded with a 551 lb ( 250 kg ) bomb crashed the top of Turret No. 3 from starboard . The explosion wiped out the 20 mm mounts and caused a large fire . The 20mm ammunition ignited from the heat , causing further casualties . In all , 10 were killed , 37 injured and 6 missing following this attack . Maryland remained on station for the next week and continued her artillery support mission through several more air raids . Turret No. 3 , damaged but usable , remained silent for the remainder of this mission . 
 On 14 April , Maryland left the firing line at Okinawa and escorted several retiring transports . They steamed via the Mariana Islands and Guam to Pearl Harbor , and she reached the Puget Sound Navy Yard at Bremerton on 7 May for extensive overhaul . All of her 5 in guns were removed and replaced by sixteen 5 inch / 38 cal guns in new twin mounts . Turret No. 3 was repaired and the crew quarters were improved . She completed repairs in August , leaving for tests and training runs just as Japan surrendered , ending the war . 
 She next entered Operation Magic Carpet fleet . During the remaining months of 1945 , Maryland made five voyages between the west coast and Pearl Harbor , returning more than 8 @,@ 000 servicemen to the United States . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 Arriving at Seattle , Washington on 17 December , Maryland completed her Operation Magic Carpet duty . She entered Puget Sound Naval Shipyard on 15 April 1946 , and was placed in commission in inactive reserve on 16 July . She was decommissioned at Bremerton on 3 April 1947 , and remained there as a unit of the Pacific Reserve Fleet . Maryland was sold for scrapping to Learner Company of Oakland , California on 8 July 1959 . 
 On 2 June 1961 , Governor of Maryland J. Millard Tawes , dedicated a monument to the memory of Maryland and her men . Built of granite and bronze and incorporating the bell of " Fighting Mary " , this monument is located on the grounds of the State House in Annapolis , Maryland . 
 = = Awards = = 
 American Defense Service Medal with " FLEET " clasp 
 American Campaign Medal 
 Asiatic Pacific Campaign Medal with seven battle stars 
 World War II Victory Medal 
 The Maryland received seven battle stars for World War II service . 
 Pearl Harbor @-@ Midway : 7 December 1941 
 Gilbert Islands operation : 13 November – 8 December 1943 
 Marshall Islands operation : Occupation of Kwajalein and Majuro Islands : 28 January – 8 February 1944 
 Marianas operation : Capture and occupation of Saipan : 11 June – 10 August 1944 
 Western Caroline Islands operations : Capture and occupation of southern Palau Island : 6 September – 14 October 1944 
 Leyte operation : Leyte landings : 1 October – 29 November 1944 
 Okinawa Gunto operation : Assault and occupation of Okinawa Gunto : 24 March – 30 June 1945 
 = Hightail = 
 Hightail – formerly YouSendIt – is a cloud service that lets users send , receive , digitally sign and synchronize files . <unk> and YouSendIt Inc. were founded in 2004 ; the company renamed itself Hightail in 2013 . 
 The company 's early focus was on helping users send files that were too large for email ; it started adding features and plug @-@ ins for businesses in 2007 . The service grew quickly , and the firm raised $ 49 million in funding between 2005 and 2010 . The service can now be used via the web , a desktop client , mobile devices , or from within business applications with a Hightail plugin . 
 In May 2015 , the company launched Hightail Spaces , designed to encourage creative professionals from conception of an idea to delivery . 
 = = History = = 
 Hightail was founded as YouSendIt Inc. in 2004 by three cofounders : Ranjith <unk> , Amir Shaikh and Khalid Shaikh . In its early years , Amir pursued advertising revenues , Jimmy <unk> managed business development , Francis Wu created the graphic design including the logo , while Kumaran focused on the user experience and Khalid did technical work . By May 2004 , the company had 300 @,@ 000 users and was growing 30 percent each month . That September , Cambrian Ventures invested $ 250 @,@ 000 . At first , YouSendIt was mainly used to send large files , such as photos or audio files , which were too large for the file @-@ size limits set by email providers at the time . 
 $ 5 million in funding was raised in August 2005 . Afterwards there was a falling out between the founders . Within a few years , Khalid and Amir Shaikh left the company , while Kumaran stayed in a product management and marketing role . In 2011 , Shaikh plead guilty to making denial of service ( DoS ) attacks on the website for the YouSendIt service between December 2008 to June 2009 . 
 Ivan Koon took over as CEO and YouSendIt continued to raise a total of $ 49 million . YouSendIt grew as file recipients saw how the service works , reaching 100 @,@ 000 paying users and 8 @.@ 5 million registered users by March 2009 . In January 2011 , YouSendIt Inc. acquired a developer of Microsoft Outlook add @-@ ons , <unk> , and an iPhone app developer , <unk> . 
 In May 2012 , a former AOL and Yahoo ! executive , Brad <unk> , was appointed as CEO . He refocused the company on file sharing and remote document access , placing it in competition with Dropbox Inc. and Box Inc . Hightail began advertising against competitors Dropbox and Box with slogans like " Your files should be neither Dropped nor Boxed " . 
 In January 2013 , YouSendIt acquired Found Software , a company that develops the Found for Mac application that searches for files on Macintosh computers and connected networks . In July of that year YouSendIt announced its rebranding as Hightail , to represent its move beyond file sharing and into file collaboration services . New mobile apps for iOS and Windows devices were also introduced , as well as an unlimited storage option . 
 In September 2013 , Hightail acquired <unk> , a security @-@ focused file @-@ sharing service for hosting files inside a corporate firewall . In November , Hightail raised $ 34 million in additional funding . Brad <unk> resigned as CEO in September 2014 , allegedly due to disagreements with the board of directors . He was replaced by co @-@ founder Ranjith Kumaran . 
 = = Products and services = = 
 Users of the Hightail service upload a file to Hightail 's servers and recipients are provided with a link where the file can be downloaded . Users can also manage files in an online folder system , or create desktop folders that access online storage . 
 In addition to <unk> , the service can be used from desktop applications for Windows and Mac , or from mobile apps for iOS and Android devices . There are also plugins for business applications , such as Microsoft Outlook and Yahoo ! Mail , that allow users to send files from within the application . Documents can be signed digitally with Hightail using a mouse or touch @-@ screen . The service has a pay @-@ per @-@ use security feature and files sent through Hightail are encrypted during transit and while stored on individual devices or servers . 
 The consumer version is sold on a freemium basis , while a business product is sold as YouSendIt for Business , which was originally released as <unk> . YouSendIt for Business integrates with Active Directory and Microsoft Sharepoint . The business version has additional features for corporate use , such as remote data wipes on mobile devices , service level agreements and controls for compliance requirements , such as <unk> and PCI . 
 As of 2013 , the company has more than 40 million registered users , in about 200 countries . Most use its free service for 2 GB of storage , while a half @-@ million pay for unlimited storage and additional features . 
 = = = Software versions = = = 
 YouSendIt was initially known as a way for individuals to share personal files and images on <unk> In 2007 , a Corporate Suite was released that had management and reporting features for business users . The following year , a tool for embedding YouSendIt into third @-@ party websites , called <unk> , was introduced . 
 Throughout 2008 , YouSendIt added plugins that allowed files to be sent through YouSendIt from within applications like Final Cut Pro , Microsoft Outlook , and Adobe Acrobat . In May of that year , a new release of Yahoo ! Mail included YouSendIt built @-@ in , which added a million YouSendIt users over the following two months . In July , YouSendIt 's online folder management system and digital signing features were introduced in order to compete with Dropbox . The following month , YouSendIt added applications for Mac and PC desktops , as well as iOS and Android devices . 
 In March 2012 , YouSendIt released a separate product intended for business users called <unk> , which was later renamed to YouSendIt for Business . 
 = = Reception = = 
 PC Magazine gave the service a 4 / 5 rating . The reviewer , Jeffrey Wilson , found its app easy to use and noted its digital signing and cloud storage features . Wilson reported problems when trying to use the digital signing feature with the phone held vertically and experienced occasional crashes . <unk> gave the service a 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 . <unk> praised the product for unlimited downloads and accessibility from a desktop , laptop or other mobile device . In benchmark tests , the service took seven minutes to upload a 30 MB file , compared to an industry average of six minutes . 
 According to a review in Small Business Trends , " Probably one of the most powerful features is the ability to sign digital documents . " A review in About.com said the service was easy @-@ to @-@ use and noted its features for password protection , file @-@ tracking and interface branding , but also pointed out that users cannot copy themselves on files sent through the Hightail Outlook application . A reviewer at MacLife liked its synchronization and collaboration tools , but had some complaints about a " clunky " user interface . 
 For the " for Business " product , PC Advisor stated that Dropbox , had better customization , while YouSendIt had the advantage of integration with Sharepoint and Active Directory for corporate environments . Enterprise Strategy Group ( ESG ) conducted a comparative review of vendors in the file sharing and collaboration market in 2012 . It gave an average score from an end @-@ user 's perspective and a slightly below @-@ average score from an administrator 's perspective . ESG noted that the pricing model was expensive on a per @-@ user basis , but its lack of caps or surcharges made it more affordable for heavy users . ESG testers found it easy and secure , but noted it lacked the auditing and workflow features of some competitors . 
 = Brian Tierney = 
 Brian P. Tierney ( born 1957 ) is an American advertising and public relations executive and former publisher of The Philadelphia Inquirer . Born in Upper Darby Township , Pennsylvania , Tierney created Tierney Communications , one of the largest and most successful public relations and advertising firms in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , which he sold in 1999 and left in 2003 . Tierney currently serves as chief executive officer of Brian Communications , which he founded in 2010 , and RealTime Media , which he bought from the previous owners with the help of the venture firm , New Spring Capital . During his early years as a public relations advocate for his clients , Tierney was known for occasionally contacting reporters and their editors when he believed there was evidence of bias or unprofessionalism surrounding a negative story about his clients . Five years after True North Communications acquired Tierney Communications in 1998 , Tierney left and founded another public relations firm , which was a sold a few months later . 
 Tierney in 2006 assembled a group of investors to form Philadelphia Media Holdings LLC , a group started with the purpose of buying The Philadelphia Inquirer and Philadelphia Daily News . Chief executive of Philadelphia Media Holdings , Mr. Tierney also became the publisher of the Philadelphia Inquirer shortly after Philadelphia Media Holdings bought the paper . Initially , there were concerns about Tierney 's neutrality because of earlier roles he held working in Republican politics and clashes he had with some reporters . But Mr. Tierney calmed those fears by hiring respected journalist and two @-@ time Pulitzer Prize winner William K. Marimow as editor of The Inquirer and by signing a pledge not to interfere with the editorial content of the two newspapers . Under Mr. Marimow , the editorial quality of The Inquirer improved as the paper returned to its roots by doing more investigative stories . Initially , circulation increased in 2007 and advertising sales improved . Meanwhile , the Daily News won the 2010 Pulitzer Prize for investigative journalism for a series of stories on corrupt Philadelphia cops . However , the 2008 financial crisis led to a steep drop in advertising revenue . At the same time , circulation dropped as more readers migrated to the Internet . Newspaper values across the country plummeted by 90 percent or more . Mr. Tierney 's group bought the paper at the top of the market and was saddled with a heavy debt burden . As a result , Philadelphia Media Holdings was forced to file for bankruptcy protection under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code . On April 28 , 2010 , the Philadelphia Inquirer , Daily News and <unk> were sold at a bankruptcy auction to a group of the original lenders , hedge funds and vulture investors led by Angelo Gordon & Company for $ 139 million . Mr. Tierney stepped down from his position as CEO of the company on May 21 , 2010 in order to allow for a smooth transition . Several news accounts of his tenure have called him an " improbable savior " and an " unlikely warrior . " Other accounts have said , " For Tierney ... his tenure as CEO by many measures could be rated a success . " and " As for Tierney , give him credit for trying . " 
 In the fall of 2010 , Tierney went back to his marketing and public relations roots by launching Brian Communications , and purchasing Realtime Media , a company specializing in digital marketing services for brands that include CNN , L ’ <unk> , Toys “ R ” Us and Unilever . The fast @-@ growing firm moved to Conshohocken , <unk> in the summer of 2013 after outgrowing its old office space . 
 Outside of business , Tierney has been active in politics and a supporter of Republican causes . Working for the Ronald Reagan administration in the 1980s , Tierney also worked in George W. Bush 's 2000 Presidential election campaign , and Sam Katz 's 2003 run for Philadelphia mayor . Tierney is also an active member of numerous board of directors including <unk> , The Episcopal Academy and the Poynter Institute Foundation , where he serves as chairman . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brian Tierney is the fourth of five sons of James and Claire Tierney . Growing up in Upper Darby Township , Pennsylvania , he attended Waldron Mercy Academy and later The Episcopal Academy . When he was seven , his family moved to Springfield Township , Pennsylvania . In 1975 , at the age of eighteen , Tierney unsuccessfully sought the Democratic nomination for township commissioner of Springfield . During the campaign supporters of his opponent in the Democratic primary had torn down his campaign posters and stole other campaign items . Tierney became a Republican after the primary when a few Republicans who said they would look out for his stuff during his primary campaign , invited him to a party meeting . 
 He graduated from the University of Pennsylvania in 1979 , majoring in political science . At the University of Pennsylvania , Tierney ran the Penn Students for Gerald Ford campaign , and , at the age of twenty @-@ two , moved to Washington , D.C. where he worked for the Republican National Committee in various positions , including as a messenger between Ronald Reagan 's administration and Republican candidates across the country . Tierney moved back to the Philadelphia region as a Reagan appointee in the U.S. Small Business Administration 's public affairs office . In 1987 , he received a law degree from Widener University . Tierney married in 1980 and has two children . 
 = = Public relations = = 
 While earning his law degree at Widener University , Tierney founded Tierney & Company Public Relations in 1984 , which he financed on his credit card . In 1986 , he sold the company to Lewis Gilman & Kynett . Tierney stayed with Lewis Gilman & Kynett and by the time he turned twenty @-@ nine he had become president and CEO of the public relations division . In 1989 , he left Lewis Gilman & Kynett and founded Tierney Group , another public relations company , with just three people . One of those people remembers Tierney 's saying " We need to look at what everyone else is charging and charge our clients $ 15 an hour more . " When told that was crazy Tierney responded , " We 're going to be the best at what we do . We need to charge people accordingly . " The company quickly grew with billings of US $ 3 @.@ 5 million and thirty @-@ five employees in offices in three cities . 
 In 1994 Tierney , in association with Chicago @-@ based True North Communications , made a deal with Foote , Cone & Belding Communications to take control of FCB Philadelphia . FCB Philadelphia , which up to 1989 was Lewis Gilman & Kynett , was renamed FCB / Tierney in May 1994 and renamed again in 1995 to Tierney & Partners . Tierney built the company into one of the largest public relations and advertising firms in the Mid Atlantic . Tierney 's clients included IBM , McDonald 's , Verizon , PECO Energy and the Pennsylvania Lottery . The company created an award winning advertising campaign for Verizon starring James Earl Jones and the slogan " Philadelphia : The place that loves you back " for the Greater Philadelphia Tourism Marketing Corporation . Other advertising campaigns included wrapping a giant hoagie around Philadelphia City Hall to promote Wawa Food Markets and an ad campaign to prevent a hostile takeover of PECO Energy by Enron . 
 = = = Cipriano affair = = = 
 Along with promotions , Tierney would advocate on behalf of his clients when targeted by news reporters . Tierney would sometimes contact news editors to complain about coverage of his clients , accusing news reporters of being biased , incompetent and unprofessional . The most notable of Tierney 's complaints to reporters was directed at The Philadelphia Inquirer and Inquirer reporter Ralph Cipriano . 
 Ralph Cipriano was The Philadelphia Inquirer 's religion reporter for about a year in 1993 . During that time he was called several times by Tierney on behalf of Tierney 's client , the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Philadelphia . After leaving the religion reporter position , Cipriano wrote articles for the Sunday paper , where in 1997 he wrote a profile on Cardinal Anthony Bevilacqua . The profile turned into an investigative piece as Cipriano obtained documents detailing US $ 5 million in questionable spending and how the church was spending millions in the suburbs while cutting inner @-@ city services . 
 While Cipriano worked on the piece , he and his editors , Jonathan Neumann and Pulitzer Prize winner Robert Rosenthal , were contacted by Tierney . Tierney accused Ralph Cipriano of using inaccurate facts , trespassing and creating a protest at the Archdiocese 's vacation home in Ventnor City , New Jersey , all of which Cipriano denies . Cipriano says that Tierney indicated to him that it was the Archdiocese that had gotten him removed from the religion reporter position , a position Cipriano says he thought he left on his own . Also according to Cipriano , Tierney indicated that if Cipriano was involved in any story about the Archdiocese of Philadelphia , Tierney would start a public relations campaign to ruin Cipriano and The Philadelphia Inquirer , a charge that Tierney denies . 
 The story Cipriano originally wanted in The Inquirer was never published . Cipriano accused The Inquirer of censoring his report and giving into demands from the Archdiocese . Cipriano eventually was published in the National Catholic Reporter and editor Robert Rosenthal accused Cipriano of bias and not being able to prove his stories . Rosenthal said Cipriano " has a very strong personal point of view and an agenda ... There were things we didn 't publish that Ralph wrote that we didn 't think were truthful . He could never prove them . " Cipriano sued Rosenthal and The Inquirer for libel and the case was later settled out of court . In an 2001 interview with the Editor & Publisher , Cardinal Bevilacqua credited Tierney with stopping the story and noted that The Philadelphia Inquirer 's stories about the Archdiocese have been more positive . In 1998 Tierney was named a Knight of the Order of St. Gregory the Great by Pope John Paul II . 
 = = = Later ventures = = = 
 Tierney Group and Tierney & Partners , later renamed Tierney Communications , was bought by True North Communications in 1998 , which is now part of Interpublic Group . Tierney continued as CEO until April 2002 , when he stepped down . He continued with Tierney Communications as chairman until December 1 , 2003 , when Tierney resigned and announced he was founding a new public relations firm , T2 Group . 
 T2 Group lasted until June 2004 when Tierney announced it was being bought by credit card company Advanta and that Tierney and most of T2 's management would be hired by Advanta . Tierney became vice chairman of Advanta , but in February 2005 , Advanta announced Tierney was no longer serving as vice @-@ chairman . The company gave no explanation as to why Tierney lost the position and Tierney 's employment with the company ended the next month . 
 = = Philadelphia Media Holdings = = 
 In 2005 Tierney attempted to buy magazines Inc. and Fast Company from Gruner + Jahr , but failed . Tierney tried again to enter the media industry in March 2006 when he assembled a group of mostly former clients or people that are with him on the board of the Episcopal Academy to buy Philadelphia Newspapers Inc . He and other local businessman formed Philadelphia Media Holdings LLC and bought The Philadelphia Inquirer , Philadelphia Daily News and <unk> for US $ 515 million from The McClatchy Company which was selling off newspapers in unionized and low @-@ growth markets after buying Philadelphia Newspapers Inc . ' s parent company Knight Ridder . The buyout was met with skepticism by many at The Inquirer , especially by reporters who had been contacted in the past by Tierney on behalf of his clients . Tierney allayed fears with the members of Philadelphia Media Holdings signing a pledge not to interfere with the paper 's editorial independence . Tierney said he would combat The Inquirer 's decreasing revenue by spending millions on advertisements and promotions and not by laying off staff . Tierney assumed the role as publisher of The Philadelphia Inquirer in August 2006 after former publisher Joe <unk> resigned for a job at the University of Miami . 
 The Inquirer 's circulation has been dropping since the 1980s , and except for briefly seeing a rise in weekday circulation in 2007 , The Philadelphia Inquirer 's weekday and Sunday circulation has continued to steadily drop since Philadelphia Media Holdings bought the paper . Loss of circulation combined with an unexpected drop in advertising revenue have forced more than 400 job cuts at The Inquirer and Daily News since they were bought by Philadelphia Media Holdings . As Philadelphia Media Holdings financial situation worsened in 2008 employees began complaining about how management has been monitoring things such as bathroom breaks and the coffee they drink , and that Tierney has been patrolling the parking garage seeing what time employees arrive for work . Despite efforts to manage the financial strain , on February 21 , 2009 , Philadelphia Newspapers LLC , the subsidiary of Philadelphia Media Holdings that owns the paper , filled for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection . The company hoped to restructure the US $ 390 million in debt it borrowed to buy the newspapers , but the end result was that the papers were auctioned off to the company 's lenders . The beginning of 2009 also saw the filing of a lawsuit that accused The Philadelphia Inquirer of writing critical stories about Chester Community Charter School 's use of public funds after business negotiations between school operator Vahan H. <unk> and Tierney failed . 
 = = Other activities = = 
 Tierney continued his political activism in the 1990s and early 2000s by donating to local and national campaigns and headed George W. Bush 's outreach to Catholics in the 2000 Presidential Election . Tierney was credited with helping generate votes for Bush and helping him win important states like Ohio and Missouri . Tierney also frequently appeared as a conservative voice on WPVI @-@ TV 's Inside Story . In 2003 Tierney headed Sam Katz 's third campaign for mayor of Philadelphia , which he lost to incumbent mayor John F. Street . During the campaign , Tierney was involved in a highly publicized dispute with Neil Oxman . Oxman was a political consultant and friend of Sam Katz who worked on Katz 's 1999 run for mayor . Oxman left Katz 's 2003 campaign because he was unable to work with Tierney , saying Tierney was a " shameless self @-@ promoter " and " full of bullshit " . Katz praised Tierney , who he said was full of optimism , which Katz said was a great asset when things were going poorly in the campaign and in Katz 's personal life . 
 Tierney is a member of numerous board of directors in the Philadelphia area . He has been on the boards of Thomas Jefferson University , the Zoological Society of Philadelphia and the University Museum of the University of Pennsylvania , among others . A member of the board for <unk> , Tierney played an important role in the company 's turnaround with the decision to dramatically increase the marketing budget . As a member of the board of the Episcopal Academy , Tierney galvanized the board of directors to buy land in Newtown Square , Pennsylvania and move the school there . In 2001 , the school 's board of trustees approved the preliminary step of buying 123 acres ( 49 @.@ 8 ha ) of farmland in Newtown Square . Tierney , along with fellow board member Brian O 'Neill , led a ninety @-@ day campaign to raise the US $ 20 million needed for the property . 
 The Pennsylvania Report named him to the 2009 " The Pennsylvania Report 100 " list of influential figures in Pennsylvania . In 2002 , he was named to the PoliticsPA list of politically influential individuals . In 2003 , he was named the PoliticsPA list of politically <unk> individuals , where he was called a " potential statewide candidate in 2004 . " 
 = Evan Gattis = 
 James Evan Gattis ( born August 18 , 1986 ) is an American professional baseball designated hitter and catcher for the Houston Astros of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He made his MLB debut with the Atlanta Braves on April 3 , 2013 . Gattis has also earned the nickname of " El Oso Blanco " or The White Bear , due to his raw power capabilities , and his large beard . While with Atlanta , he played catcher and occasionally left field . 
 Gattis was a premier amateur baseball player in the Dallas – Fort Worth area through high school . However , anxiety and substance abuse led him to abandon his scholarship to Texas A & M University . After wandering around the Western United States for four years , he returned to baseball , and was drafted by the Braves in 2010 . 
 After playing in minor league baseball for the Braves , Gattis made the team 's Opening Day roster in 2013 . Receiving playing time with Brian McCann on the disabled list , Gattis won the National League Rookie of the Month Award for both April and May 2013 . He became the Braves ' primary catcher in 2014 , but was traded to the Astros before the 2015 season . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gattis grew up in Forney , Texas , and began playing baseball at the age of six . His parents divorced when he was eight years old , and at the age of 12 , he moved from his mother 's house to live with his father 's new family . Busy playing baseball , Gattis never processed his parents ' divorce . 
 Gattis played for the Dallas Tigers , one of the premier amateur teams in the Dallas – Fort Worth metroplex . Clayton Kershaw , Corey <unk> and Yovani Gallardo were some of his teammates . He played on traveling All @-@ Star teams with Austin Jackson and in the Junior Olympic Games with Billy Butler , Homer Bailey , and Justin Upton . He attended high schools in the Dallas area , including R. L. Turner High School , Forney High School , and Bishop Lynch High School , in order to play for specific coaches . 
 Projected as a potential draft pick in the first eight rounds of the 2004 Major League Baseball ( MLB ) Draft , Gattis instead intimated that he intended to attend college and play college baseball . While Rice University offered him a scholarship to play first base , he accepted an offer from Texas A & M University , who wanted him to play as their catcher . However , the divorce of his parents and anxiety derived from the fear of failing at college baseball led Gattis to abuse alcohol and marijuana . He went undrafted in the 2004 draft . 
 Instead of going to college , Gattis ' mother took him to a drug rehabilitation facility , where he had a 30 @-@ day inpatient stay . He then went to Prescott , Arizona , where he had three months of outpatient therapy while living in a halfway house . 
 Gattis enrolled at Seminole State College , a junior college in Seminole , Oklahoma , after receiving a recruitment phone call from the team 's coach . Gattis redshirted as a freshman and played for half a season in 2006 . He injured his knee at Seminole State , became burned out on baseball , and quit . 
