 Gattis ' first job after quitting baseball was as a parking valet in Dallas . He then visited his sister in Boulder , Colorado , and decided to reside there . He sold his truck and worked in a pizza parlor and as a ski @-@ lift operator at the Eldora Mountain Resort . Depressed , unable to sleep , and contemplating suicide , Gattis entered an inpatient psychiatric ward for three days in the summer of 2007 , where he was diagnosed with clinical depression and an anxiety disorder . He was released into the care of his father . 
 After living in Colorado for seven months , Gattis then moved to Dallas with his brother , where they worked as janitors for <unk> Global Services . He met a New Age spiritual advisor there , and on her advice , he followed her to Taos , New Mexico . There , he lived in a hostel and worked at a ski resort . Three months later , he moved to California to find more spiritual gurus . Gattis also moved to Wyoming , where he worked at Yellowstone National Park . 
 = = Baseball career = = 
 = = = College and minor leagues = = = 
 Gattis decided to return to baseball in 2010 . His step @-@ brother , Drew Kendrick , was a college baseball player at the University of Texas of the Permian Basin . Brian <unk> , the coach of the Texas – Permian Basin Falcons , remembered Gattis from his high school career , and offered him a spot on the team . That season , he had a .403 batting average and 11 home runs . He was named the Heartland Conference 's player of the week for the week ending February 7 , and to the Conference 's post @-@ season first team . 
 The Atlanta Braves selected Gattis in the 23rd round of the 2010 MLB Draft . He batted .288 with four home runs in 35 games for the Danville Braves of the Rookie @-@ level Appalachian League that year . He failed to make the opening day roster of any Braves minor league team in 2011 , and remained in extended spring training . He was added to the roster of the Rome Braves of the Class A South Atlantic League ( SAL ) in May . Gattis won the SAL player of the week award twice during the season , and won the SAL batting title . After the season , the managers of the 14 teams in the SAL named Gattis to the post @-@ season all @-@ star team . 
 Gattis started the 2012 season with the Lynchburg Hillcats of the Class A @-@ Advanced Carolina League . After starting the season with a .385 batting average , nine home runs , and 29 runs batted in ( RBIs ) in 21 games , he was promoted to the Mississippi Braves of the Class AA Southern League at the end of April . With Brian McCann starting for the Braves and top prospect Christian Bethancourt regarded as an excellent catcher , Gattis was shifted to left field . After the regular season , he played in the Venezuelan Winter League , where he batted .303 with 16 home runs and a .595 slugging percentage in 53 games , leading the league in home runs and slugging percentage . He earned the nickname " El Oso Blanco " , Spanish for " the White Bear " . 
 = = = Atlanta Braves = = = 
 The Braves invited Gattis to spring training in 2013 as a non @-@ roster player . With a 19 @-@ for @-@ 53 ( .358 ) performance in the Grapefruit League and McCann starting the season on the disabled list , the Braves added Gattis to their Opening Day roster to share catching duties with Gerald Laird . On April 3 , 2013 , Gattis made his major league debut . He recorded his first hit as a major leaguer , a home run off of Roy Halladay , in his second at bat . He batted .333 in his first eight games , also homering off of Stephen Strasburg . Gattis was named the National League ( NL ) Rookie of the Month for April 2013 , in which he batted .250 and led all major league rookies with six home runs , a .566 slugging percentage ( SLG ) , 16 RBIs , and 43 total bases . 
 Following the return of McCann from the disabled list and an injury to outfielder Jason Heyward , Gattis began to play left field for the Braves . Gattis was again named NL Rookie of the Month for the month of May , after batting .303 with a .362 on @-@ base percentage and a .683 SLG for the month , while leading all rookies with 16 RBIs and tying Jedd Gyorko for most home runs as a rookie with six . Gattis became the first rookie to win consecutive Rookie of the Month awards since Heyward in 2010 . Gattis was on the disabled list from June 19 through July 14 with a strained oblique muscle . 
 With a 5 @-@ for @-@ 36 ( <unk> ) slump in August and McCann catching regularly , Gattis began to lose playing time . The Braves sent Gattis to the Gwinnett Braves of the Class AAA International League on August 31 so that he could play regularly . They recalled him on September 3 , when the International League season ended . On September 8 against Cole Hamels , Gattis recorded the longest home run of 2013 , calculated at 486 feet ( 148 m ) , which was also the longest home run in the history of Citizens Bank Park . Later in that same game Gattis hit another 400 + foot home run off of Hamels after flying out to the warning track in a previous at bat . Hamels was quoted as saying " I felt like I was throwing a golf ball and he had a driver . He 's probably going to be in the strongest man competition . " He ended the season with a .243 batting average , 21 home runs and 65 RBIs . He played a total of 47 games in left field and 38 at catcher . Gattis finished tied for seventh in NL Rookie of the Year balloting . 
 During the offseason , Gattis had surgery to remove a bone chip in his knee , which had bothered him since 2006 . With McCann leaving the Braves to sign as a free agent with the New York Yankees , Fredi González , the Braves ' manager , declared that he planned for Gattis to start between 100 and 110 games at catcher , with Laird catching the remainder , during the 2014 season . On April 16 , in a 1 – 0 win against the Philadelphia Phillies , Gattis went 4 @-@ for @-@ 4 with one home run , the first time a player has accomplished this in a 1 – 0 victory since Rogers Hornsby in 1929 . On April 21 , Gattis hit his first career walk @-@ off home run , a 2 @-@ run shot off of Miami Marlins reliever <unk> <unk> in the 10th inning to give the Braves a 4 – 2 victory . In June , he had a 20 game hitting streak . He went on the disabled list on June 30 with a bulging disc in his upper back , and returned to the Braves ' lineup on July 21 . Gattis hit the game winning home run , his 22nd of the season , against the Miami Marlins in the top of the 10th on September 6 , 2014 . This would give him a new career high and make him the first Braves catcher to hit 20 or more home runs in his rookie and sophomore seasons . 
 During the 2014 – 15 offseason , the Braves traded Heyward with the intention of shifting Gattis to left field , with Bethancourt at catcher . 
 = = = Houston Astros = = = 
 The Braves traded Gattis and James Hoyt to the Houston Astros for Mike <unk> , Andrew Thurman , and Rio Ruiz on January 14 , 2015 . Gattis said he was a fan of the Texas Rangers as a youth and not the Astros , but also said it is a " good environment " in Houston . During the 2015 season , Gattis hit 27 home runs in a career @-@ high 604 plate appearances , spending most of the season as the Astros ' primary designated hitter . He also recorded 11 triples , despite entering the 2015 season with one career triple and being the second @-@ slowest player in baseball , behind David Ortiz of the Boston Red Sox . 
 Gattis lost approximately 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) during the 2015 – 16 offseason by focusing on his nutrition and working with a personal trainer . He started only 11 games in left field in 2015 , none at catcher , and 136 at designated hitter . The Astros planned to play Gattis in the field more for the 2016 season , including left field , first base , and his original position of catcher . Eligible for salary arbitration , the Astros and Gattis agreed on a one @-@ year contract on February 16 , 2016 . The contract will pay Gattis $ 3 @.@ 3 million for the 2016 season , with a $ 5 @.@ 2 million club option for the 2017 season . Gattis underwent hernia surgery on February 9 , 2016 , causing him to miss spring training . He was activated in April 2016 , having missed seven regular season games due to the operation . In his first 20 games of 2016 , he batted .203 with a home run and seven RBIs . He was optioned to the Corpus Christi Hooks of the Class AA Texas League on May 7 , 2016 , in order to transition back into a catcher . He was recalled on May 18 , and started at catcher the next day . 
 = Rose Catherine Pinkney = 
 Rose Catherine Pinkney ( born 1964 ) is an American television development executive . She was hired as the VP Development and Original Programming for TV Land in 2012 . Pinkney has previously served as Director of Programming at Twentieth Century Fox Television , Senior Vice President of Comedy Development at Paramount Pictures Television and executive vice president of programming and production at TV One . She most recently served as the head of the television arm of Laurence Fishburne 's production company , Cinema Gypsy . Among Pinkney 's accolades are Network Journal 's 25 Most Influential Black Women in Business , Cable World 's Top 50 Women in Cable and Black Enterprise 's Top 50 Entertainment Executives . 
 = = Early life and academic career = = 
 Pinkney was born and raised in Prince George 's County , Maryland , the youngest child and only daughter of Joseph and Maud Pinkney . She points to her parents ' marriage , which as of 2008 had lasted 56 years , as her model of personal values that she has carried through life . Hailing from Brandywine , Maryland , Pinkney is a graduate of Gwynn Park High School . She has an A.B. from Princeton University in sociology and an M.B.A. from UCLA 's Anderson School of Management with a concentration in marketing and entertainment management . Pinkney is a 1986 graduate of Princeton and a lifetime member of its Association of Black Princeton Alumni . She graduated from the Anderson School in 1988 and as of 2011 served on its Alumni Advisory Board . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 While director of programming at Twentieth Century Fox , she developed series such as The X @-@ Files and supervised In Living Color for four years . While serving as director of programming she developed comedy , drama and alternative series and as current programming executive , she oversaw the production of several comedies , dramas and alternative shows each year . Among the other shows she developed were New York Undercover , South Central , and Alien Nation . 
 Subsequently , she served as Upton Entertainment 's Vice President and head of television . Here she supervised the creation of New York Undercover . 
 Next , she was Senior Vice President of comedy development at Paramount Network Television , where over the course of nearly ten years she developed more than 30 television programs for six television networks , including United Paramount Network 's ( UPN ) Girlfriends . She joined Paramount in 1995 as Vice President of comedy development and was promoted to Senior Vice President and department head in 2002 . During her time at Paramount other shows she developed included Becker , One on One and Andy Richter Controls the Universe . As department head , her responsibilities included identifying writers , directors , talent and ideas for comedy series for television . 
 She was hired at TV One , which is the second @-@ oldest and second @-@ largest black television network behind BET , in December 2005 , and she started in January 2006 . At TV One , where she served as executive vice president of programming and development , she was responsible for programming strategy and oversaw all program production , acquisition , scheduling and business development for the network . Her time at TV One was spent in unscripted reality and lifestyle programming television . When UPN and WB merged to form CW in September 2006 prior to the 2006 – 07 United States network television season , several of the African @-@ American @-@ themed sitcoms that Pinkney had developed while at Paramount were short @-@ lived . Pinkney has been one of the more outspoken executives on the issue of portrayal of race relations on air . 
 In December 2008 , Cinema Gypsy , which is Laurence Fishburne 's production company , signed a first @-@ look deal with CBS Paramount Network Television to produce television shows . At that time , Pinkney was named to head the television arm of Cinema Gypsy as it expanded its operations to television programming . In her capacity , she oversaw the development of programming for broadcast and cable networks . 
 In 2012 , Pinkney became VP Development and Original Programming at TV Land , assuming responsibility for TV Land ’ s existing original series and the development of new ones . Pinkney reports to the EVP Development and Original Programming Keith Cox . 
 = Beauty Pageant ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Beauty Pageant " is the third episode of the second season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the ninth overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on October 1 , 2009 . In the episode , Leslie serves as a judge in the Miss Pawnee beauty pageant and becomes determined to prevent an attractive , but talentless and unintelligent , contestant from winning . 
 The episode was written by Katie Dippold and directed by Jason Woliner . It featured stand @-@ up comedian Louis C.K. in his second guest appearance as Dave Sanderson , a Pawnee police officer who develops a romantic interest in Leslie . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 4 @.@ 63 million households , a slight improvement over the previous week . " Beauty Pageant " received generally positive reviews , with several commentators claiming the season continued a trend of funnier episodes than in the first season . 
 It is the only episode of the series in which Nick Offerman does not appear as Ron Swanson . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the beginning of the episode , Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) proudly announces to the parks and recreation staff that she will be judging the Miss Pawnee beauty pageant , a job she takes very seriously . Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) , excited at the prospective of judging women on the basis of their looks , pulls some strings to get a spot on the judging panel along with Leslie . April ( Aubrey Plaza ) enters the contest in order to win the $ 600 prize , despite being disgusted with the concept of a beauty contest . She tries , unsuccessfully , to gain an advantage by sucking up to Leslie . Later , Pawnee police officer Dave Sanderson ( Louis C.K. ) visits Leslie at work to ask her out on a date . She initially accepts , but when Dave mistakes a photo of Madeleine Albright for Leslie 's grandmother , Leslie becomes reluctant . 
 Meanwhile , Ann ( Rashida Jones ) offers to cook Mark ( Paul Schneider ) a cheap meal if he will fix her broken shower ; Mark accepts what he calls " the weirdest second date ever " . That night , the date goes well , until Ann takes her trash outside and finds her ex @-@ boyfriend Andy ( Chris Pratt ) is spying on her from the construction pit near her house , where he is now living . Back inside , Ann complains about Andy to Mark , who thinks they should invite Andy inside when it starts to rain . Ann reluctantly agrees , and Andy spends the rest of the night interrupting their conversations and spoiling romantic moments . After dinner , Ann kicks him out , but Andy remains convinced the night went very well for him . 
 Leslie and Tom arrive at the pageant . Leslie , who wants the Miss Pawnee winner to be dignified and graceful , favors Susan ( Anne Elizabeth Gregory ) , a student and children 's hospital volunteer . But the other judges favor Trish ( April Marie Eden ) , an attractive but untalented and unintelligent woman . Tom is particularly impressed with Trish , even when she answers Leslie 's question about how " we as citizens can improve on the great experiment ? " by making fluffy remarks about America and expressing a distaste for immigrants . April puts on an act by pretending to be a shallow beauty contestant , but instantly quits when she learns the $ 600 prize actually consists of gift certificates for a fence company . 
 After the contest , the judges deliberate . Tom and the other judges ( Susan Yeagley , Frank Medrano , Worth Howe ) all immediately agree Trish should win , but Leslie insists on further discussion . She pushes for Susan to win , but the judges eventually settle on Trish . After the pageant ends , Leslie makes a speech congratulating Susan anyway , and claiming the " Susans " of the world will carry on , even when they lose to the " <unk> " of the world . Dave approaches Leslie at the pageant and asks her again on a date . When she hesitates , he tells her she should call him if she changes her mind . As Dave leaves , he bumps into Trish , who he pushes past without much notice , impressing Leslie . They set up a date the next day and Dave tries to impress Leslie by showing he has memorized the names of all the female politicians in her photographs . Meanwhile , Tom has tried to pick up girls at the pageant by giving him his house keys with none of them showing up , but he reveals that he has been robbed twice . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Beauty Pageant " was written by Katie Dippold and directed by Jason Woliner . Woliner directed and co @-@ created the MTV sketch comedy show Human Giant , which also featured Parks co @-@ star Aziz Ansari . " Beauty Pageant " featured stand @-@ up comedian Louis C.K. in his second guest performance as Dave Sanderson , a Pawnee police officer romantically interested in Leslie . The Miss Pawnee Pageant is modeled after the long @-@ standing Miss America competition , which awards scholarships to young women from all 50 states . Several commentators compared Trish , who is attractive but unintelligent and untalented , to Caitlin Upton , the 2007 Miss South Carolina Teen USA who made an incoherent response during the Miss Teen USA 2007 pageant . Series co @-@ creator Michael Schur also indicated the episode was inspired partially by Carrie Prejean , the former Miss California USA who received nationwide attention over her answer to a question about same @-@ sex marriage during the Miss USA 2009 contest . Immediately after " Beauty Pageant " was originally broadcast , NBC set up an official Miss Pawnee Beauty Pageant website . According to the Parks and Recreation official Twitter feed , the site was established at http : / / <unk> and included biographies for the judges and competitors , as well as a downloadable PDF of Leslie 's custom scorecard from the episode , ringtones , band posters , songs for download and photos . 
 Within a week of the episode 's original broadcast , three deleted scenes from " Beauty Pageant " were made available on the official Parks and Recreation website . In the first 90 @-@ second clip , April seeks beauty contestant advice from Leslie , who tells her to act differently from her usual behavior . While awaiting the talent contest , April lists a number of her unusual talents , including inventing emoticons , convincing her mother she is adopted , instantly making security guards suspicious and determining if someone is fat or pregnant " with 60 percent accuracy " . In the second 1 minute and 15 second clip , Ann tries to explain to Mark she is not hinting at sex when she asks him to " fix her shower " , and Sanderson talks about his insecurities , including that Leslie might be too smart for him . In the final 90 @-@ second clip , Tom expresses anger that the swimsuit competition has been removed from the contest , and tries to convince the judges to reinstate it during their deliberations . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Beauty Pageant " included several cultural and pop culture references . During her introduction at the pageant , Trish said , " I 've been on YouTube " , a reference to the video sharing website on which users can upload and share videos . Susan is said to have attended Indiana State University , which helps solidify her standing as the smartest beauty pageant contestant . Leslie said one of her criteria categories as a judge is the " Naomi Wolf factor " , a reference to the American third @-@ wave feminist author and political consultant . Sanderson , who has demonstrated a lack of pop culture familiarity in the show , was unfamiliar with a reference Tom made to the 1988 police action film Die Hard and its famous protagonist , John McClane . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on October 1 , 2009 , " Beauty Pageant " was seen by 4 @.@ 63 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research . Although one of the poorer major network ratings of the night , it constituted a slight increase over the previous week 's episode , " The Stakeout " . The episode received a 1 @.@ 9 rating / 5 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49 . The episode received generally positive reviews , with several commentators claiming the season continued a trend of funnier episodes than in the first season . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said the show seemed to be more confident . He praised the silliness of Andy , the deadpan humor of April and " the sweetness of Leslie realizing how much she likes Dave the cop " . 
 H.T. " Hercules " Strong , a regular columnist with Ain 't it Cool News , said " Beauty Pageant " was " as funny as one of the funniest episodes of The Office , which is saying something . " He particularly praised Louis C.K. Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club called " Beauty Pageant " a great episode , and said Leslie is becoming less of a caricature than in previous episodes . He gave it an A- grade particularly praised Plaza , who he said " embodied pure apathy " and Pratt , who he said livened up the Ann and Mark subplot . Entertainment Weekly writer Henning Fog said Parks and Recreation has continued to improve each week , and " Beauty Pageant " showed Leslie Knope at " her most human " . Fog also said he liked the Ann , Andy and Mark characters , but felt the show was straining to find ways to include them in the story each week . Matt Fowler of IGN said he was glad Parks and Recreation was exploring subplots outside of the pit , but felt a beauty pageant was too cliched and predictable an episode plot . Fowler praised the performances of Plaza , Pratt and Louis C.K. Slate magazine writer Jonah Weiner praised " Beauty Pageant " , and called the hypocrisy of beauty contests demonstrated in the episode " a turkey shoot no less enjoyable for its familiarity " . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Beauty Pageant " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = The Front ( The Simpsons ) = 
 " The Front " is the nineteenth episode of The Simpsons ' fourth season . It originally aired in the United States on the Fox network on April 15 , 1993 . In the episode , Bart and Lisa decide to write an episode of The Itchy & Scratchy Show ; after their script is rejected , they resubmit it under the name of Abraham Simpson , resulting in Grampa being hired as a staff writer . Meanwhile , Homer returns to high school to retake a failed science course . 
 The episode was written by Adam I. Lapidus and directed by Rich Moore . It is the only Simpsons episode written by Lapidus . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After being disappointed by a new episode of Itchy & Scratchy , Bart and Lisa decide that they can write a better one themselves . Inspired by the sight of Homer accidentally slicing Marge 's hair off with hedge shears , they write a script titled " Little Barbershop of Horrors " , but their episode is rejected by Roger Meyers Jr . , head of Itchy & Scratchy International . <unk> guessing that Meyers did not take them seriously because they were children , they resubmit the manuscript under Grampa 's name , leading Meyers to hire Grampa as a staff writer . Bart and Lisa inform Grampa about what they did and the three of them conspire to continue passing off Bart and Lisa 's scripts as Grampa 's own , splitting the money three ways . 
 For his work on Itchy & Scratchy , Grampa is nominated for an award for Outstanding Writing in a Cartoon Series . When Grampa sees Itchy & Scratchy for the first time in a clip show introducing the award , he is appalled at the violent humor , and turns his acceptance speech into an assault on both the cartoon and the audience amused by it . He storms off the stage amidst boos and thrown vegetables . Grampa gives the award to Bart and Lisa , and Bart swears never to watch an award show again , unless Billy Crystal is featured . 
 In the subplot , Homer and Marge attend their " Class of 1974 " high school reunion , where they have a great time and Homer wins a variety of humorous awards . However , Principal Dondelinger interrupts the ceremony to announce that Homer never graduated high school because he failed a remedial science course , leading Dondelinger to revoke Homer 's awards . Determined to win back the accolades , Homer retakes the course and passes the final exam , finally graduating . 
 The conclusion of the episode features a brief segment , complete with its own theme song , entitled " The Adventures of Ned Flanders " . In the sketch , Ned is upset with his sons for not wanting to go to church , until they inform him that it is Saturday and the family laughs together . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Front " was written by Adam I. Lapidus and directed by Rich Moore . In the early 1990s , Lapidus saw a news report on television about three 13 @-@ year @-@ old girls - Renee Carter , Sarah <unk> , and Amy Crosby - who had written a script for Tiny Toon Adventures , titled " Buster And Babs Go Hawaiian " . The show 's executive producer , Steven Spielberg , liked the script so much that he brought the three to Hollywood to work with the show 's writing staff . Upon seeing the report , Lapidus thought , " That would really be a neat idea for Bart and Lisa . " He wrote a spec script , which made its way via executive producer James L. Brooks to the Simpsons staff , who hired Lapidus to write the episode . " The Front " is the only Simpsons episode written by Lapidus , causing some dispute among the show 's fans as to whether he actually exists or was perhaps a pseudonym . Lapidus ' mother @-@ in @-@ law came upon one such debate on an Internet forum . 
 The initial running time for " The Front " was " way , way short " , and the writers had to use " every trick in the book " to make the episode reach the minimum length . Even after greatly expanding the original script and adding an extra @-@ long couch gag during the opening sequence , the episode was still one minute too short ; " The Adventures of Ned Flanders " was added to address the problem . The segment , which plays at the end of the episode , was designed purely to fill time and had nothing to do with the other events of the episode . Showrunner Mike Reiss later commented , " As always , when we try something bold and new the general reaction is , ' What the hell was that ? ' " The scene was also an homage to Archie Comics , which sometimes used a similar technique to fill a final page ; the font used in the scene 's title card is similar to the font used by Archie . The short inspired writers Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein to produce the season seven episode " 22 Short Films About Springfield " . 
 The Fox network censors had two objections to " The Front " . The first issue was with a dream sequence in which Bart points a machine gun at Santa Claus and hijacks his sleigh . The second objection was to a scene not included in the finished episode , in which Itchy & Scratchy animators are seen observing a cat , and then putting a stick of dynamite in the cat 's mouth and lighting it . As Meyers , Bart and Lisa continue down the studio 's corridor , an explosion emanates from the room . The scene was cut because of the implied animal abuse , but is included as a deleted scene on the show 's The Complete Fourth Season DVD boxset . 
 Marge and Homer 's high school classmate Artie Ziff makes a brief appearance in the episode ; his conversation with Homer inspired the season 13 episode " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " . Artie 's usual voice artist Jon Lovitz was not available , so regular cast member Dan Castellaneta provided the voice instead . The school principal , Dondelinger , was named after someone Sam Simon knew . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode focuses on animation and includes several in @-@ jokes about The Simpsons and the animation industry in general . In a scene depicting the Itchy & Scratchy writer 's lounge , each of the writers shown is a caricature of someone working on The Simpsons at the time . The joke was conceived by the show 's animators . Later in the episode , Roger Meyers fires a Harvard alumnus who resembles Simpsons writer Jon Vitti . At the awards ceremony , The Simpsons creator Matt Groening is shown in the audience . Lisa is also seen reading a book titled How to Get Rich Writing Cartoons by John Swartzwelder , a Simpsons writer credited with nearly sixty episodes of the show . The credits at the end of Bart and Lisa 's Itchy & Scratchy episode ( shown in very small print ) are a copy of the credits at the end of The Simpsons . 
 At the Annual Cartoon Awards , the clip from the nominated The Ren & Stimpy Show is merely a black screen with the text " clip not done yet " . This was a counterattack against Ren & Stimpy creator John Kricfalusi , who had attacked The Simpsons staff by saying that " the show succeeded despite the writing " , and similarly derogatory comments . Another industry reference is the " Animation Wing " door at Itchy & Scratchy studios ; the door is identical to a door at the Disney animation building . 
 Besides copying the Simpsons credits , the Itchy & Scratchy credits also parody the sequence seen at the end of the credits of many TV shows produced by Stephen J. Cannell , where Cannell sits at the typewriter in his office and throws a sheet of paper into the air , with it forming of part of his production company 's logo . In the episode , Itchy and Scratchy are seen at a desk ; Scratchy pulls a sheet from his typewriter and throws it into the air , where it forms an " I & S Productions " logo . Mike Reiss later met Cannell , who was so pleased with the homage that he hugged Reiss . The title of the episode is a reference to The Front , a 1976 film about writers fronting for blacklisted writers in the 1950s . The Simpsons writers considered trying to make the episode plot resemble that of the film , but in the end decided against it . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The Front " finished 21st in ratings for the week of April 12 – 18 , 1993 , with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 5 , equivalent to approximately 11 @.@ 6 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating Married ... with Children . 
 Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , praised " The Front " as " an ironic look at the animation industry , with a higher than average Itchy and Scratchy count . The episode is followed by The Adventures of Ned Flanders with its own , rather wonderful , theme tune . " 
 = All Saints Church , Patcham = 
 All Saints Church is the Anglican parish church of Patcham , an ancient Sussex village which is now part of the English city of Brighton and Hove . A place of worship has existed on the hilltop site for about 1 @,@ 000 years , but the present building has Norman internal features and a 13th @-@ century exterior . Several rounds of restoration in the Victorian era included some structural additions . A wide range of monuments and wall paintings survive inside , including one commemorating Richard Shelley — owner of nearby Patcham Place and one of the most important noblemen in the early history of Brighton . The church , which is Grade II * listed , continues to serve as the Anglican place of worship for residents of Patcham , which 20th @-@ century residential development has transformed from a vast rural parish into a large outer suburb of Brighton . 
 Patcham 's first church served a large rural area north of the fishing village of Brighthelmston — the ancient predecessor of Brighton . A nucleated settlement developed around this building , which was reconstructed during the Norman era . A wide @-@ ranging series of alterations were carried out by Victorian church restorers to improve the building 's structural condition and provide more space to cater for the growing population . As Patcham developed into a suburb in the 20th century , more churches opened in the area and were administered from All Saints Church . The building 's plain exterior contrasts with its well @-@ preserved and , in parts , ancient interior whose features include wall paintings and stone memorials . The churchyard has a set of Grade II @-@ listed tombs . 
 = = History = = 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records that the area now covered by the county of Sussex was reached by Saxon forces in 477 . Within a few years , they controlled land along the English Channel coast as far as Pevensey . By the 10th century , the Kingdom of the South Saxons was fully established ; its boundaries match those of the present county . The area was divided into smaller administrative areas called hundreds . Patcham and its neighbouring village of Preston were part of Preston Hundred , one of four hundreds covering present @-@ day Brighton and Hove . The lowest administrative level was the parish , based around a church . The parish of Patcham was recorded ( under the name <unk> ) at the time of the Domesday survey in 1086 , by which time a church existed at the centre of a small village on a spur of land near the top of the South Downs . The parish , which covered 4 @,@ 325 acres ( 1 @,@ 750 ha ) , was unusually large , and its 11th @-@ century population of about 1 @,@ 750 was one of the largest for any Sussex parish . William de Warenne , 1st Earl of Surrey , who held most of the land in the local hundreds , owned the manor . The area around the church gradually became the centre of population within the parish , and a village developed on the hillside leading up to the church , east of the modern London Road . 
 The Saxon church was rebuilt in the 12th and 13th centuries , and the only feature which may survive from that era is a blocked doorway . It was reset in the north aisle when that was built in 1898 . The doorway has been described as " Norman or possibly earlier " , " pre- [ Norman ] Conquest " and " could be Saxon " by various sources . The Victoria County History of Sussex goes further by stating it was originally in the north wall of the nave , but identifies it as 12th @-@ century . The chancel arch , a " plain " structure , was inserted between the chancel and the nave in the 12th century , and the nave is of the same period . The 12th @-@ century chancel was added to in the following 200 years ; its Decorated Gothic windows are 14th @-@ century . Similar windows were inserted in the nave at the same time . 
 In the 13th century , a narrow tower was built at the west end , with thin lancet windows characteristic of the era . Its broach spire dates from the mid @-@ 19th century . The tower was given substantial diagonal buttresses with sandstone quoins . Also at this time , the exterior underwent complete restoration with some rebuilding work . The only other changes made before the 19th century was the addition of a porch at the south end and some buttresses on the south wall of the nave , both in the 16th or 17th century . 
 Having stood for more than 600 years with little alteration , the church was completely changed by four reconstructions and restorations in a 74 @-@ year period in the 19th century . The last of these , in 1898 , was the most substantial : it added a north aisle , much larger and taller than the rest of the building , and a vestry . In the early 19th century , the building had been in better structural condition than many in Sussex — a survey in 1825 by Sir Stephen Glynn of the Ecclesiological Society noted that it was " decently fitted up " — but rebuilding ancient churches was fashionable in the Victorian era , and the condition of a surviving medieval corbel suggests that the exterior walls were in poor condition . The three earlier periods of restoration were 1824 – 25 , 1856 and 1880 – 83 . During the third of these , a 13th @-@ century wall painting of Christ in Judgement was discovered above the chancel arch , hidden under 30 layers of whitewash and the remains of two later paintings ; it may be one of the oldest such murals in England , but it was repainted after its rediscovery . In 1898 , at the same time as the north @-@ side extension , the outside walls of the west , east and south sides were coated with grey cement , probably to improve their structural condition ; although this has been described as " unsightly " and " kill [ ing ] the exterior stone dead " , one historian has argued that because many medieval churches were rendered in this way , rather than having uncovered flint walls , it gives the impression of what a typical church of that era may look like . 
 Patcham 's proximity to the ever @-@ growing resort of Brighton — it is 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of the Palace Pier on the English Channel coast — encouraged suburban growth from the mid @-@ 19th century . From a low point of 286 in 1801 , the population of the village steadily rose and had nearly quadrupled by the time of the United Kingdom Census 1901 . Brighton Corporation ( the forerunners of the present city council ) built an estate of council housing in Moulsecoomb ( then still part of Patcham parish ) in the early 1920s , and on 1 April 1928 all but 152 acres ( 62 ha ) of the 4 @,@ 325 @-@ acre ( 1 @,@ 750 ha ) parish were annexed by Brighton to become part of the urban area , known at the time as Greater Brighton . Four large housing estates were built , and the population reached 5 @,@ 241 in 1930 and continued to rise thereafter . The opening of the north aisle improved capacity at a time when new houses were already surrounding the ancient village centre ; but as development spread to more distant parts of the parish , two more churches were opened — both initially as chapels of ease to All Saints Church : a temporary building erected on the <unk> Avenue estate in south Patcham became the Church of Christ the King , which was replaced by a permanent brick @-@ built church in 1958 ; and in the same year , architect John Wells @-@ Thorpe designed and built the Church of the Ascension in Westdene , a newly developed suburb west of the London Road . The original temporary church at <unk> Avenue became a church hall for Christ the King 's congregation , and All Saints Church gained its own hall in 1937 when Mackie Hall was built on Mackie Avenue . It was closed in 1995 . 
 Another round of restoration took place in 1989 . The interior was redesigned , and a reredos was made out of old choir stalls which had been removed . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 The church contains several memorials , of which the oldest is a wall tablet commemorating Richard Shelley , one of the earliest owners of Patcham Place , who died in 1594 . Patcham Place has its origins in a 16th @-@ century manor house in an isolated position west of the London Road . Its first owner , William West , 1st Baron De La Warr , passed it to Richard Shelley — son of Sir John Shelley of <unk> and a member of the family which later became the first Shelley Baronetcy . Shelley lived in Patcham from 1546 , and was an important figure in Brighton 's early history : in 1579 , he and three other local noblemen were appointed by the Privy Council to form a commission to record and regulate the " ancient customs " of the villagers and to mediate between the fishermen and the farmers , who often had conflicting needs . The commissioners produced a book , The Book of All The <unk> [ Ancient ] Customs heretofore used <unk> the fishermen of the <unk> of Brighthelmston , whose orders were enshrined in law . The memorial , of which only parts remain intact , is flanked by pilasters , the Shelley coat of arms and a naked grave @-@ digger on each side . 
 Elsewhere in the church , three generations of the Paine family are commemorated by tablets in the chancel ; John Paine of the second generation rebuilt Patcham Place in 1764 . He was the uncle by marriage of Thomas Read Kemp , who developed Brighton 's high @-@ class Kemp Town estate in the 19th century . The Roe family and its descendants of Withdean are also represented . William Roe and his son William Thomas Roe were closely involved with the former Board of Customs ( now Her Majesty 's Customs and Excise ) ; William Roe was its chairman for 14 years . William Thomas Roe also served on The Board of Admiralty . His son , his daughter 's husband and their son also have their own memorials . The manor of Withdean <unk> , one of the manors within the parish of Patcham , passed through the family after William Roe acquired it in 1794 . 
 Outside , there are seven nearly identical chest @-@ tombs , all of which are several centuries old and appear to belong to members of the <unk> family . Together with two unrelated tombs nearby , which are 18th- or early 19th @-@ century , they were listed at Grade II by English Heritage on 26 August 1999 . On the north side of the churchyard , which is traditionally used for burials of criminals and those who committed suicide , a memorial survives to " a smuggler , unfortunately shot " . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 The plan of All Saints Church comprises a west tower with heavy buttresses and a broach spire , a three @-@ bay nave with a tall aisle on the north side ( described by one historian as " quite out of proportion to the rest of the building , particularly in height " ) , and a porch on the south wall , a chancel and a vestry . Although the north aisle of 1898 was flint @-@ built with courses of red brick , the rest of the church 's exterior was clad in cement at the same time . Before this , the outside walls had been entirely flint with stone dressings and sandstone quoins . Both sides of the nave are buttressed , as is the southwest corner of the tower . These buttresses may have been added in the 16th century . The roof of the tower , below the squat 19th @-@ century spire , is of slate ; the rest of the church has a tiled roof . The porch has a gabled roof above a 14th @-@ century archway . The tower contains three bells . One is dated 1639 , and another is known to have been repaired in 1724 . The chancel roof is panelled , while the nave roof has vertical queen @-@ post supports with ancient tie @-@ beams . 
 The nave and chancel are separated by an ancient chancel arch which has recesses for a reredos on each side . These may be contemporary with the 12th @-@ century structure . Above the chancel arch are the remains of a 13th @-@ century wall painting showing Christ in Judgement . It has been dated to c . 1230 , and depicts the ascension to Heaven of the dead and the weighing of their souls by Jesus Christ , who is flanked by the Virgin Mary and John the Baptist . The fresco was in fragmentary condition when it was discovered in the 1880s , and has been redrawn . Other paintings may have existed elsewhere on the walls , but none are visible now . 
 There are lancet windows in the north and south walls and on the tower , some with stone tracery ( including the east window in the main body of the church ) . The chancel and nave windows are 14th @-@ century and in the Decorated Gothic style common at the time , while the tower windows and bell @-@ openings are smaller and in the Early English style popular in the 13th century , when the tower was built . The largest window , which sits under a hoodmould , is in the east end of the chancel ; it is a three @-@ light lancet with prominent tracery in the curvilinear / reticulated style . The window dates from the 14th century , which may make it the same age as a small window next to the porch , which has twin lights with foliated heads set below a quatrefoil in an ogive arch . Both windows also have scrollwork drip @-@ moulds . Most other windows are plain trefoil @-@ headed single lancets . 
 The blocked doorway in the modern north aisle is the oldest surviving part of the church . Its lintel is 10 inches ( 25 cm ) thick and sits below 11 voussoirs , each about 8 inches ( 20 cm ) across . Below the lintel , the former opening is 6 @.@ 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) high and 2 @.@ 75 feet ( 0 @.@ 84 m ) wide ; gradual settling into the ground has masked its original 7 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) height . The jambs are made up of five stones of equal height , but the uppermost is wider because it served as an impost . Inside the church , the jambs and arch are visible , but there is no lintel . 
 The wall of the chancel retains a trefoil @-@ arched piscina added during the 14th @-@ century restoration work . The font — a " rather florid circular " example — dates from 1864 , and the church possesses Eucharistic objects dating from the 16th and 17th centuries , such as a chalice of 1568 and a paten dating from 1666 . The west wall has a wide range of old carved prayer and commandment boards , which are a common feature of Sussex churches . Ancient examples of graffiti , consisting of etched crosses and dates , also survives inside ; such " curious carvings " are also common in Sussex . 
 = = Current status = = 
 All Saints Church was listed at Grade II * on 13 October 1952 . Worship at All Saints is in the Open Evangelical style . There is a Sunday school and regular youth group . 
 All Saints is the church in the Benefice of Patcham All Saints , which also incorporates the Church of the Ascension in Westdene , a postwar suburb west of Patcham . This is a modern building of brick and glass , designed in 1958 by architect John Wells @-@ Thorpe . The ecclesiastical parish of All Saints covers the north of Brighton and its rural hinterland , incorporating Withdean , Westdene , Patcham , Hollingbury , part of Preston ( as far south as Preston Park railway station ) , and the scattered residential buildings north of the A27 Brighton Bypass and south of <unk> . 
 Following a review by the Diocese of Chichester in 2005 , parts of the west side of the parish were transferred to the Church of the Good Shepherd on Dyke Road in Brighton , and at the south end another section was ceded to St John the Evangelist 's Church in Preston Village . At the same time the decision was taken to close the Church of Christ the King ( which had been the parish church of South Patcham ) and divide its parish between All Saints and St John the Evangelist 's churches . All Saints Church therefore received the congregation from the northern part of the Church of Christ the King 's parish . The diocese declared the Church of Christ the King redundant from 1 December 2006 , but from 20 July 2007 it was in use again as a place of worship . In that year , two displaced congregations whose churches had been demolished joined to form a new church community , which bought the building and renamed it the Fountain Centre . The Elim Balfour Road Church in Preston Village , a Pentecostal church , was demolished in 2007 , and the Immanuel Community Church had been using the former St Augustine 's Church building near Preston Park since the destruction by fire of their church in Hanover in 2003 . 
 = Manam ( film ) = 
 Manam ( English : Us ) is a 2014 Indian Telugu @-@ language fantasy family drama film written and directed by Vikram Kumar and produced by Akkineni Family under the Annapurna Studios banner . Nagarjuna appears alongside Akkineni Nageswara Rao , Naga Chaitanya , Shriya Saran and Samantha . Amitabh Bachchan , Amala , and Nagarjuna 's younger son Akkineni Akhil made cameo appearances along with other personalities . The film is set in various time periods , over the course of a hundred years up until 2013 , and deals with the concepts of rebirth and eternal love . The plot features a wealthy businessman , Nageswara Rao , attempting to bring a young couple together resembling his deceased parents and the elderly Chaitanya 's attempts to bring the businessman and a doctor together . They resemble Chaitanya 's deceased parents who died because of a mistake committed by him in his childhood . 
 The film was made with a budget of ₹ 280 million . Harsha Vardhan wrote the film 's dialogues , while Anup Rubens composed the film 's music . P. S. Vinod handled the film 's cinematography . Production began on 3 June 2013 . Principal photography began on 7 June 2013 and was shot in and around Hyderabad , Coorg and Mysore till mid April 2014 . 
 Manam was the last film of Nageswara Rao , who died on 22 January 2014 during the film 's production phase . The film was promoted as a " befitting send off " and a tribute from his son , Nagarjuna . The film was released worldwide on 23 May 2014 to positive reviews from critics and was commercially successful , collecting ₹ 365 million in its lifetime . The film was screened at the 45th International Film Festival of India in the Homage to ANR section on 29 November 2014 . The film garnered the Filmfare Award for Best Film - Telugu . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Radha Mohan and Krishna Veni are a couple leading a miserable marital life due to several misunderstandings and decide to apply for divorce . They die on 14 February 1983 at 10 : 20 AM near a clock tower on their way to the lawyer 's office . Their son , Nageswara Rao , becomes a rich and influential businessman and happens to come across his parents ' lookalikes , Nagarjuna and Priya . After befriending them , Rao decides to re @-@ establish them as a couple but is shocked when Nagarjuna introduces his lover , Prema . Rao manages to dissolve the relationship with the help of his personal adviser , Girish Karnad . Unaware of this , Nagarjuna swears not to fall in love with anyone . At the same clock tower , Rao meets Dr. Anjali and falls in love with her at first sight . He helps her in admitting an injured old man to a nearby hospital and donates his blood . The injured man , Chaitanya , is shocked upon seeing the pair as they resemble his deceased parents , Seetharamudu and Ramalakshmi . 
 Seetharamudu was a barrister who returned from London upon his father 's death to manage his family businesses . He was a zamindar and was fond of cars . In one such instance , he sees a poor farmer Ramalakshmi and decides to marry her . Asked by a mediator , she accepts the proposal , without meeting Seetharamudu , but asks him for six months ' delay as she has to buy new clothes for the bridegroom , following the village 's tradition . Seetharamudu learns about this and meets her as a reformed thief . With his help , Ramalakshmi could cultivate enough grain in three months and buy new clothes with that money . On the day of marriage , she is surprised to know that Seetharamudu is her chosen groom and they marry . On 14 February 1924 the couple goes out , but Chaitanya , suffering from fever then , fakes a stomach ache so that his parents return . The plan works and the couple rush home at high speed but die in an accident at 10 : 20 AM near the same clock tower where Radha Mohan and Krishna Veni would die . Now he aims to reunite them without letting them recollect their past as they cannot bear the pain of losing him . 
 Chaitanya stays in Rao 's house for further treatment while Nagarjuna joins them as he was expelled from his hostel . One night , Priya , remembering her past life , visit Rao 's house , only to see Nagarjuna sleeping beside him . She leaves the house in tears . While Rao 's attempts to propose to Anjali begin , Nagarjuna and Priya join Salsa dance classes where Priya constantly expresses her anger towards Nagarjuna . On Rao 's birthday , 13 February 2013 , Anjali proposes to him which he accepts . This makes Chaitanya very happy . Priya meets Nagarjuna there who is dressed as Radha Mohan , who reveals that he too recollected memories of his past life on the night she left the house in shock . He apologises for his wrong deeds and proposes her . She accepts his proposal and Rao is relieved . 
 The next day , Nagarjuna goes to a temple with Priya in a car which has no brakes and Rao chases them along with Anjali . Both the couples are nearing the same clock tower where they died in their past lives . A worried Chaitanya is offered a lift by a young biker who follow them . On 10 : 20 AM when all the four are safe near the clock tower , a lorry driven by a drunk driver is shown rushing towards them . The biker and Chaitanya jump from the bike , which goes on to hit the lorry tyre , distracting the lorry 's path . The four thank Chaitanya who urges them to thank the biker , Akhil . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Special appearances : 
 Amitabh Bachchan as Pratap 
 Akkineni Amala as a dance teacher 
 Akkineni Akhil as Akhil 
 Neetu Chandra as air hostess 
 Rashi Khanna as Prema 
 Lavanya Tripathi as Radha Mohan 's friend 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After the release of 100 % Love ( 2011 ) , Akkineni Nagarjuna decided to act and produce in an all @-@ star film along with his father , actor Akkineni Nageswara Rao and elder son Naga Chaitanya . Nageswara Rao suggested Nagarjuna to begin the film as early as possible , because of his age . After examining and rejecting many scripts due to a perceived lack of novelty , Nagarjuna was advised by actor Nithin 's father and distributor Sudhakar Reddy to listen to a script by Vikram Kumar , who was directing Nithin and Nithya Menen in Ishq ( 2012 ) . Although he liked the script after the first narration , he agreed to act in the film only after watching Ishq before its theatrical release . 
 Kumar requested Nagarjuna a year 's time to complete and provide the finishing touches to the script . The latter read the script to director K. Raghavendra Rao , who suggested Kumar develop a simpler version , as the original was too complicated . The rewritten version was read to Nagarjuna in two and a half hours and to Nageswara Rao over six hours , as the latter wanted every detail to be clear . Due to the complex nature of the second half , the latter suggested Kumar to add a comedy plotline between grandfather and grandson . After its incorporation into the script , and after considering the titles Hum and <unk> , Manam was chosen as the film 's title on Nageswara Rao 's suggestion . 
 The film was officially launched on 3 June 2013 at Annapurna Studios office by conducting a small pooja ceremony . Nageswara Rao died in late January 2014 , making this film his last project as an actor . The promotion material featured the " Akkineni Family " as the film 's producer . Nagarjuna revealed in an interview that he did so because Nageswara Rao taught his family the importance of it in his last days . Reliance Entertainment co @-@ produced and distributed the film . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Nagarjuna engaged Samantha as the female lead , to be paired with Chaitanya in the film . This was her third collaboration with Chaitanya after Ye Maaya Chesave ( 2010 ) and Autonagar Surya ( 2014 ) . Her inclusion was confirmed in mid @-@ October 2012 by Nagarjuna in an interview with The Times of India . 
 Ileana D 'Cruz was approached for the other female lead role to be paired with Nagarjuna in early February 2013 . She was impressed with her role and the film 's script and quoted a fee of ₹ 20 million , which was denied by sources close to her . However , Shriya Saran was signed as the other female lead as her fourth collaboration with Nagarjuna . Nagarjuna announced in mid September 2013 that Kaushal Sharma , Srikar <unk> and Krishna Yadav , who graduated from the Annapurna International School of Film and Media , would make their debut with this film . 
 Nagarjuna 's younger son Akkineni Akhil was rumoured to be making a cameo appearance following Nageswara Rao 's request . Sources close to the film 's unit initially denied those reports . Samantha later tweeted that Akhil appeared for shooting his portions in the film . When his health conditions worsened , Nageswara Rao asked Nagarjuna to bring the dubbing equipment to dub for his role fifteen days before his surgery as he did not want any other artist to do it if his voice worsened . He completed those activities just before he died on 22 January 2014 . Only an appearance in a song remained incomplete . 
 Neetu Chandra , who worked with Kumar on Yavarum Nalam ( 2009 ) , made a cameo appearance in the film . Nagarjuna 's sister Supriya told the media that a few other actors also made cameo appearances in the film . Rashi Khanna confirmed in early April 2014 that she too would make such an appearance . Kumar convinced Nagarjuna to let Akhil make a cameo appearance towards the end of the film or in a special song . However an official confirmation was originally unavailable . Amitabh Bachchan posted in his official blogging site on 27 April 2014 that he would make a quick cameo appearance in the film which would be his debut in Telugu cinema . Lavanya Tripathi also made a cameo appearance on Kumar 's request . Akhil made a cameo towards the film 's end , as he did not want to miss a chance of sharing the screen with his grandfather . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Anup Rubens was selected to compose the film 's music and background score in mid March 2013 marking his second collaboration with both Kumar and Chaitanya after Ishq ( 2012 ) and Autonagar Surya ( 2014 ) respectively . Kumar read the script to Rubens without revealing the film 's cast . After Rubens accepted a role in the film , both met Nagarjuna . Rubens said in an interview that he worked for fewer days when compared to his previous works and added that Kumar had a small story to tell within every song in the film . Due to Nageswara Rao 's death , a song 's tune was replaced with another tune and a few lines of the song Nenu <unk> from the film Prem Nagar ( 1971 ) . 
 Harsha Vardhan was selected in late April 2013 to write the film 's dialogues , in consideration of his work in <unk> <unk> <unk> ( 2013 ) . Since the film was a period drama , Nagarjuna wanted an experienced veteran cinematographer , and approached P. C. Sreeram . As Sreeram was busy with I ( 2015 ) , P. S. Vinod was finalised as the cinematographer , marking his return to Telugu cinema after <unk> ( 2011 ) . Chennai @-@ based costume designer Nalini Sriram , who worked for Ye Maaya Chesave , was selected as the film 's costume designer . While all the artists had to give their inputs for the costumes , Nageswara Rao gave her full freedom to design the film 's costumes . 
 Rajeevan , also a part of the technical team of Ye Maaya Chesave , was chosen as the film 's art director . In a press interview during the first look launch , executive producer Supriya announced the remaining key technicians . Prawin Pudi was confirmed as the film 's editor . Brinda was signed in on to choreograph the song sequences . FEFSI Vijayan was chosen as the stunt choreographer . Vanamali and Chandrabose were chosen to write the lyrics for the songs . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Nageswara Rao played the role of a 90 @-@ year @-@ old man . His character enters the film just before the interval and remains until the very end of the film . All the members of the principal cast except Nageswara Rao played dual roles in the film . Nagarjuna said in an interview that he would be seen in the 1920s , 1980s and 2013 and would play a zamindar in 1920 . Saran revealed that every character in the film would have a specific aspect ; Nagarjuna 's character loves cars . Regarding her role , Saran said that she would be seen as a poor but content farmer in the flashback sequences and a doctor in the present day . She added " My character goes back to 1930s and comes back in the present era . I can 't tell how it happens though . It 's a fun character and you will find me stammering a lot . Suddenly , I 'm talking normally and suddenly I start stammering , that 's how you understand my character . " She added that apart from Nagarjuna , she has more scenes with Nageswara Rao and only a couple of scenes with Chaitanya in the film . 
 Chaitanya is seen as the father of a six @-@ year @-@ old in 1980s and a happy @-@ go @-@ lucky college student in 2013 . He described the former role as a challenging one . He also said that both the roles would have multiple layers and added , " The film as you all would know by now , is spread across three generations , and all the characters go back and forth in time . I play a happy @-@ go @-@ lucky college guy in the present era . It 's a typically fun character and has nothing in common with my character from the flashback . So acting wise , it was a big challenge " . He described the drunk scenes shared with Nagarjuna , Nageswara Rao and his confrontation scene with Samantha towards the end of the film as the toughest scenes to act . 
 Samantha revealed that she too would be seen in a dual role — a mature mother named Krishna Veni in the past and a bubbly girl named Priya in the present . She added that she would not be overshadowed in the film despite the presence of three male leads . Similar to Ye Maaya Chesave , Chaitanya and Samantha had a kissing scene in this film as a part of the script . A clip of one of Samantha 's looks in the film was leaked in late July 2013 . She was seen sporting an urban look and opted for a complete makeover . Nagarjuna 's look in the film was leaked in mid August 2013 and he was seen sporting corrective eyeglasses and a conventional clean shave and moustache for which he removed the goatee he grew for his previous works <unk> <unk> ( 2013 ) and Bhai ( 2013 ) . Saran 's look in the film 's flashback sequences was leaked in late February 2014 . 
 The film had two particular wedding scenes , one filmed on Chaitanya and Samantha and the other on Nagarjuna and Saran . The first pair greet each other with " Hi " during the wedding . When Kumar wrote those scenes , they were surprised and felt that such scenes were unrealistic . But it was retained as Nageswara Rao liked it . For the other wedding scene , Kumar wanted to heighten the emotions between the two characters in that scene and it was Nagarjuna who came up with the idea of not revealing his identity to the bride till the last moment . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on 7 June 2013 . Scenes focusing on Chaitanya and Samantha were shot at <unk> in mid June 2013 . The latter completed her part in the schedule and left for Switzerland on 18 June 2013 to work on Attarintiki Daredi ( 2013 ) . The first schedule was wrapped up by late June 2013 and the second schedule was scheduled to begin in mid @-@ July 2013 . Some important scenes were planned to be shot in that schedule . Shriya Saran joined the film 's sets in late July 2013 . Samantha tweeted on 31 July 2013 that the film 's second schedule had been wrapped up . The film was shot in Hyderabad Campus of Birla Institute of Technology and Science , <unk> in late August 2013 and Samantha rejoined the film 's sets on 1 September 2013 after completing Ramayya Vasthavayya ( 2013 ) . 
 Scenes featuring Nageswara Rao , Nagarjuna and Chaitanya were shot from 9 September 2013 in Hyderabad . Executive producer Supriya announced in mid September 2013 that the filming would be completed by November 2013 . Nageswara Rao had chronic stomach ache , and doctors found out on 8 October 2013 that he is suffering from cancer . He announced this to the press on 19 October 2013 while on set . Recovering from surgery , Nageswara Rao rejoined the film 's sets in mid November 2013 . A 15 @-@ day schedule in Coorg starting from 1 December 2013 was announced in late November 2013 and key scenes on all the members of the principal cast except Nageswara Rao were planned to be shot . The next schedule began in mid December 2013 at Mysore . 
 The film 's team continued filming at <unk> , Lalitha Mahal and in the backwaters of the Krishna Raja Sagara among others . Samantha completed filming her portions on 22 February 2014 . By late March 2014 , the entire filming , except for a song sequence , was completed ; the song was planned to be shot in April 2014 Featuring Nagarjuna and Naga Chaitanya , it was shot at Annapurna Studios in mid @-@ April 2014 . Amitabh Bachchan shot the scenes for his cameo at the Filmistan Studio in Mumbai on 27 April 2014 . 
 Saran later revealed in an interview that during the shoot at Coorg , the team 's day began at 4 : 30 AM everyday . She visited coffee plantation and black pepper farms to observe the farmers ' work for her part . For a few particular scenes , where Saran teaches Nagarjuna some farm chores , the team made a few takes , as <unk> , being a quick learner , completed the tasks better than Saran . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 The film was initially rumoured to be inspired by the American science fiction comedy film Back to the Future . It was also compared with an older Hindi film Kal Aaj Aur Kal ( 1971 ) for its casting . 
 Nagarjuna revealed that the film is set over a period of a hundred years , up until 2013 , and involves reincarnation . He said in an interview that the film 's script is not particularly intense , but has a light narration . The film 's basic theme , established by Kumar and his assistant directors , was " that things have changed and our sorrows and joys have been exchanged ; Night and day , morning and evening , a movement of souls united in being , cosmic beings rearranged . Some things may go wrong in one ’ s life but they are corrected in the other life . The universe and nature correct the mistakes made in one life , in the other . " He said that this statement would seem complex but would be fully explained by the film . 
 Nagarjuna added that the film 's characters would reborn with no special purpose unlike other reincarnation films like Janaki Ramudu ( 1988 ) , Arundhati ( 2009 ) and Magadheera ( 2009 ) . Saran said in an interview that the film basically has a family @-@ oriented theme and is about falling in love with " small , little things that you sort of don 't see every day , but are really , really important " . Unlike other reincarnation based films , the film 's story develops two separate themes — the relationship between reborn lovers , but also the relationship between reborn parents and their children . Naga Chaitanya acknowledged in an interview with The Hindu that the film 's script might seem to have a few overly @-@ convenient coincidences , but felt that Kumar 's detailing in every scene made the script believable . 
 = = Music = = 
 The soundtrack features five songs as well as a theme musical piece all composed by Anoop Rubens . Chandrabose wrote lyrics for three songs and the remaining two were written by Vanamali and Rubens himself . Aditya Music acquired the audio rights and released the soundtrack on 9 May 2014 on YouTube . The soundtrack received positive response , especially for the songs <unk> <unk> and Chinni Chinni <unk> . 
 = = Release = = 
 Nagarjuna planned to release the film on 31 March 2014 , on the eve of Ugadi , confirmed on a visit to the Tirumala Venkateswara Temple with Akhil in early March 2014 . However , he later postponed the film 's release , planning to release the film after the 2014 general elections . The film 's trailer confirmed the release date as 23 May 2014 . The film was confirmed to feature in both Dolby Atmos and 5 @.@ 1 surround sound systems . On 14 May 2014 , the Central Board of Film Certification passed the film with a " U / A " certificate instead of a " U " certificate that the makers expected because of a few drinking scenes . The British Board of Film Classification passed the film with a PG rating due to " brief images of injury , mild bad language " . 
 Nagarjuna arranged a special premiere show on 22 May 2014 at Prasads IMAX for Nageswara Rao 's fans . He succumbed to the huge demand from the admirers of Nageswara Rao and changed the single screen premiere into a five @-@ multiplex screen red carpet show at Prasads IMAX , playing host to thousands of celebrity invitees . CineGalaxy Inc. stated that the film would release in more than 100 screens in the United States alone with advance ticketing commencing at few locations . The film 's release however clashed with Vikrama Simha , the Telugu dubbed version of Kochadaiiyaan ( 2014 ) . 
 Nagarjuna planned to release the film in more than 1000 screens in India as well as international markets . In India , 171 theatres in Nizam , 95 theatres in Ceded , 50 theatres in Vishakhapatnam , 85 theatres in East and West Godavari districts , 40 theatres in Krishna , 45 theatres in Guntur , 25 theatres in Nellore , 12 screens in Chennai , 20 screens in Bangalore and 25 screens in Maharashtra were booked . In overseas , 108 screens in the United States , 9 screens in Toronto , 6 screens in Germany , 2 screens in Switzerland and 3 screens in Netherlands were booked . The advance ticket booking was made available both online as well as in theatres five days before the film 's release . It registered nearly 50 % advance booking by 22 May 2014 and was expected to register more than 75 % before its theatrical release . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 Sudhakar Reddy acquired the distribution rights of the film in Nizam Region . CineGalaxy Inc. acquired the entire overseas theatrical screening rights of the film . <unk> Entertainments acquired the film 's distribution rights for Australia and New Zealand . DBB Films later acquired the theatrical screening rights of the film in all European countries except the United Kingdom , where Errabus Films was the distributor . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 The first look poster of the film was unveiled by Nagarjuna on 19 September 2013 on the eve of Nageswara Rao 's 90th birthday . The poster featured Nagarjuna dressed in a black suit , Chaitanya sitting in a throne as an elder in traditional costume and Nageswara Rao sitting on the floor posing as a child . The poster received praise for its offbeat theme . The theatrical trailer of the film was planned to be released on 11 April 2014 . The second poster was released on 31 March 2014 on the eve of Ugadi . A special video named " Candid Moments " was released along with the theatrical trailer as a tribute to Nageswara Rao on 8 April 2014 on the eve of Sri Rama Navami . The trailer began with a voiceover of Rao and ends with the message " ANR Lives On " . 
 Upon release , the trailer went viral , praised as " refreshing " . IndiaGlitz stated " The trailer looks very refreshing and promising . In overall , the trailer looks very delightful , colourful and loaded with entertainment . Hope the movie will be a befitting farewell for the great actor Akkineni Nageswara Rao " and gave it the verdict " <unk> , Vibrant and Vivid " . Oneindia Entertainment stated " The trailer of Manam shows that the movie has amazing background score , stunning camera work , breath @-@ taking exotic locales , wonderful performances by the lead actors " . The trailer was also screened in theatres screening Race Gurram ( 2014 ) on 11 April 2014 . The trailer received 1 million views of YouTube . Nagarjuna released the promo of the song <unk> <unk> Re on 26 April 2014 . It featured Nagarjuna and Chaitanya dancing in a pub . It became a viral video post its release . 
 After the audio launch , the positive reception of the song Chinni Chinni <unk> prompted the makers to release a video featuring the making of the song . Shot in the backdrop of a village , the song featured Nagarjuna dressed as a farmer while Shriya Saran was dressed as an innocent villager . On the other hand , the video showcased the recording of the song by Shreya Ghoshal . The video too received positive response . A still featuring Chaitanya and Samantha in an intimate sequence from the flashback was re @-@ tweeted many times by the fans and Telugu film websites . A short teaser , 31 seconds long , was unveiled on 13 May 2014 , in which Samantha was seen speaking about <unk> continuously at a doctors ' check up and the montage of the film 's male leads being played side by side . 
 A behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video of the making of the song <unk> <unk> was released on 14 May 2014 . The song featured Chaitanya and Samantha as a newly married couple and their onscreen romance with Lavanya Tripathi making a brief glimpse towards the end . It also showcased the recording of the song by Arijit Singh . The video received a positive response , with praises directed towards the on @-@ screen chemistry between Chaitanya and Samantha . The audio launch event , entitled " Manam <unk> " , was aired on 18 May 2014 in Gemini TV at 5 : 00 PM , with the Akkineni family in attendance . 
 Tata DoCoMo & Brooke Bond Red Label were involved with the film , advertising on hoardings , television , radio , in print , and on buses , among other venues . Tata DoCoMo came up with the tagline " Be a part of the Manam family " and offered a chance to the meet the film 's star cast by recharging with a certain amount . Brooke Bond used the slogan " Red Label celebrates the taste of togetherness with Manam " and offered a chance to meet Nagarjuna . First Show Digital handled the film 's online promotions . The film 's 100 @-@ day celebration was held along with the platinum disc function of Oka Laila <unk> ( 2014 ) on 22 September 2014 at the Shilpakala Vedika in Hyderabad . 
 = = = Leak = = = 
 In early March 2014 , the film was leaked into the Internet . Two people related to the film leakage were arrested on 8 March 2014 . They were identified as <unk> Sheik and Sheik Abid Basha hailing from Guntur . Basha illegally accessed the feed of the film and handed it over to Sheik who then uploaded it on YouTube . Post release , the film became one of the most downloaded titles in recent times and the Anti @-@ Video Piracy team worked for a week since the film 's release to reduce the effect of this leak on the film 's gross . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The television broadcast rights were sold to Gemini TV for ₹ 80 million . The film was planned for a television premiere on 20 September 2014 on the eve of Nageswara Rao 's birthday . The film registered a TRP rating of 15 @.@ 62 making it one of the highest TRPs ever registered for a film in 2014 . Reliance Home Video released the film 's DVDs and Blu @-@ ray discs in December 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film received positive reviews from critics who called it a beautiful film and a complete entertainer , according to International Business Times India . <unk> M. Borah of The Hindu praised the performances of the film 's cast , the work of the technical crew , and Kumar 's execution of the film 's script in narrating a complex story without confusion . She summarised , " The smile and laughter will not leave you while it still manage to moisten your eyes here and there " . Sandhya Rao of Sify stated , " <unk> story is something new within Telugu films context , but the way the film showcases romance and emotion , it is far from a regular fare . Go watch Manam , a complete entertainer , which will surely enthrall ! " . She recognised Nageswara Rao as the pillar of the film and termed his performance as an " outstanding " one . 
 Shekhar of Oneindia Entertainment gave the film 4 out of 5 stars , stating " Manam is a perfect family entertainer and it is director Vikram Kumar 's unique script that makes the movie a brilliant experiment . The movie is high on entertainment quotient and it is treat to see ANR , Nagarjuna and Naga Chaitanya together on screen " . Rajasekhar S of <unk> also gave the film 4 out of 5 stars and called it " classy and brilliant " , stating " Vikram K Kumar has packed the movie in such a way that the audience never get bored . Especially the last 20 minutes of the movie , towards the climax brings us to the edge of the seat " . IndiaGlitz gave the film 4 out of 5 stars as well , and called the film a " complete entertainer that is more than a love story " and stated , " The film packs everything that the trailer promised , plus the not @-@ quite @-@ unknown formula of Past Life Regression . Although we have seen many <unk> stories in the past , ' Manam ' is special because of its sublime and intriguing nature . " 
 Karthik Pasupulate of The Times of India gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and wrote , " You cannot appreciate the smarts in the script has been written , and how humorously it all gets translated onscreen without getting unduly melodramatic . Since this is ANR 's last film , the cumulative nostalgia and feel goodness of the movie might just paper over the structural issues . It 's definitely worth a watch " . Suresh Kavirayani of Deccan Chronicle also gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and wrote , " Vikram Kumar has come out with a nice story and screenplay and created a classic masterpiece . Though there are past life regressions and rebirths , the director ’ s intelligent screenplay makes you to see more comfortably without any confusion . Manam is a good film to watch and a fitting tribute to Akkineni Nageswara Rao . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film achieved an average 95 % occupancy in both single screens and multiplexes during the morning and matinee shows on its opening day , increasing during the evening and night shows . The film collected ₹ 32 @.@ 1 million worldwide on its first day according to trade analyst Taran Adarsh . It collected more than ₹ 112 @.@ 6 million net worldwide in three days and topped the Tollywood business chart , beating Vikrama Simha . In four days , the film collected ₹ 149 million worldwide . By the end of its first week , the film collected ₹ 190 million worldwide . The film collected ₹ 267 @.@ 1 million net in 10 days worldwide . 
 The film collected ₹ 327 @.@ 5 million net worldwide by the end of the 19th day of its theatrical run . By mid June 2014 , the film crossed the ₹ 350 million mark worldwide , and was expected to reach the ₹ 400 million mark . The film collected a worldwide share of ₹ 15 million by the end of its fourth weekend . By late July 2014 , after completing its 50 @-@ day run , it had amassed a ₹ 480 million share , including satellite rights and audio rights . The film collected ₹ 365 million worldwide during its lifetime , becoming one of the highest grossing Telugu films of 2014 . The film 's success was attributed to Nagarjuna 's strategy of releasing the film on a limited number of screens , and utilising a low budget according to IANS . 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 The film collected a share of ₹ 22 @.@ 3 million on its first day at AP / Nizam box office . The film collected its highest share of ₹ 9 @.@ 1 million in the Nizam region , followed by the Ceded region with ₹ 3 @.@ 9 million and ₹ 2 @.@ 2 million in Vishakhapatnam . It collected ₹ 16 million and ₹ 0 @.@ 3 million in Karnataka and the rest of India respectively . The film collected ₹ 40 @.@ 2 million at the Indian box office in two days . The film collected ₹ 62 @.@ 2 million at the AP / Nizam box office and ₹ 8 million in the rest of India by the end of its first weekend . The film again collected its highest share of ₹ 26 @.@ 7 million in the Nizam region , followed by the Ceded region with ₹ 10 @.@ 6 million and Vishakhapatnam with ₹ 6 @.@ 2 million . Adarsh reported that the film collected a share of ₹ 89 @.@ 2 million in four days at the Indian box office . 
 It collected ₹ 122 @.@ 2 million at the AP / Nizam box office , ₹ 14 @.@ 8 million at the Karnataka box office , and ₹ 3 million in the rest of India by the end of its first week . The film collected ₹ 39 @.@ 4 million net at the AP / Nizam box office and ₹ 5 @.@ 8 million in the rest of India by the end of its second weekend . It collected ₹ 218 @.@ 7 million in AP / Nizam and ₹ 21 @.@ 1 million in the rest of India by the end of its 19 @-@ day run . The film company held celebrations after the completion of its 50 @-@ day run on 14 July 2014 . The film completed a 100 @-@ day run on 30 August 2014 . 
 = = = = Overseas = = = = 
 The film collected ₹ 5 @.@ 3 million from 69 screens at its premiere in the United States . The premiere was held on Thursday , 22 May 2014 . According to Taran Adarsh , the collections made by the film from its premiere show was a " phenomenal " start . The film collected ₹ 33 @.@ 3 million in three days in the United States with many screens still yet to report as of 25 May 2014 . The film collected ₹ 49 @.@ 6 million on 108 screens as of 27 May 2014 , in the United States . With this , Manam became the film with the highest grossing opening weekend for Nagarjuna and Chaitanya in the United States , and also became the third @-@ highest grosser for an opening weekend in the country in 2014 , after 1 : Nenokkadine and Race Gurram . The film crossed the US $ 1 million mark by the end of its first four @-@ day weekend . 
 The film collected ₹ 62 @.@ 6 million in six days , thus surpassing the ₹ 59 @.@ 3 million nine @-@ day extended first week collections of Race Gurram in the United States . According to Adarsh , the film continued to do good business in the United States by collecting ₹ 64 @.@ 5 million by the end of its first week . The film continued its successful run in the United States through early June 2014 and collected ₹ 82 million . With this , the film broke the record set by Race Gurram and became the second highest grosser in 2014 after 1 : Nenokkadine . The film surpassed the lifetime collections of 1 : Nenokkadine at the United States box office in 14 days by collecting ₹ 83 @.@ 3 million . 
 The film collected ₹ 87 @.@ 7 million in the United States in 19 days . By mid June 2014 , the film collected ₹ 91 @.@ 1 million in the United States , and by the end of its 25 @-@ day run and crossed the US $ 1 @.@ 5 million mark , becoming one of the biggest commercially successful Telugu films in the country . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Celebrities like S. S. Rajamouli , Shobu Yarlagadda , Nani , K. <unk> , Manchu Manoj , Pooja Hegde , Allu Sirish , Deva Katta , <unk> Sesh , <unk> Preet Singh , Rana Daggubati , Gopimohan , Prakash Raj , Allu Arjun , and Mahesh Babu praised the film . Director Ram Gopal Varma called Manam an " avant garde product but deeply rooted in earth " and " the first constructive demonstration that Tollywood actually can go into a new age of cinema " . He added that both Nagarjuna and Vikram deserved multiple salutes for making a film like Manam , and the only tragedy was that Nageswara Rao was not alive to see this film , which Varma termed an " astounding celebration of human emotions " . Ram Charan called Manam a film that induces " Love , joy , passion , hatred , excitement and almost every feeling you can imagine and more " . Kamal Haasan watched the film on 29 May 2014 , at a special screening in Chennai . Haasan became emotional and could not control his tears . Regarding this , he said " I have always been a fan of ANR and this film has brought back very fond memories . I turned emotional when I saw ANR on the big screen . I wholeheartedly appreciate the Akkineni family for paying tribute to ANR in this manner . " 
 IndiaGlitz called Manam , along with 1 : Nenokkadine and Drushyam , the best experimental films in recent times . Manam , along with <unk> ( 2014 ) , was nominated by the Telugu Film Producers Council to the Film Federation of India to be included on the list of 30 Indian films for the 87th Academy Awards , in the category of Best Foreign Language Film . In late September 2014 , the United States postal department released a stamp in honour of Nageswara Rao , making him the first Indian actor in whose name a postal stamp had been released . That stamp featured a still of Nageswara Rao from the film . The film was screened at the 45th International Film Festival of India on 29 November 2014 , as a Homage to Nageswara Rao . In February 2015 , the makers of Bandipotu ( 2015 ) released a poster featuring <unk> Babu , Allari Naresh and <unk> , whose theme resembled the first look of Manam . 
 = Insane Clown Posse = 
 Insane Clown Posse ( ICP ) is an American hip hop duo from Detroit , Michigan . The group is composed of Joseph Bruce and Joseph Utsler , who perform under the respective personas of the " wicked clowns " Violent J and Shaggy 2 Dope ( originally 2 Dope ) . Insane Clown Posse performs a style of hardcore hip hop known as horrorcore and is known for its elaborate live performances . The duo has earned two platinum and five gold albums . According to Nielsen SoundScan , the entire catalog of the group has sold 6 @.@ 5 million units in the United States and Canada as of April 2007 . 
 Originally known as JJ Boyz and Inner City Posse , the group introduced <unk> and horror @-@ themed lyrics as a means of distinguishing itself stylistically . The duo founded the independent record label Psychopathic Records with Alex Abbiss as manager , and produced and starred in the feature films Big Money Hustlas and Big Money Rustlas . They formed their own professional wrestling federation , Juggalo Championship Wrestling , and later collaborated with many well @-@ known hip hop and rock musicians . The group has established a dedicated following called Juggalos numbering in the " tens of thousands " . 
 The songs of Insane Clown Posse center thematically on the mythology of the Dark Carnival , a metaphoric limbo in which the lives of the dead are judged by one of several entities . The Dark Carnival is elaborated through a series of stories called Joker 's Cards , each of which offers a specific lesson designed to change the " evil ways " of listeners before " the end consumes us all " . 
 = = Musical career = = 
 = = = 1985 – 94 : Early history = = = 
 Joseph Bruce ( Violent J ) and Joseph Utsler ( Shaggy 2 Dope ) met in Oak Park , a suburb on the north border of Detroit , Michigan . Along with Utsler 's brother , John , and friend , Lacy , they wrestled in backyard rings that they had built themselves . They also listened to hip hop music , including 3rd Bass , Beastie Boys , N.W.A and local rappers like Awesome Dre . In 1989 , Joseph Bruce , as Jagged Joe , Joseph Utsler , as <unk> Joe , and John Utsler , as Master J , released the single titled " Party at the Top of the Hill " under the name of JJ Boys , but the group did not pursue a serious career in music . Poverty and a difficult home life drove Bruce to move in with Rudy " The Rude Boy " Hill in River Rouge , a city near the industrial southwest side of Detroit . 
 Feeling a sense of home and belonging , Bruce formed a gang called Inner City Posse , which was composed of Joseph Utsler , Rudy Hill , other friends of Bruce , and a number of other connections he had made in Southwest Detroit . Bruce was jailed for ninety days in 1989 – 1990 for death threats , robbery , and violating probation ; this experience convinced him to reduce his involvement in gang life . Bruce began his professional wrestling career after getting out of jail , and it was at his first show that he met Rob Van Dam and Sabu , two other first @-@ timers with whom he became very good friends . During this time Bruce brought Utsler backstage with him , and all four became close friends . 
 Bruce became frustrated with the backstage politics of the wrestling business and began searching for another career . Back on the streets , Bruce , Utsler and Utsler 's brother , John performed hip hop music at local night clubs , using the stage names Violent J , 2 Dope , and John Kickjazz , under the name of their gang , Inner City Posse . Seeing a need for a manager , Bruce 's brother Robert recommended his friend and record store owner Alex Abbiss , who established the Psychopathic Records record label with the group in 1991 . Later that year the group released the self @-@ produced EP entitled Dog Beats . 
 Local radio broadcasters were reluctant to play the EP 's single , " Dog Beats " , because Inner City Posse 's members were white . While trying to get stations to play the single , Bruce learned that one of the stations he and Abbiss visited would be interviewing local rapper Esham , who Bruce considered to be a " superstar " ; Bruce had recently begun to collect Esham 's albums , as he had done with other local rappers ; by the time he had discovered Esham , the rapper had released two full @-@ length albums and three EPs . Bruce met Esham for the first time at the station and praised him . Esham wished Bruce well and Bruce gave the rapper a copy of Dog Beats ; this began the friendship and professional relationship between Psychopathic Records and Esham 's label , Reel Life Productions . Growing popularity in the local music scene turned negative for the group 's gang , which became the target of growing violence . After receiving jail sentences , the group members abandoned gang life . 
 In late 1991 , the group had the problem of having spent more money on production than was covered by returns . The group decided that its gangsta rap style was the cause : Most emcees at the time used similar styles , making it difficult for Inner City Posse to distinguish itself stylistically . Referring to local rapper Esham 's horrorcore style , Bruce suggested the band adapt this genre , in a bid to have Detroit represent acid rap , much as Los Angeles represented gangsta rap . The group agreed , but not to copying the style of Esham closely . Instead , they suggested using horror @-@ themed lyrics as an emotional outlet for all their negative life experiences . They were also unanimous in deciding not to rap openly about Satan , which Esham often did . 
 After the change in musical style , the group decided it needed a new name . Utsler suggested keeping the " I.C.P. " initials to inform the community that Inner City Posse was not defunct . Several names were considered before Bruce recalled his dream of a clown running around in Delray , which became the inspiration for the group 's new name : Insane Clown Posse . The group decided they would all don face paint due to the success of their former clown @-@ painted hype man . Upon returning home that night , Bruce says he had a dream in which " spirits in a traveling carnival appeared to him " — an image that would become the basis for the Dark Carnival mythology detailed in the group 's Joker 's Cards series . 
 = = 1992 – 2004 : First Joker Card Deck = = 
 = = = 1992 – 93 : Carnival of Carnage Era = = = 
 The group began recording their debut album , Carnival of Carnage , with producer Chuck Miller . After recording only three songs for $ 6 @,@ 000 with Miller , Alex Abbiss made his first major managerial move by finding another producer , Mike E. Clark . The group finished recording the album with Clark , who continued to work with them throughout their career . The album featured appearances from local rappers , including Esham and Kid Rock . Just weeks prior to the release of their album , John left the group because he felt that it was " taking up too much of [ his ] life " . When Bruce and Utsler attempted to call a meeting to talk about the issues , John did not attend . 
 Carnival of Carnage was released on October 18 , 1992 , with distribution within a 120 @-@ mile ( 190 km ) radius of Detroit . Allmusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine compared the group 's performance on the album to " a third @-@ rate Beastie Boys supported by a cut @-@ rate Faith No More , all tempered with the sensibility that made GWAR cult heroes — only with ... more sexism and jokes that ... wind up sounding racist " . The follow @-@ up EP , Beverly Kills <unk> , sold well and gained a larger audience . During a live performance of the song " The <unk> " , Bruce addressed the audience as Juggalos , and the positive response resulted in the group using the word thereafter . The word has been the subject of criticism from both Ben Sisario of Rolling Stone and Allmusic 's Erlewine , who suggested the term is similar to the racial slur <unk> . 
 = = = 1994 : Ringmaster Era = = = 
 The group 's second studio album , Ringmaster , was released on March 8 , 1994 , and its popularity enabled the group to sell out larger nightclubs across Detroit . Because Bruce and Utsler made reference to the Detroit @-@ produced soft drink Faygo in their songs , they " figured it would be cool to have some on stage with [ them ] " . During a concert in 1993 , Bruce threw an open bottle of Faygo at a row of concertgoers who were giving them the finger . After receiving a positive response , Bruce and Utsler have since continued to spray Faygo onto audiences . A subsequent national tour increased sales of the album , earning Ringmaster a gold certification . The group 's second EP , The Terror Wheel , was released on August 5 , 1994 . One of the songs from the EP , " Dead Body Man " , received considerable local radio play . The same year marked their first " Hallowicked " concert , which has since continued annually on Halloween night in Detroit . 
 = = = 1995 – 96 : Riddle Box Era = = = 
 In 1995 , Bruce and Utsler attempted to obtain a contract with a major record label . The duo eventually signed a contract with the short @-@ lived Jive Records sub @-@ label Battery Records , which released the group 's third studio album , Riddle Box , on October 10 , 1995 . After Battery / Jive Records showed little interest in promoting the album , Insane Clown Posse funded the promotion of Riddle Box independently . This effort led the group to Dallas , Texas , where it persuaded several music retail stores to stock the album . Sales averaged 1 @,@ 500 copies per week as a result . 
 = = = 1997 – 98 : The Great Milenko Era = = = 
 Manager Alex Abbiss negotiated a contract with the Disney @-@ owned label Hollywood Records , which reportedly paid $ 1 million to purchase the Insane Clown Posse contract from Battery / Jive / BMG Records . The group started recording its fourth studio album , The Great Milenko , in 1996 , during which Disney requested that the tracks " The Neden Game " , " Under the Moon " , and " Boogie Woogie Wu " be removed . Disney also asked that the lyrics of other tracks be changed , threatening to not release the album otherwise . Bruce and Utsler complied with Disney 's requests , and planned to go on a national tour with House of Krazees and Myzery as their opening acts . 
 During a music store autograph signing , Insane Clown Posse was notified that Hollywood Records had recalled the album within hours of its release , despite having sold 18 @,@ 000 copies and reaching # 63 on the Billboard 200 . The group was also informed that its in @-@ store signings and nationwide tour had been canceled , commercials for the album and the music video for " Halls of Illusions " ( which had reached # 1 on The Box video request channel ) were pulled from television , and that the group was dropped from the label . It was later revealed that Disney was being criticized by the Southern Baptist Convention at the time because of Disney 's promotion of " Gay Days " at Disneyland , in addition to presiding over the gay @-@ themed television sitcom Ellen . The Convention accused Disney of turning its back on " family values " . Although Abbiss told the press that Disney had stopped production of The Great Milenko to avoid further controversy , Disney claimed instead that the release of the album was an oversight by their review board , and that the album " did not fit the Disney image " because of its " inappropriate " lyrics , which they claimed were offensive to women . 
 After the termination of the Hollywood Records contract , Insane Clown Posse signed a new contract with Island / PolyGram Records , which agreed to release the album as intended . Entertainment Weekly music critic David Browne gave the record a C @-@ minus rating : " [ With ] its puerile humor and intentionally ugly metal @-@ rap tunes , the album feels oddly dated " . The Great Milenko was certified platinum with over 1 @.@ 7 million copies sold . One of the group 's first projects with Island Records was an hour @-@ long documentary titled Shockumentary , which aired on MTV . The station initially refused to play the documentary , but Island Records persuaded them to air it as a personal favor . Shockumentary helped increase album sales from 17 @,@ 000 to 50 @,@ 000 copies per week . Island also rereleased the group 's first two albums , as well as a 2 @-@ CD compilation album composed of rare songs and demos titled " Forgotten Freshness Vol . 1 " . 
 = = = = Nationwide tour = = = = 
 Two days after the Extreme Championship Wrestling ( ECW ) program , Insane Clown Posse began its rescheduled nationwide tour with House of Krazees and Myzery . Their first concert , held in Orlando , Florida , was hand @-@ picked by Insane Clown Posse and free to the public . Halfway through the tour , Brian Jones of House of Krazees had a falling out with his band members . Jones left the group , forcing House of Krazees to quit the tour . The success of the tour enabled Bruce and Utsler to purchase new houses both for each other and for their families . Bruce even told his mother to quit her job because he would pay her expenses . 
 = = = = Eminem feud = = = = 
 In late 1997 , Bruce took Myzery to St. Andrew 's Hall . Eminem , then an unknown local emcee , approached Bruce and , according to Bruce , handed him a flyer advertising the release party for the Slim Shady EP . The flyer read , " Featuring appearances by Esham , Kid Rock , and ICP ( maybe ) " . Bruce asked why Eminem was promoting a possible Insane Clown Posse appearance without first contacting the group . Bruce said that Eminem explained , " It says ' maybe . ' Maybe you will be there ; I don 't know . That 's why I 'm asking you right now . You guys comin ' to my release party , or what ? " Bruce , upset over not being consulted , responded , " Fuck no , I ain 't coming to your party . We might have , if you would 've asked us first , before putting us on the fuckin ' flyer like this . " Bruce reported that Eminem attacked the group in radio interviews . Bruce and Utsler first responded by referring to Eminem 's alter ego as " Slim Anus " on " 85 Bucks An Hour " from Twiztid 's 1997 debut , <unk> , and later in 1999 releasing a parody of Eminem 's " My Name Is " entitled " Slim Anus " . Barbs between Insane Clown Posse and Eminem continued until the feud was ended in 2005 by hip hop group D12 and Psychopathic Records . 
 = = = = The House of Horrors Tour = = = = 
 One month after ICP 's Strangle @-@ Mania Live , Insane Clown Posse began their second nationwide tour , " The House of Horrors Tour " , with Myzery added as one of the opening acts . While searching for the second opening act , Bruce received a telephone call at his home from former House of Krazees members Jamie Spaniolo and Paul Methric , who told Bruce that the group was officially disbanded and asked to be on the tour . Spaniolo and Methric provided a demo tape containing three songs : " 2nd Hand Smoke " , " <unk> " , and " How Does It Feel ? " Bruce was extremely impressed , and immediately had a contract drafted with Psychopathic Records for the new group to sign . Bruce , Spaniolo , and Methric agreed on the band name Twiztid . The House of Horrors Tour thus featured Insane Clown Posse , with opening groups Twiztid , Myzery , and Psycho Realm . 
 = = = = Legal troubles = = = = 
 On November 16 , 1997 , Bruce was arrested on an aggravated battery charge after allegedly striking an audience member thirty times with his microphone at a concert in Albuquerque , New Mexico . Bruce was held for four hours before being released on $ 5 @,@ 000 bail . The January 1998 issue of Spin magazine ran a four @-@ page cartoon lampooning Insane Clown Posse and Juggalos , claiming that the group was offensive " not for their obscenity , but for their stupidity " . Spin likened Insane Clown Posse 's stage act to " a sort of circus karaoke " and portrayed the group 's fans as overweight suburbanites . On the group 's website , Bruce responded to the article by stating , " I could give a fuck less " . 
 After a show in Indianapolis , Insane Clown Posse 's tour bus stopped at a Waffle House in Greenfield , Indiana . When a customer began to harass Spaniolo and Bruce , a fight broke out between the customer and all of the bands ' members . Months later on June 4 , 1998 , Bruce and Utsler pleaded guilty to misdemeanor disorderly conduct charges ( reduced from battery ) in an Indiana court and were fined $ 200 each . Members of Twiztid , Myzery , and Psycho Realm were charged with battery . The group 's tour was briefly derailed in January 1998 , when their tour bus drifted off a highway and down an embankment , leaving Frank Moreno of Psycho Realm with a concussion . As a result of the accident , Insane Clown Posse postponed two shows scheduled for Cleveland , Ohio , on January 22 and 23 , but honored their promise to perform on January 25 and 26 . They face a lawsuit over alleged sexual harassment . 
 = = = 1999 : The Amazing Jeckel Brothers Era = = = 
 On April 19 , 1998 , in Minneapolis , Minnesota , Bruce suffered a panic attack during a performance and was carried off stage . Bruce , who later recalled being completely " out of it " , found scissors and cut off his dreadlocks . After suffering another panic attack once he returned home , Bruce opted to spend three days in a Michigan mental health program . Insane Clown Posse later cancelled the last two weeks ' worth of dates on its United States tour , but subsequently launched their first European tour . 
 By late 1998 over one million copies of The Great Milenko had been sold , and Insane Clown Posse was ready for its fifth album , The Amazing Jeckel Brothers . Working with Mike E. Clark and Rich " Legz Diamond " Murrell , Bruce and Utsler developed their album with the highest of hopes . The group was known nationally , but were not taken very seriously . Hoping to receive the respect Bruce and Utsler felt they deserved , they planned to feature well @-@ known , respected rappers on their album . Bruce stated outright that he wanted to involve Snoop Dogg and Ol ' Dirty Bastard . They paid Snoop Dogg $ 40 @,@ 000 to appear on the song " The Shaggy Show " . Snoop Dogg also helped them contact Ol ' Dirty Bastard , who was paid $ 30 @,@ 000 for his appearance . Ol ' Dirty Bastard recorded his track in a matter of two days ; however , his recording consisted of nothing more than him rambling about " bitches " . It took Bruce and Utsler a week to assemble just four rhymes out of his rambling , and had to re @-@ record the track and title it " Bitches " . Finally , Insane Clown Posse contacted Ice @-@ T , who charged them only $ 10 @,@ 000 . The group felt that Ice @-@ T 's song did not belong on the album , and was instead released on a later album , <unk> from Outer Space . 
 To help increase their positive publicity , the group hired the Nasty Little Man publicity team . The team set up a photo shoot for Insane Clown Posse that was to appear on the cover of Alternative Press magazine in Cleveland . On the set of the photo shoot , a member of the publicity team approached Bruce and explained that in the song " Fuck the World " , the lyric that stated " Fuck the Beastie Boys and the Dalai Lama " needed to be changed . Insulted , Bruce exclaimed that his music would not be censored again — referring to Disney 's previous requirement for censorship . Nasty Little Man told Bruce that the Beastie Boys were not only clients of the company but also personal friends , and the Beastie Boys told the company to make Bruce change the lyric . In response , Bruce fired Nasty Little Man and asked its team to leave the photo shoot . 
 The Amazing Jeckel Brothers was released on May 25 , 1999 , and reached # 4 on the Billboard album charts , and has since been certified platinum by the RIAA . Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album a " four out of five stars " rating , stating that " [ Insane Clown Posse ] actually delivered an album that comes close to fulfilling whatever promise their ridiculous , carnivalesque blend of hardcore hip @-@ hop and shock @-@ metal had in the first place " . Rolling Stone writer Barry Walters gave the album a " two out of five stars " rating , writing that " no musical sleight of hand can disguise the fact that Shaggy and J remain the ultimate wack MCs " . At the same time as The Amazing Jeckel Brothers ' release , Island Records merged with Def Jam Records . It quickly became apparent to Bruce and Utsler that Def Jam Records had no interest in them . Eminem , who had begun to gain mainstream success , insulted Insane Clown Posse in interviews , tours , and the song " Till Hell Freezes Over " . 
 = = = = Big Money Hustlas = = = = 
 On Insane Clown Posse 's previous tour ( The House of Horrors Tour ) , they had watched the movie Big Ballers . The group , as well as Twiztid , loved the video . After Insane Clown Posse finished its The Amazing Jeckel Brothers album , Bruce and Utsler decided to create their own movie , Big Money Hustlas , with the same low @-@ budget comedy style as Big Ballers . Island Records gave them $ 250 @,@ 000 to begin work on the movie . Bruce and Utsler were contacted by John Cafiero , who said that he was a fan of Insane Clown Posse , and offered to direct the movie . Insane Clown Posse asked Mick Foley to appear in the movie as " Cactus Sac " , a parody of his " Cactus Jack " persona . Cafiero retained the Misfits , Fred Berry , and , at Bruce 's request , Harland Williams . The script was written by Bruce , and filmed in New York City . Bruce played a crime boss and Utsler portrayed a police detective . The stage crew members , who showed their dislike for Insane Clown Posse , were a source of contention . Despite the crew striking twice , the movie was filmed in two months . 
 = = = = Woodstock 1999 = = = = 
 While on " The Asylum In @-@ store Tour " , Bruce and Utsler were informed by Abbiss that they were offered $ 100 @,@ 000 to perform at Woodstock 1999 . They were excited about the offer , as it indicated their impact on the music industry . Some people perceived participating in Woodstock 1999 was a sell @-@ out for the group ; however , Bruce and Utsler disagreed . As Bruce explains , " [ Woodstock ] sold out the mainstream style for us ! Woodstock never came to us and asked us to change one fuckin ' thing about us or our show ! They wanted ICP just as ICP is , and nothing else . If that ain 't fresh , then I don 't know what the fuck is ! " 
 = = = = Amazing Jeckel Brothers Tour troubles = = = = 
 After Woodstock 1999 , Insane Clown Posse began its " Amazing Jeckel Brothers Tour " , along with musicians Biohazard , Krayzie Bone , Twiztid , Mindless Self Indulgence , and Coal Chamber . Biohazard , Mindless Self Indulgence , Krayzie Bone , and Twiztid were well received by audiences ; however , Coal Chamber was not . Insane Clown Posse fans were not purchasing tickets , as they did not like Coal Chamber . For the three shows that Coal Chamber played , there were multiple ticket refunds . Bruce and his brother , Rob , made the decision to eliminate Coal Chamber from the tour . After doing so , there were no tickets returned for the remainder of the tour dates . Bruce and Utsler claimed that Coal Chamber had been removed from the tour because of equipment problems , but later revealed the true reason for their actions on The Howard Stern Show , which aired August 19 , 1999 . Bruce continued by saying , " Nobody will tell you that , because everybody 's afraid of your crumpet @-@ ass bitch manager " . Later that night , Stern contacted Bruce and Utsler , asking them to appear on his show the following day to talk with Coal Chamber 's manager , Sharon Osbourne . 
 Before the show went on air , Osbourne bet Bruce and Utsler $ 50 @,@ 000 that Insane Clown Posse 's next album would not even sell 200 @,@ 000 copies — a bet that Bruce accepted . On air Osbourne informed Bruce and Utsler that Coal Chamber filed a lawsuit for breach of contract . Osbourne stated that her group was to receive $ 12 @,@ 500 per show for a scheduled two @-@ month package tour . Bruce reiterated that Coal Chamber 's music did not appeal to Insane Clown Posse fans , and that ticket refunds decreased after Coal Chamber had been removed from the tour . Osbourne then made public the bet with Bruce about Insane Clown Posse 's next album , also stating that the duo would be subsequently dropped from their distributor . In Osbourne 's words , " You 're dead . Your career is over . " Bruce predicted that the group 's next album would sell at least 500 @,@ 000 copies ; however , the bet officially stood at 200 @,@ 000 copies as agreed by both Bruce and Osbourne backstage . 
 = = = 2000 – 01 : Bizaar and Bizzar Era = = = 
 On January 10 , 2000 , Utsler collapsed on stage during a performance at the House of Blues in Chicago and was rushed to Northwestern Memorial Hospital . He was diagnosed with flu @-@ related symptoms and abnormally low blood sugar . As a result of the incident , the following week 's concert dates were rescheduled . In June 2000 , Eminem physically attacked Douglas Dail , an Insane Clown Posse affiliate , threatening him with a gun in the parking lot of a car audio store in Royal Oak , Michigan . Eminem pleaded guilty to a lesser charge in exchange for two years probation and a $ 10 @,@ 000 fine . In July 2000 , Bruce and Utsler staged the first annual Gathering of the Juggalos at the Novi Expo Center in Novi , Michigan . Described by Bruce as a " Juggalo Woodstock " , the Gathering of the Juggalos was a three @-@ day music festival that featured wrestling , games , seminars , contests , sideshows , and performances by all Psychopathic Records ' artists . Also featured at the event were Vampiro — who both wrestled and performed — Project Born , and Kottonmouth Kings . On July 18 , 2000 , Big Money Hustlas was released direct @-@ to @-@ video . 
 After the Gathering of the Juggalos , Insane Clown Posse set out to release its sixth and seventh studio albums — Bizaar and Bizzar — as a double album . While recording the albums , the duo had a fallout with long @-@ time producer Mike E. Clark . Bizaar and Bizzar were the last complete albums Clark would produce with Insane Clown Posse until his return in 2007 . Bruce and Utsler flew to Denver , Colorado to add the finishing touches to the albums . Bizaar and Bizzar were released on October 31 , 2000 , peaking at # 20 and # 21 , respectively , on the Billboard 200 . In The New Rolling Stone Album Guide , Ben Sisario wrote that the albums " qualify as ICP 's masterworks of both merchandising and music " . Both albums were given a " three out of five stars " rating . The combined sales were around 400 @,@ 000 copies , exceeding the bet placed previously with Sharon Osbourne ; Osbourne did not come through with payment for having lost the bet . 
 Two music videos were released from the albums : " Tilt @-@ a @-@ Whirl , " from Bizaar , and " Let 's Go All The Way " , a cover of a Sly Fox song from Bizzar . MTV agreed to play " Let 's Go All The Way " on their network , airing it once in the late evening . Bruce and Utsler decided to bombard Total Request Live ( TRL ) with requests for the video . While on their " Bizaar Bizzar Tour " , Insane Clown Posse posted on its website that December 8 was the day for their fans request the video . Bruce and Utsler named that day " The Mighty Day of <unk> , " meaning " The Mighty Day of All or Nothing " . On December 8 , Rudy Hill , Robert Bruce , Tom Dub , and six other Psychopathic Records employees and friends drove down to New York City . 
 They were met by nearly 400 Insane Clown Posse fans standing outside in front of the TRL studio window , all with signs supporting the duo . Thirty minutes before the show began , Viacom security guards and New York City police officers were dispatched to remove all the fans from the sidewalk . When some fans , including Robert Bruce , refused to move because it was a public street and no other individuals were asked to move , they were assaulted . All telephone requests for the video to be played were ignored , and Insane Clown Posse was never mentioned during the show . MTV later informed Island Records that the heads of the network must choose the band first before it can become eligible to be featured on TRL . 
 Bruce and Utsler left Island Records , signing a contract with D3 Entertainment to distribute every release on Psychopathic Records , which would remain independently funded , produced , and recorded . Insane Clown Posse had their own studio built , called " The Lotus Pod " . In the spring of 2001 , Insane Clown Posse 's road manager William Dail was arrested in Omaha , Nebraska , for allegedly choking a man who waved an Eminem T @-@ shirt in front of the band . Dail was charged for misdemeanor assault and battery . The charges were reduced to a $ 100 fine after he pleaded guilty to a lesser charge . 
 The second Gathering of the Juggalos was held from July 13 – 15 at the <unk> Convention Centre in Toledo , Ohio . The event featured the same activities as the first Gathering of the Juggalos , as well as guests such as Bone Thugs @-@ n @-@ Harmony , Vanilla Ice , and Three 6 Mafia . On June 15 , 2001 , Bruce was arrested in Columbia , Missouri for an outstanding warrant in St. Louis stemming from an incident in February 2001 . That incident involved Insane Clown Posse allegedly attacking employees of a St. Louis radio station over disparaging remarks that a disc jockey made on the air . The police used several squad cars to detain Bruce , Utsler , and two associates a few miles from a venue where the group had completed a concert . Bruce was transferred to St. Louis the following day and released on bail without charge on June 18 . 
 = = = 2002 – 03 : The Wraith : Shangri @-@ La Era = = = 
 The face of the sixth Joker 's Card is " The Wraith " , a personification of Death . The card features two " exhibits " , Shangri @-@ La and Hell 's Pit , each of which would be given its own album . On November 5 , 2002 , Insane Clown Posse released their eighth studio album , The Wraith : Shangri @-@ La , which debuted at # 15 on the Billboard 200 and # 1 on the Top Independent Albums chart . The album was notable for its explicit acknowledgment of ICP 's belief in God . 
 Ben Sisario criticized the album in the Rolling Stone Album Guide , writing that " the whole thing was some bland divine plan " and asking , " Is this man 's final dis of God , or His of us ? " Some critics perceived the spiritual element of the storyline to be a joke or stunt . Allmusic writer Bradley Torreano wrote that " Even if it is a joke , it isn 't a funny one , or even a clever one . " In September 2003 , Insane Clown Posse was voted the worst band of any musical genre in Blender , with The Wraith : Shangri @-@ La named as the group 's worst album . However , the magazine also gave the album a positive review for its " charming , good @-@ natured idiocy " . 
 According to Bruce , " Some people might 've been upset [ by spiritual themes in The Wraith : Shangri @-@ La ] , but through our eyes all we did was touch a lot of people . We definitely wanted it to be something everlasting . Maybe a 19 @-@ year @-@ old might not understand or like that ending now . But later , when he has four kids , he might think , ' That was the shit . ' " Following the release of The Wraith : Shangri @-@ La , Bruce and Utsler signed a new contract with Sony BMG 's RED Distribution and launched the Psychopathic Europe record label . 
 The duo went on the 75 @-@ date " Shangri @-@ La World Tour " , where they performed across the United States , Australia , and Europe . While in Australia , customs confiscated all the group 's Faygo , assuming that they were bringing it for commercial purposes . Insane Clown Posse tried to explain that they are performers and that the soda was part of their act , but were still unable to use the Faygo and forced to use a different form of soda for their Australian tour . 
 = = = 2004 : The Wraith : Hell 's Pit Era = = = 
 Following the release of The Wraith : Shangri @-@ La , Bruce admitted that he was considering not completing the production of Hell 's Pit . He is quoted as describing Shangri @-@ La as " the end of the road . It 's the end of the Joker 's Cards . After this I could do anything I want , for the rest of my life . The positivity was so unbelievable " . On August 31 , 2004 , Insane Clown Posse released their ninth studio album , Hell 's Pit , the second exhibit of The Wraith , intended to warn listeners of the horrors of Hell . Bruce described the album as the darkest , most painful work he had ever done . Two versions of the album were released , each containing a different DVD . One release featured a live concert and a twelve @-@ minute music video for the song " Real Underground Baby " , and another featured a short film for the song " Bowling Balls " , which was the first 3 @-@ D film shot in high @-@ definition video . In 2005 , D12 and Insane Clown Posse ended their feud , with the help of member Proof . Attempts to officially end the feud between Eminem and Insane Clown Posse have been unsuccessful , but Bruce states that the rivalry has ended . 
 = = 2005 – 06 : Post @-@ First Deck Era = = 
 On February 1 , 2006 , Insane Clown Posse fan Jacob D. Robida attacked individuals in a gay bar in New Bedford , Massachusetts with a handgun and a hatchet — a weapon featured in the logo of the group 's record label , Psychopathic Records . Robida had a swastika tattoo and flaunted Nazi insignias and paraphernalia on his website . On February 5 , Robida shot and killed a traffic officer during a routine stop . When police pulled Robida over during a later stop , he killed his girlfriend , Jennifer Bailey of Charleston , West Virginia , then opened fire on the police . Robida was shot twice in the head during the shootout with the police , and later died in the hospital . On February 7 , Insane Clown Posse released a statement on the Robida attacks . The group 's manager Alex Abbiss extended Bruce and Utsler 's condolences and prayers to the families of the victims , stating that " It 's quite obvious that this guy had no clue what being a Juggalo is all about . If anyone knows anything at all about ICP , then you know that they have never , ever been down or will be down with any racist or bigotry bullshit " . 
 On October 21 , 2006 , Insane Clown Posse performed at one of twenty benefit shows organized by Myspace as part of the " Rock for Darfur " campaign to raise awareness of the War in Darfur and funds for the region 's aid . 
 = = 2007 – 08 : The Tempest Era = = 
 On March 20 , 2007 , Insane Clown Posse released their tenth studio album , The Tempest , which debuted at # 20 on the Billboard 200 and sold nearly 33 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . In 2008 , Bruce and Utsler starred in the film Death Racers . It was released direct @-@ to @-@ video on September 16 , 2008 , by The Asylum . In December 2008 , John Antonelli filed a lawsuit against the group after being struck by an unopened two @-@ liter of Faygo during a performance at the Fargo nightclub The Hub , formerly known as Playmakers . Antonelli is seeking at least $ 50 @,@ 000 in damages . The lawsuit also names the venue , Playmakers , as a defendant . An attorney for Playmakers states that only Bruce should be held liable . 
 = = 2009 – present : Second Joker Card Deck = = 
 = = = Big Money Rustlas = = = 
 Filming of Big Money Rustlas , a Western spoof , began in January 2009 , and concluded on February 24 , 2009 . The tenth Gathering of the Juggalos took place at <unk> in Cave @-@ In @-@ Rock , Illinois , from August 6 to 9 . The event had the largest attendance in Gathering history with over 20 @,@ 000 people . Over 120 musical artists performed at the event , including the likes of Tech N9ne , Kottonmouth Kings , Ice Cube , GWAR , Coolio , Vanilla Ice , Onyx , Scarface , The Dayton Family , Bizarre , Esham , and NATAS . At the event , the Big Money Rustlas trailer was screened twice . An infomercial for the event was released online by Psychopathic Records . After the event , a friend of Esham 's handed Bruce a copy of his album I Ain 't Cha Homey , which depicted a clown committing suicide with a gun on the front cover . Bruce listened to the album and saw it as a diss towards Insane Clown Posse . While Esham claimed that the album was not a diss in his podcast , the album strained the relationship between Bruce and Esham , and the two have not spoken since its release . 
 = = = 2009 – 11 : Bang ! Pow ! Boom Era = = = 
 Insane Clown Posse 's eleventh studio album , Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! , was released on September 1 , 2009 . It debuted at # 1 on the Billboard Top Independent Albums chart and # 4 on the Billboard 200 . The album was later revealed to be the first of a " second deck " of Joker 's Cards . The Detroit News music critic Adam Graham gave the album a B rating , describing it as " the best material the Clowns have touched since 1999 's The Amazing Jeckel Brothers " . 
 On December 5 , 2009 , Saturday Night Live aired a sketch titled " <unk> Underground Rock Festival " , which parodied the Gathering of the Juggalos infomercial . Bruce stated that he was not offended by the parody , and that he thought that the sketch was " hilarious " and " a humongous compliment " . On February 17 , 2010 , Psychopathic Records signed a contract with Universal Music Group 's Fontana Distribution . On March 9 , 2010 , Insane Clown Posse were interviewed by Nightline journalist Martin Bashir . Bruce hated the segment , stating that Bashir took statements made by the duo out of context , pairing one of Bruce 's responses with a different question than he had been asked . 
 The trailer for Big Money Rustlas spawned a parody video called " Juggalo News " , which achieved popularity on CollegeHumor and Funny or Die , and was praised by Bruce on his Twitter account . On April 6 , 2010 , Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! was reissued in a " Nuclear Edition " , which featured previously unreleased material and music videos for the songs " In Yo Face " and " Miracles " . During this period , the duo won the Detroit Music Award for Outstanding Hip @-@ Hop Artist / Group . On April 17 , Saturday Night Live aired a sketch which parodied the " Miracles " music video , featuring host Ryan Phillippe and cast member Bobby Moynihan . Insane Clown Posse responded favorably to the parody , and asked to appear on the show . 
 Before the 12th annual Gathering of the Juggalos , Insane Clown Posse were contacted by Jack White , who invited Bruce and Utsler to his mansion because he wanted to collaborate with them . White played the track he was working on , an arrangement of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart 's " Leck mich im <unk> " with live instrumentation by <unk> the Brotherhood , for Bruce and Utsler and explained that the title of the track translated to " Lick My Ass " . Bruce perceived that the scatological nature of the composition was the reason why White asked Bruce and Utsler to appear on the song , but once White explained Mozart 's sense of humor , they became excited to work with White , went back to their hotel room to write their lyrics , and returned to record with White and <unk> the Brotherhood in White 's home recording studio . Bruce and Utsler 's vocals were recorded in one take . The song was released as a single on September 13 by White 's label Third Man Records , paired with another song , " Mountain Girl " , which Bruce describes as his favorite of the two songs recorded with White , and " more ICP 's feel " . 
 Big Money Rustlas was released on August 17 , 2010 . Insane Clown Posse returned to Europe for a tour . The group released a three @-@ disc compilation of their guest appearances with other artists called Featuring Freshness in November 2011 . The compilation also included new songs with artists Paris , Cold 187um , and Tone Tone . 
 At the 2011 Detroit Music Awards , Insane Clown Posse received the Distinguished Achievement Award . In June , Insane Clown Posse issued a cease and desist notice to the Upright Citizens Brigade , threatening legal action over a planned performance , " The Gathering of the Juggalos For A Mother Fucking Baby Funeral " . 
 = = = 2012 – 14 : The Mighty Death Pop ! Era = = = 
 At their 2010 Hallowicked concert , Insane Clown Posse announced that the second new Joker 's Card would be The Mighty Death Pop ! The album has two faces , the first of which was revealed at the Hallowicked concert . The Mighty Death Pop ! features appearances from Tech N9ne and Hopsin . 
 Additionally , the album was released in three variant editions , containing three individual full @-@ length bonus albums . The first variant edition , dubbed the Red Pop edition , contains an album of cover songs entitled Smothered , Covered & <unk> , which features appearances by Psychopathic artists Twiztid , Anybody Killa , Blaze Ya Dead Homie , Cold 187um and <unk> , as well as Limp Bizkit frontman Fred Durst and rapper Lil <unk> . The second variant , the Black Pop edition , contains the album Freaky Tales , consisting of a single , album @-@ length rap , inspired by Too Short 's song of the same name . The third variant , the White Pop edition , contains the remix album Mike E. Clark 's Extra Pop Emporium , which features remixes , outtakes and leftover songs recorded during the Mighty Death Pop sessions ; these tracks include appearances by Kottonmouth Kings , Three 6 Mafia , Color Me Badd , Ice Cube , Scarface , Geto Boys , Twiztid , Kreayshawn , Swollen Members and Willie D. ICP said in their December 21 , 2012 Hatchet Herald edition that they will be releasing a sideshow EP for The Mighty Death Pop ! in 2013 . The EP is titled House Of Wax set to be released on November 25 , 2014 packaged inside The First Six . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 : Continued legal troubles = = = = 
 Insane Clown Posse sued the FBI , whose National Gang Intelligence Center listed Juggalos as " a loosely organized hybrid gang " in a 2011 report . The report states that Juggalos are " recognized as a gang in only four states ... law enforcement officials in at least 21 states have identified criminal Juggalo sub @-@ sets " . The report also noted that New Mexico was seeing a lot of Juggalo gang expansion due to their attraction to " the tribal and cultural traditions of the Native Americans " . The lawsuit asks for the documents that the FBI used to reach this conclusion ; in August 2013 , federal authorities had " filed a motion to dismiss the case , saying they had already released several news media reports about Juggalos involved in criminal activity " . The American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan is working with ICP 's lawyers in order " to ensure the right of Juggalos everywhere to gather together and express their support of the I.C.P. without having to worry about being unfairly targeted and harassed by law enforcement " . On January 8 , 2014 , Insane Clown Posse , along with the American Civil Liberties Union of Michigan , filed suit again against the FBI . The suit aims to have Juggalos no longer considered to be a gang and to have any " criminal intelligence information " about Juggalos destroyed . ICP announced in the edition of December 21 , 2012 of the Hatchet Herald that they will be releasing a sideshow EP to The Mighty Death Pop ! in 2013 . After no word was heard on the album , it was speculated that it had been scrapped . In mid 2013 it was announced that ICP would be releasing their first ever box set titled The First Six . After the release date came and passed , The First Six was not released . In a February 2014 interview with <unk> , the question was asked if we would be able to get the box set . ICP thought it had already been released . Dog Beats ( the first ever release on Psychopathic Records ) was set to be the bonus album in the box set , ICP went back and decided to put House of Wax in the box set instead . The First Six was set to be released on October 28 , 2014 . After a minor setback , was ultimately released on November 25 , 2014 . 
 Additionally , Psychopathic Records is pushing back against a former publicist who is suing the label for sexual harassment . In late 2013 ICP teamed up with Da Mafia 6ix to create The Killjoy Club , and released their debut album Reindeer Games on September 2 , 2014 . ICP went on " The <unk> Tour " with Da Mafia 6ix , Mushroomhead , <unk> and Jelly Roll , additionally Big Hoodoo joined the tour to perform before the ticketed acts . To close out the shows on the tour Insane Clown Posse and Da Mafia 6ix performed on stage together as The Killjoy Club , doing only two songs . 
 = = = 2015 – present : The Marvelous Missing Link : Lost / Found Era = = = 
 During their 2014 Hallowicked concert , ICP revealed the 3rd Joker Card in the 2nd Deck of the Dark Carnival saga . The first part of the third card is titled The Missing Link : Lost , which is set to be released on Violent J 's 43rd birthday , April 28 , 2015 . The second part of the third card is titled The Missing Link : Found , which is set to be released during the 2015 Gathering of the Juggalos , July 28 , 2015 . ICP will give away a free poster of The Marvelous Missing Link , and will have The Marvelous Missing Link merchandise available , ( before it 's on their online store - Hatchet Gear ) , at their annual " Big Ballas Xmas Party " with Kottonmouth Kings , DJ Clay , Critical Bill , and Young Lyte , on December 20 , 2014 . 
 In a February 21 , 2015 interview with Billboard , Violent J stated that Mike E. Clark will not be producing either album due to prior engagements , which include working with Kid Rock , so they will have other people do the production . He also said that " LOST " will have darker beats , and no comedy on it . The album is like looking at the world through negative lenses . He said that " <unk> " is like you have been found , and has songs about the good times , and songs with comedy . Also in the interview it was announced that the " 20th Anniversary Riddle Box Tour " has been temporarily sidelined . They plan to tour in early spring into most of the summer , ending at the <unk> 2015 , then tour again ending at the annual Hallowicked concert . 
 Young Wicked of the Axe Murder Boyz posted on his personal Instagram account , that this album was one of the Insane Clown Posse 's best albums ever . He stated specifically that it was going back to the Insane Clown Posse 's roots in the era of the first deck of Jokers Cards . Young wicked also made a statement that referenced the idea that he may have some featured spots on one of the albums . 
 On April 7 , 2015 The Marvelous Missing Link : Lost was made available for digital download preorder . Those who preordered on that day received the first single off the album , titled " Vomit " . The rest of the album will automatically download on the release date , April 28 , 2015 . 
 Michigan @-@ based author Steve Miller is writing a book , Juggalo : Insane Clown Posse , Their Fans , and the World They Made — it 's due out in 2016 via Da Capo Press . The book will detail the fandom associated with <unk> and their struggle with the FBI . 
 In late 2015 2 flyers were released with Phantom : X @-@ tra Spooky EP , promoting 2016 solo album releases from Violent J titled , Karma Forest , and Shaggy 2 Dope titled , <unk> .. 
 In an April 8 , 2016 <unk> interview with Violent J , he stated that Shaggy 2 Dope has been working with Young Wicked , who is also producing the album , without asking Violent J for any help this far . 
 = = Style and influences = = 
 = = = Lyrics and music = = = 
 Insane Clown Posse 's performance style is often described as horrorcore hip hop , which " utilize [ s ] shocking ( and blatantly over @-@ the @-@ top ) narratives to give an over @-@ exaggerated , almost cartoon @-@ like version of urban deprivation in Detroit " , according to author Sara Cohen . Bruce and Utsler describe many of their lyrics as being tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek . The group 's early work features a raw , minimalistic sound , which later evolved into a more rock @-@ oriented style . The group 's lyrics serve as morality tales , with songs focusing on subjects such as cannibalism , murder and necrophilia . Insane Clown Posse 's debut album , Carnival of Carnage , features a politically @-@ oriented focus , criticizing elitism and prejudice against those who live in the ghetto , while the album 's liner notes criticize the Gulf War . The group 's lyrics have opposed racism , bigotry , domestic violence , and child abuse . 
 Insane Clown Posse has covered songs by Geto Boys , Sly Fox , and Above the Law . Bruce and Utsler refer to Ice Cube , Awesome Dre , Geto Boys , and Esham as influences on their own music , while Bruce has expressed admiration for Gong , Pearl Jam , and Michael Jackson . Mike E. Clark 's production for the group incorporates elements such as " carnival organ riffs , power chords and shotgun blasts ... <unk> plucking and Van Halen @-@ esque guitar squeals " , while Bruce and Utsler sometimes alternate between rapping and screaming . Bruce has credited pop music as an influence on some of the group 's material , even terming the music " Wicked Pop " . Bruce has also stated " We do our own genre of music " . In his review of The Tempest , Allmusic 's David Jeffries writes that Bruce and Utsler " [ rap ] in a carnival barker fashion that fits with their circus motif , their Insane Clown disguises , and Mike E. Clark 's big top @-@ inspired production . " Insane Clown Posse has influenced similar acts , such as Axe Murder Boyz , Blaze Ya Dead Homie and <unk> . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Insane Clown Posse is known for their elaborate concert performances . In Marley Brant 's Tales from the Rock ' n ' Roll Highway , Bruce described a typical performance : " We toss out , kick out , and shoot out into the crowd about three to four hundred two @-@ liters of Faygo at every show ... We bring with us monsters , dancing clowns , girls , trampolines , and pure and absolute madness to the stage ... Shaggy and I know that without all that crazy shit going on around us , we 'd just be two more idiots walking back and forth , rapping on stage ... ICP 's motto has always been ' Fuck <unk> ' it real : we just keep it entertaining . ' " Performances feature backdrops including , among other settings , a game show set and a cemetery . Bruce stated , " We always have a different set , not only for Hallowicked but every tour we go out on . We 've been around so long that we get to dig up the many cool sets that we used back in the day and then get to use them again on a national level . Something we might 've done once in ' 94 at St. Andrew 's Hall , we can go back again and now do it nationwide @-@ style " . 
 On tour following the release of Dog Beats , Insane Clown Posse was scheduled to perform at Ferris State University in Big Rapids , Michigan , but were delayed by a blizzard . After they arrived , the group was announced by their manager , Alex Abbiss . Bruce remembers that " [ w ] e came out with no microphones or nothing ; we were just right up in the people 's faces . Shaggy and I were just fuckin ' yelling over our own cassette . The people were staring at us in amazement and bewilderment . They must have been in shock and awe . We finished our two @-@ song set , and the crowd ... didn 't cheer or boo . They just stood there , stunned " ; they later learned that the concert was supposed to occur earlier in the evening , and that they were performing in the wrong building . 
 The group was unable to bring the large amounts of Faygo needed for their concerts to their European tours without a sales permit visa because customs believed that the group had intended to sell the soda at their concerts . As a result , the group 's European record label purchased similar quantities of another soda and created fake Faygo stickers to label the bottles . According to Bruce , " The craziness was this : they were not the regular two @-@ liter bottles we 're used to ; they were some other amount ... maybe one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ liter bottles . Over there , they make their plastic bottles taller and thinner ... when you 're doing what we do with them — that makes a world of difference " . During a performance in England , Bruce recounts that he " rocketed one of them bottles off my foot and that motherfucker shot straight up and out like a guided Patriot missile , right towards the disco ball high above the crowd ... The bottle nailed the disco ball , and ... came falling down ... on top of some English kid 's head . ... We must 've knocked fifteen or twenty people flat @-@ out cold on that tour ... Shaggy and I both had black eyes and several injuries and bruises ourselves from them things <unk> ' us " . 
 Bruce and Utsler did not expect many of their fans to attend Woodstock 1999 , and were surprised when thousands of people chanted " I @-@ C @-@ P ! I @-@ C @-@ P ! " as they waited for the group to perform . Bruce told his stage crew that he would pay $ 2 @,@ 000 to each person who ran around the stage naked , and two people took up his offer . Insane Clown Posse also brought naked women on stage . Bruce and Utsler felt that because the tickets to the event were over @-@ priced , they needed to " give something back . " According to Bruce , " We brought along these big beach balls . We announced to the crowd that they each had a hundred dollars taped to them , and then we proceeded to kick about thirty of them into the crowd . Then we rolled out these bigger giant @-@ ass beach balls and announced , ' These ones have five hundred bucks taped to them ! ' We booted a gang of them into the human sea . " Bruce also recounts that their set had multiple technical problems , and the audience was not allowed to get close to the stage , which made the duo feel less connected with them . 
 The group 's 2009 tour in support of Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! featured clowns , showgirls , a ringmaster and caged " attractions " , including " Ape Boy " . According to Bruce , " This is actually the biggest tour we 've ever brought out , as far as stage theatrics and extras on stage ... We 've got a whole circus . We 're touring clubs and theaters , but it 's more like an arena show . It 's like an arena concert packed into a club " . 
 = = = Spirituality = = = 
 The themes of God 's presence and the final judgment of individuals are explored in multiple Insane Clown Posse songs . Throughout their career , the group has used parables set within the Dark Carnival mythology to warn of the ultimate consequences of immoral behavior . Their 2002 album The Wraith : Shangri @-@ La ended the first set of Joker Card albums and included the song The Unveiling , which explicitly revealed that the hidden message of ICP 's music had always been to follow God . Joseph Bruce remarked that " The ending of the Joker Cards , the way we looked at it , was death . Heaven and hell . That 's up to each and every <unk> [ to decide ] " . 
 Several journalists have commented on the apparent conflict between the group 's sexualized and often violent lyrics and their stated spiritual message . In a June 2010 interview with The Columbian 's Alan Sculley , Bruce explained , " [ Sex and violence is ] the stuff that people are talking about on the streets ... to get attention , you have to speak their language . You have to interest them , gain their trust , talk to them and show you 're one of them . You 're a person from the street and speak of your experiences . Then at the end you can tell them God has helped me out like this and it might transfer over instead of just come straight out and just speak straight out of religion " . 
 In an October 2010 article for The Guardian , Jon Ronson characterized the Insane Clown Posse as " evangelical Christians " who have " only been pretending to be brutal and sadistic to trick their fans into believing in God " . In an interview with ICP conducted for the article , two of Ronson 's queries referred <unk> to ICP 's " Christian message " and to the members ' identities as " [ secret ] Christians " . Several papers , including The Washington Post , published summaries of Ronson 's claims . 
 Eight days after publication of the Guardian article , Joseph Bruce Tweeted " I think [ it 's ] crazy how some press say we 're a Christian band and act like we 're all religious [ ... ] I 'm proud that we believe in God but I haven 't been to church since I was like 10 . I don 't even know if [ Utsler has ] ever been to church ! " Christianity Today writer Mark <unk> also challenged Ronson 's characterization , writing that " The guys in ICP haven 't used the word ' Christian ' or ' evangelical ' [ ... ] so let 's not call them anything that they 're not claiming for themselves " . 
 In 2011 , Insane Clown Posse appeared on Attack of the Show ! and repudiated claims that they were a Christian band . Bruce explained that their Dark Carnival mythology " comes from the basic principle of right and wrong , you know . Evil and good . That 's all . We 're just trying to say that there 's bad guys out there and that there 's good guys out there [ ... ] We were taught there 's a heaven and a hell , but that 's all we were taught . We weren 't taught about the [ Ten ] Commandments [ ... or ] what 's in the Bible and all that . We just [ ... ] want to see good people hopefully go to heaven , which we refer to as Shangri @-@ La " . Joseph Utsler explained in a 2002 interview with Craig Markley that " God is in your heart [ ... ] In my definition , it doesn 't matter what creed , religion , or group you belong to . If you 're doing what 's right and are a good person , then you 're right with God . " Bruce and Utsler have also stated that they are not certain that God and the afterlife exist , but that they 'd like to believe that there is something after death . 
 = = Wrestling = = 
 Both Bruce and Utsler began wrestling as single competitors in 1983 in their backyard wrestling promotion Tag Team Wrestling , later renamed National All @-@ Star Wrestling . The two moved on to compete in various independent promotions in Michigan from 1990 to 1997 before making an appearance together in Extreme Championship Wrestling ( ECW ) as Insane Clown Posse . In 1998 , the team had a three @-@ month stint in World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) where they wrestled alongside The Oddities and , later , The Headbangers . 
 After leaving the company , they went to wrestle for World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) with The Dead Pool and The Dark Carnival between 1999 and 2000 . On December 19 , 1999 , Bruce and Utsler created their own wrestling promotion , Juggalo <unk> Wrestling ( now known as Juggalo Championship Wrestling ) . In 2004 , they briefly wrestled in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) . The duo continues to wrestle today in Juggalo Championship Wrestling as well as in various independent promotions . 
 Insane Clown Posse gained fame for being both professional musicians and professional wrestlers . Overall , they are two @-@ time JCW Tag Team Champions . Additionally , Bruce is a one @-@ time JCW Tag Team Champion with 2 Tuff Tony , and Utsler is a one @-@ time JCW Heavyweight Champion . Bruce and Utsler are also founding members of the Juggalo World Order . 
 In addition they were largely involved in Backyard Wrestling : Don 't Try This at Home , where most of the wrestlers in the game were members of JCW . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Timeline 
 = = Discography = = 
 Carnival of Carnage ( 1992 ) 
 Ringmaster ( 1994 ) 
 Riddle Box ( 1995 ) 
 The Great Milenko ( 1997 ) 
 The Amazing Jeckel Brothers ( 1999 ) 
 Bizaar ( 2000 ) 
 Bizzar ( 2000 ) 
 The Wraith : Shangri @-@ La ( 2002 ) 
 Hell 's Pit ( 2004 ) 
 The Tempest ( 2007 ) 
 Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! ( 2009 ) 
 The Mighty Death Pop ! ( 2012 ) 
 The Marvelous Missing Link : Lost ( 2015 ) 
 The Marvelous Missing Link : Found ( 2015 ) 
 = = Joker Cards and sideshows = = 
 = = = 1992 – 04 : First Deck = = = 
 Joker Card : Carnival of Carnage - October 18 , 1992 
 Sideshow : Beverly Kills <unk> EP - July 16 , 1993 
 Joker Card : Ringmaster - March 8 , 1994 
 Sideshow : The Terror Wheel EP - August 5 , 1994 
 Joker Card : Riddle Box - October 10 , 1995 
 Sideshow : Tunnel of Love EP - June 11 , 1996 
 Joker Card : The Great Milenko - June 24 , 1997 
 Sideshow : 
 Joker Card : The Amazing Jeckel Brothers - May 25 , 1999 
 Sideshow 
 Joker Card : The Wraith : Shangri @-@ La - November 5 , 2002 
 Sideshow : 
 Joker Card : The Wraith : Hells Pit - August 31 , 2004 
 Sideshow : 
 = = = 2009 – present : Second Deck = = = 
 Joker Card : Bang ! Pow ! Boom ! - September 1 , 2009 
 Sideshow : 
 Joker Card : The Mighty Death Pop ! - August 14 , 2012 
 Sideshow : House of Wax EP - November 25 , 2014 
 Joker Card : The Marvelous Missing Link : Lost - April 28 , 2015 
 Sideshow : 
 Joker Card : The Marvelous Missing Link : Found - July 31 , 2015 
 Sideshow : 
 = = Solo Albums = = 
 Enter The Ghetto Zone ( 1990 ) ( Violent J ) ( Rude Boy Productions ) 
 Fuck Off ! EP ( 1994 ) ( Shaggy 2 Dope ) ( Psychopathic Records ) 
 Wizard of the Hood EP ( July 22 , 2003 ) ( Violent J ) ( Psychopathic Records ) 
 <unk> ( February 21 , 2006 ) ( Shaggy 2 Dope ) ( Psychopathic Records ) 
 The Shining ( April 28 , 2009 ) ( Violent J ) ( Psychopathic Records ) 
 <unk> ( 2016 ) ( Shaggy 2 Dope ) ( Psychopathic Records ) 
 Karma Forest ( 2016 ) ( Violent J ) ( Psychopathic Records ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Big Money Hustlas ( 2000 ) 
 Mad TV ( 2002 ) 
 ego trip 's The ( White ) Rapper Show ( 2007 ) 
 Death Racers ( 2008 ) 
 A Family Underground ( 2009 ) 
 Aqua Teen Hunger Force [ TV series , " Juggalo " episode ] ( 2010 ) 
 Big Money Rustlas ( 2010 ) 
 1000 Ways to Die [ TV series , " Deadliest Kitsch " episode ] ( 2011 ) ( Themselves ) 
 Lopez Tonight ( 2011 ) 
 Tosh.0 [ TV series , special " Web Redemption " segment ] ( 2012 ) 
 ICP Theater [ TV series ] ( 2013 ) 
 = Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge = 
 The Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge ( local / <unk> / ) , formerly known as South Branch Bridge or Romney Bridge , is a historic Whipple truss bridge in Capon Lake , West Virginia . It is located off Carpers Pike ( West Virginia Route 259 ) and crosses the Cacapon River . The bridge formerly carried Capon Springs Road ( West Virginia Secondary Route 16 ) over the river , connecting Capon Springs and Capon Lake . 
 The bridge 's Whipple truss technology was developed by civil engineer Squire Whipple in 1847 . J. W. Murphy further modified Whipple 's truss design in 1859 by designing the first truss bridge with pinned eyebar connections . The design of the Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge incorporates Murphy 's later modifications with double @-@ intersections and horizontal chords , and is therefore considered a Whipple – Murphy truss bridge . The Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge is West Virginia 's oldest remaining example of a Whipple truss bridge and its oldest extant metal truss bridge . 
 The Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge was originally constructed in 1874 as part of the South Branch Bridge ( or alternatively , the Romney Bridge ) , a larger two @-@ span Whipple truss bridge conveying the Northwestern Turnpike ( U.S. Route 50 ) across the South Branch Potomac River near Romney . The larger Whipple truss bridge replaced an 1838 wooden covered bridge that was destroyed during the American Civil War . In 1874 , T. B. White and Sons were charged with the construction of a Whipple truss bridge over the South Branch ; that bridge served travelers along the Northwestern Turnpike for 63 years until a new bridge was constructed in 1937 . 
 Dismantled in 1937 , the bridge was relocated to Capon Lake in southeastern Hampshire County to carry Capon Springs Road ( West Virginia Secondary Route 16 ) between West Virginia Route 259 and Capon Springs . The bridge was dedicated on August 20 , 1938 . In 1991 , a new bridge was completed to the south , and the Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge was preserved in place by the West Virginia Division of Highways , due to its rarity , age , and engineering significance . The Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on December 15 , 2011 . 
 = = Geography and setting = = 
 The Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge is located in a predominantly rural agricultural and forested area of southeastern Hampshire County within the Cacapon River valley . Baker Mountain , a forested narrow anticlinal mountain ridge , rises to the immediate west , and the western rolling foothills of the anticlinal Great North Mountain rise to the bridge 's east . The confluence of Capon Springs Run with the Cacapon River lies just north ( downstream ) of the bridge . George Washington National Forest is located to the bridge 's southeast , covering the forested area south of Capon Springs Road . 
 The bridge is located along Carpers Pike ( West Virginia Route 259 ) in the unincorporated community of Capon Lake , 2 @.@ 05 miles ( 3 @.@ 30 km ) southwest of Yellow Spring and 6 @.@ 77 miles ( 10 @.@ 90 km ) northeast of the town of Wardensville . The historic Capon Springs Resort and the unincorporated community of Capon Springs are located 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) east of Capon Lake on Capon Springs Road ( West Virginia Secondary Route 16 ) . The bridge is located immediately north ( downstream ) of the intersection of Carpers Pike with Capon Springs Road , which is carried across the Cacapon River via the current Capon Lake Bridge , a steel stringer bridge built in 1991 to replace the Whipple truss bridge for conveying vehicle traffic . The property containing the Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge is less than 1 acre ( 0 @.@ 40 ha ) in size . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge is an early example of the use of metal truss bridge load @-@ bearing superstructure technology , which defined highway bridge design well into the 20th century . Because of " its uncommon innovative design and age " , the bridge is one of West Virginia 's most historically significant bridges . It is the oldest remaining example of a Whipple truss bridge in West Virginia , and the oldest extant metal truss bridge in the state . The metal truss technology of the bridge displays distinctive innovations developed by the prominent civil engineers and bridge designers Squire Whipple and J. W. Murphy ; the innovations are evident in the bridge 's double @-@ intersection diagonals and counter @-@ diagonals with pin connections . 
 Approximately 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) in width and 176 feet ( 54 m ) in length , the bridge is built atop a reinforced concrete abutment and pier . Its truss structure exhibits a double @-@ intersection configuration , constructed of 14 bays , each measuring approximately 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) wide and 23 feet ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) in height , with the diagonals extending across two bays each . The bridge is fabricated of wrought iron bracketed with pins . Spanning the full length of the bridge is a wooden pedestrian walkway that consists of an observation deck and wooden seating near the bridge 's midspan . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Whipple truss development = = = 
 The bridge 's Whipple truss technology was developed in 1847 by civil engineer Squire Whipple , who received a patent from the U.S. Patent Office the same year . Whipple was one of the first structural engineers to use scientific and mathematical methods analyzing the forces and stresses in framed structures to design the bridge , and his groundbreaking 1847 book , A Work on Bridge Building , had a significant influence on bridge engineering . Whipple 's truss bridge design incorporated double @-@ intersection diagonals into the standard Pratt truss , thus allowing the diagonals to extend across two truss bays . Engineer J. W. Murphy further modified Whipple 's truss design in 1859 when he designed the first truss bridge with pinned eyebar connections , which utilized pins instead of trunnions . Murphy 's design removed the need for riveted connections and allowed for easier and more widespread construction of truss bridges . In 1863 , Murphy designed the first pin @-@ connected truss bridge with both wrought iron tension and compression components and cast iron joint blocks and pedestals . Murphy 's truss design consisted of double @-@ intersection counter @-@ diagonals , and along with the eyebar and pin connections , permitted longer iron bridge spans . 
 The technological design advances made by Whipple and Murphy , in addition to further advances in steel and iron fabrication , made wrought iron truss bridges a major industry in the United States . The Capon Lake bridge was a Whipple – Murphy truss bridge , since it incorporated Murphy 's later modifications with double @-@ intersections and horizontal chords . At the time of the bridge 's original fabrication in 1874 , metal truss bridges were ordered from catalogs by county courts and other entities responsible for transportation construction and maintenance . These entities provided the desired width , length , and other specifications , and the truss materials were shipped to the construction site and assembled by local construction teams . Metal truss bridges were more economically feasible , could span longer distances , and were simpler to construct than stone bridges , and they were more durable than wooden bridges . They were also marketed as detachable and transportable structures that could be dismantled and reassembled . The technology used in the Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge revolutionized transport throughout West Virginia . While the Whipple truss bridge had waned in popularity by the 1890s , the bridges were commonly disassembled and re @-@ erected for use on secondary roads , as was the case with the Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge in 1938 . 
 = = = T. B. White and Sons = = = 
 The construction company that built the Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge , T. B. White and Sons , was established in 1868 . Its founder Timothy B. White had been a carpenter and contractor in New Brighton , Pennsylvania since the 1840s . White also operated factories for iron cars and woolen mill machinery until 1859 , when he began to concentrate solely on bridge construction . White 's bridge company operated from a factory on the Beaver River in New Brighton until the factory was destroyed by fire in 1878 . After the fire , the company relocated across the river to Beaver Falls and restructured as the Penn Bridge and Machine Works . In addition to iron truss bridges , the company produced a range of structural and architectural components and continued to expand ; it employed over 500 workers by 1908 . Penn Bridge and Machine Works fended off purchase by the American Bridge Company and continued to operate independently , unlike similar small bridge companies founded in the 19th century . The most prolific of its kind in the Pittsburgh region , the company was responsible for the construction of bridges throughout the United States . 
 = = = South Branch Bridge = = = 
 The Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge was originally constructed in 1874 as part of the South Branch Bridge ( or the Romney Bridge ) , a larger two @-@ span Whipple truss bridge conveying the Northwestern Turnpike ( U.S. Route 50 ) across the South Branch Potomac River 0 @.@ 57 miles ( 0 @.@ 92 km ) west of Romney . The 1874 Whipple truss bridge across the South Branch replaced an 1838 wooden covered bridge that had been chartered by the Virginia General Assembly during the construction of the Northwestern Turnpike . Before the construction of the covered bridge in 1838 , a public ferry conveyed traffic across the river . Isaac Parsons ( 1752 – 1796 ) operated a ferry there following its establishment by an act of the Virginia General Assembly in October 1786 . The 1838 covered bridge remained in use until it was destroyed by retreating Confederate forces during the American Civil War . Throughout the course of the war , Romney reportedly changed hands 56 times between Confederate and Union forces , and the crossing of the South Branch Potomac River served as a strategic point due to its position along the Northwestern Turnpike , an important east – west route . 
 Following the conclusion of the war , nearly all bridges along the Northwestern Turnpike had been destroyed , including the South Branch Bridge . In order to restore local businesses and industry , Hampshire County citizens called a meeting and steps were taken at the local level to proceed with the construction of new bridges . Local citizens and the South Branch Intelligencer newspaper of Romney campaigned for the immediate replacement of the bridge because of " continual risk , danger and inconveniences arising from want of the South Branch Bridge at Col. Gibson 's ( destroyed during the war ) ... " . Hampshire County began issuing bonds for the construction of a new bridge over the South Branch in 1868 , and by 1874 , construction of the Whipple truss bridge had commenced . T. B. White and Sons were charged with the bridge 's construction . 
 The South Branch Intelligencer published periodic updates on the progress of the South Branch Bridge 's construction . According to the newspaper , the bridge was scheduled to be completed by July 1875 . During the course of construction , John Ridenour lost a finger while working on the bridge . The new South Branch Bridge was completed well ahead of schedule in October 1874 . The October 12 , 1874 , edition of the South Branch Intelligencer characterized the new bridge as a " complete , handsome and durable structure " , and further recounted that " the contractors , Messrs. White & Sons , New Brighton , Pennsylvania ' Penn Bridge & Machine Works , ' have given us , in general opinion , a first rate , durable work , and deserve our best commendations .... We are confident that ours will realize a very handsome income and fully vindicate the wisdom of the County Court in voting its construction . " 
 Following its construction in 1874 , the Whipple truss bridge over the South Branch Potomac River served Romney and travelers along the Northwestern Turnpike for 63 years . In 1935 , the West Virginia State Road Commission began organizing a project to replace the Whipple truss bridge , and construction of the new bridge had begun by 1936 . In November of that year , a car collided with the south side of the eastern Whipple truss span , which knocked the span completely off its eastern abutment . The car plunged into the South Branch Potomac River , followed by the compromised truss span , which collapsed on top of the car . Unaware of the span 's collapse , a car traveling from the west drove off the end of the west span at the bridge 's center pier , and fell onto the collapsed span . According to the Hampshire Review , the only serious injury sustained was a broken wooden leg . Following the collapse of the eastern Whipple truss span , a temporary wooden span was hastily constructed between the western truss span and the eastern abutment , so that traffic was uninterrupted until the new bridge was completed and opened on June 21 , 1937 . The 1937 bridge was used until 2010 when it was replaced by the current South Branch Bridge . 
 = = = Capon Lake Bridge = = = 
 Because Whipple truss bridges were easily disassembled and re @-@ erected , the remaining western span of the Whipple truss over the South Branch was dismantled in 1937 and relocated to Capon Lake in southeastern Hampshire County to convey Capon Springs Road ( West Virginia Secondary Route 16 ) between West Virginia Route 259 and Capon Springs . According to Branson Himelwright , a Capon Springs resident who had been a construction worker involved in the re @-@ erection of the Whipple truss span at Capon Lake , the only two ways to cross the Cacapon River to reach Capon Springs were to cross a swinging footbridge or ford the river . During the bridge 's construction , a new pier and abutments were constructed to carry the Whipple truss span and a connected Pratt truss that had been salvaged from an unknown bridge . Himelwright and Jacob " Moss " Rudolph , who had also participated in the bridge 's construction , stated in interviews that both the site excavation and concrete work for the pier and abutments were completed by hand . 
 The newly erected Capon Lake Bridge was dedicated on August 20 , 1938 , with a ceremony including musical performances by the Romney High School and Capon Springs Resort bands . Former West Virginia Governor and Capon Springs native Herman G. Kump , West Virginia State Road Commission Secretary Cy Hammill , and numerous other state officials were in attendance at the dedication . 
 In 1991 , the new steel stringer Capon Lake Bridge was constructed 187 feet ( 57 m ) to the southwest of the Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge , after which the Whipple truss bridge was closed to vehicle traffic . Due to its rarity , age , and engineering significance , West Virginia Division of Highways District 5 decided to preserve the Whipple truss bridge . During the bridge 's restoration , the Pratt truss span was removed due to significant deterioration , and the roadway deck was also removed . A wooden pedestrian walkway and observation deck were constructed across the full span of the remaining truss bridge . 
 The Capon Lake Whipple Truss Bridge was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on December 15 , 2011 , for its " engineering significance as an excellent example of a Whipple / Murphy Truss bridge . " Since its listing , the bridge has been maintained as a historic site for pedestrians by the West Virginia Division of Highways District 5 . In 2012 , the West Virginia Division of Highways , in association with the West Virginia Archives and the history department of the West Virginia Division of Culture and History , installed a historical marker at the northwestern entry to the bridge as part of the West Virginia Highway Historical Marker Program . The marker reads : 
 First erected in 1874 as a two span bridge on US 50 near Romney , one span was moved here in 1938 and re @-@ erected on a new foundation . The 17 ' wide by 176 ' long bridge is a Whipple – Murphy Truss . The state 's oldest extant metal truss , the bridge is one of a few of its type in WV . Listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 2011 . 
 = Bella Bond murder case = 
 Bella Neveah Amoroso Bond ( August 6 , 2012 – May or June 2015 ) , previously known as the Deer Island Jane Doe and " Baby Doe " , was an American child found dead in a plastic bag on the shore of Deer Island in Boston , Massachusetts on June 25 , 2015 . Authorities pursued investigation into discovering who the child was until her identification in September 2015 . 
 The National Center for Missing & Exploited Children reconstructed the child 's face to provide the public with an estimation of the victim 's appearance during life . They aimed to generate tips to a potential identity and to locate the individual or individuals responsible for the disposal of her body . After the reconstruction was released and news coverage began nationwide a large amount of public attention emerged ; an estimated 56 million people viewed reports on the case . Half of these occurred within the first week after the body was found . 
 The publicity generated many tips with possible leads , one of which led to the girl 's identity . Bond was identified on September 18 , 2015 . Bond 's mother and her mother 's boyfriend were arrested , and authorities confirmed that Bella had been murdered , despite the fact that an initial autopsy performed on the body did not uncover the exact cause of death . Investigation is continuing toward solving the case , and the boyfriend of the victim 's mother was charged with her murder and her mother was charged as an " accessory after the fact " . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 The body was found inside a plastic garbage bag on the shoreline of Deer Island in Boston , Massachusetts . A woman walking her dog discovered Bond 's remains on the afternoon of June 25 , 2015 , when the dog stopped at the plastic bag . After the body was found , the public placed flowers near the scene . She wore only a pair of white leggings designed with a black polka @-@ dot pattern . A zebra @-@ print blanket was also inside the bag . Initially , police were unsure if there would be additional bodies at the scene , so they attempted unsuccessfully to use cadaver dogs to locate any other possible remains . 
 Authorities originally estimated that the girl had died within days of her discovery . Later developments in the case have suggested that Bella 's body had been " hidden in a fridge " for as long as one month before it was deposited on Deer Island . Despite the fact that she appeared to be deceased a short amount of time , she had already begun to decompose and become bloated , and so was impossible to identify visually . Decomposition had also made it impossible to collect fingerprints , due to exposure to the water . Investigators were able to conclude that she was a young child but were initially unsure of her race and ethnicity . 
 It was unknown how the remains had settled at the location ; the body might either have been placed at the beach or have drifted in the water from another location , some presuming from as far as Canada . The United States Coast Guard entered the investigation and analyzed the currents of the water in the area to estimate where the bag containing the remains could have originated from . Dive teams were also used around the time the body was discovered . As of mid @-@ July and August , authorities believed the victim had been placed at the scene , rather than washing onto Deer Island from another location , because the body was not in an advanced enough stage of decomposition . The beach is near a waste @-@ water treatment plant . One of the investigators thought there was a possibility that the disposal had been performed by an employee of the nearby water treatment plant . Since the area has been regarded as a " busy " area for both workers and the public , it was also possible that the person who placed the bag at the scene did so overnight , to avoid being seen . 
 = = Examination = = 
 A " preliminary " autopsy was conducted on July 3 but did not conclude what had caused the girl 's death . However , authorities suspected foul play as a factor in the case . Yet no signs of obvious injury have been found on the remains . Tests were later conducted to find any toxins , drugs or alcohol present in the body as a possible explanation for the death . Examiners were unable to find any trace of cleaners such as bleach in the remains , but continued with more testing in hopes of finding another toxin as a possible cause of death . After the identification of the victim , a conclusive cause of death had yet to be announced , yet all forms of a " natural death had been excluded " . Suffocation has not been ruled out as the cause . 
 The clothing found on the toddler , believed to be a " size 4T " was determined to have been manufactured by the <unk> company and was likely sold at a Target store . The blanket was possibly made by the Cannon Mills company and sold at K @-@ Mart . A hair band made from elastic material was also found . 
 She was eventually determined to be between the ages of three and five and appeared to be white with possible Hispanic ancestry . Her hair was described as being " brown , wavy and fourteen inches in length " . It is presumed that the child 's hair was left untrimmed for approximately two years , judging by its length . It was also estimated that she was between three feet one and three feet six inches tall and weighed around thirty pounds . There were no distinct birthmarks or scars on the body . It was later discovered that the girl had pierced ears , so the National Center for Missing & Exploited Children released an updated image of the child wearing earrings . The girl appeared to have been " well @-@ cared for " during her life ; no signs of malnutrition or abuse were noted , and investigators stated the clothing also reinforced the theory . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The National Center for Missing & Exploited Children digitally reconstructed the face of the child after preceding attempts to identify the body failed . The reconstruction was created in four hours using Adobe Photoshop with the influence of mortuary and " stock " photographs to give an estimation of the child 's appearance while alive . The reconstruction , created by forensic artist Christi Andrews , was released on July 2 , 2015 . Because of the end result of the composite created with Adobe Photoshop , many viewers mistook it for an actual photograph . The organization also digitally enhanced images of the leggings and the blanket found with the remains and created a poster featuring them on their website . Flyers containing images of the Jane Doe and her belongings were eventually dispersed in hopes of obtaining more information . 
 The child was entered into the National Missing and Unidentified Persons System on July 4 , 2015 , including details of the discovery of the subject and physical estimations . Many missing persons were excluded as possible identities ; authorities checked Shoshana Black , Paula <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> Ben – Haim , Cassidy Gibbs and Ayla Reynolds . Other leads were pursued involving children that were reported missing , some of whom were foreign to the United States . Some of the potential matches were later located alive . The disappearance case of Sarah Hoggle had been analyzed to have a possible link to the case , yet investigators stated it was " unlikely " to have been related to this case . In all , over two hundred missing people were ruled out from the case . 
 A press conference displaying the reconstruction and the enhanced images of the clothing and blanket was later held at the location where the body was found . It was televised to ask the public for assistance identifying the victim and to request of those that may have known her , especially her parents , to identify the girl . During the press conference , officials urged viewers to be aware of children that may have disappeared or gone uncounted for in the days leading up to the celebration of Independence Day . Despite their hopes , no one came forward to claim responsibility for the crime or to confirm who the victim was . Hundreds of tips were submitted over the phone and online and were investigated . 
 When searching missing persons databases produced few cases matching her profile , authorities began to believe that the child may never have been reported missing . They explored the guess that the family of the child could be unaware of her death . Another explanation for why no matches were achieved was that she could have belonged to an " undocumented " family . Police were focused on investigating in the local community , yet they believed it possible that the girl was not from the area and continued to search through various cases of missing children . 
 Among other theories about the case , early speculation was that the girl could have been murdered by a member of her family . A criminologist stated that it did not seem likely that she would have been " murdered by a stranger , " according to statistics of similar cases . The fact that she had been disposed of along with personal items reinforced this theory . The fact that there were not yet any tips from relatives with information about the child supported the idea that family members were involved with the disposal of the body — and possibly with her death . Investigators feared for other children that may have been in the care of those that disposed of the body , as they could be in danger . A different theory held that the child 's family members might also be deceased , having faced a similar demise . 
 = = = Forensic testing = = = 
 Forensics teams analyzed the DNA of Deer Island Jane to exclude some missing persons and in hopes of matching it to possible relatives of the girl whose DNA was on record . It was obtained through samples of hair and a tooth . The DNA did not match the profiles stored in databases of known missing persons . Officials stated that they also sent samples to the University of North Texas to create a more specific profile , a time @-@ consuming process . Mitochondrial DNA from the bones of the child was later developed to compare to possible relatives . 
 Besides DNA testing , authorities conducted efforts into forensic palynology as well as isotope examination of water found at the scene . Results of the testing indicated that the child had spent time in the local , urban area , most likely in Boston , as traces of both pine and soot were found through the tests . Eventually , it was also determined that she may have spent time in " any [ ... ] New England " state and possibly others . The hair and enamel tests also indicated she could have " moved across the country . " 
 = = Public interaction = = 
 Since the reconstruction and the story was publicized , an unexpectedly large amount of public interest in the case developed internationally . Many remarked on the so @-@ called " beauty " of the girl . Many people have since shared and viewed reports detailing the case on social networks , such as Twitter and Facebook . Several individuals offered to pay for the child 's funeral and burial if she could not be identified . One funeral home stated that they would donate the means to bury the child under a headstone , so she would not be buried in a pauper 's grave . Local businesses in the area began placing posters of the child in their buildings , hoping to create awareness for the case and to generate potential leads . The Massachusetts Water Resources Authority reported plans to donate a bench in memory of the girl . The digital reconstruction has been viewed an estimated fifty million times by the public , which officials have stated is significantly efficient in assisting with the case . 
 On July 10 , CNN News host Anderson Cooper interviewed the National Center for Missing & Exploited Children 's co @-@ founder and former emcee of America 's Most Wanted , John Walsh about the case . Walsh stated that " absolutely someone knows " the identity of the Jane Doe and that in similar cases , it was often the " live @-@ in boyfriend " or the mother of the child that had abused or neglected one of several children in a family , citing that the victim could have been " accidentally killed or starved to death . " When explaining a probable reason why the girl had remained unidentified , Walsh stated that " people do not want to talk to cops , " possibly due to the fear of authorities investigating their own lives . For instance , the family of Anjelica Castillo , who were undocumented immigrants and never reported the victim missing due to fear of deportation . Walsh encouraged viewers to contact him instead , giving the number for the show he hosts , The Hunt With John Walsh and the URL for his profile on the CNN website . He confirmed that those submitting tips could remain anonymous . 
 = = = Tips = = = 
 Many leads were followed that appeared to match the circumstances of the case . A woman witnessed throwing a garbage bag over a bridge was later questioned by police , but it was found that that bag contained only spoiled fruit . Other individuals stated they had seen toddlers resembling the Jane Doe , one at a store and another at a playground , seen with a woman clothed in a " burka . " Investigators were unable to find any trace of the girl at the store through information gathered by security cameras , and the subject at the playground has yet to be located . A man stated he believed he had seen the toddler in November 2014 at a laundromat with a " heavyset " and " dirty blond " woman pushing the child in a stroller . 
 The local police department reported that they received many tips suggesting possible identities for the child , those of missing girls throughout the country . Many readers online told police that the girl could be Aliya Lunsford of West Virginia , who disappeared on September 24 , 2011 . Lunsford would have been six at the time of the discovery and did bear a resemblance to the reconstruction of the Jane Doe , but she was later excluded from the case . The Massachusetts State Police later released statements on their Facebook pages regarding the exclusions of Lunsford , as well as Ayla Reynolds . Police were made aware of a possible link between the Jane Doe and Katherine Phillips , nicknamed as " Baby Kate , " who went missing in 2011 . Phillips ' body has never been recovered , despite the fact that her father has since been charged with her murder and convicted of kidnapping . Authorities expressed their doubts that the body was Katherine Phillips but said they would investigate the lead . DNA between the pair was eventually compared . Phillips was later ruled out as " Baby Doe " and an announcement to the public was released on July 10 . 
 Investigators set up a twenty @-@ four @-@ hour hotline for those with information on the case to call . A text hotline was also created . Many submitted information about potential matches , later revealed to be missing children in over half of the United States as well as European and South and Central American countries . A total of eighty @-@ four billboards , including digital signs donated by Clear Channel , were also placed across the state of Massachusetts , encouraging individuals to report tips to the anonymous hotlines created for the child . 
 = = Identification = = 
 The child was identified as Bella Neveah Amoroso Bond on September 18 , 2015 . The identification was made after the sister of one of Rachelle Bond 's neighbors reported to police a link between Bond and the Jane Doe . Apparently , the neighbor had noticed Bella was absent from the household and had confronted Rachelle Bond and her boyfriend Michael McCarthy . They stated that the girl had been " taken away by the Department of Children and Families " ( this was later disproved ) . Subsequently , the neighbor told his sister that he believed that " Baby Doe " was Bella Bond , and she contacted authorities . 
 On September 17 , 2015 , a search warrant was executed at the home of Rachelle Bond , 40 , the child 's mother , in Dorchester , Massachusetts . Since the identification was made , images of the toddler from her mother 's Facebook page have been released . 
 = = = Later developments and trials = = = 
 Rachelle Bond , known as a habitual drug user , had two other children that had been removed from her custody . She had also been arrested multiple times in the past , for other crimes , including prostitution . Police commented that they had dealt with complaints that she was neglecting her daughter and had had four separate encounters with Bond . Bella 's family was interviewed after the identification was announced . Her aunt stated that she had never suspected that " Baby Doe " was Bella , and the maternal grandmother of the victim was unaware that the child was ever born . The Department of Children and Families had responded to two neglect complaints regarding Bella ; both cases were closed . 
 Police released the information that the child was a murder victim and charged Michael McCarthy , the mother 's boyfriend , with Bond 's death . They also charged her mother with being an accessory to the crime , believing her to have assisted McCarthy with " covering up " Bella 's death . Larceny was added to Rachelle Bond 's charges after it was discovered that she accepted $ 1 @,@ 400 of welfare income after she knew about the death of her daughter . The pair were arraigned on September 21 , 2015 . Rachelle 's bail was set for one million dollars ; McCarthy was not eligible for bail . McCarthy was scheduled to appear in court again on February 16 , 2016 , after Rachelle Bond 's appearance on January 6 . A judge later set Rachelle Bond 's trial date to December 1 , 2016 . 
 Authorities have acknowledged that since the exact cause of Bella 's death remains unknown , asserting that it was homicide to a jury could be " difficult to prove . " Rachelle Bond alleged that McCarthy had punched the toddler in the stomach multiple times after claiming Bella was a " demon " , and that he was the sole perpetrator of the murder . Prosecutors of McCarthy allege that Bella was murdered in one of many abusive occasions after she had been uncooperative about going to bed . Citing that McCarthy had decided to " calm the child down , " they say Rachelle had not entered the room alongside her boyfriend . When she did enter , they say she witnessed him near the girl 's body , which was " swollen and gray , " indicating she was deceased . Rachelle Bond 's attorney claims McCarthy threatened to murder her client if she contacted authorities . She also maintained that Rachelle was not involved with hiding the victim 's body , which had initially been placed in garbage bags and concealed in a refrigerator . A cadaver dog brought to the house later indicated that it smelled something on the refrigerator . Bond contradicted the belief that the body was placed on Deer Island ; she stated that McCarthy had placed the body in a weighted duffel bag and disposed of it in the water , suggesting it drifted to the location where it was found . 
 McCarthy claimed Rachelle was responsible for the death . McCarthy 's lawyer objected to claims made by Rachelle Bond 's defense and stated that his client had no knowledge of Bella 's death , saying no sufficient evidence exists to indicate otherwise . They have also claimed that he had moved out of Rachelle Bond 's residence before Bella 's death . McCarthy claimed he had left after witnessing Rachelle 's negative treatment of Bella , which included emotional and physical abuse . His defense also cited that Rachelle 's statements could not be confirmed and that she was more likely to have killed her daughter because of her drug history . The claim of Bella being beaten to death was also challenged , as the autopsy did not indicate any signs of injuries consistent with what Rachelle described . Other claims exist that accuse Rachelle Bond of fabricating the story as a way to avoid being charged with murder . It was announced that McCarthy had sent Rachelle a text message that said " don 't tell them you have a daughter . We don 't want [ the Department of Children and Families ] getting involved " . 
 Bella 's biological father , Joe Amoroso , had allegedly never met his daughter , but had spoken over a telephone with her . Amoroso had stated he had learned of Bella 's death when Rachelle told him during a visit , within a week before the identification was made . He states that he believed that Bond would not ever have hurt her daughter . Amoroso elaborated in another interview that he believed Rachelle had been " sedated " with an injection of heroin by her boyfriend quickly after Bella 's death , as a " track mark " visible on her neck could not be the result of her own action . Unlike her son , Bella 's paternal grandmother stated that she believed Rachelle Bond was heavily involved in Bella 's death and openly questioned the truthfulness of her allegations toward Michael McCarthy . Amoroso announced plans to bury Bella in Winthrop , Massachusetts among family members , stating he had decided to have the " funeral and wake services to be public . " Bella Bond was buried on November 28 , 2015 at the Winthrop Cemetery during a private funeral , after her parents later came to a consensus not to have the service open to the public . She was buried under a headstone reading " Bella N. Bond Amoroso " with the date of death listed as the day she was discovered . 
 = Remy Hamilton = 
 Remy Martin Hamilton ( born August 30 , 1974 ) is a former American football kicker who played in the National Football League ( NFL ) and Arena Football League ( AFL ) . In college , he was an All @-@ American for the Michigan Wolverines football team . As a professional , he played for the Detroit Lions of the NFL in addition to exhibition and training camp experience with the Seattle Seahawks , St. Louis Rams and Chicago Bears . He also played for the Grand Rapids Rampage , Carolina Cobras , Milwaukee Mustangs , Los Angeles Avengers , and Dallas <unk> of the AFL . In the AFL , he holds records for all @-@ time career points and single @-@ season kick <unk> 
 At Michigan , he set the current Big Ten Conference record for single @-@ season field goals , which is 25 . He ranks both first and second in school history in single @-@ season field goals made and co @-@ holds the school record for consecutive field goals made along with Brendan Gibbons . He is the only All @-@ American placekicker in Michigan history . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Hamilton attended Spanish River Community High School in Boca Raton , Florida , where he was a three @-@ sport star in football , soccer , and tennis . In football , he played as a kicker , punter , defensive back , and quarterback , and as a senior , the Sun @-@ Sentinel named him the Offensive Player of the Year . In his senior season , Hamilton passed for 1 @,@ 147 yards and 12 touchdowns , and rushed for 249 yards and six touchdowns . 
 = = College career = = 
 Hamilton attended the University of Michigan , where he played football from 1993 to 1996 . During this first season at Michigan , he only made one field goal . Following the 1993 season , he was suspended from the team for violating team rules . He remained on suspension while police investigated a convenience store theft . After making a 47 @-@ yard field goal in his only attempt as a freshman , he lost the kicking job to Erik Lovell in spring practice . Lovell handled the kicking duties in the 1994 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season opener and Hamilton did not get the starting assignment until immediately before the second game . Lovell missed an extra point in the opener , which gave Hamilton his second chance . Thus , before the second game of his sophomore season , he had not recorded any field goals that season and still had a career total of one . However , during the September 10 , 1994 Michigan – Notre Dame rivalry game against third @-@ ranked Notre Dame , he made four field goals and two extra point conversions , including the game @-@ winning 42 @-@ yarder with two seconds remaining . Notre Dame called a timeout to ice Hamilton , but it inadvertently helped Michigan , which had prematurely packed away the kicking net on its sidelines . The field goal redeemed Hamilton for a missed tackle on a kickoff return , which he felt would have cost his team the game . For his performance , the Big Ten named him the Special Teams Player of the Week . Michigan fans still remember Hamilton for this game , and regularly congratulate him for the kick . Two games later , he had a three @-@ field goal game in the Big Ten Conference opener against Iowa . Hamilton had another four @-@ field goal outing later in the season against Illinois . This earned him another Player of the Week recognition . 
 He was named to the 1994 College Football All @-@ America and 1994 All @-@ Big Ten teams . Hamilton was a first team All @-@ American selection by the Walter Camp Football Foundation and second team selection by the Associated Press and the Football News . Despite NFL alumni that include Jay Feely , Hayden Epstein and Ali Haji @-@ Sheikh , Hamilton remains the school 's only All @-@ American placekicker . During the 1994 football season , Hamilton established the current Big Ten single @-@ season record for successful field goals at 25 , which has since been tied three times , . The Big Ten was talented at the placekicker position that season , with four of the twenty semifinalists for the Lou Groza Award being from the conference ( Hamilton , Illinois ' Chris Richardson , Minnesota 's Mike <unk> and Northwestern 's Sam <unk> ) . Hamilton won the NCAA statistical championship for field goal kickers that season . He also set Michigan 's single season kick point record with 101 in 1994 . 
 During the 1995 season , one of his more important field goals for the Wolverines came in the 5 – 0 victory over Purdue . However , when Northwestern beat Michigan at Michigan Stadium , 19 – 13 , for its first victory there since 1959 , Hamilton missed a key 37 @-@ yard field goal . His 1995 total of 19 field goals ranked second in Michigan history , behind only his own 1994 total . Garrett Rivas tied that single @-@ season total twice , but no one has unseated Hamilton from first and second place . 
 He also helped the 1996 team take a 9 – 0 halftime lead and converted an extra point to give them a 16 – 0 lead in what would eventually be a loss to Northwestern , 17 – 16 . His most notable scoring in 1996 gave Michigan essential fourth @-@ quarter points in a 27 – 20 victory over Indiana . He earned his third Big Ten Special Teams Player of the Week honors following a 13 – 9 victory over Ohio State in the Michigan – Ohio State football rivalry game on November 23 , 1996 . He put the team ahead , 10 – 9 , on the last play of the third quarter and added a key field goal with 1 : 19 remaining . A two @-@ time finalist for the Lou Groza Award , Hamilton finished his career as the all @-@ time Wolverine leader in field goals made ( 63 ) and field goals attempted ( 82 ) . Before his career ended , he became the ninth Wolverine to accumulate over 200 points . 
 Hamilton holds the Michigan record for consecutive field goals made ( 14 ) as well as outright or shared school records for single @-@ game ( 5 ) , single @-@ season ( 30 ) and career ( 82 ) field goal attempts . His career field goals made record ( 63 ) was eclipsed by Garrett Rivas in 2006 by one . Hamilton was a three @-@ time Big Ten All @-@ Academic selection ( 1993 , 1995 , 1996 ) . He was also a three @-@ time Big Ten Conference Special Teams Player of the Week ( 9 / 12 / 94 , 10 / 10 / 94 , 11 / 25 / 96 ) . His 14 consecutive field goals mark was one short of Vlade <unk> 's Big Ten record , which has since been broken . Hamilton 's 63 career field goals were two short of Todd Gregoire 's Big Ten record , which has since been broken . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Hamilton joined the AFL 's Grand Rapids Rampage in 1998 , for which he played two seasons . During these , he had modest success as a field goal kicker connecting on 31 of 88 attempts ( 35 @.@ 2 % ) . In his first season , he also caught a touchdown pass . He then played in 2000 with the Carolina Cobras and in 2001 with the Milwaukee Mustangs , where he posted 11 of 42 ( 26 @.@ 2 % ) and 18 of 47 ( 38 @.@ 3 % ) field goal performances . While with the Cobras , Hamilton played against the Los Angeles Avengers in the first AFL game played at the Staples Center on April 20 , 2000 . 
 In 2002 , he joined the Avengers for which he had his best years as a professional , making at least half of his field goal attempts each season . Hamilton was second among kickers in the AFL in scoring in 2003 . Following his strong performance , he signed with the NFL 's Seattle Seahawks , where he competed against Josh Brown . After Brown was perfect in both four field goal and seven extra point attempts in the first three preseason games , Hamilton was released about three weeks later , and he returned to play for Los Angeles again . Hamilton was the top @-@ scoring kicker in the AFL in 2004 . In August 2004 , he signed with the Chicago Bears , where he battled Paul Edinger for the kicking duties . Bears head coach Lovie Smith noted Hamilton 's skill at onside kicks . In terms of distance , Hamilton had a slight edge with his average kick three yards deep in the end zone compared with Edinger 's goal line average . However , Edinger was perfect on six field goals and two extra points in the first three preseason games , and Hamilton missed his only exhibition game field goal attempt , a 36 @-@ yarder on August 27 . The team waived him a few days later . He was again the top @-@ scoring kicker in the AFL in 2005 . That year , he eclipsed Jay Taylor 's AFL record for single @-@ season field goal percentage , which had been 72 % , with a 74 @.@ 4 % 29 for 39 performance . Hamilton started the season with eleven consecutive field goals , giving him a total of twelve in a row for a league record . He earned a couple of NFL tryouts . Hamilton first signed with the St. Louis Rams in July 2005 prior to training camp . He played for them during the 2005 exhibition season . He made the team 's final points with a field goal in an August 12 , 1995 17 – 13 preseason victory over the Chicago Bears . For the preseason , he made his only field goal and all six extra points . Nonetheless , the Rams decided to retain Jeff Wilkins who had been their kicker since 1997 . Hamilton then signed with the Detroit Lions for their practice squad in September of the 2005 NFL season . He appeared in one NFL game for Detroit , but missed his only point after touchdown attempt , which was blocked by Alfonso Boone . He also executed a couple of kickoffs , and he made the tackle on Jerry <unk> 's 33 @-@ yard return to the 37 @-@ yard line on one in the third quarter . He was activated to replace Jason Hanson who suffered a hamstring injury , which ended Hanson 's consecutive games streak at 209 . However , Hamilton was released later that month . Hamilton returned to the AFL for Los Angeles , and he led the AFL 's kickers in scoring again in 2006 . This earned Hamilton his second consecutive AFL 's " Kicker of the Year " title and second consecutive First Team All @-@ Arena League selection . His 2006 point total is 2nd in AFL history to his own 2005 total . He signed with the Rams again before training camp , and he played for them in exhibition games during 2006 . He made four of six field goals ( including a 48 @-@ yarder ) and four of five extra points during the preseason . Again the Rams kept Wilkins . Hamilton returned to the AFL for his final season in Los Angeles . He ranked third in kicker scoring in the AFL for Los Angeles in 2007 . He joined the Dallas <unk> for 2008 . He spent the 2011 season with the Dallas Vigilantes . In 2012 , Hamilton was assigned to the Philadelphia Soul . By the time of his assignment he was the AFL ’ s all @-@ time leader in field goals made ( 188 ) , extra points made ( 1 @,@ 082 ) and scoring by a kicker ( 1 @,@ 646 points ) . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In a May 2004 article , the Los Angeles Times reported that , less than 15 hours after a 53 – 52 overtime loss to the Georgia Force at Staples Center , Hamilton 's wife , Heather , delivered the couple 's first child , a boy named Tate . Hamilton has served as a personal trainer for other kickers . 
 = Gigha = 
 The Isle of Gigha ( / <unk> / ; Scottish Gaelic : Giogha ) is a small island off the west coast of Kintyre in Scotland . The island forms part of Argyll and Bute and has a usually resident population of about 160 people . The climate is mild with higher than average sunshine hours and the soils are fertile . 
 Gigha has a long history , having been inhabited continuously since prehistoric times . It may have had an important role during the Kingdom of Dalriada and is the ancestral home of Clan MacNeill . It fell under the control of the Norse and the Lords of the Isles before becoming incorporated into modern Scotland and saw a variety of conflicts during the medieval period . 
 The population of Gigha peaked at over 700 in the eighteenth century , but during the 20th century the island had numerous owners , which caused various problems in developing the island . By the beginning of the 21st century resident numbers had fallen to only 98 . However a " community buy @-@ out " in 2002 has transformed the island , which now has a growing population and a variety of new commercial activities to complement farming and tourism . 
 Attractions on the island include Achamore Gardens and the abundant wildlife , especially seabirds . There have been numerous shipwrecks on the surrounding rocks and skerries . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Hebrides have been occupied by the speakers of at least four languages since the Iron Age , and many of the names of these islands have more than one possible meaning as a result . Many modern authorities hold that the name " Gigha " is probably derived either from the Norse Guðey or from Gud @-@ øy , meaning either " good island " or " God island " . The Norse historical text Hákonar saga Hákonarsonar explicitly calls the island Guðey . 
 Despite this , Keay and Keay ( 1994 ) and Haswell @-@ Smith ( 2004 ) suggest the Gaelic name is derived instead from <unk> , meaning " island of the geo " or " cleft " . However , Norse <unk> normally shows up in Gaelic in the form of <unk> . <unk> ( 2006 ) also notes that the isle is called " <unk> " in a charter of 1309 and also appears as " <unk> " on some old maps and speculates that a possible pre @-@ Norse derivation is from the Gaelic Sheela na Gig , a female fertility symbol . Haswell @-@ Smith ( 2004 ) also offers the possibility of <unk> 's isle after the Norse female name . 
 A Gigha resident is a <unk> , also nicknamed a <unk> ( " <unk> " ) . Although the most widespread pronunciation of the Gaelic name Giogha is [ <unk> ] , the Southern dialects preserve the fricative : [ <unk> ] in Kintyre and [ <unk> ] in Argyllshire . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Gigha lies 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) off the coast of Kintyre and is 9 @.@ 5 km ( 5 @.@ 9 mi ) long in a roughly north @-@ south direction and a maximum of 2 @.@ 5 km ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) wide . The total area is 1 @,@ 395 ha ( 3 @,@ 447 acres ) and the highest elevation of Creag <unk> reaches only 100 metres ( 330 ft ) . The rocky central spine is composed of <unk> with basalt intrusions . 
 The main settlement is Ardminish which is on the south east coast and offers a small anchorage in the sheltered Ardminish Bay . Further to the north is <unk> Bay and beyond that West and East Tarbert Bays which ( as their names imply ) lie astride a small isthmus . 
 The climate is mild with higher than average sunshine hours and minimum temperatures , and lower than average days of ground frost for Scotland . Annual rainfall is typically between 1 @,@ 000 millimetres ( 39 in ) and 1 @,@ 290 millimetres ( 51 in ) . 
 = = = Surrounding islands = = = 
 Cara Island lies just offshore to the south , the smaller <unk> island lies to the west and <unk> to the south east . A sandy spit connects Gigha to Eilean Garbh in the north @-@ west . To the north are the rocks called An Dubh Sgeir ( a common name meaning " black rock " ) and <unk> Giogha . The Sound of Gigha separates Gigha and its attendant isles from mainland Kintyre . 
 To the west and north west respectively , are the two large islands of Islay and Jura . South west are Rathlin Island and the north of Ireland , which can be seen from Gigha on clear days . Between Jura and Gigha are the rocks of Na <unk> and <unk> Lighthouse . Between Gigha and Port Ellen on Islay is the Isle of <unk> . Eilean Mòr , and the Isle of Danna are little further up the Argyll coast to the north . 
 There are also many small rocks and skerries ( small rock islands ) in the seas around Gigha . Asked by a tourist if he knew where they all were , local resident Willie McSporran ( see below ) replied " No , but I know where they aren 't and that 's good enough for me " . 
 = = History = = 
 Gigha has been inhabited continuously since prehistoric times , and there are several standing stones on the island . There are many other archaeological sites , including cairns , standing stones , duns and an ogham stone near to Kilchattan , which has not been deciphered . 
 In the Early Historic Period The domain of the Cenél <unk> appears to have been centred on Kintyre and Knapdale and may have included Arran , Jura and Gigha . The title king of Kintyre is used of a number of presumed kings of the Cenél <unk> . This would have made Gigha part of Dalriada . 
 There is some evidence to show that the island might have been the seat of power for Conall mac Comgall , King of Dalriada , in the mid to late 6th century . The Annals of Tigernach refer to a Battle of <unk> ( later <unk> ) in 574 , and this has been identified as taking place on Gigha , then referred to as Eilean da <unk> , although other sources believe the battle took place in Kintyre . 
 = = = Norse period = = = 
 Nearby Islay was a centre for Norse control over the Hebrides , and Gigha was later part of the Kingdom of the Isles . The island 's name appears to be Norse in origin , although its meaning is disputed , and there are several other Norse placenames in the vicinity , such as <unk> ( i.e. " Gigha - holm " ) and Cnoc Haco ( possibly " Haakon 's hill " ) . 
 In 1849 , a Viking grave was found at East Tarbert Bay , which revealed a number of artefacts , including a bronze weighing balance dated to the 10th century . 
 Prior to the Battle of Largs , Haakon IV of Norway is said to have visited the island . According to Hákonar saga Hákonarsonar ( " The Saga of Haakon Haakonsson " ) written by Icelander Sturla Þórðarson in the 1260s : 
 King Haco sailed afterwards south to Guðey before Kintyre where he anchored . There King John met him ; he came in the ship with Bishop Thorgil . King Haco desired him to follow his banner as he should do . But King John excused himself . He said he had sworn an oath to the Scottish King , and held of him more lands than of the Norwegian Monarch ; he therefore entreated King Haco to dispose of all those estates which he had conferred upon him . King Haco kept him with him some time , and endeavoured to incline his mind to fidelity . Many laid imputations to his charge . King Haco indeed had before received bad accounts of him from the Hebrides ; for John <unk> @-@ son came to the King , while he was sailing west from Shetland , and told him the news that John King of the Hebrides , breaking his faith , had turned to the Scottish Monarch . King Haco , however , would not believe this till he had found it so . 
 During King Haco 's stay at Guðey an Abbot of a monastery of Greyfriars waited on him , begging protection for their dwelling , and Holy Church : and this the King granted them in writing . 
 Friar Simon had lain sick for some time . He died at Guðey . His corpse was afterwards carried up to <unk> where the Greyfriars interred him in their Church . They spread a fringed pall over his grave , and called him a Saint . 
 = = = John of Islay = = = 
 After Edward Balliol 's coup against the Bruce regime in 1333 , he attempted to court John of Islay , Lord of the Isles . In 1336 , Edward confirmed the territories which the Islay lords had acquired in the days of Robert I and awarded John the lands of Kintyre , Knapdale , Gigha , Colonsay , Mull , Skye , Lewis , and Morvern , previously held by magnates still loyal to the Bruces . John , however , never provided Edward with real assistance . Although Balliol 's deposition and the restoration of the House of Bruce meant that the grants made to John were void , his pre @-@ 1336 possessions were confirmed by King David II in 1343 . Moreover , in 1346 , John inherited the great Lordship of Garmoran through his brother @-@ in @-@ law Raghnall <unk> . This meant that John 's dominions now included all of the Hebrides except Skye , and all of the western seaboard from Morvern to Loch Hourn . 
 = = = Clan MacNeill = = = 
 Gigha is the ancestral home of the Clan MacNeill , which possesses its own tartan and Clan badge , both distinctly different from those of the larger and better known Clan MacNeil of Barra ( spelt with one " l " in English ) who share the same Chief . 
 The origin of the MacNeills of Taynish , Gigha and Colonsay is obscure . They were hereditary keepers of Castle Sween under the Lords of the Isles during the 15th and 16th centuries . The MacNeill of Gigha , was known as the " chief and principal of the clan and surname of <unk> " in 1530 . However , as the power of the Campbells grew and spread into the Inner Hebrides , the influence of the MacNeills of Gigha decreased . At about this time the MacNeils on the more remote island of Barra , far removed from Campbell power , began to grow in prominence and for a long time since have been regarded as " Chief of the Clan and Name " . 
 In 1449 Alexander , Lord of the Isles granted part of the island to Torquil MacNeill of Taynish , the remainder being owned by the monks of Paisley . In 1493 the whole island came under MacNeill control and it remained in their hands , with various brief interludes , until the 19th century . This prize was by no means without its hazards . In 1530 the notorious pirate Ailean nan Sop murdered MacNeill of Taynish and numerous island residents . A dozen years later the title deeds were lost when eleven gentlemen of Gigha were slain by raiders . 
 = = = Medieval conflict = = = 
 In 1554 the MacNeills relinquished their Gigha holdings to the MacDonalds , but if anything the conflicts intensified . In 1567 Gigha was " ravaged " by the Macleans of Duart . By 1587 , atrocities committed between warring West Highland clans had escalated to such an extent that Parliament devised what is known as the General Band in an effort to quell hostilities . Despite the Governments actions to secure the peace , about this time Lachlan Mor MacLean of Duart ravaged the MacDonald islands of Islay and Gigha , slaughtering 500 — 600 men . Maclean of Duart then besieged Angus MacDonald of Dunivaig and the Glens at his Castle Dunivaig on Islay . 
 The siege was only lifted when MacDonald of Dunivaig agreed with MacLean of Duart to surrender half of his lands on Islay . However , despite his agreement with the MacLeans , MacDonald of Dunivaig then invaded the MacLean islands of Mull , Tiree , Coll and Luing . Angus MacDonald of Dunivaig was aided in the action by Donald Gorm Mor MacDonald of Sleat and the MacDonalds of Clanranald , <unk> of Ardnamurchan , MacLeods of Lewis , MacNeills of Gigha , <unk> of Loup and the Macfies of Colonsay . Supporting MacLean of Duart were the MacLeods of Harris and Dunvegan , MacNeils of Barra , <unk> of <unk> and the <unk> of Ulva . 
 In 1590 , Angus of Islay sold out to John Campbell of Cawdor , a junior cousin of the Earl of Argyll . In a move that may well have been pre @-@ arranged Campbell then immediately resold back to Neil MacNeill of Taynish . The church at Kilchattan that dates from this period has some " intricately carved medieval grave slabs " . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 Visiting in the late 17th century Martin Martin wrote : 
 This isle is for the most part arable , but rocky in other parts ; the mould is brown and clayey , inclining to red ; it is good for pasturage and cultivation . The corn growing here is oats and barley . The cattle bred here are cows , horses , and sheep . There is a church in this island called Kilchattan , it has an altar in the east end , and upon it a font of stone which is very large , and hath a small hole in the middle which goes quite through it . There are several tombstones in and about this church ; the family of the <unk> , the principal possessors of this isle , are buried under the tombstones on the east side the church , where there is a plot of ground set apart for them . Most of all the tombs have a two @-@ handed sword engraven on them , and there is one that has the representation of a man upon it ... This isle affords no wood of any kind , but a few bushes of juniper on the little hills . 
 William II of Scotland visited the island in 1689 , the MacNeill remaining loyal to the crown both then and in the ' 45 . 
 = = = Modern period = = = 
 In the eighteenth century the population of Gigha peaked at over 600 , but had declined to just under 400 by the close of the 19th century . After half of millennium of association , the MacNeills sold the isle for £ 49 @,@ 000 to James Williams Scarlett , a nephew of James Scarlett , 1st Baron Abinger in 1865 . His son , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel William James Scarlett built the mansion house of Achamore and Gigha remained in the family 's hands until 1919 . 
 During the 20th century the island had various other owners . Major John Allen bought the island from the <unk> and sold it to the Richard Hamer in 1937 , before passing ownership during World War II to his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Somerset de Chair , who in turn sold to Sir James Horlick in 1944 . Horlick is recalled as a generous owner who encouraged dairy farming and created the gardens of Achamore . David <unk> then purchased it from the Horlick estate in 1973 retaining it until 1989 , during which time he created a fish farm , which now specialises in halibut with a growing international reputation . Over the years little further development took place and some owners are recalled less fondly . The island briefly passed into the hands of Malcolm Potier , a property developer , and subsequently to Derek Holt and his family prior to the sale to the Isle of Gigha Heritage Trust . By the 1960s resident numbers had fallen to 163 and by the beginning of the 21st century the population was reduced to only 98 and the housing stock was in poor condition . 
 Overview of population trends 
 Note : The figures for 1755 – 1841 include Cara . 
 = = Community buy @-@ out = = 
 The challenges created by private landlords came to an end in March 2002 when the islanders managed , with help from grants and loans from the National Lottery and Highlands and Islands Enterprise , to purchase the island for £ 4 million . They now own it through a development trust called the Isle of Gigha Heritage Trust . As a result , 15 March , the day when the purchase went through , is celebrated as the island 's " independence day " . £ 1 million of the financial support was in the form of a short @-@ term loan . The money to pay this loan back was largely raised by selling Achamore House ( but not the gardens ) to Don Dennis , a businessman from California . Dennis now operates a flower essences importing business and a boat tours company from the house , which is also rented out as a bed and breakfast business . An additional £ 200 @,@ 000 was raised by the islanders through various fundraising ventures , allowing the loan to be paid back to the Scottish Land Fund on 15 March 2004 . Since the community buy out several other private businesses have sprung up on Gigha providing a boost to the local economy , including the multi @-@ award winning Boathouse Café Bar . The island 's population and economy has begun to recover as a result of these activities . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Gigha 's economy is largely dependent on livestock farming , tourism and some limited fishing . There have been some moves to diversify the economy since the community buy @-@ out . There is also a fish farm on the island , and small @-@ scale fishing . 
 365 hectares ( 900 acres ) of arable land are farmed and relative to its size it is the most fertile and productive island in Scotland . Ayrshire cattle are kept on the island and goat 's cheese is also produced . The Achamore creamery was closed during the 1980s , but has been successively revived . 
 In October 2006 it was announced that the population had reached 150 - a rise of more than 50 per cent since the 2002 buy @-@ out . Willie McSporran , former chairman of the Heritage Trust , was quoted as saying : " The trust turned 300 years of population decline on its head by encouraging new development and the growth of the local economy . A sign of the surge of people wanting to relocate to Gigha is that we are struggling to meet the demand for housing despite building 18 new homes . " The issues of island ownership are not unique to Gigha and consequently the island has been highlighted in an edition of the BBC series , Countryfile . 
 In 2010 the historian James Hunter stated that the transfer of ownership had brought about " a spectacular reversal of Gigha 's slide towards complete population collapse " and suggested that the UK Government should learn lessons from Gigha and other community buy @-@ outs to inform their " Big Society " plans . Between 2001 and the 2011 census the island 's population grew by over 45 % . During the same period Scottish island populations as a whole grew by 4 % to 103 @,@ 702 . 
 = = = Wind turbines = = = 
 The Heritage Trust set up Gigha Renewable Energy Ltd. to buy and operate three Vestas <unk> wind turbines , known locally as The Dancing Ladies or <unk> , <unk> is <unk> ( Gaelic for Faith , Hope and Charity ) . They were commissioned on 21 January 2005 and are capable of generating up to 675 kW of power . Revenue is produced by selling the electricity to the grid via an intermediary called Green Energy UK . Gigha residents control the whole project and profits are reinvested in the community . 
 = = = Transport and infrastructure = = = 
 There is an unmanned grass landing strip running east / west near the southern end of the island , requiring prior permission for landing . It is one of the closest airstrips to Glasgow International Airport , typically a 20- to 30 @-@ minute flight away for small aircraft . 
 A Caledonian MacBrayne ferry service links the island 's only village , Ardminish , to <unk> on the Kintyre peninsula of the Scottish mainland . This in turn links to the <unk> road . 
 There is a primary school on the island , but secondary pupils must go to the Mainland for education . Ardminish has the pier , post office and shop . The island 's postcode is <unk> . 
 = = = Attractions = = = 
 Attractions on the island include the 20 @.@ 2 hectares ( 50 acres ) Achamore Gardens , begun in 1945 by Sir James Horlick and known for its rhododendrons and azaleas , the many sandy beaches and the thirteenth century St <unk> 's Chapel ruins . There is also a nine @-@ hole golf course . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 Because it is set on the eastern shores of the Atlantic Ocean , Gigha attracts a wide variety of sea birds such as guillemot and eider , which breed on Eilean Garbh . Inland , ducks such as mallard , teal , wigeon and pochard can be found along with heron , snipe , pheasant and red grouse . The hooded crow and jackdaw are present in considerable numbers , but geese are only occasional visitors . Mammals are under @-@ represented ; there are no red deer , stoat , weasel , red fox or hare . In the mid @-@ 20th century Gigha had eight boats engaged in fishing for cod and lobster , but commercial activity ceased some time ago . 
 = = Shipwrecks = = 
 Gigha 's coasts have seen numerous wrecks . In August 1886 the Staffa ran aground on Cath <unk> west of <unk> . The ship remained on the reef in calm overnight conditions and all crew and 21 passengers were rescued the following morning . On 8 April 1894 the steamship <unk> was lost on the same rocks with a cargo of coal and iron . Owned by David MacBrayne , she was en route from Glasgow to Lewis at the time . On 16 September 1940 the British steam liner Aska was bombed by a German aircraft south of Gigha whilst carrying French troops from Gambia . Twelve crewmen died in the attack and 75 survivors were successfully picked up by trawlers . On fire , the Aska drifted onto Cara and was wrecked there . Four years later the Mon <unk> was deliberately sunk in the Sound of Gigha and used for bombing practice . In 1991 the Russian factory ship Kartli was hit by two freak waves off Islay and ran aground at Port Ban after the crew were evacuated . Forty seven crew members were air @-@ lifted to safety but four men were killed in the accident . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Gigha had a vigorous tradition of harping , represented mainly by the family called Mac an <unk> ( Galbraith ) , who were active in Gigha and Kintyre , and it is thought that their descendants were in Gigha until at least 1685 . In the 1990s it was reported that many of the island 's resident spoke Gaelic although the numbers have declined significantly in recent years . 
 = = = Gaelic = = = 
 Gigha has historically been a very strong Gaelic speaking area . Both in the 1901 and 1921 census , the island was reported to be over 75 % Gaelic speaking . By 1971 , it had dropped to the 25 @-@ 49 @.@ 9 % range . In the 2001 census , the percentage of Gaelic speakers had dropped to 14 % . 
 Gigha Gaelic was studied extensively by N.M. Holmer in the 1930s , who noted features such as its weak <unk> . 
 In 2008 , Henri Macaulay of Gigha Gallery received funding from the Gaelic development body , Bord na Gàidhlig , to run a series of Gaelic @-@ learning weekends on the island as a combined cultural @-@ revival and tourism @-@ development initiative . Conversation and music form the backbone of the weekends . They run through the winter months . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Seamus McSporran who managed to do 14 jobs during the 31 years of his working life - at the same time . He has also featured in a 2006 English as a foreign or second language study book and in the widely used English textbooks for adults New <unk> Elementary and New <unk> Elementary 3rd Edition 
 Willie McSporran , MBE the first chairman of the Isle of Gigha Heritage Trust . He is the brother of Seamus . 
 Giolla <unk> <unk> , mid 15th century harper . 
 Vie Tulloch , noted sculptor and the island 's oldest resident until her death in 2011 . 
 = Heinkel He 111 = 
 The Heinkel He 111 was a German aircraft designed by Siegfried and Walter Günter at Heinkel Flugzeugwerke in 1934 . Through development it was described as a " wolf in sheep 's clothing " because the project masqueraded the machine as civilian transport , though from conception the Heinkel was intended to provide the nascent Luftwaffe with a fast medium bomber . 
 Perhaps the best @-@ recognised German bomber due to the distinctive , extensively glazed " greenhouse " nose of later versions , the Heinkel He 111 was the most numerous Luftwaffe bomber during the early stages of World War II . The bomber fared well until the Battle of Britain , when its weak defensive armament was exposed . Nevertheless , it proved capable of sustaining heavy damage and remaining airborne . As the war progressed , the He 111 was used in a variety of roles on every front in the European theatre . It was used as a strategic bomber during the Battle of Britain , a torpedo bomber in the Atlantic and Arctic , and a medium bomber and a transport aircraft on the Western , Eastern , Mediterranean , Middle Eastern , and North African Front theatres . 
 The He 111 was constantly upgraded and modified , but became obsolete during the latter part of the war . The German Bomber B project was not realised which forced the Luftwaffe to continue operating the He 111 in combat roles until the end of the war . Manufacture of the He 111 ceased in September 1944 , at which point , piston @-@ engine bomber production was largely halted in favour of fighter aircraft . With the German bomber force virtually defunct , the He 111 was used for logistics . 
 Production of the Heinkel continued after the war as the Spanish @-@ built CASA 2 @.@ 111 . Spain received a batch of He 111H @-@ 16s in 1943 along with an agreement to licence @-@ build Spanish versions . Its airframe was produced in Spain under licence by Construcciones Aeronáuticas SA . The design differed significantly in powerplant only , eventually being equipped with Rolls @-@ Royce Merlin engines . The Heinkel 's descendant continued in service until 1973 . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 = = = Design conception = = = 
 After its defeat in World War I , Germany was banned from operating an air force by the Treaty of Versailles . German re @-@ armament began earnestly in the 1930s and was initially kept secret because it violated the treaty . Consequently , the early development of military bombers was disguised as a development program for civilian transport aircraft . 
 Among those designers seeking to benefit from German re @-@ armament was Ernst Heinkel . Heinkel decided to create the world 's fastest passenger aircraft , a goal met with scepticism by Germany 's aircraft industry and political leadership . Heinkel entrusted development to Siegfried and Walter Günter , both fairly new to the company and untested . 
 In June 1933 Albert Kesselring visited Heinkel 's offices . Kesselring was head of the Luftwaffe Administration Office : at that point Germany did not have a State Aviation Ministry but only an aviation commissariat , the <unk> . Kesselring was hoping to build a new air force out of the Flying Corps being constructed in the Reichswehr and required a modern force of aircraft . Kesselring convinced Heinkel to move his factory from Warnemünde to Rostock and turn it over to mass production with a force of 3 @,@ 000 employees . Heinkel began work on the new design , which garnered urgency as the American Lockheed 12 , Boeing 247 and Douglas DC @-@ 2 began to appear . 
 Features of the He 111 were apparent in the Heinkel He 70 . The first single @-@ engined He 70 Blitz ( " Lightning " ) rolled off the line in 1932 and the type immediately started breaking records . In the normal four @-@ passenger version its speed reached 380 km / h ( 230 mph ) , when powered by a 447 kW ( 600 hp ) BMW VI engine . The He 70 was designed with an elliptical wing , which the Günther brothers had already incorporated into the Bäumer <unk> before they joined Heinkel . This wing design became a feature in this and many subsequent designs they developed . The He 70 drew the interest of the Luftwaffe , which was looking for an aircraft with dual bomber and transport capabilities . 
 The He 111 was a twin @-@ engine version of the Blitz , preserving the elliptical inverted gull wing , small rounded control surfaces and BMW engines , so that the new design was often called the Doppel @-@ Blitz ( " Double Lightning " ) . When the Dornier Do 17 displaced the He 70 , Heinkel needed a twin @-@ engine design to match its competitors . Heinkel spent 200 @,@ 000 man hours designing the He 111 . The fuselage length was extended to just over 17 @.@ 4 m / 57 ft ( from 11 @.@ 7 m / 38 ft 4 ½ in ) and wingspan to 22 @.@ 6 m / 74 ft ( from 14 @.@ 6 m / 48 ft ) . 
 = = = First flight = = = 
 The first He 111 flew on 24 February 1935 , piloted by chief test pilot Gerhard Nitschke , who was ordered not to land at the company 's factory airfield at Rostock @-@ Marienehe ( today 's Rostock @-@ <unk> neighbourhood ) , as this was considered too short , but at the central Erprobungstelle Rechlin test facility . He ignored these orders and landed back at Marienehe . He said that the He 111 performed slow manoeuvres well and that there was no danger of overshooting the runway . Nitschke also praised its high speed " for the period " and " very good @-@ natured flight and landing characteristics " , stable during cruising , gradual descent and single @-@ engined flight and having no nose @-@ drop when the undercarriage was operated . However , during the second test flight Nitschke revealed there was insufficient longitudinal stability during climb and flight at full power and the aileron controls required an unsatisfactory amount of force . 
 By the end of 1935 , prototypes V2 V4 had been produced under civilian registrations D @-@ <unk> , D @-@ <unk> and D @-@ <unk> . D @-@ <unk> became the first prototype of the He 111 A @-@ 1 on 10 January 1936 , and received recognition as the " fastest passenger aircraft in the world " , as its speed exceeded 402 km / h ( 250 mph ) . The design would have achieved a greater total speed had the 1 @,@ 000 hp DB 600 engine that powered the <unk> Bf 109 's tenth through thirteenth prototypes been available . However , Heinkel was forced initially to use the 650 hp BMW VI liquid @-@ cooled engine . 
 During the war , British test pilot Eric Brown evaluated many Luftwaffe aircraft . Among them was a He 111 H @-@ 1 of Kampfgeschwader 26 which was forced to land at the Firth of Forth on 9 February 1940 . Brown described his impression of the He 111s unique greenhouse nose : 
 The overall impression of space within the cockpit area and the great degree of visual sighting afforded by the Plexiglas panelling were regarded as positive factors , with one important provision in relation to weather conditions . Should either bright sunshine or rainstorms be encountered , the pilot 's visibility could be dangerously compromised either by glare throwback or lack of good sighting . 
 <unk> was easy and was only complicated by rain , when the pilot needed to slide back the window panel and look out to establish direction . On take off , Brown reported very little " swing " and the aircraft was well balanced . On landing , Brown noted that approach speed should be above 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) and should be held until touch down . This was to avoid a tendency by the He 111 to drop a wing , especially on the port side . 
 = = = Competition = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1930s , Dornier Flugzeugwerke and Junkers competed with Heinkel for Ministry of Aviation ( German : Reichsluftfahrtministerium , abbreviated RLM ) contracts . The main competitor to the Heinkel was the Junkers Ju 86 . In 1935 , comparison trials were undertaken with the He 111 . At this point , the Heinkel was equipped with two BMW VI engines while Ju 86A was equipped with two Jumo <unk> , both of which had 492 kW ( 660 hp ) . The He 111 had a slightly heavier takeoff weight of 8 @,@ 220 kg ( 18 @,@ 120 lb ) compared to the Ju 86 's 8 @,@ 000 kg ( 17 @,@ 640 lb ) and the maximum speed of both aircraft was 311 km / h ( 193 mph ) . However the Ju 86 had a higher cruising speed of 177 mph ( 285 km / h ) , 9 mph ( 14 km / h ) faster than the He 111 . This stalemate was altered drastically by the appearance of the DB 600C , which increased the He 111 's power by 164 kW ( 220 hp ) . The Ministry of Aviation awarded both contracts , and Junkers sped up development and production at a breathtaking pace , but the financial expenditure for the Junkers was huge . In 1934 @-@ 1935 , 3 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 RM ( 4 ½ % of annual turnover ) was spent . The Ju 86 appeared at many flight displays all over the world which helped sales to the Ministry of Aviation and abroad . Dornier , which was also competing with their Do 17 , and Heinkel were not as successful . However , in production terms , the He 111 was more prominent with 8 @,@ 000 examples produced against just 846 Ju 86s and was therefore the Luftwaffe 's most numerous type at the beginning of the Second World War . 
 = = Basic design = = 
 The design of the He 111 A @-@ L initially had a conventional stepped cockpit , with a separate pair of windscreen @-@ like panels just for the pilot and co @-@ pilot . The introduction of the P variant triggered a complete re @-@ design of the cockpit . The He 111P , and subsequent production variants , were fitted with a fully glazed cockpits , laterally asymmetric nose , with the port side having the greater curvature for the pilot , offsetting the bombardier to starboard . The resulting <unk> cockpit , which was a feature on a number of German bomber designs during the war years in varying shapes and formats , no longer had the separate windscreen panels for the pilot . The pilot had to view their exterior flight environment through the same bullet @-@ like glazing that was used by the bombardier and navigator . The pilot was seated on the left and the navigator / bomb aimer on the right . The navigator went forward to the prone bomb @-@ aiming position , or could tilt his chair to one side so that he could move into the rear of the aircraft . There was no cockpit floor below the pilot 's feet — the rudder pedals being on arms — giving very good visibility below . Sliding and removable panels were manufactured into the nose glazing to allow the pilot , navigator and or bomb aimer to exit the aircraft quickly , without a time @-@ consuming retreat into the fuselage . 
 The fuselage contained two major bulkheads . The cockpit was at the front of the first bulkhead . The nose was fitted with a rotating machine gun mount which was offset to allow the pilot a better field of forward vision . The cockpit was fully glazed , with the exception of the lower right section , which acted as a platform for the bombardier @-@ gunner to be positioned . The commonly @-@ used <unk> @-@ series bombsight penetrated through the cockpit floor into a protective housing on the external side of the cockpit area . 
 Between the forward and rear bulkhead was the bomb bay , which was constructed with a double @-@ frame to strengthen it for carrying the bomb load . The space between the bomb bay and rear bulkhead was used up by Funkgerät radio equipment and contained the dorsal and flexible casemate ventral gunner positions . The rear bulkhead contained a hatch which allowed access into the rest of the fuselage which was held together by a series of stringers . The wing was a two spar design . The fuselage was formed of stringers to which the fuselage skin was riveted . Internally the frames were fixed only to the stringers which made for simpler construction but at the loss of some rigidity . 
 The wings ' leading edges were swept back to a point inline with the engine nacelles , while the trailing edges were angled forward slightly . The wing contained two 700 L ( 190 US gal ) fuel tanks between the inner wing main spars , while at the head of the main spar the oil coolers were fitted . Between the outer spars , a second pair of reserve fuel tanks were located carrying an individual capacity of 910 L ( 240 US gal ) of fuel . The outer trailing edges were formed by the ailerons and flaps , which were met by smooth wing tips which curved forward into the leading edge . The outer leading edge sections were installed in the shape of a curved " strip nosed " rib , which was positioned ahead of the main spar . Most of the interior ribs were not solid , with the exception of the ribs located between the rear main spar and the flaps and ailerons . This was of solid construction , though even they had lightening holes . 
 The control systems also had some innovations . The control column was centrally placed and the pilot sat on the port side of the cockpit . The column had an extension arm fitted and had the ability to be swung over to the starboard side in case the pilot was incapacitated . The control instruments were located above the pilot 's head in the ceiling which allowed viewing and did not block the pilot 's vision . The fuel instruments were electrified . The He 111 used the inner fuel tanks closest to the wing root . The outer tanks acted as reserve tanks . The pilot was alerted to the fuel level when the tank had 100 L ( 26 US gal ) left . A manual pump was available in case of electrical or power failure , but the delivery rate of just 4 ½ L ( 1 @.@ 2 US gal ) per minute demanded that the pilot fly at the lowest possible speed and just below 3 @,@ 048 m ( 10 @,@ 000 ft ) . Fortunately , the He 111 handled well at low speeds . 
 The defensive machine gun positions were located in the glass nose , the flexible ventral , dorsal and lateral positions in the fuselage , and all offered a significant field of fire . The design of the nose allowed the machine gun position to be moved 10 ° upwards from the horizontal and 15 ° downwards . The gun could traverse some 30 ° laterally . Both the dorsal and ventral machine guns could move up and downwards by 65 ° . The dorsal position could move the 13 mm ( .51 in ) MG 131 machine gun 40 ° laterally , but the ventral Bola @-@ mount 7 @.@ 92 mm ( .312 in ) twinned @-@ up MG 81Z machine guns could be moved 45 ° laterally . Each MG 81 single machine gun mounted in the side of the fuselage in " waist " positions , could move laterally by 40 ° , and could move upwards from the horizontal by 30 ° and downwards by 40 ° . 
 = = Early civilian variants = = 
 = = = He 111C = = = 
 The first prototype , He 111 V1 ( W.Nr. 713 , D @-@ <unk> ) , first flew from Rostock @-@ Marienehe on 24 February 1935 . It was followed by the civilian @-@ equipped V2 and V4 in May 1935 . The V2 ( W.Nr. 715 , D @-@ <unk> ) used the bomb bay as a four @-@ seat " smoking compartment " , with another six seats behind it in the rear fuselage . V2 entered service with Deutsche Luft Hansa in 1936 , along with six other newly built versions known as the He 111C . The He 111 V4 was unveiled to the foreign press on 10 January 1936 . Nazi propaganda inflated the performance of the He 111C , announcing its maximum speed as 400 km / h ( 249 mph ) , in reality its performance standing at 360 km / h ( 224 mph ) . The He 111 C @-@ 0 was a commercial version and took the form of the V4 prototype design . The first machine , designated D @-@ <unk> " Dresden " . It was powered by the BMW VI engine and could manage a range ( depending on the fuel capacity ) of 1 @,@ 000 km ( 621 mi ) to 2 @,@ 200 km ( 1 @,@ 367 mi ) and a maximum speed of 310 km / h ( 193 mph ) . The wing span on the C series was 22 @.@ 6 m ( 74 ft 1 ¾ in ) . The fuselage dimensions stood at 17 @.@ 1 m ( 56 ft 1 ¾ in ) in the He 111 V1 , but changed in the C to 17 @.@ 5 m ( 57 ft 5 in ) . The Jumo 205 diesel @-@ type powerplant engine replaced the BMW VI . Nevertheless , the maximum speed remained in the 220 – 240 km / h ( 137 – 149 mph ) bracket . This was increased slightly when the BMW 132 engines were introduced . 
 A general problem existed in powerplants . The He 111 was equipped with BMW VI glycol @-@ cooled engines . The German aviation industry lacked powerplants that could produce more than 600 hp . Engines of suitable quality were kept for military use , frustrating German airline Luft Hansa and forcing it to rely on the BMW VI or <unk> . 
 = = = He 111G = = = 
 The He 111G was an upgraded variant and had a number of differences to its predecessors . To simplify production the leading edge of the wing was straightened , like the bomber version . Quite a few different engine types were used , among them the BMW 132 , BMW VI , DB 600 and DB601A . Some C variants had been upgraded with the new wing modifications . A new BMW <unk> engine was also used in a so @-@ called <unk> ( unitary powerplant ) . These radial engines were used in the Junkers Ju 90 and the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 200 . The wing units and engines were packed together as complete operating systems , allowing for a quick change of engine . The He 111G was the most powerful as well as the fastest commercial version . The G @-@ 0 was given the BMW VI 6 @.@ 0 ZU . Later variants had their powerplants vary . The G @-@ 3 for example was equipped with the BMW 132 . The G @-@ 4 was powered by <unk> inverted @-@ vee 950 hp ( 710 kW ) engines and the G @-@ 5 was given the <unk> with a top speed of 410 km / h ( 255 mph ) . By early 1937 , eight G variants were in Lufthansa service . The maximum number of He 111s in Lufthansa service was 12 . The He 111 operated all over Europe and flew flights as far away as South Africa . Commercial development ended with the He 111G . 
 = = Military variants = = 
 = = = He 111 A - D = = = 
 The initial reports from the test pilot , Gerhard Nitschke , were favourable . The He 111 's flight performance and handling were impressive although it dropped its wing in the stall . As a result , the passenger variants had their wings reduced from 25 m ( 82 ft ) to 23 m ( 75 ft ) . The military aircraft - V1 , V3 and V5 - spanned just 22 @.@ 6 m ( 74 @.@ 1 ft ) . The prototypes were equipped with 431 kW ( 578 hp ) BMW VI 6 @.@ 0 V12 in @-@ line engines , succeeded <unk> kW ( 999 hp ) DB 600 engines . 
 The first prototypes were underpowered , as they were equipped with 431 kW ( 578 hp ) BMW VI 6 @.@ 0 V12 in @-@ line engines . This was eventually increased to 745 kW ( 999 hp ) with the fitting of the DB ( Daimler @-@ Benz ) 600 engines into the V5 , which became the prototype of the " B " series . 
 Only 10 He 111 A @-@ 0 models based on the V3 were built , but they proved to be underpowered and were eventually sold to China . The type had been lengthened by 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) due to the added 7 @.@ 92 mm ( .312 in ) MG 15 machine gun in the nose . Another gun position was installed on top of the fuselage , and another in a ventral position as a " dustbin " exposed turret , which could retract . The bomb bay was divided into two compartments and could carry 680 kg ( 1 @,@ 500 lb ) of bombs . The problem with these additions was that the weight of the aircraft reached 8 @,@ 200 kg ( 18 @,@ 080 lb ) . The He 111 's performance was seriously reduced ; in particular , the BMW VI 6 @.@ 0 Z engines were not now powerful enough . The increased length also altered the 111 's aerodynamic strengths and reduced its excellent handling on takeoffs and landings . 
 The crews found the aircraft difficult to fly , and its top speed was reduced significantly . Production was shut down after the pilots reports reached the Ministry of Aviation . However , a Chinese delegation was visiting Germany and they considered the He 111 A @-@ 0 fit for their needs and purchased seven machines . 
 The first He 111B made its maiden flight in the autumn of 1936 . The first production batch rolled off the production lines that summer , at Rostock . Seven B @-@ 0 pre @-@ production aircraft were built , bearing the <unk> ( Works numbers ) 1431 to 1437 . The B @-@ 0s were powered by DB 600C engines fitted with variable pitch <unk> . The screws increased output by 149 kW ( 200 hp ) . The B @-@ 0 had a MG 15 machine gun installed in the nose . The B @-@ 0 could also carry 1 @,@ 500 kg ( 3 @,@ 310 lb ) in their vertical cells . The B @-@ 1 had some minor improvements . The installation of the revolving gun @-@ mount in the nose and a flexible <unk> turret under the fuselage . After improvements , the RLM ordered 300 He 111 B @-@ 1s ; the first were delivered in January 1937 . In the B @-@ 2 variant , engines were upgraded to the supercharged 634 kW ( 850 hp ) DB 600C , or in some cases , the 690 kW ( 925 hp ) <unk> . The B @-@ 2 began to roll off the production lines at Oranienburg in 1937 . The He 111 B @-@ 3 was a modified trainer . Some 255 B @-@ 1s were ordered . However , the production orders were impossible to fulfill and only 28 B @-@ 1s were built . Owing to the production of the new He 111E , only a handful of He 111 B @-@ 3s were produced . Due to insufficient capacity , Dornier , Arado and Junkers built the He 111B series at their plants in Wismar , Brandenburg and Dessau , respectively . The B series compared favourably with the capacity of the A series . The bomb load increased to 1 @,@ 500 kg ( 3 @,@ 300 lb ) , while there was also an increase in maximum speed and altitude to 215 mph ( 344 km / h ) and 22 @,@ 000 ft ( 6 @,@ 700 m ) 
 In late 1937 , the D @-@ 1 series entered production . However , the DB <unk> engine with 781 kW ( 1 @,@ 047 hp ) planned for this variant was instead allocated to Messerschmitt Bf 109 and Bf 110 production lines . Heinkel then opted to use Junkers Jumo engines , and the He 111 V6 was tested with Jumo 210 G engines , but was judged underpowered . However , the improved 745 kW ( 999 hp ) Jumo 211 A @-@ 1 powerplant prompted the cancellation of the D series altogether and concentration on the design of the E series . 
 = = = He 111 E = = = 
 The pre @-@ production E @-@ 0 series were built in small numbers . Fitted with Jumo 211 A @-@ 1 engines loaded with retractable radiators and exhaust systems . The variant could carry 1 @,@ 700 kg ( 3 @,@ 748 lb ) of bombs giving it a take off weight of 10 @.@ 300 kg ( 22 @,@ 707 lbs ) . The development team for the Jumo 211 A @-@ 1 engines managed to increase engine power to 930 hp ( 690 kW ) , subsequently the He 111 E @-@ 1s bomb load capacity increased to 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 410 lb ) and a top speed of 242 mph ( 390 km / h ) . 
 The E @-@ 1 variant with Jumo 211A @-@ 1 engines was developed in 1937 , the He 111 V6 being the first production variant . The E @-@ 1 had its original powerplant , the DB 600 replaced with the Jumo 210 Ga engines . The more powerful Jumo 211 A @-@ 1 engines desired by the Ministry of Aviation were not yet ready for installation . Another trial aircraft , He 111 V10 ( D @-@ <unk> ) was to be fitted with two oil coolers necessary for the Jumo 211 A @-@ 1 installation . 
 The E @-@ 1s came off the production line in February 1938 , in time for a number of these aircraft to serve in the Condor Legion during the Spanish Civil War in March 1938 . The RLM thought that because the E variant could outrun enemy fighters in Spain , there was no need to upgrade the defensive weaponry , which would prove a mistaken in later years . 
 The fuselage bomb bay used four bomb racks , in later versions eight modular standard bomb racks designed to carry one SC 250 kg ( 550 lb ) bomb or four SC 50 kg ( 110 lb ) bombs each in nose up orientation . These modular standard bomb racks were a common feature on the first generation of Luftwaffe bombers , but it turned out that they limited the ordnance selection to bombs of only two sizes . These racks were abandoned in later designs . 
 The E @-@ 2 series was not produced , and was dropped in favour of producing the E @-@ 3 with only a few modifications , such as external bomb racks . Its design features were distinguished by improved FuG radio systems . The E @-@ 3 series was equipped with the Jumo 211 A @-@ 3 for the duration of the series which packed 1 @,@ 100 hp ( 820 kW ) . 
 The E @-@ 4 variant was fitted with external bomb racks also and the empty bomb bay space was filled with an 835 L ( 221 US gal ) tank for aviation fuel and a further 115 L ( 30 US gal ) oil tank . This increased the loaded weight but increased range to 1 @,@ 800 km ( 1 @,@ 130 mi ) . The modifications allowed the He 111 to perform both long- and short @-@ range missions . The E @-@ 4s eight internal vertically aligned bomb racks could each carry a 250 kg ( 550 lb ) . The last E Variant , the He 111 E @-@ 5 , was powered by the Jumo 211 A @-@ 3 , and retained the 835 L ( 221 US gal ) fuel tank on the port side of the bomb bay . Only a few of the E @-@ 4 and E @-@ 5 were built . 
 The RLM had acquired an interest in rocket boosters fitted for the sake of simplicity below the wings of a heavily loaded bomber to cut down the length of runway needed for takeoff . Once in the air the booster canisters would be jettisoned by parachute for reuse . The firm of Hellmuth Walter , at Kiel , handled this development . The first standing trials and tests flights of the Walter HWK 109 @-@ 500 <unk> liquid @-@ fueled boosters were held in 1937 at <unk> with test pilot Erich <unk> at the controls of Heinkel He 111E bearing civil registration D @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = He 111 F = = = 
 The He 111 design quickly ran through a series of minor design revisions . One of the more obvious changes started with the He 111F models , which moved from the elliptical wing to one with straight leading and trailing edges , which could be manufactured more efficiently . The dimensions of the new design had a wing span of <unk> ( 74 ft 1 ¾ in ) and an area of <unk> ² ( 942 @.@ 90 ft ) . 
 Heinkel 's industrial capacity was limited and production was delayed . Nevertheless , 24 machines of the F @-@ 1 series were exported to Turkey . Another 20 of the F @-@ 2 variant were built . The Turkish interest , prompted by the fact the tests of the next prototype , He 111 V8 , was some way off , prompted the Ministry of Aviation to order 40 F @-@ 4s with Jumo 211 A @-@ 3 engines . These machines were built and entered service in early 1938 . This fleet was used as a transport group during the Demyansk Pocket and Battle of Stalingrad . At this time , development began on the He <unk> . It was powered by the DB 600 and was intended as a torpedo bomber . As a result , it lacked an internal bomb bay and carried two external torpedo racks . The Ministry of Aviation gave an order for the bomb bay to be retrofitted ; this variant became known as the J @-@ 1 . In all but the powerplant , it was identical to the F @-@ 4 . 
 The final variant of the F series was the F @-@ 5 , with bombsight and powerplants identical to the E @-@ 5 . The F @-@ 5 was rejected as a production variant owing to the superior performance of the He 111 P @-@ 1 . 
 = = = He 111 J = = = 
 The He 111 's low @-@ level performance attracted the interest of the Kriegsmarine . The result was the He <unk> , was capable of carrying torpedoes and mines . However , the navy eventually dropped the program as they deemed the four @-@ man crew too expensive in terms of manpower . The RLM nevertheless continued production of the He 111 J @-@ 0 . Some 90 ( other sources claim 60 ) were built in 1938 and were then sent to <unk> 806 ( Coastal Flying Group ) . Powered by the DB <unk> engines , it could carry a 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 410 lb ) payload . But few of the pre @-@ production J @-@ 0s were fitted with the powerplant . Instead , the DB 600 was used , performance deteriorated and the torpedo bomber was not pursued . The J variants were used in training schools until 1944 . Some J @-@ 1s were utilised used as test beds for Blohm & Voss L 10 radio @-@ guided air @-@ to @-@ ground torpedo missiles . 
 = = = He 111 P = = = 
 The He 111P incorporated the updated Daimler @-@ Benz DB <unk> @-@ 1 liquid @-@ cooled engine and featured a newly designed nose section , including an asymmetric mounting for an MG 15 machine gun that replaced the ' stepped ' cockpit with a roomier and more aerodynamic glazed <unk> cockpit over the entire front of the aircraft . This smooth glazed nose was first tested on the He 111 V8 in January 1938 . These improvements allowed the aircraft to reach 475 km / h ( 295 mph ) at 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 400 ft ) and a cruise speed of 370 km / h ( 230 mph ) , although a full bomb load reduced this figure to 300 km / h ( 190 mph ) . The design was implemented in 1937 because pilot reports indicated problems with visibility . The pilot 's seat could actually be elevated , with the pilot 's eyes above the level of the upper glazing , complete with a small pivoted windscreen panel , to get the pilot 's head above the level of the top of the " glass tunnel " for a better forward view for takeoffs and landings . The rear @-@ facing dorsal gun position , enclosed with a sliding , near @-@ clear view canopy , and for the first time , the ventral <unk> rear @-@ facing gun position , immediately aft of the bomb bay , that replaced the draggy " dustbin " retractable emplacement became standard , having been first flown on the He 111 <unk> , bearing civil registration D @-@ <unk> . 
 One of Heinkel 's rivals , Junkers , built 40 He <unk> at Dessau . In October 1938 , the Junkers Central Administration commented : 
 Apparent are the externally poor , less carefully designed components at various locations , especially at the junction between the empennage and the rear fuselage . All parts have an impression of being very weak .... The visible flexing in the wing must also be very high . The left and right powerplants are interchangeable . Each motor has an exhaust @-@ gas heater on one side , but it is not connected to the fuselage since it is probable that ... the warm air in the fuselage is not free of carbon monoxide ( CO ) . The fuselage is not subdivided into individual segments , but is attached over its entire length , after completion , to the wing centre section . Outboard of the powerplants , the wings are attached by universal joints . The latter can in no way be satisfactory and have been the cause of several failures . 
 The new design was powered by the DB 601 Ba engine with 1 @,@ 175 PS The first production aircraft reached Luftwaffe units in Fall 1938 . In May 1939 , the P @-@ 1 and P @-@ 2 went into service with improved radio equipment . The P @-@ 1 variant was produced with two DB <unk> powerplants of 1 @,@ 150 hp ( 860 kW ) . It had self @-@ sealing fuel tanks . The P @-@ 1 featured a semi @-@ retractable tail wheel to decrease drag . Armament consisted of a MG 15 in the nose , and a sliding hood for the fuselage 's dorsal B @-@ Stand position . Installation of upgraded FuG III radio communication devices were also made and a new ESAC @-@ 250 / III vertical bomb magazine was added . The overall takeoff weight was now 13 @,@ 300 kg ( 29 @,@ 321 lb ) . 
 The P @-@ 2 , like the later P @-@ 4 , was given stronger armour and two MG 15 machine guns in " waist " mounts on either side of the fuselage and two external bomb racks . Radio communications consisted of FuG <unk> radios and the <unk> A @-@ 1 replaced the <unk> powerplants . The <unk> 7 bombsights , which became the standard bombsight for German bombers , were also fitted to the P @-@ 2 . The P @-@ 2 was also given " field equipment sets " to upgrade the weak defensive armament to four or five MG 15 machine guns . The P @-@ 2 had its bomb capacity raised to 4 ESA @-@ 250 / IX vertical magazines . The P @-@ 2 thus had an empty weight of 6 @,@ 202 kg ( 13 @,@ 272 lb ) , a loaded weight increased to 12 @,@ 570 kg ( 27 @,@ 712 lb ) and a maximum range of 2 @,@ 100 km ( 1 @,@ 305 mi ) . 
 The P @-@ 3 was powered with the same DB601A @-@ 1 engines . The aircraft was also designed to take off with a land catapult ( KL @-@ 12 ) . A towing hook was added to the fuselage under the cockpit for the cable . Just eight examples were produced , all without bomb equipment . 
 The P @-@ 4 contained many changes from the P @-@ 2 and P @-@ 3 . The jettisonable loads were capable of considerable variation . Two external SC 1800 kg ( 3 @,@ 960 lb ) bombs , two LMA air @-@ dropped anti @-@ shipping mines , one SC 1 @,@ 800 kg plus four SC 250 kg ; or one SC 2 @,@ 500 kg external bomb could be carried on an ETC <unk> rack . Depending on the load variation , an 835 L fuel and 120 L oil tank could be added in place of the internal bomb bay . The armament consisted of three defensive MG 15 machine <unk> later supplemented by a further three MG 15s and one MG 17 machine gun . The radio communications were standard FuG X ( 10 ) , Peil G V direction finding and FuBI radio devices . Because of the increase in defensive firepower , the crew numbers increased from four to five . The empty weight of the P @-@ 4 increased to 6 @,@ 775 kg ( 14 @,@ 936 lb ) , and the full takeoff weight increased to 13 @,@ 500 kg ( 29 @,@ 762 lb ) owing to the mentioned alterations . 
 The P @-@ 5 was powered by the DB601A . The variant was mostly used as a trainer and at least twenty @-@ four production variants were produced before production ceased . The P @-@ 5 was fitted with meteorological equipment , and was used in Luftwaffe weather units . 
 Many of the He 111 Ps served during the Polish Campaign . With the Junkers Ju 88 experiencing technical difficulties , the He 111 and the Do 17 formed the backbone of the <unk> . On 1 September 1939 , Luftwaffe records indicate the Heinkel strength at 705 ( along with 533 Dorniers ) . 
 The P @-@ 6 variant was the last production model of the He 111 P series . In 1940 , the Ministry of Aviation abandoned further production of the P series in favour of the H versions , mostly because the P @-@ series ' Daimler @-@ Benz engines were needed for Messerschmitt Bf 109 and Bf 110 fighter production . The remaining P @-@ 6s were redesignated P @-@ 6 / <unk> and used as heavy glider tugs . The most notable difference with previous variants was the upgraded DB <unk> powerplants . 
 The P @-@ 7 variant 's history is unclear . The P @-@ 8 was said to have been similar to the H @-@ 5 fitted with dual controls . The P @-@ 9 was produced as an export variant for the Hungarian Air Force . Due to the lack of DB <unk> engines , the series was terminated in summer 1940 . 
 = = He 111H and its variants = = 
 = = = He 111 H @-@ 1 to H @-@ 10 = = = 
 The H variant of the He 111 series was more widely produced and saw more action during World War II than any other Heinkel variant . Owing to the uncertainty surrounding the delivery and availability of the DB 601 engines , Heinkel switched to <unk> kW ( 1 @,@ 100 hp ) Junkers Jumo 211 powerplants , whose somewhat greater size and weight were regarded as unimportant considerations in a twin @-@ engine design . When the Jumo was fitted to the P model it became the He 111 H. 
 The He 111 H @-@ 1 was fitted with a standard set of three 7 @.@ 92 mm ( .312 in ) MG 15 machine guns and eight SC 250 250 kg ( 550 lb ) or 32 SC 50 50 kg ( 110 lb ) bombs . The same armament was used in the H @-@ 2 which started production in August 1939 . The P @-@ series was gradually replaced on the eve of war with the new the H @-@ 2 , powered by improved Jumo 211 A @-@ 3 engines of 820 kW ( 1 @,@ 100 hp ) . A count on 2 September 1939 revealed that the Luftwaffe had a total of 787 He 111s in service , with 705 combat ready , including 400 H @-@ 1 and H @-@ 2s that had been produced in a mere four months . Production of the H @-@ 3 , powered by the 895 kW ( 1 @,@ 200 hp ) Jumo 211 D @-@ 1 , began in October 1939 . Experiences during the Polish Campaign led to an increase in defensive armament . MG 17s were fitted whenever possible and the number of machine guns was increased to seven . The two waist positions received an additional MG 15 or 17 , and on some variants a belt @-@ fed MG 17 was even installed in the tail . 
 After the Battle of Britain , smaller scale production of the H @-@ 4s began . The H @-@ 4 was virtually identical to the He 111 P @-@ 4 with the DB 600s swapped for the Jumo 211D @-@ 1s . Some also used the Jumo <unk> @-@ 1 . This variant also differed from the H @-@ 3 in that it could either carry 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 410 lb ) of bombs internally or mount one or two external racks to carry one 1 @,@ 800 kg ( 3 @,@ 970 lb ) or two 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 210 lb ) bombs . As these external racks blocked the internal bomb bay doors , a combination of internal and external storage was not possible . A PVR <unk> bomb rack was fitted externally and an 835 L ( 221 US gal ) tank added to the interior spaces left vacant by the removal of the internal bomb @-@ bay . The PVR <unk> was capable of carrying a SC 1000 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 210 lb ) bomb . Some H @-@ 4s had their PVC racks modified to drop torpedoes . Later modifications enabled the PVC 1006 to carry a 2 @,@ 500 kg ( 5 @,@ 510 lb ) " Max " bomb . But 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) " Hermann " or 1 @,@ 800 kg ( 3 @,@ 970 lb ) " <unk> " were used more widely . 
 The H @-@ 5 series followed in February 1941 , with heavier defensive armament . Like the H @-@ 4 , it retained a PVC 1006 L bomb rack to enable it to carry heavy bombs under the fuselage . The first ten He 111 H @-@ 5s were pathfinders , and selected for special missions . The aircraft sometimes carried 25 kg flashlight bombs which acted as flares . The H @-@ 5 could also carry heavy fire bombs , either heavy containers or smaller incendiary devices attached to parachutes . The H @-@ 5 also carried LM A and LM B aerial mines for anti @-@ shipping operations . After the 80th production aircraft , the PVC 1006 L bomb rack was removed and replaced with a heavy @-@ duty ETC 2000 rack , enabling the H @-@ 5 to carry the SC 2500 " Max " bomb , on the external ETC 2000 rack , which enabled it to support the 5 @,@ 000 lb ( 2 @,@ 300 kg ) bomb . 
 Some H @-@ 3 and H @-@ 4s were equipped with barrage balloon cable @-@ cutting equipment in the shape of cutter installations forward of the engines and cockpit . They were designated H @-@ 8 , but later named H8 / R2 . These aircraft were difficult to fly and production stopped . The H @-@ 6 initiated some overall improvements in design . The Jumo 211 F @-@ 1 engine of 1 @,@ 007 kW ( 1 @,@ 350 hp ) increased its speed while the defensive armament was upgraded with one 20 mm MG FF cannon in the nose position , one MG 15 in the ventral turret , and in each of the fuselage side windows ( optional ) . Some H @-@ 6 variants carried tail @-@ mounted MG 17 defensive armament . The performance of the H @-@ 6 was much improved . The climb rate was higher and the machine could reach a slightly higher ceiling of 8 @,@ 500 m ( 27 @,@ 200 ft ) . When heavy bomb loads were added , this ceiling was reduced to 6 @,@ 500 m ( 20 @,@ 800 ft ) . The weight of the H @-@ 6 increased to 14 @,@ 000 kg ( 30 @,@ 600 lb ) . Some H @-@ 6s received Jumo 211F @-@ 2s which improved a low @-@ level speed of 226 mph ( 365 km / h ) . At an altitude of 6 @,@ 000 m ( 19 @,@ 200 ft ) the maximum speed was 270 mph ( 435 km / h ) . If heavy external loads were added , the speed was reduced by 21 @.@ 75 mph ( 35 km / h ) . 
 Other designs of the mid @-@ H series included the He 111 H @-@ 7 and H @-@ 8 . The airframes were to be rebuilds of the H @-@ 3 / H @-@ 5 variant . Both were designed as night bombers and were to have two Jumo 211F @-@ 1s installed . The intention was for the H @-@ 8 to be fitted with cable @-@ cutting equipment and barrage <unk> deflectors on the leading edge of the wings . The H @-@ 7 was never built . 
 The H @-@ 9 was intended as a trainer with dual control columns . The airframe was a H @-@ 1 variant rebuild . The powerplants consisted of two <unk> @-@ 1s or D @-@ 1s . The H @-@ 10 was also designated to trainer duties . Rebuilt from an H @-@ 2 or H @-@ 3 airframe , it was installed with full defensive armament including 13 mm ( .51 in ) MG 131 and 7 @.@ 92 mm ( .312 in ) MG 81Z machine guns . It was to be powered by two Jumo 211A @-@ 1s , D @-@ 1s or F @-@ 2s . 
 = = = Later H variants , H @-@ 11 to H @-@ 20 = = = 
 In the summer of 1942 , the H @-@ 11 , based on the H @-@ 3 was introduced . With the H @-@ 11 , the Luftwaffe had at its disposal a powerful medium bomber with heavier armour and revised defensive armament . The drum @-@ fed 7 @.@ 92 mm ( .312 in ) MG 15 was replaced with a belt @-@ fed 13 mm ( .51 in ) MG 131 in the now fully enclosed dorsal position ( B @-@ Stand ) ; the gunner in the latter was now protected with armoured glass . The single MG 15 in the ventral C @-@ Stand or Bola was also replaced , with a belt @-@ fed 7 @.@ 92 mm ( .312 in ) MG 81Z with much higher rate of fire . The beam positions originally retained the single MG 15s , but the H @-@ 11 / R1 replaced these with twin MG 81Z as well ; this latter arrangement was standardized in November 1942 . The port internal ESAC bomb racks could be removed , and an 835 L ( 221 US gal ) fuel tanks installed in its place . Many H @-@ 11s were equipped with a new PVC rack under the fuselage , which carried five 250 kg ( 550 lb ) bombs . Additional armour plating was fitted around crew spaces , some of it on the lower fuselage and could be jettisoned in an emergency . Engines were two 1 @,@ 000 kW ( 1 @,@ 340 hp ) Junkers Jumo 211F @-@ 2 , allowing this variant to carry a 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 410 lb ) payload to a range of 2 @,@ 340 km ( 1 @,@ 450 mi ) . Heinkel built 230 new aircraft of this type and converted 100 H @-@ 3s to H @-@ 11s by the summer of 1943 . 
 The third mass production model of the He 111H was the H @-@ 16 , entering production in late 1942 . Armament was as on the H @-@ 11 , with some differences . The 20 mm MG FF cannon was deleted , as the H @-@ 16s were seldom employed on low @-@ level missions , was replaced with a single MG 131 in a flexible installation in the nose ( A @-@ Stand ) . On some aircraft , designated He 111 H @-@ 16 / R1 , the dorsal position was replaced by a Drehlafette DL 131 electrically powered turret , armed with a single MG 131 . The two beam and the aft ventral positions were provided with MG <unk> , as on the H @-@ 11 . The two 1 @,@ 000 kW ( 1 @,@ 340 hp ) Jumo 211 F @-@ 2 provided a maximum speed of 434 km / h ( 270 mph ) at 6 @,@ 000 m ( 19 @,@ 690 ft ) ; cruising speed was 390 km / h ( 242 mph ) , service ceiling was 8 @,@ 500 m ( 27 @,@ 900 ft ) <unk> ( FuG ) radio equipment . FuG 10P , FuG 16 , <unk> Z and <unk> 6 were fitted for communication and navigation at night , while some aircraft received the FuG <unk> radio altimeter . The H @-@ 16 retained its eight ESAC internal bomb cells ; four bomb cells , as on previous versions could be replaced by a fuel tank to increase range . ETC 2000 racks could be installed over the bomb cell openings for external weapons carriage . Empty weight was 6 @,@ 900 kg ( 15 @,@ 210 lb ) and the aircraft weighed 14 @,@ 000 kg ( 30 @,@ 860 lb ) fully loaded for take off . German factories built 1 @,@ 155 H @-@ 16s between the end of 1942 and the end of 1943 ; in addition , 280 H @-@ 6s and 35 H @-@ 11s were updated to H @-@ 16 standard . An undetermined number of H variants were fitted with the FuG 200 Hohentwiel . The radar was adapted as an anti @-@ shipping detector for day or night operations . 
 The last major production variant was the H @-@ 20 , which entered into production in early 1944 . It was planned to use two 1 @,@ 305 kW ( 1 @,@ 750 hp ) Junkers Jumo <unk> @-@ 1 engines , turning three @-@ blade , Junkers VS 11 wooden @-@ bladed variable @-@ pitch propellers . It would appear this plan was never developed fully . Though the later H @-@ 22 was given the E @-@ 1 , the F @-@ 2 remained the H @-@ 20s main power plant . Heinkel and its licensees built 550 H @-@ 20s through the summer of 1944 , while 586 H @-@ 6s were upgraded to H @-@ 20 standard . 
 In contrast to the H @-@ 11 and H @-@ 16 the H @-@ 20 , equipped with two Jumo 211F @-@ 2s , had more powerful armament and radio communications . The defensive armament consisted of one MG 131 in an A @-@ Stand gun pod for the forward mounted machine gun position . One rotatable Drehlafette DL 131 / 1C ( or E ) gun mount in the B @-@ stand was standard and later MG 131 machine guns were added . Navigational direction @-@ finding gear was also installed . The Peil G6 was added to locate targets and the FuBI 2H blind landing equipment was built in to help with night operations . The radio was a standard FuG 10 , <unk> 10 and FuG <unk> for navigating to the target . The H @-@ 20 also was equipped with barrage balloon cable @-@ cutters . The bomb load of the H @-@ 20 could be mounted on external ETC 1000 racks , or four ESAC 250 racks . The sub variant H @-@ 20 / R4 could carry 20 50 kg ( 110 lb ) bombs as external loads . 
 = = = He 111Z = = = 
 The He 111Z <unk> was a design that entailed the merging of two He 111s . The design was originally conceived to tow the Messerschmitt Me 321 glider . Initially , four He 111 H @-@ 6s were modified . This resulted in a twin @-@ fuselage , five @-@ engine aircraft . They were tested at Rechlin in 1941 , and the pilots rated them highly . A batch of 10 were produced and five were built from existing H @-@ 6s . The machines were joined by a centre wing formed by two sections 6 @.@ 15 m ( 20 ft ) in length . The powerplants were five Jumo 211F engines at 1 @,@ 000 kW ( 1 @,@ 340 hp ) each . Total fuel capacity was 8 @,@ 570 L ( 2 @,@ 260 US gal ) . This was increased with the addition of four 600 L ( 160 US gal ) drop tanks . It could tow a Gotha Go 242 glider or Me 321 for up to 10 hours at cruising speed . It could also remain airborne if the three central powerplants failed . The He 111 Z @-@ 2s and Z @-@ 3s were also planned as heavy bombers carrying 1 @,@ 800 kg ( 3 @,@ 970 lb ) of bombs and having a range of 4 @,@ 000 km ( 2 @,@ 500 mi ) . The ETC extensions allowed for a further four 600 L ( 160 US gal ) drop tanks to be installed . 
 The He 111 Z @-@ 2 could carry four Henschel Hs 293 anti @-@ shipping guided missiles , which were guided by the FuG <unk> Kehl III missile control equipment . With this load the He 111Z had a range of 1 @,@ 094 km ( 680 mi ) and a speed of 314 km / h ( 195 mph ) . Its maximum bombload was 7 @,@ 200 kg ( 15 @,@ 870 lb ) . To increase power the five Jumo 211F @-@ 2 powerplants were to be fitted with Hirth TK 11 superchargers . The armament was the same as the H @-@ 6 with the addition of one 20 mm MG 151 / 20 in a rotating gun @-@ mount on the centre section . The variant did not display any convincing ( stable ) flight performance . 
 The layout of the He 111Z had the pilot and his controls in the port fuselage only . Only the controls themselves and essential equipment remaining in the starboard section . The aircraft had a crew of seven ; a pilot , first mechanic , radio operator and gunner in the port fuselage , and the observer , second mechanic and gunner in the starboard fuselage . 
 The Z @-@ 3 was to be a reconnaissance version and was to have additional fuel tanks increasing its range to 6 @,@ 000 km ( 3 @,@ 730 mi ) . Production was due to take place in 1944 , just as bomber production was being abandoned . The long @-@ range variant designs failed to come to fruition . The He 111Z was to have been used in an invasion of Malta in 1942 and as part of an airborne assault on the Soviet cities Astrakhan and Baku in the Caucasus in the same year . During the Battle of Stalingrad their use was cancelled due to insufficient airfield capacity . Later in 1943 it helped evacuate German equipment and personnel from the Caucasus region and during the Allied invasion of Sicily attempted to deliver reinforcements to the island . 
 During operations , the He 111Z did not have enough power to lift a fully loaded Me 321 . The He 111s in <unk> ( rocket assisted takeoff ) units were supplemented by rocket pods . Two were mounted beneath each fuselage and one underneath each wing . This added 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) in weight , but gave additional thrust to the engines . The pods were then released by parachute after takeoff . 
 The He 111Z 's operational history was minimal . One such machine was caught by RAF fighter aircraft over France on 14 March 1944 . The He 111Z was towing a Gotha Go 242 , and was shot down . Eight were shot down or destroyed on the ground in 1944 . 
 = = Production = = 
 To meet demand for numbers , Heinkel constructed a factory at Oranienburg . On 4 May 1936 , construction began , and exactly one year later the first He 111 rolled off the production line . The Ministry of Aviation Luftwaffe administration office suggested that Ernst Heinkel lend his name to the factory . The " Ernst Heinkel GmbH " was established with a share capital of 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Reichsmarks ( RM ) . Heinkel was given a 150 @,@ 000 RM share . The factory itself was built by , and belonged to , the German state . 
 From this production plant , 452 He 111s and 69 Junkers Ju 88s were built in the first year of the war . German production for the Luftwaffe amounted to 808 He 111s by September 1939 . According to Heinkel 's memoirs , a further 452 were built in 1939 , giving a total of 1 @,@ 260 . But " 1940s production suffered extreme losses during the Battle of Britain , with 756 bombers lost " . Meanwhile , the He 111 's rival - the Ju 88 - had increased production to 1 @,@ 816 aircraft , some 26 times the number from the previous year . Losses were also considerable the previous year over the Balkans and Eastern Fronts . To compensate , He 111 production was increased to 950 in 1941 . In 1942 , this increased further to 1 @,@ 337 He 111s . The Ju 88 production figures were even higher still , exceeding 3 @,@ 000 in 1942 , of which 2 @,@ 270 were bomber variants . In 1943 , He 111 increased to 1 @,@ 405 aircraft . But the Ju 88 still outnumbered it in production terms as its figures reached 2 @,@ 160 for 1943 . The Allied bomber offensives in 1944 and in particular Big Week failed to stop or damage production at Heinkel . Up until the last quarter of 1944 , 756 Heinkel He 111s had been built , while Junkers produced 3 @,@ 013 Ju 88s , of which 600 were bomber versions . During 1939 @-@ 1944 , a total of 5 @,@ 656 Heinkel He 111s were built compared to 9 @,@ 122 Ju 88s . As the Luftwaffe was now on the strategic defensive , bomber production and that of the He 111 was suspended . Production in September 1944 , the last production month for the He 111 , included 118 bombers . Of these 21 Junkers Ju 87s , 74 Junkers Ju <unk> , 3 Junkers Ju <unk> and 18 Arado Ar <unk> were built . Of the Heinkel variants , zero Heinkel He 177s were produced and just two Heinkel He 111s were built . 
 = = = Exports = = = 
 In 1937 , 24 He 111 F @-@ 1s were bought by the Turkish Air Force . The Turks also ordered four He 111 G @-@ 5s . China also ordered 12 He 111 A @-@ 0s , but at a cost 400 @,@ 000 Reichsmark ( RM ) . The aircraft were crated up and transported by sea . At the end of the Spanish Civil War , the Spanish Air Force acquired 59 He 111 " survivors " and a further six He 111s in 1941 @-@ 1943 . Bulgaria was given one He 111 H @-@ 6 , Romania received 10 E @-@ 3s , 32 H @-@ 3s and 10 H @-@ 6s . Two H @-@ 10s and three H @-@ 16s were given to Slovakia , Hungary was given 3 He <unk> and 12 @-@ 13 He 111s by 6 May 1941 . A further 80 P @-@ 1s were ordered , but only 13 arrived . Towards the end of 1944 , 12 He <unk> were delivered . The Japanese were due to receive 44 He <unk> , but in 1938 the agreement was cancelled . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 The Heinkel He 111 served on all the German military fronts in the European Theatre of World War II . Beginning the war as a medium bomber it supported the German campaigns in the field until 1943 when , owing to Western Allied and Soviet air superiority , it reverted to a transport aircraft role . 
 German @-@ built He 111s remained in service in Spain after the end of the Second World War , being supplemented by Spanish licence @-@ built CASA <unk> from 1950 . The last two German @-@ built aircraft remained in service until at least 1958 . 
 = = Variants = = 
 = = Operators = = 
 = = = Military operators = = = 
 Bulgaria 
 Bulgarian Air Force 
 China 
 Chinese Nationalist Air Force 
 Czechoslovakia 
 Czechoslovak Air Force operated one aircraft post @-@ war . 
 Germany 
 Luftwaffe 
 Hungary 
 Royal Hungarian Air Force 
 Romania 
 Royal Romanian Air Force 
 Slovakia 
 Slovak Air Force 
 Soviet Union 
 Soviet Air Forces operated several captured He 111s during World War II . 
 Spanish State 
 Spanish Air Force . 
 Turkey 
 Turkish Air Force operated 24 He 111F @-@ 1s , with first deliveries in 1937 , and remaining in use until 1944 . 
 United Kingdom 
 Royal Air Force operated various captured variants during and after the war for evaluation purposes i.e. to discover strengths and weaknesses . 
 United States 
 United States Army Air Forces operated several captured aircraft after the war . One pictured H @-@ 20 - 23 , may be the aircraft currently on display at the RAF Museum Hendon , minus the Drehlafette DL 131 turret . 
 = = = Civil operators = = = 
 China 
 Central Air Transport Corporation ( <unk> ) operated a single ex @-@ air force He 111A re @-@ fitted with Wright Cyclone radial engines . 
 Germany 
 Deutsche Luft Hansa operated 12 aircraft . 
 Romania 
 Unknown civilian user operated one converted bomber . The registration of the He 111 was YR @-@ <unk> . It is unknown whether this was a German or Romanian designation . Works , or factory number is unknown . 
 = = Survivors = = 
 Only four original German built He 111 survivors are on display or stored in museums around the world ( not including major sections ) : 
 He 111 E @-@ 3 ( code 25 + 82 ) , Wk Nr <unk> with the " conventional " cockpit is on display at the Museo del Aire , Madrid , Spain . 
 A mostly complete He 111 P @-@ 2 ( 5J + CN ) , Werknummer 1526 of <unk> / Kampfgeschwader 54 ( KG 54 — Bomber Wing 54 ) , is on display at the Royal Norwegian Air Force Museum at Gardermoen , part of the Norwegian Armed Forces Aircraft Collection . The 5J <unk> code on the aircraft is usually documented as being that of either I. Gruppe / KG 4 or KG 100 with B3 being KG 54 's equivalent code throughout the war . 
 A He 111 H @-@ 20 ( Stammkennzeichen of NT + SL ) , Wk Nr <unk> , a troop @-@ carrying version is on display at the RAF Museum Hendon , London . <unk> by USAAF pilots in France at the end of the war , it was left in Britain following the unit 's return to the US , and taken on by the RAF . 
 In 2005 , another He 111 was salvaged from a Norwegian lake and has since been moved to Germany for restoration . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 = = = He 111 H @-@ 6 = = = 
 Data from Heinkel He 111 : A Documentary History 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 5 ( pilot , navigator / bombardier / nose gunner , ventral gunner , dorsal gunner / radio operator , side gunner ) 
 Length : 16 @.@ 4 m ( 53 ft 9 ½ in ) 
 Wingspan : 22 @.@ 60 m ( 74 ft 2 in ) 
 Height : 4 @.@ 00 m ( 13 ft 1 ½ in ) 
 Wing area : 87 @.@ 60 m ² ( 942 @.@ 92 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 8 @,@ 680 kg ( <unk> lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 12 @,@ 030 kg ( 26 @,@ 500 lb ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 14 @,@ 000 kg ( 30 @,@ 864 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Jumo 211F @-@ 1 or 211F @-@ 2 liquid @-@ cooled inverted V @-@ 12 , 986 kW ( 1 @,@ 300 hp ( F @-@ 1 ) or 1 @,@ 340 ( F @-@ 2 ) ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 440 km / h ( 273 mph ) 
 Range : 2 @,@ 300 km ( 1 @,@ 429 mi ) with maximum fuel 
 Service ceiling : 6 @,@ 500 m ( 21 @,@ 330 ft ) 
 Rate of climb : 20 minutes to 5 @,@ 185 m ( 17 @,@ 000 ft ) 
 Wing loading : 137 kg / m ² ( 28 @.@ 1 lb / ft ² ) 
 Power / mass : <unk> kW / kg ( <unk> hp / lb ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : up to 7 × 7 @.@ 92 mm MG 15 or MG 81 machine guns , ( 2 in the nose , 1 in the dorsal , 2 in the side , 2 in the ventral ) some of them replaced or augmented by 
 1 × 20 mm MG FF cannon ( central nose mount or forward ventral position ) 
 1 × 13 mm MG 131 machine gun ( mounted dorsal and / or ventral rear positions ) 
 Bombs : 2 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 4 @,@ 400 lb ) in the main internal bomb bay . 
 Up to 3 @,@ 600 kilograms ( 7 @,@ 900 lb ) could be carried externally . External bomb racks blocked the internal bomb bay . Carrying bombs externally increased weight and drag and impaired the aircraft 's performance significantly . Carrying the maximum load usually required rocket @-@ assisted take @-@ off . 
 = = = He 111 C @-@ 0 = = = 
 Data from Black Cross Volume 4 : Heinkel He 111 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 2 
 Length : 17 @.@ 5 m ( 57 ' 5 " ) 
 Wingspan : 22 @.@ 60 m ( 74 ft 2 in ) 
 Height : 4 @.@ 10 m ( 13 ' 5 ⅜ " ) 
 Wing area : 87 @.@ 60 m ² ( 942 @.@ 92 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 5 @,@ 400 kg ( <unk> lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 9 @,@ 610 kg ( 21 @,@ 186 lb ) 
