 = = = <unk> scenery = = = 
 Lincoln 's Inn Fields opened on 28 June 1661 , with the first " moveable " or " changeable " scenery used on the British public stage , i.e. wings or shutters that ran in grooves and could be smoothly and mechanically changed between or even within acts . The production was a revamped version of Davenant 's own five @-@ year @-@ old opera The Siege of Rhodes . It is not known who painted the scenes or shutters , or whether continental craftsmen were responsible for the technical construction , but the result was such a sensation that it brought Charles II to a public theatre for the first time . The competing King 's Company suddenly found itself playing to empty houses , as Pepys notes on 4 July : 
 I went to the theatre [ in Vere Street ] and there I saw <unk> ( the first time I ever saw it ) , well acted . But strange to see this house , that use to be so thronged , now empty since the opera begun — and so will continue for a while I believe . 
 The Siege of Rhodes " continued acting 12 days without interruption with great applause " according to the prompter John Downes in his " historical review of the stage " Roscius <unk> ( 1708 ) . This was a remarkable run for the limited potential audience of the time . As four more acclaimed Duke 's Company productions " with scenes " followed at Lincoln 's Inn Fields in the course of 1661 ( including Hamlet ) , all highly admired by Pepys , the King 's Company had no other recourse than to hastily commission a changeable @-@ scenery playhouse of their own . Bowing to the inevitable just seven months after the opening of Lincoln 's Inn Fields , Killigrew and his actors signed orders for a new , even more magnificent , theatre in Bridges Street . This theatre , the first step in the war of spectacle escalation of the 1660s , was so full when Pepys and his wife went to see an opera there that " they told us we could have no room " . The large , yet compact , Restoration playhouses , with audience capacities from 700 ( Bridges Street ) to upwards of 2 @,@ 000 ( the next house on the same site , the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , finished in 1674 ) , were enormous investments , financed through selling shares in the companies , which were thus bound to make more and more money from ticket sales . Not only the theatres and their technical equipment , but the flats painted for a single performance , the special effects , and the elaborate stage clothes , were extremely expensive . Audiences appreciated both luxury and appropriateness of décor and costume : Pepys was quite capable of going several times to see a play that , as such , he disliked , purely for the pleasure of viewing striking and innovative scenery like " a good scene of a town on fire " . The companies struggled to outdo each other in catering to these expensive tastes , with precarious finances and the ever @-@ present consciousness that the investments could literally burn to the ground in a few hours . When the theatre in Bridges Street did burn down in January 1672 , with its entire stock of scenery and costumes , it was an economic blow from which the King 's Company 's never recovered . 
 The Duke 's Company , operating smoothly under what soon became Davenant 's and Thomas Betterton 's joint management , consistently led the way while the King 's lagged further and further behind , moving only in forced response and suffering from chronic management conflict between Killigrew and powerful actor shareholders like Michael Mohun and Charles Hart , who insisted on actor @-@ centred " talk " drama . The difference can be traced in Pepys ' regular preference for performances at the Duke 's , and in his ever @-@ renewed admiration for Betterton 's acting . In December 1667 , the King 's Company even ceased acting for some days because of a quarrel between Mohun and Hart . With the escalation of expense , days with zero takings were a very serious matter . The crowning grand investment of the Duke 's Company was totally beyond the King 's means to respond to : the " machine house " at Dorset Garden . 
 = = 1670s : Machine theatre = = 
 = = = Dorset Garden Theatre = = = 
 An era came to an end in 1668 with two events : Davenant died suddenly , leaving a messy ownership situation for the Duke 's Company , and Pepys ' eyesight forced him to stop keeping a diary . Thomas Betterton , though formally a minority shareholder , continued to run the Duke 's Company , and , in the spirit of Davenant , commissioned the most elaborate of the Restoration playhouses , the theatre at Dorset Garden ( or Dorset Gardens ) , with a flat for himself on top . Although the Dorset Garden Theatre quickly became a famous and glamorous venue , very little is concretely known about the building and outfitting of it : a vague and undocumented tradition ascribes its design to Christopher Wren . The absence of Pepys ' record means that performance data for the next decades are only patchily known . 
 = = = " Obliged to the French " = = = 
 The machines at Dorset Garden and several of the most flamboyant production concepts realised through them were strongly influenced by the French opera and tragédie en machines . Paris was home to the most elaborate visual and musical stage productions in Europe , and Betterton travelled to Paris in the summer of 1671 to learn from the sensation of the season , the comédie @-@ ballet <unk> by Molière , Corneille , and Quinault , to music by Lully . " For several things concerning the decoration of the play , I am obliged to the French " , acknowledged Thomas Shadwell in the introduction to his own Psyche in 1674 . Even more directly influential were the French operatic visits to London , which sparked off a new interest in opera proper in London audiences . In a brilliant move , the King 's Company , all but bankrupt after the crushing blow of the fire in Bridges Street , invited the French musician Robert <unk> to perform his opera Ariadne as one of the first productions at their new playhouse in Drury Lane . The Duke 's Company responded to the visual <unk> of this guest appearance with a Shakespearean extravaganza at Dorset Garden : Shadwell 's adaptation of Davenant 's and Dryden 's version of Shakespeare 's Tempest , a piece designed to show off the new machinery : 
 The Front of the Stage is open 'd , and the Band of 24 Violins , with the <unk> and <unk> 's which accompany the Voices , are plac 'd between the Pit and the Stage . While the Overture is playing , the Curtain rises , and discovers a new <unk> , <unk> 'd to the great <unk> , on each side of the Stage ... Behind this is the Scene , which represents a thick Cloudy Sky , a very Rocky Coast , and a <unk> Sea in perpetual Agitation . This Tempest ( <unk> 'd to be rais 'd by Magick ) has many dreadful Objects in it , as several Spirits in horrid shapes flying down amongst the <unk> , then rising and crossing in the Air . And when the Ship is sinking , the whole House is darken 'd , and a shower of Fire falls upon ' em . This is accompanied with Lightning , and several <unk> of Thunder , to the end of the Storm . 
 This multiplication of effects at the very outset of the play served as a shock and foretaste of what the audience would find farther along . 
 = = = Dorset Garden specials = = = 
 The technical capacities of Dorset Garden were little used for Restoration comedy , and , while most heroic drama included some scenes that showed off the perspective stage or used some of the simpler machines , spectacle on this limited scale could be just as well staged at Drury Lane . The plays for which Dorset Garden was built , the " machine plays " of the 1670s and 1680s and the operas of the 1690s , were a category to themselves , different from ordinary serious drama : more static , more mythological , much more gorgeous , infinitely more expensive . So elaborate was the scale of these productions , and so long each preparation time , that only five " machine plays " were produced during the 1670s ; yet they were hugely important for the finances of the Duke 's Company , mostly in a positive sense . They were Davenant 's version of Macbeth ( 1672 – 73 ) , Settle 's Empress of Morocco ( probably 1673 ) , Shadwell / Dryden / Davenant 's Tempest ( 1673 – 74 ) , Thomas Shadwell 's long @-@ awaited Psyche ( 1674 – 75 ) , and Charles Davenant 's Circe ( 1676 – 77 ) . 
 Psyche had not one , but two , extremely elaborate sets for each of five acts . This is the setting for the beginning of Act 3 : 
 The Scene is the Palace of Cupid , <unk> 'd of wreath 'd Columns of the Corinthian Order ; the <unk> is adorn 'd with Roses , and the Columns have several little Cupids flying about ' em , and a single Cupid standing upon every Capital . At a good distance are seen three Arches , which divide the first Court from the other part of the Building : The middle Arch is noble and high , beautified with Cupids and <unk> , and supported with Columns of the <unk> Order . Through these Arches is seen another Court , that leads to the main Building , which is at a mighty distance . All the Cupids , Capitals and <unk> of the whole Palace are of Gold . Here the Cyclops are at work at a forge , forging great Vases of Silver . The Musick strikes up , they dance , hammering the Vases upon <unk> . After the Dance , Enter Vulcan . 
 ( The gold cupids on the columns are due to come to life and jump off . ) The use of perspective scenery and many arches is evident here , creating an illusion of the first court being " at a good distance " and the next " at a mighty distance " . This creation of fake depth was a favourite device , repeated when the scene changed halfway through the act : 
 The scene changes to the principal street of the city , with vast numbers of people looking down from the tops of houses , and out of the windows and balconies , which are hung with tapestry . In this street is a large triumphal arch , with columns of the Doric order , adorned with the statues of Fame and Honour , & c. beautified with festoons of flowers ; all the <unk> of gold . Through this arch , at a vast distance , in the middle of a piazza , is seen a stately obelisk . 
 The numbers of performers used , mainly dancers , is clearly staggering compared to the regular comedy or serious play , where the norm was something like 10 – 15 actors plus a few extras . Although actual numbers are generally vague in these mass scene stage directions , dance scenes like that of the cyclops , and all the cupids who will join them on the floor minutes later , rely on coordination , choreography , and generous collective effects . Of course the many highly paid dancers would be busy in many roles , returning as townspeople after the scene change of Act 3 with most of the gold paint hastily washed off , and entranced looking upwards to see " Mars and Venus meet in the air in their chariots , his drawn by horses , and hers by doves " . 
 Each production was a gamble . The aspect of the machine plays that posterity knows most about is their economics , as this was what the old prompter Downes most vividly recalled when he wrote his Roscius <unk> in 1708 . The scenery alone for Psyche cost more than £ 800 , which can be related to the entire annual box office takings for the company of £ 10 @,@ 000 . Ticket prices for these performances would be raised to up to four times normal . Both Psyche and The Tempest actually complained of the production costs in their epilogues , hinting pointedly that the public ought to reward the " poor players " for their risk @-@ taking and for offering splendours that had so far been reserved for royal masques : 
 We have <unk> 'd all we have to treat you here , 
 And therefore , Sirs , you should not be severe . 
 We in one Vessel have <unk> 'd all ; 
 The loss , should we be <unk> 'd , were not small . 
 ... 
 Poor Players have this day that Splendor shown , 
 Which yet but by Great Monarchs has been done . 
 The audience apparently agreed , transfixed by such sights as Venus ascending into the heavens and " being almost lost in the clouds " , whereupon " Cupid flies up and gets into her chariot , and brings her back " , followed by Jupiter appearing on a flying eagle . Psyche turned out highly profitable . It is altogether a pattern that the 1670s productions did make money , while those of the 1680s and 1690s barely broke even or were actual economic disasters . 
 = = = Parody : " Fire , apples , nuts " = = = 
 Even after the King 's Company got their new well @-@ appointed playhouse in Drury Lane in 1674 , they could not take full advantage of it , as they lacked the capital to mount competitive spectaculars . Instead , they attempted to simultaneously capitalise on and snipe at the Duke 's most successful mid @-@ 1670s offerings by mounting several burlesques or parodies of them , written by Thomas Duffett . The records for the mid @-@ 1670s are particularly incomplete , and neither exact dates nor the public reaction to Duffett 's pieces are known , but even the printed versions , pale shadows of Duffett 's travesty spectacles , have proved highly amusing to modern critics . The first of them , The Empress of Morocco , caricatured simultaneously Settle 's Empress of Morocco and the sumptuous new Dorset Garden production of Davenant 's Macbeth adaptation , with Duffett 's three witches flying in over the pit on brooms at the high point of the action , followed by the descent of <unk> over the Stage " in a glorious chariot , adorned with pictures of hell and devils , and made of a large wicker basket " . The Mock Tempest improves on the shower of fire over the audience in the Dorset Garden pseudo @-@ Shakespearean tempest scene with a rain of " fire , apples , nuts " . 
 = = 1680s : Political spectacular = = 
 There was no investment in spectaculars during the political unrest of 1678 – 84 with the Popish Plot and the Exclusion Crisis , lean years for theatre . In 1682 , the companies merged , making Dorset Garden 's technical resources available to Dryden , who rapidly got over his principled objection to the superficiality of " spectacle " and " empty operas " . The orgy of machinery and extravagant visuals that he went on to write , Albion and Albanius ( 1684 – 85 ) , is quoted in the " Introductory " section , with the cave of Proteus rising out of the sea . Here is Juno in her flying peacock machine : 
 The Clouds divide , and <unk> appears in a Machine drawn by Peacocks ; while a Symphony is playing , it moves gently forward , and as it descends , it opens and discovers the Tail of the Peacock , which is so large , that it almost fills the opening of the Stage between Scene and Scene . 
 Unusual visual allegory in this Tory panegyric of Charles II and the House of Stuart includes a figure representing the radical Whig leader Anthony Ashley @-@ Cooper , 1st Earl of Shaftesbury " with fiend 's wings , and snakes twisted round his body ; he is encompassed by several fanatical rebellious heads , who suck poison from him , which runs out of a tap in his side . " In an investor 's nightmare , while Dryden 's propaganda piece was in preparation , Charles II died , James II succeeded him , and the Monmouth Rebellion which Shaftesbury had fomented broke out . On the very day of the premiere , June 3 , 1685 , the Duke of Monmouth landed in the west . " The nation being in a great consternation " , recollected Downes , " it was performed but six times , which not answering half the charge they were at , involved the company very much in debt . " This traumatic fiasco ruled out all further operatic spectacle investment until the calmer times after the Glorious Revolution of 1689 . 
 = = 1690s : Opera = = 
 While the monopoly United Company 's takings were being bled off by Davenant 's <unk> sons , one of whom , Alexander , was forced to flee the country in 1693 and other predatory investors , Thomas Betterton continued to act as de facto day @-@ to @-@ day manager and producer , enjoying a budget on the scale of Cecil B. DeMille . In the early 1690s , he staged the three real operas of the Restoration spectacular genre , or the shows usually so designated : Dioclesian ( 1689 – 90 ) by Massinger / Fletcher / Betterton ; King Arthur ( 1690 – 91 ) by John Dryden ; and The Fairy @-@ Queen ( 1691 – 92 ) , adapted from Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream by perhaps Elkanah Settle , all of them graced by music by Henry Purcell , and together perhaps a sign of the coming 18th @-@ century vogue for Italian opera . The lavish variety entertainment Dioclesian , adapted by Betterton , with many monsters , dragons , and machines , from Massinger and Fletcher 's History of Dioclesian , was very popular throughout the 1690s and made a lot of money for the United Company . So did Dryden 's much more serious King Arthur , the first operatic entertainment that Hume is prepared to consider an artistic success , with Purcell 's marvellous music a major part of the entertainment and the songs " for once well integrated into the play " . 
 At the very end of its history , the economics of the Restoration spectacular spiralled out of control with the magnificent production of The Fairy Queen in the 1691 – 92 season . It was a great popular success , but so stuffed with special effects and so expensive that it nevertheless proved impossible to make money from it . As Downes recalls : " Though the court and town were wonderfully satisfied with it ... the expenses in setting it out being so great , the company got little by it . " Its twelve @-@ foot @-@ high working fountain and six dancing real live monkeys have become notorious in theatre history . 
 The spectacular play died out with the Restoration period , but spectacle would continue on the English stage as the splendours of Italian grand opera hit London in the early 18th century . The dangerous Restoration economic spiral of the ever @-@ more @-@ expensive machine plays would teach 18th- and 19th @-@ century theatrical entrepreneurs to dispense with <unk> altogether and minimise the cast , utilising any number of surprising effects and scenes in the dumbshow of pantomime and Harlequin , without attendant costs in music , dramatists , and cast . 
 There have been a small number of attempts to resurrect the Restoration spectacular as a background to modern cinema : Terry Gilliam 's The Adventures of Baron Munchausen features at its start perhaps the most accurate reconstruction , with painted scenery , mechanisms and lighting effects typical of the period . 
 = Ben Gascoigne = 
 Sidney Charles <unk> " Ben " Gascoigne AO ( 11 November 1915 – 25 March 2010 ) was a New Zealand @-@ born Australian optical astronomer and expert in photometry who played a leading role in the design and commissioning of Australia 's largest optical telescope , the Anglo @-@ Australian Telescope , one of the world 's most important astronomical facilities . Born in Napier , New Zealand , Gascoigne trained in Auckland and at the University of Bristol , before moving to Australia during World War II to work at the Commonwealth Solar Observatory at Mount Stromlo in Canberra . He became skillful in the design and manufacture of optical devices such as telescope elements . 
 Following the war , Gascoigne and astronomer Gerald Kron used newly modernised telescopes at Mount Stromlo to determine that the distance between our galaxy and the Magellanic Cloud dwarf galaxies had been underestimated by a factor of two . Because this measurement was used to calibrate other distances in astronomy , the result effectively doubled the estimated size of the universe . They also found that star formation in the Magellanic Clouds had occurred more recently than in the Milky Way ; this overturned the prevailing view that both had evolved in parallel . A major figure at Mount Stromlo Observatory , Gascoigne helped it develop from a solar observatory to a centre of stellar and galactic research , and was instrumental in the creation of its field observatory in northern New South Wales , Siding Spring Observatory . When the British and Australian governments agreed to jointly build the Anglo @-@ Australian Telescope at Siding Spring , Gascoigne was involved from its initial conception and throughout its lengthy commissioning , taking its first photograph . Gascoigne was made an Officer of the Order of Australia for his contributions to astronomy and to the Anglo @-@ Australian Telescope . 
 Gascoigne and his wife , artist Rosalie Gascoigne , had three children . After he retired , Gascoigne wrote several works on Australian astronomical history . He acted as Rosalie 's photographer and assistant , using his technical skills to make her artworks resilient for public display . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ben Gascoigne 's parents met and married in Levin , New Zealand , just before the First World War . They soon moved to Napier , where Gascoigne was born in 1915 . He attended Auckland Grammar School , and won a scholarship to Auckland University College ( now the University of Auckland ) a year before he was due to finish high school . Faced with a choice between studying history or the sciences , he chose the latter because he had a severe stammer and thought that it would be less of an impediment . He completed both a Bachelor 's degree and a Master 's qualification in science , securing Honours in both mathematics and physics , finishing his studies in 1937 . Despite these achievements , he did not consider himself to be practically trained , saying : " I was still very much a theorist , with no practical physics at all . The professor in Auckland used to wince when I walked past the cupboard in which the good instruments were kept ! " 
 In 1933 , while studying at the University , he met his future wife Rosalie Norah King Walker , although they did not marry for another decade . Rosalie completed a Bachelor of Arts while Gascoigne was studying in Auckland ; she also studied at Auckland 's teacher training college while he was in Bristol . 
 Although Gascoigne had always intended to study mathematics at Cambridge , an event occurred that significantly shaped his career . In 1931 , an earthquake in New Zealand killed Michael Hiatt Baker , a young traveller from Bristol , and his parents established a postgraduate scholarship in his memory , for study at the University of Bristol , which Gascoigne won and took up in 1938 . During his thesis studies at Bristol , Gascoigne developed a diffraction theory of the Foucault test that is used for evaluating the shape of large telescope mirrors . He completed his doctorate in physics in 1941 , but by then war had broken out in Europe , and he had already returned to New Zealand on the last available ship . 
 = = War service 1940 – 1945 = = 
 Returning to a job in the physics department at Auckland , Gascoigne worked on military optics , developing gun sights and rangefinders , although he did not remain there for long . Richard van der Riet Woolley , director of the Commonwealth Solar Observatory in Canberra ( now Mount Stromlo Observatory ) , sought out Gascoigne because his " experience in optical work [ was ] unique " and Gascoigne was " trained in a way that no one else in Australia has been qualified " . When in 1941 Gascoigne was offered a research fellowship by Woolley , he moved to Canberra . The Solar Observatory staff had similar responsibilities to those Gascoigne had held in New Zealand . His first task was to design an anti @-@ aircraft gun sight , and he was also involved in a range of other military optical projects . In 1944 , the Melbourne Observatory , home to the Commonwealth Time Service , was closed . Gascoigne reestablished the Time Service at Mount Stromlo , using two Shortt @-@ <unk> clocks and astronomical observing equipment that he and his colleagues adapted ; the Time Service remained at Mount Stromlo until 1968 . The knowledge and experience Gascoigne gained during the war proved valuable . He was at the only facility in Australia where optical work could be done , from design and manufacture to assembly and testing . Gascoigne developed a wide range of skills and " finished up quite practical , especially with a screwdriver . " 
 A decade after Gascoigne first met Rosalie in New Zealand , she travelled to Canberra , and on 9 January 1943 they were married . Their first son , Martin , was born in November , and their second , Thomas , was born in 1945 . 
 = = Mount Stromlo = = 
 Following the end of the war Woolley redirected the Commonwealth Observatory from solar research towards the study of stars and galaxies . It took time to get the old and unused telescopes back up to working condition : they had to be overhauled and refurbished , and in one case rebuilt from scrap . Woolley got funding approval from the Prime Minister for construction of a 74 @-@ inch telescope , but it would not be finished for years . Gascoigne began to work in the nascent field of photoelectric photometry , using electrical devices to measure the brightness of stars more accurately than had been possible using photographic techniques . In 1951 , with equipment brought by visiting astronomer Gerald Kron from California 's Lick Observatory , he observed Cepheid variable stars , which are used to measure astronomical distances . Granted nine months of observing time on the Observatory 's Reynolds 30 @-@ inch reflector telescope – an extraordinary opportunity – Gascoigne , Kron and others surveyed Cepheid stars in both the Small Magellanic Cloud and , later , the Large Magellanic Cloud . They also examined the colours of star clusters in the Small Cloud . The research produced remarkable results : " it meant that the Magellanic Clouds were twice as far away as was previously thought , and if then the baseline is twice as long , the size of the universe is doubled . " It also showed that star formation in the Magellanic Clouds had occurred more recently than in the Milky Way . The results overturned the prevailing view that our galaxy and the Magellanic Clouds had evolved in parallel . Gascoigne said of his work : 
 When suddenly all this dropped into place , after I had been working away at it for quite a while , measuring more Cepheids in our own Galaxy and some in the Large Cloud , the feeling of triumph , the great feeling that I had really done something , was wonderful . I had joined the professional astronomers . Not only that , but I truly understood a problem , a proper problem ... 
 Subsequent research confirmed what were described as pioneering results , arrived at through very innovative techniques . 
 In 1949 , the <unk> ' third child , daughter Hester , was born . Like many Observatory personnel , the <unk> lived in a staff residence on Mount Stromlo , which was a long difficult trip away from Canberra . It was cold and lonely , particularly for Rosalie , but they enjoyed the outdoors , and the landscape inspired Rosalie 's creativity and later her artistic career . In 1960 they relocated to Deakin in suburban Canberra , and in the late 1960s they moved to another suburb , Pearce . 
 In 1957 , administrative responsibility for the Commonwealth Observatory was transferred from the Australian Government 's Department of the Interior to the Australian National University ( ANU ) , a move supported by both its director , Richard Woolley , and Gascoigne . This was an era of significant change at Mount Stromlo : in January 1956 Woolley had resigned as director of Mount Stromlo to take up a position as Astronomer Royal and director of the Royal Observatory Greenwich . He was replaced by Bart Bok , whom Gascoigne liked and under whose directorship he played a significant role . Also in 1957 , the Mount Stromlo team began searching for a new field observatory site , due to the increased light pollution from Canberra 's growth . The search was vigorously promoted by Bok , and after an examination of 20 possible locations , two were shortlisted : Mount <unk> , near Griffith , New South Wales , and Siding Spring , near <unk> , New South Wales . Gascoigne was one of a group of scientists who visited Siding Spring Mountain as part of the search , and he was one of those who advocated this choice : 
 We had to climb the last bit on foot ... [ I was ] the first astronomer to set foot on Siding Spring . I liked the look of the place right away , partly because it had such good features for astronomy – for example , the north and west faces had sheer cliffs that were very good for draining away the cold air – and because of its beautiful outlook , on the edge of the national park . It really is a wonderful place to be . 
 In 1962 , Siding Spring was selected , and by 1967 Siding Spring Observatory was fully operational . 
 At the end of Woolley 's directorship , the 74 @-@ inch telescope he had initiated finally came online . Gascoigne , looking for a new research project and keen to use the new telescope , took up the study of globular clusters , compact groups of tens of thousands of ancient stars of similar age . With a new design of photometer , he was able to measure the exceptionally faint stars in these clusters . Gascoigne determined that the clusters in the Magellanic Clouds were both young and old , and had quite different characteristics to those in the Milky Way : this information was important for modelling the evolution of galaxies . 
 In 1963 , Gascoigne developed a device , known as an optical corrector plate , which allowed wide field photography on the new 40 @-@ inch telescope at Siding Spring . Such corrector plates were subsequently used on many telescopes and became known as Gascoigne correctors . During this period he was also active in supporting the establishment of a national research organisation for astronomers , the Astronomical Society of Australia . It held its first meeting in 1966 , and Gascoigne was made its first vice @-@ president . 
 When Bok retired as Stromlo 's director in early 1966 , Gascoigne became acting director for three months until the arrival of Bok 's replacement , American astronomer Olin J. Eggen . Eggen was an enormously productive scientist , but was " enigmatic " , " somewhat gruff " and selective in the friendships he formed . Although Eggen and Gascoigne had previously collaborated on research projects , when Eggen arrived to take up the post , he and Gascoigne did not get on well , in contrast to Gascoigne 's relationships with other astronomers . Gascoigne said of Eggen : " he made it clear I had no further part in running the Observatory . I was given no information , saw no documents , attended no meetings , and was asked for no advice , not even in optical matters . " 
 = = Anglo @-@ Australian Telescope = = 
 In 1963 Gascoigne published an article in the journal Nature titled " Towards a Southern Commonwealth Observatory " . Gascoigne was then given a significant opportunity that became the focus of the remainder of his paid academic career : to help establish one of the world 's largest optical telescopes , at Siding Spring . In the early 1960s , the Australian and British governments proposed a partnership to build a joint optical telescope facility , and Gascoigne was among the experts involved . Former Mount Stromlo director and now head of the Greenwich observatory , Richard Woolley , was prominent in supporting the project from the British end . In 1967 , the two governments formally agreed to collaborate on the construction of a large telescope , to be known as the Anglo @-@ Australian Telescope ( AAT ) . Given the existing infrastructure of the ANU 's Siding Spring Observatory , the site was readily agreed as the location for the AAT . Gascoigne was one of the four members of the Technical Committee established to guide the telescope 's development . He provided leadership on the design and optics of the new telescope , and was made the chief commissioning astronomer in 1974 . 
 A bitter struggle over the management and operation of the new facility went on for some years . The Australian National University and the director at Stromlo , Olin Eggen , wanted the telescope to be under the control of the University while other Australian astronomers , including some at Stromlo , and the British wanted it established independently . Gascoigne 's co @-@ authored history of the telescope states that " None of the eight fellow of the Australian Academy of Science [ Gascoigne was one of them ] supported the ANU " and in 1973 the debate was resolved in favour of an independent structure , the Anglo @-@ Australian Observatory . Gascoigne was one of only a few Stromlo employees who ended up working on the AAT for an extended period during its establishment phase : the Anglo @-@ Australian Observatory chose to offer short @-@ term positions rather than academic tenure like that at the ANU . 
 The work at Siding Spring was rewarding , but it could also be dangerous . During construction , Gascoigne constantly warned colleagues to take care on the elevated catwalks around the telescope . However , Gascoigne himself was almost killed when , while working one night around the telescope structure , he fell seven metres to the floor of the observatory , narrowly missing " a massive steel structure with long protruding bolts " . He survived , and was the first to take a photograph using the telescope , on 26 or 27 April 1974 . Gascoigne was so pleased with the quality of the optics that he said he wanted a number describing the hyperboloid shape of the mirror ( 1 @.@ 1717 ) engraved on his headstone . The site quickly became one of the world 's most important astronomical observatories and was for many years home to world @-@ leading <unk> David Malin . The successes of the AAT have been documented in annual reports by its Board , while a 2008 analysis of the relative impacts of astronomical observing facilities placed the AAT in the top three , coming after only the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and the W. M. Keck Observatory ( both telescopes built more than two decades later ) . For Gascoigne , it was " a wonderful thing to be associated with – the high point in my life . " 
 It was during the period of Gascoigne 's association with the Anglo @-@ Australian telescope that he and his wife commissioned architect Theo Bischoff to design a house for them , which was planned and constructed between 1967 and 1969 . Bischoff , who was responsible for numerous Canberra residences , designed a modernist home to the detailed , if contrasting , instructions from his client couple , who in turn were heavily influenced by their negative experiences with Canberra housing , particularly their home on Mount Stromlo . Based on Gascoigne 's interest in optics , and Rosalie 's strong visual sense as an artist , the resulting design " was based on maximising the potential for observation " , creating " a form of habitable optical instrument " . 
 = = Artist 's assistant and historian = = 
 By the middle of 1975 , the Anglo @-@ Australian Telescope was fully operational , and Gascoigne was offered a job with the new telescope , based in Sydney . By this time his wife was emerging as a significant artist who relied on the landscapes and materials around their home for her inspiration . Gascoigne decided to return to the Australian National University in Canberra ; he retired a few years later in 1980 , and supported Rosalie in her work . 
 Gascoigne completed a course in welding and became his wife 's assistant , making " her assemblies of ' found objects ' safer and more durable " . He also catalogued and photographed her work , describing himself as " artist 's handyman , cook , and archivist . " Rosalie Gascoigne 's artistic career came late – she was almost 60 when she held her first solo shows – and her rise was " meteoric " ; five public galleries purchased works from her early exhibitions . She died in 1999 . In 2008 , Gascoigne donated Rosalie 's final major work , a ten @-@ panel installation titled Earth ( 1999 ) , to the National Gallery of Australia . 
 As well as being an astronomer , Gascoigne was a scholar of the history of Australian astronomy . He wrote histories of major telescopes , such as the Melbourne Telescope and the AAT . He wrote biographies for the Australian Dictionary of Biography , including those of the first trained astronomer at Canberra 's Mount Stromlo Observatory , William Bolton Rimmer , and pioneering Australian astronomer Robert Ellery . 
 Gascoigne died on 25 March 2010 . A memorial service was held at St John 's Church in Reid , Canberra , on 12 April . 
 = = Recognition and legacy = = 
 Gascoigne was widely respected for his astronomical skills and his generous nature . English astronomer and writer Sir Fred Hoyle , at one time the Chairman of the AAT , gave Gascoigne considerable credit for the telescope 's success , and astronomer Harry <unk> likewise credited him , together with Roderick Oliver Redman , for the telescope 's extremely good optics . Former AAT director Russell Cannon regarded Gascoigne as a world leader in his field , as well as being " a delightful man " . Historian of astronomy <unk> <unk> considered Gascoigne to have been an important figure in Australian astronomy , responsible for substantial advances in the field . 
 In 1966 , Gascoigne was elected a fellow of the Australian Academy of Science . He was made an Honorary Fellow of the Astronomical Society of Australia ; became the first person to be elected as an Honorary Member of the Optical Society of Australia ; and was the first Australian to be elected as an Associate of the Royal Astronomical Society . On 11 June 1996 , Gascoigne was made an Officer of the Order of Australia for his contributions to astronomy and to the AAT . On 1 January 2001 , he was awarded the Centenary Medal , for his service to society and to astronomy . 
 = = Select bibliography = = 
 Scientific journal articles 
 Kron , Gerald E. ; White , Howard S. ; Gascoigne , S. C. B. ( 1953 ) . " Red and Infrared Magnitudes for 138 Stars Observed as Photometric Standards " . Astrophysical Journal 118 : 502 . Bibcode : <unk> ... 118 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1086 / <unk> . 
 Gascoigne , S. C. B. ; Burr , E. J. ( 1956 ) . " Surface photometry of the globular clusters 47 Tucanae and Omega Centauri " . Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 116 ( 5 ) : 570 . Bibcode : <unk> .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / mnras / 116 @.@ 5 @.@ 570 . 
 Kron , G.E. ; Gascoigne , S. C. B. ; White , H. S. ( 1957 ) . " Red and infrared magnitudes for 282 stars with known trigonometric parallaxes " . Astronomical Journal 62 : 205 – 220 . Bibcode : <unk> ..... 62 .. <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1086 / <unk> . 
 Gascoigne , S. C. B. ( 1966 ) . " Colour @-@ magnitude diagrams for nine globular @-@ like clusters in the Magellanic Clouds " . Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 134 : 59 . Bibcode : <unk> ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / mnras / 134 @.@ 1 @.@ 59 . 
 Gascoigne , S. C. B. ( 1969 ) . " Further observations of Magellanic cloud <unk> " . Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 146 : 1 . Bibcode : <unk> .... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / mnras / 146 @.@ 1 @.@ 1 . 
 Books 
 Gascoigne , S. C. B. ; Proust , Katrina M. ; Robins , Malcolm Owen ( 1990 ) . The creation of the Anglo @-@ Australian Observatory . Cambridge UK : Cambridge University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 = Hadropithecus = 
 Hadropithecus is a medium @-@ sized , extinct genus of lemur , or strepsirrhine primate , from Madagascar that includes a single species , Hadropithecus stenognathus . Due to its rarity and lack of sufficient skeletal remains , it is one of the least understood of the extinct lemurs . Both it and Archaeolemur are collectively known as " monkey lemurs " or " baboon lemurs " due to body plans and dentition that suggest a terrestrial lifestyle and a diet similar to that of modern baboons . Hadropithecus had extended molars and a short , powerful jaw , suggesting that it was both a grazer and a seed predator . 
 The monkey lemurs are considered to be most closely related to the living indriids and the recently extinct sloth lemurs , although recent finds had caused some dispute over a possible closer relation to living lemurids . Genetic tests , however , have reaffirmed the previously presumed relationship . Hadropithecus lived in open habitat in the Central Plateau , South , and Southwest regions of Madagascar . It is known only from subfossil or recent remains and is considered to be a modern form of Malagasy lemur . It died out around 444 – 772 CE , shortly after the arrival of humans on the island . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The common names that Hadropithecus shares with Archaeolemur , " monkey lemurs " and " baboon lemurs " , come from their dental and locomotor adaptations , which resemble that of modern African baboons . The genus Hadropithecus is derived from the Greek words <unk> , <unk> , meaning " stout " or " large " , and <unk> , <unk> , meaning " ape " . The species name derives from the Greek root <unk> , <unk> , meaning " narrow " , and <unk> , <unk> , meaning " jaw " or " mouth " . 
 = = Classification and phylogeny = = 
 Hadropithecus stenognathus is classified as the sole member of the genus Hadropithecus and belongs to the family Archaeolemuridae . This family in turn belongs to the infraorder Lemuriformes , which includes all the Malagasy lemurs . The species was formally described in 1899 from a mandible ( lower jaw ) found at Andrahomana cave in southeastern Madagascar by paleontologist Ludwig Lorenz von <unk> , who thought it represented an ape . A year later , Lorenz von <unk> also described <unk> <unk> based on photographs of a skull , which upon further review turned out to be a juvenile version of Hadropithecus stenognathus . In a publication from 1902 , he declared that <unk> stenognathus was not an ape , but a lemur . Over 100 years later , the rarity of its skeletal remains has made this species one of the least understood species of subfossil lemur . 
 Based on similarities in their skull and teeth , it was later thought that monkey lemurs ( Hadropithecus and Archaeolemur ) were a sister group to the living indriids and the recently extinct sloth lemurs ( family Palaeopropithecidae ) . However , there was some debate over whether the monkey lemurs or the sloth lemurs were more closely related to today 's indriids . The monkey lemurs had skulls that more closely resembled the indriids , but their teeth were very specialized and unlike those of the indriids . The sloth lemurs , on the other hand , had teeth like the indriids , but very specialized skulls . The matter was settled with the discovery of new skeletons of Babakotia and Mesopropithecus , two genera of sloth lemur , both of which had indriid @-@ like skulls and teeth . More recently , postcranial remains of Hadropithecus found in the early 2000s prompted the suggestion that the monkey lemurs were more closely related to the lemurids . However , DNA sequencing has reaffirmed the sister group status of the monkey lemurs to indriids and sloth lemurs . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 Hadropithecus stenognathus has been estimated to have weighed between 27 and 35 kg ( 60 and 77 lb ) and to have been roughly as large as Archaeolemur , although more gracile . Newer subfossil finds , however , suggest that Hadropithecus may have been more robust , and more like a gorilla than a baboon . It may also have been less agile than Old World monkeys . Both lemurs were quadrupedal ( walked on four legs ) . There is no evidence of <unk> ( adaptations specifically for running ) in either species , and although Hadropithecus could have climbed trees , it lacked adaptations for leaping or suspension . 
 Although fewer postcranial remains have been discovered for Hadropithecus than for Archaeolemur , what has been found indicates that both were adapted for a terrestrial or semi @-@ terrestrial lifestyle , an unusual trait for lemurs . Both genera had short limbs and a powerful build . Due to its specialized dentition and likely diet , Hadropithecus is thought to have been the more terrestrial of the two , since Archaeolemur may have sent more time foraging and sleeping in the trees . Both genera also have shortened hands and feet , an adaptation for walking on the ground . 
 The face of Hadropithecus was shortened and adapted to heavy stress from chewing . The monkey lemurs had highly specialized teeth , but Hadropithecus went further by specializing in strong grinding . It had expanded molars that wore down quickly , much like those of ungulates , and its posterior premolars acted like molars to extend the grinding surface . It also had a robust mandible to facilitate crushing hard objects . Even the strepsirrhine toothcomb was reduced in this species . Its dental formula was 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 31 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 × 2 = 34 
 The skulls of both Hadropithecus and Archaeolemur indicate that monkey lemurs had relatively large brains compared to the other subfossil lemurs , with Hadropithecus having an estimated endocranial volume of 115 ml . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Like all other lemurs , Hadropithecus was endemic to Madagascar . Because it died out only recently and is only known from subfossil remains , it is considered to be a modern form of Malagasy lemur . It once ranged across the Central Plateau , South , and Southwest regions of Madagascar . Within its original range , there were few other lemurs to overlap its ecological niche , and it has been shown to be the only subfossil lemur to consume both C3 and C4 ( or CAM ) plants , an indication that it lived in more open habitats and had a varied diet . Its physiology and dentition suggest that it may have been much like the <unk> Baboon in locomotion and diet , acting as a manual grazer ( picking grass with the hands ) since its teeth were well @-@ adapted for grinding either grass or seeds . <unk> patterns on its teeth , as well as its overly large molars , indicate it processed hard objects like nuts or seeds , making it a seed predator . More recent microwear analysis suggests differences between <unk> <unk> and Hadropithecus , indicating that this extinct lemur may not have been a grazer , but strictly a hard object processor . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 Because of the low number of subfossil finds , Hadropithecus is thought to have been rare , and it died out sooner than its sister taxon , Archaeolemur . Both disappeared shortly after the arrival of humans to the island , but being a large , specialized , terrestrial grazer , Hadropithecus would have faced more pressure from domestic livestock , introduced pigs , and spreading human populations than its more generalized cousin . The last known record was radiocarbon dated to around 444 – 772 CE . 
 = Nine Inch Nails live performances = 
 Nine Inch Nails , an industrial rock band fronted by Trent Reznor , did various live performances throughout the world , including tours in North America , South America , Europe , Australia , Japan , and China . While Reznor controls the creative and musical direction of Nine Inch Nails in @-@ studio , the touring band performs different arrangements of the songs in live settings . In addition to regular concerts , the band has performed in both supporting and headlining roles at festivals such as Woodstock ' 94 , Lollapalooza 1991 and 2008 , as well as many other one @-@ off performances including the MTV Video Music Awards . Prior to their 2013 tour , the band played 938 gigs . 
 Nine Inch Nails ' live performances contrast with its in @-@ studio counterpart . Reznor writes and performs nearly all Nine Inch Nails studio material , with occasional instrumental and vocal contributions from others artists . However , Reznor has typically assembled groups of backing musicians to interpret songs for tours and other live performances . Keyboardist Alessandro Cortini said that " if you see the show and you 're used to the CDs it 's pretty clear that the studio entity is different from the live entity " . 
 The only constant member of the live band is Reznor . Live Nine Inch Nails performances are typically accompanied by lighting , stage , and video projection effects . Since 1999 , the visual design components of live shows have been curated by Reznor with Rob Sheridan . Three tours have been chronicled on live albums and tour documentaries . 
 Critical and commercial response to Nine Inch Nails live performances has generally been positive . Critics have pointed to the concerts ' aggressive on @-@ stage dynamic and visual designs as high points . Reznor decided in 2008 to cease touring with the band after a 2009 farewell tour . The band resumed touring in 2013 , with the group planning a set of concerts in the U.S. beginning September 28 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pretty Hate Machine Tour Series ( 1988 – 1991 ) = = = 
 Reznor assembled the first live line @-@ up in 1988 to support the Canadian industrial music band Skinny Puppy on tour . The three @-@ piece band consisted of Reznor on guitars and lead vocals , Ron <unk> on drums , and Chris Vrenna on keyboards . The band was poorly received , however , and they were asked to leave the tour after 10 dates . After the Skinny Puppy tour the band was rearranged and expanded to include a fourth member ; <unk> departed and Vrenna moved to drums , Gary Talpas , Nick <unk> , and later David Hymes contributed on keyboards , while Richard Patrick was added as guitarist . 
 Nine Inch Nails toured North America as an opening act for The Jesus and Mary Chain in 1990 , and later for Peter Murphy . During these tours , Reznor began to smash equipment while on stage , and <unk> interviewer Mike Gitter attributed the band 's early success to this aggressive attitude . In 1991 , the band undertook a world tour that continued through the first Lollapalooza festival , where , according to biographer Martin Huxley , they " stole the show " . New Musical Express had a sentiment after the performance , describing the show as " genuinely frightening " , and asking the reader to " decide for yourself if it 's choreographed chaos or unbridled grievous bodily harm " . Nine Inch Nails was then invited to open for Guns N ' Roses on their European Tour , though they were reportedly poorly received yet again . Before the Lollapalooza date , Chris Vrenna left the band due to a fall out with Reznor , and was replaced for the remainder of the tour by drummer Jeff Ward . Vrenna would rejoin the band for the Self @-@ Destruct tour in 1994 . At the conclusion of the Pretty Hate Machine tour , Richard Patrick left the group to form his own band , Filter . 
 = = = Self @-@ Destruct ( 1994 – 1995 ) = = = 
 After the 1994 release of The Downward Spiral , the live band embarked on the Self @-@ Destruct tour in support of the album . The Nine Inch Nails live band embarked on the Self Destruct tour in support of The Downward Spiral . Chris Vrenna and James Woolley performed drums and keyboards respectively , Robin Finck replaced Richard Patrick on guitar and bassist Danny Lohner was added to the line @-@ up . The stage set @-@ up consisted of dirty curtains which would pulled down and up for visuals shown during songs such as " Hurt " . The back of the stage was littered with darker and standing lights , along with very little actual ones . The tour debuted the band 's grungy and messy image in which they would come out in ragged clothes slathered in corn starch . The concerts were violent and chaotic , with band members often injuring themselves . They would frequently destroy their instruments at the end of concerts , attack each other , and stage @-@ dive into the crowd . 
 The tour included a set at Woodstock ' 94 broadcast on Pay @-@ per @-@ view and seen in as many as 24 million homes . The band being covered in mud was a result of pre @-@ concert backstage play , contrary to the belief that it was an attention @-@ grabbing ploy , thus making it difficult for Reznor to navigate the stage : Reznor pushed Lohner into the mud pit as the concert began and saw mud from his hair going into his eyes while performing . Nine Inch Nails was widely proclaimed to have " stolen the show " from its popular contemporaries , mostly classic rock bands , and its fan base expanded . The band received considerable mainstream success thereafter , performing with significantly higher production values and the addition of various theatrical visual elements . Its performance of " Happiness in Slavery " from the Woodstock concert earned the group a Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance in 1995 . Entertainment Weekly commented about the band 's Woodstock ' 94 performance : " Reznor <unk> rock to its horrifying , melodramatic <unk> experience as draining as it is exhilarating " . Despite this acclaim , Reznor attributed his dislike of the concert to its technical difficulties . 
 The main leg of the tour featured Marilyn Manson as the supporting act , who Reznor had recently signed to his Nothing Records label . At the time , Marilyn Manson featured bassist Jeordie White ( then playing under the pseudonym " Twiggy Ramirez " ) , who would later play bass with Nine Inch Nails from 2005 to 2007 . After another tour leg supporting the remix album Further Down the Spiral , Nine Inch Nails contributed to the Alternative Nation Festival in Australia and subsequently embarked on the Dissonance Tour , which included 26 separate performances with co @-@ headliner David Bowie . Nine Inch Nails was the opening act for the tour , and its set transitioned into Bowie 's set with joint performances of both bands ' songs . However , the crowds reportedly did not respond positively to the pairing due to their creative differences . 
 The tour concluded with " Nights of Nothing " , a three @-@ night showcase of performances from Nothing Records bands Marilyn Manson , Prick , Meat Beat Manifesto , and Pop Will Eat Itself , which ended with an 80 @-@ minute set from Nine Inch Nails . Kerrang ! described the Nine Inch Nails set during the Nights of Nothing showcase as " tight , brash and dramatic " , but was disappointed at the lack of new material . On the second of the three nights , Richard Patrick was briefly reunited with the band and contributed guitar to a performance of " Head Like a Hole " . After the Self Destruct tour , Chris Vrenna , member of the live band since 1988 and frequent contributor to Nine Inch Nails studio recordings , left the act permanently to pursue a career in producing and to form <unk> . 
 = = = Fragility ( 1999 – 2000 ) = = = 
 In support of Nine Inch Nails ' third full @-@ length studio album , The Fragile , the live @-@ band reformed for the Fragility tour . The lineup remained largely the same from the Self @-@ Destruct tour , featuring Finck , Clouser , and Lohner . To replace long @-@ time member Vrenna , Reznor held open auditions to find a new drummer , eventually picking then @-@ unknown Jerome Dillon . Dillon would remain a member of the live band until 2005 . 
 Nine Inch Nails ' record label at the time , Interscope Records , reportedly refused to fund the promotional tour following The Fragile 's lukewarm sales . Reznor instead committed himself to fund the entire tour out of his own pocket , concluding that " The reality is , I ’ m broke at the end of the tour , " but also adding " I will never present a show that isn ’ t fantastic . " 
 The Fragility tour began in late 1999 , running until mid @-@ 2000 , and was broken into two major legs , Fragility 1 @.@ 0 and Fragility 2 @.@ 0 respectively . Destinations included Europe , Japan , New Zealand , Australia , and North America . Before the first Fragility performance date in Spain , Nine Inch Nails opened their final rehearsal in London to 100 fans . Kick @-@ starting the tour was a performance of the title track from The Fragile at the MTV Video Music Awards . Atari Teenage Riot opened for Nine Inch Nails during Fragility 1 @.@ 0 , and A Perfect Circle for Fragility 2 @.@ 0 . At the time , A Perfect Circle featured Josh Freese on drums , who would later replace Dillon and play drums for Nine Inch Nails from 2005 to 2007 . The tour featured increasingly large production values , including a triptych video display created by contemporary video artist Bill Viola . Rolling Stone magazine named the Fragility the best tour of 2000 . 
 In 2002 , the tour documentary And All That Could Have Been was released featuring a collection of performances from the Fragility 2 @.@ 0 tour . While making the DVD , Reznor commented on the tour in retrospect by saying " I thought the show was really , really good when we were doing it " , but later admitted that he " can 't watch [ the DVD ] at all . I was sick for most of that tour and I really don 't think it was Nine Inch Nails at its best " . 
 = = = Live : With Teeth ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = 
 Following the release of With Teeth in 2005 , the live band was reassembled for the Live : With Teeth tour . Since the previous tour five years earlier , much of band had moved on in their careers , and only drummer Jerome Dillon rejoined . To find replacements , Reznor held auditions during December 2004 . He stated that keyboardist Alessandro Cortini " fit in immediately " , though he had trouble finding a guitarist to replace Robin Finck until auditioning Aaron North . 
 The tour began with a series of small @-@ club performances early in 2005 . The band told journalists they were " pleasantly surprised by the interest " of fans despite their lengthy absence . This initial leg of the tour also included a headlining performance at Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival . The band followed with a North American arena tour in autumn 2005 , supported by Queens of the Stone Age , Death From Above 1979 , <unk> , and Saul Williams . Williams performed on stage with Nine Inch Nails at the Voodoo Music Experience festival during a headlining appearance in hurricane @-@ stricken New Orleans , Reznor 's former home . To conclude the With Teeth era of the band , Nine Inch Nails completed a tour of North American amphitheaters in the summer of 2006 , joined by Bauhaus , TV on the Radio , and Peaches . The 2007 release Beside You in Time features performances from the North American arena tour , the North American amphitheater tour , and a number of studio rehearsals . 
 Nine Inch Nails were scheduled to perform at the 2005 MTV Movie Awards , but dropped themselves from the show due to a disagreement with the network over the use of an unaltered image of George W. Bush as a backdrop to the band 's performance of " The Hand that Feeds " . Soon afterwards , Reznor wrote on the official Nine Inch Nails website : " apparently , the image of our president is as offensive to MTV as it is to me " . MTV replied by saying they respected Reznor 's point of view , but were " uncomfortable " with the performance being " built around partisan political statements " . A performance by the Foo Fighters replaced Nine Inch Nails ' time slot on the show . 
 During the first arena performance in 2005 , Dillon was forced to stop midway through the show and was subsequently hospitalized . His condition was later diagnosed as a non @-@ life @-@ threatening cardiac disorder , a consequence of his thyroid medication . Dillon later remarked that when he was ready to return he encountered " complete apathy and no sympathy " from Reznor and Nine Inch Nails management . Reznor in turn wrote that Dillon 's " recollection of the events leading to his departure from the band is once again inaccurate " . Josh Freese initially replaced Dillon for two shows before Alex <unk> joined the band for the remainder of the arena tour . Freese eventually replaced <unk> and joined the band on a permanent basis . 
 = = = Performance 2007 ( 2007 ) = = = 
 Having taken a break from touring to complete work on Year Zero , Nine Inch Nails began a world tour in 2007 , including their first ever performance in China . Reznor continued to tour with the same band he concluded the Live : With Teeth tour , which was composed of North , White , Freese , and Cortini . Supporting acts included Ladytron , Unkle , The Dandy Warhols , Alec Empire , and Serena Maneesh . 
 The Year Zero project included an alternate reality game of the same name , with much of the game revolving around various live shows . During a Nine Inch Nails concert in Lisbon , Portugal , a USB flash drive was found in a bathroom stall containing a high @-@ quality MP3 of the track " My Violent Heart " , a song from the then @-@ unreleased album . A second USB drive was found after a concert in Barcelona , containing the track " Me , I 'm Not " . Following the release of Year Zero the focus of the tour shifted towards debuting and promoting tracks from the new album . While some of these songs were performed by all 5 band members as conventional guitar @-@ driven rock songs , two of them ( " Me , I 'm Not " and " The Great Destroyer " ) were played by Reznor , guitarist North and keyboard player Cortini as a 3 piece , using a combination of live guitars and pre @-@ programmed samples triggered onstage with computers and manipulated in real time using Ableton software . 
 In April 2007 , Nine Inch Nails fans received in @-@ game telephone @-@ calls in which they were invited to a " resistance meeting " in Los Angeles . At the meeting , fans attended a fictional Art is Resistance meeting , and were later rewarded by an unannounced performance by Nine Inch Nails . The concert was cut short as the meeting was raided by a fictional SWAT team and the audience was rushed out of the building . 
 Later that year , the Honolulu Star @-@ Bulletin reported that the September 18 show in Honolulu would be the last performance of the current incarnation of the Nine Inch Nails live band . Reznor told the newspaper " at this point , I want to switch things around a bit . Nine Inch Nails as a rock band configuration , we 've done it and we 've done it again . I see other ways I can present the material in concert , more challenging , something new . I don 't want it to go stale " . In the same article , Reznor also admitted that " the idea of five guys playing loud music [ for ] two hours ... has got to change once finances come into play , especially performing in markets outside of the mainland U.S. I want to whittle things down " . 
 = = = Lights in the Sky ( 2008 ) = = = 
 The seventh and eighth major Nine Inch Nails studio @-@ releases , Ghosts I – IV and The Slip , were released in March and May 2008 respectively . Both albums feature contributions from live @-@ band member Alessandro Cortini . Since the release of Ghosts I – IV , a 25 @-@ date tour was announced in several North American cities . Cortini and Freese returned as members from the previous tour , while Robin Finck rejoined the band . The lineup was initially to include Rich Fownes , but before any scheduled performances it was revealed that Justin Meldal @-@ Johnsen would instead be contributing on bass guitar . 
 Supporting acts for the tour include Deerhunter , Crystal Castles , Does It Offend You , Yeah ? , <unk> Observatory , A Place to Bury Strangers , and White Williams . In early June , a tour EP was released for free on the Nine Inch Nails website featuring four songs from the supporting artists and one from Nine Inch Nails . The files are DRM @-@ free MP3s that are fully tagged , and included with the download are desktop wallpapers and a printable tour poster . 
 The band headlined the 2008 Lollapalooza festival , the 2008 Virgin Festival , and the first Pemberton Music Festival . In May 2008 , Nine Inch Nails announced that premium seating for all the upcoming 2008 tour shows would be offered in a pre @-@ sale for fans who registered at the official Nine Inch Nails website . In an effort to combat ticket scalpers , each concert ticket will list the purchaser 's legal name . The ticketing process was previously used for smaller pre @-@ sales and was available exclusively to fan club members . On July 26 , Reznor introduced an " unplugged " portion into the live show in which the band steps to the front of the stage about an hour into the show , with Reznor on vibraphone and bassist Meldal @-@ Johnsen playing an upright bass . The 20 @-@ minute jazzy , acoustic set is taken mostly from Ghosts I - IV . The stage show also featured mesh LED curtains that projected various visuals , ranging from falling rain to static to a ruined city , and made the band appear to be playing on " a stage that appeared to be constructed entirely out of lights . " Nine Inch Nails later confirmed that the tour was to extend to South America and it was thought this would be the last Americas set of dates but soon after Reznor announced yet more North American dates including two dates in tourist capital Florida . 
 On October 8 , 2008 , after finishing up their last show in South America , Reznor posted on the official Nine Inch Nails website blog that Josh Freese would be leaving the band following the completion of the current tour . Shortly after , it was announced that Alessandro Cortini would also be leaving the band . On November 15 , 2008 , Reznor announced via the official Nine Inch Nails website that Ilan Rubin of Lostprophets would be replacing Freese after his departure at the end of 2008 . No replacement was announced for Cortini , and the band subsequently toured as a 4 @-@ piece without a full @-@ time keyboard player . 
 = = = NIN | JA / Wave Goodbye ( 2009 ) = = = 
 In 2008 , Reznor decided to put Nine Inch Nails on indefinite hiatus . He later clarified that " NIN as a touring live band or live band that 's on the road all the time [ would be ] stopping " after a comprehensive tour , but that he would continue to produce music thereafter . 
 After a set of shows in Australia and New Zealand , Nine Inch Nails embarked on a North American tour of amphitheatres with Jane 's Addiction and Street Sweeper Social Club dubbed " NIN / JA 2009 " . Concerts in Europe and Asia were also announced before Reznor added a series of smaller @-@ venue shows in New York , Chicago , and Los Angeles . The final show was on September 10 , 2009 . 
 = = = Festival Circuit / Tension ( 2013 @-@ 2014 ) = = = 
 In February 2013 , Trent Reznor announced that Nine Inch Nails would begin touring once more , with festival performances in the summer , arena performances in the fall , and worldwide performances throughout 2014 . After Eric Avery and Adrian Belew dropped out during rehearsals , the festival tour lineup featured Alessandro Cortini , Josh Eustis , Robin Finck , Trent Reznor , and Ilan Rubin . 
 = = Visual elements = = 
 Visual elements employed during Nine Inch Nails concerts have often included numerous lighting , stage and projection effects employed to accompany and augment presentation . Prior to the Fragility tour in 2000 , Reznor reflected that " I ’ ve adopted a philosophy of the way to present Nine Inch Nails live that incorporates a theatrical element . I want it to be drama . I want my rock stars to be larger than life , you know ? The Kurt <unk> of the world , I ’ m sick of that shit . I don ’ t want a gas station attendant being my hero . I grew up with Gene Simmons . I grew up with Ziggy Stardust . " 
 Many songs are typically accompanied with specially designed visual aids , including synchronized lighting effects and projected stock @-@ footage montages . Early performances of the song " Hurt " , for example , were accompanied by a projected montage of clouds , charred bodies , mushroom clouds , maggots , and war refugees , a performance of which is featured in the song 's music video . Recent performances of the song , however , have featured less lighting effects . 
 Since 1999 , the visual presentation of Nine Inch Nails live shows have been directed by Rob Sheridan , while Bill Viola designed a large triptych display for the Fragility tour . The images displayed on the triptych focused on storm and water imagery . And All That Could Have Been features an audio commentary track by Viola describing the display and his inspirations for it . 
 For the Live : With Teeth tour , Roy Bennett and Martin Phillips were responsible for the lighting design and stage design respectively . Bennett explained in a 2005 interview that much of the lighting was done using a series of LED lights arranged in " stalactites or stalagmites [ formations ] to tie in to the album artwork " . DLP projectors were also used to project images onto a gauze screen in front of the stage . 
 Using the gauze projection @-@ screen , Phillips , Reznor , and Sheridan devised a " gag " where they projected " a sheet of glass shattering onto a downstage kabuki scrim that would drop as the glass shatters fell . ... We settled on Trent swinging his guitar at the gauze [ and ] shattering it , but with all the pieces falling up as the [ screen ] flew out " . This technique can be seen in the tour documentary Beside You in Time . In contrast to the lighting of previous tours , Performance 2007 featured minimal lighting that was designed to shadow Reznor and the band . 
 The visual elements of the live shows has been subject to much commentary . The Boston Globe described the Fragility tour as " one of the most outstanding light shows in memory " . A reviewer from the Contra Costa Times described a Live : With Teeth performance as being " heightened by just the right amount of dark purple or blue spotlights , with up @-@ lighting from the stage front , giving the band a horror @-@ flick feel " . 
 = = Live releases = = 
 Nine Inch Nails has released one album and three videos featuring the live band . Closure , a double VHS set released in 1997 , features live performances from the Self @-@ Destruct Tour , including a performance of " Hurt " with David Bowie during the Dissonance Tour . The video has been out of print since its initial release , and all attempts to re @-@ release the video on DVD have failed . A deluxe two @-@ disc DVD version of Closure was delivered to Interscope Records in 2004 and indefinitely delayed from being released . However , both discs appeared on BitTorrent networks in December 2006 , presumably leaked by Trent Reznor himself . And All That Could Have Been , which features performances from the Fragility 2 @.@ 0 tour , was released in 2002 as a live CD and double DVD . An easter egg in the DVD version features a performance with Marilyn Manson at Madison Square Garden of the songs " Starfuckers , Inc . " and Manson 's " The Beautiful People " . In 2007 , Nine Inch Nails released Beside You in Time , featuring performances from the Live : With Teeth tour . The DVD also features rehearsal footage , music videos , and still photographs from the tour . 
 = = Live band members = = 
 The configuration of the band has evolved since first touring in 1988 . Early incarnations of the band had three people playing guitars , drums , keyboards , and samplers . Later incarnations replaced the keyboards and samplers with an additional guitarist , and incarnations after that added a multi @-@ instrumentalist whose main role was as a bassist but also played guitars and keyboards on a number of songs . Finally , the live component of Nine Inch Nails has settled as a five @-@ piece band since the Self Destruct tour from 1994 . On the Performance 2007 tour , some songs from the Year Zero album were performed as a 3 piece band , featuring Reznor , keyboard player Alessandro Cortini and guitarist Aaron North , using a combination of live guitars and triggered loops . In September 2007 , Reznor expressed his interest in moving away from the " rock band configuration " to explore " other ways [ to ] present the material in concert " , though once again the 2008 incarnation consisted of five positions , but adding a variety of instruments not normally used in Nine Inch Nails such as double bass , various percussion instruments , steel guitar , vibraphone and other acoustic instruments as well as sampled sounds triggered from a variety of electronic instruments . No replacement was hired for keyboard player Alessandro Cortini after he left the band in late 2008 , and the 2009 live band is a four @-@ piece , with the role of keyboard player being shared between all members . 
 Describing the selection process , early contributor Chris Vrenna told Gannett News " coming from the same emotional background , I feel , is more important than how well you can play your instrument . That 's one reason that makes our shows more intense when we 're up there ... We found people that understood that . It makes us stronger " . Reznor described his selection of the earliest incarnations of the live band by saying " I 'm not in the position to offer somebody a thousand dollars a week to rehearse ... So I took some young guys who were malleable , who would basically do what I want them to do but expand on it . The only context I 've worked with them in so far is , ' Here are the songs , here are your parts , learn them . ' " 
 Between major tours , live band members have on occasion contributed instrumental performances to official Nine Inch Nails releases , though creative control and direction has always been the responsibility of Reznor . Live @-@ band members who have contributed to major Nine Inch Nails studio releases are denoted by a " # " below . Most members provide backing vocals during live performances . 
 Personnel 
 Live guests 
 Mike Garson # – piano ( September 2009 at the Henry Fonda Theater for the song Just Like You Imagined ) 
 = = Guest artists and collaborations = = 
 Through the years , Reznor has invited many prominent musicians on stage with his band to perform material outside the usual range of Nine Inch Nails songs : 
 During Lollapalooza ' 91 Jane 's Addiction members Dave Navarro and Eric Avery played guitars alongside Gibby Haynes and Ice @-@ T for the last song of the band 's set , " Head Like a Hole " . 
 In early 1995 , Adam Ant and Marco Pirroni joined Nine Inch Nails on stage to perform " Physical " and other Adam and the Ants songs . 
 During the Dissonance tour , Nine Inch Nails co @-@ headlined with David Bowie . Throughout the tour , Nine Inch Nails would perform first and segue into Bowie 's band . The two bands would play a mixture of Nine Inch Nails and David Bowie songs . Nine Inch Nails would eventually leave the stage and Bowie and his band would continue with their own set . 
 Marilyn Manson appeared on stage at during a concert at Madison Square Garden in 2000 to sing " Starfuckers , Inc . " and " The Beautiful People " . This performance is featured as an Easter Egg in the And All That Could Have Been DVD . 
 During the Live : With Teeth amphitheater tour , Nine Inch Nails and Peter Murphy of Bauhaus performed the Pere Ubu song " Final Solution " , which was also a solo hit for Murphy . For the last show , they collaborated to cover Joy Division 's " Dead Souls " , which Nine Inch Nails has regularly played since 1994 . Also during this tour , Reznor , Murphy , and other musicians performed four unique sets of their favorite songs on radio stations around the country . 
 Ben Weinman and Greg <unk> of The Dillinger Escape Plan joined Nine Inch Nails on stage during the encore of their performance at the Adelaide leg of the 2009 Soundwave Festival to perform Wish and joined again on the Perth leg with the full band . On June 15 , 2009 The Dillinger Escape Plan joined Nine Inch Nails on stage at Bonnaroo performing " Wish " . 
 During the Wave Goodbye tour in 2009 Nine Inch Nails invited many special guests to perform with them . The guest appearances included Gary Numan , Peter Murphy , Atticus Ross , Danny Lohner , Mike Garson , Dave Navarro , Eric Avery , Saul Williams , The Dillinger Escape Plan , and Health . 
 = The Teen Idles = 
 The Teen Idles were an American hardcore punk band formed in Washington , D.C. in September 1979 . Consisting of teenagers Nathan Strejcek , Geordie Grindle , Ian MacKaye and Jeff Nelson , the Idles ' recorded two demo sessions and the 1980 Minor Disturbance EP before they broke up in November 1980 . The influential independent record label Dischord Records was originally created with the sole purpose of releasing the Teen Idles 7 " record . They were an early landmark in the D.C. hardcore movement , and MacKaye and Nelson would later form the seminal punk outfit Minor Threat . 
 The Teen Idles were among the first punk rock groups from the early 1980s hardcore movement to break out of their regional scene to tour and sell nationally . Inspired by other American punk bands like the Cramps and Bad Brains , the Teen Idles ' music was an early version of hardcore punk , and an attempt , in the words of MacKaye , " to get away from a really corrupted music . " Their appearances , lyrics and musical style sought to revive a punk movement that they believed had lost its original zeal . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 In 1978 , Washingtonian teenager Ian MacKaye discovered punk rock through a local college radio station , Georgetown University 's WGTB . He met Jeff Nelson , a classmate of his , after Nelson set off a pipe bomb outside their school and MacKaye went to investigate . The two became friends and quickly discovered their shared interest in punk . MacKaye and Nelson saw their first punk show in January 1979 — a benefit concert by the Cramps for WGTB . The concert inspired the pair ; MacKaye later admitted , " It blew my mind because I saw for the first time this huge , totally invisible community that had gathered together for this tribal event . [ ... ] I thought , ' This appeals to me . This is the world I think I can breathe in . This is what I need . ' " 
 After seeing a Bad Brains concert , MacKaye and Nelson began playing in a punk band , the Slinkees , with school friends George Grindle and Mark Sullivan . The Slinkees played a single show before Sullivan went to college . After a failed attempt to recruit MacKaye 's friend Henry Garfield ( later Henry Rollins ) , the band recruited Nathan Strejcek as a vocalist . The Slinkees soon renamed themselves the Teen Idles . After touring and practising for several months , the band recorded two demo sessions at a local studio in February and April 1980 , despite the engineer and a visiting band openly laughing as they recorded . They also began playing at house parties and pizza parlors , and opened for Bad Brains at an art gallery , in a dilapidated row house in the Adams @-@ Morgan neighborhood , called Madam 's Organ . 
 To revive the fervor of punk , which the band felt was being distorted by new wave , the Idles sought to look as intimidating as possible . They shaved their heads , grew mohawks and wore various punk accessories . Nelson and MacKaye even drove thumbtacks into the soles of their boots so they would make an " ominous clacking " sound when they walked . The band 's visual presentation was at odds with their demeanor ; according to MacKaye , " in our shows and within our own community , we were totally goofy guys . We were painfully honest — we didn 't shoplift , we didn 't vandalize , we didn 't spray @-@ paint . [ ... ] We don 't do anything — everybody just hates us because of the way we look . " 
 After a number of concerts in D.C. opening for bands such as the Untouchables , the Idles decided to tour the West Coast in August 1980 . Along with roadies Garfield and Sullivan , the band traveled to California . They were immediately hassled by police upon their arrival , and after challenging the police , Nelson was handcuffed for an hour . When the Teen Idles eventually began their tour , they were refused entry at Los Angeles ' Hong Kong Cafe because of their age . Originally due to open for the Dead Kennedys and the Circle Jerks , they settled for playing the next night , opening for the Mentors and a band called Puke , Spit and Guts in exchange for just $ 15 . The Teen Idles impressed those at the venue ; MacKaye later said " People were freaked out by how fast [ we played ] . " 
 Upon returning to D.C. , the Teen Idles were asked by Skip Groff , owner of the Washington record store Yesterday and Today , to record some tracks at Inner Ear , a small recording studio in Arlington , Virginia . They were introduced to engineer and owner Don Zientara ( the " studio " was a four @-@ track recorder at Zientara 's house ) . The Teen Idles played live in the basement while Zientara engineered and Groff produced . Seven tracks were recorded in total . However , the band were undecided about what to do with the tapes and eventually shelved them . 
 = = = Breakup and Minor Disturbance = = = 
 In late 1980 , the Teen Idles decided to break up , mostly because Grindle had fallen out with Nelson . Grindle 's new girlfriend , a born @-@ again Christian , disapproved of the band , causing Grindle to question his role . Tensions between Grindle and Nelson , who was an outspoken atheist , escalated until Grindle decided to quit . Their last show was on November 6 , when they opened for SVT at the 9 : 30 Club . It was a key event for the popularity of all @-@ ages shows — where alcohol was not for sale , and thus no age restriction for admission . Previously , at the Mabuhay Gardens in California , the band were allowed entry to the club only after big Xs were drawn on their hands — this showed that they were under the legal drinking age . The Idles suggested this to 9 : 30 's management , and vowed that if youths were caught drinking , the club could ban them . The management agreed ; the Teen Idles ' final show passed without incident . 
 After a year in existence , the band had earned $ 700 total . They now faced two options : divide the money among the members , or press the recordings they had made with Zientara at Inner Ear . Choosing the latter , Nelson , Strejcek and MacKaye formed Dischord Records with Groff 's help , to release the recordings . The band sent the tapes to a pressing plant in Nashville , Tennessee that specialized in pressing country music records . Initially puzzled by the request to put eight songs on a 7 " record , they pressed 1 @,@ 000 copies . For the cover , the band took apart another 7 " record sleeve and used it as a template for their own cover design . They photocopied it on 11 " × 17 " paper , which the band members cut out with scissors , folded and glued by hand , then into these inserted the records and lyric sheets . Released in January 1981 Minor Disturbance was a local success , receiving radio air @-@ play and reviews from fanzines such as Touch and Go , which meant that Dischord now had enough money to release records by other bands . 
 After the Teen Idles disbanded , Grindle chose not to pursue a career in music . By the time of Minor Disturbance 's release , Nelson and MacKaye had already formed Minor Threat . The new band 's first show was on December 17 , 1980 . Strejcek became involved in the running of Dischord , until Nelson and MacKaye , disappointed by his lack of effort , " decided to take it back . " The Teen Idles appeared on a number of hardcore @-@ punk compilations throughout the 1980s and 1990s . Dischord , to celebrate their one hundredth release , issued Teen Idles in 1996 , comprising the two demo sessions the band had recorded in February and April 1980 . 
 = = Musical style and outlook = = 
 According to journalist Michael Azerrad , the Teen Idles " played proto @-@ hardcore tunes that skewered their social milieu " . MacKaye later explained in the hardcore documentary Another State of Mind : " When I became a punk , my main fight was against the people who were around me — friends . " When MacKaye was thirteen he moved to Palo Alto , California for nine months . On his return , his friends had begun taking drugs and drinking . He remarked , " I said , ' God , I don 't want to be like these people , man . I don 't fit in at all with them . ' So it was an alternative . " 
 The graphic emblem most associated with the Straight Edge movement is a black " X " , typically drawn onto the wearers hands with a marker . According to MacKaye , " We were in San Francisco , and we played a place called Mabuhay Gardens . They figured out we were underage , and they wouldn 't let us play . We worked out a deal with their management that we just wanted to play and we weren 't going to drink , so they got a marker and put a big ' X ' on our hand , So we came back to Washington D.C. and went to this nightclub , the 9 : 30 , and said ' Hey look , we 're not going to drink and we will put this ' X ' on our hand . If you see us drinking you can throw us out forever . We are not going to drink , we just came to see the music . ' " The band adopted the marking , and though it was initially meant to signify youth , it became a wider emblem for bands prepared to play to audiences under the legal age to be served alcohol . MacKaye noted that at the time the symbol " wasn 't supposed to signify straight edge — it was supposed to signify kids . It was about being young punk rockers ... it represents youth . " 
 Most of the band 's lyrics were written by MacKaye . Like the group 's appearance , their lyrical subject matter reacted against the then dominant New Wave scene , and the perceived complacency that many first @-@ wave punk bands , including the Clash and the Damned seemed to have fallen into by the early 1980s . In " <unk> Fury " , Strejcek pleads , " The clothes you wear have lost their sting / So 's the fury in the songs you sing " . The Teen Idles were strongly influenced by punk bands in Washington and California , such as Bad Brains , Black Flag , and the Germs . These band 's influence is reflected in The Teen Idles ' songs , which consisted mostly of Strejcek shouting over a one @-@ two hardcore beat , with MacKaye and Grindle providing short and speedy riffs , interspersed with quick guitar solos from Grindle . 
 = = Discography = = 
 All Teen Idles records were issued by Dischord Records 
 Minor Disturbance , 7 " EP , 1981 
 3 songs on Flex Your Head , compilation LP , 1982 
 First EP reissued as part of Four Old 7 " s on a 12 " , 1984 
 First EP reissued on Dischord 1981 : The Year in 7 " s , 1995 
 Teen Idles ( 1980 demos ) , 1996 
 1 song on 20 Years of Dischord , compilation 3 @-@ CD box set , 2002 
 = 1866 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1866 Atlantic hurricane season was originally one of only four Atlantic hurricane seasons in which every known tropical cyclone attained hurricane status , along with 1852 , 1858 , and 1884 . Initially , there were three known storms during the season , but a re @-@ analysis confirmed the increased activity . There were also two other systems that were included as tropical cyclones at one time , although both were considered to have been other storms already in the database . All tropical activity occurred between the middle of July and the end of October . There may have been additional unconfirmed tropical cyclones during the season . Meteorologist Christopher Landsea estimates that up to six storms were missed from the official database , due to small tropical cyclone size , sparse ship reports , and relatively unpopulated coastlines . 
 Every storm but the fourth hurricane affected land during the season . The first hurricane hit Matagorda , Texas in July , the only one of the season to hit the United States as a hurricane . A month later a hurricane made two landfalls in Mexico . The third hurricane of the season formed near Bermuda and was last observed along the southern coast of Newfoundland . A few weeks later another storm executed a similar track , although it struck Newfoundland as a hurricane and caused damage . The most notable storm of the season was the Great Nassau Hurricane , which killed at least 383 people in the Turks and Caicos , Bahamas , and the western Atlantic Ocean . It attained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) , which is a Category 4 on the modern @-@ day Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The final hurricane developed over the Bahamas and later struck New Jersey , producing strong winds and high tides across New England . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One = = = 
 The first hurricane of the season was observed on July 11 , when a schooner encountered heavy seas to the south of the Florida Panhandle . As the hurricane moved westward , it remained a short distance off the Gulf Coast of the United States , bringing strong winds to New Orleans on July 12 . High tides surrounded the lighthouse at Timbalier Bay for about 24 hours , prompting the lighthouse keeper to resign from loneliness and from fear of the weather . 
 On July 15 , the hurricane moved ashore near Matagorda Bay in Texas , with winds estimated around 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , or a Category 2 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . At landfall , the minimum barometric pressure was estimated at 969 mbar ( 28 @.@ 61 inHg ) . The hurricane 's strong winds broke all of the boats from their moorings in the Matagorda harbor . Four ships were either lost or wrecked , and one schooner was washed ashore . The storm dissipated early on July 16 after progressing further inland . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 On August 13 , a ship encountered a severe hurricane in the eastern Caribbean Sea . Based on observations , it is estimated the hurricane attained winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . There were no reports for several days , although based on continuity it is estimated the storm passed south of Jamaica on August 15 . The following day , the hurricane struck the eastern Yucatán Peninsula , washing seven boats ashore . It is estimated to have weakened to a tropical storm while moving over land , although the system re @-@ intensified into a hurricane in the Bay of Campeche . It made its second and final landfall near Veracruz before dissipating on August 18 . 
 = = = Hurricane Three = = = 
 The third hurricane of the season was first encountered on September 4 by a ship 200 mi ( 320 km ) north of Bermuda ; the vessel sustained damage to its foretopmast . The storm affected another ship later that day , leaving similar heavy damage . Tracking generally northeastward , the hurricane was last observed on September 7 near Newfoundland . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 On September 18 and for two days subsequently , a barque sailed through a hurricane near the Cape Verde islands . The vessel was en route from New York to Shanghai , but due to a leak from the storm it had to return to New York for repairs . Aside from a single reported location , the track of the hurricane is unknown . Winds were estimated around 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Five = = = 
 A ship named " Honduras " observed the fifth hurricane of the season on September 22 to the south @-@ southeast of Nova Scotia . The ship lost its masts and sails from the storm , and based on the observations the winds were estimated around 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . Additional ship reports indicated the hurricane maintained a northeast track toward Newfoundland . Late on September 23 , the hurricane made landfall in south @-@ central Newfoundland , although it quickly weakened to tropical storm intensity . The winds spread across much of the island , severing the telegraphs in and around St. John 's . Late on September 24 , the storm was last observed to the north of the island . 
 = = = Hurricane Six = = = 
 Known as the Great Nassau Hurricane of 1866 , the sixth hurricane of the season was also the longest @-@ lasting . The brig <unk> encountered the hurricane on September 24 to the west @-@ southwest of the Cape Verde islands . The track is unknown for the following five days , until another ship reported a hurricane about 20 miles ( 32 km ) north of Anegada in the British Virgin Islands . The hurricane affected the Leeward Islands , washing several ships ashore and destroying a pier in St. Thomas . On September 30 through the following day , the cyclone moved through the Turks and Caicos Islands , becoming what was considered " one of the most terrific hurricanes ever known " . About 75 % of the population was left homeless and <unk> . 
 After affecting the Turks and Caicos Islands , the hurricane passed through the Bahamas . The eye crossed over Nassau , where a barometric pressure of 938 mbar ( 27 @.@ 70 inHg ) was reported . Based on this observation , the hurricane is estimated to have had sustained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) . The hurricane struck without warning in the Bahamas , either washing ashore or sinking every ship but one in Nassau . In addition , strong winds downed trees and destroyed roofs . Every building in Nassau was damaged or destroyed . After moving through the islands , the hurricane curved northeastward , affecting dozens of other ships and wrecking four . On October 4 , it passed north of Bermuda , where it produced Force 11 winds on the Beaufort scale . The hurricane was last observed on October 5 to the southeast of Atlantic Canada . Along its path through the Turks and Caicos , the Bahamas , and the western Atlantic , the hurricane killed at least 383 people , making it among the 100 deadliest Atlantic hurricanes as of 1997 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Seven = = = 
 The final storm of the season was first observed on October 28 over the Bahamas , and may have been a hybrid or subtropical cyclone . It moved north @-@ northwestward through the island chain , followed by a turn to the north @-@ northeast over the western Atlantic . Several ships encountered the tropical storm , and one lost their supply of molasses . On October 30 , the cyclone , at the time transitioning to extratropical , struck on the southern end of Long Beach Island with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . As it moved through the northeastern United States , the storm dropped heavy rainfall , causing flooding near Jersey City and Hoboken , New Jersey . In Brooklyn , the storm moved the rail cars off their tracks , while in Providence , Rhode Island the winds destroyed three buildings and wrecked the roofs of two others . Further northeast , the storm disrupted shipping and cut telegraph lines , although no fatalities were reported . The post @-@ tropical storm was last observed over Vermont late on October 30 . 
 = Mandodari = 
 Mandodari ( Sanskrit : <unk> <unk> , lit . " soft @-@ bellied " ; ) was the queen consort of Ravana , the king of Lanka , according to the Hindu epic Ramayana . The Ramayana describes Mandodari as beautiful , pious , and righteous . She is extolled as one of the Panchakanya ( " five virgins " ) , the recital of whose names is believed to dispel sin . 
 Mandodari was the daughter of Mayasura , the King of the Asuras ( demons ) , and the apsara ( celestial nymphs ) Hema . Mandodari bears three sons : Meghanada ( Indrajit ) , Atikaya , and Akshayakumara . According to some Ramayana adaptations , Mandodari is also the mother of Rama 's wife Sita , who is infamously kidnapped by Ravana . Despite her husband 's faults , Mandodari loves him and advises him to follow the path of righteousness . Mandodari repeatedly advises Ravana to return Sita to Rama , but her advice falls on deaf ears . Her love and loyalty to Ravana are praised in the Ramayana . 
 Different versions of the Ramayana record her ill @-@ treatment at the hands of Rama 's monkey generals . Some versions say they disturb a sacrifice by Ravana , and some that they destroy her chastity , which was the last protection for Ravana 's life . Hanuman tricks her into disclosing the location of a magical arrow which Rama uses to kill Ravana . After Ravana 's death , Vibhishana — Ravana 's younger brother who joins forces with Rama and is responsible for Ravana 's death — marries Mandodari on the advice of Rama . [ Citation needed . Going by <unk> versions is meaningless ) 
 = = Birth = = 
 The Uttara Ramayana narrates a story about the birth of Mandodari . Mayasura ( Maya ) , the son of sage Kashyapa is married to the apsara ( heavenly nymph ) Hema . They have two sons , Mayavi and <unk> , but long for a daughter , so they start performing penances to seek the favour of the god Shiva . 
 Meanwhile , an apsara named Madhura arrives at Mount Kailash , the abode of Shiva , to pay her respects . In absence of his wife Parvati , Madhura has clandestine coitus with Shiva . When Parvati returns , she finds traces of ashes from Shiva ’ s body on the breasts of Madhura . Agitated , Parvati curses Madhura and sends her to live in a well as a frog for twelve years . Shiva consoles Madhura and says she will become a beautiful woman and be married to a great valorous man . After twelve years , Madhura becomes a beautiful maiden again and cries out loudly from the well . Mayasura and Hema , who are performing penance nearby , answer her call and adopt her as their daughter . They bring her up as Mandodari . 
 = = Marriage and later life = = 
 Ravana comes to the house of Mayasura and falls in love with Mandodari . Mandodari and Ravana are soon married with Vedic rites . Mandodari bears Ravana three sons : Meghanada , Atikaya , and Akshayakumara . Mandore , a town located 9 km north of Jodhpur , is believed to be the native place of Mandodari . Ravana is treated as a son @-@ in @-@ law among some local Brahmins and has a temple dedicated to him here . 
 Despite Ravana 's faults , Mandodari loves him and is proud of his strength . She is aware of Ravana 's weakness towards women . A righteous woman , Mandodari tries to lead Ravana to righteousness , but Ravana always ignores her advice . She advises him to not to subdue the Navagraha , the nine celestial beings that govern one 's destiny , and not to seduce Vedavati , who would be reborn as Sita and cause the destruction of Ravana . 
 Ravana kidnaps Sita , the wife of Rama , the exiled prince of Ayodhya , who is an incarnation of the god Vishnu . Mandodari advises Ravana to return Sita to Rama , but to no avail . Mandodari knows this lust will bring the downfall of Ravana . 
 Mandodari is described as a beautiful woman in Valmiki 's Ramayana . When Hanuman , the monkey messenger of Rama , comes to Lanka in search of Sita , he is stupefied by Mandodari 's beauty when he enters Ravana 's bed chambers and mistakes Mandodari for Sita . When Hanuman finally finds Sita , he finds Ravana threatening to kill Sita unless she marries him . Ravana raises his sword to behead Sita when she refuses . Mandodari saves Sita by holding Ravana 's hand . Mandodari says that the murder of a woman is a heinous sin and thus Ravana should not kill Sita . She asks Ravana to entertain himself with his other wives and give up the idea of having Sita as his wife . Ravana spares Sita 's life , but does not give up his wish to marry Sita . Though Mandodari considers Sita inferior to her in beauty and ancestry , Mandodari acknowledges Sita 's devotion to Rama and compares her to goddesses like Sachi and Rohini . 
 When all attempts for a peaceful return of Sita fail , Rama declares war on Ravana 's Lanka . Before the final battle against Rama , Mandodari makes a last attempt to dissuade Ravana , but to no avail . Finally , Mandodari stands by her husband in the final battle like an obedient and faithful wife , though she also advises her son Meghanada , alias Indrajit ( " One who had conquered Indra ; the god @-@ king of heaven " ) , to not to fight Rama . 
 The Valmiki Ramayana narrates : When all of Ravana 's sons and warriors die , Ravana organizes a yajna ( " fire sacrifice " ) to assure his victory . Rama sends a troop of monkeys headed by Hanuman and the monkey prince Angada to destroy this yajna . The monkeys create havoc in Ravana 's palace , but Ravana continues the yajna . Angada drags Mandodari by her hair in front of Ravana . Mandodari pleads to her husband to save her and reminds him what Rama is doing for his wife . The enraged Ravana abandons the yajna and strikes Angada with his sword . With the yajna disturbed , Angada 's purpose is served and he leaves Mandodari and escapes . Mandodari again implores Ravana to surrender Sita to Rama , but he refuses . Other Ramayana adaptations present more gruesome descriptions of the incident . The Krittivasi Ramayan narrates that the monkeys dragged Mandodari . 
 Ravana fights the final duel with Rama . Rama fails to kill Ravana with his ordinary arrows , but finally kills with a magical arrow . While Valmiki 's Ramayana narrates that the magical arrow was given to Rama by Indra , in other versions the magical arrow is hidden in Mandodari 's bed chambers or under her bed . While Mandodari is engrossed in worshipping the goddess Parvati for Ravana 's wellbeing , Hanuman comes to her disguised as a Brahmin . After winning her confidence , he tricks her into revealing the secret location of the arrow . Hanuman seizes the arrow and gives it to Rama , leading to Ravana 's end . Mandodari appears at the death scene of Ravana in a disarrayed state and laments his death . In this battle , Mandodari loses her husband , her sons , and her kinsmen . 
 After the death of Ravana , Rama advises Vibhishana to take Mandodari as his wife , even though he already has a wife . A theory suggests that Ravana 's race may have had matrilineal families and thus , to restore order in the kingdom after Ravana 's death , it was necessary for Vibhishana to marry the reigning queen to get the right to rule . Another theory suggests it may be a non @-@ Aryan custom to marry the reigning queen . The marriage between Mandodari and Vibhishana is purely an " act of statesmanship " , rather than a marriage based on their " mutual sexual interference " . Mandodari may have agreed to marry Vibhishana , her younger brother @-@ in @-@ law , as this would lead the kingdom to prosperity and stability as allies of Rama 's Ayodhya , and she would continue to have a say in governance . Another reason for the marriage is as an alternative to suicide for the widowed Mandodari , which is averted by Rama . 
 = = Mother of Sita ? = = 
 Though Valmiki 's Ramayana does not record Mandodari as being the mother of Sita , some later adaptations of the Ramayana depict Mandodari as the mother of Sita or at least the cause of the latter 's birth . 
 The Adbhuta Ramayana narrates : Ravana used to store the blood of sages he killed in a large pot . The sage <unk> was practicing penance to acquire the goddess Lakshmi as his daughter . He stored milk from <unk> grass and purified it with mantras in a pot so that Lakshmi would inhabit it . Ravana poured the milk from this pot into his blood pot . Mandodari is frustrated seeing the evil deeds of Ravana , so she decides to commit suicide by drinking the contents of the blood @-@ pot , which is described to be more poisonous than poison . Instead of dying , Mandodari gets pregnant with the incarnation of Lakshmi due to the power of <unk> 's milk . Mandodari buries the foetus in Kurukshetra , where it is discovered by Janaka , who named her Sita . 
 The Devi Bhagavata Purana says : When Ravana wants to marry Mandodari , Maya warns him that her horoscope indicated her first @-@ born would destroy her clan and should be killed . Ignoring Maya 's advice , Ravana buries his first child by Mandodari in a casket in Janaka ’ s city , where it is discovered and grew up as Sita . Jain adaptations of the Ramayana like <unk> , Uttara @-@ purana , and others also state that Sita is the daughter of Ravana and Mandodari , and is abandoned when she is prophesied to be the cause of the end of Ravana and his family . 
 In the Malay Seri Rama and the Indonesian @-@ Javanese Rama <unk> , Ravana wants to possess Mandodari , the mother of Rama , but instead marries a pseudo @-@ Mandodari , who looks like the real one . Rama 's father has a union with this pseudo @-@ Mandodari , resulting in the birth of Sita , who is nominally Ravana 's daughter . 
 According to the Ananda Ramayana , king <unk> had a daughter named Padma - an incarnate of the goddess Lakshmi . When her marriage is organized , Rakshasas ( demons ) kill the king . The grief @-@ stricken Padma jumps into fire . Ravana discovers her body , which had turned into five jewels , in the fire and takes it to Lanka sealed in a box . Mandodari opens the box and finds Padma inside it . She advises Ravana to cast off the box containing the ill @-@ fated Padma , who led to the doom of her father . When the lid of the box is closed , Padma curses Ravana that she will return to Lanka and cause his doom . Ravana buries the box in the city of Janaka , who discovers Padma and brings her up as Sita . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 Remembering ever the virgins five <unk> , Draupadi , Kunti , Tara and Mandodari 
 Destroys the greatest of sins . 
 Hindus remember the panchakanya - the five virgins or maidens in this daily prayer , though none of them is considered an ideal woman who could be emulated . Mandodari , with Ahalya and Tara , belong to the Ramayana , while the rest are from the Mahabharata . Among the five elements , Mandodari is equated to water , " turbulent on the surface and deep in her spiritual quest " . The writer <unk> Ayyer says : 
 Her story is a reminder that the universal denigration of a group , based on the behaviour of a few , cannot cloud the greatness of the individual . Mandodari defies the stereotype of this racism . She is simple , unswerving , and self @-@ effacing , driven by the light of knowledge which gives meaning to solid materialism in an age that is shrouded by impulse , passion , and desire . She is the instrument that awakens the mind and counsels reason when irrationality becomes the core being . That she goes unheard and unheeded does not change her path . To her , the dharmic part is inward @-@ looking , while the role of the dutiful wife is the external self . Mandodari thought that her duty to her husband on issues of morals and values ended with her telling him what she thought of his actions . She neither put up any brave fight to stop him nor considered it her duty to do so . 
 Mandodari 's role is short in the Ramayana but very important . She is described as a pious and righteous royal lady . Compared to the rest of the panchakanya , Mukherjee considers Mandodari 's life as " less colourful and eventful " . He adds : " Mandodari seldom got prominence ... Her image lacks substance and fades quickly " , though he stresses on her love and loyalty towards her husband . Pradip Bhattacharya , author of the book <unk> : Women of Substance notes that " there is hardly anything special that Valmiki ( Ramayana ) has written about her ( Mandodari ) except that she warns her husband to return Sita and has enough influence to prevent his raping her . " 
 = Adrift ( 1911 film ) = 
 Adrift is a 1911 American silent short drama film produced by the Thanhouser Company and directed by Lucius J. Henderson . The film depicts a story of a young artist whose lack of success leads him to attempt suicide . Before he can carry out the act , his daughter follows and stops him . He confesses to his wife and she thanks her child , providing the inspiration for the artist to complete a great painting . It brings him success and he grows distant from his wife and becomes interested in another woman whom he was commissioned by . Once again saved by his daughters actions , whose crying moves the woman to break off the relationship with the artist . The artist destroys the painting and learns a moral lesson . 
 The film was advertised to the American churchgoer as a moral picture . The film was generally well received by critics , but the faults of story for the sake of a moral lesson was noted . Adrift , like all other American silents of the day , had no musical accompaniment , but a letter written into a trade publication provides a score for the drama . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 An official synopsis of the film was published in The Moving Picture World states : " Jack Thorne , a young artist , finds his efforts unappreciated , and he and his wife and little daughter are on the verge of starvation . The final blow comes when his last painting , on which he had built much hope , was rejected by a rich man , whom an artist chum kindly brought to the impoverished studio . Jack decides that he can struggle no longer . Unseen by his wife , he picks up his revolver , puts it in his pocket and goes out , intending to end everything . But his little daughter has watched him ; she follows him and stays his hand . Her prayers and entreaties bring him to a realization of what his rash act would mean to the two helpless ones that would be left behind . Penitent and remorseful , he accompanies his child back to their poor home . There he confesses to his wife that it was only the child 's timely interference that saved him from ending it all . The mother drops on her knees beside her child , and clasping her in her arms , raises grateful eyes to Heaven in a prayer of thankfulness . Jack , looking up suddenly , sees the beautiful group of mother and child , with a light as if from Heaven upon them . Realizing that [ this ] is the inspiration and subject for which he has sought in vain , he calls for them not to move , and at once begins his great painting of them , which brings him fame and wealth . " 
 " But with wealth , the artist becomes dissatisfied with his wife , and is infatuated with a beautiful society woman whose portrait he is painting . The couple , happy in poverty , are now rapidly drifting on the shoals of matrimonial disaster , but the child saves them . She is weeping one day when Miss Brent , the society woman , enters the room . Miss Brent , who has never seen the child before , asks the cause of her sorrow , and tries to comfort her . The child tells her , and Julia 's heart is touched . Though she has contempt [ u ] <unk> ignored the wife , she feels that she cannot ruin the life of the helpless child , even to win the artist 's love . On the spur of the moment , she writes a farewell note to Jack , and gives it to the child , saying that it will cure all her sorrow . Then she goes out of their lives forever . Jack realizes , when he sees that his child is the messenger , why Julia has broken with him . An outsider had made a sacrifice to save the future of little Marie , when he , her father , who had always loved her , had selfishly forgotten his duty . <unk> , he tears up the letter , and destroys the painting , not angrily , but as a symbol that he had cast the original out of his life . Then he makes peace with his wife and daughter , who are joyfully ready to forgive , and tells them that their love will keep him [ on ] the right path for the rest of his life , and that the lesson he has been taught will never be forgotten . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 William Garwood as the artist 
 Lucille Younge as the artist 's wife 
 Marie Eline as the young daughter 
 Katherine Horn as the society woman 
 = = Production = = 
 The single reel drama was directed by Lucius J. Henderson . Henderson was an important director at the Thanhouser Company who began directing in the late autumn of 1910 . It is unknown how many film 's Henderson directed prior to the release of Adrift , but one prior credit When Love Was Blind was released two weeks prior , on January 24 , 1911 . The New York Dramatic Mirror on February 4 , 1914 , stated that Henderson had directed about 150 one and two reel dramas for the Thanhouser Company . 
 = = = Musical accompaniment = = = 
 Musical accompaniment for the silent films were not provided by the studios , and the Thanhouser productions were no exception . The musical program for the screenings were decided and played by the individual accompanists . At times , musical accompaniments were shared in trade journals and the musical accompaniment for Adrift was provided by an unnamed writer from Oklahoma in The Moving Picture World . The suggestion was to begin with a waltz until the friend pats the artist on the shoulder , when All I Get is Sympathy is played . The suggestion for I Don 't Know Where I 'm Going completes the scene and Life 's A Funny Proposition follows the artist packing up until the artist pulls out the gun . A soft hurry follows as the girl confronts her father , leading to a crescendo at the climax . 
 Then the accompanist returns to Life 's A Funny Proposition until the father is sitting down in the house . What 's the Use of Dreaming leads to Gee , But It 's Great to Meet a Friend with the arrival of a friend . A waltz accompanies the gallery scene until the picture is shown , leading to Some Day When Dreams Come True as the artist becomes famous . The introduction with the society woman is accompanied by How Do You Do Miss Josephine and then by So Long Mary as she exits . No Place Like Home begins the next scene until the wife recognizes the emotional distancing of her husband when All I Ask is Love is played . The studio scene begins with I Love My Wife , But Oh You Kid and leads to Be Sweet to Me Kid or Next to your Mother ... with Nobody 's Little Girl during the crying scene . 
 The unnamed accompanist was using a range of works and shortened some titles in the letter , but these works are identifiable . They include : 
 All I Get Is Sympathy ( circa 1906 ) by Irving Berlin 
 I Don 't Know Where I 'm Going , But I 'm on My Way ( 1906 ) by Arthur Collins 
 Life 's a Funny Proposition After All ( 1904 ) by George M. Cohan 
 Gee , But It 's Great To Meet a Friend From Your Home Town ( 1910 ) by William Tracey and Jas . <unk> 
 What 's the Use of Dreaming ( 1907 ) by Irving Gillette 
 How Do You Do Miss Josephine ( 1909 ) by Collins & Harlan 
 No Place Like Home may be a reference to Home ! Sweet Home ! ( 1823 ) by Henry Bishop or There 's No Place Like Home ( 1902 ) by Byron G. Harlan 
 So Long Mary ( 1905 ) by George M. Cohan 
 All That I Ask of You is Love ( 1910 ) by Edgar Selden and Herbert Ingraham 
 I Love I Love I Love My Wife ( But Oh ! You Kid ! ) ( 1909 ) by Jimmy Lucas and Harry Von <unk> 
 Be Sweet To Me Kid ( 1907 ) by Joseph Howard 
 Next to Your Mother , Who do you Love ? ( 1909 ) by Irving Berlin 
 Nobody 's Little Girl ( 1907 ) by Jack <unk> and Theodore Morse 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The Thanhouser Company released Adrift on February 3 , 1911 . The film was advertised as being of a moral picture and targeted towards the American churchgoer as an example of a film that would change the views of the demographic towards film productions in general . The Thanhouser advertisement in the Moving Picture News said " [ Adrift ] is a useful film with a big , simple moral that would do much to reconcile the Church to the Motion Picture — if the former knew that this sort of film was so much in evidence . " It saw a wide release across the United States , with showings in Pennsylvania , Indiana , Missouri , Kansas , and New Hampshire . One of the last advertisements for the film 's showing was in September 1913 . 
 The film was positively reviewed by critics , but contained within the reviews were often criticism on the execution of the story and plot . A review in the The Moving Picture World was positive to the moral lesson the film asserted and found the acting to be satisfactory . Walton of the The Moving Picture News criticized the type of film as invoking sudden and unnatural changes in character for the sake of a moral lesson . The child 's influence and ability to bring sense to her father was seen as cheap theatrics , but ended with the assertion that the film was not second rate for employing such theatrics . The New York Dramatic Mirror was positive , but said that the scene upon which the little girl follows her father was not believable because she was unaware of her father 's intentions to kill himself . The film is presumed lost . 
 = USS Chickasaw ( 1864 ) = 
 USS Chickasaw was an ironclad Milwaukee @-@ class river monitor built for the United States Navy during the American Civil War . The ship participated in the Battle of Mobile Bay in August 1864 , during which she was lightly damaged , and the bombardments of Forts Gaines and Morgan as Union troops besieged the fortifications defending the bay . In March – April 1865 , Chickasaw again supported Union forces during the Mobile Campaign as they attacked Confederate fortifications defending the city of Mobile , Alabama . 
 She was placed in reserve after the end of the war and sold in 1874 . Her new owners converted Chickasaw into a train ferry in 1881 and renamed her Gouldsboro . The ship was later converted into a barge and remained in use until she sank sometime during the 1950s . Her wreck was discovered in the Mississippi River in New Orleans in 2003 , although there are no plans to raise her . 
 = = Description = = 
 Chickasaw was 229 feet ( 69 @.@ 8 m ) long overall and had a beam of 56 feet ( 17 @.@ 1 m ) . The ship had a depth of hold of 8 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) and a draft of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) . She was 970 tons burthen and displaced 1 @,@ 300 long tons ( 1 @,@ 300 t ) . Her crew numbered 138 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship was powered by two 2 @-@ cylinder horizontal non @-@ condensing steam engines , each driving two propellers , using steam generated by seven tubular boilers . The engines were designed to reach a top speed of 9 knots ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . Chickasaw carried 156 long tons ( 159 t ) of coal . 
 The ship 's main armament consisted of four smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading 11 @-@ inch Dahlgren guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets . Unlike her sisters , both of her turrets were designed by John Ericsson . Each gun weighed approximately 16 @,@ 000 pounds ( 7 @,@ 300 kg ) and could fire a 136 @-@ pound ( 61 @.@ 7 kg ) shell up to a range of 3 @,@ 650 yards ( 3 @,@ 340 m ) at an elevation of + 15 ° . 
 The cylindrical turrets were protected by eight layers of wrought iron 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) plates . The sides of the hull consisted of three layers of one @-@ inch plates , backed by 15 inches ( 380 mm ) of pine . The deck was heavily cambered to allow headroom for the crew on such a shallow draft and it consisted of iron plates .75 inches ( 19 mm ) thick . The pilothouse , positioned behind and above the fore turret , was protected by 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of armor . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 James Eads was awarded the contracts for all four of the Milwaukee @-@ class ships . He subcontracted Chickasaw to Gaylord , Son and Co. of St. Louis , Missouri who laid down the ship in 1862 . She was the first U.S. Navy ship to be named after the Indian tribe , and was launched on 10 February 1864 . Chickasaw was brought to Mound City , Illinois , on the Ohio River , on 8 May for fitting out and commissioned on 14 May 1864 . 
 After commissioning , Chickasaw patrolled the Mississippi River against Confederate raids and ambushes for several months . She was transferred to Rear Admiral David Farragut 's West Gulf Blockading Squadron on 9 July , together with her sister Winnebago . The ship required some time to refit at New Orleans and prepare for the voyage to Mobile across the Gulf of Mexico , so the two sisters did not depart New Orleans until 29 July . On the voyage down the Mississippi to the Pass A Loutre , Chickasaw was forced to anchor overnight because of steering problems and the two ships did not cross the sandbar at the mouth of the pass until the evening of the following day . Once in the Gulf , Chickasaw was taken under tow by the sidewheel gunboat Tennessee for the voyage across the Gulf . The two ships were forced to stop at Ship Island so Chickasaw 's engines could be repaired . That required only a day and the sidewheel gunboat Metacomet towed the monitor the rest of the way . 
 Farragut briefed Lieutenant Commander George H. Perkins , Chickasaw 's commander , on his ship 's intended role in the battle . The larger , more heavily armed monitors Tecumseh and Manhattan were to keep the ironclad ram CSS Tennessee away from the vulnerable wooden ships while they were passing Fort Morgan and then sink her . Chickasaw and Winnebago were to engage the fort until all of the wooden ships had passed . The four monitors would form the starboard column of ships , closest to Fort Morgan , with Chickasaw in the rear , while the wooden ships formed a separate column to port . The eastern side of the channel closest to Fort Morgan was free of obstacles , but " torpedoes " , as mines were called at the time , were known to be present west of a prominent black buoy in the channel . 
 The two Milwaukee @-@ class ships bombarded Fort Morgan for about an hour and a half while the wooden ships passed through the mouth of Mobile Bay . Chickasaw fired 75 rounds at the fort beginning at 07 : 10 ; the return fire badly damaged her funnel so that the crew was forced to use tallow and coal tar to generate enough steam to keep the ship in the fight . She engaged the Tennessee two hours later until the ironclad surrendered at 10 : 40 . The Confederate ironclad was shooting at the wooden ships at this time at point @-@ blank range in a chaotic melee with both sides making multiple attempts to ram each other . Chickasaw remained off the Tennessee 's stern through their engagement and fired on her at ranges between 10 to 50 yards ( 9 @.@ 1 to 45 @.@ 7 m ) . None of her 52 shells penetrated their target 's armor , but they did jam shut several of the armored shutters that protected the aft gun ports , including the stern gun port at 09 : 40 . Perkins claimed that his ship shot away the Tennessee 's flagstaff , smokestack and the exposed steering chains that controlled her rudder . Chickasaw was struck 11 times during the action , with one shot penetrating her deck that set some of the crew 's hammocks on fire . Two of Chickasaw 's sailors , Chief Boatswain 's Mate Andrew Jones and Master @-@ at @-@ Arms James <unk> , were later awarded the Medal of Honor for their actions during the battle . 
 Later that day , the ship captured a barge out from under the guns of Fort Powell , a fortification guarding another entrance to Mobile Bay further north . Chickasaw fired 25 shots at the fort and was struck once , another hit on her smokestack . On 6 August , the ship bombarded Fort Gaines for two hours in support of troops besieging the fort . Beginning on 13 August , she intermittently bombarded Fort Morgan until the fort surrendered on 23 August . Between 15 – 17 August , Chickasaw was operating further north in Mobile Bay and engaged several of the ships defending Mobile without result . 
 In March – April 1865 , Chickasaw bombarded fortifications during the Battles of Spanish Fort and Fort <unk> . Together with the ironclad Cincinnati and the steamboat Nyanza , under the overall command of Captain Edward Simpson , Chickasaw sailed up the Tombigbee River on 9 May 1865 to Nanna Hubba Bluff where Simpson accepted the surrender of the casemate ironclad Nashville , the gunboats Baltic and Morgan , and the river boat Black Diamond from Commodore Ebenezer Ferrand . The monitor remained in the vicinity of Mobile Bay until 3 July when she sailed for New Orleans . 
 = = Post @-@ war career and heritage = = 
 Upon her arrival at New Orleans on 6 July , Chickasaw was decommissioned . She temporarily bore the name Samson between 15 June and 10 August 1869 before resuming her original name . She was sold on 12 September 1874 to the New Orleans Pacific Railway Company who modified the ship into a coal barge with the name of Samson . The railroad converted the ship into a train ferry in 1880 and changed her to side @-@ wheel propulsion under the name Gouldsboro . She was sold in the 1940s to the New Orleans Coal & <unk> <unk> Co. and converted into a work barge . It sank off the Greenville Bend of the Mississippi River in New Orleans sometime during the 1950s . 
 The wreck of the Gouldsboro was discovered when a section of riverbank collapsed in 2003 and the Army Corps of Engineers surveyed the area in 2004 to determine how best to stabilize the riverbank . There are no plans to raise the wreck , but the Corps of Engineers will preserve it in place . 
 = California State Route 209 = 
 State Route 209 ( SR 209 ) was a state highway in the U.S. state of California , connecting Cabrillo National Monument with the interchange of Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) and I @-@ 8 in San Diego , passing through the neighborhoods of Point Loma . The majority of the route was along Rosecrans Street ; it also included Cañon Street and Catalina Boulevard leading to the tip of Point Loma . 
 The Rosecrans Street portion of SR 209 corresponded to the original routing of the historic La Playa Trail . Rosecrans Street was paved in the late 1900s through the community of Roseville , and was added to the state highway system in 1933 as Route 12 . SR 209 was designated in the 1964 state highway renumbering , and a full interchange with I @-@ 5 and I @-@ 8 was completed in 1969 . The designation was removed from the state highway system in 2003 and responsibility for the road was transferred to the city of San Diego . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The route began at a turnaround next to the Old Point Loma Lighthouse in the Cabrillo National Monument , near the southern tip of Point Loma . Heading north along the crest of the Point Loma peninsula , it passed through Fort Rosecrans Military Reservation and Fort Rosecrans National Cemetery before exiting the former through a gate and entering the Wooded Area neighborhood of Point Loma as Catalina Boulevard . SR 209 passed through this residential neighborhood and provided access to Point Loma Nazarene University . The SR 209 designation then made a right turn onto Cañon Street , curved to the southeast , and went downhill to the bayside location of the old La Playa Trail . At the intersection with Rosecrans Street , the designation made a turn to the northeast at a right angle onto Rosecrans . 
 As it continued northeast through the Roseville and Loma Portal neighborhoods , SR 209 intersected both Harbor Boulevard and Nimitz Boulevard before passing along the northwestern edge of the Naval Training Center San Diego ( now closed and redeveloped as Liberty Station ) and providing access to the Marine Corps Recruit Depot San Diego at Barnett Street . SR 209 continued from Midway Drive northeast to the intersection of Sports Arena Boulevard and Camino del Rio West , where the highway continued north onto the latter , terminating at the ramps leading into the interchange with I @-@ 5 and I @-@ 8 . 
 In 1996 , SR 209 had an annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) of 2 @,@ 600 at the southern end in Cabrillo National Monument , and 61 @,@ 000 at the northern end at the I @-@ 5 / I @-@ 8 junction , the latter of which was the highest AADT for the highway . 
 = = History = = 
 The Rosecrans Street portion of the highway followed the route of the historic La Playa Trail , the oldest European trail on the west coast , which connected the Spanish settlements in Old Town and Mission San Diego de Alcala with the ship loading and unloading area at La Playa . 
 In February 1907 , a petition to construct a railway line along Rosecrans Street from 38th Street to <unk> Street was introduced to the San Diego City Council . By July , work was to begin on grading Rosecrans Street through what was known as the city of Roseville in preparation for construction of the Point Loma Electric Railway line . The work was briefly disrupted due to a labor dispute , but by June 1908 , two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of the 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) had been paved . By March 1909 , railroad tracks were being placed along Rosecrans Street . The city assumed maintenance of the road on May 1 , after it had been paved from Tide Street to Ocean Beach . Private citizens paid for over $ 100 @,@ 000 of the costs , and the city was to pay for $ 12 @,@ 000 , according to an agreement made in 1904 . However , by December the bill had not been paid by the city due to a lack of funds , and the construction company filed a claim ; on December 29 , the city agreed to pay $ 12 @,@ 000 , using funds from the water department . 
 The termination of the Point Loma streetcar line was considered in 1923 , but the San Diego Electric Railway decided to keep it running after residents opposed the idea of using buses instead . However , by 1946 , bus lines were in place on Rosecrans Street , and a petition for increased bus service to Point Loma was given to the city in October 1947 . 
 The new divided highway known as Rosecrans Boulevard from Lytton Street to Canon Street was dedicated on June 5 , 1940 , and was a part of the state highway system extending to Cabrillo National Monument , which served as the western end of Legislative Route 12 . Before this project , it was a two @-@ lane road that had issues such as traffic congestion and flooding . A monument marking La Playa Trail at Avenida de Portugal and Rosecrans Street that had been installed in 1934 was removed by the construction in the 1940s ; however , a replacement was installed in 2010 . Another of the six monuments was moved out of the median near the Midway Drive intersection to a commercial area that same year . During the 1950s , the route from Lytton Street and Rosecrans Street to Pacific Highway was considered a part of US 80 . 
 SR 209 was designated in the 1964 state highway renumbering . Plans for an interchange between I @-@ 5 , I @-@ 8 , SR 209 , and SR 109 date from 1965 , although several concerns had to be taken into account , including the preservation of historical Old Town and keeping traffic through the area moving during construction . The goal was to begin construction in 1966 , and complete the interchange in 1969 . There were concerns about a $ 3 billion shortfall in funding during May 1966 , which caused the San Diego Chamber of Commerce Highway Committee to recommend the completion of SR 109 as a project . 
 Construction had begun on September 22 , 1966 , and the interchange was to replace the intersection of Pacific Highway and Rosecrans Street . The cost of the interchange was projected to be $ 10 @.@ 86 million . The eight @-@ lane freeway was projected to relieve traffic in the Frontier Street area coming from the San Diego Sports Arena . Completion of both the interchange and SR 109 was planned for early 1969 . The ramp from south I @-@ 5 to Camino del Rio opened in February 1968 , with the remainder of the project to be completed in summer 1969 . The entire project was completed in September , with the road scheduled to open in October ; just a few months before , the routing of SR 209 had been determined . The routing of SR 109 was officially added to I @-@ 8 in 1972 . 
 In 1971 , there was a state proposal to remove SR 209 from the state highway system , which the City of San Diego objected to . However , SR 209 was deleted from the system in 2003 , and had been given to the City of San Diego in 2001 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The entire route was in San Diego , San Diego County . 
 = Julie Kavner = 
 Julie Deborah Kavner ( born September 7 , 1950 ) is an American film and television actress , voice actress and comedian . She first attracted notice for her role as Valerie Harper 's character 's younger sister Brenda in the sitcom Rhoda for which she won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series . She is best known for her voice role as Marge Simpson on the animated television series The Simpsons . She also voices other characters for the show , including Jacqueline Bouvier , and Patty and Selma Bouvier . 
 Known for her improvisation and distinctive " honeyed gravel voice , " Kavner was cast in her first professional acting role as Brenda Morgenstern in Rhoda in 1974 . She received the Primetime Emmy Award in 1978 and three more nominations for playing the character . Following Rhoda , Kavner was cast in The Tracey Ullman Show , which debuted in 1987 . The Tracey Ullman Show included a series of animated shorts about a dysfunctional family . Voices were needed for the shorts , and the producers decided to ask Kavner to voice Marge . The shorts would eventually be spun off into The Simpsons . 
 Kavner has been described as " nearly reclusive " ; part of her contract says that she will never have to promote The Simpsons on video . For her work as Marge , Kavner received another Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance in 1992 and an Annie Award nomination for her performance as the character in The Simpsons Movie . 
 Typically cast as a " woman who is supportive , sympathetic or self @-@ effacingly funny , " Kavner grew to dislike playing such roles . In 1992 , she starred in This Is My Life , her first leading role in a feature film . Kavner has also appeared in live @-@ action roles in seven films written by Woody Allen , and in the Adam Sandler comedy Click . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kavner was born in Los Angeles , California , on September 7 , 1950 , the second daughter of Rose , a family counselor , and David Kavner , a furniture manufacturer , and grew up in Southern California . She decided to pursue a career in acting because " There was nothing else I wanted to do , ever . " She attended Beverly Hills High School ( which she later admitted she hated ) , where she was " something of a loner " , and unsuccessfully tried out for several plays . John Ingle , formerly the chairman of the Beverly Hills High School art department , later commented that Kavner was " excellent at improvisation but she wasn 't an ingenue and not that castable at that age . " 
 After graduating from high school , Kavner attended San Diego State University and majored in drama , being cast in several productions including a role as Charlotte Corday in Marat / Sade , becoming known for her improvisation and ability to do both comedy and drama . After graduating in 1971 she got a day job as a typist at the UCLA School of the Arts and Architecture . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In 1973 , Kavner auditioned for a role as one of Rhoda Morgenstern 's sisters in The Mary Tyler Moore Show . David Davis , producer of the show , had convinced her to audition for the part , but decided to cast another actress instead . A year later , Rhoda Morgenstern became the leading character in a spin @-@ off called Rhoda . Kavner was cast in her first professional acting role as Brenda Morgenstern , sister of the eponymous character . Rhoda ran on CBS from September 9 , 1974 , to December 1978 . She received four Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Continuing Performance by a Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series for playing Brenda , winning in 1978 . She also received four Golden Globe Award nominations . In 1975 , she received Daytime Emmy Award nomination for her starring role in the daytime special The Girl Who Couldn 't Lose . 
 Following Rhoda , Kavner had a guest appearance on Taxi and appeared in the 1985 comedy Bad Medicine as well as the 1987 film Surrender , both of which were box office failures . She appeared in the television movies Revenge of the Stepford Wives , No Other Love and A Fine Romance , and shot a television pilot . She also starred in several stage plays , including a play called It Had to be You at a dinner theater in Canada , Particular Friendships in New York in 1981 , and Two for the Seesaw , directed by Burt Reynolds . Woody Allen first saw Kavner one night while he was watching Rhoda in the 1970s . He thought that she was remarkable and later offered her a role in his 1986 film Hannah and Her Sisters . Kavner agreed , and credits Allen and the film with rejuvenating her career . 
 Kavner was then cast as a sidekick to Tracey Ullman in The Tracey Ullman Show , which debuted on Fox in 1987 . Kavner described the show as , " like being back in school , a chance to play a wide variety of characters , some really vicious people , to not rest on laurels , to not play it safe . " Kavner commented , " What I do is not mimicry or an impersonation , but more of an assimilation . [ On The Tracey Ullman Show ] we did a lot of looking at people to find out who to base our characters on . We did our homework on our lunch hour . " She received four Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Best Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program . 
 = = = The Simpsons = = = 
 Kavner became most famous for her role as Marge Simpson on the animated television show The Simpsons , a show that continues to the present . The Tracey Ullman Show included a series of animated shorts about the dysfunctional Simpson family . Voices were needed for the shorts , so the producers decided to ask Kavner and fellow cast member Dan Castellaneta to voice Marge and Homer rather than hire more actors . Kavner has what Hilary de Vries of The New York Times described as a " honeyed gravel voice " . Kavner says her distinctive voice is due to " a bump on [ her ] vocal cords . " 
 Although Marge is her most famous character , Kavner 's favorite characters to voice are her sisters Patty and Selma Bouvier because " they 're really funny and sad at the same time . " Series creator Matt Groening instructed Kavner to voice the duo as characters who " suck the life out of everything . " Both have similar raspy voices , but Patty 's voice is more masculine and has a lower register , while Selma 's voice is a little sweeter . Kavner also provides the voices of every other female member of the Bouvier family , including Marge 's mother Jacqueline , Great @-@ Aunt Gladys ( a dead relative who was introduced on season four 's " Selma 's Choice " ) , and an unnamed grandmother seen on the season six episode " Fear of Flying " . 
 Part of Kavner 's contract says that she will never have to promote The Simpsons on video and she rarely performs Marge 's voice in public because she believes it " destroys the illusion . People feel these are real people . " Kavner takes recording sessions seriously and feels that voice acting is , " a little more limiting than live acting . And I have nothing to do with my character 's movement . " Nancy Cartwright , who voices Bart Simpson , said in her book My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy that Kavner is " a workhorse of an actor " with " extraordinary professionalism and quiet work ethic , " and notes that she is rarely late for recording sessions . 
 Until 1998 , Kavner was paid $ 30 @,@ 000 per episode . During a pay dispute in 1998 , Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors with new actors , going as far as preparing to cast new voices . However , the dispute was soon resolved and she received $ 125 @,@ 000 per episode until 2004 when the voice actors demanded that they be paid $ 360 @,@ 000 an episode . The issue was resolved a month later , and Kavner earned $ 250 @,@ 000 per episode . After salary re @-@ negotiations in 2008 , the voice actors received approximately $ 400 @,@ 000 per episode . Three years later , with Fox threatening to cancel the series unless production costs were cut , Kavner and the other cast members accepted a 30 percent pay cut , down to just over $ 300 @,@ 000 per episode . 
 At the 44th Primetime Emmy Awards , Kavner received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance for voicing Marge in the season three episode " I Married Marge " . In 2004 , Kavner and Dan Castellaneta won a Young Artist Award for " Most Popular Mom & Dad in a TV Series " . For her performance in The Simpsons Movie , Kavner was nominated for " Best Voice Acting in an Animated Feature " at the 2007 Annie Awards , but lost to Ian Holm from Ratatouille . Kavner 's emotional performance in the movie got positive reviews and one critic said she " gave what must be the most heartfelt performance ever to find its way into a movie based on an irreverent cartoon . " Some scenes in the movie , such as Marge 's emotional video message to Homer , were recorded over one hundred times , leaving Kavner exhausted . 
 = = = Further career = = = 
 Many of Kavner 's roles have been described by New York Times writer Hilary de Vries as a " woman who is supportive , sympathetic or self @-@ effacingly funny . " Kavner grew to despise playing such roles , saying " If it smacks of Brenda Morgenstern , I won 't take the job . " She had a supporting role as Eleanor Costello , a nurse who befriends Robin Williams ' character in the Academy Award nominated film <unk> . Kavner interviewed several nurses in preparation for the role , and Penny Marshall , the director of the film , described Kavner as " a low @-@ maintenance actor [ ... ] You never have to worry about giving [ her ] back @-@ story for her characters . " In 1992 , Kavner starred in This Is My Life , her first leading role in a feature film . Kavner played Dottie Ingels , an aspiring stand @-@ up comedian who starts neglecting her family when her career begins to take off . Kavner described Dottie as " really selfish " but admitted , " I liked the role for that very reason . " Kavner had been asked to play a character with a smaller role in the film , but Joe Roth , at the time the chairman of 20th Century Fox , suggested that they cast a lesser known actress in the lead role . Nora Ephron , the writer of This Is My Life , said Kavner " has so little vanity that it is almost shocking . Not only does she have no demands as an actress — ' How big is my trailer , what 's in my refrigerator ? ' — but she will do anything for the character if it makes sense to her . " 
 Kavner has frequently appeared in Woody Allen films , having roles in Hannah and Her Sisters ( 1986 ) , Radio Days ( 1987 ) , New York Stories ( 1989 ) , Alice ( 1990 ) , Shadows and Fog ( 1991 ) , the television movie Don 't Drink the Water ( 1994 ) and Deconstructing Harry ( 1997 ) . Allen described her as " a naturally funny person . When she does a scene you listen to her and look at her and the prism through which it 's all filtered is funny . " Kavner believes he is " a true filmmaker , one that has something to say , continually experimenting on different themes within his own film @-@ making , " adding that " anything [ Allen ] ever does , I always want to do , [ ... ] I don 't even have to read it . " 
 She has done voice @-@ over work in films such as The Lion King 1 ½ , Dr. Dolittle and an uncredited role as an announcer in A Walk on the Moon . Her most recent live @-@ action film was a role of the mother of Adam Sandler 's character in Click . She has also worked with Tracey Ullman in the HBO sketch comedy series Tracey Takes On .... 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kavner leads a private , " nearly reclusive " life , " discreet and guarded beyond the usual reticent star routine . " She rarely makes public appearances and refuses to allow herself to be photographed at work , especially in the studio while doing The Simpsons . Her partner is retired producer David Davis ; they have lived together since 1976 . In a 1992 interview with The New York Times , Kavner said she was considering retiring , " except for doing three days a year for Woody [ Allen ] , " but felt that if she did retire , she would receive a script she wanted " to do more than life itself " . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 The Simpsons ( 1991 ) – Marge Simpson 
 Storybook Weaver ( 1994 ) - Mayzie Bird 
 The Simpsons Cartoon Studio ( 1996 ) – Marge Simpson 
 Virtual Springfield ( 1997 ) – Marge Simpson , Patty and Selma Bouvier 
 Simpsons Bowling ( 1999 ) – Marge Simpson , Patty and Selma Bouvier 
 The Simpsons Wrestling ( 2001 ) – Marge Simpson 
 The Simpsons : Road Rage ( 2001 ) – Marge Simpson 
 The Simpsons Skateboarding ( 2002 ) – Marge Simpson 
 The Simpsons : Hit & Run ( 2003 ) – Marge Simpson , Patty and Selma Bouvier 
 Storybook Weaver Deluxe ( 2004 ) - Mayzie Bird 
 The Simpsons Game ( 2007 ) – – Marge Simpson , Patty and Selma Bouvier 
 The Simpsons : Tapped Out ( 2012 ) – Marge Simpson , Patty and Selma Bouvier 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 " Do the Bartman " ( 1990 ) – Marge Simpson 
 = = = Theme park = = = 
 The Simpsons Ride ( 2008 ) – Marge Simpson , Patty and Selma Bouvier 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Gordon Roberts ( ice hockey ) = 
 Gordon William " Doc " Roberts ( September 5 , 1891 – September 1 , 1966 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey forward who played for the Ottawa Hockey Club and Montreal Wanderers of the National Hockey Association ( NHA ) and the Vancouver Millionaires and Seattle Metropolitans of the Pacific Coast Hockey Association ( PCHA ) . He was a member of the Ottawa team that defended the Stanley Cup in a 1910 challenge ; Roberts scored seven goals in two games in his team 's victory over the Edmonton Hockey Club . He moved to Montreal in 1910 where he was consistently among the NHA 's leading scorers with the Wanderers while also studying medicine at McGill University . 
 While in Montreal , Roberts attended McGill University where he studied to become a physician . Following his graduation , he settled in British Columbia to begin his medical career . Continuing his hockey career , Roberts joined the Vancouver Millionaires where he was named a PCHA all @-@ star at left wing and led the league in scoring with 43 goals in 1916 – 17 . He retired from hockey in 1918 following a season in Seattle before Vancouver lured him back to the game one year later . Roberts left the sport again in 1920 and his medical career ultimately took him to Oakland , California where he practiced for over 40 years . He was posthumously inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1971 . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 Roberts participated in several sports in his youth . In addition to hockey , he played lacrosse and football . Roberts focused on hockey , however , and played for several teams in his hometown of Ottawa . He was the leading scorer of the Ottawa City Hockey League in 1908 – 09 as a member of the <unk> Hockey Club with 19 goals in six games . 
 When he turned professional in 1909 by joining the Ottawa Hockey Club , Roberts was one of the youngest players in his league at the age of 18 years . He scored three goals with the team in a single game in the short @-@ lived Canadian Hockey Association before Ottawa jumped to the National Hockey Association ( NHA ) for the remainder of the season . In nine NHA games , Roberts recorded 13 goals . Ottawa was the defending Stanley Cup champions and , during the season , were challenged for the trophy by the Alberta champion Edmonton Hockey Club in January 1910 . The Ottawa Citizen described Roberts as being the star of the first game . The paper praised his defensive checking in addition to his four goals scored in an 8 – 4 victory . He added three goals in the second game as Ottawa retained control of the Stanley Cup by a 21 – 11 aggregate score . 
 Having enrolled at McGill University to study medicine , Roberts moved to Montreal . He continued to play hockey and lacrosse but could not play football as McGill was unable to have him certified as an amateur . Also ineligible to play collegiate hockey , he joined the Montreal Wanderers for the 1910 – 11 NHA season . Roberts played only four NHA games that year , but thereafter was consistently one of the league 's leading scorers . Following a pair of 16 @-@ goal seasons , Roberts finished second in league scoring with 31 goals in 1913 – 14 and with 29 in 1914 – 15 . He was also named a league all @-@ star in 1914 . 
 Roberts found it difficult to both study and play hockey , but praised the support of his classmates and the faculty in helping him earn his degree . He had to complete an extra year of schooling after failing his second year , but graduated from McGill in 1916 . Following an 18 @-@ goal season in 1915 – 16 , he left Montreal to take up practice in British Columbia . Roberts continued his hockey career and joined the Vancouver Millionaires of the Pacific Coast Hockey Association ( PCHA ) . He led the PCHA in scoring with 43 goals – in 23 games – and was named a league all @-@ star on left wing . His medical career took him to Seattle and as a result , he joined the Seattle Metropolitans for the 1917 – 18 PCHA season . He retired in 1918 to focus on his medical career in the Howe Sound region of British Columbia , but was lured back to the PCHA by the Millionaires for the 1919 – 20 season . He scored 16 goals in 22 games for Vancouver before permanently retiring from hockey . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Roberts was considered by his contemporaries to be one of the greatest left wings in the sport 's history . His wrist shot , one of the most fearsome of the pre @-@ 1927 era , became the stuff of legend across the country , in both the PCHA and NHA . Roberts was sometimes described as being the inventor of the " curved shot " , preceding and <unk> players such as Harry Cameron , Babe Dye and Didier Pitre . Bernie Morris , and Hall of Famers Frank Foyston and Lester Patrick all attested to the unrivalled effectiveness and dramatic trajectory of Roberts ’ shot . Clint Benedict , often considered the greatest goalie of the 1893 @-@ 1926 era also gave praise to Roberts ’ accuracy coupled with his ability to curve the puck . 
 Roberts was noted for being able to get his shot off at very bad angles from close in , as well as drive it in from far outside the reach and typical positional range of defenceman . 
 Notwithstanding his shooting prowess , Roberts was also well regarded for his stamina and skating ability , as well as being an above @-@ average defensive checker . Despite being a physical player , Roberts ( like his contemporary Frank Nighbor ) was noted for his gentlemanly conduct on the ice – which he may have used to protect himself from retaliation : 
 “ Montreal boss George Kennedy told a story of a game against the Montreal Wanderers in which Pitre was being tripped and butt @-@ ended by rugged winger Gordon Roberts . 
 Kennedy screamed at Pitre , ‘ Are you afraid of Roberts ? ’ 
 ‘ No , sure not , ’ was Pitre 's surprised response . 
 ‘ Well , why don 't you hit him back ? ’ Kennedy snapped . 
 ‘ How can I hit back ? ’ Pitre asked . ‘ Roberts , he is very polite , very nice . Each time I fall , he helps me get up and apologizes and says it is an accident ... can I hit a man who is apologizing to me ? No , never , it is not done . ’ ' ” 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Born September 5 , 1891 , and raised in Ottawa , Roberts was the youngest of ten children ; he had eight brothers and a sister . His brother Laurie was also a doctor and athlete , while another brother , Eddie , fought and died in the First World War . Roberts returned east in 1922 where he did post @-@ graduate studies in New York . The Ottawa Senators , then of the National Hockey League , attempted to bring him out of retirement again and Cornell University sought his services as a lacrosse coach . Roberts turned down both offers and chose to retain focus on his medical career ; He moved to California where he taught for a time at Stanford University Hospital . By 1925 , he settled in Oakland where he practiced as an obstetrician for over 40 years . Roberts also acted as a referee at California Hockey League games . Roberts died September 1 , 1966 , and in 1971 was posthumously inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = SMS Graudenz = 
 SMS Graudenz was the lead ship of her class of light cruisers . She had one sister ship , SMS Regensburg . The ship was built by the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) in the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Kiel , laid down in 1912 and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in August 1914 , days after the outbreak of World War I. She was named for the then @-@ German town of Graudenz ( now <unk> , Poland ) . The ship was armed with a main battery of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns and had a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 Graudenz saw extensive service during World War I , including serving as part of the reconnaissance screen for the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group during the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby in December 1914 . The ship also took part in the Battle of Dogger Bank in January 1915 , and the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 . She had been damaged by a mine and was unable to participate in the Battle of Jutland in May 1916 . She was assigned to the planned final operation of the High Seas Fleet in October 1918 , weeks before the end of the war , but a major mutiny forced the cancellation of the plan . After the end of the war , the ship was ceded to Italy as a war prize and commissioned into the Italian Navy as Ancona ; she remained in service until 1937 when she was stricken and broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Graudenz was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Prinzess Wilhelm " and was laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Kiel in 1912 and was launched on 25 October 1913 . At her launch , the mayor of Graudenz , Dr. <unk> , christened the ship . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 10 August 1914 . The ship was 142 @.@ 7 meters ( 468 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 8 m ( 45 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 75 m ( 18 @.@ 9 ft ) forward . She displaced 6 @,@ 382 t ( 6 @,@ 281 long tons ; 7 @,@ 035 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of Marine steam turbines driving two 3 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 11 ft ) propellers . They were designed to give 26 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 000 kW ) . These were powered by ten coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers and two oil @-@ fired double @-@ ended boilers . These gave the ship a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . Graudenz carried 1 @,@ 280 t ( 1 @,@ 260 long tons ) of coal , and an additional 375 t ( 369 long tons ) of oil that gave her a range of approximately 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 21 officers and 364 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , eight were located amidships , four on either side , and two in a superfiring pair aft . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 12 @,@ 700 m ( 41 @,@ 700 ft ) . These were later replaced with seven 15 cm SK L / 45 guns and two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns . She was also equipped with a pair of 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes submerged in the hull on the broadside . Two deck @-@ mounted launchers were added when the gun armament was upgraded . She could also carry 120 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with up to 60 mm thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Graudenz 's first operation was the raid on Yarmouth on 3 November 1914 . She formed part of the reconnaissance screen for the battlecruisers of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's I Scouting Group , along with the cruisers Kolberg and Strassburg . The bombardment was conducted without incident , but on the return , the armored cruiser Yorck struck a German mine outside Wilhelmshaven and sank . She was also present for the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . After completing the bombardment of the towns , the Germans began to withdraw , though British forces moved to intercept them . Graudenz , Stralsund , Strassburg , and two flotillas of torpedo boats steamed between two British squadrons . In the heavy mist , which reduced visibility to less than 4 @,@ 000 yd ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) , only Stralsund was spotted , though only briefly . The Germans were able to use the bad weather to cover their withdrawal . Graudenz again screened for the I Scouting Group for the sortie out to the Dogger Bank on 24 January 1915 . In the ensuing Battle of Dogger Bank , the large armored cruiser Blücher was sunk . 
 In August 1915 , Graudenz went into the Baltic for a major operation to clear the Gulf of Riga of Russian naval forces . Eight dreadnoughts and three battlecruisers from the High Seas Fleet were detached for the operation . Graudenz participated in the second attack on 16 August , led by the dreadnoughts Nassau and Posen . The minesweepers cleared the Russian minefields by the 20th , allowing the German squadron to enter the Gulf . The Russians had by this time withdrawn to Moon Sound , and the threat of Russian submarines and mines in the Gulf prompted the Germans to retreat . The major units of the High Seas Fleet were back in the North Sea before the end of August . Graudenz struck a mine in mid 1916 , and was in drydock for repairs in May 1916 . As a result , she was unavailable for the fleet operation that resulted in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May − 1 June 1916 . For the remainder of the war , she served as a torpedo boat flotilla leader . 
 By October 1918 , Graudenz was assigned to the II Scouting Group , which was to participate in a final , climactic attack by the High Seas Fleet . The planned operation called for raids on Allied shipping in the Thames estuary and Flanders to draw out the Grand Fleet . Graudenz , Karlsruhe and Nürnberg were assigned to the force tasked with attacking Flanders . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . Commodore Andreas Michelsen organized a force of light craft , including light cruisers , destroyers , and U @-@ boats to oppose a possible British attack while the heavy units of the fleet were in disarray ; he chose Graudenz as his flagship . 
 Graudenz served with the newly reorganized Reichsmarine in the aftermath of the war , through 1919 . She was stricken from the naval register on 10 March 1920 and surrendered to the Allies as a war prize . She was transferred to Italy on 1 June 1920 under the name " E " in the French port of Cherbourg . She was placed in Italian service and renamed Ancona . She was overhauled starting in 1921 through 1924 . Her coal storage space was reduced from 1 @,@ 280 t ( 1 @,@ 260 long tons ; 1 @,@ 410 short tons ) to 900 metric tons ( 890 long tons ; 990 short tons ) and her oil bunker capacity was correspondingly increased from 375 t ( 369 long tons ; 413 short tons ) to 1 @,@ 520 t ( 1 @,@ 500 long tons ; 1 @,@ 680 short tons ) . Ancona was commissioned into the Italian Navy on 6 May 1925 . She was provided with equipment to handle an Macchi M.7 seaplane in 1926 . The ship 's bow and forecastle were lengthened between 1928 and 1929 to mount a catapult for the seaplane . She remained in service until 1932 when she was placed in reserve in Taranto . She was stricken on 11 March 1937 and subsequently broken up . 
 = Love Like This ( Natasha Bedingfield song ) = 
 " Love Like This " is a song performed by British pop singer Natasha Bedingfield . It was included on Bedingfield 's second North American album , Pocketful of Sunshine , and features vocals from reggae pop singer Sean Kingston . The song was written by Bedingfield , Kingston , Louis Biancaniello , Rico Love , Ryan Tedder , Sam Watters , and Wayne Wilkins , while production was handled by Biancaniello , Love , Tedder , and Watters under their production group , The Runawayz . Its lyrics discuss finding love with a person who has " been there all your life and has always loved you , but you 've never noticed it until now " . The official remix features vocals from rapper Lil Wayne and a slightly different beat , produced by Jim Jonsin . 
 The song was released in North America on 2 October 2007 to mixed reviews from critics . It was released in the United Kingdom and Ireland on 7 April 2008 . The song was a commercial success , reaching the top 20 on the majority of the charts it entered , and topped the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart in the United States . On 12 March 2008 , " Love Like This " was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2007 , Bedingfield began writing and recording new material for her second North American album Pocketful of Sunshine . Producer J. R. Rotem had been working with Bedingfield on the album . Rotem introduced Bedingfield to reggae pop singer / rapper Sean Kingston , who was also recording with Rotem . Bedingfield decided to work with Kingston because she " just Liked his thing " . In an interview with Digital Spy , she said that she respected rappers and seemed to " have a little thing with rappers " since she had previously worked with Estelle , Eve and Bizarre from D12 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song was written by Bedingfield , Kingston , Wayne Wilkins , Louis Biancaniello , Rico Love , Ryan Tedder from the band OneRepublic , and Sam Watters from the group Color Me Badd . It was also produced by Biancaniello , Love , Tedder , and Watters together in their production team , The Runawayz . The song is composed in the key of F major and set in common time . Bedingfield 's vocals span from C4 to F5 . The Auto Tune effect is heard in a few parts of the song . In the song , Bedingfield discusses finding love with a person who has always " been there all your life " , but that " you 've never noticed it until now " . According to her , it is all about realizing how that person is actually the " love of your life " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Love Like This " received mixed reviews from critics . Chuck Taylor in a review for Billboard described the song as a " jaunty , youthful track that clears home base and should propel Nat forward " , while Chris Boeckmann of Stylus Magazine called it " useless " and a " dud " . Michael Slezak of Entertainment Weekly found the song left him " feeling absolutely nothing " . Slezak was unimpressed with the pairing of Bedingfield and Kingston , writing " it 's as if two people who I 'm not entirely convinced can sing got together and recorded a heavily focus @-@ grouped song , then ran their vocals through a giant computer " . 
 In a review for About.com , Bill Lamb called the song " irrepressibly sunny , but forgettable " . In another review of the song , Lamb wrote that Kingston 's vocals " serve no purpose other than providing an extra element for the single 's marketing campaign " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Love Like This " was officially solicited to radio in the United States on 20 September 2007 . The song was released as a download on 2 October 2007 , and debuted at number 19 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . The following week the song rose to number four , before debuting on the Hot 100 chart at number 94 . Fifteen weeks later " Love Like This " reached number 11 . The song did well on pop @-@ oriented charts , reaching number 10 on the Pop 100 chart and number 10 on the Top 40 Mainstream chart . The single had crossover success in the dance charts , where it reached number one on the Hot Dance Club Play chart and number 17 on the Hot Dance Airplay chart . The song has sold over one million digital downloads and has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . 
 Elsewhere , " Love Like This " was largely successful , reaching number nine in Canada and number five in New Zealand . In the United Kingdom , the song debuted at number 27 on 25 March 2008 . Four weeks later , it reached number 20 and remained on the singles chart for seven weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Gil Green and produced by Merge @ Crossroads . Filmed in Los Angeles , California , the video features Bedingfield reuniting with a love from her past . The video begins with Bedingfield singing in a park . She then meets up with a boyfriend ( played by model Josh Slack ) from her past . The two then remember the good times they had together while sitting on a picnic bench . The video concludes with Bedingfield singing and dancing at a house party . Scenes of Kingston in front of an ice cream truck and at the house party are intercut throughout the video . 
 The video premiered on Bedingfield 's official US website on 27 October 2007 . In 2008 , the video reached number 2 on VH1 's <unk> Top 20 Countdown in the United States . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " Love Like This " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Natasha Bedingfield – lead vocals 
 Sean Kingston – vocals 
 <unk> Brown - backing vocals 
 Keith Gretlein , Nate <unk> , Matt Serrecchio - assistant engineer 
 Greg Ogan - vocal engineering 
 The Runawayz - mixing 
 David Kutch - mastering 
 Ryan Tedder <unk> , producer , composer 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Poughkeepsie , Tramps and Thieves = 
 " Poughkeepsie , Tramps and Thieves " is the eleventh episode of the third season of the American mystery television series Veronica Mars , and the fifty @-@ fifth episode overall . Written by executive producer Diane Ruggiero and directed by John T. Kretchmer , the episode premiered on The CW on January 30 , 2007 . The series depicts the adventures of Veronica Mars ( Kristen Bell ) as she deals with life as a college student while moonlighting as a private detective . 
 In this episode , Veronica is hired by Max ( Adam Rose ) a student who is looking for his beloved , Chelsea , but Veronica learns that Chelsea is actually a prostitute hired to make Max lose his virginity . Meanwhile , Keith finds the official police report of Dean O 'Dell 's death . In addition , Veronica asks Logan about his past , eventually finding out that he had sex with Madison Sinclair ( Amanda Noret ) when they were broken up . 
 Adam Rose makes his second appearance in " Poughkeepsie , Tramps and Thieves " , while the episode was one of Thomas 's favorites of the season , particularly enjoying scenes between Logan and Veronica , Veronica and Keith , and Chelsea and Max . In its initial broadcast , the episode received 2 @.@ 69 million viewers and mixed reviews from television critics , with critics being divided over the case of the week and the development of Veronica and Logan 's romance . Eric Goldman of IGN thought that the episode was " extremely witty and fast @-@ paced " , while Rowan Kaiser , writing for The A.V. Club , believed that the episode suffered from a " lack of development for Max 's character . " 
 = = Background = = 
 Veronica Mars is a student who progresses from high school to college while moonlighting as a private investigator under the tutelage of her detective father . In each episode , Veronica solves a different stand @-@ alone case while working to solve a more complex mystery . In addition , there is usually a major mystery throughout episodes that takes Veronica longer to solve . In the case of the third season , there are two standalone cases with nine and six episodes , respectively , followed by five episodes without a major story arc . " Poughkeepsie , Tramps and Thieves " is the second episode to solely focus on the mystery of Dean O 'Dell 's ( Ed Begley , Jr . ) death , with the previous one being " Show Me the Monkey " ; the previous story arc , a serial rape , was solved in " Spit & Eggs " . 
 = = Plot synopsis = = 
 After a lunch with Logan , Veronica notices that the Hearst Lampoon ’ s offices were egged . Veronica is approached by a mysterious student , Max , hires her to find his beloved , Chelsea , who is engaged , in a week , or else he threatens to kill himself . They spent one night talk together talking . He tells her that she sent him a text message . Veronica quickly finds out that Max ’ s friends hired Chelsea , a prostitute , in order to make him be more confident with girls . His roommate sent him a text message in order to help him get over her . Keith receives the police report of Dean O ’ Dell ’ s death , but he doesn ’ t find anything useful in it . Veronica hires the two prostitutes who might be Chelsea , and one of them is Chelsea . She is incredibly happy to see Max , surprising both Veronica and Logan . 
 As Max and Chelsea ( whose real name is Wendy ) make out on the couch , Madison ( Amanda Noret ) appears , looking for Dick . Keith interrogates the Lilith house girls , who have alibis for the Dean ’ s death . A battered prostitute appears at Logan ’ s door and takes Wendy away , citing problems with their pimp , leaving Max heartbroken . Veronica finds a stain of purple makeup on a towel , and she immediately deduces that Wendy conned Max out of $ 1 @,@ 000 . Veronica blackmails a judge in order to secure the $ 1 @,@ 000 back . Veronica and Logan ask each other personal questions in an attempt to become more intimate , but it fails . At the bus locker at which Veronica instructed the judge to leave the money , she instead finds a note that tells Veronica and Max to get in a limo . In the limo , they find Wendy ’ s pimp , who is actually a woman . She tells them that she actually did fall in love with Max , but that she needed money for other reasons . 
 Max immediately pays $ 10 @,@ 000 in order for Wendy to be forgiven , under the condition that he doesn ’ t tell anyone about the judge . Unexpectedly , Wendy shows up at Max ’ s door . Keith informs Veronica that Nish ’ s alibi doesn ’ t check out for the Dean ’ s car but that it was likely true for Mindy ’ s car , putting her under suspicion . Max and Wendy ’ s relationship becomes difficult , and she leaves the following morning , claiming that he has acted differently towards her after he found out her occupation . Max pays back Veronica in $ 1 bills he received from Wendy , indicating that she had returned to stripping . Madison tells Veronica that she and Logan had sex when he and Veronica were broken up . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by executive producer Diane Ruggiero and directed by John T. Kretchmer , marking Ruggiero 's sixteenth and penultimate writing credit and Kretchmer 's twelfth directing credit . One scene in the episode depicts Veronica and Max sitting in the backseat of a vehicle with Chelsea 's pimp ( a woman ) and several bodyguards . Kretchmer decided to place one of the physically domineering bodyguards between Max and Veronica for comedic effect . In addition , Thomas noted that the actress of the pimp , Jackie Debatin , appeared in a similar role in an episode of The Office several weeks after the episode aired . The scene in which Keith , in a Sheriff 's uniform , spots Don Lamb in his car was difficult to edit because although there was initially no radio music playing , Michael Muhney , the actor of Lamb , was moving his mouth as if singing lyrics . Thomas reported difficulty in finding a song that would match the movements . 
 Adam Rose makes his second appearance in " Poughkeepsie , Tramps and Thieves " , after being a suspect in " Hi , Infidelity " . From the very beginning of his appearances , Rose 's character , Max , was planned to begin a romantic relationship with Mac . When Rose received the call that he would be appearing in more episodes for a romantic storyline with Mac , Rose , who was roommates with the actor of Bronson , another Mac love interest , stated , " But I thought that 's what my roommate was doing . " Thomas called the scene in which Chelsea paints Max 's toenails one of his favorite scenes involving no series regulars , noting that it was nearly a three @-@ minute scene . 
 Thomas enjoyed Brianne Davis 's , the actress of Chelsea , performance so much that he called her and complimented her after filming ended , while Peter Roth expressed interest in giving her a job on another show . The episode was scored by Mark Lanegan , with whom Thomas had gone to elementary school . Thomas was favorable towards the scene in which Veronica and Logan discuss his past , stating that the scene could have dragged due to its length but that it did not . When scripting the scene , there was a discussion in the writers ' room regarding what the extent of Veronica 's jealousy could be , with Thomas and Ruggiero , who Thomas described as " naturally jealous people " , winning out and making Veronica more envious rather than less . For the scene in which Veronica asks Keith about the report on Dean O 'Dell 's suicide by humorously requiring him to sing what he has found , Colantoni gave nine different musical impressions of his dialogue , " I finally got the police report on the Dean 's suicide ! " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original broadcast in the United States , " Poughkeepsie , Tramps and Thieves " was viewed by 2 @.@ 69 million viewers , ranking 92nd of 100 in the weekly rankings . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Poughkeepsie , Tramps and Thieves " received mixed reviews from television critics . Eric Goldman of IGN rated the episode an 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 , indicating that it was " great " . He was positive towards many aspects of the episode , particularly the first half , while he was more mixed or negative towards the conclusion of the main storyline as well as the romantic development . He wrote that " The first half of this episode was extremely witty and fast @-@ paced . " However , he thought that the Max @-@ Chelsea storyline should have ended earlier in the episode , and that " love sick , mopey Logan has gotten very old . " However , he was complimentary towards Keith 's plotline . Rowan Kaiser , writing for The A.V. Club , had mixed feelings towards the episode , being critical of the case of the week while enjoying some of the secondary storylines . While stating that the episode suffered from " the lack of exploration of Max 's character " and Wendy being underdeveloped , he elaborated that " those are generally minor quibbles with a decent standalone episode , however . " He went on to praise the Logan @-@ Veronica dynamic and Keith 's investigation into the Dean 's death . 
 Alan Sepinwall , on his blog What 's Alan Watching ? , was mostly positive towards the episode , praising the crew 's decision to focus on the mysteries of the week , stating that " if the last couple of episodes are an indication , maybe done @-@ in @-@ one is in the right direction . " He found that he was invested in the case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week , while he felt as though the Dean O 'Dell plotline was not advancing quickly enough . Keith McDuffee of AOL TV was critical of nearly all aspects of the episode , stating that he was missing the longer story arcs and that once the mystery of Dean O 'Dell 's murder ended , the show would be relatively aimless . In addition , he decried Mac , Wallace , Piz , and Parker 's absences , saying , " I miss the ' gang ' . " Television Without Pity gave the episode a " B- " . 
 = Cyathus striatus = 
 Cyathus striatus , commonly known as the fluted bird 's nest , is a common saprobic bird 's nest fungus with a widespread distribution throughout temperate regions of the world . This fungus resembles a miniature bird 's nest with numerous tiny " eggs " ; the eggs , or peridioles , are actually lens @-@ shaped bodies that contain spores . C. striatus can be distinguished from most other bird 's nest fungi by its hairy exterior and grooved ( striated ) inner walls . Although most frequently found growing on dead wood in open forests , it also grows on wood chip mulch in urban areas . The fruiting bodies are encountered from summer until early winter . The color and size of this species can vary somewhat , but they are typically less than a centimeter wide and tall , and grey or brown in color . Another common name given to C. striatus , splash cups , alludes to the method of spore dispersal : the sides of the cup are angled such that falling drops of water can dislodge the peridioles and eject them from the cup . The specific epithet is derived from the Latin <unk> , meaning " with fine ridges or grooves " . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Cyathus striatus was first described by William Hudson in his 1778 work Flora <unk> as Peziza striata . Carl Ludwig Willdenow transferred it to Cyathus in 1787 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The " nest " , or peridium , is usually about 7 to 10 mm in height and 6 to 8 mm in width , but the size is somewhat variable and specimens have been found with heights and widths of up to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) . The shape typically resembles a vase or inverted cone . The outer surface ( exoperidium ) ranges in color from slightly brownish to grayish buff to deep brown ; the exoperidium has a shaggy or hairy texture ( a tomentum ) , with the hairs mostly pointing downward . The inner surface of the peridium ( the endoperidium ) is striated or grooved , and shiny . Young specimens have a lid , technically called an epiphragm , a thin membrane that covers the cup opening . The epiphragm is hairy like the rest of the exoperidial surface , but the hairs often wear off leaving behind a thin white layer stretched across the lid of the cup . As the peridium matures and expands , this membrane breaks and falls off , exposing the peridioles within . The peridium is attached to its growing surface by a mass of closely packed hyphae called an emplacement ; in C. striatus the maximum diameter of the emplacement is typically 8 – 12 mm , and often incorporating small fragments of the growing surface into its structure . 
 Peridiole structure 
 The peridioles are about 1 to 1 @.@ 5 mm wide and rarely up to 2 mm wide . They are disc @-@ shaped , but may appear angular due to pressure from neighbouring peridioles . Peridioles may be dark , or a drab gray if still covered with a thin membrane called a tunica . 
 Peridioles in C. striatus are sheathed and attached to the endoperidium by complex cords of mycelia known as a funiculus in the singular . The funiculus is differentiated into three regions : the basal piece , which attaches it to the inner wall of the peridium , the middle piece , and an upper sheath , called the purse , connected to the lower surface of the peridiole . Inside the purse and middle piece is a coiled thread of interwoven hyphae called the funicular cord , attached at one end to the peridiole and at the other end to an entangled mass of hyphae called the hapteron . When dry the funiculus is brittle , but when wet it is capable of long extension . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The basidia , the spore @-@ bearing cells , are club @-@ shaped with long stalks . They typically hold 4 spores that are sessile , that is , attached directly to the surface of the basidium , rather than by a short stalk ( a sterigmata ) . Spores measure about 15 to 20 µm long by 8 to 12 µm wide . They are elliptical , smooth , hyaline , and notched at one end . During development , the spores are separated from the basidia when the latter collapse and gelatinize along with other cells lining the inner walls of the peridiole . The spores expand in size somewhat after being detached from the basidia . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Cyathus striatus is a saprobic fungus , deriving its nutrition from decaying organic material , and is typically found growing in clusters on small twigs or other woody debris . It is also common on mulch under shrubs . The features of the microenvironment largely influence the appearance of C. striatus ; all else being equal , it is more likely to be found in moist , shallow depressions than elevated areas . It is very widespread in temperate areas throughout the world , growing in summer and fall . The fungus has been recorded from Asia , Europe , North America , Central America , South America , and New Zealand . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 Cyathus striatus can reproduce both asexually ( via vegetative spores ) , or sexually ( with meiosis ) , typical of taxa in the basidiomycetes that contain both haploid and diploid stages . Basidiospores produced in the peridioles each contain a single haploid nucleus . After the spores have been dispersed into a suitable growing environment , they germinate and develop into homokaryotic hyphae , with a single nucleus in each cell compartment . When two homokaryotic hyphae of different mating compatibility groups fuse with one another , they form a dikaryotic mycelia in a process called plasmogamy . After a period of time and under the appropriate environmental conditions , fruiting bodies may be formed from the dikaryotic mycelia . These fruiting bodies produce peridioles containing the basidia upon which new spores are made . Young basidia contain a pair of haploid sexually compatible nuclei which fuse , and the resulting diploid fusion nucleus undergoes meiosis to produce haploid basidiospores . The process of meiosis in C. striatus has been found to be similar to that of higher organisms . 
 = = Spore dispersal = = 
 The cone shaped fruiting body of Cyathus striatus makes use of a splash @-@ cup mechanism to help disperse the spores . When a raindrop hits the interior of the cup with the optimal angle and velocity , the downward force of the water ejects the peridioles into the air . The force of ejection rips open the funiculus , releasing the tightly wound funicular cord . The hapteron attached to the end of the funiculus is adhesive , and when it contacts a nearby plant stem or stick , the hapteron sticks to it ; the funicular cord wraps around the stem or stick powered by the force of the still @-@ moving peridiole ( similar to a tetherball ) . The peridioles degrade over time to eventually release the spores within , or they may be eaten by herbivorous animals and redeposited after passing through the digestive tract . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 Cyathus striatus has proven to be a rich source of bioactive chemical compounds . It was first reported in 1971 to produce " <unk> " substances ( compounds with an indole ring structure ) as well as a complex of diterpenoid antibiotic compounds collectively known as cyathins . Several years later , research revealed the <unk> substances to be compounds now known as <unk> . <unk> ( A , B and C ) have antibiotic activity against fungi <unk> , and various Gram @-@ positive and Gram @-@ negative bacteria . C. striatus also produces sesquiterpene compounds called <unk> . It also contains the <unk> compounds <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> <unk> , <unk> acid , <unk> acid , <unk> acid and <unk> acid . The latter four compounds were unknown prior to their isolation from C. striatus . 
 = Penmon = 
 Penmon is a promontory , village and ecclesiastical parish on the south @-@ east tip of the Isle of Anglesey in Wales , about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east of the town of Beaumaris . It is in the community of Llangoed . The name comes from Welsh : pen ( which can mean " head " , " end " or " promontory " ) and Môn , which is the Welsh word for Anglesey . It is the site of a historic monastery and associated 12th @-@ century church . Walls near the well next to the church may be part of the oldest remaining Christian building in Wales . Penmon also has an award @-@ winning beach and the Anglesey Coastal Path follows its shores . Quarries in Penmon have provided stone for many important buildings and structures , including Birmingham Town Hall and the two bridges that cross the Menai Strait . The area is popular with locals and visitors alike for its monuments , tranquillity , bracing air and fine views of Snowdonia to the south across the Menai Strait . 
 = = History = = 
 According to tradition , the community at Penmon grew up around a monastery ( <unk> ) established in the early 6th century by Saint Seiriol on land provided by his brother Saint <unk> , king of Llyn . Although Seiriol eventually removed himself to a hermitage on nearby Puffin Island , the monastery prospered and two crosses were set up at its gate . In 971 , Vikings destroyed much of Penmon . The two crosses and the decorated font remain from this time . During the 12th century , the abbey church was rebuilt under Gruffudd ap Cynan and Owain Gwynedd . In the 13th century , under Llywelyn ap Iorwerth , monasteries started a newer more regular kind of rule , and Penmon became an Augustinian priory with conventional buildings . The priory expanded . After surviving the conquest of Wales by King Edward , it was eventually dissolved in 1538 . The buildings were transferred to the ownership of the Bulkeleys of Beaumaris , a prominent local family , and are still in use today . The Bulkeleys also used most of the land for a deer park , and built the dovecot near the church . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The average temperature and rainfall figures taken between 1971 and 2000 at the Met Office weather station in Colwyn Bay , around 10 miles east of Penmon ( and also by the sea ) are set out in the table below . When compared to the corresponding figures for Wales as a whole , the area can be seen to be both warmer and drier than the average location in Wales throughout the whole year . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The author of A History of Anglesey , written in 1775 , said of Penmon that there were " plenty of oysters , remarkable large , the poor find constant employ in the dredge , and in pickling the fish for foreign consumption . " The population in 1801 was 169 . The 1831 census recorded that there were 51 adult males ( over 20 years old ) and that the majority of residents were labourers or servants , with over half the male adult workers being employed in agriculture . After reaching a high of 291 in 1821 , the population declined to a low of 213 in 1871 . The population rose thereafter so that it was 300 in 1931 . 
 The Imperial Gazetteer of England and Wales of 1870 @-@ 2 noted that millstone , good limestone and marble were found in the area . It also recorded that the population was 240 and that there were 53 houses , with the property being " divided among a few " . In fact , the number of houses in Penmon did not exceed 60 throughout the 19th century , first reaching 60 in 1901 . 
 At the time of the 2001 census , Llangoed ward ( which includes the parish of Penmon ) had a population of 1 @,@ 275 . About 60 % of residents in the area had been born in Wales , with about 36 % having been born in England . About 63 % of residents were able to use the Welsh language to some degree . 99 @.@ 76 % of residents identified as White , and 0 @.@ 24 % as Black or Black British . Compared to Anglesey as a whole , Llangoed ward had a lower proportion of residents aged 0 – 4 years ( 4 @.@ 78 % compared to 5 @.@ 4 % ) and a higher proportion of residents aged 65 or over ( 25 @.@ 02 % compared to 18 @.@ 86 % ) . The general health of the population of Llangoed ward was poorer than that of Anglesey generally : 12 @.@ 47 % said that their health was " not good " ( Anglesey : 10 @.@ 53 % ) and 25 @.@ 73 % reported a " limiting long @-@ term illness " ( Anglesey : 22 @.@ 38 % ) . 
 = = Places of interest = = 
 Penmon has some interesting buildings with histories to match . These buildings ( the Priory and church , the dovecot and the well ) are close together on the site of the old monastery . There is also an island of note nearby , Puffin Island . 
 = = = Penmon Priory = = = 
 The monastery ( called St. Seiriol 's monastery ) grew in size and had a wooden church building by the 10th century . This wooden building was , however , destroyed in 971 and then rebuilt in the 12th century in stone , from 1120 to 1123 . The oldest parts of the Priory Church of St Seiriol date to 1140 . It survived the initial Norman invasion of Gwynedd between 1081 and 1100 , defended by Prince Gruffudd ap Cynan of Gwynedd . The priory church was enlarged in the early 13th century , at the time of the Augustinian Rule . There are records for the election of Priors in the Calendar of Patent Rolls back to 1306 , when one <unk> the Prior is mentioned . The dining hall was on the first floor , with a cellar below and dormitory above . In the 16th century , a kitchen and a warming house were added at the east of the building . The eastern range of buildings has gone , but the southern one , containing the refectory with a dormitory above , still stands . 
 Llywelyn Fawr and his successors made the church wealthy , giving it land . This was taken away at the time of the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1536 but the church survived . The priory was in decline before 1536 in any event , and had only the Prior and two other members at that time . 
 St. Seiriol 's Church , which was the centrepiece of the monastery , is now part of the <unk> benefice of Beaumaris , within the Diocese of Bangor . The church was given a grant by the Welsh Assembly Government of £ 20 @,@ 570 in May 2004 . This was to repair the <unk> , the rainwater goods , repointing and <unk> of the tower roof and the superstructure of the building . Another building in Penmon , the Priory House ( which is set around the cloister court of the church ) , received £ 21 @,@ 600 . This was to repair the chimneys , the walls , the windows and the roof of the house . 
 = = = Penmon crosses = = = 
 The two medieval crosses that once stood in front of the monastery ( from the 10th century ) are still in existence today , but are now inside the church . One cross is larger but badly weathered ( because it stood outside until 1977 , in a deer park ) . It is almost complete except for about 30 centimetres between the top of the shaft and the head . The other cross is smaller , not as weathered but has an arm of the cross cut off because it was used as a lintel for the refectory windows . It has a modern stone base unlike the other cross . 
 = = = St Seiriol 's Well = = = 
 As was often the case with Celtic churches from this period , the church was associated with a well . It was built by the monks of Penmon and was believed to have healing powers by some people visiting it . It is probably one of the oldest buildings in Penmon . It has been said that the lower stone walls near the well were part of Seiriol 's church in the 6th century ; if so , this would make it the oldest remaining Christian building in Wales . A small chamber surrounds the well . In modern times , water from the well has been used as a symbol of Anglesey by the island 's representatives at the launch ceremony of the 10th International Island Games ( held in Guernsey in June 2003 ) and the 11th Island Games ( held in the Shetland Islands in July 2005 ) . 
 = = = Dovecot = = = 
 The dovecot ( also spelt dovecote ) standing near the church was probably built in about 1600 , in Elizabethan times , by Sir Richard Bulkeley for housing pigeons for their eggs and meat . It has a large domed roof with a cupola on top so birds could fly in and out . Inside the dovecot were 1 @,@ 000 nesting boxes , with a pillar in the centre supporting a revolving ladder to provide access to the nesting boxes . The central pillar remains , but the ladder is now gone . 
 = = = Puffin Island = = = 
 St. Seiriol established a cell and a community on Puffin Island ( in Welsh , Ynys Seiriol or Seiriol 's Island ) half a mile from the coast at the same time as he founded the monastery . There is a tower of a 12th @-@ century church on Puffin Island still . There is a tradition that St. Seiriol and perhaps Maelgwn Gwynedd ( king of Gwynedd in the first half of the 6th century ) were buried there . The island once had large numbers of puffins and guillemots . However , rats reduced the bird population to 40 in the 1890s . 
 In 1748 , Lewis Morris made a hydrographic survey of the coast of Wales and suggested that the tower of the ruined church on the island be converted into a lighthouse . However , this suggestion was not implemented . On 17 August 1831 , The Rothesay Castle , a wooden @-@ hulled paddle steamer on a day trip from Liverpool , sank in very heavy seas . Of more than 140 on board , only 23 people survived . Afterwards , the Trwyn Du Lighthouse and a lifeboat station were built to try to prevent similar tragedies . The lifeboat station was closed in 1915 as it had been superseded by a lifeboat at Beaumaris . In its years of operation , the Penmon lifeboats saved at least 143 lives . 
 = = = Beach = = = 
 The beach at Penmon has been awarded a 2006 Seaside Award by the " Keep Wales Tidy " group . To be awarded the yellow and blue flag , beaches have to meet mandatory standard water quality and must be clean , safe and well @-@ managed . Penmon is classified for these purposes as being a " rural " beach and as a result the standards for a Seaside Award differ from those applied for " resort " beaches , which are expected to have a wider selection of facilities such as toilets and car parks . The beach has been awarded the flag from 2003 onwards . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 Penmon was featured in film when it was used ( along with Snowdonia ) as the setting for The Fever , a 2004 film starring Vanessa Redgrave and Angelina Jolie . The region was used , at the choice of a London @-@ based production company , to represent an Eastern Europe country . Jolie had filmed in North Wales in 2002 for Lara Croft Tomb Raider : The Cradle of Life and had apparently been " enchanted " by the scenery . The scenes involving Jolie and Redgrave were shot in February 2003 . Filming took place at the Priory and the dovecot was used to depict a deserted church . Extras from Gwynedd and Anglesey were also used in filming . Penmon Priory has also been used for the BBC programme Songs of Praise , featuring Aled Jones ( who comes from <unk> , a village about seven miles from Penmon ) and also for filming the 1960s television show Danger Man starring Patrick McGoohan . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Akira The Don , independent Pop and Hip @-@ Hop musician , lived in the village for some time in his youth and blames the " bleak and depressing " nature of the landscape for making him " a <unk> little bugger " . [ sic ] 
 = = Geology = = 
 There are many geological features in Penmon , including fossils of brachiopods , a tunnel under a cliff and the cliff itself . The cliff is made up of limestone and shale , in alternating layers . It has been moved many times due to faults fracturing and moving the beds of rock , and there are distinct lines where the beds have been moved . The cliff is approximately eight metres high ; however , the distribution of limestone and shale is different near the top and bottom of the cliff . There is a gradual change of shale to limestone ; near the bottom there is a lot more shale per metre of rock and nearer the top there is a lot more limestone . The cliff has been struck by several faults , causing it to look unstable ; rocks fall from it from time to time . Penmon is close to the sea , thus making it prone to erosion . Quite a lot of the cliff has been eroded away , thus causing an arch to form under the cliff . The shale has eroded away faster than the limestone beds , and as such , has caused thinner beds of limestone between to collapse . This is the reason the arch is only a few metres high and does not extend further , where there are less shale beds . Faults passing through the cliff have displaced the beds , one such fault almost 23 cm , causing a ledge halfway through the tunnel . 
 The grey @-@ brown veined limestone quarried in the area is known as " Penmon marble " . Brachiopod fossils are sometimes found in it . The largest of the Penmon quarries , <unk> Park , was worked for limestone by <unk> Quarries Ltd from about 1898 until the 1970s . Penmon limestone ( along with limestone from Llanddona , <unk> and Holyhead ) was used to build Birmingham Town Hall and help with the reconstruction of Liverpool and Manchester following the destruction caused by World War II . The stone was also used in the construction of the Menai Suspension Bridge ( completed in 1826 ) and the Britannia Bridge ( completed in 1850 ) . 
 = Stripped ( Christina Aguilera album ) = 
 Stripped is the fourth studio album by American recording artist Christina Aguilera . It was released on October 22 , 2002 by RCA Records . Looking to transition from the teen pop styles of her self @-@ titled debut album ( 1999 ) , Aguilera took creative control over her next album project , both musically and lyrically . She also changed her public image and established her new alter ego , " Xtina " . Musically , its music incorporates pop and R & B with influences from many different genres , including soul , metal , rock , hip hop , gospel and Latin music . Lyrically , most of the songs from the album discuss the theme of self @-@ respect , while a few other songs talk about sex and feminism . As executive producer , Aguilera enlisted many new collaborators for the album . 
 Upon its release , Stripped received generally mixed reviews from music critics , most of them criticized its lack of musical focus , while some of them called it an album for grown @-@ ups . However , the album received multiple Grammy Award nominations , including one win . Commercially , Stripped debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 with first @-@ week sales of 330 @,@ 000 copies . Consequently , it was certified quadruple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping over four million copies in the region alone . The album also charted within the top five of charts in Canada , Europe , the Netherlands , Ireland , New Zealand and the United Kingdom . It was Aguilera 's best @-@ performing album in the United Kingdom , becoming the 29th and 40th best @-@ selling album of the decade and millennium there respectively , with 1 @.@ 9 million copies sold . As of 2015 , Stripped has sold over 13 million copies worldwide . 
 Five singles were released from the album . The lead single " Dirrty " was met with criticism and controversy due to its sexual music video but was an international hit on the charts . The follow @-@ up " Beautiful " was praised by critics and garnered chart success worldwide . The last three singles ; " Fighter " , Can 't Hold Us Down " and " The Voice Within " became top 10 hits in various countries . Aguilera performed several songs from Stripped live during a number of shows , notably during the 2002 MTV Europe Music Awards , the American Music Awards of 2003 , and the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards . Two concert tours were held to promote the album , the Justified and Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) and The Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the release of her self @-@ titled debut album in 1999 , Aguilera had achieved major success with four worldwide hits , including " Genie in a Bottle " and " What a Girl Wants " . Following that , she continued to garner major success with " Lady Marmalade " ( 2001 ) , a cover of LaBelle which features Lil ' Kim , Pink and Mýa . Despite the international success , Aguilera was unsatisfied with the music and image that her management , Steve Kurtz , had created for her , having been marketed as a bubblegum pop singer because of the genre 's financial lure . She mentioned plans for her next album to have more musical and lyrical depth . By late 2000 , Aguilera decided not to continue the contact with Kurtz . After terminating Kurtz 's services , Irving Azoff was hired as her new manager . Following the managerial shakeup , Aguilera decided to create her new style of music on the following album . She also used her new alter ego , " Xtina " . She also changed her public appearance and persona , with her hair dyed black and nude photographs on magazine covers . 
 Aguilera further commented about the event with USA Today , " When you 're part of a pop phenomenon , you have so many opinions shoved down your throat . People try to tell you what you should do , how you should act , what you should wear , who you should be with . At the time things started happening for me , it was popular to be the squeaky @-@ clean , cookie @-@ cutter pop singer . But that role didn 't speak to me , because it 's so boring and superficial " . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In late 2000 , Aguilera started to record her then @-@ upcoming material . The recording sessions took place in studios around California and New York City , including Electric Lady Studios in New York , The Enterprise Studios in Burbank , California , Conway Recording Studios , The Record Plant and NRG Recording Studios in Hollywood . According to Aguilera , the recording sessions were much longer than she thought . She further explained that lots of things came up during that time , including her first break @-@ up with her first boyfriend Jorge Santos . Aguilera also believed that the lyrics of Stripped were so personal , and her vocals " represent a rawer , more bare @-@ bones approach as well , with less of the ostentatious riffing that has miffed critics in the past " . She stated , " I did the vocal gymnastics thing because it was fun . That 's why I like blues , too , because you can experiment more with that side of your voice . But I thought the lyrics on this record are so personal , deep and good that I wanted to make them stand out more than what I could do with my voice technically " . 
 On her new album , entitled Stripped , Aguilera enlisted a wide range of songwriters and producers , notably Alicia Keys , Scott Storch , and Linda Perry . Perry was one of the biggest influences to Aguilera during the making of the album . The singer stated , " She taught me that imperfections are good and should be kept because it comes from the heart . It makes things more believable and it 's brave to share them with the world . " Keys was featured on the track " Impossible " , which was recorded at Electric Lady Studios in New York City . Another notable producer is Storch ; he wrote and produced a total of seven songs from Stripped , including two singles . He stated that during the making of Stripped , Aguilera was one of his friends that he cared most ; however Storch didn 't produce her fifth studio album Back to Basics ( 2006 ) , later it resulted a feud between the two artists , which was stated by Aguilera in one of the track from Back to Basics , " F.U.S.S. " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 Musically , Stripped is a pop and R & B album which incorporates elements of many different genres , including soul , metal , hip hop , rock , rock and roll , gospel and Latin . The album broke her teen pop root in the self @-@ titled debut album in 1999 . According to Aguilera , she wanted to be " real " in her next records because she was " overworked " at the time she was " a part of the big craze pop phenomenon " . Multiple critics criticized its musical style , calling it a lack of musical concentration . On Stripped , Aguilera became the writer of most of the songs . She also revealed that Perry 's songwriting on Pink 's album Missundaztood ( 2001 ) inspired Aguilera a lot . She further commented , " I wasn 't a big fan of the Dallas Austin songs , but I really , really loved the Linda Perry song " . 
 = = = Songs and lyrical content = = = 
 The album 's opening track , " Stripped Intro " , describes her musical changes as she sings , " Sorry that I speak my mind / Sorry don 't do what I 'm told " . The follow @-@ up " Can 't Hold Us Down " featuring Lil ' Kim is an R & B and hip hop song which incorporates elements from dancehall toward its end . Lyrically , it talks about the theme of feminism , and was suggested that it is toward rapper Eminem and Fred Durst . The third track " Walk Away " is a piano ballad where she uses a " clever " metaphor to talk about an abusive relationship . It is followed by the fourth track and third single from Stripped , " Fighter " , which incorporates strong elements from rock and arena rock . It talks about a woman wants to thank a man who has done something wrong to her , and was inspired by Aguilera 's unhappy childhood . It is followed @-@ up by the interlude " Primer Amor Interlude " , the flamenco @-@ inspired latin pop track " Infatuation " , and the interlude " Loves Embrace Interlude " , respectively . 
 " Loving Me 4 Me " is a " sultry " classic R & B ballad . The follow @-@ ups " Impossible " featuring Keys incorporates a piano theme , and " Underappreciated " talks about the pain of a break @-@ up . The piano ballad " Beautiful " , which talks about the theme of self @-@ respect , was deemed as the album 's highlight by many critics , who praised its overall production . The next track " Make Over " is a salsa and dance @-@ rock song that features a garage @-@ rock beat . It was sued in the United Kingdom for illegally sampling the Sugababes ' song " Overload " , The Guardian also noted similarities between the two songs . Later , the ASCAP organization had added the songwriting credits of Sugababes to the song . " Cruz " is a rock ballad that is musically similar to works of Michael Bolton . The two next tracks , " Get Mine , Get Yours " and " Dirrty " talk about the theme of sexual intercourse , and have been described as " majestically filthy " . The latter is the remake of Redman 's " Let 's Get Dirty ( I Can 't Get in da Club ) " ( 2001 ) , and also features the rapper . The follow @-@ up is the interlude " Stripped Pt . 2 " . The empowering ballad " The Voice Within " talks about trusting oneself . " I 'm OK " is a ballad which incorporates strings and discusses Aguilera 's abusive childhood with her father , and the final song from the album , " Keep on Singin ' My Song " , incorporates elements from drum and bass with gospel choir . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Dirrty " was serviced as the lead single from the album on September 14 , 2002 . Perry and Aguilera 's management wanted to release " Beautiful " as the lead single . However , Aguilera wanted to release a seriously " down and dirty " song to announce her comeback , so RCA Records decided to release it as the first single . Upon its release , the song received mixed reviews from critics ; some of whom criticized its sound and negatively compared it to Britney Spears ' " I 'm a Slave 4 U " , while the others chose it as a stand @-@ out track from Stripped . Its accompanying music video , directed by David LaChapelle , was criticized due to its sexual content , and sparked protests in Thailand . However , it was a worldwide hit , achieving certifications in Australia , New Zealand , Switzerland , and the United Kingdom . 
 The album 's second single , " Beautiful " was written solely by Perry . Rush @-@ released following the controversial " Dirrty " on November 16 , 2002 , " Beautiful " garnered positive critical reception . Commercially , the single gained impact on charts worldwide , peaking within the top five in many countries , as well as achieving certifications in the United States , Australia , New Zealand and the United Kingdom . Its music video , directed by Jonas Åkerlund , garnered positive reaction from media outlets by touching on anorexia nervosa , homosexuality , bullying , self @-@ esteem , and transgender issues . The video was honored at the 14th GLAAD Media Awards due to its positive portrayal of the LGBT community . " Beautiful " was listed as one of the greatest songs throughout the 2000s decade by Rolling Stone and VH1 . 
 " Fighter " was released as the third single from Stripped on March 13 , 2003 . The single was well received by most critics , as well as managed chart success in several countries and achieved gold certification in the United States and Australia . Its accompanying music clip , directed by Floria Sigismondi , was inspired by the director 's dark theatrics and moths . The album 's four single " Can 't Hold Us Down " featuring Kim , was released on July 8 , 2003 . It garnered mixed reviews from music journalism , and gained moderate success commercially , achieving gold certification in Australia . The album 's fifth and final single " The Voice Within " , was released October 27 , 2003 . Critics complimented the simple piano ballad , which talks about the theme of self @-@ respect . Both music videos for the two songs were directed by LaChapelle , who previously directed the clip for " Dirrty " . On March 14 , 2008 , the song " Walk Away " entered the Danish Tracklisten chart at number 35 , despite not being released as a single . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Touring = = = 
 Aguilera also supported Stripped by embarking on two different tours . In summer 2003 , Justin Timberlake and Aguilera embarked on the Justified and Stripped Tour , which took place in North America . Talking about the tour , Timberlake revealed that " She 's got one of the most amazing voices I 've ever heard . That <unk> can sing ... this is why I am standing here " . Several tour dates were cancelled and rescheduled due to the collapse of lightning systems . An extended play entitled Justin & Christina was released exclusively at Target Stores in July 2003 to promote the tour . The CD contains four remixes of Aguilera and Timberlake 's songs from their two albums , and two new tracks . In late 2003 , The Stripped Tour , the former 's extension , happened without Timberlake 's acts . The tour took place in Europe , Japan and Australia . The former grossed total US $ 30 @,@ 261 @,@ 670 , becoming the sixteenth highest @-@ grossing tour of 2003 . In summer 2004 , Aguilera was expected to return to North American during the second leg of the tour . However , the 29 tour dates were cancelled in the last minute due to the singer 's vocal strain . On November 15 , 2008 , an accompanying video release of the tour , Stripped Live in the U.K. , was released worldwide . On December 8 , 2004 , a compilation album which includes Stripped and the DVD was released in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Promotion for Stripped started on October 28 , 2002 , when Aguilera appeared at Chicago radio station B96 's Halloween Bash and performed four songs from the album , " Dirrty " , " Get Mine , Get Yours " , " Beautiful " and " Impossible " . The same day Aguilera performed " Beautiful " on the Late Show with David Letterman , wearing a black gown , a black fedora , and black heels . She also performed " Dirrty " and " Beautiful " on Top of the Pops ; later the show was broadcast in October 2002 . On November 1 , 2002 , Aguilera appeared on The Today Show and performed " Beautiful " and " Impossible " . On November 4 , 2002 , Aguilera was invited as a guest on The Daily Show to promote Stripped . At the 2002 MTV Europe Music Awards , Aguilera performed " Dirrty " with rapper Redman on November 14 , 2002 , <unk> the stage as a boxing ring while entering the stage riding a motorcycle and wearing chaps during the performance , as seen in the music video for the song . On December 15 , 2002 , she performed " Dirrty " during the 2002 VH1 Awards . On January 13 , 2003 , Aguilera performed " Beautiful " and " Impossible " on the American Music Awards . 
 Aguilera gave a performance of " Beautiful " on Saturday Night Live on March 15 , 2003 , where she also sang " Fighter " . At the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards , Aguilera performed with Madonna , Britney Spears and Missy Elliott during the ceremony a medley of Madonna 's songs " Like a Virgin " and " Hollywood " and Elliott 's " Work It " on August 23 , 2003 . Towards the end of " Hollywood " , Madonna kissed both Aguilera and Spears during the performance , making huge tabloid stories and fuss from the public , and marking it as one of the most iconic performances from the MTV Video Music Awards history . Later that night , she also performed " Dirrty " and " Fighter " with Redman and guitarist Dave Navarro . On January 16 , 2004 , she performed " Walk Away " on the Late Show with David Letterman . On February 8 , 2004 , Aguilera performed " Beautiful " at the 2004 Grammy Awards , where she also won a Grammy Award for the song . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 55 , based on 14 reviews , which indicates " mixed or average reviews " . Billboard was positive toward the album , writing that the album is " a must @-@ heard recording rich with pleasantly surprising depth " . In a mixed review , E ! Online wrote , " If she had just shown up and sang her ass off , Stripped would 've been a better show " . Josh Kun from Spin commented , " As an artistic statement , Stripped is all over the place – it 's a move toward hip @-@ hop , it 's a move toward rock , it 's ghetto , it 's Disney " . Jancee Duncan of Rolling Stone provided a three @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five @-@ stars rating for the album , calling it an album for grown @-@ ups , yet criticized its lack of musical concentration . Blender wrote a mixed review , yet commenting that it is better than Britney Spears ' works . Writing for BBC Music , Jacqueline Hodges said that the album " is as full @-@ on bold and over the top as most of Christina 's outfits ... much of this seems to be an exercise in stretching the vocal chords to weak backing tracks " . Jim Wirth for NME commented that Stripped is a Mariah Carey album . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine commented that the album is " so overproduced and overwrought that it could easily pass for a Janet album " . 
 In a negative way , The Village Voice criticized the album as a " <unk> @-@ Mariah on mood stabilizers , extended with pseudo @-@ pastiches of semi @-@ popular songs " . Todd Burns for Stylus Magazine was also negative toward the album , giving it an " F " score and wrote , " in between ten to twelve mediocre / good songs , we have eight to ten songs that would be better served as B @-@ sides " . Q provided a two @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five @-@ stars rating and commented that " Sadly , bra @-@ burning rhetoric and gospel warbling make poor substitutes for addictive songs " . AllMusic 's editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine also wrote a negative review , commenting that the album is " the sound of an artist who was given too much freedom too early and has no idea what to do with it " . Writing for The New York Times , Jon Pareles also provided a negative review , commenting that Stripped " is a blast of excess that risks alienating Ms. Aguilera 's old fans without luring new ones , and it 's bursting with misguided energy " . 
 Stripped garnered multiple Grammy Awards nominations . At the 2003 Grammy Awards , the lead single " Dirrty " gained a nomination for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals . A year later , the album was nominated for Best Pop Vocal Album , while " Beautiful " garnered one win for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance and one nomination for Song of the Year . " Can 't Hold Us Down " was also nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals that year . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 According to Nielsen SoundScan , Stripped debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 with first @-@ week sales of 330 @,@ 000 copies ( only behind Eminem 's 8 Mile , which debuted at number one with first @-@ week sales of 702 @,@ 000 copies ) . The album stayed on the chart until 2004 , and was certified quadruple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . By December 2009 , Nielsen SoundScan reported that Stripped had sold 4 @,@ 234 @,@ 000 copies in the region , became her second highest @-@ selling album in the United States , only behind Christina Aguilera , which had sold 8 @,@ 207 @,@ 000 copies . As of August 2014 , the album has sold over 4 @,@ 383 @,@ 000 copies in the country alone . In Canada , Stripped debuted at number three on the Canadian Albums Chart with first @-@ week sales of 14 @,@ 000 copies , and was eventually certified triple platinum by Music Canada . 
 Elsewhere , Stripped also garnered commercial success . In the United Kingdom , the album debuted at number 19 , and peaked at number two there . It became Aguilera 's best @-@ performing album in the country , spending 102 weeks within the top 100 of the chart , and was certified six times platinum by British Phonographic Industry . Throughout Europe , Stripped also peaked within the top ten charts of several countries , including Denmark , the Netherlands , Germany , Ireland , and Norway . Due to its success in the continent , Stripped was certified triple platinum by the European International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) for shipping more than three millions copies in the region and was the best selling pop album by a female that year . In Australia , the album garnered quadruple platinum certification by the Australian Recording Industry Association for shipments of 280 @,@ 000 copies in the country , despite only peaking at number seven on the chart . As of June 2006 , Stripped had sold over 12 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 Following its release and five successful singles , Stripped became one of Aguilera 's strongest albums on charts . In the United States , the album became the tenth best @-@ selling album of 2003 , and Aguilera was ranked as the fifth most successful pop artist of the year . She also became the most successful pop female act throughout the year , with six chart entries . Likewise , Aguilera was the fourth most successful female musical act on the Billboard 200 chart , and the thirteenth overall . Due to the successful single releases , the magazine ranked Aguilera as the second best @-@ selling female singles artist on the Hot 100 , only behind Beyoncé , and the Top Female Mainstream Top 40 act . 
 In the United Kingdom , the album became the 29th best @-@ selling album there throughout the 2000s decade , becoming the second highest @-@ selling album by a US female artist in the country during the decade , only behind Norah Jones ' Come Away with Me . As of 2011 , the album had sold 1 @,@ 850 @,@ 852 copies alone in the UK , and was ranked at number 73 on the list of 100 best @-@ selling albums in the United Kingdom during the same time . As of October 2013 , a total of 1 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 copies of Stripped were sold in the United Kingdom . By 2015 , Official Charts Company revealed that Stripped had become the 40th best selling album of the millennium . 
 Selena Gomez 's second studio album Revival cited Stripped as one of her inspirations saying “ That ’ s one of my favorite albums and that was kind of what I started off Revival as , some sort of story . I mean , that album for her was incredible — ’ Beautiful , ’ ’ Can ’ t Hold Us Down , ’ all of that — that ’ s the stuff that I love , ” she said . “ That was an album , that was complete on my record . I have ’ Rise , ’ ’ Survivors , ’ ’ Revival , ’ ’ Kill Em With Kindness . ’ My stuff is full on , it ’ s an album , it ’ s a piece , it ’ s something that I ’ m proud of . ” 
 The album was included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies a vocal producer 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from the liner notes of Stripped . 
 Production 
 Musicians 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Lobaria pulmonaria = 
 Lobaria pulmonaria is a large epiphytic lichen consisting of an ascomycete fungus and a green algal partner living together in a symbiotic relationship with a cyanobacterium — a symbiosis involving members of three kingdoms of organisms . Commonly known by various names like tree lungwort , lung lichen , lung moss , lungwort lichen , oak lungs or oak lungwort , it is sensitive to air pollution and is also negatively affected by habitat loss and changes in forestry practices . Its population has declined across Europe and L. pulmonaria is considered endangered in many lowland areas . The species has a history of use in herbal medicines , and recent research has corroborated some medicinal properties of lichen extracts . 
 = = Description = = 
 It is a foliose lichen and its leaf @-@ like thallus is green , leathery and lobed with a pattern of ridges and depressions on the upper surface . Bright green under moist conditions , it becomes brownish and papery when dry . This species often has a fine layers of hairs , a tomentum , on its lower surface . The cortex , the outer protective layer on the thallus surface , is roughly comparable to the epidermis of a green plant . The thallus is typically 5 – 15 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 – 5 @.@ 9 in ) in diameter , with individual lobes 1 – 3 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 39 – 1 @.@ 18 in ) wide and up to 7 cm long . The asexual reproductive structures <unk> and isidia are present on the thallus surface . Minute ( 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 5 mm in diameter ) cephalodia — pockets of cyanobacteria — are often present on the lower surface of the thallus ; these spots are conspicuously darker than the green surface of the thallus . Like other foliose lichens , the thallus is only loosely attached to the surface on which it grows . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The thallus contains internal structures known as cephalodia , characteristic of three @-@ membered lichen symbioses involving two <unk> ( the photosynthetic symbionts in the fungal @-@ algal lichen relationship ) . These internal cephalodia , found between the " ribs " of the thallus surface , arise when blue @-@ green algae ( from the genus Nostoc ) on the thallus surface are enveloped during mycobiont growth . Structurally , cephalodia consist of dense aggregates of Nostoc cells surrounded by thin @-@ walled hyphae — this delimits them from the rest of the thallus which contains a loose structure of thick @-@ walled hyphae . Blue @-@ green cyanobacteria can fix atmospheric nitrogen , enhancing nutrient availability for the lichen . The other photobiont of L. pulmonaria is the green algae <unk> reticulata . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 L. pulmonaria has the ability to form both vegetative propagation and sexual propagules at an age of about 25 years . In sexual reproduction , the species produces small reddish @-@ brown discs known as apothecia containing asci , from which spores are forcibly released into the air ( like <unk> ) . Based on studies of <unk> germination , it has been suggested that L. pulmonaria spores use some mechanism to inhibit germination — the inhibition is lifted when the spores are grown in a synthetic growth medium containing an adsorbent like bovine serum albumin or α @-@ <unk> . 
 Dispersal by vegetative propagules ( via <unk> or isidia ) has been determined as the predominant mode of reproduction in L. pulmonaria . In this method , the protruding propagules become dry and brittle during the regular wet / dry cycles of the lichen , and can easily crumble off the thallus . These fragments may develop into new thalli , either at the same locale or at a new site after dispersal by wind or rain . A number of steps are required for the development of the vegetative propagules , including the degeneration of the thallus cortex , replication of green algal cells , and entanglement of fungal hyphae with the green algal cells . This steps lead to an increase in internal pressure which eventually breaks through the cortex . Continued growth leads to these granules being pushed upwards and out of the thallus surface . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 It has a wide distribution in Europe , Asia , North America and Africa , preferring damp habitats with high rainfall , especially coastal areas . It is the most widely distributed and most common Lobaria species in North America . Associated with old @-@ growth forests , its presence and abundance may be used as an indicator of forest age , at least in the Interior Cedar @-@ Hemlock biogeoclimatic zone in eastern British Columbia . It is also found in pasture @-@ woodlands . It usually grows on the bark of broad @-@ leaved trees such as oak , beech and maple but will also grow on rocks . In the laboratory , L. pulmonaria has been grown on nylon <unk> . Various environmental factors are thought to affect the distribution of L. pulmonaria , such as temperature , moisture ( average humidity , rapidity and frequency of wet @-@ dry cycles ) , sunlight exposure , and levels of air pollution . Attempts to quantitatively evaluate the contribution of these factors to lichen growth is difficult because differences in the original environment from which the lichen thalli are collected will greatly affect heat and desiccation tolerances . 
 Due to declining population , L. pulmonaria is considered to be rare or threatened in many parts of the world , especially in lowland areas of Europe . The decline has been attributed to industrial forestry and air pollution , particularly acid rain . L. pulmonaria , like other lichens containing a blue @-@ green algal component , are particularly susceptible to the effects of acid rain , because the subsequent decrease in pH reduces nitrogen fixation through inhibition of the algal nitrogenase enzyme . 
 = = Chemical compounds = = 
 L. pulmonaria is known to contain a variety of acids common to lichens , such as <unk> acid , <unk> <unk> acid , <unk> acid , <unk> , <unk> acid , <unk> acid , <unk> acid , and <unk> acid . These compounds , collectively known as <unk> , are known to be involved in defense against grazing herbivores like lichen @-@ feeding molluscs . It also contains the sugar alcohols D @-@ arabitol , volemitol , in addition to several carotenoids ( total content > 10 mg / kg ) , such as alpha carotene , beta carotene , and beta <unk> . The upper cortex of the lichen contains melanins that screen UV and PAR radiation from the photobiont . The synthesis of melanin pigments in the lichen increases in response to greater solar irradiation , and shade @-@ adapted thalli are greenish @-@ grey in the air @-@ dry state , while sun @-@ exposed thalli can be dark brown in color . This adaptation helps protect the <unk> D. reticulata , known to be relatively intolerant to high light levels . 
 Also known to be present are various steroids , namely ergosterol , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Medicinal = = = 
 Its shape somewhat resembles the tissue inside lungs and therefore it is thought to be a remedy for lung diseases based on the doctrine of signatures . The lichen 's common English names are derived from this association . Gerard 's book The Herball or General Historie of plants ( 1597 ) recommends L. pulmonaria as medicinally valuable . It is still used for asthma , urinary incontinence and lack of appetite . In India it is used as a traditional medicine to treat hemorrhages and eczema , and it is used as a remedy for coughing up blood by the <unk> in British Columbia , Canada . An <unk> survey of the high Molise region in central @-@ southern Italy revealed that L. pulmonaria is used as an antiseptic , and is rubbed on wounds . 
 A hot @-@ water extract prepared using this species has been shown to have anti @-@ inflammatory and ulcer @-@ preventing activities . Also , methanol extracts were shown to have a protective effect on the gastrointestinal system of rats , possibly by reducing oxidative stress and reducing the inflammatory effects of neutrophils . Furthermore , methanol extracts also have potent antioxidative activity and reducing power , probably due to the presence of phenolic compounds . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 L. pulmonaria has also been used to produce an orange dye for wool , in the tanning of leather , in the manufacture of perfumes and as an ingredient in brewing . 
 = Loved ( video game ) = 
 Loved is a browser @-@ based platform video game developed by Alexander Ocias , an Australian graphic designer and artist . Written in Adobe Flash , the game was built over the course of about half a year in Ocias ' spare time . Released online on 14 June 2010 onto various game hosting websites , it has garnered sizeable praise and scrutiny since its release , with critics finding the game to be thought @-@ provoking while having poor controls . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 A narrator first asks players , " are you a man , or a woman ? " Players who select " man " are instead told they are a " girl " . Similarly , players who select " woman " are called a " boy " . Navigation is by arrow keys , which also control the ability to jump and duck . The narrator instructs players intermittently , sometimes to achieve goals but often to suggest actions that will kill the player character ( such as falling into a pit full of spikes ) . Players are sometimes , but not always , congratulated when following these instructions , while dissenting the narrator results in a barrage of insults . Both the player character and environment are in stark black and white , with a colourful motif appearing if the character disobeys the narrator 's instructions , or the visuals becoming more detailed but still in monochrome if the character decides to be compliant . 
 = = Development = = 
 Loved was built over the course of about half a year , transforming from the exploration genre to a <unk> and building @-@ based adventure game before settling on the platform genre . Ocias worked on the game intermittently in his spare time , using his " bit of self @-@ taught programming knowledge " to code it . Although no libraries were used during development , Ocias expressed that he wished that he had during the end of production . Research was taken into achieving " certain little fiddly things , " Ocias explained , such as generating the text elements and instructing Flash to read his tile maps . 
 According to Ocias , the main themes of Loved were of dominance and power , but to provide a fuller answer would " defy the point of the game " . His intentions in making the game were to get people to think about the games they were playing — a direction he found much of the video game industry shying away from . The confrontational aspect of the game was motivated by two aspects : primarily to use " the resource of emotions " invoked by its risk and reward mechanic ; and secondly to absorb the awareness of people online . Expanding upon his inspirations , Ocias cited individual games such as The Last Guardian and Deus Ex : Human Revolution , along with companies such as Thatgamecompany and Eidos Montreal , as showing " greater depth " to video games as well as experimentation and research . Ocias ultimately stated that while he dislikes " force @-@ feeding " players , he would try to take a different approach both mechanically and thematically for his next game . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Loved was published as freeware onto Newgrounds and Kongregate , as well as Ocias 's official website , on 14 June 2010 . Since its release , the game has received sizeable praise and scrutiny from players , with some responding <unk> over it . Duncan <unk> of Wired dubbed it " great high @-@ brow lunchtime gaming " that exploits the paradox of video games being supposedly a better medium than music and films , despite most gamers being compliant by design . Writing for Rock , Paper , Shotgun , Kieron Gillen called the atmosphere " genuinely oppressive " and the game 's <unk> between free will and control " really quite excellent " . A review in the Italian magazine Dude named it one of their top 16 favourite independent games . 
 In interviewing Ocias , Justin <unk> of Gamasutra called the experience of playing the game challenging of the " assumptions people may hold about the respective weight of narrative and play mechanics " . Kris <unk> of PopMatters called the controls frustrating and " only just playable " , but disregarded this as " all it needs in order to work " . Chris <unk> of Kill Screen found the game provoking of " gut reactions " and noted a sexual undercurrent throughout it . Referred to by Gillen , Michael Rose of IndieGames.com called the controls " a little wonky " , but concluded that it was " definitely worth giving a go " . Tim W. of the same website ranked the game second place of the top 10 browser platformers of 2010 . Rose later published in his book 250 Indie Games You Must Play that the game is worth playing twice to see the alternative endings based on the player 's decisions . Writing for the official website of G4 , Brittany Vincent called the game " especially curious " in its depiction of a dominant and submissive relationship and a " fantastic case " of the medium " pushing the margins of human emotion " . 
 = 2008 Summer Olympics = 
 The 2008 Summer Olympic Games , officially known as the Games of the XXIX Olympiad ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Dì <unk> <unk> <unk> Àolínpǐkè <unk> ) and commonly known as Beijing 2008 , was a major international multi @-@ sport event that took place in Beijing , China , from 8 to 24 August 2008 . A total of 10 @,@ 942 athletes from 204 National Olympic Committees ( NOCs ) competed in 28 sports and 302 events ( a total of one event more than the schedule of the 2004 Games ) . China became the 22nd nation to host the Olympic Games and the 18th to hold a Summer Olympic Games . It was the third time that the Summer Olympic Games were held in East Asia and Asia , after Tokyo , Japan , in 1964 and Seoul , South Korea , in 1988 . 
 The equestrian events were held in Hong Kong , making it the third time the events of the same Olympics were held under the jurisdiction of two different NOCs , while sailing was contested in Qingdao , and football events took place in several different cities . 
 Beijing was awarded the Games over four competitors on July 13 , 2001 , having won a majority of votes from members of the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) after two rounds of voting . The Government of the People 's Republic of China promoted the Games and invested heavily in new facilities and transportation systems . A total of 37 venues were used to host the events , including 12 constructed specifically for use at the Games . The official logo of these Olympic Games , titled " Dancing Beijing " , refers to the host city by featuring a stylized calligraphic character jīng ( 京 , meaning capital ) . The Games were the most watched Olympics in history , attracting 4 @.@ 7 billion viewers worldwide . Some politicians and non @-@ governmental organizations criticized the choice of China as Olympic host because of the country 's human rights record , and protests by critics of China 's human rights record , with particular focus on Tibet , marred the international portion of the Olympic torch relay . 
 There were 43 world records and 132 Olympic records set at the 2008 Summer Olympics . An unprecedented 86 countries won at least one medal during the Games . Chinese athletes won the most gold medals , with 51 , and 100 medals altogether , while the United States had the most total medals with 110 . The final medal tally was led by host China , followed by the United States and Russia . Though there were several controversies , the games were deemed generally successful with the rising standard of competition amongst nations across the world . 
 = = Organization = = 
 = = = Bid = = = 
 Beijing was elected as the host city for the 2008 Summer Olympics on 13 July 2001 , during the 112th IOC Session in Moscow , defeating bids from Toronto , Paris , Istanbul , and Osaka . Prior to the session , five other cities ( Bangkok , Cairo , Havana , Kuala Lumpur , and Seville ) had submitted bids to the IOC , but failed to make the short list chosen by the IOC Executive Committee in 2000 . After the first round of voting , Beijing held a significant lead over the other four candidates . Osaka received only six votes and was eliminated . In the second round , Beijing was supported by a majority of voters , eliminating the need for subsequent rounds . Toronto 's bid was their 5th failure since 1960 ( failed bid for 1960 , 1964 , 1976 and 1996 games ) . 
 Members of the IOC did not disclose their votes , but news reports speculated that broad international support led to China 's selection , especially from developing nations who had received assistance from China in the construction of stadiums . The size of China , its increased enforcement of doping controls , and sympathy concerning its loss of the 2000 Summer Olympics to Sydney were all factors in the decision . Eight years earlier , Beijing had led every round of voting for the 2000 Summer Olympics before losing to Sydney by two votes in the final round . 
 Human rights concerns expressed by Amnesty International and politicians in both Europe and the United States were considered by the delegates , according to IOC Executive Director François <unk> . <unk> and others suggested that the selection might lead to improvements in human rights in China . In addition , a number of IOC delegates who had formerly been athletes expressed concern about heat and air quality during the Games , considering the high levels of air pollution in Beijing . China outlined plans to address these environmental concerns in its bid application . 
 = = = Costs = = = 
 On 6 March 2009 , the Beijing Organizing Committee for the Olympic Games reported that total spending on the games was " generally as much as that of the Athens 2004 Olympic Games " , which was equivalent to about US $ 15 billion . They went on to claim that surplus revenues from the Games would exceed the original target of $ 16 million . Other reports , however , estimated the total costs from $ 40 billion to $ 44 billion , which would make the Games " far and away the most expensive ever " . 
 Its budget has since been exceeded by the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi , which suffered from major cost overruns , causing the budget to exceed US $ 51 billion . 
 = = = Venues = = = 
 By May 2007 the construction of all 31 Beijing @-@ based Olympic Games venues had begun . The Chinese government renovated and constructed six venues outside Beijing as well as 59 training centres . The largest structures built were the Beijing National Stadium , Beijing National Indoor Stadium , Beijing National Aquatics Center , Olympic Green Convention Center , Olympic Green , and Beijing <unk> Culture & Sports Center . Almost 85 % of the construction budget for the six main venues was funded by $ 2 @.@ 1 billion ( RMB ¥ 17 @.@ 4 billion ) in corporate bids and tenders . Investments were expected from corporations seeking ownership rights after the Olympics . Some events were held outside Beijing , namely football in <unk> , Shanghai , Shenyang , and Tianjin ; sailing in Qingdao ; and , because of the " uncertainties of equine diseases and major difficulties in establishing a disease @-@ free zone " , the equestrian events were held in Hong Kong . 
 The centrepiece of the 2008 Summer Olympics was the Beijing National Stadium , nicknamed " The Bird 's Nest " because of its nest @-@ like skeletal structure . The stadium hosted both the opening and closing ceremonies as well as the athletics competition . Construction of the venue began on December 24 , 2003 . The Guangdong Olympic Stadium was originally planned , constructed , and completed in 2001 to help host the Games , but a decision was made to construct a new stadium in Beijing . In 2001 , the city held a bidding process to select the best arena design . Several criteria were required of each design , including flexibility for post @-@ Olympics use , a retractable roof , and low maintenance costs . The entry list was narrowed to thirteen final designs . The bird 's nest model submitted by architects Jacques Herzog and Pierre de <unk> in collaboration with Li <unk> of China Architecture Design and Research Group ( <unk> ) was selected as the top design by both a professional panel and by a broader audience during a public exhibition . The selection of the design became official in April 2003 . Construction of the stadium was a joint venture among the original designers , project architect Stefan Marbach , artist Ai Weiwei , and a group of <unk> architects led by Li <unk> . Its $ 423 million cost was funded by the state @-@ owned corporate conglomerate CITIC and the Beijing State @-@ Owned Assets Management Company . 
 The 2008 Beijing Olympics caused traditional <unk> neighborhoods to be cleared for the construction of modern Olympic stadiums . In an effort to ensure success for the games , the government invested billions in building new infrastructure , although clearance to tiny , outdated neighborhoods in Beijing called <unk> resulted ( <unk> ) . Jim Yardley , a New York Times reporter interviews Pan <unk> , a 64 @-@ year @-@ old local resident : " They [ the government ] don ’ t want foreigners to see this scarred old face " . Feng <unk> and her husband , Zheng <unk> have lived in their house for 50 years and the family has owned the property before the Communists took control in 1949 . The government , trying to clear the area , has offered them to move with a compensatory sum of $ 175 @,@ 000 USD , but the family insists the land is worth $ 1 @.@ 4 million USD ( Yardley ) . Michael Meyer , an American who lives in the <unk> reported that a total of 500 @,@ 000 residents were relocated from their homes before the Olympics began ( Meyer ) . 
 = = = Transport = = = 
 To prepare for Olympic visitors , Beijing 's transportation infrastructure was expanded . Beijing 's airport underwent a major renovation with the addition of the new Terminal 3 , designed by architect Norman Foster . Within the city itself , Beijing 's subway was doubled in capacity and length , with the addition of 7 lines and 80 stations to the previously existing 4 lines and 64 stations . Included in this expansion was a new link connecting to the city 's airport . A fleet of thousands of buses , minibuses , and official cars transported spectators , athletes , and officials between venues . 
 In an effort to improve air quality , the city placed restrictions on construction sites and gas stations , and limited the use of commercial and passenger vehicles in Beijing . From June 20 through September 20 , passenger vehicle restrictions were placed on alternate days depending on the terminal digit of the car 's license plate . It was anticipated that this measure would take 45 % of Beijing 's 3 @.@ 3 million cars off the streets . The boosted public transport network was expected to absorb the demand created by these restrictions and the influx of visitors , which was estimated at more than 4 million additional passengers per day . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The 2008 Summer Olympics emblem was known as Dancing Beijing . The emblem combined a traditional Chinese red seal and a representation of the calligraphic character jīng ( 京 , " national capital " , also the second character of Beijing 's Chinese name ) with athletic features . The open arms of the calligraphic word symbolized the invitation from China to the world to share in its culture . IOC president Jacques Rogge was very happy with the emblem , saying , " Your new emblem immediately conveys the awesome beauty and power of China which are embodied in your heritage and your people . " 
 The official motto for the 2008 Olympics was " One World , One Dream " ( <unk> <unk> ) . It called upon the whole world to join in the Olympic spirit and build a better future for humanity , and was chosen from over 210 @,@ 000 entries submitted from around the world . Following the announcement of the motto , the phrase was used by international advocates of Tibetan secession . Banners reading " One World , One Dream , Free Tibet " were unfurled from various structures around the globe in the lead up to the Beijing Olympics , such as from the San Francisco Golden Gate Bridge and the Sydney Opera House in Australia . 
 The mascots of Beijing 2008 were the five Fuwa , each representing both a colour of the Olympic rings and a symbol of Chinese culture . In 2006 , the Beijing Organizing Committee released pictograms of 35 Olympic disciplines ( for some multi @-@ discipline sports , such as cycling , a single pictogram was released ) . This set of sport icons was named the beauty of seal characters , because of each pictogram 's likeness to Chinese seal script . 
 = = = Media coverage = = = 
 The 2008 Games were the first to be produced and broadcast entirely in high definition by the host broadcaster . In comparison , American broadcaster NBC broadcast only half of the 2006 Turin Winter Games in HD . In their bid for the Olympic Games in 2001 , Beijing stated to the Olympic Evaluation Commission that there would be , " [ N ] o restrictions on media reporting and movement of journalists up to and including the Olympic Games . " However , some media outlets claimed that organizers ultimately failed to live up to this commitment . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , 4 @.@ 7 billion viewers worldwide tuned into some of the television coverage , one @-@ fifth larger than the 3 @.@ 9 billion who watched the 2004 Olympic Games in Athens . American broadcaster NBC produced only 2 hours of online streaming video for the 2006 Winter Games but produced approximately 2 @,@ 200 hours of coverage for the 2008 Summer Games . CNN reported that , for the first time , " live online video rights in some markets for the Olympics have been separately negotiated , not part of the overall ' broadcast rights . ' " The new media of the digital economy was said to be growing " nine times faster than the rest of the advertising market . " 
 The international European Broadcasting Union ( EBU ) provided live coverage and highlights of all arenas only for certain territories on their website , <unk> Many national broadcasters likewise restricted the viewing of online events to their domestic audiences . The General National Copyright Administration of China announced that " individual ( sic ) and websites will face fines as high as 100 @,@ 000 yuan for uploading recordings of Olympic Games video to the internet " , part of an extensive campaign to protect the pertinent intellectual property rights . The Olympic Committee also set up a separate YouTube channel at Beijing 2008 . 
 = = = Theme song = = = 
 The theme song of the 2008 Olympic Games was " You and Me , " which was composed by Chen <unk> , the musical director of the opening ceremony . It was performed during the opening ceremony by Chinese singer Liu Huan and British singer Sarah Brightman . 
 = = Torch relay = = 
 The design of the 2008 Olympic Torch was based on traditional scrolls and used a traditional Chinese design known as the " <unk> Clouds " ( <unk> ) . The torch was designed to remain lit in 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) winds , and in rain of up to 50 mm ( 2 in ) per hour . 
 The relay , with the theme " Journey of Harmony " , was met with protests and demonstrations by pro @-@ Tibet supporters throughout its journey . It lasted 130 days and carried the torch 137 @,@ 000 km ( 85 @,@ 000 mi ) — the longest distance of any Olympic torch relay since the tradition began at the 1936 Berlin Games . The torch relay was described as a " public relations disaster " for China by USA Today , with protests against China 's human rights record , particularly focused on Tibet . The IOC subsequently barred future Olympics organizers from staging international torch relays . 
 The relay began March 24 , 2008 , in Olympia , Greece . From there , it traveled across Greece to Panathinaiko Stadium in Athens , and then to Beijing , arriving on March 31 . From Beijing , the torch followed a route passing through every continent except Antarctica . The torch visited cities on the Silk Road , symbolizing ancient links between China and the rest of the world . A total of 21 @,@ 880 torchbearers were selected from around the world by various organizations and entities . 
 The international portion of the relay was problematic . The month @-@ long world tour encountered wide @-@ scale protests . After trouble in London involving attempts by protestors to put out the flame , the torch was extinguished in Paris the following day . The American leg in San Francisco on April 9 was altered without prior warning to avoid such disturbances , although there were still demonstrations along the original route . The relay was further delayed and simplified after the 2008 Sichuan earthquake hit western China . 
 The flame was carried to the top of Mount Everest on a 108 km ( 67 mi ) long " highway " scaling the Tibetan side of the mountain , built especially for the relay . The $ 19 @.@ 7 million <unk> project spanned from <unk> County of <unk> Prefecture to the Everest Base Camp . In March 2008 , China banned mountaineers from climbing its side of Mount Everest , and later persuaded the Nepalese government to close their side as well , officially citing environmental concerns . It also reflected concerns by the Chinese government that Tibet activists may try to disrupt its plans to carry the Olympic torch up the world 's tallest peak . 
 The originally proposed route would have taken the torch through Taipei after leaving Vietnam and before heading for Hong Kong . However , the government of Taiwan ( then led by the independence @-@ leaning Democratic Progressive Party ) objected to this proposal , claiming that this route would make the portion of the relay in Taiwan appear to be part of the torch 's domestic journey through China , rather than a leg on the international route . This dispute , as well as Chinese demands that the flag and the national anthem of the Republic of China be banned along the route led the government of Taiwan to reject the proposal that it be part of the relay route , and the two sides of the Taiwan Strait subsequently blamed each other for injecting politics into the event . 
 = = Calendar = = 
 All times are in China Standard Time ( UTC + 8 ) 
 In the following calendar for the 2008 Olympic Games , each blue box represents an event competition , such as a qualification round , on that day . The yellow boxes represent days during which medal @-@ awarding finals for a sport were held . Each bullet in these boxes is an event final , the number of bullets per box representing the number of finals that were contested on that day . On the left the calendar lists each sport with events held during the Games , and at the right how many gold medals were won in that sport . There is a key at the top of the calendar to aid the reader . 
 = = Olympic and world records = = 
 125 Olympic records including 37 world records were set in various events at the Games . In swimming , sixty @-@ five Olympic swimming records including 25 world records were broken due to the use of the LZR Racer , a specialized swimming suit developed by NASA and the Australian Institute of Sport . Only two swimming Olympic records remained intact after the Games . 
 = = Games = = 
 = = = Opening ceremony = = = 
 The opening ceremony officially began at 8 : 00 pm China Standard Time ( UTC + 8 ) on August 8 , 2008 in the Beijing National Stadium . The number 8 is associated with prosperity and confidence in Chinese culture , and here it was a triple eight for the date and one extra for time ( close to 08 : 08 : 08 pm ) . The ceremony was co @-@ directed by Chinese filmmaker Zhang Yimou and Chinese choreographer Zhang <unk> and featured a cast of over 15 @,@ 000 performers . The ceremony lasted over four hours and was reported to have cost over US $ 100 million to produce . 
 A rich assembly of ancient Chinese art and culture dominated the ceremony . It opened with the beating of Fou drums for the countdown . Subsequently , a giant scroll was unveiled and became the show 's centerpiece . The official song of the 2008 Olympics , titled " You and Me " , was performed by Britain 's Sarah Brightman and China 's Liu Huan , on a large spinning rendition of the globe . The last recipient in the Olympic Torch relay , former Chinese gymnast Li Ning ignited the cauldron , after being suspended into the air by wires and completing a lap of the National Stadium at roof height . 
 The opening ceremony was lauded by spectators and various international presses as " spectacular " and " spellbinding " . Hein Verbruggen , chairman of the IOC Coordination Commission for the XXIX Olympiad , called the ceremony " a grand , unprecedented success . " 
 = = = Events = = = 
 The program for the Beijing Games was quite similar to that of the 2004 Summer Olympics held in Athens . There were 28 sports and 302 events at the 2008 Games . Nine new events were held , including two from the new cycling discipline of BMX . Women competed in the 3000 metre steeplechase for the first time . Open water swimming events for men and women , over the distance of 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) , were added to the swimming discipline . Team events ( men and women ) in table tennis replaced the doubles events . In fencing , women 's team foil and women 's team sabre replaced men 's team foil and women 's team épée . Two sports were open only to men , baseball and boxing , while one sport and one discipline were open only to women , softball and synchronized swimming . Equestrian and mixed badminton are the only sports in which men and women compete together . 
 The following were the 302 events in 28 sports that were contested at the Games . The number of events contested in each sport is indicated in parentheses ( in sports with more than one discipline , as identified by the IOC , these are also specified ) . 
 In addition to the official Olympic sports , the Beijing Organising Committee was given special dispensation by the IOC to run a wushu competition in parallel to the Games . The Wushu Tournament Beijing 2008 saw 128 athletes from 43 countries participate , with medals awarded in 15 separate events ; however , these were not to be added to the official medal tally since Wushu was not on the programme of the 2008 Olympic Games . 
 = = = Closing ceremony = = = 
 The 2008 Summer Olympics Closing Ceremony concluded the Beijing Games on August 24 , 2008 . It began at 8 : 00 pm China Standard Time ( UTC + 8 ) , and took place at the Beijing National Stadium . 
