 The Ceremony included handover of the Games from Beijing to London . Guo Jinlong , the Mayor of Beijing handed over the Olympic flag to the Mayor of London Boris Johnson , followed by a performance organized by the London Organising Committee of the Olympic Games and Paralympic Games ( LOCOG ) . This presentation included performances by guitarist Jimmy Page , and recording artist Leona Lewis . Footballer David Beckham was also featured during London 's presentation . 
 = = = Medal count = = = 
 Eighty @-@ seven nations earned medals , 54 of which won gold medals , both setting new records for Olympic Games . 118 participating countries did not win a medal . Athletes from China won 51 gold medals , the most of any nation at these Olympics , becoming the first nation other than the United States and Russia ( Soviet Union ) to lead in medals since Germany at the 1936 Summer Olympics . The United States team won the most medals overall , with 110 . Afghanistan , Mauritius , Sudan , Tajikistan and Togo won their first Olympic medals . Athletes from Mongolia ( which previously held the record for most medals without a gold ) and Panama won their nation 's first gold medals . An athlete from Serbia won its first medal under that name , having previously won medals as part of Yugoslavia and Serbia and Montenegro . 
 American swimmer Michael Phelps received a total of eight gold medals , more than any other Olympian in a single Olympic games , setting numerous world and Olympic records in the process . Jamaican sprinter Usain Bolt also set records in multiple events , completing the 100 m final with a time of 9 @.@ 69 seconds , surpassing his own previous world record . Russian @-@ born American gymnast Nastia Liukin won the all @-@ around gold medal in artistic gymnastics , becoming the third American woman to do so , following Mary Lou Retton in 1984 and Carly Patterson in 2004 . 
 These are the top ten nations that won medals in the 2008 Games . 
 = = Participating National Olympic Committees = = 
 All but one of the 205 recognized National Olympic Committees ( NOCs ) that existed as of 2008 participated in the 2008 Summer Olympics , the exception being Brunei . Three countries participated in the Olympic Games for their first time : the Marshall Islands , Montenegro and Tuvalu . 
 While not a full member recognized by the IOC and thus not allowed to compete formally in the Olympics , the Macau Sports and Olympic Committee sent a delegation to participate in the Wushu Tournament Beijing 2008 , being the only unrecognized National Olympic Committee to have taken part in the 2008 Summer Olympics . It also coordinated efforts with the Chinese Olympic Committee to organize the torch relay through Macau . 
 The Marshall Islands and Tuvalu gained National Olympic Committee status in 2006 and 2007 respectively , and 2008 was the first games in which they were eligible to participate . The states of Serbia and Montenegro , which participated at the 2004 Games jointly as Serbia and Montenegro , competed separately for the first time . The Montenegrin Olympic Committee was accepted as a new National Olympic Committee in 2007 . Neighboring Kosovo , however , did not participate . After the declaration of independence in Kosovo , the IOC specified requirements that Kosovo needs to meet before being recognized by the IOC ; most notably , it has to be recognized as independent by the United Nations . China and the United States had the largest teams , with 639 athletes for China and 596 for the United States . 
 More than 100 sovereigns , heads of state and heads of government as well as 170 Ministers of Sport attended the Beijing Olympic Games . 
 = = = National participation changes = = = 
 Athletes from the Republic of China ( Taiwan ) competed at the 2008 Games as Chinese Taipei ( <unk> ) under the Chinese Taipei Olympic flag and using the National Banner Song as their official anthem . The participation of Taiwan was briefly in doubt because of disagreements over the name of their team in the Chinese language and concerns about Taiwan marching in the Opening Ceremony next to the special administrative region of Hong Kong . A compromise on the naming was reached , and Taiwan was referred to during the games as " Chinese Taipei , " rather than " China @-@ Taipei , " as the mainland China government had proposed . In addition , the Central African Republic was placed between Chinese Taipei and the Special Administrative Regions during the march of nations . 
 Starting in 2005 , North Korea and South Korea held meetings to discuss the possibility of sending a united team to the 2008 Olympics . The proposal failed , because of disagreements about how athletes would be chosen ; North Korea was demanding a certain percentage representation for its athletes . A subsequent attempt to broker an agreement for the two nations to walk together during the March of Nations failed as well , despite their having done so during the 2000 and 2004 Games . 
 On July 24 , 2008 , the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) banned Iraq from competing in the 2008 Olympic Summer Games because of " political interference by the government in sports . " The IOC reversed its decision five days later and allowed the nation to compete after a pledge by Iraq to ensure " the independence of its national Olympics panel " by instituting fair elections before the end of November . In the meantime , Iraq 's Olympic Organisation was run by " an interim committee proposed by its national sports federations and approved by the IOC . " 
 Brunei Darussalam was due to take part in the 2008 Summer Olympic Games . However , they were disqualified on August 8 , having failed to register either of their two athletes . The IOC spokeswoman Emmanuelle Moreau said in a statement that " it is a great shame and very sad for the athletes who lose out because of the decision by their team not to register them . The IOC tried up until the last minute , midday Friday August 8 , 2008 , the day of the official opening , to have them register , but to no avail . " Brunei 's Ministry of Culture , Youth and Sports issued a press release stating that their decision not to participate was due to an injury to one of their athletes . 
 Georgia announced on August 9 , 2008 , that it was considering withdrawing from the Beijing Olympic Games because of the 2008 South Ossetia war , but it went on to compete while the conflict was still ongoing . 
 = = = Participation of athletes with disabilities = = = 
 South African swimmer Natalie du Toit , whose left leg was amputated following a motor scooter accident , qualified to compete at the Beijing Olympics . The five time gold medalist at the Athens Paralympics in 2004 made history by becoming the first amputee to qualify for the Olympic Games since <unk> <unk> in 1936 . She was able to compete in the Olympics rather than the Paralympics because she does not use a prosthetic leg while swimming . Polish athlete Natalia <unk> , who was born without a right forearm , competed in Table Tennis in both the 2008 Olympic Games and 2008 Paralympic Games . 
 = = Concerns and controversies = = 
 A variety of concerns over the Games , or China 's hosting of the Games , had been expressed by various entities , including allegations that China violated its pledge to allow open media access , various alleged human rights violations , its continuous support of repressive regimes ( such as Zimbabwe , Burma , Sudan and North Korea ) , air pollution in both the city of Beijing and in neighbouring areas , proposed boycotts , warnings of the possibility that the Beijing Olympics could be targeted by terrorist groups , disruption from pro @-@ Tibetan protesters , and religious persecutions . 
 There were also reports that several members of China 's women 's gymnastics team , including double gold medal winner He Kexin , were too young to compete under the Fédération Internationale de <unk> 's rules for Olympic eligibility , but all were exonerated after an official IOC investigation . 
 In the lead @-@ up to the Olympics , the government allegedly issued guidelines to the local media for their reporting during the Games : most political issues not directly related to the games were to be downplayed ; topics such as pro @-@ Tibetan independence and East Turkestan movements were not to be reported on , as were food safety issues such as " cancer @-@ causing mineral water . " As the 2008 Chinese milk scandal broke in September 2008 , there was widespread speculation that China 's desire for a perfect Games may have been a factor contributing towards the delayed recall of contaminated infant formula . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The 2008 Olympic Games have been generally accepted by the world 's media as a logistical success . Many of the worst fears about the games failed to materialize : no terrorists struck Beijing ; no athlete protested at the podium ( though Swedish wrestler Ara <unk> tossed his bronze medal in disgust over judging ) , and the air quality – due largely to favorable weather patterns – was not as bad as many had feared beforehand despite being the worst in Olympics history . Hopes that hosting the Games would lead to improvements in human rights protections and rule of law in China , however , went unfulfilled . 
 Many in China viewed the Olympics as " an affirmation of a single nationalistic dream " and saw protests during the international torch relay as an insult to China . The Games also bolstered domestic support for the Chinese government , and for the policies of the Communist Party , giving rise to concerns that the Olympics would give the state more leverage to suppress political dissent , at least temporarily . Efforts to quell any unrest before and during the Games also contributed to a rapid expansion in the size and political clout of China 's internal security forces , and this growth continued through the following years . Reports also indicated that the Olympics boosted the political careers of pro @-@ Beijing politicians in Hong Kong , as many Chinese gold medal winners campaigned on behalf of the pro @-@ Beijing DAB during the 2008 election , although any trend towards greater identification by Hong Kongers with Mainland China appears to have been short @-@ lived . 
 The long @-@ term economic impact of the games on China and Beijing in particular is not yet clear . Some sectors of the economy may have benefited from the influx of tourists , and other sectors such as manufacturing lost revenue because of plant closings related to the government 's efforts to improve air quality . Four years after the Games , many of the specially constructed facilities were underused or even deserted . It is generally expected by economists that there will be no lasting effects on Beijing 's economy from the games . 
 Seven years after the 2008 Games , Beijing was awarded the 2022 Winter Olympics . 
 = Trust No 1 = 
 " Trust No 1 " is the sixth episode of the ninth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on January 6 , 2002 . The episode was written by series creator Chris Carter and executive producer Frank Spotnitz , and directed by Tony Wharmby . " Trust No 1 " helps to explore the series ' overarching mythology . The episode received a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 1 and was viewed by 8 @.@ 4 million viewers ; it garnered mixed to negative reviews from television critics , with many feeling that it portrayed the series ' characters in a way that was unfaithful to the show 's history . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files ; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . In this episode , Scully is hopeful about reuniting with her former partner , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) when a complete stranger offers new information about what drove him into hiding . Yet her trust in the stranger may place Mulder in even more danger , for the man turns out to be a super soldier . 
 " Trust No 1 " features former leading star Duchovny via the use of previously filmed footage . It was written in response to fans who felt that , during season eight , Mulder 's abduction was not dealt with until his miraculous return in " This is Not Happening " / " Deadalive " . Actor Terry O 'Quinn , who appears in this episode as the Shadow Man , had appeared as different characters in the second season episode " Aubrey " and the 1998 feature film and appeared as Peter Watts in The X @-@ Files sister show Millennium . The tagline for the episode is " They 're Watching . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 While at a coffee shop , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) sees an infant crying and sees the infant 's mother , Patti , outside of the coffee shop arguing with her husband , who then drives off . Scully asks the mother if she is OK , and the mother leaves with her child . Meanwhile , Doggett and Reyes stake out the location where Doggett traced a tipster 's call to his cell phone . They see Patti 's husband , who they believe to be the tipster , walk inside the apparently abandoned building . Inside , the husband sits at a computer . The Shadow Man ( Terry O 'Quinn ) , who appears to be the husband 's boss , monitors Scully through surveillance . 
 Scully sees Patti a short time later , arguing with her husband , who drives off with their baby in the car . Scully approaches Patti , offering her assistance , and invites Patti inside . Scully convinces Patti to stay the night after learning she has nowhere else to go . The next morning , Patti turns off the baby monitor and removes William from his crib . Scully awakens when she gets a phone call from Doggett warning her that they the tipster they were following had just gone into her building . Scully then hears William cry and confronts Patti with her gun , telling her to put down her baby . Just then , Patti 's husband attempts to pick Scully 's lock , but is stopped by Doggett and Reyes . The husband reveals to Scully that he works for the NSA and has no name . He says he was not there to take William , but was there to retrieve his wife , as he knew she was upset . Patti says their daughter is just like William , and they only want to keep both children safe . The husband informs Scully , Doggett , and Reyes that they are being watched , and signals to Scully to close the window . 
 The husband reveals that he has discovered that their infant was part of the government 's “ Super Soldier ” project and begs her to call Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) out of hiding in order to give him this information . John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) and Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) confirm that the couple 's story matches with what is known about the Super Soldiers . Initially , Doggett encourages Scully to contact Mulder . He believes the tipster has the names of super soldiers and that information would be vital to tracking the super soldiers down . The tipster indicates that he is willing to share this information with <unk> other than Mulder . Scully , fearful for Mulder 's safety , falsely claims not to know his whereabouts . All the while , she absent @-@ mindedly touches a printout of an email that Mulder sent her earlier . 
 Moments after Scully closes the drapes to her window , the Shadow Man calls her and tells her that she must get Mulder . The Shadow Man then tells her that she has one day to contact Mulder or else he will disappear with a list of the Super Soldiers ' identities . Scully refuses to contact Mulder unless she can meet with the Shadow Man face @-@ to @-@ face . The Shadow Man gives Scully detailed instructions about how and where to meet him , warning her that even a slight deviation from his instructions would mean that he would never contact her again . The Shadow Man tells her to drive a series of vehicles and to drive west until she is told to stop . He also tells her to change into a different outfit that he has in the trunk of the car she is driving . Scully reluctantly changes her clothing . The Shadow Man then comes face @-@ to @-@ face with Scully , and she questions him about how he knows her clothing size . During the meeting , the Shadow Man explains that he has been watching her for quite some time and , that , in addition to her clothing size , he knows everything about her including , " That one lonely night you invited Mulder to your bed . " The Shadow Man presses a button , causing the vehicle Scully had been driving to explode . Scully finally gives in and contacts Mulder ; she tells Doggett that before Mulder left , they had worked out a plan that , if Mulder was to return , he would be arriving by train . Doggett urges Scully to contact Mulder and tell him not to come , fearing that the Shadow Man is a set up , and that Mulder is in harm 's way . Scully replies that she wants to see Mulder , and that it is too late to call it off . Reyes , Doggett , and the husband / NSA agent cover Scully at the train station . However , as the train pulls up , the Shadow Man appears and guns down the husband / agent before approaching Scully . Before the Shadow Man can kill Scully , Doggett appears and shoots him twice , sending him falling onto the train tracks , where the train seemingly runs over him without stopping . Because there has been a shooting , much to Scully 's dismay , a train employee radios to the conductor to keep the train moving and not to stop at that station . 
 While Scully consoles Patti , whose husband just died in Scully 's arms , Doggett reports that he cannot find the Shadow Man 's body . Scully , fearful that he is a Super Soldier pursuing Mulder , chases after the train with Doggett and Reyes . An employee who works for the trail gets a call on his radio , saying that someone jumped off a train and into a rock quarry . Doggett and Reyes chase after someone they believe to be Mulder , while Scully goes deeper into the quarry . There , she is attacked by the Shadow Man . Suddenly , the Shadow Man is destroyed by the magnetite being mined from the quarry . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Trust No 1 " was written by series creator Chris Carter along with executive producer Frank Spotnitz ; it was directed by Tony Wharmby . The episode features former leading star David Duchovny via the use of previously shot footage . According to Matt Hurwitz and Chris Knowles in their book The Complete X @-@ Files , the episode includes themes " about Orwellian surveillance . " " Trust No 1 " was written in response to fans who felt that , during season eight , Mulder 's abduction was not dealt with until his miraculous return in " This is Not Happening " / " DeadAlive " . Despite this , series director Kim Manners was critical of this take on Mulder , noting , " The only thing I thought we didn 't do right during seasons eight and nine was that a lot of the shows were about Mulder , and I thought it was a mistake to make a series about a man that wasn 't standing in front of the camera . " The email addresses that Mulder and Scully use to communicate with each other were real addresses , created and maintained by Ten Thirteen Productions . The tagline for the episode is " They 're Watching " , changed from the usual " The Truth is Out There " . 
 Actor Terry O 'Quinn , who appears in this episode as the Shadow Man , had appeared as different characters in the second season episode " Aubrey " and the 1998 feature film . He had also played a recurring role as Peter Watts on Millennium , the sister series to The X @-@ Files , and appeared in the short @-@ lived series Harsh Realm . O 'Quinn later earned the nickname " Mr. Ten Thirteen " , due to his appearance in multiple shows and movies affiliated with Ten Thirteen Productions , the company that produced The X @-@ Files . His name is spelled Terrance Quinn in the opening credits . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Trust No 1 " first premiered on the Fox network in the United States on January 6 , 2002 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 1 , meaning that it was seen by 5 @.@ 1 % of the nation 's estimated households and was viewed by 5 @.@ 4 million households , and 8 @.@ 4 million viewers . It was the 55th most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending March 3 . The episode eventually aired in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on December 8 , 2002 . The episode was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 4 – Super Soldiers , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien super soldiers arc . 
 The episode received mixed to negative reviews from television critics . Jessica Morgan from Television Without Pity gave the episode a B – grade . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it a 6 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this is not nearly as bad an episode as many people are making it out to be , but it ’ s not exactly a sterling piece of work , either . It feels like they were shooting for a ' Momento Mori ' [ sic ] , and wound up with a ' Zero Sum ' . This episode is interesting in the information it provides , and not much else . But in my opinion , it ’ s better than ' Lord of the Flies ' . " 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five . The two called the entry " an exercise in futility [ … ] at best " and argued that , because Duchovny had left the series , the sense of excitement that he might have made an appearance in the episode was completely gone . Furthermore , Shearman and Pearson heavily criticized Mulder and Scully 's characterization , calling Mulder a character the audience " can 't recognize any more " and Scully a " gullible patsy " . M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X @-@ Files after 9 / 11 , was also critical of the script 's treatment of the characters , arguing that Mulder and Scully in this episode " sound nothing like the characters we have come to know " . He also lamented that the episode did not examine the central theme of electronic surveillance in greater detail . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , wrote a largely negative review of the episode . He derided the series for making it appear that Mulder abandoned the woman he loved and his own child . He noted , " Just because it walks , talks , and sometimes acts like The X @-@ Files , doesn 't make it The X @-@ Files . " 
 = Timothy M. Carney = 
 Timothy Michael Carney ( born July 12 , 1944 ) is a retired American diplomat and consultant . Carney served as a career Foreign Service Officer for 32 years , with assignments that included Vietnam and Cambodia as well as Lesotho and South Africa before being appointed as ambassador to Sudan and later in Haiti . Carney served with a number of U.N. Peacekeeping Missions , and until recently led the Haiti Democracy Project , an initiative launched under the presidency of George W. Bush to build stronger institutional foundations for the country 's long @-@ term relationship with the United States . 
 In 2003 , Carney was appointed to oversee America 's reconstruction efforts in Iraq after the war that deposed Saddam Hussein . After a long diplomatic career , Carney served as Executive Vice President of the Clinton @-@ Bush Haiti Fund , a non @-@ profit organization whose principal purpose was to assist Haiti 's redevelopment in the aftermath of the January 2010 earthquake until the Fund rolled over operations in December 2012 to a domestic Haitian non @-@ profit organization . 
 Carney 's appointment to diplomatic postings in countries that had often difficult relations with the United States earned him both praise and criticism from observers for his hands @-@ on diplomatic style . His strong views on Iraq 's reconstruction efforts after the war in 2003 were in part responsible for a wholesale change in the Bush administration 's strategy to stabilize the war @-@ torn nation . He also advocated engagement with Sudan at a time when White House officials and the C.I.A. wanted the U.S. Embassy closed in Khartoum . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Carney was born in St. Joseph , Missouri and was raised and educated at military posts in the U.S. as well as abroad where his parents were stationed , including in Bad <unk> , Germany , Fort Bliss , Texas and Taipei , Taiwan . His father served in the United States Army in the early 1940s before being assigned to the Judge Advocate Generals Corps in 1948 . His mother , daughter of a surgeon in St. Joseph , raised Carney and his two siblings as the family moved from one military posting to another . He received his Bachelor of Science degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1966 and the U.S. Foreign Service sent him on a brief sabbatical to study at Cornell University from 1975 until 1976 , focusing on Southeast Asian studies as part of his career . Carney was a member of the board of the American Academy of Diplomacy and speaks Khmer , Thai and French fluently . 
 Carney is married to a free @-@ lance journalist , Victoria Butler . He has a daughter from a previous marriage . He and his wife , both writers , have published , with a British photographer , a photographic essay on the Sudan . 
 = = Foreign Service career = = 
 = = = Early assignments = = = 
 Carney began his Foreign Service Officer career in Vietnam in 1967 as a rotation officer based in Saigon for biographic and youth affairs and for commercial matters . He was then stationed in Lesotho as second of two officers in charge of consular , political and economic affairs until 1971 . In 1972 , he was appointed Second Secretary at the U.S. Mission in Phnom Penh , before returning to the United States to study at Cornell University in 1975 . 
 After spending a few years at the State Department 's Vietnam , Laos and Cambodia desk , Carney was appointed as U.S. consul in Udorn , Thailand and later as political officer in Bangkok during the third Indochina war from 1979 until 1983 . After serving three year stints as the political counselor to U.S. Missions in Jakarta , Indonesia and Pretoria , South Africa ( before Apartheid ended ) , Carney joined the U.S. Mission to the UN as political adviser for the 1989 UN General Assembly . On return to Washington he joined the White House National Security Council staff under President George H. W. Bush . He focused on Southeast Asian and Pacific Island affairs . 
 Carney cycled through several United Nations positions during the 1990s , serving from 1992 to 1993 as the Director of Information and Education of the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia , in 1993 as the Special Political Adviser to the Special Representative of the UN Secretary General in Somalia , and in 1994 in the UN Observer Mission in South Africa as it prepared for the historic post @-@ Apartheid transition to democracy in 1994 . In 1994 , Carney was appointed as Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for South Asian Affairs . A year later , he would receive his first ambassadorial posting . 
 = = = U.S. Ambassador to Sudan = = = 
 Carney was appointed U.S. Ambassador to Sudan on 27 June 1995 during a period of turmoil in <unk> relations . Osama bin Laden had fled Saudi Arabia for the safe confines of Khartoum a few years earlier , and Sudan 's alleged harboring and abetting of Muslim extremists on its soil was attracting attention of counterterrorism experts in the United States and abroad . Carney 's tenure as ambassador followed a tumultuous period during which his predecessor , Donald K. Petterson , had been forced to draw down embassy staff by half and send their families back to America when terrorist threats were made against U.S. diplomats stationed in Khartoum . 
 In late 1993 , Petterson was asked by officials in the Clinton administration to deliver a " non @-@ paper " ultimatum to Sudan 's Islamist leader , Hasan al @-@ <unk> , and the country 's president , Omar al @-@ Bashir . The document contained a brief list of talking points that were designed to warn Sudan 's top government officials about any involvement in alleged plots to kill U.S. diplomats working in Sudan . The alleged threats were based on evidence gathered by a foreign agent retained by the C.I.A. , data which would be used to justify Petterson 's reduction of American embassy personnel in Khartoum . The agent 's information would later be found to have been fabricated , and would force the C.I.A. to redact or delete up to 100 reports on Sudan . Petterson would later state that he did not believe the intelligence findings warranted a draw down in embassy staff . 
 Petterson 's compulsory delivery of the talking points based on faulty U.S. intelligence would set the stage for strained relations between Washington and Khartoum that lasted well into Carney 's early tenure as ambassador . In late 1995 , Carney was also asked to deliver a similar non @-@ paper message based on what he would later recount as having been poorly sourced U.S. intelligence . 
 In early 1996 , a few months after his credentials had been accepted , Carney met with senior Sudanese foreign ministry officials prior to vacating the U.S. embassy in Khartoum for the safer environs of Nairobi . He proposed tangible steps to recover the rapidly deteriorating relationship between Washington and Khartoum . In March 1996 , El Fatih <unk> , then minister of state for defense , was authorized by President Omar al @-@ Bashir to make several secret trips to the United States to hold talks with U.S. officials , including Carney and senior C.I.A. Africa experts , about U.S. sanctions policy against Sudan and what measures might be taken by the Bashir regime to lift them . 
 During a series of meetings in northern Virginia , <unk> was presented with a list of U.S. requirements , including demands for information about bin Laden and other radical Islamic groups encamped in Sudan . The U.S. also demanded that the Bashir regime stop hosting the Popular Arab and Islamic Congress conferences that were increasingly perceived in the west as global terrorist planning sessions . Carney argued with State Department , C.I.A. and other U.S. officials , including Susan Rice , then the National Security Council 's Africa Director , that Sudan 's Mukhabarat ( equivalent of the C.I.A. ) was amassing volumes of valuable intelligence on Islamist leaders through their pilgrimages to Khartoum for the <unk> conferences . In May 1996 , despite Carney 's efforts to persuade U.S. officials to reconcile with Khartoum on intelligence matters , the Clinton Administration demanded that Sudan expel bin Laden . The Saudi fugitive fled to Afghanistan . Carney was relegated to shuttling from Nairobi to Khartoum to engage in his ambassadorial duties . Carney ended his post as ambassador in November 1997 to move to Haiti . 
 = = = U.S. Ambassador to Haiti = = = 
 Carney arrived as U.S. Ambassador to Haiti on January 14 , 1998 . At the time of his appointment , Haiti was in political turmoil : former president , Jean @-@ <unk> Aristide , was locked in a battle to retake power in the election of 2000 . Upon arrival in Haiti , Carney laid out U.S. concerns — lack of governance , lack of economic sustainability programs and an inability to prevent narco @-@ trafficking through Haiti as the first port of call by the Cali drug cartels from Colombia . 
 American policy in the region was ineffective at the time . Carney 's first task was to streamline reporting to Washington about ground realities in Haiti , as well as bringing in U.S. policymakers in to see firsthand what U.S. taxpayer dollars were funding in the country . Carney touted humanitarian successes of U.S. policy in Haiti , including success in preventing the spread of AIDS and providing lunch money to upwards of 500 @,@ 000 Haitian students each school day . Microcredit financing efforts were also on display , as was the U.S. Coast Guard to monitor Haiti 's coastline for Cali go @-@ fast boats laden with cocaine shipments bound for the U.S. mainland . 
 Structural problems remained , however , including widespread political and judicial corruption , as well as police malfeasance . Haiti nevertheless slowly developed a more active civil society . As Aristide made his comeback , Carney made plans to retire to the private sector , and on December 11 , 1999 , resigned his post . Shortly after his term as ambassador to Haiti had ended , U.S. Senator Mike DeWine commended Carney and his wife Vicki for their efforts to improve living conditions in Haiti on July 26 , 2000 , in a speech from the Senate floor , " ... Tim and his wife Vicki proudly represented the United States . Day in and day out , they were committed to helping the people of Haiti overcome their dismal surroundings and their dire circumstances . Tim and Vicki worked to alleviate hunger and poverty throughout the island and encouraged practical economic reforms . " 
 = = = Other assignments = = = 
 In March 2003 , Carney joined the staff of Lt. Gen. Jay Garner in Iraq and served for several months as a senior staff member in the Ministry of Industry and Minerals as part of the Coalition Provisional Authority ( CPA ) that governed Iraq in the aftermath of U.S. forces overthrowing the regime of Saddam Hussein . Upon arrival in Baghdad , he became critical of the plan set out by CPA , making clear that Iraq czar Paul Bremer 's ideological vision was impeding progress that could have been made to stabilize Iraq . He left Baghdad two months after arriving in April 2003 , disillusioned by an inability to execute a more pragmatic plan for Iraq 's reconstruction . Carney returned to Washington where he made known his disagreement with the Bremer plan . In 2007 , Under a significant reorganization of the Iraq reconstruction effort by the Bush administration that witnessed other policy dissenters return to Baghdad , Carney was asked by the State Department to return to the U.S. Embassy in Baghdad to oversee the overall U.S. effort to rebuild Iraq . 
 He has also lectured on areas of his expertise on Iraq since 2004 to assist in readying U.S. Army and National Guard contingents for their assignments in Iraq . In 2007 , Carney returned to Iraq from February until June to serve as Coordinator for Economic Transition and was again with the State Department as Head of the Interagency Election Support Team in Kabul from March until November 2009 . Throughout his long foreign service career , Carney advocated a policy of " constructive engagement " with rogue countries , often against policy prescriptions formulated by White House advisers in the administrations for whom he worked . Viewed as something of a maverick diplomat , he was often at odds with senior national security officials as well as political appointees on both sides of the aisle in Washington . 
 = = Haiti Democracy Project = = 
 The Haiti Democracy Project was officially launched at the Brookings Institution in November 2002 as a non @-@ profit organization . Its funding was raised from Haitian @-@ Americans and Haitians living in the United States , as well as other U.S. citizens . Its primary purpose was creating a more pragmatic and operative U.S. policy towards Haiti . 
 As Haiti 's economic situation had deteriorated during the second Aristide presidency , demonstrations proliferated everywhere throughout the nation and political dialogue broke down between opposition leaders and the Aristide government . Carney , who spoke at the inaugural event and later went on to become Chairman of the Board for the project , raised concerns about whether the United States government was paying attention to the gravity of problems that were beginning to affect Haiti 's stability systemically . 
 He criticized U.S. congressional leaders , particularly those in the Congressional Black Caucus , for a " do @-@ nothing " attitude towards Haiti , much of which he had seen firsthand during his tenure as ambassador . 
 The project was criticized as an elitist forum for wealthy right @-@ wing Haitians to promote their own agendas for Haiti 's future . Funding was provided , in material part , by controversial Haitian businessman Rodolphe <unk> who was involved in a pharmaceutical poisoning controversy in 1996 . The project was seen as a platform for giving opponents of the <unk> administration a hearing in Washington . 
 The Haiti Democracy Project 's report , published on May 4 , 2005 , was attacked for drawing only on government bodies and officials who had a vested interest in the report 's findings . Haiti 's police officials were found to be the only source of information , for example , in reporting on police actions during the <unk> administration 's time in office . Human rights findings were criticized for having " extreme bias " in the report . 
 = = Clinton @-@ Bush Haiti Fund = = 
 In the aftermath of the earthquake in Haiti on January 10 , 2010 , President Barack Obama asked former presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush to work together in raising funds for the rehabilitation and long @-@ term recovery of Haiti . The Clinton @-@ Bush Haiti Fund was created as a 501 ( c ) 3 organization and began operations in 2010 . 
 Carney served as executive vice president of the Fund until it ceased operations at the end of 2012 . Its purpose was to assist Haitians in developing sustainable paradigms for medium @-@ term and long @-@ term economic growth as well as creating jobs that stabilize its domestic economy . The Fund raised $ 54 million , and during its term , the Fund estimated that its programs sustained or created 7 @,@ 350 jobs , trained 20 @,@ 050 individuals , and had an additional positive impact on the conditions of more than 311 @,@ 000 Haitians . 
 = Awake ( TV series ) = 
 Awake is an American television police procedural fantasy drama that originally aired on NBC for one season from March 1 to May 24 , 2012 . The pilot episode had an early release on Hulu on February 16 , 2012 , two weeks before the series ' premiere on television . The show 's central character is Michael Britten ( Jason Isaacs ) , a detective who works for the Los Angeles Police Department . Kyle Killen , the series ' creator , was primarily responsible for the program 's concept ; although he served as a writer , he avowed that writing episode scripts was difficult . Killen also served as an executive producer ( with David Slade ) of the pilot episode . Jeffrey Reiner and Howard Gordon then continued producing ( with Killen ) for Gordon 's Teakwood Lane Productions . 
 Michael lives in two separate realities after a car accident . In one reality ( where he wears a red wristband ) , his wife Hannah ( Laura Allen ) survives the accident ; in the other reality ( where he wears a green wristband ) , his son Rex ( Dylan Minnette ) survives . Michael does not know which reality is " real " and uses the wristbands to differentiate between the two . He sees two therapists : Dr. Jonathan Lee ( BD Wong ) in the " red reality " and Dr. Judith Evans ( Cherry Jones ) in the " green reality " . At work , Michael 's erratic behavior triggers clashes with his team ; they do not know about Michael 's uncanny ability to solve crimes using details from both realities . 
 Awake averaged 4 @.@ 8 million viewers per episode , ranking 125th in viewership for the 2011 – 12 season . A critical success , Awake 's cast was praised ( particularly Isaacs ' performance as Michael ) . On May 11 , after 11 of the 13 produced episodes had aired , the show was canceled due to low ratings , although NBC aired the remaining episodes in the series ' original time slot . Fans of the show created a " Save Awake " campaign to convince networks to revive the show , which was unsuccessful . Awake has been nominated for one award . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Killen ( the series ' creator ) devised the concept of the program , described as a " police procedural about the life of a detective experiencing a parallel universe after a car accident involving his family . " NBC picked up the pilot episode of Awake in February 2011 , and green @-@ lit production of the show ( originally entitled REM ) in May . 
 Killen previously created the American television drama Lone Star ( 2010 ) for the Fox network ; it was canceled by the network ( due to low ratings ) after two episodes had aired . Jennifer Salke , president of the NBC entertainment division , encouraged Killen to develop a concept for a future television series after the cancellation of Lone Star . Killen said that the duality concept of Lone Star provided him with a good platform to explore new ideas for a potential television show . He felt that Awake had a concept similar to that of Lone Star , and wanted to continue the idea of living in " two spaces " . 
 Killen drew inspiration from the dreaming process : " The concept of the way your dreams feel real , the way you seem to experience them as something that you don 't blink at until something crazy happens that sort of bursts that balloon . I think I became interested in the question of what if nothing ever popped that balloon ? What if you couldn 't tell the difference between when you were awake and when you were asleep ? And then I started looking for a way to marry those two ideas up , and a few months later we had Awake . " 
 Within a few weeks Killen sent a rough draft of the script to his agent , Marc Korman . Korman phoned Salke , calling the script " remarkable " and praising Killen : " ... for a guy who has never written a procedural show in his life " , he was " making two cases work . " Initially , Salke and Korman hoped to sell acquisition rights to other networks ( including Fox ) . Although it successfully made its way into the lower executive branches of the company , the script was ultimately declined by Fox entertainment president Kevin Reilly . Gary Newman , chairman of 20th Century Fox Television , opted not to develop a deal with cable @-@ television networks . Believing it should be a broadcast @-@ network show , he did not accept the idea that the difference between cable and network dramas was their degree of intelligence . 
 Killen described Awake as neither supernatural drama nor science fiction . He contrasted it with the Fox television series Fringe , claiming that Fringe " asks you to delve into sci @-@ fi " ; Awake was described as a " human story " , with the crimes on the show emphasizing that level . In addition , Killen made the version of Michael 's reality the viewer is watching obvious with a subtle visual device ; in the reality where his son is alive ( the " green reality " ) , the background is layered with a watery blue filter ( Michael often wears blue in the series ) . In the reality where his wife is alive ( the " red reality " ) , the background is infused with a brighter , golden hue . 
 = = = Production team = = = 
 Awake is a co @-@ production of Letter Eleven and Howard Gordon 's Teakwood Lane Productions , in association with 20th Century Fox Television . Gordon was chosen as showrunner for the series by Killen , and commended the pilot script at first glance on a flight to New York . " I read the pilot , and once I got past my envy , I was struck by the voice , " he stated . " So few writers have real voices . Kyle is disarmingly self @-@ effacing ; and at the same time , he 's disarmingly confident . It 's that duality thing : On the one hand , he 's open ; on the other , he 's closed . " Gordon later compared the television series to The Good Wife : " The Good Wife has so many procedural aspects that they have to decide which format to use each week ... Why is this an Awake episode ? " He and Killen served as executive producers ( with David Slade and Jeffrey Reiner ) for the pilot episode . 
 The series ' episodes were written by Killen , Gordon , Evan Katz , Lisa Zwerling , Noelle Valdivia , Leonard Chang , Davey Holmes and David Graziano . Episodes were directed by Slade , Reiner , Sarah Pia Anderson , Aaron Lipstadt , Scott Winant , Adam Davidson , Michael Waxman , Nick Gomez , Laura Innes , Milan Cheylov and Miguel Sapochnik . Jason Isaacs , Keith Redmon , Ed Milkovich and Michael <unk> produced the show . Feliks Parnell was the show 's primary cinematographer . Editors of the show were Paul Trejo and <unk> <unk> ; principal photography for the pilot was completed at Fox Studios in Los Angeles , California . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In February 2011 , Isaacs was cast in the role of Michael Britten , the central character of the series . Gordon summarized the character : " He 's a guy who goes to sleep , wakes up , he 's with his wife , goes to sleep , wakes up , and he 's with his son . And so — and he 's a cop who sees clues and details that crossover [ sic ] from one world to the next , and he uses that insight to solve crimes . " " [ The main character ] was somebody that you couldn 't decide if you liked or hated , and I think that [ Michael ] ' s dilemma is something that we 're not only sympathetic for , but somehow we want him to win . " Producers of the show initially approached Michaela McManus to play Hannah Britten . However , Laura Allen was cast instead ; McManus obtained the role of Tara ( for which Allen originally auditioned ) . 
 In March 2011 , six roles were cast ( including Dylan Minnette as Rex Britten , Michael 's son ) . Minnette commended the series ' script , and noted that auditioning was quick . He stated , " The process of getting the job actually went by really fast because the first audition Kyle Killen [ ... ] was in the room , Jason [ Isaacs ] was in the room , the cast director was in the room and the director was in the room . David Slade . And they were all there , for the first audition and I was like ' Wow ! Okay . ' " Minnette received the role two weeks after his audition . Other cast members included Wilmer Valderrama and Steve Harris as Michael 's partner in each reality , while Cherry Jones and BD Wong 's characters were cast as Michael 's therapists in separate realities . Wong chose the role in lieu of his part on the police @-@ procedural television drama Law & Order : Special Victims Unit . In September 2011 , Innes garnered a recurring role in the series as Tricia Harper , Michael 's commanding officer . In January 2012 , Kevin Weisman was cast in a recurring role as Ed Hawkins , a detective in a separate division of the LAPD . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Killen said that writing the pilot episode 's script was one of the more @-@ difficult components of creating the show . He and his writing team would often get confused with exchanging and executing ideas for the script ; as a result they created outlines , distinguishing the separate realities with green or red ink . Slade edited the language to better separate the ideas . Stating that things are " initially confusing to us when we are just trying to break story , " he hoped that when viewers watched the pilot episode , they would be immediately oriented in the reality on screen at the time . 
 The complexity of the pilot 's script ( and the show 's concept ) was cited as a potential issue for the series . Salke considered that viewers enjoyed the series ' mythology as it affected the characters , despite the show 's Sliding Doors – like script . Upon reading the script , Isaacs felt that the show was complicated ; knowing which reality you are in was a " gift . " He stated that work for Awake was hard , but enjoyable . Isaacs later suggested that it might be too brooding for mainstream American television , and that it could potentially be the " U @-@ bend of scripts . " Despite such concerns , Gordon asserted that the concept of Awake was understandable if the viewer was attentive . 
 = = Series overview = = 
 Michael Britten , a detective with the Los Angeles Police Department ( LAPD ) , and his family are involved in a car accident . After the crash , Michael is confronted with two separate realities . His wife Hannah has ( apparently ) survived the accident ; however , in a second " reality " , his son Rex survives instead . To distinguish the two realities for the viewer , Michael wears a red wristband in the first reality and a green one in the second . Michael does not know which " reality " is real ; he has therapy sessions with Dr. Jonathan Lee in the " red reality " and Dr. Judith Evans in the " green " , both of whom attempt to diagnose what is happening to Michael . Each therapist sees it as a coping mechanism , insisting that the other reality is a dream . Dr. Lee is confrontational about the accident , while Dr. Evans is more nurturing . In the " red reality " Hannah plans to move to Portland , Oregon , but later decides against it ( partly due to Michael 's objections ) . 
 Before the crash Michael worked with his long @-@ time partner , Detective Isaiah Freeman ( known to his LAPD team as " Bird ) " . After the accident , Michael is assigned to Detective Efrem Vega in the " red reality . " Vega was previously an officer , when Bird was transferred to the western division to work with Detective Ed Hawkins . In the " green reality , " Michael stays with Bird and Efrem remains an officer . While working on cases in both realities , Michael begins to realize that the details of one case can help him with another case in the other reality . Due to this , he often clashes with his partners ( who are unaware of this ) . Rex and Hannah grieve each other 's death after the accident , coping in different ways : In the " red reality " Hannah begins to redecorate the house , while in the " green reality " Rex begins to play tennis with Hannah 's former partner Tara . In " Turtles All the Way Down " , in a dream Michael sees Hannah at a restaurant . He was " dreaming while he was dreaming " , and Hannah told Michael to give her " one last kiss goodbye " . This causes Dr. Evans to note that Michael realizes the " green reality " is life . However , soon afterwards Michael sees Rex and Hannah together and is happy . 
 Details surrounding the accident are slowly revealed as the series progresses . Shortly after the crash , Michael 's commanding officers ( Tricia Harper and Carl Kessel ) meet to talk about the accident and how they set up a " short " guy . Later a microphone at Ricky 's Tacos speaks to Michael , claiming that if he moved to Portland he would " never know the truth " . Michael slowly begins to remember what happened in the accident ; after realizing that Ed caused it , he speaks with Dr. Evans and Dr. Lee . His therapists insist that he is imagining it all to help cope with the pain . However , when Michael later breaks into Ed 's house Ed admits that he and an accomplice were hiding heroin at the Westfield Distribution Center ; " they decided he had to go " , after Michael began to uncover it . Michael does not know who " they " are , demanding that Ed tell him . Ed asks for protection before telling him , and attacks Michael when he is distracted . During the struggle Michael kills Ed , and Bird comes into the house after speaking to Dr. Evans . Michael later discovers that Carl and Tricia are involved in the setup . Tricia shoots Carl in the " green reality " ( in an attempt to hide her involvement in the accident ) , but is later imprisoned . At the end of the series finale ( " Turtles All the Way Down " ) , Michael sees Hannah and Rex together . Concerned about his odd behavior , they ask if he is all right . Michael replies , " I 'm perfect , " and closes his eyes . 
 Killen has said that he has seen interesting theories about the finale 's meaning . He says no theory is " wrong " except those which compared Awake 's finale to Dallas ( an American television soap opera ) or Newhart ( an American television sitcom ) . He supposed that there was the " <unk> " that Michael was in a coma , or had a new third reality created , but it was not interpreted as " He woke up and his family was fine . He 'd just been having two nightmares . " Killen said " we actively fought against " the idea that the series was Michael 's dream ; what seeing his wife and son together " really represents is a further fracturing of his psyche " . A second season , Killen said , would have explored the idea of Michael 's wife and son both living but not ( necessarily ) a third reality . Another season also raised the possibility of Tara and Michael beginning a romantic relationship . Since the finale was written before the show 's cancellation , it was written so either reality could have been the " real " one : " [ the writers ] didn 't intend to have that mystery sewn up in [ ' Turtles All the Way Down ' ] " . 
 = = Characters and story arcs = = 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 There are four main characters in each reality , totaling eight . Michael Britten ( the lead character ) is an LAPD detective who lives in both realities . Since he does not know which reality is " real " , he has routines to help him maintain the illusion of control ; however , he is also disorganized and sometimes behaves oddly . Michael is often confused , suffers from a sleep disorder and dislikes heights . He refuses treatment because he does not want closure for his family . Hannah Britten is Michael 's wife , who is grieving her son 's death . She was planned to have an unexpected pregnancy in the show 's second season . Rex Britten is Michael 's son , a teenage student who had previously been kidnapped . After school Rex often works on a motorbike with his best friend , Cole , at Cole 's house . He is emotional and angry over his mother 's death , keeping a tennis racket to deal with his grief . When Cole accidentally breaks it , Rex is enraged ; later , he apologizes . 
 Efrem Vega ( a detective in the " red reality " ) and Michael often argue about their cases , and is concerned about Michael 's erratic behavior . In " The Little Guy " , Vega and Michael are arguing about a case involving a short person when Captain Tricia Harper calls Michael into her office . Shortly afterwards , Michael puts Vega on the lead of a new case and the two become friends . Michael had previously worked with Bird in the " red reality , " but Bird is reassigned to a new division . Vega remains an officer in the " green reality " Bird and Michael now only work with each other as partners in the " green reality . " Michael sees two therapists : Dr. Jonathan Lee and Dr. Judith Evans . Dr. Lee claims that Michael 's two realities are problematic , and Dr. Evans states that they are " remarkable " . Rex 's tennis coach , Tara , only appeared in three episodes of the series . The character was planned as a potential love interest for Michael in the " green reality " near the end of the first season , but the writers abandoned that storyline ; Killen explained they would have explored this storyline during the second season . 
 = = = Recurring characters = = = 
 There are five recurring characters , all appearing in both realities . Captain Tricia Harper , Michael 's commanding officer at the precinct , was a co @-@ conspirator in Michael 's car accident ; however , it is hinted that her involvement was reluctant . Captain Carl Kessel ( commanding officer at Hawkins ' precinct ) hid heroin in a storage unit for himself and Harper , and was behind Michael 's car accident . For the crash the two used Ed Hawkins , on orders from Kessel . 
 Other recurring characters include Emma ( Daniela Bobadilla ) , Rex 's girlfriend . Pregnant with Rex 's baby , she was originally told to give it up for adoption ; however , after a talk with her father Joaquin ( Carlos <unk> ) she is allowed to keep it . Cole , Rex 's best friend , is another recurring character . The two work on a motorbike together ; Cole lets Hannah ride it in the " red reality " , after she convinces him to finish it . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Awake received generally @-@ favorable reviews from critics . At Metacritic ( which assigns a weighted mean — out of 100 — based on reviews from mainstream critics ) the show received a weighted mean score of 75 from 29 reviews . It was the number @-@ two best @-@ reviewed show by Metacritic users for the 2011 – 12 season , with a user score of 8 @.@ 0 ( behind Revenge ) . TVLine called Awake in their review of 2012 the " most ambitious ill @-@ fated show " . Rachel Ray of The Daily Telegraph called the premiere episode " impressive " , while Tierney Bricker of E ! Online commented that he enjoyed the idea of a man living in two separate realities to stay in touch with the people he loves . NPR 's Linda Holmes said that the pilot laid the foundation for several emotional storylines , evaluating it among the strongest shows in recent memory and very engaging ( compared with similar shows ) . 
 James Poniewozik of Time noted that while its concept seemed melodramatic , the episode " focuses unflinchingly on the subject of loss , yet manages to be not a downer or painful to watch , but moving , absorbing and even hopeful . " He affirmed that the program effectively resolved the issues raised about the series , writing " Awake handles the confusion problem well : yes , it takes more concentration than a Law & Order , but it 's no Inception in its <unk> . Michael himself needs to hold on to markers to anchor his sense of reality — for instance , he wears a red and a green wristband in the existences in which his wife and his son are alive , respectively — and those help us follow along too . " Reuters ' Tim Molloy avouched that the episode was the " best new show of the season " : " Despite the most complicated narrative since ABC 's Lost kept skipping through time , Awake makes a fast , emotional connection that gives viewers an almost immediate stake in the lives of its compelling characters . " 
 RedEye journalist Curt Wagner stated that the series was smartly @-@ written , and praised its actors . BuddyTV writer Laurel Brown called the pilot a " great episode " . In his " A " <unk> review , Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club said that the episode was a " great piece of televised art " , describing the script as " witty , warm , and soulful " . He praised Slade 's directing , calling the pilot episode " unique " and " wonderful " . " Pilot " was highly anticipated by Los Angeles Times journalist Robert Lloyd , who observed that " it promised to be one of the year 's best and most interesting new series . " In a pre @-@ broadcast review , Matt Fowler from IGN gave the pilot a 10 out of 10 , classifying it as a " masterpiece " . Writing for the New York Post , Michael Starr called Awake " compelling " . 
 Critics lauded the cast 's acting , specifically Isaacs ' performance . VanDerWerff concluded that the cast 's performances were " delicate and almost perfect " , while Wagner felt that Isaacs was well @-@ suited for the lead role and could easily captivate the audience ; " his touching , solid work grounds everything . He shows viewers what lengths one man in pain might go to hold onto those he loves . And it 's heartbreaking . " Denise Duguay of the Montreal Gazette thought that Isaacs evoked a " <unk> " and ambiguity which attracted viewers to his character . Tim Goodman of The Hollywood Reporter echoed this sentiment , writing , " He perfectly conveys a man struggling with two horrible options . " Poniewozik considered Isaacs " utterly compelling " , calling him " mature " , " soulful " , and " wearied " . Although Stuever felt that Isaacs failed to engage the audience , he praised the performances of Wong and Jones ; " Jones and Wong [ ... ] are excellent and even vaguely sinister as the dueling shrinks . " 
 Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly was keen on Isaacs ' acting in the series . " It helps enormously to have Isaacs playing the lead . This actor knows how to convey a gravity that contrasts well with the series ' airy concept , but he avoids becoming heavy and morose . " Fowler stated that Isaacs " delivers a graceful and subdued performance as a man who , on a daily basis , must taste both heaven and hell . A man full of guilt , but also gratitude . " Fowler noted that Allen and Minnette 's acting in the series deserved praise for playing characters dealing with loss without closure , while Starr called the casting " fine all @-@ around " . Critics from IGN and Paste contended that Isaacs ' performance deserved an Emmy Award . After Awake 's cancellation , Mareen Ryan of The Huffington Post hoped that new dramas on NBC would " achieve the kind of visual and emotional poetry that Awake did . " Robert Bianco from USA Today thought that Awake could become one of the season 's best new shows . As the series progressed , " Say Hello to My Little Friend " was generally considered the best episode since " Pilot " . 
 Some critics were less enthusiastic . Writing for The Washington Post , Hank Stuever felt that despite high ambitions the pilot episode was slow and drowsy . David Hinckley , in the New York Daily News , claimed that Awake " requires more work [ to understand ] than the average viewer is likely to put in " and described it as a show which would not fit into prime @-@ time television . " Game Day " , in contrast , received mixed reviews from IGN and The A.V. Club ; the publications gave it their lowest scores of the season . Zack Handlen , an A.V. Club critic , described the mysteries of " Game Day " " childishly simple " . In addition , " Ricky 's Tacos " was criticized for being too much like Law & Order : Special Victims Unit . Despite this , recurring guest star Dr. Banks ( Chris McGarry ) was well received by Handlen , who thought that he " [ was ] becoming [ his ] favorite secondary character on the show " . " Nightswimming " also received mixed reviews from critics . That episode 's " red reality " storylines were praised ; those for the " green reality " were considered " boring " . Handlen thought that if the " red reality " storyline was not featured in " Nightswimming " , it would not work as an episode ; Sepinwall thought the episode should not have gone into detail about the guest stars . 
 = = = U.S. television ratings = = = 
 Awake had low viewership and ratings throughout its original run . The premiere episode , which was originally broadcast on March 1 , 2012 , was watched 6 @.@ 2 million viewers ( the most @-@ viewed program in its time slot for NBC since April 2010 and an improvement over its lead @-@ in show , Up All Night ) . NBC also won the hour for the 18 – 49 audience , nearly doubling its numbers with those viewers over The Firm . Awake debuted slightly better than the previous drama occupying the slot in fall 2011 , Prime Suspect , which premiered with 6 @.@ 05 million total viewers and a 1 @.@ 8 / 5 @-@ percent share in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 The second episode fell by 2 million viewers , running against The Mentalist on CBS and a rerun of GCB on ABC . Awake had its series low with the episode " Two Birds " , which premiered on May 17 , 2012 against the season finales of the ABC political drama Scandal and The Mentalist on CBS . Awake averaged 4 @.@ 81 million viewers per episode , ranking 125th in viewership for the 2011 – 12 season . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 In June 2011 Awake was honored , along with seven others , with the Critics ' Choice Television Award for Most Exciting New Series , chosen by journalists who had seen the pilots . ET Online chose Isaacs as its first actor in their annual Emmy Preview , which predicts winners of particular Emmy Awards . ET Online reviewer Jarett Wieselman noted that Isaacs could snag an Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series nomination ; however , Isaacs was not on the list of nominees announced July 19 , 2012 . In 2013 , Zap2it included the show on their list of 22 great one @-@ season television shows . 
 = = = Fan base = = = 
 Awake generated viewer loyalty during its original three @-@ month broadcast run on NBC , with fans organizing to try and save the series from cancellation . Their efforts included a campaign entitled " Save Awake " , holding a " sleep blackout " ( fans wearing red and green wristbands with posters saying " Save Awake " ) outside major television networks in the United States , a letter @-@ writing campaign to networks such as Fox and CBS and a YouTube fan @-@ made video . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Awake episodes premiered in March 2012 on NBC in the United States and the Global Television Network in Canada ( which had identical schedules ) . However , Global aired the series finale a day before its American premiere because the Canadian series Rookie Blue was broadcast in Awake 's time slot . It premiered on April 11 in Australia on W , and on May 4 in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky Atlantic . Fox picked up the rights to air the series in Asia , and debuted Awake on June 11 . 
 Episodes of the show are also available online at Netflix , Amazon Video , and the iTunes Store ( which offer all 13 episodes for purchase — with episodes originally appearing the day after their live airing — in standard @-@ definition and high @-@ definition ) . As of September 2012 , the final five episodes are available in streaming video on NBC 's official Awake webpage and Hulu . The first episode was made available two weeks before the series ' broadcast premiere ( on February 16 , 2012 ) on Hulu , YouTube ( its first seven minutes ) , and the iTunes Store . 
 = = Broadcast history = = 
 Awake consists of thirteen one @-@ hour episodes . The series originally aired in the United States at 10 : 00 pm ( EST ) Thursdays on NBC from March 1 to May 24 , 2012 ( although it was originally scheduled to premiere in fall 2011 ) . Awake debuted as a mid @-@ season replacement for The Firm , which moved to Saturday nights in the U.S. and Canada . The series ' final episode , " Turtles All the Way Down " , aired outside the television season on May 24 , 2012 . Low ratings resulted in NBC 's cancelling the show on May 11 , 2012 ( after eleven of the thirteen produced episodes were aired ) , although the network finished airing the remaining episodes in the series ' original time slot . 
 The A.V. Club opined that Awake 's slot ( opposite the hit drama The Mentalist ) contributed to the show 's failure . Film.com 's Gretchen Alice observed that Awake was in a " tough timeslot " , and NBC 's previous shows in that slot also fared poorly . 
 = The Gift That Keeps Giving = 
 See The gift that keeps on giving for the catchphrase . 
 " The Gift That Keeps Giving " is a song by Super Furry Animals taken from their 2007 album , Hey Venus ! . It was given away as a free download single from the band 's official website on Christmas Day 2007 . 
 The song was conceived as a Christmas single as part of the band 's plans to make a " pop record " in parent album Hey Venus ! The title stems from sessions in 2004 for the extended live version of " The Man Don 't Give a Fuck " , at which the group 's engineer <unk> used the phrase . Critical response to " The Gift That Keeps Giving " was generally positive with the NME claiming it to be one of the best songs on Hey Venus ! and BBC Wales describing the track as " brain @-@ bendingly catchy " . 
 A Team <unk> directed music video was made to accompany the track 's release as a single . The video features a spoilt child being showered with Christmas presents while poorer children are shown in tears due to their lack of gifts . Two different endings for the video were produced - in one Santa Claus is shown crucified on a cross while another sees Santa laid on the floor with an arrow through his head . 
 = = Origins and recording = = 
 In a 2008 interview with Uncut singer Gruff Rhys stated that " The Gift That Keeps Giving " was written as an " AOR Christmas single " following a visit to Japan where " they celebrate Christmas as a commercial holiday with all the decorations .. in one store they had Santa on a cross hanging from the wall ... so the Christmas single was just an excuse to have Santa on a cross on the cover " . Although the cover art did not in the end feature this scene , a crucified Santa does appear in the accompanying music video . 
 Speaking to British music magazine Artrocker Rhys offered another explanation as to the origins of the song : 
 The track was recorded at Miraval Studios , France along with the rest of Hey Venus ! 
 = = Musical structure = = 
 " The Gift That Keeps Giving " is 3 minutes 20 seconds long and is in the key of D minor . The track begins with a phased guitar melody backed only by synthesizer , hi @-@ hat and occasional guitar chords . Cian Ciaran 's piano joins the mix as the song builds up with the introduction of drums at 25 seconds . Gruff Rhys begins singing after 39 seconds and is joined by <unk> which accompany the lines " all the bells started ringing " shortly before the first chorus which features harmony backing vocals ( the first of many in the " falsetto @-@ laden " track ) singing the title phrase . Another verse and chorus follow before an instrumental verse at 1 minute 46 seconds featuring a trumpet solo playing around the vocal melody . The song " crescendos tenderly " with a double chorus before entering the outro which initially includes spoken word backing vocals chanting " giving again " and is " enhanced by a horn section that the Furries seem to be able to utilise more effectively than anyone else " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Critical reaction to " The Gift That Keeps Giving " was generally positive with the New Musical Express rating it as one of the best on parent album Hey Venus ! ; " [ it doesn 't so much raise ] the bar , as balances it on top of Mount Snowdon " going on to state : " From a foundation of ELO guitar cloud @-@ swells , Gruff 's Elvis Costello @-@ in @-@ a @-@ bubblegum @-@ bath voice wraps around tender trombone <unk> to create the band 's most beautiful moment since " Demons " . BBC Wales commented on the track 's Christmas links , describing " The Gift That Keeps Giving " as a " mellow , mellifluous , slow ode to the joys of the festive season ... lyrically incredibly simple ... brain @-@ bendingly catchy " . The Guardian meanwhile , stated that the song " might sound more California than Christmas " but still possesses the " obligatory <unk> ... shaken throughout " . Much was made of the ' retro ' nature of the track with Yahoo Music UK claiming that the song is " a pure blue @-@ eyed soul tune , of the sort that Dan Penn and Spooner Oldham used to churn out four decades ago " and The Guardian describing it as a " gorgeous , Bacharach @-@ tinged haze " . In contrast the UCSD Guardian described " The Gift That Keeps Giving " as " jazzy " and " lo @-@ fi " and saw it as " a throw @-@ back to 2000 's experimental Mwng " . 
 Billboard noted that " the group 's penchant for sonic flourishes is used to subtle effect " on " The Gift That Keeps Giving " and went on to suggest that the track is representative of Hey Venus ! as a whole . Cokemachineglow , however , thought that the song " will be cast into the void , one daring , lonely piece of the first Super Furry Animals album to not succeed as a thorough unit " and , in their single review of " The Gift That Keeps Giving " , the NME suggested that the track wasn 't one of the group 's best . 
 The band 's decision to employ Japanese surrealist Keiichi Tanaami to produce the cover for Hey Venus ! and its singles received some criticism , not least because the artist had already used similar designs . In a 2005 interview with German magazine <unk> , keyboard player Cian Ciaran stated that the artwork for " The Gift ... " was unique , however , and praised the artist . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The video for " The Gift That Keeps Giving " was directed by Team <unk> and revolves around a festive theme in keeping with the track 's release date of Christmas day . 
 The video opens with a spoilt child opening numerous Christmas presents including a toy train , a box full of kittens and a copy of Hey Venus ! ( which he throws over his shoulder in disgust ) . Towards the end of the video less privileged children are shown crying at their lack of presents before we cut back to the initial child who is surrounded by gifts while Santa Claus is seen in front of a log fire , crucified on a cross . An alternative ending instead features Santa lying on the floor with an arrow through his head . 
 Despite the apparently cynical nature of the video , BBC Wales asserts that it is " not meant to be read in any deeper level than ' ain 't Christmas brilliant ? ' " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by Super Furry Animals . 
 " The Gift That Keeps Giving " – 3 : 20 
 Although the track was initially reported to come with an " exclusive b @-@ side " this turned out not to be the case and only " The Gift That Keeps Giving " was made available . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Gruff Rhys : Vocals 
 Huw Bunford : Guitar 
 Guto Pryce : Bass guitar 
 Cian Ciaran : keyboards 
 Dafydd Ieuan : Drums 
 Kris Jenkins : Percussion 
 Matt Sibley : Saxophone 
 Gary <unk> : Trumpet 
 Nick Atwood : Trombone 
 = New Jersey Route 163 = 
 Route 163 is a short 0 @.@ 30 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 48 km ) long state highway in the county of Warren in New Jersey . The route , which is currently a stub , used to be the approach to the destroyed Delaware Bridge , which was a road bridge over the Delaware River , connecting the settlement of Delaware , New Jersey with Portland , Pennsylvania . Until 1953 , the bridge carried U.S. Route 46 over the river . The bridge has been destroyed , but the approaches are still state @-@ maintained . A still @-@ existing bridge carries an abandoned ex @-@ Delaware , Lackawanna and Western Railroad line across the river just north of the former road crossing . The unsigned Route 163 runs from US 46 north to a dead end on the east side of US 46 , all in Knowlton Township , New Jersey . From the dead end , the bridge approach continued northwest and west over US 46 to the bridge . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 163 begins north of an intersection with U.S. Route 46 and Roy Ace Road in the community of Delaware . The highway heads to the north along Lackawanna Road . Route 163 passes several residences to the north and a short stretch of homes to the south . There is a short intersection with an unnamed local road . After that intersection , Route 163 passes a truck stop that is visible on both Route 46 , which parallels to the south , and the short state highway . There is another short truck stop before an intersection with a return ramp to Route 46 . Route 163 officially terminates at a barricaded dead @-@ end near Hemlock Hill Road . 
 = = History = = 
 New Jersey Route 163 originated as an alignment of U.S. Route 46 ( co @-@ signed with New Jersey State Highway Route 6 ) . The alignment of 6 and 46 went along the alignment of the original State Highway Route 5 from the early 1920s , stretching from Newark to the bridge over the Delaware River at Delaware . The route was decommissioned when the 1927 renumbering occurred . After that renumbering , the route became State Highway Route 6 , a co @-@ designation to U.S. Route 46 , which had been assigned the prior year . The two highway designations remained intact until the 1953 renumbering , when Route 6 was decommissioned in favor of using the U.S. 46 designation . U.S. Route 46 was realigned once again when the Portland @-@ Columbia Toll Bridge opened in 1953 , when the alignment of the highway was changed to head along former State Highway Route 8 ( mostly New Jersey Route 94 ) , where it ended at U.S. Route 611 and NJ 94 , where its current terminus is located . After the realigning of the Delaware Bridge alignment , the route was renumbered to New Jersey Route 163 . Two years later , the Delaware Bridge was swept away in floods caused by Hurricane Connie and Diane in 1955 , which took out several other bridges over the Delaware . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Delaware , Warren County . 
 = 2012 Summer Paralympics = 
 The 2012 Summer Paralympics , the fourteenth Summer Paralympic Games , and also more generally known as the London 2012 Paralympic Games , were a major international multi @-@ sport event for athletes with disabilities governed by the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) , that took place in London , England from 29 August to 9 September 2012 . These Paralympics were one of the largest multi @-@ sport events ever held in the United Kingdom after the 2012 Summer Olympics , and were the largest Paralympics ever : 4 @,@ 302 athletes from 164 National Paralympic Committees participated , with fourteen countries appearing in the Paralympics for the first time ever . A total of 503 events in 20 sports were held during these games ; for the first time since their suspension after the 2000 Paralympics , events for the intellectually disabled were also held in selected sports . 
 The lead @-@ up to these games prominently emphasized the return of the Paralympic movement to its spiritual birthplace : in 1948 , the British village of Stoke Mandeville first hosted the Stoke Mandeville Games , an athletics event for disabled British veterans of the Second World War held to coincide with the opening of the Summer Olympics in London . They were the first @-@ ever organized sporting event for disabled athletes , and served as a precursor to the modern Paralympic Games . Stoke Mandeville also co @-@ hosted the 1984 Summer Paralympics with Long Island , New York , after its original host , the University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign , pulled out due to financial issues . 
 Organizers expected the Games to be the first Paralympics to achieve mass @-@ market appeal , fuelled by continued enthusiasm from the British public following the country 's successful performance at the Summer Olympics , awareness of the United Kingdom 's role in the history of the Paralympics , public attention surrounding South African sprinter Oscar Pistorius ( who , only just prior to the Paralympics , became the first double amputee to compete in the Summer Olympics alongside able @-@ bodied athletes ) , a major marketing campaign instituted by the Games ' local broadcaster , and growing media coverage of Paralympic sport . The games ultimately met these expectations , breaking records for ticket sales , heightening the profile of the Paralympics in relation to the Olympics , and prompting IPC president Philip Craven to declare them the " greatest Paralympic Games ever . " 
 = = Bidding process = = 
 As part of a formal agreement between the International Paralympic Committee and the International Olympic Committee established in 2001 , the winner of the bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics was also to host the 2012 Summer Paralympics . At the 117th IOC Session in Singapore , the rights to host the 2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics were awarded to London . 
 = = Development and preparation = = 
 As with the Olympics , the 2012 Summer Paralympics were overseen by LOCOG and the Olympic Delivery Authority ( ODA ) . LOCOG was responsible for overseeing the staging of the games , while the ODA dealt with infrastructure and venues . 
 The Government Olympic Executive ( <unk> ) within the Department for Culture , Media and Sport ( DCMS ) was the lead Government body for co @-@ ordinating the London 2012 Olympics and Paralympics . The <unk> reported through the DCMS Permanent Secretary to the Minister for Sports and the Olympics Hugh Robertson . It focused on oversight of the Games , cross @-@ programme management and the London 2012 Olympic Legacy . 
 = = = Venues and infrastructure = = = 
 The 2012 Summer Paralympics used many of the same venues as the 2012 Summer Olympics , along with several new locations such as Eton Manor for wheelchair tennis and Brands Hatch for road cycling . London 's purpose @-@ built Olympic venues and facilities , including the Olympic Village itself , were designed to be accessible as possible so they could easily accommodate the Paralympics . Some venues also contained additional accessible seating areas during the Paralympics . 
 = = = Public transport = = = 
 Transport for London operated the Paralympic Route Network ( a downsized version of the Olympic Route Network operated during the Summer Olympics ) to facilitate road traffic between venues and facilities . The network provided 8 @.@ 7 miles ( 14 @.@ 0 kilometres ) of lanes specifically reserved for Paralympic athletes and officials . TfL continued to operate its Get Ahead of the Games website during the Paralympics , which provided updates and advice for commuters during the Games . Prior to the Games , concerns were raised by TfL commissioner Peter Hendy that London 's transportation system might not be able to handle the Paralympics adequately . He feared that the end of the school summer holiday ( which fell during the Games ) would result in increased traffic , and that commuters might not heed traffic warnings or change their travel behaviour as they had during the Olympics . 
 Sevenoaks railway station was designated as the preferred station for spectators travelling to watch the cycling at Brands Hatch . Organisers chose Sevenoaks over the closer Swanley railway station because of its " existing step @-@ free access and excellent transport links " , and because Swanley did not yet have a wheelchair lift . Whilst organisers did not believe that Swanley would be able to have wheelchair lifts installed by the start of the Paralympics , the station finished their installation by early August 2012 . 
 = = = Lead @-@ up and promotion = = = 
 = = = = Handover ceremony = = = = 
 The formal handover occurred during the closing ceremony of the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , when Mayor of London Boris Johnson received the Paralympic Flag from Mayor of Beijing Guo Jinlong . This was followed by a cultural presentation by Britain , which was similar to its presentation during the Olympics ' closing ceremony . It featured urban dance group <unk> , the Royal Ballet , and <unk> , a physically integrated dance group , all dressed as London commuters and waiting for a bus by a zebra crossing . A double @-@ decker bus drove around the stadium , guided by Ade <unk> , to music composed by Philip Sheppard . The top of the bus was open and folded down to show a privet hedge featuring London landmarks such as Tower Bridge , The Gherkin and the London Eye . <unk> Osei , drummer for Mika , and Sam <unk> then performed , before the top of the bus folded up into its original form , sporting multi @-@ coloured Paralympic livery . Both the Paralympic and Olympic flags were formally raised outside of London 's City Hall on 26 September 2008 . British Paralympians Helene <unk> and Chris Holmes raised the Paralympic flag . 
 = = = = Paralympic Day and Super Saturday = = = = 
 On 8 September 2011 Trafalgar Square staged International Paralympic Day , hosted by Rick Edwards , Ade <unk> and Iwan Thomas , to coincide with a visit to London by representatives of the IPC . The event celebrated the Paralympic Games , showcasing and demonstrating the 20 sports that would feature during the Games ( with some sessions also made inclusive to people with hearing disabilities ) . It also featured appearances by Paralympic athletes Oscar Pistorius , Ellie Simmonds and Sascha Kindred , and the unveiling of a bronze statue of Pistorius by Ben Dearnley . British Prime Minister David Cameron and London 's mayor Boris Johnson also appeared . Two days later on 10 September , supermarket chain Sainsbury 's and Channel 4 presented Sainsbury 's Super Saturday , a family event at Clapham Common . The event featured showcases of Paralympic sports , and a concert featuring pop music acts including Nicola Roberts , Olly Murs , The Wanted , Will Young , Pixie Lott , <unk> , Sugababes , The Saturdays , Chipmunk and Taio Cruz . 
 = = = = Channel 4 promotional campaign = = = = 
 Channel 4 , the host broadcaster of the 2012 Summer Paralympics in the United Kingdom , promoted its coverage of the Games with a multi @-@ platform advertising campaign that included television adverts , online content , and billboard advertising , some of which carrying the tagline " Thanks for the warm @-@ up . " Overall , Channel 4 's campaign aimed to change the public 's view of the Paralympics , encouraging viewers to see the Games as an " event in its own right " rather than as an afterthought to the Olympics . As part of the campaign , Channel 4 produced a two @-@ minute @-@ long trailer for its coverage entitled Meet the Superhumans , which was directed by Tom <unk> with input from Deborah Poulton , 2012 Paralympic Project Leader and Alison Walsh , Editorial Manager of Disability , both at Channel 4 . The trailer , set to Public Enemy 's song " Harder Than You Think " , focused on the competitive and " superhuman " aspects of Paralympic sport , while acknowledging the personal events and struggles that reflected every athlete 's participation in the Games . Meet the Superhumans premiered on 17 July 2012 , and aired simultaneously as a " roadblock " advert on 78 different commercial television channels in the UK ( which included rival channels ITV1 and Sky1 ) . 
 The advert was met with critical acclaim : Adweek 's Tim Nudd declared it " the summer 's most stunning sports commercial " , while Simon Usborne of The Independent felt it was " an act of branding genius " and " a clear bid to bring the Paralympics from the sporting wings to centre stage . " The advert was seen by an estimated audience of 10 million viewers ; Channel 4 's marketing and communications chief Dan Brooke estimated that reaction to the advert through social media was double that of the première of the BBC 's trailer for its Olympics coverage . 
 Meet the Superhumans won a Golden Lion award at the Cannes Lions Festival in June 2013 , losing the overall award to Dumb Ways to Die . Sir John Hegarty , the jury president said of it : " When you 've got some really outstanding work it is tragic in some ways it can 't get a bigger award , but there can only be one grand prix " , while jury member Carlo <unk> added " [ Meet the Superhumans ] is an amazing campaign , one of the golds that went through [ the judging process ] immediately ... Everyone felt it had the highest level of craft . It puts an issue that was really important before London 2012 to raise awareness of the Paralympics [ and ] they were hyper successful … Dumb Ways to Die was a tough contender . " 
 = = = = Royal Mail stamps and gold post boxes = = = = 
 In August 2009 Royal Mail unveiled a series of 30 stamps ( reflecting the 30th Olympiad ) about the coming Olympic and Paralympic Games . They were released in batches of ten between 2009 and July 2011 ; each stamp featured an Olympic or Paralympic sport and the London 2012 logo . 
 As it had done during the Olympics , Royal Mail honoured Britain 's Paralympic gold medallists by painting a post box gold in each of their home towns ( along with an additional post box outside the National Spinal Injuries Centre in Stoke Mandeville , in honour of its role in the Games ' history ) , and featured them on commemorative stamps released throughout the Games . Royal Mail originally planned only to release a series of six stamps with group portraits of Britain 's medallists ; however , the decision was met with backlash from critics , who argued that the organization was discriminating against Paralympians by not granting them the same individual recognition as their Olympian counterparts . Olympic shadow minister Tessa Jowell was also critical of Royal Mail 's plan , saying that the stamps were a symbolic aspect of Britain 's celebration of the Olympics and that " it would be a shame if this important symbol was not offered to our Paralympian heroes as well . " 
 Royal Mail initially defended its decision , arguing that it would have been " logistically and practically impossible " to issue individual stamps for each gold medallist , since it expected the British team to meet or exceed its performance at Beijing of 42 gold medals . As a result of the criticism , Royal Mail announced on 15 August 2012 that it would release individual stamps for each British gold medallist during the Paralympics . 
 = = = = Test events = = = = 
 Several Paralympics @-@ specific events were held during the London Prepares series of test events for the Olympic and Paralympic Games ; these included the London International Goalball Tournament , and the London Disability Grand Prix — which was also the first Paralympic event to be held at London 's Olympic Stadium . 
 = = = Torch relay = = = 
 The Paralympic torch relay began on 22 August , when groups of disabled and non @-@ disabled scouts kindled four Paralympic flames on the highest peaks of each nation of the United Kingdom ; Scafell Pike in England , Ben Nevis in Scotland , Slieve Donard in Northern Ireland , and Snowdon in Wales . On 24 August the four flames were used to light ceremonial cauldrons in London , Edinburgh , Belfast and Cardiff during special " Flame Festival " events ; smaller " Flame Celebration " events were also held in various communities over the bank holiday weekend . 
 On 28 August the four flames were united during a ceremony at Stoke Mandeville Stadium . The flame then travelled a 92 @-@ mile ( 148 @-@ kilometre ) route to Olympic Stadium in a 24 @-@ hour relay , with 580 torchbearers working in teams of five . After a two @-@ hour weather delay , a backup flame was taken straight to the stadium as a contingency , and the relay route was modified . However , as the opening ceremony 's parade of nations took longer than expected , the flame was able to arrive at Olympic Stadium in time . 
 = = = Ticketing = = = 
 2 @.@ 7 million tickets were offered in total , including event @-@ specific tickets and those granting access solely to the Olympic Park , along with multi @-@ event passes offered for ExCeL London and Olympic Park that were intended to allow spectators to discover a variety of Paralympic events . Unlike previous Paralympics , tickets were in extremely high demand , and the ticket allocation was increased from the originally planned 2 @.@ 5 million . Whilst the period during the Olympics has historically been the busiest for Paralympic sales , 1 @.@ 4 million tickets were already sold before the start of the Summer Olympics , already surpassing the total number sold in Sydney . The high demand resulted in technical issues with the Ticketmaster @-@ operated website , which led to complaints via social networking services by users who were struggling to order . 
 Organisers expected the first ever sell @-@ out in the history of the Paralympics . LOCOG 's chief executive Paul Deighton remarked that " the interest in attending the Paralympics has been extraordinary from the start . " This success was attributed to the enthusiasm surrounding Great Britain 's performance during the Olympics , fan interest in South African " Blade Runner " Oscar Pistorius ( a Paralympic athlete who was the first ever double amputee to compete in the Olympics ) , and affordable prices . 
 On 8 August LOCOG announced that 2 @.@ 1 million tickets had been sold ( 600 @,@ 000 in the previous month alone ) , breaking the record of 1 @.@ 8 million set in Beijing ( 1 @.@ 6 million tickets were also distributed by the Chinese government ) . IPC president Philip Craven congratulated London for this achievement , crediting it to " the insatiable appetite the public has for top class elite sport " , and noted it would be fitting for a Paralympics held in its spiritual birthplace to have filled venues . By the opening ceremony , 2 @.@ 4 million had been sold , with the remaining 100 @,@ 000 sold during the Games ; 10 @,@ 000 were offered each day . The last 800 tickets to the Opening Ceremony were distributed to police and the military , while Mayor Boris Johnson arranged for the distribution of 1 @,@ 100 to members of London 's youth athletics clubs . Due to popular demand , a further 100 @,@ 000 contingency tickets were released on 6 September ( which included multi @-@ event passes , and event tickets given up by sponsors and partners ) , along with 100 @,@ 000 giving access solely to the Olympic Park . 
 = = = Logo = = = 
 The 2012 Summer Paralympics used an emblem sharing a common design with that of the Summer Olympics — the first time this had ever been done . The logo , designed by Wolff <unk> , was unveiled on 4 June 2007 , and is a representation of the number 2012 . The Paralympic version has its own distinct colour scheme , and substitutes the Olympic Rings with the Paralympic " <unk> " . 
 = = = Mascots = = = 
 The official mascot of the 2012 Summer Paralympic Games , Mandeville , was unveiled alongside its Olympic counterpart Wenlock on 19 May 2010 . As characters , they are portrayed drops of steel from a steelworks in Bolton , and feature singular camera eyes — representing " focus " and the cameras being used to capture the Games . Mandeville is named in honour of Stoke Mandeville due to its significance in the origins of the Paralympics . Mandeville also wears a helmet emblazoned in the red , green , and blue colours of the Paralympic emblem . 
 = = = Opening ceremony = = = 
 The opening ceremony was held on 29 August at the Olympic Stadium . It was inspired by William Shakespeare 's play " The Tempest " and themed around the concept of " Enlightenment " . It featured appearances by theoretical physicist Stephen Hawking , along with actors Ian McKellen and Nicola Miles @-@ Wildin playing the roles of Prospero and Miranda from " The Tempest " . The ceremony also featured a performance by British electronic music group Orbital . The leading UK disabled theatre company <unk> played their version of the polio survivor Ian Dury 's 1981 protest song ' <unk> <unk> ' . 
 The final bearers of the Paralympic flame represented several generations of Paralympic athletes . Joe Townsend , a Royal Marine who lost both of his legs after stepping on a land mine on duty in Afghanistan ( who represented the future , as he plans to compete in Rio ) , delivered the flame to Olympic Stadium via a <unk> from the ArcelorMittal Orbit tower . He passed the flame to long @-@ time British Five @-@ a @-@ side football captain David Clarke , who then passed it to the lighter of the Paralympic cauldron , Margaret Maughan , who was the winner of Britain 's first gold medal at the first official Paralympics , in Rome . 
 = = = Closing ceremony = = = 
 The closing ceremony was held on 9 September at the Olympic Stadium . Entitled " The Festival of the Flame " , the ceremony was themed around the gathering of people in celebration , and was directed by Kim Gavin , who also directed the closing ceremony of the Summer Olympics just a few weeks prior . The ceremony featured sequences set to a live performance by the British rock band Coldplay , who were accompanied by guest performers such as the British <unk> ( who accompanied the band on " Strawberry Swing " , and also performed the Paralympic anthem ) , Barbadian singer Rihanna ( who performed her collaboration with Coldplay , " Princess of China " , and her solo hit " We Found Love " ) and American rapper Jay @-@ Z ( who performed " Run This Town " with Rihanna and Coldplay , and joined in a reprise of " Paradise " ) . To mark its hosting of the 2016 Summer Paralympics , the Paralympic flag was passed from Boris Johnson , Mayor of London to Eduardo Paes , Mayor of Rio de Janeiro . LOCOG chief Sebastian Coe and IPC president Philip Craven both congratulated London for its successful hosting of the Paralympics ; Coe was proud that both the Olympics and Paralympics in London could be labelled " Made in Britain " , while Sir Phillip felt that the Games were the " greatest Paralympic Games ever . " Ellie Simmonds and Jonnie Peacock shared the honour of extinguishing the Paralympic cauldron , sharing its last flame on torches to others throughout the stadium to represent its eternal spirit . 
 = = The Games = = 
 = = = Participating nations = = = 
 London 2012 had the largest number of athletes and participating nations of any Paralympic Games . A total of 4 @,@ 302 athletes from 164 countries competed in the Games . This represented an increase of 291 athletes and 18 countries from the 2008 Games , which had 4 @,@ 011 athletes from 146 countries . 
 Fourteen countries made their Paralympic début : Antigua and Barbuda , Brunei , Cameroon , Comoros , the Democratic Republic of the Congo , Djibouti , the Gambia , Guinea @-@ Bissau , Liberia , Mozambique , North Korea , San Marino , the Solomon Islands and the US Virgin Islands . Trinidad and Tobago returned to the Games for the first time since 1988 . 
 Andorra made its début in the Summer Paralympics , having already made three appearances at the Winter Paralympics . Malawi , which would have been making its debut at the Games , and Botswana , were both due to send delegations but withdrew hours before the opening ceremony citing a lack of government funds . 
 The following National Paralympic Committees sent delegations to compete : 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 The programme of the 2012 Summer Paralympics featured events in 20 sports . The number of events in each sport is noted in parentheses . 
 = Art Houtteman = 
 Arthur Joseph Houtteman ( August 7 , 1927 – May 6 , 2003 ) was an American right @-@ handed pitcher in Major League Baseball who played for 12 seasons in the American League with the Detroit Tigers , Cleveland Indians and Baltimore Orioles . In 325 career games , Houtteman pitched 1 @,@ 555 innings and posted a win @-@ loss record of 87 – 91 , with 78 complete games , 14 shutouts , and a 4 @.@ 14 earned run average ( ERA ) . 
 Known on the sandlot for his pitching motion , Houtteman was signed by scout Wish Egan in 1945 at 17 years of age . He was recruited by major league teams , and joined a Tigers pitching staff that had lost players to injuries and World War II . After moving between the major and minor leagues over the next few years , he was nearly killed in an automobile accident just before the 1949 season . Houtteman rebounded from his injuries and went on to win 15 games that season and made his only All @-@ Star appearance in the following year . 
 He played three more seasons with the Tigers , then was sold to Cleveland , where he pitched for the pennant @-@ winning Indians during their 1954 season . After losing his starting job , he played two more seasons with the Indians before he was bought by the Orioles , and he finished his final season in Major League Baseball with them . Houtteman ended his baseball career in the minor leagues and became a sales executive in Detroit . In 2003 , Houtteman died at the age of 75 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Art Houtteman was born in Detroit , Michigan , on August 7 , 1927 . He was a second @-@ generation American citizen ; his grandfather Joseph had emigrated from Belgium . The only son born to the Houtteman family , Art 's father , also named Arthur , vowed that his son would become a major league player by the time he turned 17 . 
 Houtteman played baseball at Detroit Catholic Central High School , where his pitching caught the attention of baseball scout Wish Egan , who praised Houtteman 's " perfect pitching motion " . Houtteman was signed by the Detroit Tigers late in 1944 and began to practice with the Tigers in spring training before the 1945 season along with fellow Detroit sandlot player Billy Pierce . He spent most of the 1945 season playing for Detroit 's top minor league affiliate , the Buffalo Bisons . But injuries plagued the Tigers ' pitching staff , and the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Houtteman was called up by the parent club and began his major league career . 
 = = Detroit Tigers = = 
 = = = Hard Luck Houtteman = = = 
 Due to Tiger pitching injuries , and with many top players still in the military late in World War II ( Houtteman was too young for the draft ) , he made his major league debut on April 29 . At 17 years old , he was the youngest player in the American League in the 1945 season before being optioned back to Buffalo , where on June 20 he threw seven no @-@ hit innings , facing only 22 batters in the process , but lost the game 2 – 0 in extra innings . He also appeared in 13 games as a relief pitcher , and finished his minor league season with no wins , two losses and an ERA of 5 @.@ 33 in just over 25 innings pitched . He was not on the active roster , and as a result did not pitch during the Tigers ' World Series victory over the Chicago Cubs . 
 Houtteman was the youngest major leaguer in 1946 but played only one game for the Tigers that season , allowing eight runs and fifteen hits in eight innings . He spent most of 1946 in the minor leagues , finished at 16 – 13 and led the league in strikeouts . At the end of the season , Houtteman was named by six of the eight International League managers as the top pitching prospect in the league , leading the league in strikeouts with 150 , pitching over 200 innings , finishing second in victories with 16 , and amassing an 11 – 2 road record . Minor league third baseman Johnny <unk> liked Houtteman 's fielding ability so much that he called him " a fifth infielder . " 
 Despite his newfound top prospect status Houtteman remained in Buffalo at the beginning of the 1947 season before being recalled to the Tigers in July . He was relegated to the bullpen for a time , and saw little action . But after Hal Newhouser , Fred Hutchinson and Dizzy Trout were used in two days , Tiger manager Steve O 'Neill decided to start Houtteman against the Washington Senators for only the second start of his career . He tossed a five @-@ hit shutout and Tiger general manager Billy Evans said , " In 40 years I 've never seen a better pitching job by a first @-@ year pitcher . We now know that Houtteman is really a big leaguer " . He followed this with another five @-@ hit victory against the Boston Red Sox , then pitched a three @-@ hit shutout in September against the St. Louis Browns . He finished the season at 7 – 2 with a 3 @.@ 42 ERA , seven complete games and two shutouts . His performance in 1947 caught the attention of New York Yankees star and future Hall of Famer Joe DiMaggio , who said of Houtteman and Bob Lemon , " They have more stuff and more pitching sense than any other young fellows I 've seen come up in a long while " . 
 The 1948 Detroit Tigers season began with Houtteman in the starting rotation . Things started off poorly , however , as Houtteman lost his first eight decisions . Two of the first five losses , though , were by one run , and he had little run support . The 0 – 8 start and lack of run support led to his being called " Hard Luck Houtteman " in the media . His first victory that year came against the Senators , in which he also drove in the winning run . After winning his next start , he defeated the Philadelphia Athletics allowing only five hits , and avoided another loss . But he then lost eight more games and finished the season at 2 – 16 . His teammates and the media attributed this to bad luck rather than bad pitching , and still regarded him as a prime prospect . Newhouser said , " The kid has had nothing but bad luck since the season opened " , while Fred Hutchinson said , " He shouldn 't have lost more than three or four games had he gotten an even break " . But his 4 @.@ 66 ERA was only 0 @.@ 06 higher than the major league average . 
 As 1949 spring training began , Houtteman was nearly killed . In Lakeland , Florida on March 10 , while driving home from Florida Southern College , he crashed into a fruit truck fracturing his skull . Originally listed in critical condition ( a priest stood by to administer the last rites in extremis ) , he recovered rapidly and was able to talk with his teammates two days after the accident , telling them , " I 'll be able to pitch sooner than you " . Within two weeks , the Tigers were optimistic that Houtteman would be able to play again by June . As a result of the injuries to Houtteman and Yankee star catcher Yogi Berra due to car accidents , Cleveland Indians playing manager Lou Boudreau banned his players from driving , forcing the soon @-@ to @-@ be world champions to ride chartered buses to exhibition games . 
 = = = Ace of the staff = = = 
 Houtteman marked his return to the Tigers ' rotation on May 21 , 1949 , but he lost his first three decisions . His performance improved , however , as he began to earn more victories in the 1949 season . These wins included a five @-@ hit 2 – 1 victory over the New York Yankees on July 23 . Over the course of the season , Houtteman beat each American League club at least once and beat the Yankees and Red Sox three times . He finished the season with a 15 – 10 record , a 3 @.@ 71 ERA , 13 complete games , and two shutouts . He was placed in most valuable player ( MVP ) voting , and received three points and finished tied for 22nd with teammate Virgil Trucks . The Philadelphia Sports Writers Association honored him as the year 's " Most Courageous Athlete " because of his injury and comeback . 
 As the 1950 Detroit Tigers season started , Houtteman was on a high note , pitching all of spring training without allowing a walk . He won his tenth game of the season on June 28 , 1950 , and became the first pitcher to hit the 10 @-@ win mark alongside Bob Lemon . After the game , he told an Associated Press reporter that he was just about convinced that Lady Luck had decided to give him a break after kicking him around for the past two or three years . Houtteman said , " I 've been having a pretty good year and it sure feels good after some of the things that have happened to me " . A week into July , Houtteman notched his eleventh victory , and only lost five games , in a 6 – 1 win against the St. Louis Browns . Just a few days later , Houtteman was named to the All @-@ Star roster alongside fellow Tigers including Ted Gray , George Kell and Hoot Evers . In the 1950 All @-@ Star game , Houtteman pitched three innings and batted once . He allowed one earned run , three hits , and one walk , his one earned run coming in the ninth inning on a Ralph Kiner home run that made the game go to extra innings . 
 Houtteman continued his successful season in the second half . On August 19 , he faced the Browns and pitched a one @-@ hitter , and faced the minimum 27 batters in the process . Houtteman ended the season just short of Ted Gray 's prediction of 20 victories , and finished the season with a 19 – 12 record . He led the league in shutouts with four and was second in games started with 34 , second in innings pitched with 274 @.@ 7 , third in wins , and third in complete games with 21 . His ERA of 3 @.@ 54 was good for fifth in the American League . He also earned six points in MVP voting , and finished tied for 24th . On October 2 , the day after the 1950 season ended , Houtteman married Shelagh Marie Kelly . They met in New York 's Catskill Mountains at Grossinger 's Resort . 
 = = = Military and return to Tigers = = = 
 Before the start of the 1951 season , Houtteman was drafted into the United States Army . He had originally been classified 4F , or medically ineligible for the draft , because of a high school knee injury , and he felt that he was drafted only because he was a prominent athlete . He served in the heavy weapons division of the Army , where the roar of the big guns sent pains throbbing through Houtteman 's head and gave him severe headaches , which doctors believed was a lingering effect of the skull fracture three years earlier . As a result , the Army reclassified Houtteman as not fully qualified for combat duty . This led to a medical discharge on September 15 , 1951 . Speaking of his time in the Army , Houtteman said , " I spent most of my time in the Army hospital . I did play a little ball at Camp Pickett " , Virginia . 
 When he returned to the Tigers for spring training in 1952 , Tigers ' manager Red Rolfe noted , " Artie could be our best pitcher . He 's the slump @-@ breaking type , a guy who can throw a shutout once in a while " . After a poor season without Houtteman in 1951 , Rolfe predicted , " We 'll be back in the first division this season because Art Houtteman is back . Houtteman makes us at least a dozen games better than [ last year 's Tigers ' team ] " . Houtteman worked out in Detroit with pitcher Ted Gray over the winter before the 1952 season . Before the season started , Houtteman said , " It all depends on how I get off . I 'm anxious to get into the season . My arm doesn 't feel any different than it did in ' 50 . I hope I can do even better than my last year " . Houtteman also took number 21 on his uniform , the number he had when he first arrived with the Tigers , because he felt that it had given both him and teammate George Kell , who won a batting title with the number , good luck . 
 It appeared that " Hard Luck Houtteman " had returned as the 1952 Detroit Tigers season began . On April 2 , 1952 , just before the season started , Art lost his seven @-@ month @-@ old daughter in an automobile accident . In an April 26 matchup against the Cleveland Indians , with two outs in the bottom of the ninth , Houtteman was one out away from a no @-@ hitter when he threw a fastball that was " supposed to sink " but did not , which Harry hit for a single . Houtteman said , " This was the only pitch I shook Ginsberg off the whole game " , and for years afterwards , catcher Joe Ginsberg repeatedly said to Houtteman , " If you 'd listened to me , I 'd have you in the Hall of Fame " . Detroit won the game by a score of 13 – 0 . After losing his tenth game on June 22 , manager Red Rolfe moved Houtteman out of the starting rotation and into the bullpen . He finished the year with an 8 – 20 record and a 4 @.@ 36 ERA . His 20th loss came on September 21 against the Indians , and he became the first Tiger to lose 20 games since Bobo Newsom in 1941 . His disappointing season led to the possibility of a trade , with general manager Charlie Gehringer acknowledging that Houtteman might be traded if the right offer came along . 
 Houtteman spent the offseason selling cars and making public appearances for the Detroit Tigers . During the 1953 Detroit Tigers season there were rumors of possible trades for Houtteman , with the Yankees proposing the possibility of trading Hank Bauer , an infielder , and Gil McDougald for Houtteman . Gehringer said of Houtteman 's high trading price , " Art has always had good stuff — much too good to be a 20 @-@ game loser " . That season , he was used as both a starter and reliever during the season . However , he lost six straight decisions , and by the middle of June had a 2 – 6 record and a 5 @.@ 90 ERA . This marked the end of his career as a Tiger . 
 = = Cleveland Indians = = 
 On June 15 , 1953 , Houtteman was traded by the Tigers , along with Owen Friend , Joe Ginsberg and Bill Wight , to the Cleveland Indians for Ray Boone , Al Aber , Steve Gromek and Dick <unk> . In July 1953 , he returned to Detroit to pitch against the Tigers . At the time , Houtteman admitted he wanted to be traded . He said , " The fans are down on me and I 'd do everybody a lot more good by being traded " . He was not content with the Tigers and said there were times when it seemed he " couldn 't wait to peel off his uniform after a game " . As a result of Indians ' pitching coach Mel Harder doing a " complete " overhaul , Houtteman was moved into the starting rotation , to replace Bob Feller . Houtteman finished the season in Cleveland with a 7 – 7 record , six complete games , one shutout , 109 innings pitched , and a 3 @.@ 80 ERA . 
 At the start of the 1954 Cleveland Indians season , Houtteman 's second daughter , Hollis Ann , was born on February 22 . His pitching continued to improve under Mel Harder , who " got me to quit experimenting and to seek my natural delivery " . The Indians used him when they could , especially in extra inning affairs . In the Indians ' first six extra inning games , Houtteman was used three times . As a result , Houtteman finished the season with a career @-@ high 11 complete games . The Indians also began to use Houtteman and Feller for doubleheaders with great success , as they had a 9 – 1 record after their first five doubleheaders . Houtteman finished the season with a 15 – 7 record , a 3 @.@ 35 ERA , and 188 innings pitched . In the 1954 World Series with the Indians , he pitched two innings in Game 3 against the New York Giants , allowing one run and striking out one batter . 
 The 1955 Cleveland Indians season originally planned to use Houtteman as the number four pitcher on the starting rotation , as he had been the previous year . He saw himself remaining the fourth starter , and said , " Herb Score won 't beat me out of the fourth starting job with the Indians " on April 11 . However , he became a spot starter , as he lost his starting position to Score , the " most talked @-@ about rookie in all the major league training camps " . He split starting time with Bob Feller and finished the season with a 10 – 6 record , a 3 @.@ 98 ERA , and three complete games . On December 29 , 1955 , Houtteman 's first son , Jeff , was born with assistance from National Football League player Leon Hart , who was visiting Houtteman and helped deliver the baby . 
 Houtteman remained a reliever during the 1956 Cleveland Indians season . He continued to get trade offers in 1956 , though , as the Chicago White Sox were willing to trade outfielder Jim Rivera for him . A three @-@ team , nine @-@ player deal involving Houtteman again becoming part of the White Sox along with George Strickland was also scrapped at the last second . Houtteman finished the 1956 season having only made 22 appearances on the mound , earning a 2 – 2 record . However , he had a high ERA of 6 @.@ 56 , his highest since 1946 , when he made one appearance . 
 As the 1957 Cleveland Indians season neared , tension was running high . There was talk about Houtteman 's being " in the doghouse " , or out of favor with the team 's management , during the 1956 season due to his lack of starts . According to sportswriter Hal Lebovitz , this was a result of the starting five for the Indians , including spot starter Feller , pitching very well during spring training . Houtteman was again brought up in trade rumors , along with Mike Garcia , since the Indians were loaded with pitching talent . When manager Al Lopez was replaced by Kerby Farrell , Houtteman did , in fact , land in Farrell 's doghouse . Farrell called him out front of his teammates after a poor performance in spring training . Houtteman pitched only four innings in three games for the Indians in 1957 . 
 = = Baltimore Orioles and minor leagues = = 
 Houtteman was put on the trading block before the 1957 season , but he drew no serious offers because Cleveland seemed desperate to trade him . On May 20 , after playing three games for the Indians , Houtteman was sold to the Baltimore Orioles for an undisclosed amount . Hal Lebovitz called Houtteman " a pitcher of considerable promise but who somehow has yet to cash in on it " , despite the fact that he was in his 12th and final major league season . During the 1957 Baltimore Orioles season , Houtteman made four relief appearances before he was demoted to the Vancouver Mounties of the Pacific Coast League . He was brought back up to the major league roster to pitch on September 22 , the final start of his major league career . In his final game , he pitched 2 ⅓ innings , allowing three runs on seven hits and throwing two strikeouts . 
 Just before the 1958 season began , Houtteman was cut by the Orioles , ending his major league career . Shortly after being cut , he signed on with the Charleston Senators , a farm club of the Tigers . He had a 3 @.@ 25 ERA and a 7 – 9 record for the Senators at the end of the 1958 season . In 1959 , the Kansas City Athletics decided to give him a tryout . However , despite what was described as an " impressive " performance , they cut Houtteman as they were looking for more youthful arms . Houtteman signed with the Portland Beavers of the Pacific Coast League , and posted a 6 – 9 record with an ERA of 3 @.@ 69 for the season . After the season ended , and after a third daughter , Sharon , was born in 1959 , Houtteman announced his retirement from baseball at the age of 32 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After retiring from professional baseball , Houtteman kept baseball a part of his life and became a sports reporter for a television station in Detroit for a time . He later became a sales executive with Paragon Steel in Detroit , where he worked until reaching the age of retirement . He was in attendance for the last game at Tiger Stadium in 1999 . Houtteman died on May 6 , 2003 , at the age of 75 , of an apparent heart attack at his home in Rochester Hills , Michigan . He was survived by his wife , three children , and six grandchildren . 
 = Asteroids ( video game ) = 
 Asteroids is an arcade space shooter released in November 1979 by Atari , Inc. and designed by Lyle Rains , Ed Logg , and Dominic Walsh . The player controls a spaceship in an asteroid field which is periodically traversed by flying saucers . The object of the game is to shoot and destroy asteroids and saucers while not colliding with either or being hit by the saucers ' counter @-@ fire . The game becomes harder as the number of asteroids increases . 
 Asteroids was one of the first major hits of the golden age of arcade games . The game sold over 70 @,@ 000 arcade cabinets and proved both popular with players and influential with developers . It has since been ported to multiple platforms . Asteroids was widely imitated and directly influenced Defender , <unk> , and many other video games . 
 Asteroids was conceived during a meeting between Logg and Rains and used hardware developed by Howard Delman previously used for Lunar Lander . Based on an unfinished game titled Cosmos and inspired by Spacewar ! and Computer Space , both early shoot ' em up video games , Asteroids ' physics model and control scheme were derived by Logg from these earlier games and refined through trial and error . The game is rendered on a vector display in a two @-@ dimensional view that wraps around in both screen axes . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The objective of Asteroids is to destroy asteroids and saucers . The player controls a triangular ship that can rotate left and right , fire shots straight forward , and thrust forward . Once the ship begins moving in a direction , it will continue in that direction for a time without player intervention unless the player applies thrust in a different direction . The ship eventually comes to a stop when not thrusting . The player can also send the ship into hyperspace , causing it to disappear and reappear in a random location on the screen , at the risk of self @-@ destructing or appearing on top of an asteroid . 
 Each level starts with a few large asteroids drifting in various directions on the screen . Objects wrap around screen edges – for instance , an asteroid that drifts off the top edge of the screen reappears at the bottom and continues moving in the same direction . As the player shoots asteroids , they break into smaller asteroids that move faster and are more difficult to hit . Smaller asteroids are also worth more points . Two flying saucers appear periodically on the screen ; the " big saucer " shoots randomly and poorly , while the " small saucer " fires frequently at the ship . After reaching a score of 40 @,@ 000 , only the small saucer appears . As the player 's score increases , the angle range of the shots from the small saucer diminishes until the saucer fires extremely accurately . Once the screen has been cleared of all asteroids and flying saucers , a new set of large asteroids appears , thus starting the next level . The game gets harder as the number of asteroids increases until after the score reaches a range between 40 @,@ 000 and 60 @,@ 000 . The player starts with 3 lives after a coin is inserted and gains an extra life every 10 @,@ 000 points . When the player loses all his lives , the game ends . 
 Asteroids contains several bugs . The game slows down as the player gains 50 @-@ 100 lives , due to a programming error in that there is no limit for the permitted number of lives . The player can " lose " the game after more than 250 lives are collected . 
 = = Development and design = = 
 Asteroids was conceived by Lyle Rains and programmed by Ed Logg with collaborations from other Atari staff . Logg was impressed with the Atari 2600 ( then known as " Atari Video Computer System " ) and joined Atari 's coin @-@ op division and worked on Dirt Bike , which was never released due to an unsuccessful field test . He developed Super Breakout after hearing that Nolan Bushnell , founder of Atari , wanted Breakout updated . Paul Mancuso joined the development team as Asteroids ' technician and engineer Howard Delman contributed to the hardware . During a meeting in April 1979 , Rains discussed Planet Grab , a multiplayer arcade game later renamed to Cosmos . Logg did not know the name of the game , thinking Computer Space as " the inspiration for the two @-@ dimensional approach . " The unfinished game featured a giant , indestructible asteroid , so Rains asked Logg : " Well , why don ’ t we have a game where you shoot the rocks and blow them up ? " In response , Logg described a similar concept where the player selectively shoots at rocks that break into smaller pieces . Both agreed on the concept . 
 Asteroids was implemented on hardware developed by Delman and is a vector game , in which the graphics are composed of lines drawn on a vector monitor . Rains initially wanted the game done in raster graphics , but Logg , experienced in vector graphics , suggested an XY monitor because the high image quality would permit precise aiming . The hardware is chiefly a MOS 6502 executing the game program , and <unk> , a high @-@ resolution vector graphics processor developed by Atari and referred to as an " XY display system " and the " Digital Vector Generator ( <unk> ) " . 
 The original design concepts for <unk> came out of Cyan Engineering , Atari 's off @-@ campus research lab in Grass Valley , California , in 1978 . Cyan gave it to Delman , who finished the design and first used it for Lunar Lander . Logg received Delman 's modified board with five buttons , 13 sound effects , and additional RAM , and used it to develop Asteroids . The size of the board was 4 by 4 inches , and it was " linked up " to a monitor . 
 Logg modeled the player 's ship , the five @-@ button control scheme , and the game physics after Spacewar ! , which he had played as a student at the University of California , Berkeley , but made several changes to improve playability . The ship was programmed into the hardware and rendered by the monitor , and was configured to move with thrust and inertia . The hyperspace button was not placed near Logg 's right thumb , which he was dissatisfied with , as he had a problem " tak [ ing ] his hand off the thrust button . " Drawings of asteroids in various shapes were incorporated into the game . Logg copied the idea of a high score table with initials from <unk> 's Star Fire . 
 The two saucers were formulated to be different from each other . A steadily decreasing timer that shortens intervals between saucer attacks was employed to keep the player from not shooting asteroids and saucers . The minimalist soundtrack features a " heartbeat " sound effect , which quickens as the game progresses . The game did not have a sound chip , so Delman created a hardware circuit for 13 sound effects by hand which was wired onto the board . 
 A prototype of Asteroids was well received by several Atari staff and engineers , who would " wander between labs , passing comment and stopping to play as they went . " Logg was often asked when he would be leaving by employees eager to play the prototype , so he created a second prototype specifically for staff to play . Atari went to Sacramento , California for testing , setting up prototypes of the game in local arcades to measure its potential success . The company also observed veteran players and younger players during focus group sessions at Atari itself . A group of old players familiar with Spacewar ! struggled to maintain grip on the thrust button and requested a joystick , whereas younger players accustomed to Space Invaders noted they get no break in the game . Logg and other Atari engineers observed proceedings and documented comments in four pages . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Asteroids was immediately successful upon release . It displaced Space Invaders by popularity in the United States and became Atari 's best selling arcade game of all time , with over 70 @,@ 000 units sold . Atari earned an estimated $ 150 million in sales from the game , and arcade operators earned a further $ 500 million from coin drops . Atari had been in the process of manufacturing another vector game , Lunar Lander , but demand for Asteroids was so high " that several hundred Asteroids games were shipped in Lunar Lander cabinets . " Asteroids was so popular that some video arcade operators had to install large boxes to hold the number of coins spent by players . 
 The saucer in the original game design was supposed to take a shot as soon as it appeared . This action was altered so there would be a delay before the saucer shoots , leading to " lurking " from players . Lurking is a strategy in which the player uses thrust to keep the ship in motion , leaves 1 or 2 asteroids undamaged , and hunts for saucers , allowing the player to pick off as many 1 @,@ 000 @-@ point UFOs as possible and play indefinitely on a single credit . Since the saucer could only shoot directly at the player 's position on the screen , the player could " hide " at the opposite end of the screen and shoot across the screen boundary , while remaining relatively safe . Complaints from operators losing revenue due to lurking led to the creation of an <unk> restricting such chances . Usage of the names of Saturday Night Live characters " Mr. Bill " and " <unk> " to refer to the saucers in an Esquire article about the game led to Logg receiving a cease and desist letter from a lawyer with the " Mr. Bill Trademark . " 
 Asteroids received positive reviews from video game critics and has been regarded as Logg 's magnum opus . Brett Alan Weiss , writing for Allgame , likened the monochrome vector graphics to minimalism and viewed its sound effects as memorable . Weiss found its overall design to be near @-@ perfect and cites the intensity and controls as elements that make the game addicting . He admitted the game is easily understandable and " holds up extremely well over time . " William Cassidy , writing for GameSpy 's " Classic Gaming " , noticed its innovations , including being one of the first video games to track initials and allow players to enter their initials for appearing in the top 10 high scores , and commented , " the vector graphics fit the futuristic outer space theme very well . " Asteroids was ranked fourth on Retro Gamer 's list of " Top 25 Arcade Games " ; the Retro Gamer staff cited its simplicity and the lack of a proper ending as allowances of revisiting the game . Entertainment Weekly named Asteroids one of the top ten games for the Atari 2600 in 2013 . It was added to the Museum of Modern Art 's collection of video games . By contrast , in March 1983 the Atari 8 @-@ bit port won sixth place in Softline 's Dog of the Year awards " for badness in computer games " , Atari division , based on reader submissions . 
 The gameplay in Asteroids was imitated by many games that followed , mostly " Asteroid clones " . By December 1981 BYTE observed that " If imitation is the sincerest form of flattery , then [ Atari 's Asteroids has ] a lot to be proud of ... Its popularity has inspired numerous imitations " , including eight for personal computers . The Mattel Intellivision title <unk> was conceived as Avalanche ! after Meteor ! did not take up the cartridge 's entire ROM space . Meteor ! , an Asteroids clone , was cancelled to avoid a lawsuit and Avalanche ! was released as <unk> . The resultant game borrows elements from Asteroids and Space Invaders , both which also influenced Defender and <unk> , two popular and often cloned arcade <unk> Software 's Asteroids in Space ( 1980 ) , another Asteroids clone , was one of the best selling games for the Apple II and was voted one of the most popular software titles of 1978 @-@ 80 by <unk> magazine . Others include <unk> 's Meteors , Moons of Jupiter for the Commodore VIC @-@ 20 , and <unk> for the <unk> . 
 = = Arcade sequels = = 
 Released in 1981 , Asteroids Deluxe is the first sequel to Asteroids . Dave Shepperd edited the code and made enhancements to the game without Logg 's involvement . The onscreen objects were tinted blue , and hyperspace was replaced by a shield that depleted if used . The asteroids rotate , and the added killer satellite enemy breaks apart into three smaller ships when hit that home in on the player 's position . The arcade machine 's monitor displays vector graphics overlaying a holographic backdrop . The game is much harder than the original and does not allow saucers to be hunted — a common strategy for Asteroids high scores . 
 It was followed by Owen Rubin 's Space Duel in 1982 , featuring colorful geometric shapes and co @-@ op multiplayer gameplay . 
 In 1987 's <unk> , Ed Rotberg added " power @-@ ups , ship morphing , branching levels , bosses , and the ability to dock your ships in multiplayer for added firepower . " <unk> uses raster graphics instead of vectors . 
 = = Ports = = 
 Asteroids has been ported to multiple platforms , including much of Atari 's hardware ( Atari 2600 and 8 @-@ bit computers in 1981 , Atari 7800 in 1987 , Atari Lynx in 1994 ) and many other platforms . Released in 1981 , the 2600 port was the first game to use bank switching , a technique developed by Carl Nielsen 's group of engineers that increased available ROM space from 4 KB to 8 KB . Brad Stewart , the programmer tasked to work on the port , used bank switching to complete the game . A port for the Atari 5200 , identical to the Atari 8 @-@ bit computer version , was in development in 1982 , but was not published . 
 The Atari 7800 version was a launch title and features co @-@ operative play . The asteroids receive colorful textures , and the " heartbeat " sound effect remains intact . The game was included as part of the Atari Lynx title Super Asteroids & Missile Command , and featured in the original Microsoft Arcade compilation in 1993 , the latter with four other Atari video games : Missile Command , Tempest , Centipede , and Battlezone . 
 Activision made an enhanced version of Asteroids for PlayStation , Nintendo 64 , Microsoft Windows , and the Game Boy Color in 1998 . Doug Perry , writing for entertainment and video game journalism website IGN , praised the high @-@ end graphics – with realistic space object models , backgrounds , and special effects – for making Asteroids " a pleasure to look at " while being a homage to the original arcade version . The Atari Flashback series of dedicated video game consoles have included both the 2600 the arcade versions of Asteroids . 
 Published by Crave Entertainment on December 14 , 1999 , Asteroids Hyper 64 is the Nintendo 64 port of Asteroids . The game 's graphics were upgraded to 3D , with both the ship and asteroids receiving polygon models along static backgrounds , and it was supplemented with weapons and a multiplayer mode . IGN writer Matt Casamassina was pleased that the gameplay was faithful to the original but felt the minor additions and constant " repetition " was not enough to make the port " warrant a $ 50 purchase . " He was disappointed about the lack of music and found the sound effects to be of poor quality . 
 In 2001 , Infogrames released Atari Anniversary Edition for the Sega Dreamcast , PlayStation , and PC <unk> . Developed by Digital Eclipse , it included emulated versions of Asteroids and other old Atari games . Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot criticized the Dreamcast version for its limitations , such as the presentation of vector graphics on a low resolution television set , which obscures the copyright text in Asteroids . The arcade and Atari 2600 versions of Asteroids , along with Asteroids Deluxe , were included in Atari Anthology for both Xbox and PlayStation 2 . 
 Released on November 28 , 2007 , the Xbox Live Arcade port of Asteroids has revamped HD graphics along with an added intense " throttle monkey " mode . Both Asteroids in its arcade and 2600 versions and Asteroids Deluxe were ported to Microsoft 's Game Room download service in 2010 . Glu Mobile released a mobile phone port of the game with supplementary features as well as the original arcade version . 
 Asteroids was included on Atari Greatest Hits Volume 1 for the Nintendo DS . Craig Harris , writing for IGN , noted that the Nintendo DS 's small screen can not properly display details of games with vector graphics . 
 = = Highest score = = 
 On November 13 , 1982 , 15 @-@ year @-@ old Scott Safran of Cherry Hill , New Jersey , set a world record of 41 @,@ 336 @,@ 440 points on the arcade game Asteroids , beating the 40 @,@ 101 @,@ 910 point score set by Leo Daniels of Carolina Beach on February 6 , 1982 . In 1998 , to congratulate Safran on his accomplishment , the Twin Galaxies Intergalactic Scoreboard searched for him for four years until 2002 , when it was discovered that he had died in an accident in 1989 . In a ceremony in Philadelphia on April 27 , 2002 , Walter Day of Twin Galaxies presented an award to the surviving members of Safran 's family , commemorating the Asteroid Champion 's achievement . On April 6 , 2010 , John McAllister broke Safran 's record with a high score of 41 @,@ 338 @,@ 740 in a 58 @-@ hour Internet livestream . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 In 2009 , Universal Studios obtained the rights to adapt Asteroids into a film , with Matthew Lopez as the scriptwriter and Lorenzo di Bonaventura as the producer . Universal will create the story from scratch , as done with Battleship , a film based on the Hasbro board game of the same name . 
 = Apollo 16 = 
 Apollo 16 was the tenth manned mission in the United States Apollo space program , the fifth and penultimate to land on the Moon and the first to land in the lunar highlands . The second of the so @-@ called " J missions , " it was crewed by Commander John Young , Lunar Module Pilot Charles Duke and Command Module Pilot Ken Mattingly . Launched from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at 12 : 54 PM EST on April 16 , 1972 , the mission lasted 11 days , 1 hour , and 51 minutes , and concluded at 2 : 45 PM EST on April 27 . 
 John Young and Charles Duke spent 71 hours — just under three days — on the lunar surface , during which they conducted three extra @-@ vehicular activities or moonwalks , totaling 20 hours and 14 minutes . The pair drove the Lunar Roving Vehicle ( LRV ) , the second produced and used on the Moon , 26 @.@ 7 kilometers ( 16 @.@ 6 mi ) . On the surface , Young and Duke collected 95 @.@ 8 kilograms ( 211 lb ) of lunar samples for return to Earth , while Command Module Pilot Ken Mattingly orbited in the Command / Service Module ( CSM ) above to perform observations . Mattingly spent 126 hours and 64 revolutions in lunar orbit . After Young and Duke rejoined Mattingly in lunar orbit , the crew released a subsatellite from the Service Module ( SM ) . During the return trip to Earth , Mattingly performed a one @-@ hour spacewalk to retrieve several film cassettes from the exterior of the Service Module . 
 Apollo 16 's landing spot in the highlands was chosen to allow the astronauts to gather geologically older lunar material than the samples obtained in the first four landings , which were in or near lunar maria . Samples from the Descartes Formation and the Cayley Formation disproved a hypothesis that the formations were volcanic in origin . 
 = = Crew = = 
 Mattingly had originally been assigned to the prime crew of Apollo 13 , but was exposed to the measles through Duke , at that time on the back @-@ up crew for Apollo 13 , who had caught it from one of his children . He never contracted the illness , but was nevertheless removed from the crew and replaced by his backup , Jack Swigert , three days before the launch . Young , a captain in the United States Navy , had flown on three spaceflights prior to Apollo 16 : Gemini 3 , Gemini 10 and Apollo 10 , which orbited the Moon . One of 19 astronauts selected by NASA in April 1966 , Duke had never flown in space before Apollo 16 . He served on the support crew of Apollo 10 and was a Capsule Communicator ( CAPCOM ) for Apollo 11 . 
 = = = Backup crew = = = 
 Although not officially announced , the original backup crew consisted of Fred W. Haise ( CDR ) , William R. Pogue ( CMP ) and Gerald P. Carr ( LMP ) , who were targeted for the prime crew assignment on Apollo 19 . However , after the cancellations of Apollos 18 and 19 were finalized in September 1970 this crew would not rotate to a lunar mission as planned . Subsequently , Roosa and Mitchell were recycled to serve as members of the backup crew after returning from Apollo 14 , while Pogue and Carr were reassigned to the Skylab program where they flew on Skylab 4 . 
 = = = Support crew = = = 
 Anthony W. England 
 Karl G. Henize 
 Henry W. Hartsfield , Jr . 
 Robert F. Overmyer 
 Donald H. Peterson 
 = = = Mission insignia = = = 
 The insignia of Apollo 16 is dominated by a rendering of an American eagle and a red , white and blue shield , representing the people of the United States , over a gray background representing the lunar surface . <unk> the shield is a gold NASA vector , orbiting the Moon . On its gold @-@ outlined blue border , there are 16 stars , representing the mission number , and the names of the crew members : Young , Mattingly , Duke . The insignia was designed from ideas originally submitted by the crew of the mission . 
 = = Planning and training = = 
 = = = Landing site selection = = = 
 Apollo 16 was the second of the Apollo type J missions , featuring the use of the Lunar Roving Vehicle , increased scientific capability , and lunar surface stays of three days . As Apollo 16 was the penultimate mission in the Apollo program and there was no new hardware or procedures to test on the lunar surface , the last two missions ( the other being Apollo 17 ) presented opportunities for astronauts to clear up some uncertainties in understanding the Moon 's properties . Although previous Apollo expeditions , including Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 , obtained samples of pre @-@ mare lunar material , before lava began to <unk> from the Moon 's interior and flood the low areas and basins , none had actually visited the lunar highlands . 
 Apollo 14 had visited and sampled a ridge of material that had been ejected by the impact that created the Mare Imbrium impact basin . Likewise , Apollo 15 had also sampled material in the region of Imbrium , visiting the basin 's edge . There remained the possibility , because the Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 landing sites were closely associated with the Imbrium basin , that different geologic processes were prevalent in areas of the lunar highlands far from Mare Imbrium . Several members of the scientific community remarked that the central lunar highlands resembled regions on Earth that were created by volcanic processes and hypothesized the same might be true on the Moon . They had hoped that scientific output from the Apollo 16 mission would provide an answer . 
 Two locations on the Moon were given primary consideration for exploration by the Apollo 16 expedition : the Descartes Highlands region west of Mare Nectaris and the crater Alphonsus . At Descartes , the Cayley and Descartes formations were the primary areas of interest in that scientists suspected , based on telescopic and orbital imagery , that the terrain found there was formed by magma more viscous than that which formed the lunar maria . The Cayley Formation 's age was approximated to be about the same as Mare Imbrium based on the local frequency of impact craters . The considerable distance between the Descartes site and previous Apollo landing sites would be beneficial for the network of geophysical instruments , portions of which were deployed on each Apollo expedition beginning with Apollo 12 . 
 At the Alphonsus , three scientific objectives were determined to be of primary interest and paramount importance : the possibility of old , pre @-@ Imbrium impact material from within the crater 's wall , the composition of the crater 's interior and the possibility of past volcanic activity on the floor of the crater at several smaller " dark halo " craters . Geologists feared , however , that samples obtained from the crater might have been contaminated by the Imbrium impact , thus preventing Apollo 16 from obtaining samples of pre @-@ Imbrium material . There also remained the distinct possibility that this objective had already been satisfied by the Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 missions , as the Apollo 14 samples had not yet been completely analyzed and samples from Apollo 15 had not yet been obtained . 
 It was decided to target the Apollo 16 mission for the Descartes site . Following the decision , the Alphonsus site was considered the most likely candidate for Apollo 17 , but was eventually rejected . With the assistance of orbital photography obtained on the Apollo 14 mission , the Descartes site was determined to be safe enough for a manned landing . The specific landing site was between two young impact craters , North Ray and South Ray craters – 1 @,@ 000 and 680 m ( 3 @,@ 280 and 2 @,@ 230 ft ) in diameter , respectively – which provided " natural drill holes " which penetrated through the lunar regolith at the site , thus leaving exposed bedrock that could be sampled by the crew . 
 After selecting the landing site for Apollo 16 , sampling the Descartes and Cayley formations , two geologic units of the lunar highlands , was determined by mission planners to be the primary sampling interest of the mission . It was these formations that the scientific community widely suspected were formed by lunar volcanism , but this hypothesis was proven incorrect by the composition of lunar samples from the mission . 
 = = = Training = = = 
 In preparing for their mission , in addition to the usual Apollo spacecraft training , Young and Duke , along with backup commander Fred Haise , underwent an extensive geological training program that included several field trips to introduce them to concepts and techniques they would use in analyzing features and collecting samples on the lunar surface . During these trips , they visited and provided scientific descriptions of geologic features they were likely to encounter . In July 1971 , they visited Sudbury , Ontario , Canada for geology training exercises , the first time U.S. astronauts did so . Geologists chose the area because of a 60 mi ( 97 km ) wide crater created about 1 @.@ 8 billion years ago by a large meteorite . The Sudbury Basin shows evidence of shatter cone geology familiarizing the Apollo crew with geologic evidence of a meteor impact . During the training exercises the astronauts did not wear space suits , but carried radio equipment to converse with each other and scientist @-@ astronaut Anthony W. England , practicing procedures they would use on the lunar surface . 
 In addition to the field geology training , Young and Duke also trained to use their EVA space suits , adapt to the reduced lunar gravity , collect samples , and drive the Lunar Roving Vehicle . They also received survival training and preparation for other technical aspects of the mission . 
 Command Module pilot Mattingly also received training in recognizing geological features from orbit by flying over the field areas in an airplane , and trained to operate the Scientific Instrument Module from lunar orbit . 
 = = Mission highlights = = 
 = = = Launch and outbound trip = = = 
 The launch of Apollo 16 was delayed one month from March 17 to April 16 . This was the first launch delay in the Apollo program due to a technical problem . During the delay , the space suits , a spacecraft separation mechanism and batteries in the Lunar Module ( LM ) were modified and tested . There were concerns that the explosive mechanism designed to separate the docking ring from the Command Module ( CM ) would not create enough pressure to completely sever the ring . This , along with a dexterity issue in Young 's space suit and fluctuations in the capacity of the Lunar Module batteries , required investigation and trouble @-@ shooting . In January 1972 , three months before the planned April launch date , a fuel tank in the Command Module was accidentally damaged during a routine test . The rocket was returned to the Vertical Assembly Building ( VAB ) and the fuel tank replaced , and the rocket returned to the launch pad in February in time for the scheduled launch . 
 The official mission countdown began on Monday , April 10 , 1972 , at 8 : 30 AM , six days before the launch . At this point the Saturn V rocket 's three stages were powered up and drinking water was pumped into the spacecraft . As the countdown began , the crew of Apollo 16 was participating in final training exercises in anticipation of a launch on April 16 . The astronauts underwent their final preflight physical examination on April 11 . On April 15 , liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen propellants were pumped into the spacecraft , while the astronauts rested in anticipation of their launch the next day . 
 The Apollo 16 mission launched from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at 12 : 54 PM EST on April 16 , 1972 . The launch was nominal ; the crew experienced vibration similar to that of previous crews . The first and second stages of the Saturn V rocket performed nominally ; the spacecraft entered orbit around Earth just under 12 minutes after lift @-@ off . After reaching orbit , the crew spent time adapting to the zero @-@ gravity environment and preparing the spacecraft for Trans Lunar Injection ( TLI ) , the burn of the third @-@ stage rocket that would propel them to the Moon . In Earth orbit , the crew faced minor technical issues , including a potential problem with the environmental control system and the S @-@ IVB third stage 's attitude control system , but eventually resolved or compensated for them as they prepared to depart towards the Moon . After two orbits , the rocket 's third stage reignited for just over five minutes , propelling the craft towards the Moon at about 22 @,@ 000 mph ( 35 @,@ 000 km / h ) . Six minutes after the burn of the S @-@ IVB , the Command / Service Module , containing the crew , separated from the rocket and traveled for 15 m ( 49 ft ) before turning around and retrieving the Lunar Module from inside the expended rocket stage . The maneuver , known as transposition , went smoothly and the LM was extracted from the S @-@ IVB . Following transposition and docking , the crew noticed the exterior surface of the Lunar Module was giving off particles from a spot where the LM 's skin appeared torn or shredded ; at one point , Duke estimated they were seeing about five to ten particles per second . The crew entered the Lunar Module through the docking tunnel connecting it with the Command Module to inspect its systems , at which time they did not spot any major issues . Once on course towards the Moon , the crew put the spacecraft into a rotisserie " barbecue " mode in which the craft rotated along its long axis three times per hour to ensure even heat distribution about the spacecraft from the Sun . After further preparing the craft for the voyage , the crew began the first sleep period of the mission just under 15 hours after launch . 
 By the time Mission Control issued the wake @-@ up call to the crew for flight day two , the spacecraft was about 98 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 181 @,@ 000 km ) away from the Earth , traveling at about 5 @,@ 322 ft / s ( 1 @,@ 622 m / s ) . As it was not due to arrive in lunar orbit until flight day four , flight days two and three were largely preparatory days , consisting of spacecraft maintenance and scientific research . On day two , the crew performed an electrophoresis experiment , also performed on Apollo 14 , in which they attempted to prove the higher purity of particle migrations in the zero @-@ gravity environment . The remainder of day two included a two @-@ second mid @-@ course correction burn performed by the Command / Service Module 's Service Propulsion System engine to tweak the spacecraft 's trajectory . Later in the day , the astronauts entered the Lunar Module for the second time in the mission to further inspect the landing craft 's systems . The crew reported they had observed additional paint peeling from a portion of the LM 's outer aluminum skin . Despite this , the crew discovered that the spacecraft 's systems were performing nominally . Following the LM inspection , the crew reviewed checklists and procedures for the following days in anticipation of their arrival and the Lunar Orbit Insertion burn . Command Module Pilot Mattingly reported a " gimbal lock " warning light , indicating the craft was not reporting an attitude . Mattingly alleviated this by realigning the guidance system using the Sun and Moon . At the end of day two , Apollo 16 was about 140 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 260 @,@ 000 km ) away from Earth . 
 At the beginning of day three , the spacecraft was about 157 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 291 @,@ 000 km ) away from the Earth . The velocity of the craft steadily decreased , as it had not yet reached the lunar sphere of gravitational influence . The early part of day three was largely housekeeping , spacecraft maintenance and exchanging status reports with Mission Control in Houston . The crew performed the Apollo light flash experiment , or <unk> , to investigate " light flashes " that were seen by the astronauts when the spacecraft was dark , regardless of whether or not their eyes were open , on Apollo lunar flights . This was thought to be caused by the penetration of the eye by cosmic ray particles . During the second half of the day , Young and Duke again entered the Lunar Module to power it up and check its systems , and perform housekeeping tasks in preparation for lunar landing . The systems were found to be functioning as expected . Following this , the crew donned their space suits and rehearsed procedures that would be used on landing day . Just before the end of flight day three at 59 hours , 19 minutes , 45 seconds after liftoff , while 178 @,@ 673 nautical miles ( 330 @,@ 902 km ) from the Earth and 33 @,@ 821 nautical miles ( 62 @,@ 636 km ) from the Moon , the spacecraft 's velocity began increasing as it accelerated towards the Moon after entering the lunar sphere of influence . 
 After waking up on flight day four , the crew began preparations for the maneuver that would brake the spacecraft into orbit around the Moon , or lunar orbit insertion . At a distance of 11 @,@ 142 nautical miles ( 20 @,@ 635 km ) from the Moon , the Scientific Instrument Module ( SIM ) bay cover was jettisoned . At just over 74 hours into the mission , the spacecraft passed behind the Moon , losing direct contact with Mission Control . While over the far side of the Moon , the Command / Service Module 's Service Propulsion System engine burned for 6 minutes and 15 seconds , braking the spacecraft into an orbit around the Moon with a low point ( pericynthion ) of 58 @.@ 3 and a high point ( <unk> ) of 170 @.@ 4 nautical miles ( 108 @.@ 0 and 315 @.@ 6 km , respectively ) . After entering lunar orbit , the crew began preparations for the Descent Orbit Insertion ( DOI ) maneuver to further modify the spacecraft 's orbital trajectory . The maneuver was successful , decreasing the craft 's pericynthion to 10 @.@ 7 nautical miles ( 19 @.@ 8 km ) . The remainder of flight day four was spent making observations and preparing for activation of the Lunar Module , undocking , and landing the next day . 
 = = = Lunar surface = = = 
 The crew continued preparing for Lunar Module activation and undocking shortly after waking up to begin flight day five . The boom that extended the mass spectrometer out from the Command / Service Module 's Scientific Instruments Bay was stuck in a semi @-@ deployed position . It was decided that Young and Duke would visually inspect the boom after undocking from the CSM in the LM . They entered the LM for activation and checkout of the spacecraft 's systems . Despite entering the LM 40 minutes ahead of schedule , they completed preparations only 10 minutes early due to numerous delays in the process . With the preparations finished , they undocked in the LM Orion from Mattingly in the Command / Service Module Casper 96 hours , 13 minutes , 13 seconds into the mission . For the rest of the two crafts ' passes over the near side of the Moon , Mattingly prepared to shift Casper to a circular orbit while Young and Duke prepared Orion for the descent to the lunar surface . At this point , during tests of the CSM 's steerable rocket engine in preparation for the burn to modify the craft 's orbit , a malfunction occurred in the engine 's backup system . According to mission rules , Orion would have then re @-@ docked with Casper , in case Mission Control decided to abort the landing and use the Lunar Module 's engines for the return trip to Earth . After several hours of analysis , however , mission controllers determined that the malfunction could be worked around and Young and Duke could proceed with the landing . As a result of this , powered descent to the lunar surface began about six hours behind schedule . Because of the delay , Young and Duke began their descent to the surface at an altitude higher than that of any previous mission , at 20 @.@ 1 kilometers ( 10 @.@ 9 nmi ) . At an altitude of about 4 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) , Young was able to view the landing site in its entirety . Throttle @-@ down of the LM 's landing engine occurred on time and the spacecraft tilted forward to its landing orientation at an altitude of 2 @,@ 200 m ( 7 @,@ 200 ft ) . The LM landed 270 m ( 890 ft ) north and 60 m ( 200 ft ) west of the planned landing site at 104 hours , 29 minutes , and 35 seconds into the mission , at 2 : 23 : 35 UTC on April 21 . 
 After landing , Young and Duke began powering down some of the LM 's systems to conserve battery power . Upon completing their initial adjustments , the pair configured Orion for their three @-@ day stay on the lunar surface , removed their space suits and took initial geological observations of the immediate landing site . They then settled down for their first meal on the surface . After eating , they configured the cabin for their first sleep period on the Moon . The landing delay caused by the malfunction in the Command / Service Module 's main engine necessitated significant modifications to the mission schedule . Apollo 16 would spend one less day in lunar orbit after surface exploration had been completed to afford the crew contingency time to compensate for any further problems and to conserve expendables . In order to improve Young 's and Duke 's sleep schedule , the third and final moonwalk of the mission was trimmed from seven hours to five . 
 The next morning , flight day five , Young and Duke ate breakfast and began preparations for the first extra @-@ vehicular activity ( EVA ) , or moonwalk . After the pair donned and pressurized their space suits and depressurized the Lunar Module cabin , Young climbed out onto the " porch " of the LM , a small platform above the ladder . Duke handed Young a jettison bag full of trash to dispose of on the surface . Young then lowered the equipment transfer bag ( <unk> ) , containing equipment for use during the EVA , to the surface . Young descended the ladder and , upon setting foot on the lunar surface , became the ninth human to walk on the Moon . Upon stepping onto the surface , Young expressed his sentiments about being there : " There you are : Mysterious and Unknown Descartes . Highland plains . Apollo 16 is gonna change your image . I 'm sure glad they got ol ' Brer Rabbit , here , back in the briar patch where he belongs . " Duke soon descended the ladder and joined Young on the surface , becoming the tenth and youngest human to walk on the Moon , at age 36 . After setting foot on the lunar surface , Duke expressed his excitement , commenting : " Fantastic ! Oh , that first foot on the lunar surface is super , Tony ! " The pair 's first task of the moonwalk was to unload the Lunar Roving Vehicle , the Far Ultraviolet Camera / Spectrograph ( <unk> ) , and other equipment , from the Lunar Module . This was done without problems . On first driving the lunar rover , Young discovered that the rear steering was not working . He alerted Mission Control to the problem before setting up the television camera and planting the flag of the United States with Duke . The day 's next task was to deploy the Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package ( ALSEP ) ; while they were parking the lunar rover , on which the TV camera was mounted , to observe the deployment , the rear steering began functioning without explanation . While deploying a heat @-@ flow experiment ( that had burned up with the Lunar Module Aquarius on Apollo 13 and had been attempted with limited success on Apollo 15 ) , a cable was inadvertently snapped after getting caught around Young 's foot . After ALSEP deployment , they collected samples in the vicinity . About four hours after the beginning of EVA @-@ 1 , they mounted the lunar rover and drove to the first geologic stop , Plum Crater , a 36 m @-@ wide ( 118 ft ) crater on the rim of Flag crater , about 240 m ( 790 ft ) across . There , at a distance of 1 @.@ 4 km ( 0 @.@ 87 mi ) from the LM , they sampled material from the vicinity of Flag Crater , which scientists believed penetrated through the upper regolith layer to the underlying Cayley Formation . It was there that Young retrieved , at the request of Mission Control , the largest rock returned by an Apollo mission , a breccia nicknamed Big Muley after mission geology principal investigator William R. <unk> . The next stop of the day was Buster Crater , about 1 @.@ 6 km ( 0 @.@ 99 mi ) from the LM . There , Duke took pictures of Stone Mountain and South Ray Crater while Young deployed a magnetic field experiment . At that point , scientists began to reconsider their pre @-@ mission hypothesis that Descartes had been the setting of ancient volcanic activity , as the two astronauts had yet to find any volcanic material . Following their stop at Buster , Young did a demonstration drive of the lunar rover while Duke filmed with a 16 mm movie camera . After completing more tasks at the ALSEP , they returned to the LM to close out the moonwalk . They reentered the LM 7 hours , 6 minutes , and 56 seconds after the start of the EVA . Once inside , they pressurized the LM cabin , went through a half @-@ hour briefing with scientists in Mission Control , and configured the cabin for the sleep period . 
 Shortly after waking up on the morning of flight day six three and a half minutes early , they discussed with Mission Control in Houston the day 's timeline of events . The second lunar excursion 's primary objective was to visit Stone Mountain to climb up the slope of about 20 degrees to reach a cluster of five craters known as " Cinco Craters . " After preparations for the day 's moonwalk were completed , the astronauts climbed out of the Lunar Module . After departing the immediate landing site in the lunar rover , they arrived at the day 's first destination , the Cinco Craters , 3 @.@ 8 km ( 2 @.@ 4 mi ) from the LM . At 152 m ( 499 ft ) above the valley floor , the pair were at the highest elevation above the LM of any Apollo mission . After marveling at the view ( including South Ray ) from the side of Stone Mountain , which Duke described as " spectacular , " the astronauts gathered samples in the vicinity . After spending 54 minutes on the slope , they climbed aboard the lunar rover en route to the day 's second stop , station five , a crater 20 m ( 66 ft ) across . There , they hoped to find Descartes material that had not been contaminated by ejecta from South Ray Crater , a large crater south of the landing site . The samples they collected there , although their origin is still not certain , are , according to geologist Don Wilhelms , " a reasonable bet to be Descartes . " The next stop , station six , was a 10 m @-@ wide ( 33 ft ) blocky crater , where the astronauts believed they could sample the Cayley Formation as evidenced by the firmer soil found there . Bypassing station seven to save time , they arrived at station eight on the lower flank of Stone Mountain , where they sampled material on a ray from South Ray Crater for about an hour . There , they collected black and white breccias and smaller , crystalline rocks rich in plagioclase . At station nine , an area known as the " Vacant Lot , " which was believed to be free of ejecta from South Ray , they spent about 40 minutes gathering samples . Twenty @-@ five minutes after departing station nine , they arrived at the final stop of the day , halfway between the ALSEP site and the LM . There , they dug a double core and conducted several <unk> tests along a line stretching 50 m ( 160 ft ) east of the ALSEP . At the request of Young and Duke , the moonwalk was extended by ten minutes . After returning to the LM to wrap up the second lunar excursion , they climbed back inside the landing craft 's cabin , sealing and pressurizing the interior after 7 hours , 23 minutes , and 26 seconds of EVA time , breaking a record that had been set on Apollo 15 . After eating a meal and proceeding with a debriefing on the day 's activities with Mission Control , they reconfigured the LM cabin and prepared for the sleep period . 
 Flight day seven was their third and final day on the lunar surface , returning to orbit to rejoin Mattingly in the Command / Service Module following the day 's moonwalk . During the third and final lunar excursion , they were to explore North Ray Crater , the largest of any of the craters any Apollo expedition had visited . After exiting Orion , the pair drove the lunar rover 0 @.@ 8 km ( 0 @.@ 50 mi ) away from the LM before adjusting their heading to travel 1 @.@ 4 km ( 0 @.@ 87 mi ) to North Ray Crater . The drive was smoother than that of the previous day , as the craters were shallower and boulders were less abundant north of the immediate landing site . Boulders gradually became larger and more abundant as they approached North Ray in the lunar rover . Upon arriving at the rim of North Ray crater , they were 4 @.@ 4 km ( 2 @.@ 7 mi ) away from the LM . After their arrival , the duo took photographs of the 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) wide and 230 m ( 750 ft ) deep crater . They visited a large boulder , taller than a four @-@ story building , which became known as ' House Rock ' . Samples obtained from this boulder delivered the final blow to the pre @-@ mission volcanic hypothesis , proving it incorrect . House Rock had numerous bullet hole @-@ like marks where micrometeoroids from space had impacted the rock . About 1 hour and 22 minutes after arriving , they departed for station 13 , a large boulder field about 0 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 31 mi ) from North Ray . On the way , they set a lunar speed record , traveling at an estimated 17 @.@ 1 kilometers per hour ( 10 @.@ 6 mph ) downhill . They arrived at a 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) high boulder , which they called ' Shadow Rock ' . Here , they sampled permanently shadowed soil . During this time , Mattingly was preparing the Command / Service Module in anticipation of their return approximately six hours later . After three hours and six minutes , they returned to the LM , where they completed several experiments and offloaded the rover . A short distance from the LM , Duke placed a photograph of his family and a United States Air Force commemorative medallion on the surface . Young drove the rover to a point about 90 m ( 300 ft ) east of the LM , known as the ' VIP site , ' so its television camera , controlled remotely by Mission Control , could observe Apollo 16 's liftoff from the Moon . They then reentered the LM after a 5 @-@ hour and 40 minute final excursion . After pressurizing the LM cabin , the crew began preparing to return to lunar orbit . 
 = = = Return to Earth = = = 
 Eight minutes before departing the lunar surface , CAPCOM James Irwin notified Young and Duke from Mission Control that they were go for liftoff . Two minutes before launch , they activated the " Master Arm " switch and then the " Abort Stage " button , after which they awaited ignition of Orion ’ s ascent stage engine . When the ascent stage ignited , small explosive charges severed the ascent stage from the descent stage and cables connecting the two were severed by a guillotine @-@ like mechanism . Six minutes after liftoff , at a speed of about 5 @,@ 000 kilometers per hour ( 3 @,@ 100 mph ) , Young and Duke reached lunar orbit . Young and Duke successfully rendezvoused and re @-@ docked with Mattingly in the Command / Service Module . To minimize the transfer of lunar dust from the LM cabin into the CSM , Young and Duke cleaned the cabin before opening the hatch separating the two spacecraft . After opening the hatch and reuniting with Mattingly , the crew transferred the samples Young and Duke had collected on the surface into the CSM for transfer to Earth . After transfers were completed , the crew would sleep before jettisoning the empty Lunar Module ascent stage the next day , when it was to be crashed intentionally into the lunar surface . 
 The next day , after final checks were completed , the expended LM ascent stage was jettisoned . Because of a failure by the crew to activate a certain switch in the LM before sealing it off , it initially tumbled after separation and did not execute the rocket burn necessary for the craft 's intentional de @-@ orbit . The ascent stage eventually crashed into the lunar surface nearly a year after the mission . The crew 's next task , after jettisoning the Lunar Module ascent stage , was to release a subsatellite into lunar orbit from the CSM 's Scientific Instrument Bay . The burn to alter the CSM 's orbit to that desired for the subsatellite had been cancelled ; as a result , the subsatellite lasted half of its anticipated lifetime . Just under five hours later , on the CSM 's 65th orbit around the Moon , its Service Propulsion System main engine was reignited to propel the craft on a trajectory that would return it to Earth . The SPS engine performed the burn flawlessly despite the malfunction that had delayed the lunar landing several days before . 
 At a distance of about 170 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 310 @,@ 000 km ) from Earth , Mattingly performed a " deep @-@ space " extra @-@ vehicular activity , or spacewalk , during which he retrieved several film cassettes from the CSM 's SIM bay . While outside the spacecraft , Mattingly set up a biological experiment , the Microbial Ecology Evaluation Device ( <unk> ) . The <unk> experiment was only performed on Apollo 16 . The crew carried out various housekeeping and maintenance tasks aboard the spacecraft and ate a meal before concluding the day . 
 The penultimate day of the flight was largely spent performing experiments , aside from a twenty @-@ minute press conference during the second half of the day . During the press conference , the astronauts answered questions pertaining to several technical and non @-@ technical aspects of the mission prepared and listed by priority at the Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston by journalists covering the flight . In addition to numerous housekeeping tasks , the astronauts prepared the spacecraft for its atmospheric reentry the next day . At the end of the crew 's final full day in space , the spacecraft was approximately 77 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 143 @,@ 000 km ) from Earth and closing at a rate of about 7 @,@ 000 feet per second ( 2 @,@ 100 m / s ) . 
 When the wake @-@ up call was issued to the crew for their final day in space by CAPCOM Tony England , it was about 45 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 83 @,@ 000 km ) out from Earth , traveling just over 9 @,@ 000 ft / s ( 2 @,@ 700 m / s ) . Just over three hours before splashdown in the Pacific Ocean , the crew performed a final course correction burn , changing their velocity by 1 @.@ 4 ft / s ( 0 @.@ 43 m / s ) . Approximately ten minutes before reentry into Earth 's atmosphere , the cone @-@ shaped Command Module containing the three crewmembers separated from the Service Module , which would burn up during reentry . At 265 hours and 37 minutes into the mission , at a velocity of about 36 @,@ 000 ft / s ( 11 @,@ 000 m / s ) , Apollo 16 began atmospheric reentry . At its maximum , the temperature of the heat shield was between 4 @,@ 000 and 4 @,@ 500 ° F ( 2 @,@ 200 and 2 @,@ 480 ° C ) . After successful parachute deployment and less than 14 minutes after reentry began , the Command Module splashed down in the Pacific Ocean 350 km ( 220 mi ) southeast of the island of Kiritimati ( or " Christmas Island " ) , 290 hours , 37 minutes , 6 seconds after liftoff . The spacecraft and its crew was retrieved by USS Ticonderoga . They were safely aboard the Ticonderoga 37 minutes after splashdown . 
 = = Lunar subsatellite PFS @-@ 2 = = 
 The Apollo 16 subsatellite ( PFS @-@ 2 ) was a small satellite released into lunar orbit from the Service Module . Its principal objective was to measure charged particles and magnetic fields all around the Moon as the Moon orbited Earth , similar to its sister spacecraft , PFS @-@ 1 , released eight months earlier by Apollo 15 . " The low orbits of both <unk> were to be similar ellipses , ranging from 55 to 76 miles ( 89 to 122 kilometres ) above the lunar surface . " 
 " Instead , something bizarre happened . The orbit of PFS @-@ 2 rapidly changed shape and distance from the Moon . In 2 @-@ 1 / 2 weeks the satellite was swooping to within a hair @-@ raising 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) of the lunar surface at closest approach . As the orbit kept changing , PFS @-@ 2 backed off again , until it seemed to be a safe 30 miles away . But not for long : inexorably , the subsatellite 's orbit carried it back toward the Moon . And on May 29 , 1972 — only 35 days and 425 orbits after its release " — PFS @-@ 2 crashed into the Lunar surface . 
 In later years , through a study of many lunar orbiting satellites , scientists came to discover that most low lunar orbits ( <unk> ) are unstable . PFS @-@ 2 had been placed , unknown to mission planners at the time , squarely into one of the most unstable of orbits , at 11 degrees orbital inclination , far from the four frozen lunar orbits discovered only later at 27 ° , 50 ° , 76 ° , and 86 ° inclination . 
 = = Spacecraft locations = = 
 The aircraft carrier USS Ticonderoga delivered the Apollo 16 Command Module to the North Island Naval Air Station , near San Diego , California , on Friday , May 5 , 1972 . On Monday , May 8 , 1972 , ground service equipment being used to empty the residual toxic reaction control system fuel in the Command Module tanks exploded in a Naval Air Station hangar . Forty @-@ six people were sent to the hospital for 24 to 48 hours observation , most suffering from inhalation of toxic fumes . Most seriously injured was a technician who suffered a fractured kneecap when the GSE cart overturned on him . A hole was blown in the hangar roof 250 feet above ; about 40 windows in the hangar were shattered . The Command Module suffered a three @-@ inch gash in one panel . 
 The Apollo 16 Command Module Casper is on display at the U.S. Space & Rocket Center in Huntsville , Alabama . The Lunar Module ascent stage separated 24 April 1972 but a loss of attitude control rendered it out of control . It orbited the Moon for about a year . Its impact site remained unknown until January 2016 , when it was discovered within Mare Insularum by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter , approximately 160 mi ( 260 km ) southwest of Copernicus Crater . 
 Duke donated some flown items , including a lunar map , to Kennesaw State University in Kennesaw , Georgia . He left two items on the Moon , both of which he photographed . The most famous is a plastic @-@ encased photo portrait of his family ( NASA Photo <unk> @-@ 117 @-@ <unk> ) . The reverse of the photo is signed by Duke 's family and bears this message : " This is the family of Astronaut Duke from Planet Earth . Landed on the Moon , April 1972 . " The other item was a commemorative medal issued by the United States Air Force , which was celebrating its 25th anniversary in 1972 . He took two medals , leaving one on the Moon and donating the other to the Wright @-@ Patterson Air Force Base museum . 
 In 2006 , shortly after Hurricane Ernesto affected Bath , North Carolina , eleven @-@ year @-@ old Kevin Schanze discovered a piece of metal debris on the ground near his beach home . Schanze and a friend discovered a " stamp " on the 36 @-@ inch ( 91 cm ) flat metal sheet , which upon further inspection turned out to be a faded copy of the Apollo 16 mission insignia . NASA later confirmed the object to be a piece of the first stage of the Saturn V rocket that launched Apollo 16 into space . In July 2011 , after returning the piece of debris at NASA 's request , 16 @-@ year @-@ old Schanze was given an all @-@ access tour of the Kennedy Space Center and VIP seating for the launch of STS @-@ 135 , the final mission of the Space Shuttle program . 
 = Jay Barbree = 
 Jay Barbree ( born November 26 , 1933 ) is a correspondent for NBC News , focusing on space travel . Barbree is the only journalist to have covered every manned space mission in the United States , beginning with the first American in space , Alan Shepard aboard Freedom 7 in 1961 , continuing through to the last mission of the Space Shuttle , Atlantis 's STS @-@ 135 mission in July 2011 . Barbree has been present for all 135 space shuttle launches , and every manned launch for the Mercury , Gemini , and Apollo eras . In total , Barbree has been witness to 166 manned space launches . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Barbree grew up on his family 's farm in Early County , Georgia , and entered the United States Air Force in 1950 , when he was only 16 years of age . Following the Air Force , Barbree began his broadcast journalism career at <unk> in Albany , Georgia where , in 1957 , he saw Sputnik 's spent booster rocket orbiting in the sky and then wrote radio and TV reports about the Soviet Union 's launch of the first artificial satellite . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Reporting career = = = 
 Barbree was so interested in the space program , that he paid for his own ticket to get to Cape Canaveral , Florida in 1957 , and watched the attempted Vanguard launch . The failed launch was one Barbree would never forget : " There 's ignition . We can see the flames , " Barbree reported . " Vanguard 's engine is lit and it 's burning . But wait ... wait a moment , there 's ... there 's no liftoff ! It appears to be crumbling in its own fire ... It 's burning on the pad ... Vanguard has crumbled into flames . It failed ladies and gentlemen , Vanguard has failed . " 
 Early the next year , he returned and witnessed the successful launch of Explorer 1 on January 31 , 1958 , all the while calling in his reports to <unk> . Eventually , Barbree was hired by radio station <unk> in Cocoa Beach , and worked as a traffic reporter , covering the space program as well . 
 Six months later , Barbree joined NBC as a part @-@ time space program reporter , eventually moving up to full @-@ time . Over the years , Barbree had been offered the opportunity to move to Washington , D.C. , or New York , but he turned down every offer , preferring to stay and report on what had quickly become his passion , spaceflight . 
 " This is a job where … you have to be , whether you like it or not , a certain member of the space family . " 
 In 1958 , while in a restroom , Barbree overheard a general and a NASA official , talking about an upcoming launch called " Project SCORE " , one of the earliest American satellites . This would become one of Barbree 's many " scoops " , when after a bit of digging , he found that President Dwight D. Eisenhower would use the satellite to broadcast a pre @-@ recorded Christmas message from outer space . When SCORE launched in 1958 , Barbree broadcast the story , knowing the military would not deny it once the satellite was in space . 
 In the early days of the space program , astronauts and reporters would often socialize together in Cocoa Beach , and had a very different relationship than they do today . Barbree described his relationship with the astronauts as a friend and confidant , often going out to dinner with them , or socializing together when the astronauts were in town . In his book , Barbree writes that in 1961 Alan Shepard told him an " off the record " fact : He was going to be the first American astronaut in space . Barbree noted that if he were to report this , it would not only jeopardize the friendships , but possibly his career as well , so he said nothing . Barbree also recounts a conversation with Gus Grissom about the astronaut ’ s concerns regarding Apollo not long before the fatal Apollo 1 fire . Barbree 's association with the astronauts had some unexpected bonuses as well , Neil Armstrong carried a gold coin to the moon on Apollo 11 for Barbree , and Pete Conrad flew several flags and patches on Apollo 12 , which Barbree later handed out to friends . 
 In the early 1980s , when NASA developed the Teacher in Space program , a similar program was developed , the Journalist in Space program . Barbree was one of forty finalists to be selected as a Journalist in Space . Both the teacher and journalist programs were discontinued after the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster . 
 In 1986 , following the Space Shuttle Challenger accident , Barbree placed a telephone call to a friend and retired employee of NASA , who — as a favor to Barbree — went to Kennedy Space Center , looked over the accident information and analysis being done , and later reported the early findings to Barbree . Consequently , Barbree was the first journalist to report on the source of the destruction of the Space Shuttle Challenger : Faulty O @-@ rings . He was also part of the NBC News Space Unit that won an Emmy award for NBC 's coverage of the Apollo 11 moon landing . Following the Space Shuttle Columbia accident , Barbree was the first reporter to break the news of an internal NASA memo expressing concerns about foam striking the orbiter 's left wing during ascent . 
 In 1995 , NASA awarded him with recognition for being the " only journalist known to have covered all 100 flights " . Among those present for the ceremony were several NASA officials , Alan Shepard , and shuttle commander Robert L. Gibson . 
 In 2011 , Barbree was honored by the Space Foundation as a recipient of the Douglas S. Morrow Public Outreach Award in recognition of the role he played in shaping the way the nation views and understands space . 
 At age seventy @-@ seven , Barbree is one of the longest @-@ serving network correspondents to work continuously on a single subject . He started working for NBC on July 21 , 1958 covering the space program , and continues in that capacity to the present . He has never missed a mission launch , despite suffering a heart attack while jogging along Cocoa Beach in 1987 , and being declared clinically dead for several minutes . Following his heart attack , he had bypass surgery , and still did not miss any launches . 
 Barbree covers the shuttle program and space missions for the cable network MSNBC , and NBC 's news reports covering missions . His contract with NBC runs through 2010 , allowing him to complete the coverage of the entire space shuttle program , and he has expressed hope that he will be there for the return to the moon missions . 
 = = = Career as author = = = 
 Barbree is the author or coauthor of seven books , including two memoirs . In 1993 , Shepard , fellow Mercury astronaut Deke Slayton , journalist Howard Benedict , and Barbree collaborated to write the book Moon Shot . Slayton was a participant in name only and died before the book was completed . 
 Barbree 's most recent book , " Live from Cape Canaveral : Covering the Space Race , from Sputnik to Today " , was released on August 28 , 2007 , to coincide with the 50th anniversary of spaceflight , that began with the Sputnik 1 launch on October 4 , 1957 . The foreword is written by Tom Brokaw . Barbree 's book attempts to illustrate how the media has changed in their coverage of the space programs , from the early enthusiasm to the relative disinterest in the program today . Barbree says he wrote the book because as he looked back over his career , when recalling all the people he 'd worked with , very few were left . Barbree claims that he told himself , " You 're the only one who has covered the whole program going all the way back to the beginning , and if you don 't tell the story , who is going to do it ? " It received generally poor reviews from space historians . 
 Barbree also collaborated with Martin Caidin on a number of non @-@ fiction works , such as Destination Mars : In Art , Myth and Science ( Penguin , 1997 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 670 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 ) and A Journey Through Time : Exploring the Universe with the Hubble Space Telescope ( Penguin , 1995 , ISBN 0 @-@ 670 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 ) . Barbree also wrote the novelization of " Pilot Error " , an episode of The Six Million Dollar Man , a television series based upon Caidin 's novel Cyborg ( Warner , 1975 , ISBN 0 @-@ 446 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 ) . 
 Over the years , Barbree has stated that he has stayed away from sensationalizing the space program , or those associated with it , and commented that he would not put some items that could be considered harmful into his newest book , stating " The whole idea of the book is not to hurt somebody . " Barbree attempts to illustrate this in his memoir by telling of a private investigator who approached him with an audio tape which allegedly contained proof of an extramarital affair involving an astronaut . Barbree told the investigator he would speak to his superiors , but then proceeded to erase the tape . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Barbree has been married since 1960 to the former Jo <unk> , whom he met while covering her participation in Florida beauty pageants . They live in Merritt Island . They have three children , Steve , Alicia , and Karla . Their son Scott died in infancy following a premature birth . 
 = SMS Nassau = 
 SMS Nassau was the first dreadnought battleship built for the Imperial German Navy , a response to the launching of the British battleship HMS Dreadnought . Nassau was laid down on 22 July 1907 at the Kaiserliche Werft in Wilhelmshaven , and launched less than a year later on 7 March 1908 , approximately 25 months after Dreadnought was launched . She was the lead ship of her class of four battleships , which included Posen , Rheinland , and Westfalen . 
 Nassau saw service in the North Sea in the beginning of World War I , in the II Division of the I Battle Squadron of the German High Seas Fleet . In August 1915 , she entered the Baltic Sea and participated in the Battle of the Gulf of Riga , where she engaged the Russian battleship Slava . Following her return to the North Sea , Nassau and her sister ships took part in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . During the battle , Nassau collided with the British destroyer HMS Spitfire . Nassau suffered a total of 11 killed and 16 injured during the engagement . 
 After World War I , the bulk of the High Seas Fleet was interned in Scapa Flow . As they were the oldest German dreadnoughts , the Nassau @-@ class ships were for the time permitted to remain in German ports . After the German fleet was scuttled , Nassau and her three sisters were surrendered to the victorious powers as replacements for the sunken ships . Nassau was ceded to Japan in April 1920 . With no use for the ship , Japan sold her to a British wrecking firm which then scrapped her in Dordrecht , Netherlands . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Nassau was ordered under the provisional name Ersatz Bayern , as a replacement for the old Sachsen @-@ class ironclad Bayern . She was laid down on 22 July 1907 at the Kaiserliche Werft in Wilhelmshaven , under construction number 30 . Construction work proceeded under absolute secrecy ; detachments of soldiers were tasked with guarding the shipyard itself , as well as contractors that supplied building materials , such as Krupp . The ship was launched on 7 March 1908 ; she was christened by Princess Hilda of Nassau , and the ceremony was attended by Kaiser Wilhelm II and Prince Henry of the Netherlands , representing his wife 's House of Orange @-@ Nassau . 
 Fitting out work was delayed significantly when a dockyard worker accidentally removed a blanking plate from a large pipe , which allowed a large amount of water to flood the ship . The ship did not have its watertight bulkheads installed , so the water spread throughout the ship and caused it to list to port and sink 1 @.@ 6 m ( 5 ft 3 in ) to the bottom of the dock . The ship had to be pumped dry and cleaned out , which proved to be a laborious task . The ship ultimately was completed by the end of September 1909 . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 1 October 1909 , and trials commenced immediately . HMS Dreadnought , the ship that spurred Nassau 's construction , had been launched 2 February 1906 , some 25 months before Nassau . The ship cost the German navy 37 @,@ 399 @,@ 000 gold marks . 
 Nassau was 146 @.@ 1 m ( 479 ft 4 in ) long , 26 @.@ 9 m ( 88 ft 3 in ) wide , and had a draft of 8 @.@ 9 m ( 29 ft 2 in ) . She displaced 18 @,@ 873 t ( 18 @,@ 575 long tons ) with a normal load , and 20 @,@ 535 t ( 20 @,@ 211 long tons ) fully laden . The ship had a crew of 40 officers and 968 enlisted men . Nassau retained three @-@ shafted triple expansion engines with coal @-@ fired boilers instead of more advanced turbine engines . Her propulsion system was rated at 21 @,@ 699 ihp ( 16 @,@ 181 kW ) and provided a top speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . She had a cruising radius of 8 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 400 km ; 9 @,@ 600 mi ) at a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . This type of machinery was chosen at the request of both Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz and the Navy 's construction department ; the latter stated in 1905 that the " use of turbines in heavy warships does not recommend itself . " This decision was based solely on cost : at the time , Parsons held a monopoly on steam turbines and required a 1 million gold mark royalty fee for every turbine engine . German firms were not ready to begin production of turbines on a large scale until 1910 . 
 Nassau carried twelve 28 cm ( 11 in ) SK L / 45 guns in an unusual hexagonal configuration . Her secondary armament consisted of twelve 15 cm ( 6 in ) SK L / 45 guns and sixteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 in ) SK L / 45 guns , all of which were mounted in casemates . The ship was also armed with six 45 cm ( 18 in ) submerged torpedo tubes . One tube was mounted in the bow , another in the stern , and two on each broadside , on either ends of the torpedo bulkhead . The ship 's belt armor was 270 mm ( 11 in ) thick in the central portion of the hull , and the armored deck was 80 mm ( 3 in ) thick . The main battery turrets had 280 mm ( 11 in ) thick sides , and the conning tower was protected with 400 mm ( 16 in ) of armor plating . 
 = = Service history = = 
 On 16 October 1909 , Nassau and her sister Westfalen participated in a ceremony for the opening of the new third entrance in the Wilhelmshaven Naval Dockyard . They were still on trials in February 1910 , but they took part in the annual maneuvers of the High Seas Fleet . Nassau finished her trials on 3 May and joined the newly created I Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet . Over the next four years , the ship participated in the normal series of squadron and fleet maneuvers and training cruises . The one exception was the summer training cruise for 1912 when , due to the Agadir Crisis , the cruise only went into the Baltic . On 14 July 1914 , the annual summer cruise to Norway began . The threat of war , however , caused the Kaiser to cancel the cruise after two weeks , and by the end of July , the fleet was back in port . War between Austria @-@ Hungary and Serbia broke out on the 28th , and in the span of a week all of the major European powers had joined the conflict . 
 Nassau participated in most of the fleet advances into the North Sea throughout the war . The first operation was conducted primarily by Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's battlecruisers ; the ships bombarded the English coastal towns of Scarborough , Hartlepool , and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . A German battlefleet of 12 dreadnoughts — including Nassau — and eight pre @-@ dreadnoughts sailed in support of the battlecruisers . On the evening of 15 December , they came to within 10 nmi ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) of an isolated squadron of six British battleships . However , skirmishes between the rival destroyer screens in the darkness convinced the German fleet commander , Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , that the entire Grand Fleet was deployed before him . Under orders from Kaiser Wilhelm II to not risk the fleet , von Ingenohl broke off the engagement and turned the battlefleet back towards Germany . 
 = = = Battle of the Gulf of Riga = = = 
 In August 1915 , the German fleet attempted to clear the Gulf of Riga in order to facilitate the capture of Riga by the German army . To do so , the German planners intended to drive off or destroy the Russian naval forces in the area , which included the pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Slava and a number of gunboats and destroyers . The German naval force would also lay a series of minefields in the northern entrance to the gulf to prevent Russian naval reinforcements from being able to enter the area . The fleet that assembled for the assault included Nassau and her three sister ships , the four Helgoland @-@ class battleships , and the battlecruisers Von der Tann , Moltke , and Seydlitz . The force would operate under the command of Vice Admiral Franz von Hipper . The eight battleships were to provide cover for the forces engaging the Russian flotilla . The first attempt on 8 August was unsuccessful , as it had taken too long to clear the Russian minefields to allow the minelayer Deutschland to lay a minefield of her own . 
 On 16 August 1915 , a second attempt was made to enter the gulf : Nassau and Posen , four light cruisers , and 31 torpedo boats managed to breach the Russian defenses . On the first day of the assault , the German minesweeper T 46 was sunk , as was the destroyer V 99 . The following day , Nassau and Posen engaged in an artillery duel with Slava , resulting in three hits on the Russian ship that forced her to retreat . By 19 August , the Russian minefields had been cleared and the flotilla entered the gulf . However , reports of Allied submarines in the area prompted the Germans to call off of the operation the following day . Nassau and Posen remained in the Gulf until 21 August , and while there assisted in the destruction of the gunboats Sivuch and Korietz . Admiral Hipper later remarked that , 
 " To keep valuable ships for a considerable time in a limited area in which enemy submarines were increasingly active , with the corresponding risk of damage and loss , was to indulge in a gamble out of all proportion to the advantage to be derived from the occupation of the Gulf before the capture of Riga from the land side . " 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 Nassau took part in the inconclusive Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 , in the II Division of the I Battle Squadron . For the majority of the battle , the I Battle Squadron formed the center of the line of battle , behind Rear Admiral Behncke 's III Battle Squadron , and followed by Rear Admiral Mauve 's elderly pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the II Battle Squadron . Nassau was the third ship in the group of four , behind Rheinland and ahead of Westfalen ; Posen was the squadron 's flagship . However , when the German fleet reorganized into a nighttime cruising formation , the order of the ships was inadvertently reversed , and so Nassau was the second ship in the line , astern of Westfalen . 
 Between 17 : 48 and 17 : 52 , eleven German dreadnoughts , including Nassau , engaged and opened fire on the British 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron ; Nassau 's target was the cruiser Southampton . Nassau is believed to have scored one hit on Southampton , at approximately 17 : 50 at a range of 20 @,@ 100 yd ( 18 @,@ 400 m ) , shortly after she began firing . The shell struck Southampton obliquely on her port side , but did not cause significant damage . Nassau then shifted her guns to the cruiser Dublin , but ceased firing by 18 : 10 . At 19 : 33 , Nassau came into range of the British battleship Warspite ; her main guns fired briefly , but after the 180 degree turn by the German fleet , the British ship was no longer within reach . 
 Nassau and the rest of the I Squadron were again engaged by British light forces shortly after 22 : 00 , including the light cruisers Caroline , Comus , and Royalist . Nassau followed her sister Westfalen in a 68 ° turn to starboard in order to evade any torpedoes that might have been fired . The two ships fired on Caroline and Royalist at a range of around 8 @,@ 000 yd ( 7 @,@ 300 m ) . The British ships turned away briefly , before turning about to launch torpedoes . Caroline fired two at Nassau ; the first passed close to her bows and the second passed under the ship without exploding . 
 At around midnight on 1 June , the German fleet was attempting to pass behind the British Grand Fleet when it encountered a line of British destroyers . Nassau came in contact with the destroyer Spitfire , and in the confusion , attempted to ram her . Spitfire tried to evade , but could not maneuver away fast enough , and the two ships collided . Nassau fired her forward 11 @-@ inch guns at the destroyer , but they could not depress low enough for Nassau to be able to score a hit . Nonetheless , the blast from the guns destroyed Spitfire 's bridge . At that point , Spitfire was able to disengage from Nassau , and took with her a 6 m ( 20 ft ) portion of Nassau 's side plating . The collision disabled one of Nassau 's 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns , and left a 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 @.@ 5 ft ) gash above the waterline ; this slowed the ship to 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) until it could be repaired . During the confused action , Nassau was hit by two 4 in ( 10 cm ) shells from the British destroyers , which damaged her searchlights and inflicted minor casualties . 
 Shortly after 01 : 00 , Nassau and Thüringen encountered the British armored cruiser Black Prince . Thüringen opened fire first , and pummeled Black Prince with a total of 27 heavy @-@ caliber shells and 24 shells from her secondary battery . Nassau and Ostfriesland joined in , followed by Friedrich der Grosse . The heavy fire quickly disabled the British cruiser and set her alight ; following a tremendous explosion , she sank , taking her entire crew with her . The sinking Black Prince was directly in the path of Nassau ; to avoid the wreck , the ship had to steer sharply towards the III Battle Squadron . It was necessary for Nassau to reverse her engines to full speed astern in order to avoid a collision with Kaiserin . Nassau then fell back into a position between the pre @-@ dreadnoughts Hessen and Hannover . At around 03 : 00 , several British destroyers attempted another torpedo attack on the German line . At approximately 03 : 10 , three or four destroyers appeared in the darkness to port of Nassau ; at a range of between 5 @,@ 500 yd ( 5 @,@ 000 m ) to 4 @,@ 400 yd ( 4 @,@ 000 m ) , Nassau briefly fired on the ships before turning away 90 ° to avoid torpedoes . 
 Following her return to German waters , Nassau , her sisters Posen and Westfalen , and the Helgoland @-@ class battleships Helgoland and Thüringen , took up defensive positions in the Jade roadstead for the night . In the course of the battle , Nassau was hit twice by secondary shells , though these hits caused no significant damage . Her casualties amounted to 11 men killed and 16 men wounded . During the course of the battle , she fired 106 main battery shells and 75 rounds from her secondary guns . Repairs were completed quickly , and Nassau was back with the fleet by 10 July 1916 . 
 = = = Later operations = = = 
 Another fleet advance followed on 18 – 22 August , during which the I Scouting Group battlecruisers were to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . As only two of the four German battlecruisers were still in fighting condition , three dreadnoughts were assigned to the Scouting Group for the operation : Markgraf , Grosser Kurfürst ( or Großer Kurfürst ) , and the newly commissioned Bayern . The High Seas Fleet , including Nassau , would trail behind and provide cover . However , at 06 : 00 on 19 August , Westfalen was torpedoed by the British submarine HMS E23 , some 55 nautical miles ( 102 km ; 63 mi ) north of Terschelling ; the ship remained afloat and was detached to return to port . The British were aware of the German plans and sortied the Grand Fleet to meet them . By 14 : 35 , Admiral Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and , unwilling to engage the whole of the Grand Fleet just 11 weeks after the close call at Jutland , turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 Another sortie into the North Sea followed on 19 – 20 October . On 21 December , Nassau ran aground in the mouth of the Elbe . She was able to free herself , however , and repairs were effected in Hamburg at the <unk> Dockyard until 1 February 1917 . The ship was part of the force that steamed to Norway to intercept a heavily escorted British convoy on 23 – 25 April , though the operation was canceled when the battlecruiser Moltke suffered mechanical damage and had to be towed back to port . Nassau , Ostfriesland , and Thüringen were formed into a special unit for Operation Schlußstein , a planned occupation of St. Petersburg . On 8 August , Nassau took on some 250 soldiers in Wilhelmshaven and then departed for the Baltic . The three ships reached the Baltic on 10 August , but the operation was postponed and eventually canceled . The special unit was dissolved on 21 August and the battleships were back in Wilhelmshaven on the 23rd . 
 Nassau and her three sisters were to have taken part in a final fleet action at the end of October 1918 , days before the Armistice was to take effect . The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Grand Admiral ( Großadmiral ) of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , to improve Germany 's bargaining position , despite the expected casualties . But many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt that the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Following the German collapse in November 1918 , a significant portion of the High Seas Fleet was interned in Scapa Flow . Nassau and her three sisters were not among the ships listed for internment , so they remained at German ports . During this period , from November to December , Hermann Bauer served as the ship 's commander . On 21 June 1919 , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , under the mistaken impression that the Armistice would expire at noon that day , ordered his ships be scuttled to prevent their seizure by the British . As a result , the four Nassau @-@ class ships were ceded to the various Allied powers as replacements for the ships that had been sunk . Nassau was awarded to Japan on 7 April 1920 , though the Japanese had no need for the ship . They therefore sold her in June 1920 to British ship @-@ breakers , who scrapped the ship in Dordrecht . 
 = <unk> = 
 The antbirds are a large passerine bird family , Thamnophilidae , found across subtropical and tropical Central and South America , from Mexico to Argentina . There are more than 200 species , known variously as antshrikes , antwrens , antvireos , fire @-@ eyes , bare @-@ eyes and bushbirds . They are related to the antthrushes and antpittas ( family Formicariidae ) , the tapaculos , the gnateaters and the ovenbirds . Despite some species ' common names , this family is not closely related to the wrens , vireos or shrikes . 
 Antbirds are generally small birds with rounded wings and strong legs . They have mostly sombre grey , white , brown and rufous plumage , which is sexually dimorphic in pattern and colouring . Some species communicate warnings to rivals by exposing white feather patches on their backs or shoulders . Most have heavy bills , which in many species are hooked at the tip . 
 Most species live in forests , although a few are found in other habitats . Insects and other arthropods form the most important part of their diet , although small vertebrates are occasionally taken . Most species feed in the understory and midstory of the forest , although a few feed in the canopy and a few on the ground . Many join mixed @-@ species feeding flocks , and a few species are core members . To various degrees , around eighteen species specialise in following columns of army ants to eat the small invertebrates flushed by the ants , and many others may feed in this way opportunistically . 
 Antbirds are monogamous , mate for life , and defend territories . They usually lay two eggs in a nest that is either suspended from branches or supported on a branch , stump , or mound on the ground . Both parents share the tasks of incubation and of brooding and feeding the nestlings . After fledging , each parent cares exclusively for one chick . 
 Thirty @-@ eight species are threatened with extinction as a result of human activities . Antbirds are not targeted by either hunters or the pet trade . The principal threat is habitat loss , which causes habitat fragmentation and increased nest predation in habitat fragments . 
 = = Systematics = = 
 The antbird family Thamnophilidae used to be considered a subfamily , <unk> , within a larger family Formicariidae that included antthrushes and antpittas . Formerly , that larger family was known as the " antbird family " and the <unk> were " typical antbirds " . In this article , " antbird " and " antbird family " refer to the family Thamnophilidae . 
 Thamnophilidae was removed from Formicariidae , leaving behind the antthrushes and antpittas , due to recognition of differences in the structure of the breastbone ( sternum ) and syrinx , and Sibley and Ahlquist 's examination of DNA – DNA hybridization . The Thamnophilidae antbirds are members of the infraorder <unk> ( or <unk> suboscines ) , one of two infraorders in the suborder <unk> . The Thamnophilidae are now thought to occupy a fairly basal position within the infraorder , i. e. with regard to their relatives the antthrushes and antpittas , tapaculos , gnateaters , and also the ovenbirds . The sister group of the Thamnophilidae is thought to be the gnateaters . The ovenbirds , tapaculos , antthrushes and antpittas are thought to represent a different radiation of that early split . 
 The antbird family contains over 200 species , variously called antwrens , antvireos , antbirds and antshrikes . The names refer to the relative sizes of the birds ( increasing in the order given , though with exceptions ) rather than any particular resemblance to the true wrens , vireos or shrikes . In addition , members of the genus <unk> are known as bare @-@ eyes , <unk> as fire @-@ eyes and <unk> and <unk> as bushbirds . Although the systematics of the Thamnophilidae is based on studies from the mid @-@ 19th century , when fewer than half the present species were known , comparison of the myoglobin intron 2 , <unk> intron 11 and the mtDNA cytochrome b DNA sequences has largely confirmed it . There are two major clades – most antshrikes and other larger , strong @-@ billed species as well as <unk> , versus the classical antwrens and other more slender , longer @-@ billed species – and the monophyly of most genera was confirmed . 
 The Thamnophilidae contains several large or very large genera and numerous small or monotypic ones . Several , which are difficult to assign , seem to form a third , hitherto unrecognised clade independently derived from ancestral antbirds . The results also confirmed suspicions of previous researchers that some species , most notably in <unk> and <unk> , need to be assigned to other genera . Still , due to the difficulties of sampling from such a large number of often poorly known species , the assignment of some genera is still awaiting confirmation . 
 = = Morphology = = 
 The antbirds are a group of small to medium @-@ sized passerines that range in size from the large giant antshrike , which measures 45 cm ( 18 in ) and weighs 150 g ( 5 @.@ 29 oz ) , to the tiny 8 @-@ cm ( 3 in ) pygmy antwren , which weighs 7 g ( 0 @.@ 25 oz ) . In general terms , " antshrikes " are relatively large @-@ bodied birds , " antvireos " are medium @-@ sized and chunky , while " antwrens " include most smaller species ; " antbird " genera can vary greatly in size . Members of this family have short rounded wings that provide good manoeuvrability when flying in dense undergrowth . The legs are large and strong , particularly in species that are obligate ant @-@ followers . These species are well adapted to gripping vertical stems and saplings , which are more common than horizontal branches in the undergrowth , and thus the ability to grip them is an advantage for birds following swarms of army ants . The claws of these antbirds are longer than those of species that do not follow ants , and the soles of some species have projections that are tough and gripping when the foot is clenched . Tarsus length in antbirds is related to foraging strategy . Longer tarsi typically occur in genera such as the <unk> antshrikes that forage by perch @-@ gleaning ( sitting and leaning forward to snatch insects from the branch ) , whereas shorter tarsi typically occur in those that catch prey on the wing , such as the Thamnomanes antshrikes . 
 Most antbirds have proportionately large , heavy bills . Several genera of antshrike have a strongly hooked tip to the bill , and all antbirds have a notch or ' tooth ' at the tip of the bill which helps in holding and crushing insect prey . The two genera of bushbirds have upturned chisel @-@ like bills . 
 The plumage of antbirds is soft and not brightly coloured , although it is occasionally striking . The colour palette of most species is blackish shades , whitish shades , rufous , chestnut and brown . <unk> can be uniform in colour or patterned with barring or spots . Sexual dimorphism – differences in plumage colour and pattern between males and females – is common in the family . Overall the pattern within the family is for the males to have combinations of grey , black or white plumage and the females having buff , rufous and brown colours . For example , the male dot @-@ winged antwren is primarily blackish , whereas the female has rust @-@ coloured underparts . In some genera , such as <unk> , species are better distinguished by female plumage than by male . Many species of antbirds have a contrasting ' patch ' of white ( sometimes other colours ) feathers on the back ( known as <unk> patches ) , shoulder or underwing . This is usually concealed by the darker feathers on the back but when the bird is excited or alarmed these feathers can be raised to flash the white <unk> dot @-@ winged antwrens puff out white back patches , whereas in bluish @-@ slate antshrikes and white @-@ flanked antwrens the white patch is on the shoulder . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 The songs and calls of antbirds are generally composed of repeated simple uncomplicated notes . The family is one of the suboscines ( suborder <unk> ) which have simpler syrinxes ( " <unk> " ) than other songbirds . Nevertheless , their songs are distinctive and species @-@ specific , allowing field identification by ear . Antbirds rely on their calls for communication , as is typical of birds in dark forests . Most species have at least two types of call , the <unk> and the <unk> . The functions of many calls have been deduced from their context ; for example some <unk> have a territorial purpose and are given when birds meet at the edges of their territories , or during the morning rounds of the territory . Pairs in neighbouring territories judge the proximity of rivals by the degradation of the song caused by interference by the environment . In bouts of territorial defence the male will face off with the other male and the female with her counterpart . <unk> duets are also potentially related to the maintenance of pair bonds . The functions of <unk> are more complex , and possibly related to pair @-@ bond maintenance . In addition to these two main calls a range of other sounds are made ; these include scolding in mobbing of predators . The calls of antbirds are also used <unk> . Some species of antbirds and even other birds will actively seek out ant @-@ swarms using the calls of some species of ant @-@ followers as clues . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The distribution of the antbirds is entirely Neotropical , with the vast majority of the species being found in the tropics . A few species reach southern Mexico and northern Argentina . Some species , such as the barred antshrike , have a continental distribution that spans most of the South and Middle American distribution of the family ; others , such as the ash @-@ throated antwren , have a tiny distribution . 
 Antbirds are mostly birds of humid lowland rainforests . Few species are found at higher elevations , with less than 10 % of species having ranges above 2000 m ( 6500 ft ) and almost none with ranges above 3000 m ( 10000 ft ) . The highest species diversity is found in the Amazon basin , with up to 45 species being found in single locations in sites across Brazil , Colombia , Bolivia and Peru . The number of species drops dramatically towards the further reaches of the family 's range ; there are only seven species in Mexico , for example . Areas of lower <unk> diversity may contain localised endemics , however . The <unk> antbird , for example , is restricted to the stunted woodlands that grow in areas of nutrient @-@ poor white @-@ sand soil ( the so @-@ called Amazonian <unk> ) in Brazil , Venezuela and Colombia . Some species are predominantly associated with microhabitats within a greater ecosystem ; for example , the bamboo antshrike is predominantly found in bamboo patches . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Antbirds are diurnal : they feed , breed and defend territories during the day . Many of the family are , however , reluctant to enter areas of direct sunlight where it breaks through the forest canopy . Antbirds will engage in anting , a behaviour in which ants ( or other arthropods ) are rubbed on the feathers before being discarded or eaten . While this has conventionally been considered a way to remove and control feather parasites , it has been suggested that for antbirds it may simply be a way to deal with the distasteful substances in prey items . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The main component of the diet of all antbirds is arthropods . These are mostly insects , including grasshoppers and crickets , cockroaches , praying mantises , stick insects and the larvae of butterflies and moths . In addition antbirds often take spiders , scorpions and centipedes . They swallow smaller prey items quickly , whereas they often beat larger items against branches in order to remove wings and spines . Larger species can kill and consume frogs and lizards as well , but generally these do not form an important part of the diet of this family . Other food items may also be eaten , including fruit , eggs and slugs . 
 The family uses a number of techniques to obtain prey . The majority of antbirds are arboreal , with most of those feeding in the understory , many in the middle story and some in the canopy . A few species feed in the leaf litter ; for example , the wing @-@ banded antbird forages in areas of dense leaf @-@ litter . It does not use its feet to scratch the leaf litter , as do some other birds ; instead it uses its long bill to turn over leaves rapidly ( never picking them up ) . The antbirds that forage <unk> show a number of techniques and specialisations . Some species perch @-@ glean , perching on a branch watching for prey and snatching it by reaching forward , where others sally from a perch and snatch prey on the wing . In both cases birds will hop through the foliage or undergrowth and pause , scanning for prey , before pouncing or moving on . The time paused varies , although smaller species tend to be more active and pause for shorter times . 
 = = = = Mixed @-@ species feeding flocks = = = = 
 Many species participate in mixed @-@ species feeding flocks , forming a large percentage of the participating species within their range . Some of these are core or " nuclear species " . These nuclear species share territories with other nuclear species but exclude conspecifics ( members of the same species ) and are found in almost all flocks ; these are joined by " attendant species " . Loud and distinctive calls and conspicuous plumage are important attributes of nuclear species as they promote cohesion in the flock . The composition of these flocks varies geographically ; in Amazonia species of Thamnomanes antshrike are the leading nuclear species ; elsewhere other species , such as the dot @-@ winged antwrens and checker @-@ throated antwrens , fill this role . Other species of antwren and antbird join them along with woodcreepers , ant @-@ tanagers , foliage @-@ gleaners and <unk> . The benefits of the mixed flock are thought to be related to predation , since many eyes are better for spotting predatory hawks and falcons . Comparisons between multi @-@ species feeding flocks in different parts of the world found that instances of flocking were positively correlated with predation risk by raptors . For example , where Thamnomanes antshrikes lead the group they give loud warning calls in the presence of predators . These calls are understood and reacted to by all the other species in the flock . The advantage to the Thamnomanes antshrikes is in allowing the rest of the flock , which are typically gleaners , to act as beaters , flushing prey while foraging which the antshrikes can obtain by sallying . Similar roles are filled in other flocks by other antbird species or other bird families , for example the shrike @-@ tanagers . Within the feeding flocks competition is reduced by <unk> partitioning ; where dot @-@ winged antwrens , checker @-@ throated antwrens and white @-@ flanked antwrens feed in flocks together , the dot @-@ wings feed in the densest vines , the white @-@ flank in less dense vegetation , and the checker @-@ throats in the same density as the latter but in dead foliage only . 
 = = = = Ant followers = = = = 
 Swarms of army ants are an important resource used by some species of antbird , and the one from which the family 's common name is derived . Many species of tropical ant form large raiding swarms , but the swarms are often nocturnal or raid underground . While birds visit these swarms when they occur , the species most commonly attended by birds is the Neotropical species Eciton burchellii , which is both diurnal and surface @-@ raiding . It was once thought that attending birds were actually eating the ants , but numerous studies in various parts of Eciton burchellii 's range has shown that the ants act as beaters , flushing insects , other arthropods and small vertebrates into the waiting flocks of " ant followers " . The improvement in foraging efficiency can be dramatic ; a study of spotted antbirds found that they made attempts at prey every 111 @.@ 8 seconds away from ants , but at swarms they made attempts every 32 @.@ 3 seconds . While many species of antbirds ( and other families ) may opportunistically feed at army ant swarms , 18 species of antbird are obligate ant @-@ followers , obtaining most of their diet from swarms . With only three exceptions , these species never regularly forage away from ant swarms . A further four species regularly attend swarms but are as often seen away from them . Obligate ant @-@ followers visit the nesting bivouacs of army ants in the morning to check for raiding activities ; other species do not . These species tend to arrive at swarms first , and their calls are used by other species to locate swarming ants . 
 Because army ants are unpredictable in their movements , it is impractical for obligate ant @-@ followers to maintain a territory that always contains swarms to feed around . Antbirds have evolved a more complicated system than the strict territoriality of most other birds . They generally ( details vary among species ) maintain breeding territories but travel outside those territories in order to feed at swarms . Several pairs of the same species may attend a swarm , with the dominant pair at the swarm being the pair which holds the territory that the swarm is in . In addition to competition within species , competition among species exists , and larger species are dominant . In its range , the ocellated antbird is the largest of the obligate ant @-@ following antbirds and is dominant over other members of the family , although it is subordinate to various species from other families ( including certain woodcreepers , motmots and the rufous @-@ vented ground cuckoo ) . At a swarm , the dominant species occupies positions above the central front of the swarm , which yields the largest amount of prey . Smaller , less dominant species locate themselves further away from the centre , or higher above the location of the dominant species , where prey is less plentiful . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Antbirds are monogamous , in almost all cases forming pair bonds that last the life of the pair . Studies of the dusky antbird and the white @-@ bellied antbird did not find " infidelity " . In the white @-@ plumed antbird divorces between pairs are common , but , as far as known , this species is exceptional . In most species the pair defends a classic territory , although the nesting territories of ant followers are slightly different ( see feeding above ) . Territories vary in size from as small as 0 @.@ 5 ha for the Manu antbird , to 1500 m ( 5000 ft ) in diameter for the ocellated antbird . Ocellated antbirds have an unusual social system where the breeding pair forms the nucleus of a group or clan that includes their male offspring and their mates . These clans , which can number up to eight birds , work together to defend territories against rivals . Pair bonds are formed with courtship feeding , where the male presents food items to the female . In spotted antbirds males may actually feed females sufficiently for the female to cease feeding herself , although she will resume feeding once copulation has occurred . Mutual grooming also plays a role in courtship in some species . 
 The nesting and breeding biology of antbirds have not been well studied . Even in relatively well @-@ known species the breeding behaviour can be poorly known ; for example the nest of the ocellated antbird was first described in 2004 . Nests are constructed by both parents , although the male undertakes more of the work in some species . <unk> nests are cups of vegetation such as twigs , dead leaves and plant fibre , and they follow two basic patterns : either suspended or supported . Suspended cups , which may hang from forks in branches , or between two branches , are the more common style of nest . Supported nests rest upon branches , amongst vines , in hollows , and sometimes on mounds of vegetation on the ground . Each species nests at the level where it forages , so a midstory species would build its nest in the midstory . Closely related species nest in the same ways . For example , antvireos in the genus <unk> are all suspension nesters . 
 Almost all antbirds lay two eggs . A few species of antshrike lay three eggs , and a smaller number of antbirds lay one egg , but this is unusual . Small clutch sizes are typical of tropical birds compared to more temperate species of the same size , possibly due to nest predation , although this is disputed . Both parents participate in incubation , although only the female incubates at night . The length of time taken for chicks to hatch is 14 – 16 days in most species , although some , such as the dusky antbird , can take as long as 20 days . The altricial chicks are born naked and blind . Both parents brood the young until they are able to thermoregulate , although , as with incubation , only the female broods at night . In common with many songbirds , the parents take faecal sacs for disposal away from the nest . Both parents feed the chicks , often bringing large prey items . When the chicks reach fledging age , after 8 – 15 days , attending parents call their chicks . As each chick leaves the nest it is cared for exclusively from then on by the parent that was present then . After the first chick fledges and leaves with a parent the remaining parent may increase the supply of food to speed up the process of fledging . After fledging , chicks spend the first few days well hidden as the parents bring them food . Chicks of some species may not become independent of the parents for as long as four months in some antwrens , but two months is more typical for the rest of the family . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Antbirds are common components of the avifauna of some parts of the Neotropics and are thought to be important in some ecological processes . They are preyed upon by birds of prey , and their tendency to join flocks is thought to provide protection against such predation . The greater round @-@ eared bat preys on some antbird species , such as the white @-@ bibbed antbird and the scaled antbird ; the latter is the bat 's preferred prey . Nests , including incubating adults , chicks and eggs , are vulnerable to predators , particularly snakes but also nocturnal mammals . Nesting success is low for many species , particularly in areas of fragmented habitat . 
 It was once suggested that the relationship between the obligate and regular ant @-@ followers and the army ants , particularly Eciton burchellii , was mutualistic , with the ants benefiting by having the birds chase prey back down towards them . However , experiments where ant followers were excluded have shown that the foraging success of the army ants was 30 % lower when the birds were present , suggesting that the birds ' relationship was in fact parasitic . This has resulted in a number of behaviours by the ants in order to reduce kleptoparasitism , including hiding of secured prey in the leaf litter and caching of food on trails . It has been suggested that the depressive effect of this parasitism slows the development of E. burchellii swarms and in turn benefits other ant species which are preyed upon by army ants . The ant @-@ following antbirds are themselves followed by three species of butterfly in the family <unk> which feed on their droppings . Bird droppings are usually an unpredictable resource in a rainforest , but the regular behaviour of ant followers makes the exploitation of this resource possible . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 As of April 2008 , 38 species are considered by the IUCN to be near threatened or worse and therefore at risk of extinction . Antbirds are neither targeted by the pet trade nor large enough to be hunted ; the principal cause of the decline in antbird species is habitat loss . The destruction or modification of forests has several effects on different species of antbirds . The fragmentation of forests into smaller patches affects species that are averse to crossing gaps as small as roads . If these species become locally extinct in a fragment , this reluctance to cross unforested barriers makes their re @-@ establishment unlikely . Smaller forest fragments are unable to sustain mixed @-@ species feeding flocks , leading to local extinctions . Another risk faced by antbirds in fragmented habitat is increased nest predation . An unplanned experiment in fragmentation occurred on Barro Colorado Island , a former hill in Panama that became an isolated island during the flooding caused by the creation of the Panama Canal . Numerous species of antbird formerly resident in the area were extirpated , in no small part due to increased levels of nest predation on the island . While the species lost from Barro Colorado are not globally threatened , they illustrate the vulnerability of species in fragmented habitats and help explain the declines of some species . The majority of threatened species have very small natural ranges . Some are also extremely poorly known ; for example the Rio de Janeiro antwren is known only from a single specimen collected in 1982 , although there have been unconfirmed reports since 1994 and it is currently listed as critically endangered . Additionally , new species are discovered at regular intervals ; the Caatinga antwren was described in 2000 , the acre antshrike in 2004 , the <unk> antwren in 2007 , and the description of a relative of the Paraná antwren discovered in 2005 in the outskirts of São Paulo is being prepared . While not yet scientifically described , conservation efforts have already been necessary , as the site of discovery was set out to be flooded to form a reservoir . Consequently , 72 individuals were captured and transferred to another locality . 
 = Action of 26 April 1797 = 
 The Action of 26 April 1797 was a minor naval engagement during the French Revolutionary Wars in which a Spanish convoy of two frigates was trapped and defeated off the Spanish town of Conil de la Frontera by British ships of the Cadiz blockade . The British vessels , the ship of the line HMS Irresistible and the Fifth @-@ rate frigate HMS Emerald , were significantly more powerful than the Spanish frigates , which were on the last stage of a voyage carrying treasure from Havana , Cuba , to the Spanish fleet base of Cadiz . 
 The British commander , Captain George Martin , succeeded in chasing the Spanish vessels into the rocky Conil Bay , where they surrendered after a brief engagement in which the Spanish suffered significantly higher casualties than the British . One of the Spanish ships , the Santa Elena , was subsequently wrecked on the shore , while the other , the Ninfa , was captured and later recommissioned into the Royal Navy . The treasure carried on board the frigates , however , had been removed by a Spanish fishing boat before the battle and so did not fall into British hands . 
 = = Background = = 
 In late 1796 , with the French Revolutionary Wars three years old , a major shift occurred in the conflict when the Kingdom of Spain , until that point an enemy of the French Republic , abruptly changed sides following the signing of the Treaty of San Ildefonso . This reversal forced the British Royal Navy to retire from the Mediterranean Sea to preserve its lines of communication , falling back to the mouth of the Tagus River near Lisbon . From the Tagus , pressure was placed on the Spanish Navy by the erstwhile British Mediterranean Fleet under Vice @-@ Admiral Sir John Jervis , who organised a blockade of the main Spanish fleet base at Cádiz on the country 's Southern Atlantic coast . This resulted in the Battle of Cape St. Vincent on 14 February 1797 , when Jervis inflicted a stinging defeat on the Spanish fleet . The surviving Spanish ships limped back to Cádiz after the battle , and to ensure that they could not sail again without risking a repeat action , Jervis arranged a close blockade of the port so that by April there were 21 British ships of the line and numerous frigates watching the Spanish fleet at anchor . 
 The blockade of Cádiz was designed not only to contain the main Spanish fleet , but also to disrupt Spanish communications and transport . Cádiz was the principal port of Southern Spain and thus an important destination for shipping from across the Spanish Empire . This included numerous so @-@ called " treasure ships " , heavily armed warships that convoyed the gold and silver from the Spanish colonies in the Americas to the Spanish mainland . For centuries , Spanish treasure ships had been the ultimate prize for Royal Navy captains , and the sums of prize money involved were enormous . In October 1799 for example , a Spanish treasure convoy was captured off Vigo and the British captains alone were awarded £ 40 @,@ 730 each ( the equivalent of £ 3 @,@ 608 @,@ 900 as of 2016 ) . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 06 : 00 on 26 April 1797 , the 74 @-@ gun ship of the line HMS Irresistible under Captain George Martin and the 36 @-@ gun frigate HMS Emerald under Captain <unk> Cornewall Berkeley were sailing at the southern edge of Jervis ' ( now known as Earl St. Vincent ) fleet . While cruising close to the Spanish coast two unknown ships were sighted . Martin immediately ordered his ships to give chase and the strangers fled with Martin 's vessels in pursuit . The new arrivals were two Spanish 34 @-@ gun frigates , the Santa Elena and Ninfa , bound to Cádiz from Havana with a cargo of silver specie . The captains of these Spanish ships had unwittingly sailed into the midst of the blockade fleet the previous night , but had had a fortunate encounter with a Spanish fishing vessel which had warned them of the danger . Acting quickly , the captains off @-@ loaded their treasure into the fishing boat with instructions to carry it safely into Cádiz . 
 The Spanish captains , recognising that they were outmatched by the larger British vessels , attempted to shelter in Conil Bay , a rocky stretch of coastline near the village of Conil de la Frontera to the north of Cape Trafalgar . At 14 : 30 they were discovered by Martin 's ships , which had to carefully negotiate a large rock formation known as the <unk> de Cape Rocha which protected the head of the bay . With this obstacle successfully behind them , Irresistible and Emerald attacked the anchored Spanish frigates broadside to broadside . The action lasted an hour and a half , with the Spanish ships taking much the worst of the damage . At 16 : 00 , both battered Spanish vessels surrendered , although as the British ships launched boats to take possession of their prizes , the crew of Santa Elena hacked through the anchor cables and allowed their ship to drift onto the rocky shoreline where they disembarked and escaped inland . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Martin ordered Ninfa to be secured by his men and Santa Elena to be towed off the rocks with the intention of salvaging the vessel . The tow succeeded in freeing the wrecked ship , but she sank soon afterwards in the deeper water of Conil Bay . All of the treasure which the Spanish frigates had carried was subsequently safely transported into Cadiz by the fishing boat whose secret cargo was not suspected by the British blockade forces . Spanish losses in the engagement amounted to 18 killed and 30 wounded , the British losing one man killed and one wounded on Irresistible . Ninfa was subsequently purchased by the Royal Navy and commissioned as the 36 @-@ gun frigate HMS <unk> . In his dispatch to the Admiralty regarding the action , Earl St. Vincent noted that the action was " one of the most notable that had ever come under my observation " . The blockade of Cadiz remained in force with varying degrees of intensity for the remainder of the year , with the British fleet retiring to the Tagus during the winter . 
 = HMS Defence ( 1861 ) = 
 HMS Defence was the lead ship of the Defence @-@ class armoured frigates ordered by the Royal Navy in 1859 . Upon completion in 1862 she was assigned to the Channel Fleet . The ship was paid off in 1866 to refit and be re @-@ armed and was briefly reassigned to the Channel Fleet again when she recommissioned in 1868 . Defence had brief tours on the North Atlantic and Mediterranean Stations , relieving other ironclads , from 1869 to 1872 before she was refitted again from 1872 to 1874 . She became guard ship on the Shannon when she recommissioned . The ship was transferred to the Channel Fleet again in 1876 and then became guard ship on the Mersey until 1885 . Defence was placed in reserve until 1890 when she was assigned to the mechanical training school in Devonport in 1890 . She was renamed Indus when the school adopted that name and served there until sold in 1935 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Defence @-@ class ironclads were designed as smaller and cheaper versions of the Warrior @-@ class armoured frigates . This meant that they could not fit the same powerful engines of the Warrior @-@ class ships and were therefore 2 knots ( 3 @.@ 7 km / h ; 2 @.@ 3 mph ) slower and had far fewer guns . The naval architect Sir Nathaniel Barnaby , a future Constructor of the Navy , considered that in terms of combat a Defence @-@ class ship was worth one quarter of a Warrior . 
 HMS Defence was 280 feet ( 85 @.@ 3 m ) long between perpendiculars and 291 feet 4 inches ( 88 @.@ 80 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 54 feet 2 inches ( 16 @.@ 51 m ) and a draft of 26 feet 2 inches ( 8 @.@ 0 m ) . The ship displaced 6 @,@ 070 long tons ( 6 @,@ 170 t ) and had a ram in the shape of a plough . The hull was subdivided by watertight transverse bulkheads into 92 compartments and had a double bottom underneath the engine and boiler rooms . Defence was 128 feet 8 inches ( 39 @.@ 2 m ) shorter overall and displaced over 3 @,@ 000 long tons ( 3 @,@ 000 t ) less than the Warrior @-@ class ironclads . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Defence @-@ class ships had one 2 @-@ cylinder trunk steam engine made by John Penn and Sons driving a single propeller . Four rectangular boilers provided steam to the engine . It produced a total of 2 @,@ 343 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 747 kW ) . During sea trials on 10 February 1868 Defence had a maximum speed of 11 @.@ 23 knots ( 20 @.@ 80 km / h ; 12 @.@ 92 mph ) . The ship carried 450 long tons ( 460 t ) of coal , enough to steam 1 @,@ 670 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 090 km ; 1 @,@ 920 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ironclads were barque @-@ rigged and had a sail area of 24 @,@ 500 square feet ( 2 @,@ 276 m2 ) . The lower masts and bowsprit were made of iron to withstand the shock of ramming . Defence could make about 10 @.@ 5 knots ( 19 @.@ 4 km / h ; 12 @.@ 1 mph ) under sail and the funnel was semi @-@ retractable to reduce wind resistance while under sail alone . The ship 's propeller could be hoisted up into the stern of the ship to reduce drag while under sail . She was re @-@ rigged as a barque from September 1864 to April 1866 before returning to her original ship rig . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The armament of the Defence @-@ class ships was intended to be 18 smoothbore , muzzle @-@ loading 68 @-@ pounder guns , eight on each side on the main deck and one each fore and aft as chase guns on the upper deck , plus four rifled breech @-@ loading 40 @-@ pounder guns as saluting guns . This was modified during construction to eight rifled 110 @-@ pounder breech @-@ loading guns , ten 68 @-@ pounders and four breech @-@ loading 5 @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) guns . Both breech @-@ loading guns were new designs from Armstrong and much was hoped of them . Six of the 110 @-@ pounder guns were installed on the main deck amidships and the other two became chase guns ; all of the 68 @-@ pounder guns were mounted on the main deck . Firing tests carried out in September 1861 against an armoured target , however , proved that the 110 @-@ pounder was inferior to the 68 @-@ pounder smoothbore gun in armour penetration and repeated incidents of breech explosions during the Battles for Shimonoseki and the Bombardment of Kagoshima in 1863 – 64 caused the navy to begin to withdraw the gun from service shortly afterwards . 
 The 7 @.@ 9 @-@ inch ( 201 mm ) solid shot of the 68 @-@ pounder gun weighed approximately 68 pounds ( 30 @.@ 8 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 10 @,@ 640 pounds ( 4 @,@ 826 @.@ 2 kg ) . The gun had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 579 ft / s ( 481 m / s ) and had a range of 3 @,@ 200 yards ( 2 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of + 12 ° . The 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) shell of the 110 @-@ pounder Armstrong breech @-@ loader weighed 107 – 110 pounds ( 48 @.@ 5 – 49 @.@ 9 kg ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 150 ft / s ( 350 m / s ) and , at an elevation of + 11 @.@ 25 ° , a maximum range of 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) . The 110 @-@ pounder gun weighed 9 @,@ 520 pounds ( 4 @,@ 318 @.@ 2 kg ) . All of the guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 Defence was rearmed during her 1867 – 68 refit with fourteen 7 @-@ inch and two 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . The new guns were heavier so fewer could be carried . The shell of the 15 @-@ calibre 8 @-@ inch gun weighed 175 pounds ( 79 @.@ 4 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 9 long tons ( 9 @.@ 1 t ) . It had a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 410 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal 9 @.@ 6 inches ( 244 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The 16 @-@ calibre 7 @-@ inch gun weighed 6 @.@ 5 long tons ( 6 @.@ 6 t ) and fired a 112 pounds ( 50 @.@ 8 kg ) shell . It was credited with the nominal ability to penetrate 7 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) armour . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The Defence @-@ class ships had a wrought iron armour belt , 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) thick , that covered 140 feet ( 42 @.@ 7 m ) amidships . The armour extended from upper deck level to 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) below it . 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch transverse bulkheads protected the guns on the main deck . The armour was backed by 18 inches ( 460 mm ) of teak . The ends of the ship were left entirely unprotected which meant that the steering gear was very vulnerable . They were , however , sub @-@ divided into many watertight compartments to minimize any flooding . 
 = = Service = = 
 HMS Defence was laid down on 14 December 1859 by the Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company in Jarrow . She was launched on 24 April 1861 , commissioned on 4 December 1861 and completed on 12 February 1862 . After completion she served in the Channel Fleet until 1866 , when she paid off in Plymouth for refit and re @-@ armament . The ship returned to the Channel Fleet in 1868 , and in 1869 she was sent to the North America station to relieve HMS Royal Alfred . She served with the Mediterranean Fleet from 1871 to 1872 under the command of Captain Nowell Salmon , who had earned the Victoria Cross during the Indian Mutiny in 1857 . While recovering items lost when the ironclad HMS Lord Clyde grounded off Pantelleria , Defence damaged her propeller and rudder when she briefly grounded in the trough of a wave , and was nearly blown ashore herself in March 1872 . She was paid off again for a lengthy refit in Plymouth between 1872 and 1874 and became the guard ship on the Shannon until 1876 . The ship then rejoined the Channel Fleet until 1879 and was transferred with most of that fleet to the Mediterranean while the Mediterranean Fleet patrolled the Dardanelles during the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1878 . Defence replaced her sister ship HMS Resistance as guard ship in the Mersey until 1885 , after which she saw no further sea @-@ going service . On 20 July 1884 the ship collided with HMS Valiant in Lough Swilly , damaging her bow and flooding some compartments . In 1890 she was converted into a floating workshop at Devonport , and was renamed HMS Indus in 1898 . She was sold for scrap at Devonport in August 1935 . 
 = Inolvidable ( song ) = 
 " Inolvidable " ( " Unforgettable " ) is a song written by Julio Gutiérrez in 1944 . It is considered one of the most popular boleros released during the Cuban musical movement led by pianists . The song has been recorded by several performers , including Roberto Carlos , Diego El Cigala , Fania All @-@ Stars , Eydie <unk> , Danny Rivera , Tito Rodríguez and Bebo Valdés , among others . 
 In the song , the protagonist kisses different lips looking for new sensations , haunted by the memory of a past love . The song has experienced popular acclaim , especially with the version recorded by Mexican singer Luis Miguel on his album Romance released in 1991 . This version peaked at the top of the Billboard Top Latin Songs chart in the United States , and the album was deemed as responsible for reviving the bolero genre . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Inolvidable " was written by Cuban pianist Julio Gutiérrez . Gutiérrez was born in Manzanillo , Cuba , and at age six he played piano and at 14 he directed his own orchestra . In 1940 , the Orchestra Casino de la Playa toured eastern Cuba , and on that tour <unk> Valdés met Gutiérrez and suggested he should go to the capital ( Havana ) , where better opportunities would arise . Months later , Gutiérrez moved to the capital , and was hired as a pianist in the orchestra Casino de la Playa . " Inolvidable " , written in 1944 , was released during the Cuban musical movement led by pianists , in which Gutiérrez participated . Two songs composed by Gutiérrez , " Inolvidable " and " <unk> de Luna " ( " Crying Moon " ) , were highly successful boleros in Latin America . In 1992 , a compilation album including an instrumental version of the song performed by Gutiérrez was released . 
 Musically " Inolvidable " is a bolero . According to Rodrigo Bazán , in his book Y Si Vivo Cien Años ... Antología del Bolero en México , the song was not different from others that were released at the time about unhappy love , but differed from other popular genres that based their lyrics on the lack of love such as tango . With the song , Julio Gutiérrez joined the list of prominent <unk> in Cuba . Lyrically , the song presents the protagonist kissing different lips and looking for new sensations ( " He <unk> otras <unk> <unk> nuevas <unk> " ) . 
 = = Performers = = 
 In 1963 , Tito Rodríguez recorded " Inolvidable " on his album From Tito Rodríguez with Love . The song became very successful , selling one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half million units . Musical ensemble Fania All @-@ Stars released their first studio album Tribute to Tito Rodríguez in 1976 and included a cover version of " Inolvidable " . The album was originally intended to feature the group in a supporting role for Rodríguez , but resulted in a tribute album after the singer died from leukemia in early 1973 . Brazilian singer @-@ songwriter Roberto Carlos included his version of the song on the album <unk> Que <unk> Tudo Pro Inferno in 1975 . Puerto @-@ Rican Danny Rivera recorded a tribute album titled Inolvidable Tito : A Mi Me Pasa lo Mismo Que a Usted , including a version of " Inolvidable " . The album received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Latin Pop Performance . In 1988 , American singer Eydie <unk> had her version of the track on the album De Corazón a Corazón . Cuban pianist Bebo Valdés and Spanish flamenco performer Diego El Cigala recorded the track for their collaborative album Lágrimas Negras . The album was produced in 2003 by Academy Award winner Fernando Trueba , sold 200 @,@ 000 units in Spain and won the Latin Grammy Award for Best Traditional Tropical Album . 
 = = = Luis Miguel version = = = 
 Mexican singer Luis Miguel released the 1991 album Romance , which was produced by Miguel and Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Armando Manzanero , and included a selection of classic boleros . The success of the album revived the interest for bolero , even though the new musical arrangements of the songs make them unrecognizable . Romance received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Latin Pop Album ( which it lost to Jon Secada 's Otro Día Más Sin Verte ) , was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America and sold seven million copies worldwide . The first single taken from the album was " Inolvidable " , a version that according to Carlos <unk> in his book Los <unk> del <unk> , guarantees " the adoption of the past , and that the romantic sensibility is not dead . " 
 The track debuted in the Billboard Top Latin Songs chart ( formerly Hot Latin Tracks ) at number 30 in the week of November 23 , 1991 , climbing to the top ten three weeks later . " Inolvidable " peaked at number one on January 25 , 1992 , spending five weeks at the top of the chart . The song was number three on the Billboard Top Latin Songs Year @-@ End Chart of 1992 . In Mexico , the song and the following single ( " No Sé Tú " ) remained in the top of the charts for six months altogether . 
 A live version of " Inolvidable " was included on the EP América & En Vivo in 1992 and as a part of a medley with the rest of the singles taken from Romance on the live album Vivo ( 2000 ) . The track was also added to the compilation album Grandes Éxitos in 2005 . 
 = = = = Format and track listing = = = = 
 Mexican Promo CD Single 
 " Inolvidable " – 4 : 19 
 = = = = Credits and personnel = = = = 
 Credits adapted from the " Inolvidable " liner notes . 
 Luis Miguel – co @-@ production , vocals 
 Julio Gutiérrez – songwriting 
 Armando Manzanero – production 
 Bebu Silvetti – co @-@ production , arranging 
 = Spanish conquest of Petén = 
 The Spanish conquest of Petén was the last stage of the conquest of Guatemala , a prolonged conflict during the Spanish colonisation of the Americas . A wide lowland plain covered with dense rainforest , Petén contains a central drainage basin with a series of lakes and areas of savannah . It is crossed by several ranges of low karstic hills and rises to the south as it nears the Guatemalan Highlands . The conquest of Petén , a region now incorporated into the modern republic of Guatemala , climaxed in 1697 with the capture of Nojpetén , the island capital of the Itza kingdom , by Martín de Ursúa y Arizmendi . With the defeat of the Itza , the last independent and unconquered native kingdom in the Americas fell to European colonisers . 
 Sizeable Maya populations existed in Petén before the conquest , particularly around the central lakes and along the rivers . Petén was divided into different Maya polities engaged in a complex web of alliances and enmities . The most important groups around the central lakes were the Itza , the Yalain and the Kowoj . Other groups with territories in Petén included the Kejache , the Acala , the Lakandon Ch 'ol , the Xocmo , the Chinamita , the Icaiche and the Manche Ch 'ol . 
 Petén was first penetrated by Hernán Cortés with a sizeable expedition that crossed the territory from north to south in 1525 . In the first half of the 16th century , Spain established neighbouring colonies in Yucatán to the north and Guatemala to the south . Spanish missionaries laid the groundwork for the extension of colonial administration in the extreme south of Petén from 1596 onwards , but no further Spanish entry of central Petén took place until 1618 and 1619 when missionaries arrived at the Itza capital , having travelled from the Spanish town of Mérida in Yucatán . 
 In 1622 a military expedition set out from Yucatán led by Captain Francisco de Mirones and accompanied by Franciscan friar Diego Delgado ; this expedition was a disaster , and the Spanish were massacred by the Itza . In 1628 the Manche Ch 'ol of the south were placed under the administration of the colonial governor of Verapaz within the Captaincy General of Guatemala . The Manche Ch 'ol unsuccessfully rebelled against Spanish control in 1633 . In 1695 a military expedition tried to reach Lake Petén Itzá from Guatemala ; this was followed in 1696 by missionaries from Mérida and in 1697 by Martín de Ursúa 's expedition from Yucatán that resulted in the final defeat of the independent kingdoms of central Petén and their incorporation into the Spanish Empire . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The modern department of Petén is located in northern Guatemala . It is bordered on the west by the Mexican state of Chiapas ; this border largely follows the course of the Usumacinta River . On the north side Petén is bordered by the Mexican state of Campeche and on the northwest by the Mexican state of Tabasco ; Petén is bordered on the east by Belize and on the south side by the Guatemalan departments of Alta Verapaz and Izabal . 
 The Petén lowlands are formed by a densely forested low @-@ lying limestone plain featuring karstic topography . The area is crossed by low east – west oriented ridges of Cenozoic limestone and is characterised by a variety of forest and soil types ; water sources include generally small rivers and low @-@ lying seasonal swamps known as bajos . A chain of fourteen lakes runs across the central drainage basin of Petén ; during the rainy season some of these lakes become interconnected . This drainage area measures approximately 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) east – west by 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) north – south . The largest lake is Lake Petén Itzá , near the centre of the drainage basin ; it measures 32 by 5 kilometres ( 19 @.@ 9 by 3 @.@ 1 mi ) . A broad savannah extends south of the central lakes ; it has an average altitude of 150 metres ( 490 ft ) above mean sea level with karstic ridges reaching an average altitude of 300 metres ( 980 ft ) . The savannah features a compact red clay soil that is too poor to support heavy cultivation , which resulted in a relatively low level of pre @-@ Columbian occupation . It is surrounded by hills with unusually steep southern slopes and gentler northern approaches ; the hills are covered with dense tropical forest . To the north of the lakes region bajos become more frequent , interspersed with forest . In the far north of Petén the Mirador Basin forms another interior drainage region . To the south Petén reaches an altitude of approximately 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) as it rises towards the Guatemalan Highlands and meets Paleozoic metamorphic rocks . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The climate of Petén is divided into wet and dry seasons , with the rainy season lasting from June to December , although these seasons are not clearly defined in the south . The climate varies from tropical in the south to semitropical in the north ; temperature varies between 12 and 40 ° C ( 54 and 104 ° F ) , although it does not usually drop beneath 18 ° C ( 64 ° F ) . Mean temperature varies from 24 @.@ 3 ° C ( 75 @.@ 7 ° F ) in the southeast around <unk> to 26 @.@ 9 ° C ( 80 @.@ 4 ° F ) around Uaxactún in the northeast . Highest temperatures are reached from April to June , and January is the coldest month ; all Petén experiences a hot dry period in late August . Annual precipitation is high , varying from a mean of 1 @,@ 198 millimetres ( 47 @.@ 2 in ) in the northeast to 2 @,@ 007 millimetres ( 79 @.@ 0 in ) in central Petén around Flores ( Nojpetén ) . The extreme southeast of Petén experiences the largest variations in temperature and rainfall , with precipitation reaching as much as 3 @,@ 000 millimetres ( 120 in ) in a year . 
 = = Petén before the conquest = = 
 The first large Maya cities developed in Petén as far back as the Middle Preclassic ( c . 600 – 350 BC ) , and Petén formed the heartland of the ancient Maya civilization during the Classic period ( c . AD 250 – 900 ) . The great cities that dominated Petén had fallen into ruin by the beginning of the 10th century AD with the onset of the Classic Maya collapse . A significant Maya presence remained into the Postclassic period after the abandonment of the major Classic period cities ; the population was particularly concentrated near permanent water sources . 
 Although there is insufficient data to accurately estimate population sizes at the time of contact with the Spanish , early Spanish reports suggest that sizeable Maya populations existed in Petén , particularly around the central lakes and along the rivers . Before their defeat in 1697 the Itza controlled or influenced much of Petén and parts of Belize . The Itza were warlike , and their martial prowess impressed both neighbouring Maya kingdoms and their Spanish enemies . Their capital was Nojpetén , an island city upon Lake Petén Itzá ; it has developed into the modern town of Flores , which is the capital of the Petén department of Guatemala . The Itza spoke a variety of Yucatecan Maya . 
 The Kowoj were the second in importance , and they were hostile towards their Itza neighbours . The Kowoj were located to the east of the Itza , around the eastern lakes : Lake Salpetén , Lake Macanché , Lake Yaxhá and Lake Sacnab . Other groups are less well known , and their precise territorial extent and political makeup remains obscure ; among them were the Chinamita , the Kejache , the Icaiche , the Lakandon Ch 'ol , the Mopan , the Manche Ch 'ol and the Yalain . 
 The Yalain appear to have been one of the three dominant polities in Postclassic central Petén , alongside the Itza and the Kowoj . The Yalain territory had its maximum extension from the east shore of Lake Petén Itzá eastwards to Tipuj in Belize . In the 17th century the Yalain capital was located at the site of that name on the north shore of Lake Macanché . At the time of Spanish contact the Yalain were allied with the Itza , an alliance cemented by intermarriage between the elites of both groups . In the late 17th century Spanish colonial records document hostilities between Maya groups in the lakes region , with the incursion of the Kowoj into former Yalain sites including <unk> on Lake Macanché and <unk> on Lake Salpetén . 
 The Kejache occupied a territory to the north of the Itza , between the lakes and what is now Campeche . To the west of them was Acalan , inhabited by a Chontal Maya @-@ speaking group with their capital in the south of what is now Campeche state . The Ch 'olan Maya @-@ speaking Lakandon ( not to be confused with the modern inhabitants of Chiapas by that name ) controlled territory along the tributaries of the Usumacinta River spanning southwestern Petén in Guatemala and eastern Chiapas . The Lakandon had a fierce reputation among the Spanish . The Xocmo were another Ch 'olan @-@ speaking group ; they occupied the remote forest somewhere to the east of the Lakandon . Never conquered , the Xocmo escaped repeated Spanish attempts to locate them and their eventual fate is unknown ; they may be ancestors of the modern Lacandon people . The Manche Ch 'ol held territory in the extreme south of what is now the Petén department . The Mopan and the Chinamita had their polities in the southeastern Petén . The Manche territory was to the southwest of the Mopan . 
 = = Background to the conquest = = 
 Christopher Columbus discovered the Americas for the Kingdom of Castile and León in 1492 . By 1580 this had unified with neighbouring kingdoms to form one Spanish kingdom . Private adventurers thereafter entered into contracts with the Spanish Crown to conquer the newly discovered lands in return for tax revenues and the power to rule . In the first decades after the discovery , the Spanish colonised the Caribbean and established a centre of operations on the island of Cuba . They heard rumours of the rich empire of the Aztecs on the mainland to the west and , in 1519 , Hernán Cortés set sail with eleven ships to explore the Mexican coast . By August 1521 the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan had fallen to the Spanish . Within three years of the fall of Tenochtitlan the Spanish had conquered a large part of Mexico , extending as far south as the Isthmus of Tehuantepec . The newly conquered territory became New Spain , headed by a viceroy who answered to the Spanish Crown via the Council of the Indies . Cortés despatched Pedro de Alvarado with an army to conquer the Mesoamerican kingdoms of the Guatemalan Sierra Madre and neighbouring Pacific plain ; the military phase of the establishment of the Spanish colony of Guatemala lasted from 1524 to 1541 . The Captaincy General of Guatemala had its capital at Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala and covered a wide territory that also included the Mexican state of Chiapas as well as El Salvador , Honduras and Costa Rica . The Spanish imposed colonial rule over Yucatán between 1527 and 1546 , and over Verapaz from the 16th to the 17th centuries , leaving the area between – essentially Petén and much of Belize – independent long after surrounding peoples had been subjugated . 
 = = Impact of Old World diseases = = 
 A single soldier arriving in Mexico in 1520 was carrying smallpox and thus initiated the devastating plagues that swept through the native populations of the Americas . The European diseases that ravaged the indigenous inhabitants of the Americas also severely affected the various Maya groups of Petén . It is estimated that there were approximately 30 @,@ 000 Ch 'ol and Ch ’ <unk> ’ Maya in western Petén at the start of the 16th century . Between 1559 and 1721 they were devastated by a combination of disease , war and enforced relocations . 
 When Nojpetén fell in 1696 there were approximately 60 @,@ 000 Maya living around Lake Petén Itzá , including a considerable number of refugees from other areas . It is estimated that 88 % of the inhabitants died during the first decade of colonial rule because of disease and war . Although disease was responsible for the majority of deaths , internecine warfare between rival Maya groups and Spanish expeditions also took their toll . 
 = = Weaponry and armour = = 
 Conquistadors often wore steel armour that included chainmail and helmets . The Spanish were sufficiently impressed by the quilted cotton armour of their Maya enemies that they adopted it in preference to their own steel armour . Maya weaponry was not sufficiently powerful to justify the discomfort of wearing European armour . Quilted cotton armour , although still uncomfortably hot , was flexible and weighed much less . The Maya armour was adapted by the Spanish , who used knee @-@ length quilted cotton tunics and Spanish @-@ style caps . Horsemen wore long quilted cotton leg protectors ; their horses were also protected with padded cotton armour . After the final push to the Petén lakes in early 1697 , the Spanish recorded that they left with their garrison over 50 Dutch- and French @-@ made muskets , three 1 @-@ pound ( 0 @.@ 45 kg ) calibre light cannons ( <unk> ) cast from iron and mounted on carriages , four iron and two bronze <unk> ( 2 @-@ chambered stone @-@ launchers ) and six of at least eight bronze light cannons ( known as <unk> ) . 
 = = = Native weaponry = = = 
 The Spanish described the weapons of war of the Petén Maya as bows and arrows , fire @-@ sharpened poles , flint @-@ headed spears and two @-@ handed swords known as <unk> that were crafted from strong wood with the blade fashioned from inset obsidian ; these were similar to the Aztec macuahuitl . They had a thin , wide wooden shaft with obsidian or flint blades set into channels in the wood . The shaft was up to 80 centimetres ( 31 in ) long and was crafted from the hard , dark wood of a flowering tree ( <unk> paniculata ) called chulul by the Maya . The bows used by the Maya were described as almost as high as a man and were made from the same chulul wood as the <unk> , with the bowstring fashioned from <unk> fibre ; the bow was called a <unk> . Arrows were made from reeds with flint , bone or <unk> arrowheads and flights crafted from feathers . In hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat the Maya used daggers with obsidian or flint blades set into a chulul @-@ wood handle , they were about 20 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) long . Maya spears were referred to as <unk> ; sometimes the tip was fire @-@ hardened , sometimes they were set with a stone blade . Spears were mainly used to thrust and slash but they could also be thrown as a javelin . The Maya used several different sizes of spear with the smaller spears probably employed as a missile ; the longer spears were a similar size as those used by the Spanish . 
 Distinguished Maya warriors entered battle wearing armour . The upper body was covered by a short jacket that was filled with rock salt , and the forearms and legs were protected with tight bindings of cloth or leather . The salt @-@ packed cotton armour was tough enough that even arrows could not penetrate it . Armour could be decorated and was often adorned with feathers . Commoners did not wear armour in battle , usually only wearing a loincloth and <unk> . Warriors carried shields made from two right @-@ angled wooden bars with deerskin stretched across them . 
 = = Strategies and tactics = = 
 The Spanish were aware that the Itza Maya had become the centre of anti @-@ Spanish resistance and engaged in a policy of encircling their kingdom and cutting their trade routes over the course of almost two hundred years . The Itza resisted this steady encroachment by recruiting their neighbours as allies against the Spanish advance . The Spanish engaged in a strategy of concentrating native populations in newly founded colonial towns , or reducciones ( also known as congregaciones ) . Native resistance to the new nucleated settlements took the form of the flight of the indigenous inhabitants into inaccessible regions such as the forest or joining neighbouring Maya groups that had not yet submitted to the Spanish . Those that remained behind in the reducciones often fell victim to contagious diseases . 
 In addition to military expeditions , a contract for conquest was issued to the Dominican Order , which engaged missionaries for the peaceful pacification of native populations so they would accept Roman Catholicism and submit to Spanish rule . This tactic worked in the neighbouring mountains of Verapaz to the south , although their success there was aided by the threat of Spanish garrisons stationed within striking distance . In the lowland Petén this approach was not so successful , since the Maya could disappear easily into the rainforest leaving the Spanish with deserted settlements . Likewise , the Franciscan Order engaged in generally peaceful attempts to incorporate the Maya into the Spanish Empire via the attempted Christian conversion of native leaders . The Franciscan Order routinely embraced the practice of missionary violence , including corporal punishment and the defence of the idea of " holy war " against non @-@ Christians . In many cases the Maya remained Christian only while the missionaries were present , and they would immediately become apostate as soon as the friars left . In Guatemala in the late 17th century , the Franciscan friar Francisco de Asís Vázquez de Herrera argued that war against apostate Indians was obligatory . Missionary penetration of Petén was not risk @-@ free , and many missionaries were killed in the region . 
 Independent Maya frequently attacked Christianised Maya settlements and encouraged such settlements to abandon their new religion and resist the Spanish . As Spanish military expeditions were launched against the Maya with increasing frequency , independent Maya communities began to request the presence of missionaries to avoid armed conflict . The Itza attempted to use neighbouring Maya groups , such as the Yalain , as a buffer against Spanish encroachment ; they may also have instigated rebellions by neighbouring groups that were already undergoing incorporation into the Spanish Empire . With Spanish attempts to penetrate the region divided between mutually independent colonial authorities in Yucatán and Guatemala , at times the Itza would be making peaceful overtures on one front while fighting on the other . 
 = = Cortés in Petén = = 
 In 1525 , after the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire , Hernán Cortés led an expedition to Honduras over land , cutting across the Itza kingdom in what is now the northern Petén Department of Guatemala . His aim was to subdue the rebellious Cristóbal de Olid , whom he had sent to conquer Honduras ; Olid had set himself up independently on his arrival in that territory . Cortés had 140 Spanish soldiers , 93 of them mounted , 3 @,@ 000 Mexican warriors , 150 horses , a herd of pigs , artillery , munitions and other supplies . He also had with him 600 Chontal Maya carriers from Acalan . They arrived at the north shore of Lake Petén Itzá on 13 March 1525 . 
 The Roman Catholic priests accompanying the expedition celebrated mass in the presence of Aj Kan Ek ' , the king of the Itza , who was said to be so impressed that he pledged to worship the cross and to destroy his idols . Cortés accepted an invitation from Kan Ek ' to visit Nojpetén ( also known as Tayasal ) , and crossed to the Maya city with 20 Spanish soldiers while the rest of his army continued around the lake to meet him on the south shore . On his departure from Nojpetén , Cortés left behind a cross and a lame horse that the Itza treated as a deity , attempting to feed it poultry , meat and flowers , but the animal soon died . The Spanish did not officially contact the Itza again until the arrival of Franciscan priests in 1618 , when Cortés ' cross was said to still be standing at Nojpetén . 
 From the lake , Cortés continued south along the western slopes of the Maya Mountains , a particularly arduous journey that took 12 days to cover 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) , during which he lost more than two @-@ thirds of his horses . When he came to a river swollen with the constant torrential rains that had been falling during the expedition , Cortés turned upstream to the Gracias a Dios rapids , which took two days to cross and cost him more horses . 
 On 15 April 1525 the expedition arrived at the Maya village of Tenciz . With local guides they headed into the hills north of Lake Izabal , where their guides abandoned them to their fate . The expedition became lost in the hills and came close to starvation before they captured a Maya boy who led them to safety . Cortés found a village on the shore of Lake Izabal , perhaps Xocolo . He crossed the Dulce River to the settlement of Nito , somewhere on the Amatique Bay , with about a dozen companions , and waited there for the rest of his army to regroup over the next week . By this time the remnants of the expedition had been reduced to a few hundred ; Cortés succeeded in contacting the Spaniards he was searching for , only to find that Cristóbal de Olid 's own officers had already put down his rebellion . Cortés then returned to Mexico by sea . 
 = = Prelude to conquest = = 
 From 1527 onwards the Spanish were increasingly active in the Yucatán Peninsula , establishing several colonies and towns by 1544 , including Campeche and Valladolid in what is now Mexico . The Spanish impact on the northern Maya , encompassing invasion , epidemic diseases and the export of up to 50 @,@ 000 Maya slaves , caused many Maya to flee southwards to join the Itza around Lake Petén Itzá , within the modern borders of Guatemala . 
 Dominican missionaries were active in Verapaz and the southern Petén from the late 16th century through the 17th century , attempting non @-@ violent conversion with limited success . In the 17th century , the Franciscans came to the conclusion that the pacification and Christian conversion of the Maya would not be possible as long as the Itza held out at Lake Petén Itzá . The constant flow of escapees fleeing the Spanish @-@ held territories to find refuge with the Itza was a drain on the workforce managed by the encomienda system . 
 = = = Missions in southern Petén = = = 
 The first Catholic missionaries entered southern Petén in 1596 to convert the Manche Ch 'ol and the Mopan . The Q 'eqchi ' of Verapaz long had close ties with the Manche Ch 'ol . The colonial Maya towns of Cobán and Cahabón , in Alta Verapaz , traded quetzal feathers , copal , chile , cotton , salt and Spanish @-@ produced iron tools with their lowland Lakandon and Manche Ch 'ol neighbours , receiving cacao and <unk> in exchange . Many Q 'eqchi ' from Verapaz fled Spanish control to settle among the <unk> and Manche Ch 'ol . These fugitives strengthened the existing ties between the independent Ch 'ol and the Spanish @-@ controlled Maya of Verapaz ; the constant flow of Maya between colonial Verapaz and independent Petén led to religious syncretism that the Spanish religious authorities were unable to prevent . This relationship did not hinder the Spanish from using the Q 'eqchi ' to help conquer and reduce the Manche Ch 'ol . 
 From the middle of the 16th century the Dominican Order had been tasked with the peaceful conversion of the Ch 'ol of Verapaz and southern Petén , and their concentration into new colonial towns . The Itza became fearful that the newly converted Manche Ch 'ol would lead the Spanish to Nojpetén . In 1628 the towns of the Manche Ch 'ol were placed under the administration of the governor of Verapaz , with Dominican friar Francisco Morán as their ecclesiastical head . Morán favoured a more robust approach to the conversion of the Manche and moved Spanish soldiers into the region to protect against raids from the Itza to the north . The new Spanish garrison in an area that had not previously seen a heavy Spanish military presence provoked the Manche to revolt , which was followed by abandonment of the indigenous settlements . The Itza , worried about the southern approaches to their territory , may have instigated a Manche rebellion that took place in Lent 1633 . 
 Towards the end of the 17th century Spanish priorities changed , and the failure of the peaceful efforts of the Dominicans to convert the Ch 'ol combined with the increasing British presence in the Caribbean led the colonial authorities to end the Dominican monopoly and allow the Franciscans and other orders to enter the region ; military options were also viewed more favourably . Between 1685 and 1689 , the Q 'eqchi ' of Cobán and Cahabón were forced to assist the Spanish in their armed expeditions against the Manche Ch 'ol and in forcibly relocating them to Verapaz . These actions depopulated the southern Petén and led to the breakdown of the trade routes linking colonial Guatemala with the independent Maya of Petén . From 1692 to 1694 , Franciscan friars Antonio Margil and Melchor López were active among the Manche and Lakandon Ch 'ol . They were eventually expelled by the Ch 'ol ; upon their return to Santiago de Guatemala they proposed three invasion routes into southern Petén and neighbouring Chiapas . Throughout the 17th century , Spanish missionaries encountered considerable reticence among the Manche , until the Spanish finally decided to move them to an area where they could be more easily controlled . At the time of contact there were perhaps 10 @,@ 000 Manche ; these were devastated by war and disease , with the survivors relocated to Rabinal in the modern department of Baja Verapaz . After 1700 the Manche Ch 'ol ceased to play any part in the history of Petén . 
 The Mopan population has been estimated at between 10 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 people at the time of contact . In 1692 the Council of the Indies ordered that the Manche Ch 'ol and the Mopan be dealt with decisively . The population suffered the effects of war and disease , and the few survivors were moved into Spanish reducciones in southeastern Petén , before being moved to colonial settlements in other parts of Petén . In 1695 the colonial authorities decided to act upon a plan to connect the province of Guatemala with Yucatán , and soldiers commanded by Jacinto de Barrios Leal , president of the Royal Audiencia of Guatemala , conquered several Ch 'ol communities . The most important of these was Sakb 'ajlan on the Lacantún River in eastern Chiapas , now in Mexico , which was renamed as Nuestra Señora de Dolores , or Dolores del Lakandon , in April 1695 . This was one part of a three @-@ pronged attack against the independent inhabitants of Petén and neighbouring Chiapas ; a second group joined up with Barrios Leal having marched from Huehuetenango . The third group , under Juan Díaz de Velasco , marched from Verapaz against the Itza . Barrios Leal was accompanied by Franciscan friar Antonio Margil who served as an advisor as well as his personal confessor and chaplain to his troops . The Spanish built a fort and garrisoned it with 30 Spanish soldiers . Mercederian friar Diego de Rivas was based at Dolores del Lakandon , and he and his fellow Mercederians baptised several hundred Lakandon Ch 'ols in the following months and established contacts with neighbouring Ch 'ol communities . 
 Resistance against the Spanish continued , and hostile Ch 'ol killed several newly baptised Christian Indians . In early March 1696 such was the success of the friars that captain Jacobo de <unk> and the Mercederians decided to try to reach Lake Petén Itzá . They headed eastwards towards the Pasión River with 150 heavily armed soldiers plus native guides , travelling in five large canoes . They got as far as the savannah to the southeast of the lake before turning back for unknown reasons . Antonio Margil remained in Dolores del Lakandon until 1697 . The Ch 'ol of the Lacandon Jungle were resettled in Huehuetenango in the early 18th century . 
 = = Conquest of the central lakes = = 
 Nojpetén fell to a Spanish assault on 13 March 1697 , more than 150 years after the conquest of the rest of the Yucatán Peninsula and more than 160 years after the conquest of the Guatemalan Highlands . The lengthy delay in conquering the Petén region was due to a combination of its geographical remoteness and <unk> and the fierce reputation of its Maya inhabitants . During this time the Itza used the Yalain as an eastern buffer against Spanish approach from Belize . The lengthy indirect contact between the Itza and the Spanish invaders allowed the Itza to develop an understanding of Spanish strategy and tactics that was honed over the period of almost two centuries that the Itza were surrounded by European @-@ dominated territories . This understanding distinguished the conquest of Petén from the 16th @-@ century conquests of the Aztecs , Maya and Incas . In contrast , the Spanish had a very poor understanding of the Itza and their neighbours and viewed them as ignorant savages whose kingdom was protected by Satan from the <unk> efforts of the Spanish Empire and the Roman Catholic Church . From the time that Hernán Cortés crossed Petén in the early 16th century , the Spanish mistakenly believed the king of the Itza ( the Aj Kan Ek ' ) was the overlord of the entire central Petén region . 
 = = = Early 17th century = = = 
 Following Cortés ' visit , no Spanish attempted to visit the warlike Itza inhabitants of Nojpetén for almost a hundred years . In 1618 two Franciscan friars set out from Mérida in Yucatán on a mission to attempt the peaceful conversion of the still pagan Itza in central Petén . Bartolomé de Fuensalida and Juan de Orbita were accompanied by some Christianised Maya . Andrés Carrillo de <unk> , a Criollo who was the alcalde of Bacalar ( a colonial official ) , joined the party at Bacalar and escorted them upriver as far as Tipuj , returning to Bacalar once he was certain of the friars receiving a good welcome there . After an arduous six @-@ month journey the travellers were well received by the current Kan Ek ' . They stayed at Nojpetén for some days in an attempt to evangelise the Itza , but the Aj Kan Ek ' refused to renounce his Maya religion , although he showed interest in the masses held by the Catholic missionaries . Kan Ek ' informed them that according to ancient Itza prophecy it was not yet time for them to convert . In the time since Cortés had visited Nojpetén , the Itza had made a statue of the deified horse . Juan de Orbita was outraged when he saw the idol and he immediately smashed it into pieces . Fuensalida was able to save the lives of the visitors from the infuriated natives by means of a particularly eloquent sermon that resulted in them being forgiven . Attempts to convert the Itza failed , and the friars left Nojpetén on friendly terms with Kan Ek ' . 
 The friars returned in 1619 , arriving in October and staying for eighteen days . Again Kan Ek ' welcomed them in a friendly manner , but this time the Maya priesthood were hostile and jealous of the missionaries ' influence upon the king . They persuaded Kan Ek 's wife to convince him to expel the unwelcome visitors . The missionaries ' lodgings were surrounded by armed warriors , and the friars and their accompanying servants were escorted to a waiting canoe and instructed to leave and never return . Juan de Orbita attempted to resist and was rendered unconscious by an Itza warrior . The missionaries were expelled without food or water but survived the journey back to Mérida . 
 Before the early 17th century , the western Petén had been heavily populated by Ch 'ol and Ch 'olti ' Maya and was an important trade route for the Itza . By the mid @-@ 17th century , these populations had been devastated by war , disease and the enforced movement of the inhabitants into colonial settlements , negating the economic importance of the region for the Itza . At the same time the Kejache were becoming important intermediaries between the Itza and Yucatán . The <unk> Acalan subgroup of the Kejache had previously traded directly with the Itza but had been relocated by the Spanish . The remaining Kejache , devastated by disease and subject to the intense attentions of Spanish missionaries , were no longer able to supply the Itza directly and became middlemen instead . 
 = = = = Spanish setbacks in the 1620s = = = = 
 In March 1622 , governor of Yucatán Diego de Cardenas ordered captain Francisco de Mirones Lezcano to launch an assault upon the Itza ; he set out from Yucatán with 20 Spanish soldiers and 80 Mayas from Yucatán . His expedition was later joined by Franciscan friar Diego Delgado . The expedition first camped at <unk> ; in May they moved to Sakalum , southwest of Bacalar , where there was a lengthy delay while they waited for reinforcements . En route to Nojpetén , Delgado believed that the soldiers ' treatment of the Maya was excessively cruel , and he left the expedition to make his own way to Nojpetén with eighty Christianised Maya from Tipuj in Belize . In the meantime the Itza had learnt of the approaching military expedition and had become hardened against further Spanish missionary attempts . When Mirones learnt of Delgado 's departure , he sent 13 soldiers to persuade him to return or continue as his escort should he refuse . The soldiers caught up with him just before Tipuj , but he was determined to reach Nojpetén . From Tipuj , Delgado sent a messenger to Kan Ek ' , asking permission to travel to Nojpetén ; the Itza king replied with a promise of safe passage for the missionary and his companions . The party was initially received in peace at the Itza capital , but as soon as the Spanish soldiers let their guard down , the Itza seized and bound the new arrivals . The soldiers were sacrificed to the Maya gods , with their hearts cut from their chests and their heads impaled on stakes around the town . After the sacrifice of the Spanish soldiers , the Itza took Delgado , cut his heart out and dismembered him ; they displayed his head on a stake with the others . The fate of the leader of Delgado 's Maya companions was no better . With no word from Delgado 's escort , Mirones sent two Spanish soldiers with Bernardino Ek , a Maya scout , to learn their fate . When they arrived upon the shore of Lake Petén Itzá , the Itza took them across to their island capital and imprisoned them . They escaped to a canoe by the lakeshore but the two Spanish , slowed by their bonds , were soon recaptured . Ek escaped and returned to Mirones with the news . 
 Soon afterwards , on 27 January 1624 , an Itza war party led by AjK 'in P 'ol caught Mirones and his soldiers off guard and unarmed in the church at Sakalum and slaughtered them . Spanish reinforcements led by Juan Bernardo Casanova arrived too late ; the Spanish soldiers had been sacrificed , hanged and beheaded , with their corpses burned and impaled on stakes at the entrance to the village ; Mirones and the Franciscan priest had been bound to the church posts and then sacrificed with their hearts cut out . A number of local Maya men and women had also been hanged but not decapitated , and the attackers had burned the town . 
 Following these massacres , Spanish garrisons were stationed in several towns in southern Yucatán , and rewards were offered for the whereabouts of AjK 'in P 'ol . The Maya governor of Oxkutzcab , Fernando Kamal , set out with 150 Maya archers to track the <unk> down ; they succeeded in capturing the Itza captain and his followers , together with silverware from the looted Sakalum church and items belonging to Mirones . The prisoners were taken back to the Spanish captain Antonio Méndez de Canzo , interrogated under torture , tried , and condemned to be hanged , drawn and quartered . They were decapitated , and the heads were displayed in the plazas of towns throughout the colonial Partido de la Sierra in what is now Mexico 's Yucatán state . These events ended all Spanish attempts to contact the Itza until 1695 . In the 1640s internal strife in Spain distracted the government from attempts to conquer unknown lands ; the Spanish Crown lacked the time , money or interest in such colonial adventures for the next four decades . 
 = = = Late 17th century = = = 
 In 1692 Basque nobleman Martín de Ursúa y Arizmendi proposed to the Spanish king the construction of a road from Mérida southwards to link with the Guatemalan colony , in the process " reducing " any independent native populations into colonial congregaciones ; this was part of a greater plan to subjugate the Lakandon and Manche Ch 'ol of southern Petén and the upper reaches of the Usumacinta River . The original plan was for the province of Yucatán to build the northern section and for Guatemala to build the southern portion , with both meeting somewhere in Ch 'ol territory ; the plan was later modified to pass further east , through the kingdom of the Itza . 
 = = = = Spanish – Itza diplomatic contacts , 1695 = = = = 
 In December 1695 the Spanish colonial authorities in Mérida received a diplomatic visit sent by the Aj Kan Ek ' . The diplomatic contact had been negotiated by Spanish captain Francisco Hariza y <unk> , alcalde of Bacalar @-@ at @-@ <unk> ' . Hariza had sent a Christian Maya ambassador to Nojpetén from Tipuj in April 1695 , who arrived around the same time that the Itza were preparing to defend themselves against a Spanish party entering from Guatemala ; nonetheless the emissary was received in peace and despatched back to Hariza with promises of submission to Spain . In August Hariza travelled to Mérida in the company of a group of seven Tipuj natives offering submission to Spain . Four members of this party were not from Tipuj at all , but were Itza diplomats sent incognito from Yalain to discuss possible peaceful contacts with the colonial authorities . The leader of the Itza delegation was AjChan , a nephew of the Itza king . When friar Avendaño was in Mérida in September 1695 between attempts to reach Nojpetén , he met with the Itza – Yalain delegation and was able to give an account of them when he travelled through Yalain after visiting Nojpetén in January 1696 . AjChan and his companions returned to Nojpetén in November but did not stay long before leaving for Mérida again . 
 In December , Kan Ek ' despatched AjChan to negotiate peace with Spain , with three Itza companions . They were accompanied to Mérida by a small number of Mopans from the Tipuj region . AjChan , through family ties and marriage , had a key role as a middleman between the Itza , Yalain and Kowoj ; he also had family ties with the semi @-@ Christianised Maya at Tipuj , and his mother was from Chichen Itza in the northern Yucatán . His marriage to a Kowoj woman had been an attempt , ultimately unsuccessful , to defuse Itza – Kowoj hostility . Kan Ek ' sent AjChan to Mérida with a message of peaceful submission to the Spanish Empire in an attempt to solidify his own position as sole ruler of the Itza , even if this meant sacrificing Itza independence from Spain . The Itza king 's uncle and the Kowoj were fundamentally opposed to any negotiations with the Spanish and viewed AjChan 's embassy as treachery . The Spanish were unaware of the tensions between different Maya factions in central Petén , which by now had escalated into a state of inter @-@ Maya warfare . AjChan was baptised as Martín Francisco on 31 December 1695 , with Martín de Ursúa , governor of Yucatán , acting as his godfather . 
 The arrival of AjChan and his subsequent baptism was an important diplomatic coup for Ursúa , who used the visit for his own political advancement , promoting the embassy as the peaceful final submission of the Itza kingdom to the Spanish Crown . This formal submission of the Itza kingdom to Spain was a critical turning point , since from a Spanish legal viewpoint the Itza were now subjects and the royal prohibition on military conquest could be sidestepped . AjChan left Mérida with his companions and a Spanish escort in the middle of January 1696 and arrived back at Tipuj around the end of the month . After a few days at Tipuj he learnt of violent events unfolding around Lake Petén Itzá including the battle at Ch 'ich ' and the subsequent killing of two Franciscans . Fearing the response of his Spanish escort , he abandoned them and fled back to Yalain . 
 = = = = García de Paredes ' entry from Yucatán , March – April 1695 = = = = 
 The governor of Yucatán , Martín de Ursúa y Arizmendi , began to build the road from Campeche south towards Petén . At the beginning of March 1695 , Ursúa ordered captain Alonso García de Paredes to explore this road ; García led a group of 50 Spanish soldiers , accompanied by native guides , muleteers and labourers . García had previous experience from military expeditions around Sajkab 'chen ( near modern <unk> in southern Campeche state ) The expedition advanced some way south of Sajkab 'chen into Kejache territory , which began at Chunpich , about 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) north of the modern border between Mexico and Guatemala . He rounded up some natives to be moved into colonial settlements , but met with armed Kejache resistance . A skirmish ensued at a Kejache village , resulting in the deaths of eight Kejache warriors . Prisoners taken during the skirmish informed García that many independent Maya lived in the area , both Kejache and others . García decided to retreat around the middle of April , probably to escort captured Kejache back to Sajkab 'chen to be put to work on García 's encomienda . Captain García reported back to Ursúa on 21 April 1695 . 
 = = = = Díaz de Velasco and Cano 's entry from Verapaz , March – April 1695 = = = = 
 In March 1695 , captain Juan Díaz de Velasco set out from Cahabón in Alta Verapaz with 70 Spanish soldiers , accompanied by a large number of Maya archers from Verapaz , and native muleteers ; four Dominican friars led by Criollo friar Agustín Cano accompanied the expedition . Theoretically the Spanish soldiers were provided solely as an escort for the Dominicans . The Guatemalan expedition , under orders of President Jacinto de Barrios Leal , were secretly trying to reach the Itzas before Martín de Ursúa could reach them from Yucatán ; the existence of the expedition was carefully concealed during all communications between Guatemala and the governor of Yucatán . It formed a part of a three @-@ pronged attack against the independent inhabitants of Petén and neighbouring Chiapas ; the other two expeditions were launched against the Lakandon . 
 The expedition proceeded northwards through Ch 'ol territory and into Mopan territory ; there they camped at Mopan town ( modern San Luis ) . Due to their fear of their warlike Itza neighbours , both the Ch 'ol and the Mopans claimed not to know of any paths to Lake Petén Itzá . The Spanish were held up at Mopan for several days by supply problems and desertions among their native carriers . The Dominicans took advantage of the delay to proselytise the Mopans and Cano wrote that he had converted four caciques ( native chiefs ) there , although <unk> Chan , king of the Mopans , had fled with many of the local inhabitants . Cano believed that the Mopans were ruled by the king of the Itzas . 
 = = = = = First skirmish = = = = = 
 The Spanish believed that by pressing ahead to Lake Petén Itzá they would link up with a simultaneous expedition headed by President Barrios himself , unaware that Barrios had not reached the region . Díaz de Velasco sent out a scouting party of 50 musketeers accompanied by native archers on 6 April . They soon found evidence of recent Itza camps in the area , estimated to be a month old . The scouts found a clear road heading north to the Itza kingdom , and the army set off along it . The main force camped about ten leagues ( 26 miles or 42 km ) south of the lake , while a smaller scouting party was sent off ahead ; this consisted of two Spanish soldiers , two archers and two muleteers from Verapaz , with two Ch 'ol @-@ speaking native interpreters . The scouting party advanced to the savannah just to the south of Lake Petén Itzá , where they encountered about 30 Itza hunters armed with spears , shields and bows , accompanied by hunting dogs . The hunters drew their weapons and prepared to fight , but the Mopan interpreter was instructed to explain that the Spanish party were traders who came in peace , accompanied by missionaries . The Spanish began to suspect that the interpreter was plotting against them with the Itza hunters , and one of the Verapaz archers dragged him out from among the hunters . The encounter degenerated into a scuffle , and the Itzas once again drew weapons . The Spanish fired their muskets , fatally wounding two hunters , and a Verapaz Indian charged the Itzas with a machete . The hunters fled , leaving the scouting party in possession of the food and arrows at the hunting camp . 
 = = = = = Second skirmish = = = = = 
 Five days after this skirmish , Antonio Machuca led a party of 12 musketeers , 25 archers and 13 muleteers to try to find President Barrios , to scout a river route to the lake and to capture another interpreter , the previous one no longer being trusted . The main party arrived on the savannah near the lake . The following night one of the advance party came back into camp with an Itza prisoner , captured after a fierce struggle with the scouts . Interrogation of the prisoner revealed that he was from a high @-@ ranking Itza lineage , and that he had been sent out to find the Spanish party and to see if they came as traders or invaders . The rest of Machuca 's scouting party soon returned to the main camp , reporting that they had camped four leagues ( approximately 10 @.@ 4 miles or 16 @.@ 7 km ) from the lake , where they encountered another hunting party of about " a dozen " Itzas . The Spanish tried to use their interpreter to talk to them but the Itzas responded with a volley of arrows . The Spanish musketeers tried to respond with <unk> , but found their gunpowder too wet to fire properly . The Itza warriors charged upon them with spears , axes and machetes , and the ensuing hand @-@ to @-@ hand battle lasted an hour , during which six of the Itzas were killed ; the rest finally retreated . Thanks to their padded cotton armour , the Spanish party received no injuries from the skirmish . The Spanish pursued the fleeing Itzas and another fierce skirmish ensued , lasting another hour during which most of the remaining Itzas were killed . Three Itzas escaped , and their leader was rendered unconscious with machete blows to the head ; he was taken prisoner and later made a full recovery . Machuca 's party reached the lakeshore and could see Nojpetén across the water , but saw such a large force of Itzas that they retreated south , back to the main camp . 
 An Itza account of this encounter reached the colonial authorities in Yucatán via Tipuj . The Itza reported that the Guatemalan party approached on horseback to within sight of Nojpetén , and about thirty curious Itzas gathered to talk to the intruders , whereupon they were attacked by the Spanish , resulting in the deaths of thirty Itzas , the capture of one and yet more wounded . A Christian Maya emissary from Bacalar @-@ at @-@ <unk> ' , Yucatán , was in Nojpetén around this time , and reported that the Itza gathered 3 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 warriors ready to repulse Díaz de Velasco 's party . 
 = = = = = Retreat to Guatemala = = = = = 
 On 24 April , the first prisoner escaped from the main camp ; the same day that the injured second prisoner was taken in by Machuca and his men . Interrogation of the new prisoner , who turned out to be an Itza nobleman , revealed that the Itza kingdom was in a state of high alert to repel the Spanish . Friar Cano met with his fellow Dominicans to discuss what should be done , having had information from both Machuca and his prisoner that the Itza were ready for war . The Dominicans were highly critical of the Spanish soldiers ' readiness to open fire on poorly armed natives who offered no real threat to them , and suspected that President Barrios was nowhere near the lake ; furthermore the Spanish were beginning to succumb to sickness , and the Verapaz Indian recruits were deserting daily . Díaz agreed with the Dominicans ; two muleteers had already died from sickness , and he recognised that the size of his expedition was not sufficient for a full confrontation with the Itza nation . The expedition almost immediately withdrew back to Cahabón . The new prisoner , AjK 'ixaw was later taken back to Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala , where the Dominicans questioned him in detail . In Guatemala AjK 'ixaw learnt Spanish and returned to Petén in 1696 as a guide and interpreter for another expedition , before turning on his captors . After the Spanish retreated to Guatemala , rumours ran rife among the Itza and Kowoj that they would return to engage in wholesale slaughter of the Maya population ; large tracts of territory were abandoned in response , including many towns in an area stretching from Lake Petén Itzá eastwards to Tipuj and southwards to Mopán . 
 = = = = García de Paredes ' entry from Yucatán , May 1695 = = = = 
 When captain García de Paredes unexpectedly returned to Campeche in early May 1695 , governor Martín de Ursúa was already preparing reinforcements for his expedition . With García 's arrival , he was immediately allocated the extra soldiers . On 11 May Ursúa ordered García to begin a second expedition southwards and was allotted 100 salaried Maya to accompany him . These workers were to be paid three pesos per month and received a suspension of their obligations to supply encomienda work and tribute . García paid for additional Spanish soldiers from his own funds , as did José Fernández de Estenos , a Campeche resident who was to serve as second @-@ in @-@ command . The final force numbered 115 Spanish soldiers and 150 Maya musketeers , plus Maya labourers and muleteers ; the final tally was more than 400 people , which was regarded as a considerable army in the impoverished Yucatán province . Ursúa also ordered two companies of Maya musketeers from Tek 'ax and Oxk 'utzkab ' to join the expedition at B <unk> 'en Kawich , some 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) southeast of the city of Campeche . Bonifacio Us was captain of the Tek 'ax company ; Diego Uk was that of the Oxk 'utzkab ' company . Marcos Pot was overall " cacique captain " of these two Maya companies ; all three officers were Maya . A Maya company from Sajkab 'chen served as elite musketeers charged with rounding up forest Maya into the reducciones ; this company was excused from heavy labour duties . Non @-@ Maya soldiers were a mix of Spanish , mestizos ( mixed race Spanish and native ) and mulattos ( mixed race Spanish and black ) . 
 On 18 May Ursúa requested three missionaries to support the expedition from the Franciscan provincial superior , friar Antonio de Silva ; by 30 May three friars were ready to join the Spanish force , accompanied by a lay brother who had not yet taken vows . In addition , Silva sent another group of Franciscans led by friar Andrés de Avendaño , who was accompanied by another friar and a lay brother . This second group was only to remain with García while convenient for them to do so , and were to continue onwards independently to Nojpetén to make contact with the Itzas , with the tacit approval of Ursúa . In fact Avendaño and his party left Mérida on 2 June , a week before the party assigned to García . On 23 June Ursúa received a message informing him of the occupation of Sakb 'ajlan ( Dolores del Lakandon ) by Guatemalan troops . By this time García was at Tzuktok ' , near the Kejache border . Although Ursúa 's purported plan , as authorised by the Spanish crown , was to build a road uniting Yucatán with Guatemala , he now realised that he was in a race to conquer the Itza kingdom ; President Barrios of Guatemala had reached Sakb 'ajlan and was returning to Santiago to prepare another expedition , and Guatemalan soldiers had already reached the lakeshore of Petén Itzá . Any linking road to Dolores del Lakandon would have passed through sparsely inhabited territory ; instead the Yucatecan surveyor plotted a route due south directly to the lake where it could connect with the south road via Cahabón in Verapaz . This route would leave Dolores del Lakandon and the Lakandon Ch 'ol isolated to the west . Ursúa issued new orders to García <unk> his desire to conquer the Itza . His letter ordered García to link up with President Barrios at Dolores del Lakandon , and gave him a precise route that would take him instead to the lake . A short time after receiving these orders , García ordered the construction of a fort at Chuntuki , some 25 leagues ( approximately 65 miles or 105 km ) north of Lake Petén Itzá . This would serve as the main military base for the Camino Real ( " Royal Road " ) project ; the supply base was at Kawich , under the command of Juan del Castillo y <unk> . On 27 July Ursúa authorised the creation of three new militia companies of 25 men apiece to reinforce García . Two were Spanish companies and one was a mixed @-@ race company consisting of mestizos and <unk> . 
 = = = = = Skirmish at Chunpich = = = = = 
 The Sajkab 'chen company of native musketeers pushed ahead with the road builders from <unk> ' to the first Kejache town at Chunpich , which the Kejache had fled , leaving behind a substantial amount of food . The company 's officers sent for reinforcements from García at Tzuktok ' but before any could arrive some 25 Kejache returned to Chunpich with baskets to collect their abandoned food . The nervous Sajkab 'chen sentries feared that the residents were returning en masse and discharged their muskets at them , with both groups then retreating . The musketeer company then arrived to reinforce their sentries and charged into battle against approaching Kejache archers . Several musketeers were injured in the ensuing skirmish , and the Kejache retreated along a forest path without injury , mocking the invaders . The Sajkab 'chen company followed the path and found two more deserted settlements with large amounts of abandoned food . They seized the food and retreated back along the path . 
 = = = = = Reinforcements = = = = = 
 Around 3 August García moved his entire army forward to Chunpich , and by October Spanish soldiers had established themselves near the source of the San Pedro River . By November Tzuktok ' was garrisoned with 86 soldiers and more at Chuntuki ; in that month García once again returned to Campeche . By December 1695 Ursúa was under pressure to complete the conquest of the Itza , and he approved the despatch of reinforcements along the Camino Real to join the main garrison . The reinforcements included 150 Spanish and pardo soldiers and 100 Maya soldiers , together with labourers and muleteers . An advance group of 150 mixed Maya and non @-@ Maya soldiers met up with García at Campeche and proceeded southwards along the Camino Real towards the San Pedro River . The rest of the reinforcements did not leave Campeche until March 1696 . 
 = = = = Avendaño 's entry from Yucatán , June 1695 = = = = 
 In May 1695 Antonio de Silva had appointed two groups of Franciscans to head for Petén ; the first group was to join up with García 's military expedition . The second group was to head for Lake Petén Itza independently . This second group was headed by friar Andrés de Avendaño . Avendaño was accompanied by friar Antonio Pérez de San Román , lay brother Alonso de Vargas and six Maya Christians recruited from Mérida and towns en route to Campeche . This latter group left Mérida on 2 June 1695 and made its way to Juan del Castillo y <unk> 's supply base at Kawich , set up to support García 's military expedition . On 24 June Avendaño 's party left Kawich and set off across sparsely inhabited territory . On 29 June they arrived at an abandoned Maya temple , which he referred to by the name <unk> , meaning " Big Temple " . The Spanish had already passed through and had broken many " idols " but the friars climbed the temple and managed to find about 50 additional ceremonial sculptures , which they destroyed ; they also placed a cross inside . The other group of friars , on their way to join García , passed through <unk> a few days later and found that local Maya had already placed new offerings within . Avendaño 's group continued southwards and found increasing signs of habitation and arrived at the military camp of captain José Fernández de Estenos at the deserted Maya town of <unk> <unk> ' , which had been cleared by the Spanish under García some sixteen years previously . 
 Avendaño continued south along the course of the new road , finding increasing evidence of Spanish military activity , with the rounding up of local inhabitants and raiding of fields and orchards for provisions by Spanish troops . The Franciscans overtook García at B 'uk 'te , about 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) before Tzuktok ' . Avendaño 's party arrived at Tzuktok ' , near the Kejache border , by 10 July and left two weeks later , around the same time that García arrived there with his captives rounded up at B 'uk 'te for forced labour . Before leaving , the Franciscans protested to García and his officers about the poor treatment of the local inhabitants ; the officers promised better treatment of the Maya in future . On 3 August García advanced to Chunpich but tried to persuade Avendaño to stay behind to minister to the prisoners from B 'uk 'te . Avendaño instead split his group and left in secret with just four Christian Maya companions , seeking the Chunpich Kejache that had attacked one of García 's advance companies and had now retreated into the forest . He was unable to find the Kejache but did manage to get information regarding a path that led southwards to the Itza kingdom . He met four exhausted Sajkab 'chen musketeers who were carrying a letter addressed to him from captain Fernández de Estenos . This letter explained that further south there were various deserted Maya towns with only rotten maize abandoned by their occupiers . Avendaño returned to Tzuktok ' and reconsidered his plans ; the Franciscans were short of supplies , and the forcefully congregated Maya that they were charged with converting were disappearing back into the forest daily . Additionally , the Spanish officers ignored the concerns of the friars and García was abducting local Maya women and children to be taken back to his encomienda for forced labour . The Franciscans set upon a different , ultimately unsuccessful , plan ; they would follow the road back north to Jop <unk> 'en near Campeche city and attempt to reach the Itza via Tipuj . This route was blocked when the secular clergy prevented the Franciscans from attempting it . Antonio de Silva ordered Avendaño to return to Mérida , and he arrived there on 17 September 1695 . The other group of Franciscans , led by Juan de San Buenaventura Chávez , continued following the roadbuilders into Kejache territory , through IxB 'am , B 'atkab ' and Chuntuki ( modern <unk> near Carmelita , Petén ) . 
 = = = = San Buenaventura among the Kejache , September – November 1695 = = = = 
 Juan de San Buenaventura 's small group of Franciscans had arrived in Chuntuki on 30 August 1695 , and found that the army had opened the road southwards for another seventeen leagues ( approximately 44 @.@ 2 miles or 71 @.@ 1 km ) , almost half way to Lake Petén Itzá , but returned to Chuntuki due to the seasonal rains . San Buenaventura was accompanied by friar Joseph de Jesús María , lay friar Tomás de Alcoser and lay brother Lucas de San Francisco . With Avendaño 's return to Mérida , provincial superior Antonio de Silva despatched two additional friars to join San Buenaventura 's group : Diego de Echevarría and Diego de Salas . One of these was to convert the Kejache in Tzuktok ' , and the other was to do the same at Chuntuki . Although initially reluctant to permit the group to continue into Itza territory , by late October García de Paredes had relented and acquiesced to de Silva 's instructions for San Buenaventura and his original companions to continue to Nojpetén , although it appears that this never happened . On 24 October San Buenaventura wrote to the provincial superior reporting that the warlike Kejache were now pacified and that they had told him that the Itza were ready to receive the Spanish in friendship . On that day 62 Kejache men had voluntarily come to Chuntuki from Pak 'ek 'em , where another 300 Kejache resided . San Buenaventura sent lay brother Lucas de San Francisco to convince them to relocate to the Chuntuki mission . Lucas de San Francisco destroyed the idols in Pak 'ek 'em but the inhabitants were not brought to the mission because of worries about feeding the new arrivals . Instead , in early November 1695 , friar Tomás de Alcoser and brother Lucas de San Francisco were sent to establish a mission at Pak 'ek 'em , where they were well received by the cacique and his pagan priest . Pak 'ek 'em was sufficiently far from the new Spanish road that it was free from military interference , and the friars oversaw the building of a church in what was the largest mission town in Kejache territory . A second church was built at B 'atkab ' to attend to over 100 K 'ejache refugees who had been gathered there under the stewardship of friar Diego de Echevarría ; a further church was established at Tzuktok ' , overseen by Diego de Salas . 
 = = = = Avendaño 's entry from Yucatán , December 1695 – January 1696 = = = = 
 Franciscan Andrés de Avendaño left Mérida on 13 December 1695 , and arrived in Nojpetén around 14 January 1696 ; he followed the new road as far as possible then continued towards Nojpetén with local Maya guides . He was accompanied by friars Antonio Pérez de San Román , Joseph de Jesús María and Diego de Echevarría , and by lay brother Lucas de San Francisco ; some of these he collected on his journey south along the Camino Real . On 5 January they caught up with and passed the main contingent of the army at B 'atkab ' , continuing to Chuntuki . From Chuntuki they followed an Indian trail that led them past the source of the San Pedro River and across steep karst hills to a watering hole by some ruins , which was recorded as Tanxulukmul by Avendaño . From Tanxulukmul they followed the small <unk> River to a Chak 'an Itza town called <unk> . They arrived at the western end of Lake Petén Itzá to an enthusiastic welcome by the local Itza . 
 Unknown to the Franciscans , the northern Chak 'an Itza province of the Itza kingdom was allied with the Kowoj and was at war with the Itza king . The Chak 'an Itzas carried off most of the gifts that the Spanish party had brought for the Itza king , in an effort to hinder friendly relations developing . The following day , the current Aj Kan Ek ' travelled across the lake with eighty canoes to greet the visitors at the Chak 'an Itza port town of Nich , on the west shore of Lake Petén Itza . The Franciscans returned to Nojpetén with Kan Ek ' and baptised over 300 Itza children over the following four days . Avendaño tried to convince Kan Ek ' to convert to Christianity and surrender to the Spanish crown , without success . The Franciscan friar tried to convince the Itza king that the K 'atun 8 Ajaw , a twenty @-@ year Maya calendrical cycle beginning in 1696 or 1697 , was the right time for the Itza to finally embrace Christianity and to accept the king of Spain as overlord . The king of the Itza , like his forebear , cited Itza prophecy and said the time was not yet right . He asked the Spanish to return in four months , at which time the Itza would convert and swear fealty to the King of Spain . 
 On 19 January AjKowoj , the king of the Kowoj , arrived at Nojpetén and spoke with Avendaño , arguing against the acceptance of Christianity and Spanish rule . The discussions between Avendaño , Kan Ek ' and AjKowoj exposed deep divisions among the Itza – and the apparent treachery of the Itza king in offering his kingdom to the Spanish undermined Kan Ek 's power over his own people . Kan Ek ' learnt of a plot by the Kowoj and their Chak 'an Itza allies to ambush and kill the Franciscans , and the Itza king advised them to return to Mérida via Tipuj . The Itza king 's efforts to save his Spanish guests effectively ended his power to rule ; from that point on anti @-@ Spanish sentiment governed Itza responses to the Spanish . The Franciscans were guided to Yalain where they were well received but while they were there the Yalain heard rumours of battle and a Spanish advance towards Lake Petén Itzá . The Franciscans were shown a path that led to Tipuj but their Yalain guides soon abandoned them . The Spanish friars became lost and suffered great hardships , including the death of one of Avendaño 's companions , but after a month wandering in the forest found their way back to Chuntuki and from there made their way back to Mérida . 
 = = = = Battle at Ch 'ich ' , 2 February 1696 = = = = 
 Kan Ek ' had sent emissaries to Mérida in December 1695 to inform Martín de Ursúa that the Itza would peacefully submit to Spanish rule . By mid @-@ January captain García de Paredes had advanced from B 'atkab ' to the advance portion of the Camino Real at Chuntuki . By now he only had 90 soldiers plus labourers and porters , with many of his soldiers deserting as the force advanced towards Lake Petén Itzá ; they were further delayed by the necessity of building an oar @-@ powered longboat ( or piragua ) to cross the San Pedro River . Soon after Avendaño 's flight eastward from Nojpetén , a group of 60 Maya warriors entered Chuntuki in full <unk> and bearing weapons ; they claimed to have been sent by Avendaño to collect religious regalia and another friar . This was not the case , and they were almost certainly a scouting party sent by the Kowoj and their Chak 'an Itza allies to see what progress the Spanish army was making along the road . They spoke with García and then rapidly departed without taking any of the items that they had supposedly been sent to collect . García despatched two Kejache scouts to the lakeshore to discover Avendaño 's whereabouts ; at the same time Avendaño 's Kejache guides were returning to Chuntuki from Nojpetén with news of Avendaño 's flight . The Itzas at the lake handed over an open letter written by Avendaño before his departure from Nojpetén as a token of friendship between the Itza and the Spanish . Friar Juan de San Buenaventura was enthused by the letter and wished to travel on to Nojpetén himself . 
 García sent captain Pedro de Zubiaur , his senior officer , on towards the lake . He arrived at Lake Petén Itza with 60 musketeers , friar San Buenaventura and another Franciscan and allied Yucatec Maya warriors . They were also accompanied by about 40 Maya porters . On 2 February the expedition was approached by two Itza warriors who told them of a recent battle between a Guatemalan expedition and the Itza ; these two Itzas guided the party to a nearby Itza settlement , and the letter from Avendaño was shown to captain Zubiaur , convincing him that he could advance safely . The port town of Ch 'ich ' was abandoned but a large number of canoes approached , judged to be as many as 300 by the Spanish captain , bearing perhaps 2 @,@ 000 Itza warriors . The warriors began to mingle freely with the Spanish party and began to load the Spanish supplies into the canoes with a promise of transporting the expedition across to Nojpetén , with one soldier in each canoe . The Franciscans readily boarded the canoes , with two soldiers as an escort . A scuffle then broke out ; a dozen more of the Spanish party were forced into canoes , and two porters were beaten to death . One of the captured Spanish soldiers was immediately decapitated . At this point the Spanish soldiers opened fire with their muskets , and the Itza retreated across the lake with their prisoners . 
 The Spanish party retreated from the lake shore and regrouped on open ground where they were surrounded by about 2 @,@ 000 Itza warriors who attempted to disarm them ; the Itzas managed to seize another Spaniard and immediately struck off his head . At this point about 10 @,@ 000 Itza archers appeared from canoes concealed among the lakeside mangroves , and Zubiaur ordered his men to fire a volley that killed between 30 and 40 Itzas . Realising that they were hopelessly outnumbered , the Spanish retreated towards Chuntuki , abandoning their captured companions to their fate . A Christian Maya musketeer and six other Indians fled at the start of the battle and took news to García that the entire expedition had been slaughtered ; Zubiaur and the survivors of his expedition marched back into the base camp at Chuntuki two days later . Ursúa later reported that the Spanish prisoners were taken back to Nojpetén where they were all killed ; this was also confirmed by AjChan at a later date . The bones of the dead were said to have been found by the Spanish after the final assault on Nojpetén in 1697 ; AjK 'in Kan Ek ' , the Itza high priest , later reported that he had bound San Buenaventura and his companion into cross shapes and cut out their hearts . 
 This turn of events convinced Martín de Ursúa that Kan Ek ' would not surrender peacefully , and he began to organise an all @-@ out assault on Nojpetén . The enlistment of previously authorised reinforcements was now urgent , but was hindered when 70 of 100 soldiers mutinied and never reached García 's camp . Work on the road was redoubled and about a month after the battle at Ch 'ich ' the Spanish arrived at the lakeshore , now supported by artillery . Again a large number of canoes gathered , and the nervous Spanish soldiers opened fire with cannons and muskets ; no casualties were reported among the Itza , who retreated and raised a white flag from a safe distance . 
 = = = = Amésqueta 's entry from Verapaz , February – March 1696 = = = = 
 The Guatemalan authorities were unaware of ongoing contacts between the colonial authorities in Yucatán and the Itza . In the second half of 1695 President Barrios began planning another expedition against the Itza from Verapaz , following harsh criticism of Juan Díaz de Velasco 's retreat from near Lake Petén Itzá in April of that year . Barrios died in November , and oidor José de <unk> became acting head of the Guatemalan colonial administration . He appointed oidor Bartolomé de Amésqueta to lead the next expedition against the Itza . Amésqueta marched his men through torrential rain from Cahabón to Mopán , arriving on 25 February 1696 ; the Guatemalans were still unaware of the clashes between García 's forces and the Itza . Amésqueta 's expedition was suffering from shortages of native labour and supplies . Twenty @-@ five of his 150 men were sick , and his advance stalled as the force rested up at Mopán . Captain Díaz de Velasco volunteered to lead a party of 25 men ahead to the lake ; he was accompanied by Dominican friars Cristóbal de Prada and Jacinto de Vargas . He was also accompanied by AjK 'ixaw , the Itza nobleman who had been taken prisoner on Díaz 's previous expedition , who served as a trusted guide , scout and translator . They set out from Mopán on 7 March and left some sick soldiers with some supplies after five days , they then caught up with an advance party of roadbuilders and their military escort at Río Chakal . The two forces combined , giving Díaz a force of 49 soldiers and 34 porters and archers from Verapaz . Once they arrived at IxB 'ol , near the shore of Lake Petén Itzá , AjK 'ixaw was sent ahead as an emissary to Nojpetén . 
 = = = = = Amésqueta 's attempt to locate Díaz de Velasco = = = = = 
 Back in Mopán , Amésqueta had received additional supplies and decided to catch up with his advance party . He left Mopán on 10 March 1696 with friar Agustín Cano and about 10 soldiers . He arrived at Chakal a week later but there was still no word from Díaz or AjK 'ixaw . On 20 March Amésqueta left Chakal with 36 men and four days ' supplies to find Díaz 's party , whom he assumed would be nearby . After two days travelling in intense heat they met up with some Verapaz porters that Díaz had left behind . They followed Díaz 's trail to the shore of Lake Petén Itzá near to the Itza capital . As they scouted along the south shore they were shadowed by about 30 Itza canoes , and more Itzas approached by land but kept a safe distance . There were plentiful signs that Díaz 's party had passed that way , and Amésqueta assumed that they had crossed to Nojpetén . He wrote a letter to Díaz , which was passed to an Itza onlooker who indicated he would deliver it . Various Itzas now approached the party , including a nobleman who exchanged gifts with Amésqueta . During various attempts at communication to verify Díaz 's whereabouts the Itza became agitated and responded angrily , although no @-@ one in the Spanish party could understand the Itza language . The Itzas indicated that the Spanish should proceed to the lakeshore along a narrow path and embark in the small canoes that were stationed nearby . One of Amésqueta 's officers recognised an Indian among the Itzas as a Mopan who had served as a soldier in Díaz 's first expedition and thought that the Mopan was trying to tell him not to trust the Itzas . 
 Amésqueta was extremely suspicious of the small canoes being supplied , knowing that the Itza had 30 @-@ man canoes ; he was also aware that tricking enemies into small canoes was a favoured tactic among the lowland Maya to separate and kill Spanish intruders . He suspected that AjK 'ixaw had betrayed them and that this was precisely what had happened to Díaz and his men . As nightfall approached , low on rations , in a vulnerable location and with no sign of Díaz and his men , Amésqueta retreated from the lakeshore and his men took up positions on a small hill nearby . In the early hours of the morning he ordered a retreat by moonlight , using just a few torches . They arrived back at Chakal on 25 March and from there retreated to San Pedro Mártir on 9 April , beset by worsening conditions , a hurricane , sickness and rumours of enemies . The battered expedition set up a base camp nine leagues ( approximately 23 @.@ 4 miles or 37 @.@ 7 km ) north of Mopan . 
 = = = = = Fate of Díaz de Velasco 's expedition = = = = = 
 Writing after the fall of Nojpetén , friar Cano described the ultimate fate of Díaz de Velasco and his companions ; he claimed to have received the information from interviews with the soldiers from Yucatán who had stormed the Itza capital and from Ch 'ol witnesses , although there were no Ch 'ol at Nojpetén . Díaz 's party arrived at the lakeshore and were told by local Itza that Franciscan friars were at Nojpetén . They were wary at first and asked for proof , upon which an Itza messenger brought them a rosary as a token . Looking across the lake they saw men dressed as friars calling to them to come across , these were Itza dressed in the habits of the two Franciscans who had recently been killed at the island . Díaz and his companions then boarded the Itza canoes , leaving thirty Maya porters with their mules and supplies . 
 Once on the lake the Itza overturned some of the canoes and killed some of Díaz 's men ; others were wounded and dragged ashore to be killed . Díaz , the Dominicans and two other men were in a large canoe that was not overturned and were taken to Nojpetén where a fierce struggle ensued as Díaz attempted to defend himself with his sword , killing several Itzas . The two other men were immediately killed while the friars were beaten and tied to X @-@ shaped crosses before having their hearts cut out . Across the lake , the Itza attacked the porters guarding the expedition supplies and killed all of them . The Itza killed a total of 87 expedition members , including 50 soldiers , two Dominicans and about 35 Maya helpers . The remains of the small group that were killed on Nojpetén were later retrieved by the Spanish after the fall of the city and were taken back to Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala for burial . 
 = = = = = Aftermath of Amésqueta 's entry = = = = = 
 Over the following weeks scouts were sent out to try to make contact with local Mopan and Ch 'ol communities , including Chok Ajaw , <unk> , IxB 'ol and Manche without success – most of the natives had fled , leaving the forest deserted . At San Pedro Mártir he received news of AjChan 's embassy to Mérida in December 1695 and the formal surrender of the Itza to Spanish authority . Unable to reconcile the news with the loss of his men at Lake Petén Itzá , and with appalling conditions in San Pedro Mártir , Amésqueta abandoned the unfinished fort . Friar Cano recommended to the new Guatemalan president that the Ch 'ol be moved to Verapaz where they could be properly administered . As a result of the failed expedition , Cano 's recommendation was accepted , the fort was dismantled and any Maya that could be captured across a wide swathe of southern Petén was forcibly relocated to Belén near Rabinal in Verapaz . This relocation was brutal and ruthless and was condemned by several high @-@ ranking colonial officials , including oidor José de <unk> and even by Amésqueta . 
 = = = Fall of Nojpetén = = = 
 The Itzas ' continued resistance had become a major embarrassment for the Spanish colonial authorities , and soldiers were despatched from Campeche to take Nojpetén once and for all . The final assault was made possible by the gradual opening of the road from Mérida to Petén ; by December 1696 this road had reached the lake shore although it was unfinished and still almost impassable in places . By this time the deep divisions between the political leaders of the Itza were such that a unified defence of the Itza kingdom had become impossible . 
 = = = = Final preparations = = = = 
 In late December 1696 the Chak 'an Itza attacked the large Kejache mission town of Pak 'ek 'em ; they abducted almost all the inhabitants and burned the church . The demoralised Spanish garrison at Chuntuki buried their weapons and ammunition and retreated five leagues ( approximately 13 miles or 21 km ) back towards Campeche . From late December 1696 to the middle of January 1697 Ursúa sent parties of soldiers and workmen along the road towards the lake ; the first group was commanded by Pedro de Zubiaur and had instructions to begin building a galeota , a large oar @-@ powered warship . This group was followed by reinforcements bringing supplies , including light and heavy weapons , gunpowder and food . On 23 January Ursúa left Campeche with more soldiers and muleteers , bringing the total number of soldiers arriving as reinforcements to 130 . The Spanish fortified their positions at Ch 'ich ' and deployed heavy artillery for its defence . 
 Martín de Urzúa y Arizmendi arrived on the western shore of lake Petén Itzá with his soldiers on 26 February 1697 , and once there built the heavily @-@ armed galeota attack boat , which was assembled at Ch 'ich ' over a space of 12 days in early March . The galeota had a keel of 30 cubits or 14 @.@ 4 metres ( 47 ft ) ; it had 12 oars on each side and a rudder with an iron screw . The galeota carried 114 men and at least five artillery pieces , including a <unk> ( light cannon ) and four <unk> ( mortars ) . The piragua longboat used to cross the San Pedro River was also transported to the lake to be used in the attack on the Itza capital ; this boat had 6 oars and a rudder . 
 From 28 February onwards the Spanish expedition was repeatedly approached by hostile Itzas , who sometimes shot arrows in the direction of the intruders but inflicted no casualties . At the same time , small groups of curious Itzas mingled freely with the Spanish and received trinkets from them such as belts , necklaces and earrings . 
 = = = = Assault on Nojpetén = = = = 
 On 10 March , Itza and Yalain emissaries arrived at Ch 'ich ' to negotiate with Ursúa . First came AjChan who had already met him in Mérida ; he was followed by Chamach Xulu , the ruler of the Yalain . Kan Ek ' then sent a canoe with a white flag raised bearing emissaries , including the Itza high priest , who offered peaceful surrender . Ursúa received the embassy in peace and invited Kan Ek ' to visit his encampment three days later . On the appointed day Kan Ek ' failed to arrive ; instead Maya warriors massed both along the shore and in canoes upon the lake . 
 Ursúa decided that any further attempts at peaceful incorporation of the Itza into the Spanish Empire were pointless , and a waterbourne assault was launched upon Kan Ek 's capital on the morning of 13 March . The encampment at Ch 'ich ' was left defended by 25 Spanish soldiers , three Maya musketeers and several artillery pieces . Ursúa boarded the galeota with 108 soldiers , two secular priests , five personal servants , the baptised Itza emissary AjChan and his brother @-@ in @-@ law and an Itza prisoner from Nojpetén . The attack boat was rowed east from Ch 'ich ' towards the Itza capital ; half way across the lake it encountered a large fleet of canoes spread in an arc across the approach to Nojpetén , covering about 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) from one shore to another – Ursúa simply gave the order to row through them . A large number of defenders had gathered along the shore of Nojpetén and on the roofs of the city . As the galeota approached , more canoes put out from the shore and the Spanish were surrounded . Once they had surrounded the galeota , Itza archers began to shoot at the invaders . Ursúa gave orders to his men not to fire but arrows wounded several soldiers ; one of the wounded soldiers discharged his musket and at that point the officers lost control of their men . The defending Itza soon fled from the withering Spanish gunfire . 
 The city fell after a brief but bloody battle in which many Itza warriors died ; the Spanish suffered only minor casualties . The Spanish bombardment caused heavy loss of life on the island ; the surviving Itza abandoned their capital and swam across to the mainland with many dying in the water . After the battle the surviving defenders melted away into the forests , leaving the Spanish to occupy an abandoned Maya town . Martín de Ursúa planted his standard upon the highest point of the island and renamed Nojpetén as Nuestra Señora de los Remedios y San Pablo , Laguna del Itza ( " Our Lady of Remedy and Saint Paul , Lake of the Itza " ) . The Itza nobility fled , dispersing to Maya settlements throughout Petén ; in response the Spanish scoured the region with search parties . Kan Ek ' was soon captured with help from the Yalain Maya ruler Chamach Xulu ; The Kowoj king ( Aj Kowoj ) was also soon captured , together with other Maya nobles and their families . With the defeat of the Itza , the last independent and unconquered native kingdom in the Americas fell to the European colonisers . 
 = = = = Aftermath = = = = 
 Martín de Ursúa had little interest in administering the newly conquered territory and delegated its control to military officers who he did very little to support , either militarily or financially . With Nojpetén safely in the hands of the Spanish , Ursúa returned to Mérida , leaving Kan Ek ' and other high @-@ ranking members of his family as prisoners of the Spanish garrison at Nuestra Señora de los Remedios y San Pablo , isolated among the hostile Itza and Kowoj who still dominated the mainland . The garrison was reinforced in 1699 by a military expedition from Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala , accompanied by mixed @-@ race ladino civilians who came to found their own town around the military camp . The settlers brought disease with them , which killed many soldiers and colonists and swept through the indigenous population . The Guatemalans stayed just three months before returning to Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala , taking the captive Itza king with them , together with his son and two of his cousins . The cousins died on the long journey to Santiago ; Ajaw Kan Ek ' and his son spent the rest of their lives under house arrest in the colonial capital . 
 When the Spanish conquered the Petén lakes in 1697 , the Yalain were initially cooperative and assisted in the capture of the king of the Itza . At this time Yalain was ruled by Chamach Xulu . The Yalain leadership encouraged Christian conversion as a means of maintaining peace with the occupying Spanish forces . As time went on , Yalain cooperation with the Spanish appears to have decreased . Soon after the conquest , the Yalain fled their settlements to avoid foraging Spanish parties that were abducting Maya women for " service " at their barracks . At this time , such was the hostility that was felt towards the occupying forces that the inhabitants of the Yalain settlements preferred to burn their fields and break all their pottery rather than leave anything for the Spanish . The Yalain capital is recorded as having been burned in 1698 . 
 = = Final years of conquest = = 
 In the late 17th century , the small population of Ch 'ol Maya in southern Petén and Belize was forcibly removed to Alta Verapaz , where the people were absorbed into the Q 'eqchi ' population . After the conquest , the colonial administration of Petén was divided between the ecclesiastical authorities in Yucatán and secular administration as part of the Captaincy General of Guatemala . There was never a strong Spanish presence in the area , which remained remote , although the Spanish built a fortress @-@ prison , the Castillo de Arismendi ; it was finished in 1700 . 
 The distance from Nuestra Señora de los Remedios y San Pablo ( formerly Nojpetén ) to Mérida , combined with the difficult terrain and the hostility of the natives led to the road from Yucatán falling into a state of disrepair . In 1701 Ursúa y <unk> realised that the road was in such a poor state that the Spanish garrison could not be supplied from Yucatán . He wrote to the King of Spain , requesting that Petén be transferred from the jurisdiction of Yucatán to the Audiencia Real of Guatemala . In 1703 Ursúa 's petition was granted , with the condition that the ecclesiastical authority over Petén would pass to the Dominican Order . 
 Between 1703 and 1753 , reducciones were established at San José and San Andrés on Lake Petén Itzá , Santa Ana just south of the lake , and at San Luis , Santo Toribio and Dolores in the south ( not to be confused with Dolores del Lakandon ) . Each of these mission towns had its own minister who answered to the <unk> general with the Spanish garrison at Nuestra Señora de los Remedios y San Pablo . In the first decades of the 18th century , churches were built in five colonial towns : Dolores , Remedios , San Andrés , San José and Santo Toribio . The church in Dolores was built in 1708 ; the construction was probably overseen by Juan Antonio Ruiz y Bustamante . In 1699 there were nine priests in Petén but thereafter there was usually a shortage of clergy in colonial Petén . In spite of the objections of the Dominicans who had been working in southern Petén , the Franciscans continued to provide clergy from Yucatán , and it was the Franciscans who oversaw the spiritual welfare of Petén during the colonial period . 
 <unk> was one of the lords of the northern Chak 'an Itza province of the conquered Itza kingdom ; friar Avendaño had met him during his expedition to Nojpetén . After the conquest he relocated from the north shore of Lake Petén Itzá to <unk> , a region lying between Lake Yaxha and the Classic period ruins of Tikal . For some years after the conquest he established the <unk> region as a refuge from the Spanish and engaged in internecine war against the surviving Kowoj to the south . 
 = = = Reductions around Lake Petén Itzá = = = 
 At the time of the fall of Nojpetén , there are estimated to have been 60 @,@ 000 Maya living around Lake Petén Itzá , including a large number of refugees from other areas . It is estimated that 88 % of them died during the first ten years of colonial rule owing to a combination of disease and war . Although disease was responsible for the majority of deaths , Spanish expeditions and internecine warfare between indigenous groups also played their part . 
 Catholic priests from Yucatán founded several mission towns around Lake Petén Itzá in 1702 – 1703 . The first towns to be concentrated into colonial reducciones were <unk> , which became the new town of San José , and neighbouring San Andrés , both on the north shore of Lake Petén Itzá . They were first subjugated by one of Ursúa 's officers , Cristobal de <unk> , before being passed into the care of the Dominican friars for the Christian conversion of the inhabitants . Surviving Itza and Kowoj were resettled in the new colonial towns by a mixture of persuasion and force . Kowoj and Itza leaders in these mission towns rebelled against their Spanish overlords in 1704 and almost retook Nojpetén , but although well @-@ planned , the rebellion was quickly crushed . Its leaders were executed , and most of the mission towns were abandoned ; by 1708 only about 6 @,@ 000 Maya remained in central Petén . The reductions failed in large part because the missionaries charged with converting the inhabitants could not speak the Itza language . 
 = = Legacy of the conquest = = 
 Martín de Ursúa used his conquest of the Itza as a stepping stone to achieving the coveted post of Governor @-@ General of the Philippines , which he took up in 1709 . European @-@ introduced diseases devastated the native population of Petén , with the effects of disease compounded by the psychological impact of defeat . The population around Lake Petén Itzá numbered between 20 @,@ 000 and 40 @,@ 000 in 1697 . By 1714 , a census recorded just over 3 @,@ 000 individuals in Spanish Petén , including non @-@ Indians . This number would not have included the so @-@ called " wild " Maya living in the forest far from Spanish administration and control . By 1700 the new colonial capital of Petén was mainly inhabited by colonists , soldiers and convicts . During the second half of the 18th century , adult male Indians were heavily taxed , often being forced into debt peonage . Western Petén and neighbouring Chiapas remained sparsely populated , and the Maya inhabitants avoided contact with the Spanish . 
 San José , on the northwest shore of lake Petén Itzá , is the home of the last surviving speakers of the Itza language . The surname Kowoj still survives , but the Kowoj and Itza have fully merged and no longer exist as separate ethnicities . In modern times there is a history of conflict between San José ( the former Itza town of <unk> 'ot ) and neighbouring San Andrés ( the former Kowoj @-@ allied town of Chak 'an ) , and this mutual hostility probably represents ancient hostility between the Itza and the Kowoj . 
 = = Historical sources = = 
 Hernán Cortés described his expedition to Honduras in the fifth letter of his Cartas de Relación , in which he details his crossing of what is now Guatemala 's Petén Department . Bernal Díaz del Castillo accompanied Cortés on the expedition to Honduras . He wrote a lengthy account of the conquest of Mexico and neighbouring regions , the Historia verdadera de la conquista de la Nueva España ( " True History of the Conquest of New Spain " ) . His account was finished around 1568 , some 40 years after the campaigns it describes ; it includes his own description of the expedition . In 1688 colonial historian Diego López de <unk> detailed the expeditions of the Spanish missionaries Bartolomé de Fuensalida and Juan de Orbita in 1618 and 1619 in his Los <unk> siglos de la <unk> española en Yucatán o sea historia de esta provincia ( " The three centuries of Spanish domination in Yucatán , or the history of this province " ) ; he based it upon Fuensalida 's report , which is now lost . 
 Franciscan friar Andrés Avendaño y Loyola recorded his own account of his late 17th century journeys to Nojpetén , written in 1696 and entitled Relación de las <unk> que <unk> a la <unk> de los gentiles <unk> ( " Account of the expeditions that I made to convert the Itza heathens " ) . When the Spanish finally conquered Petén in 1697 they produced a vast quantity of documentation . Juan de <unk> Soto @-@ Mayor was a Spanish colonial official who first held the post of relator of the Royal Chancery of <unk> and later as that of the Council of the Indies . As such he had access to the large amount of colonial documents stored in the General Archive of the Indies . From these he produced his Historia de la Conquista de la Provincia de el Itza , <unk> , y <unk> de la de el Lacandon , y otras <unk> de indios <unk> , de la <unk> de el <unk> de <unk> , a las <unk> del Yucatan en la América Septentrional ( " History of the Conquest of the Province of the Itza , reduction , and advances in that of the Lakandon , and other nations of barbarous indians , and the intervention of the Kingdom of Guatemala , and the provinces of Yucatan in Northern America " ) . This was first published in Madrid in 1701 and detailed the history of Petén from 1525 through to 1699 . 
 = = Archaeology = = 
