 Ursúa referred to the western port town of Ch 'ich ' as Nich . The modern name for a point on the south side of the bay is Punta <unk> , which is probably derived from the colonial Yucatec nix tun , meaning stone ramp . Archaeologists carried out excavations at the lake shore at Punta <unk> and discovered a stone ramp there , which was probably built by Ursúa 's troops to launch his galeota . 
 = Skyfall = 
 Skyfall is the 23rd James Bond film produced by Eon Productions and released in 2012 . It features Daniel Craig in his third performance as James Bond , and Javier Bardem as Raoul Silva , the film 's villain . It was directed by Sam Mendes and written by Neal Purvis , Robert Wade and John Logan , and features an Academy Award @-@ winning theme , sung by Adele . It was distributed by Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( MGM ) and Columbia Pictures . 
 The story centres on Bond investigating an attack on MI6 ; the attack is part of a plot by former MI6 agent Raoul Silva to humiliate , discredit and kill M as revenge against her for betraying him . The film sees the return of two recurring characters to the series after an absence of two films : Q , played by Ben Whishaw , and Moneypenny , played by Naomie Harris . Skyfall is the last film of the series for Judi Dench , who played M , a role that she had played in the previous six films . The position is subsequently filled by Ralph Fiennes ' character , Gareth Mallory , though Dench would make a brief appearance in the next Bond film , Spectre . 
 Mendes was approached to direct the film after the release of Quantum of Solace in 2008 . Development was suspended when MGM encountered financial troubles and did not resume until December 2010 ; during this time , Mendes remained attached to the project as a consultant . The original screenwriter , Peter Morgan , left the project during the suspension . When production resumed , Logan , Purvis , and Wade continued writing what became the final version of the script . Filming began in November 2011 and primarily took place in the United Kingdom , with smaller portions shot in China and Turkey . 
 Skyfall premiered in London at the Royal Albert Hall on 23 October 2012 and was released in the United Kingdom on 26 October 2012 and the United States on 9 November 2012 . It was the first James Bond film to be screened in IMAX venues , although it was not filmed with IMAX cameras . The film 's release coincided with the 50th anniversary of the series , which began with Dr. No in 1962 . Skyfall was positively received by critics , being praised for its performances — particularly those of Craig , Bardem and Dench — writing and script , cinematography , Mendes ' direction , Thomas Newman 's score , and the action scenes . It was the 14th film to gross over $ 1 billion worldwide , and the first Bond film to do so . It became the seventh @-@ highest @-@ grossing film at the time , the highest @-@ grossing film in the UK , the highest @-@ grossing film in the series , the highest @-@ grossing film worldwide for both Sony Pictures and MGM , and the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2012 . The film won several accolades , including two BAFTA Awards , two Academy Awards and two Grammys . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Istanbul , MI6 agents James Bond and Eve Moneypenny chase a mercenary , Patrice , who has stolen a computer hard drive containing details of undercover agents . As Bond and Patrice fight atop a train , M , the head of MI6 , orders Eve to shoot Patrice from long range . Eve misses and inadvertently hits Bond , who falls into a river . Bond is presumed dead , and Patrice escapes . 
 In the aftermath of the operation , M comes under political pressure from Gareth Mallory , the chairman of the British parliament 's Intelligence and Security Committee , to retire . On her return from the meeting , MI6 's servers are hacked , and M receives a taunting message via computer moments before the MI6 building explodes , killing eight employees . Bond , who used his presumed death to retire , learns of the attack and returns to London . Although he fails a series of physical and psychological examinations , M approves his return to the field . Bond is ordered to identify Patrice 's employer , recover the stolen hard drive , and kill Patrice . He meets with Q , MI6 's new quartermaster , who gives him a pistol that will only shoot when Bond is holding it and a radio beacon . 
 In Shanghai , Bond follows Patrice into a skyscraper , but is unable to prevent him from killing his target . The two fight , but Patrice falls to his death before Bond can learn of his employer 's identity . Searching Patrice 's equipment , Bond finds a gambling chip intended as payment for the assassination , which leads him to a casino in Macau . Bond is approached by Séverine , Patrice 's accomplice , and asks to meet her employer . She warns him that he is about to be killed by her bodyguards , but promises to help Bond if he will kill her employer . Bond thwarts the attack and joins Séverine on her yacht . They travel to an abandoned island off the coast of Macau , where they are taken prisoner by the crew and delivered to Séverine 's employer , Raoul Silva . A former MI6 agent , Silva has turned to cyberterrorism , and orchestrated the attacks on MI6 . Silva kills Séverine , but Bond captures Silva for rendition to Britain . 
 At MI6 's underground headquarters , Q attempts to decrypt Silva 's laptop but inadvertently enables it to access the MI6 systems , allowing Silva to escape from MI6 custody . Bond realises that Silva wanted to be captured as part of a plan to kill M , whom he resents for leaving him to die after being captured years earlier . Bond gives chase through the tunnel network under London . Silva attacks M during a public inquiry into her handling of the stolen hard drive . Bond arrives in time to repel Silva 's attack , and M is hurried from the building by her aide , Bill Tanner . 
 Bond takes M to Skyfall , his family estate and childhood home in Scotland . Laying a trap , he instructs Q to leave an electronic trail for Silva to follow , a decision Mallory supports . Bond and M are met by Kincade , the Skyfall gamekeeper . The trio set up a series of booby traps throughout the house . When Silva 's men arrive , Bond , M and Kincade manage to kill most of them , but M is wounded . Silva arrives by helicopter with a second party and much heavier weapons , so Bond sends M and Kincade off through a secret tunnel to a chapel on the grounds . Bond detonates gas canisters and retreats down the same tunnel as M and Kincade . The resulting blast causes the helicopter to crash , destroying the house and killing all but a handful of Silva 's men . 
 Silva survives and , spotting Kincade 's torch beam , follows Kincade and M to the chapel . He forces his gun into M 's hand , begging her to kill them both . Bond arrives and kills Silva by throwing a knife into his back . M , however , succumbs to her wound and dies . Following M 's funeral , Eve — formally introducing herself to Bond as Eve Moneypenny — retires from field work to become secretary for the new head of MI6 , Mallory , who assumes the title of M. 
 = = Cast = = 
 Daniel Craig as James Bond , agent 007 . 
 Judi Dench as M , the head of MI6 and Bond 's superior . 
 Javier Bardem as Raoul Silva ( born Tiago Rodriguez ) , an ex @-@ MI6 operative @-@ turned @-@ cyberterrorist . 
 Ralph Fiennes as Gareth Mallory , chairman of the Intelligence and Security Committee . 
 Naomie Harris as Eve Moneypenny , an MI6 field agent . 
 Bérénice Lim Marlohe as Séverine , Raoul Silva 's associate . 
 Albert Finney as Kincade , the gamekeeper of the Skyfall estate . 
 Ben Whishaw as Q , the MI6 quartermaster . 
 Rory Kinnear as Bill Tanner , the MI6 Chief of Staff . 
 Ola Rapace as Patrice , a mercenary . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Production of Skyfall was suspended throughout 2010 because of MGM 's financial troubles . They resumed pre @-@ production following MGM 's exit from bankruptcy on 21 December 2010 and , in January 2011 , the film was officially given a release date of 9 November 2012 by MGM and the Broccoli family , with production scheduled to start in late 2011 . Subsequently MGM and Sony Pictures announced that the UK release date would be brought forward to 26 October 2012 , two weeks ahead of the US release date , which remained scheduled for 9 November 2012 . The film 's budget is estimated to have been between US $ 150 million and $ 200 million , compared to the $ 200 million spent on Quantum of Solace . Skyfall was part of year @-@ long celebrations of the 50th anniversary of Dr. No and the Bond film series . According to producer Michael G. Wilson , a documentary crew was scheduled to follow production of the film to celebrate the anniversary . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 After the release of Quantum of Solace in 2008 , producer Barbara Broccoli commented that Skyfall , untitled at the time , may continue the plot of the Quantum organisation , introduced in Casino Royale and continued in Quantum of Solace . Ultimately , Skyfall was a stand @-@ alone film . 
 In August 2011 the Serbian newspaper <unk> stated that Bond 23 would be entitled Carte Blanche and would be an adaptation of the recent continuation novel by Jeffery Deaver . On 30 August Eon Productions officially denied any link between Bond 23 and Carte Blanche , stating that " the new film is not going to be called Carte Blanche and will have nothing to do with the Jeffery Deaver book " . On 3 October 2011 15 domain names including ' <unk> @-@ <unk> ' and ' <unk> ' were reported to have been registered on behalf of MGM and Sony Pictures by Internet brand @-@ protection service <unk> . This led to supposition in the media that the film had been given the name " Skyfall " . These reports were not confirmed at the time by Eon Productions , Sony or MGM . Skyfall was later confirmed as the title at a press conference on 3 November 2011 , during which co @-@ producer Barbara Broccoli said that the title " has some emotional context which will be revealed in the film " . The title refers to the name of Bond 's childhood home " Skyfall " , and the setting for the film 's finale . 
 = = = = Casting = = = = 
 The main cast of Skyfall was officially announced at a press conference held at the Corinthia Hotel in London on 3 November 2011 , 50 years to the day after Sean Connery was announced to play James Bond in the film Dr. No . Daniel Craig returned as James Bond for the third time , saying he felt lucky to have the chance to appear as 007 . Director Sam Mendes described Bond as experiencing a " combination of lassitude , boredom , depression [ and ] difficulty with what he 's chosen to do for a living " . Judi Dench returned as M for her seventh and final appearance in the role . Over the course of the film , M 's ability to run MI6 is repeatedly called into question , culminating in a public inquiry into her running of the service . 
 Javier Bardem was cast as the film 's principal villain , Raoul Silva , a cyberterrorist who is seeking revenge against those he holds responsible for betraying him . Bardem described Silva as " more than a villain " , while Craig stated that Bond has a " very important relationship " to Silva . In casting the role , director Sam Mendes admitted that he lobbied hard for Bardem to accept the part . Mendes saw the potential for the character to be recognised as one of the most memorable characters in the series and wanted to create " something [ the audience ] may consider to have been absent from the Bond movies for a long time " . He felt that Bardem was one of the few actors up to the task of becoming " colourless " and existing within the world of the film as something more than a function of the plot . In preparing for the role , Bardem had the script translated into his native Spanish to better understand his character , which Mendes cited as being a sign of the actor 's commitment to the film . Bardem dyed his hair blond for the role after brainstorming ideas with Mendes to come up with a distinct visual look for the character , which led some commentators to observe a similarity between the character and WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange . Bérénice Marlohe was cast as Séverine , a character who had been saved from the Macau sex trade by Silva and now works as his representative . Marlohe described her character as being " glamorous and enigmatic " , and that she drew inspiration from GoldenEye villain Xenia Onatopp ( played by Famke Janssen ) in playing Séverine . 
 Ralph Fiennes was cast as Gareth Mallory , a former lieutenant colonel in the British Army and now the chairman of the Intelligence and Security Committee , which gives him the authority to regulate MI6 . At the end of the film , Mallory becomes the head of MI6 , assuming the title of M. During production , Fiennes stated that he could not say anything specific about the role other than that it was a " really interesting part which is really quite fun " . To play the returning character of Miss Moneypenny , Naomie Harris was cast . Harris ' role was initially presented as that of Eve , an MI6 field agent who works closely with Bond . Despite ongoing speculation in the media that Harris had been cast as Miss Moneypenny , this was not confirmed by anyone involved in production of the film , with Harris herself even going so far as to dismiss claims that Eve was in fact Moneypenny , stating that " Eve is not remotely office @-@ bound " . According to Harris , Eve " [ believes ] she is Bond 's equal , but she is really his junior " . Another character returning to the series was Q , played by Ben Whishaw . Mendes had initially declined to confirm which part Whishaw would play , and later said the idea of the re @-@ introduction was his , saying " I offered ideas about Moneypenny , Q and a flamboyant villain and they said yes " . To play the part of Kincade , Mendes cast Albert Finney . The producers briefly considered approaching Sean Connery to play the role in a nod to the 50th anniversary of the film series , but elected not to as they felt Connery 's presence would be seen as stunt casting and disengage audiences from the film . 
 = = = = Crew = = = = 
 Skyfall was directed by Sam Mendes , who first signed on to the project shortly after Quantum of Solace was released , and remained on board as a consultant during the period of uncertainty surrounding MGM 's financial situation . Mendes , who had previously worked with Craig on Road to Perdition , was approached after seeing Craig in a production of A Steady Rain . The two met after a performance , where Craig broached the subject of directing a Bond film for the first time . Mendes was at first hesitant to accept the job as directing a Bond film had no appeal to him , but he did not reject the offer immediately because of Craig 's involvement and enthusiasm for the project ; Mendes described Craig 's casting and performance in Casino Royale as being precisely what he felt the Bond franchise needed in its lead actor . He agreed to direct after meeting with producers Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli and seeing the early direction the film was going to take . Speculation in the media suggested that Mendes had commissioned rewrites of the script to " [ remove ] action scenes in favour of ' characterful performances ' " with the intention of bidding for an Academy Award . Mendes denied the reports , stating that the film 's planned action scenes were an important part of the overall film . 
 Peter Morgan was originally commissioned to write a script , but left the project when MGM filed for bankruptcy and production of the film stalled ; despite his departure , Morgan later stated that the final script was based on his original idea , retaining what he described as the film 's " big hook " . Director Mendes adamantly denied this , stating that it was " just not true " and that Morgan 's script treatment had been discarded once Mendes agreed to direct . The final script was written by Bond screenwriting regulars Neal Purvis , Robert Wade and John Logan . Logan recounted being brought into the project by his long @-@ time friend Sam Mendes , describing the process between Mendes and the writers as " very collaborative " , and that writing Skyfall was one of the best experiences he had had in scripting a film . British playwright Jez Butterworth also provided uncredited contributions . 
 Roger Deakins signed on as cinematographer , having previously worked with Mendes on Jarhead and Revolutionary Road . Dennis Gassner returned as production designer , the costume designer was Jany Temime , Alexander Witt was director of the second unit , the stunt co @-@ ordinator was Gary Powell and Chris Corbould supervised the special effects , while the visual effects supervisor was Steve Begg . All have worked on previous Bond films . Daniel Kleinman returned to design the film 's title sequence after stepping aside to allow graphic design studio MK12 to create the Quantum of Solace sequence . 
 = = = = Location scouting = = = = 
 Sam Mendes and Barbara Broccoli travelled to South Africa for location scouting in April 2011 . With the film moving into pre @-@ production in August , reports emerged that shooting would take place in India , with scenes to be shot in the Sarojini Nagar district of New Delhi and on railway lines between Goa and Ahmedabad . The production crew faced complications in securing permission to close sections of the Konkan Railway . Similar problems in obtaining filming permits were encountered by production crews for The Dark Knight Rises and Mission : Impossible – Ghost Protocol . Permission was eventually granted to the Bond production crew ; however , the production ultimately did not shoot in India . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography was scheduled to take up to 133 days , although the actual filming took 128 . Filming began on 7 November 2011 in and around London , with the cinematographer Roger Deakins using Arri Alexa digital cameras to shoot the entire film . Scenes were shot in London Underground stations , Smithfield car park in West Smithfield , the National Gallery , Southwark , Whitehall , Parliament Square , Charing Cross station the Old Royal Naval College in Greenwich , Cadogan Square and Tower Hill . St Bartholomew 's Hospital was used as the filming location for the scene in which Bond enters MI6 's underground headquarters , while the Old Vic Tunnels underneath Waterloo Station in London served as the MI6 training grounds . For the meeting between Q and Bond , production worked during the National Gallery 's closing hours at night . The Department of Energy and Climate Change was used in the scene when Bond stood on the roof near the end of the film . The Vauxhall Bridge and Millbank was closed to traffic for filming the explosion at the MI6 headquarters at Vauxhall Cross . Unlike The World Is Not Enough , which also featured an explosion at the building — which was filmed at a large @-@ scale replica — the explosion in Skyfall was added digitally in post @-@ production . Shooting of the finale was planned to take place at <unk> Castle in Argyll , but was cancelled shortly after filming began . Glencoe was instead chosen for filming of these scenes . Although supposedly based in Scotland , Bond 's family home of Skyfall was constructed on Hankley Common in Surrey using plywood and plaster to build a full @-@ scale model of the building . 
 Production moved to Turkey in March 2012 , with filming reported to be continuing until 6 May . Production was expected to take three months in the country . Adana stands in for the outskirts of Istanbul in the film . A group of Turkish teenagers infiltrated a closed set in a railway sidings in Adana to film rehearsals of a fight scene on top of a train before being caught by security . The train scene depicted in trailers showed the Varda Viaduct outside Adana . Bond stunt double Andy Lister dived backwards off the 300 @-@ foot drop for the scene . A crane was set up on a train carriage to hold a safety line . Parts of Istanbul — including the Spice Bazaar , Yeni Camii , the Main Post Office , Sultanahmet Square and the Grand Bazaar — were closed for filming in April . Store owners in the affected areas were reportedly allowed to open their shops , but were not allowed to conduct business , instead being paid <unk> ( $ 418 ) per day as compensation . Production faced criticism for allegedly damaging buildings while filming a motorcycle chase across rooftops in the city . Michael G. Wilson denied these claims , pointing out that the film crew had removed sections of rooftops before filming began and replaced them with replicas for the duration of the shoot ; when filming finished , the original rooftops would be restored . The production team negotiated with 613 part owners of the <unk> Beach in <unk> , to film along the coastline . 
 Mendes confirmed that China would be featured in the film , with shooting scheduled to take place in Shanghai and " other parts " of the country . John Logan described that production deliberately sought out locations that were " in opposition " to London with an exotic quality that made them " places for Bond to be uncomfortable " . Many scenes were not filmed on location in Shanghai . Instead , the Virgin Active pool in London 's Canary Wharf acted as Bond 's hotel pool in Shanghai , and the entrance to London 's fourth tallest building , Broadgate Tower , was also lit up to look like an office building there ; for the aerial footage of Shanghai , the crew received rare access to shoot from a helicopter on loan from the Chinese government . The interior of the Golden Dragon casino in Macau where Bond met Séverine was constructed on a sound stage at Pinewood , with 300 floating lanterns and two 30 @-@ foot high dragon heads lighting the set . Additional scenes were filmed at Ascot Racecourse , standing in for Shanghai Pudong International Airport . The first official image from the film was released on 1 February 2012 , showing Daniel Craig on set at Pinewood Studios , within a recreation of a skyscraper in Shanghai . 
 Set reports dated April 2012 recorded that scenes would be set on Hashima Island , an abandoned island off the coast of Nagasaki , Japan . In actuality , the scene was set on an unnamed island off the coast of Macau , though based on the real @-@ life Hashima . Sam Mendes explained that the location was a hybrid of a set and computer @-@ generated images . Production chose to include the Hashima model after Daniel Craig met with Swedish film @-@ maker Thomas <unk> whilst shooting The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo in Stockholm . <unk> , who produced a short documentary on Hashima Island in 2002 entitled Hashima , recalled Craig taking extensive notes on the island at the time of the meeting , but was unaware of his interest in it until Skyfall was released . 
 The film was later converted into the IMAX format for projection in IMAX cinemas . Deakins was unaware that the film was to be released on IMAX until after he had made the decision to shoot the film with the Arri Alexa cameras , and was unhappy with the IMAX tests made from his footage as the colours " didn 't look great " . After exploring the IMAX system further and discovering that the IMAX Corporation was using their proprietary re @-@ mastering process , Deakins had further tests made without the process and found that " the images looked spectacular on the big IMAX screen " , quelling his doubts about the format . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Thomas Newman , who worked with Sam Mendes as composer for American Beauty , Road to Perdition , Jarhead and Revolutionary Road , replaced David Arnold as composer , becoming the ninth composer in the series ' history . When asked about the circumstances surrounding his departure from the role , David Arnold commented that Newman had been selected by Mendes because of their work together , rather than because of Arnold 's commitment to working with director Danny Boyle as composer for the Opening Ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics . The soundtrack album was released on 29 October 2012 in the United Kingdom and on 6 November 2012 in the United States . 
 In October 2012 British singer @-@ songwriter Adele confirmed that she had written and recorded the film 's theme song with her regular songwriter , Paul Epworth . She later posted the cover for the " Skyfall " sheet music on Twitter , crediting the songwriting to herself and Epworth , with arrangements to both Epworth and orchestrator J. A. C. Redford . The song was released online at 0 : 07 am BST on 5 October 2012 , a day dubbed " James Bond Day " by the producers as it marked 50 years to the day of the release of Dr. No . 
 The song was nominated for and won the Academy Award for Best Original Song . It was the first time a Bond song had won , and only the fourth time one had been nominated . " Skyfall " also won the Brit Award for Best British Single at the 2013 BRIT Awards . 
 The film also features Charles <unk> 's 1938 song , " Boum ! " during scenes in which Silva shows Bond around his abandoned island , and The Animals ' 1964 cover of John Lee Hooker 's song , " Boom Boom " when Silva assaults Skyfall in the film 's finale . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The premiere of Skyfall was on 23 October 2012 at the Royal Albert Hall in London . The event was attended by Charles , Prince of Wales , and his wife Camilla , Duchess of Cornwall . The film was released in the UK three days later on 26 October and into US cinemas on 8 November . Skyfall was the first Bond film to be screened in IMAX venues and was released into IMAX cinemas in North America a day earlier than the conventional cinema release . 
 Skyfall attracted some criticism from the National Sexual Violence Resource Center which , without having screened the film , expressed concern that Bond " abuses his power and authority " in a scene that suggests Bond initiates sexual intercourse with Séverine , a former victim of sex trafficking . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Skyfall earned $ 1 @.@ 109 billion worldwide , and is the highest @-@ grossing film worldwide for Sony Pictures and the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2012 . On its opening weekend , it earned $ 80 @.@ 6 million from 25 markets . In the UK the film grossed £ 20 @.@ 1 million on its opening weekend , making it the second @-@ highest Friday @-@ to @-@ Sunday debut ever behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 . It also achieved the second @-@ highest IMAX debut ever behind The Dark Knight Rises . The film set a record for the highest seven @-@ day gross with £ 37 @.@ 2 million , surpassing previous record holder Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ( £ 35 @.@ 7 million ) . By 9 November 2012 the film had earned over £ 57 million to surpass The Dark Knight Rises as the highest @-@ grossing film of 2012 , and the highest @-@ grossing James Bond film of all time in the UK . After 40 days of release the total UK gross stood at £ 94 @.@ 28 million , making Skyfall the highest @-@ grossing film in the UK , surpassing the £ 94 @.@ 03 million of Avatar . By 30 December 2012 , it became the first film to gross more than £ 100 million ( $ 161 @.@ 6 million ) in the UK . Skyfall 's takings at the box office saw it become only the 14th film and first Bond film to gross over $ 1 billion , making it the seventh highest @-@ grossing film ever made at the time and taking it past the inflation @-@ adjusted amount of $ 1 @.@ 047 billion earned by Thunderball . 
 Skyfall set an opening weekend record in Switzerland ( $ 5 @.@ 3 million ) and recorded the second @-@ largest opening weekend for a Hollywood film in India of 2012 ( $ 5 @.@ 1 million ) , as well as grossing $ 14 @.@ 3 million on its opening weekend in France . In Austria , it achieved the second @-@ highest opening weekend ever ( $ 3 @.@ 4 million ) behind The Lord of the Rings : The Return of the King , while in Finland , it scored the largest opening weekend when excluding previews ( $ 1 @.@ 47 million ) . 
 In North America , the film opened in 3 @,@ 505 cinemas , the widest opening for a Bond film . The film earned $ 2 @.@ 4 million from midnight showings on its opening day and a further $ 2 @.@ 2 million from IMAX and large @-@ format cinemas . CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade filmgoers gave the film was an " A " on an A + to F scale . Skyfall went on to gross $ 30 @.@ 8 million on its opening day in the US and Canada , and $ 88 @.@ 4 million in its opening weekend , the biggest debut yet for a Bond film . By the end of its theatrical run , the film earned $ 304 @,@ 360 @,@ 277 in the United States and Canada , making it the fourth highest @-@ grossing film of 2012 in these regions . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Skyfall received " generally positive reviews from critics and fans " , according to the <unk> . Rotten Tomatoes sampled 348 reviewers and judged 93 % of the reviews to be positive , while the film scored 81 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 49 reviews . A number of critics , including Kate Muir , reviewing for The Times , Philip French , writing in The Observer , IGN 's Daniel Krupa and the reviewers for the Irish Independent and the Daily Record , all asked whether Skyfall was the best Bond film produced . The Daily Telegraph 's film reviewer , Robbie Collin , considered Skyfall to be " often dazzling , always audacious " , with excellent action sequences in a film that contained humour and emotion . Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter thought that Skyfall was " dramatically gripping while still brandishing a droll undercurrent of humor " , going on to say that it was a film that had " some weight and complexity to it " . Variety 's Peter <unk> suggested that the film 's greatest strength lay in its willingness to put as much focus on characterisation as it did action set @-@ pieces , allowing the two to co @-@ exist rather than compete for the audience 's attention , while Manohla Dargis , reviewing for The New York Times , considered Skyfall to be " a superior follow @-@ up to Casino Royale " which is " opulent rather than outlandish and insistently , progressively low @-@ key " . Kim Newman , reviewing the film for Empire , concluded , " Skyfall is pretty much all you could want from a 21st Century Bond : cool but not camp , respectful of tradition but up to the moment , serious in its thrills and relatively complex in its characters but with the sense of fun that hasn 't always been evident lately " . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film 4 out of 4 stars , describing it as " a full @-@ blooded , joyous , intelligent celebration of a beloved cultural icon " . Reviewing for the New Statesman , Ryan Gilbey saw that " nostalgia permeates the movie " , going on to say that " sometimes the old ways are the best " . 
 A number of reviewers praised Daniel Craig in Skyfall . Roger Ebert believed that in Skyfall " Daniel Craig [ takes ] full possession of a role he previously played unconvincingly " ; Philip French commented that " Craig manages to get out of the shadow of Connery " ; while Daniel Krupa thought Craig 's Bond was a " defining performance " for " a great actor " . Edward Porter , writing in The Sunday Times , considered that " Craig has developed an authoritative Bond persona , dry and intelligent " . Ryan Gilbey thought Craig had " relaxed into Bond without losing any steeliness " . 
 The supporting cast also received praise . Roger Ebert reflected that Skyfall " at last provides a role worthy of Judi Dench , one of the best actors of her generation . She is all but the co @-@ star of the film , with a lot of screen time , poignant dialogue , and a character who is far more complex and sympathetic than we expect in this series " . Jenny McCartney , writing in The Sunday Telegraph , agreed , describing Dench as " compellingly luminous " in the film , and the one that " the camera caresses most meaningfully and often " . McCartney thought Javier Bardem played Silva " with worrisome élan " , while Henry K Miller considered his character " the most authentically Bondian Bond villain in decades " . A number of critics noted the strength of the supporting cast ; Kim Newman found the " warmth and gravitas " of Finney 's performance noteworthy , while other reviewers , including Edward Porter , Daniel Krupa and The Playlist 's Oliver Lyttelton , singled out Ralph Fiennes as Mallory and Ben Whishaw as Q. 
 Ann Hornaday , writing for The Washington Post , thought Sam Mendes had reinvigorated the series , with Skyfall being " sleek , crisp , classy ... exhibiting just the right proportion of respect for legacy and embrace of novelty " . Henry K. Miller of Sight & Sound agreed , and praised Mendes , who he thought was worthy of directing more Bond films . Kim Newman also praised Mendes ' direction of the action sequences . The work of cinematographer Roger Deakins also received praise : Newman commented that he " delivers the most impressive visuals this series has had since the 1960s " , and Miller described the film as " dazzlingly photographed " . 
 The film did not escape criticism , with reviews pointing to its two and a half @-@ hour running time , and the final third of the film being " protracted " , and not matching the first two thirds in its momentum as the underlying flaws in the film . Xan Brooks of The Guardian , in an otherwise positive review , criticised the " touchy @-@ feely indulgence " of " the bold decision to open Bond up – to probe at the character 's back @-@ story and raise a toast to his relationship with M " . Daniel Krupa also singled out Naomie Harris as " awkward " and having a " virtually non @-@ existent chemistry " with Daniel Craig . Similarly Philip French in The Observer tempered his praise for the film by highlighting " some lazy repetition " and argued , " the <unk> is often perfunctory and Bond is as usual captured too easily and too easily escapes " . Edward Porter , writing in The Sunday Times , considered that while aspects of the film were " achieved with wit and panache " , he found that the climax to the film was slightly disappointing , although the " weaknesses in the final stages are not serious , however , and the film 's brief epilogue is wonderful " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Skyfall was released on DVD , Blu @-@ ray and digital HD in the US on 12 February 2013 , and in the UK on 18 February 2013 . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = Goosebumps = 
 Goosebumps is a series of children 's horror fiction novellas by American author R. L. Stine , published by Scholastic Publishing . The stories follow child characters , who find themselves in scary situations . From 1992 to 1997 , 62 books were published under the Goosebumps umbrella title . Various spin @-@ off series were written by Stine : Goosebumps Series 2000 , Give Yourself Goosebumps , Tales to Give You Goosebumps , Goosebumps Triple Header , Goosebumps HorrorLand , and Goosebumps Most Wanted . Another series , Goosebumps Gold , was never released . Goosebumps has spawned a television series and merchandise , as well as a feature film , starring Jack Black as R. L. Stine . 
 Since the release of its first novel , Welcome to Dead House , in July 1992 , the series has sold over 350 million books worldwide in 32 languages . Individual books in the series have been listed in several bestseller lists , including the New York Times Best Seller list for children . 
 = = Structure and genre = = 
 The Goosebumps series falls under the children 's fiction , horror and thriller genres , although Stine characterizes the series as " scary books that are also funny " . Each book features different child characters and settings . The primary protagonists are middle class and can be either male or female . The primary protagonists of a Goosebumps story are often situated in a remote location or somehow isolated from typical societal conventions . This can range anywhere from comfortable suburban areas to boarding schools , foreign villages or campsites . Books typically feature characters who either recently moved to a new neighborhood or are sent to stay with relatives . 
 The books in the Goosebumps series feature similar plot structures with fictional children being involved in scary situations . The books are mostly written in first person narrative , often concluding with twist endings . They contain surreal horror , with characters encountering the strange and supernatural . The author has plot devices that he follows throughout his Goosebumps books . Stine says he does not have any death in his stories , and the children in his novels are never put into situations that would be considered too serious . He attributed the success of his books to their absence of drugs , depravity and violence . 
 = = Inspiration and themes = = 
 Books and characters in the series were inspired by books and films . For example , the character Slappy the Dummy was inspired by the literary classic The Adventures of Pinocchio . Some of Stine 's ideas for the books also came from real life ; Stine got the idea for the book The Haunted Mask after his son , Matt , had a Halloween mask that he had trouble getting off . Stine also uses his childhood fears to help him write his books . The author said , " Luckily , I have a great memory . As I write a story , I can remember what it feels like to be afraid and panicky " . Stine states that he often thinks of a title to a novel first , then lets the title lead him to a story . 
 Two common themes in the series are children triumphing over evil and children facing horrid or frightening situations and using their own wit and imagination to escape them . Stine does not attempt to incorporate moral lessons into his novels , and says his books are " strictly reading motivation " . 
 = = Original Goosebumps series = = 
 Following the success of Stine 's young adult horror novels , the co @-@ founder of Parachute Press ( the company that developed the series ) , Joan <unk> , persuaded him to write scary books for younger children . Stine says the name for the book series came to him after he saw a TV station 's ad in TV Guide that stated " It ’ s goosebumps week on Channel 11 " . He originally signed a six @-@ book deal with the publisher Scholastic , but went on to write 62 books in the original series , the first book being Welcome to Dead House , released in July 1992 . The series was originally aimed at girls , but both boys and girls enjoyed the series equally with half of Stine 's fan mail being sent from boys . The cover illustrations for this series were first done by Tim Jacobus . Twenty @-@ nine of the books from the original series were later re @-@ released with new artwork under the Classic Goosebumps rename . 
 = = Spin @-@ off series = = 
 The books in the Tales to Give You Goosebumps and Goosebumps Triple Header series were written as short story anthologies , featuring a collection of stories in each book . From 1994 to 1997 , six Tales to Give You Goosebumps books were published . Two Goosebumps Triple Header books were released from 1997 to 1998 , beginning with Three Shocking Tales of Terror : Book 1 . 
 Fifty Give Yourself Goosebumps books were published from 1995 to 2000 , starting with Escape from the Carnival of Horrors . The books in this series were written as gamebooks , featuring multiple endings . The books in this series were ghostwritten by several authors , including Kathryn Lance and Stine 's sister @-@ in @-@ law Megan Stine . Many of the cover illustrations for this series were done by Mark Nagata . 
 Due to declining Goosebumps sales and increasing competition , Scholastic and R. L. Stine decided to create Goosebumps Series 2000 . From 1998 to 2000 , 25 books in the series were published , beginning with Cry of the Cat . The books in this series were written in a similar format and featured similar content to the original series , but Stine classified them as being " much scarier . " The covers in this series were illustrated by Tim Jacobus . 
 The books in the Goosebumps Gold series appeared on illustrator Tim Jacobus 's website and marketing sites but were never released . In this series , Stine intended to write a sequel to The Haunted Mask II ( The Haunted Mask Lives ! ) , and a sequel to Welcome to Dead House ( Happy Holidays from Dead House ) . It was one of the two book series by Stine that was planned to be released in 2000 ( the other was The Nightmare Room ) . 
 The series was renewed in 2008 following the release of the first book in the Goosebumps HorrorLand series , Revenge of the Living Dummy , that was published on April 1 , 2008 . Before the 2008 release of Revenge of the Living Dummy , there had not been a Goosebumps book published in almost 10 years . Stine decided to start writing Goosebumps books again after receiving mail asking him to write new books in the series . Nineteen Goosebumps HorrorLand books were published , and books in the series mainly featured two stories . The series continued in 2012 with new stories featuring some of the series ' most memorable villains , including Slappy the Dummy , the Lawn Gnomes and others . The first book of the spin @-@ off series Goosebumps Most Wanted , Planet of the Lawn Gnomes , was released in October 2012 . 
 = = Achievements , reception and controversy = = 
 = = = Achievements = = = 
 Following the release of the first novel in the series , the books quickly became popular , selling a million copies a month soon after they first appeared , and four million copies a month by the mid @-@ 1990s . Individual Goosebumps books appeared in the New York Times Best Seller list for children and the USA Today bestseller list . In 2001 , Publishers Weekly listed 46 books in the series in its list of bestselling children 's paperback books of all @-@ time . Goosebumps was a bestseller in many countries , including the United States , the United Kingdom , France , and Australia . 
 In 1996 , the book series accounted for almost 15 % of Scholastic 's annual revenue . Following the decline of Goosebumps sales in 1997 , Scholastic 's sales had dropped 40 % . The decline in Goosebumps book sales had made front page news of most newspaper business sections , which Patrick Jones stated " demonstrates the impact and importance of R. L. Stine . One writer , it seems , influences the fate of an entire company " . 
 As of 2008 , the Goosebumps series maintains an 82 % brand awareness among children 7 – 12 . It is listed as the number two bestselling children 's book series of all time and as Scholastic 's bestselling children 's book series of all time . By 2014 , according to Scholastic , there were 350 million copies of Goosebumps books sold in 32 languages , including Chinese , Czech , Spanish , and Hebrew . As of 2008 , the book series sells about two million copies annually . 
 Three books from the Goosebumps series have won the Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Awards for Favorite Book : Deep Trouble in 1995 ( the award category 's first year ) , the book Tales to Give You Goosebumps in 1996 , and Deep Trouble II in 1998 . In 2000 , the series was ranked as the number two children 's books by the National Education Association , as chosen by children . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Slate 's Katy Waldman classified a classic Goosebumps story as " funny , icky , and just a bit menacing " . Following the release of the first Goosebumps HorrorLand book , Publishers Weekly stated in a starred review that the new Goosebumps series was " deliciously chilling " . Two reviewers of the Goosebumps books did not feel that the books were high quality literature . U.S. News & World Report 's Marc Silver thought the series was " quite tame " . He called the Goosebumps books " <unk> " , stating the plotting in the books was careless and that characters in the stories rarely grew . Roderick McGillis , from the academic journal <unk> , described the books as camp , writing the books " are so artificial , so formulaic , so predictable , so repetitive " . McGillis also felt that the content of the Goosebumps series is " thin in the extreme " . 
 Stine 's books have a reputation for getting children excited about reading , which the writer is very proud of . James Carter , writing in Talking Books : Children 's Authors Talk About the Craft , Creativity and Process of Writing , stated " regarding Point Horrors and Goosebumps , I feel that anything that children read avidly is a good thing " . Librarian and writer Patrick Jones commented that " [ t ] he real horror is a culture where kids , especially boys , don 't read — and Stine has done his best to stop that turn of the screw from happening in his lifetime " . 
 = = = Book challenges = = = 
 Goosebumps was listed 15th in the list of most frequently challenged books during 1990 – 1999 and 94th in the list of top banned / challenged books during 2000 – 2009 by the American Library Association ( ALA ) . According to the ALA , a challenge is an attempt by a person or group to remove or restrict materials from a library or school curriculum . The series was challenged for being too frightening for young people and depicting occult or satanic themes . By 1997 , the ALA was informed of 46 challenges , over 75 % of which occurred in school libraries . The rest of the challenges were held in public libraries or the location of the challenges were unknown . In 1997 , a hearing by the Anoka @-@ Hennepin School District to ban the books was broadcast by C @-@ SPAN . In the hearing , most of the parents and children felt the books should not be banned , and the school district 's book review committee decided to keep the books . 
 = = Adaptations and merchandise = = 
 = = = Audiobooks = = = 
 Walt Disney Records and Scholastic Audiobooks have adapted Goosebumps into numerous audiobooks from 1996 @-@ present . 
 = = = Television adaptation = = = 
 In the 1990s , a Goosebumps TV series was produced in Canada by Protocol Entertainment in association with Scholastic Productions . The TV anthology series ran for four seasons from 1995 to 1998 , premiering on the Fox network on October 27 , 1995 . The series mainly featured plots based on the Goosebumps books , among them The Haunted Mask and Cuckoo Clock of Doom . The TV series aired in over 100 countries and it was the number one rated children 's TV show for three years in the United States . Margaret Loesch , formerly the CEO of Fox Kids , offered Scholastic a TV deal after her son responded positively to the Goosebumps book Say Cheese and Die she had bought for him a day earlier . A book series , titled Goosebumps Presents , was based on the TV series . 
 = = = Film adaptation = = = 
 The first attempt at a Goosebumps film was in 1998 , which Tim Burton was going to produce . Chris Meledandri , the president of Fox Family Films , said : " I think you 'll see us tackling a scale of story that would be prohibitive to do on the small screen " . However , the film did not materialize since they could not find a script they liked or determine which book or monster to adapt . In 2008 , Columbia Pictures acquired rights to create a Goosebumps film , with Neal H. Moritz and Deborah Forte , the latter of whom developed the TV series , producing the film . Duo Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski were hired as screenwriters and wrote the original script for the film . They felt that the individual books in the series were too short to adapt into a film , so they chose instead to do a fake biographical film in which R. L. Stine writes a book and all the monsters within it become real . 
 On January 14 , 2012 , it was reported that a new draft of the screenplay was written by Darren Lemke . Lemke co @-@ wrote the screenplays for Shrek Forever After and Bryan Singer 's Jack the Giant Slayer . In September 2013 , it was revealed that Jack Black was to play a fictionalized version of R. L. Stine " whose scary characters literally leap off the page , forcing him to hide from his own creepy creations " . Rob Letterman was also confirmed as the director , which would reunite him with Black , after working together on Shark Tale and Gulliver 's Travels . 
 It was announced in February 2014 that Dylan Minnette was cast as Zach Cooper , and <unk> Rush was cast as R. L. Stine 's fictional daughter , Hannah . In the film , which was released on October 16 , 2015 , Hannah 's father R. L. Stine keeps all the monsters in the series locked up in his books . When Zach unintentionally releases the monsters from the books , Zach , Hannah , and Stine team up in order to put the monsters back where they came from . Principal photography on the film began on April 23 , 2014 in Candler Park in Atlanta ; they also shot the film in Conyers and Madison , Georgia . Principal photography ended on July 16 , 2014 . 
 = = = Games = = = 
 There are four Goosebumps video games , two of which have been created for the PC by DreamWorks Interactive . A 1996 game entitled Escape from HorrorLand is an interactive sequel to the book One Day at HorrorLand , and a 1997 game entitled Attack of the Mutant was based on the book of the same name . Scholastic released a Goosebumps video game in October 2008 entitled Goosebumps HorrorLand , based on the series of the same name . Another video game , Goosebumps : The Game , a prequel to the 2015 film , was released on October 13 , 2015 . Goosebumps : Night of <unk> , a mobile game based on the film and the book series was released for iOS and Android devices on October 15 of the same year . 
 The books One Day at HorrorLand and A Night in Terror Tower were adapted into two separate board games in 1996 . Both games were published by Milton Bradley and designed by Craig Van Ness . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 Goosebumps has spawned merchandise , including T @-@ shirts , board games , puzzles , hats , fake skulls , dolls , bike helmets , fake blood , and boxer shorts . Goosebumps was also adapted into a stage play by Rupert Holmes in 1998 . Goosebumps has an official website , which garners 1 @.@ 5 million page views each month as of 2008 . An attraction based on the series , the Goosebumps HorrorLand Fright Show and <unk> , opened in October 1997 at Disney @-@ MGM Studios 's New York Street . Before it closed , the attraction consisted of a stage play which featured characters from the series ; this show played five times a day . The attraction also featured a funhouse , called the Goosebumps HorrorLand Hall of Mirrors , which contained a maze of mirrors along with other props and gags from the series . In 2008 , it was announced that Sally Corporation would market Goosebumps rides . 
 A comic book series , titled Goosebumps Graphix , was written based on books from the original series . There were three books published in the series ; the first one , Creepy Creatures , was published on September 1 , 2006 . 
 = = Legal dispute = = 
 In November 1996 , Scholastic , the publisher of the series , and Parachute Press , the developer of the series , agreed to a new contract . Scholastic retained control of book publishing and the TV series , but gave Parachute Press merchandising rights to the series . In September 1997 , following a dispute between Scholastic and Parachute Press , Scholastic accused Parachute Press of breaching the contract . Scholastic claimed that Parachute Press had been making merchandising deals and issuing press releases without Scholastic 's required consent , and had begun withholding payments from them . In November 1997 , Parachute responded by alleging Scholastic had repudiated its financial obligations , claiming Scholastic had voided its rights to publish 54 books . Parachute Press filed a lawsuit , which followed with numerous other suits and counter lawsuits over who controls certain rights to the series . In 2003 , the two sides reached an agreement , with Scholastic receiving the Goosebumps trademark and all other rights to the series for US $ 9 @.@ 65 million . 
 = = Note = = 
 = Rejtan ( painting ) = 
 Rejtan , or the Fall of Poland ( Polish : Rejtan . Upadek Polski ) is an oil painting by the Polish artist Jan Matejko , finished in 1866 , depicting the protest of Tadeusz Rejtan ( lower right ) against the First Partition of Poland during the Partition Sejm of 1773 . Both a depiction of a historical moment , and an allegory for the surrounding period of Polish history , the painting is one of Matejko 's most famous works , and an iconic picture of an emotional protest . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Tadeusz Rejtan was a deputy in the Sejm ( parliament ) of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1773 , infamously known as the Partition Sejm . The Sejm convened to review the demands of three Commonwealth 's neighbours ( the Russian Empire , Prussia and Austria ) in order to legalize their territorial demands , known as the First Partition of Poland . The Sejm operated under threat of foreign forces present in the Commonwealth , and with a significant number of deputies either bribed or threatened by foreign diplomats . The three powers officially justified their actions as a compensation for dealing with a troublesome neighbor and restoring order through military intervention in the civil war ( the War of Bar Confederation ) ; in fact all three were interested in territorial gains . 
 On 21 April that year , Rejtan , in a dramatic gesture at the Sejm , is said to have bared his chest and laid himself down in a doorway , blocking the way with his own body in a dramatic attempt to stop the other members from leaving the chamber where the debate was being held . Leaving of the chamber would have signified an end to the discussion , and the acceptance of the motion , meaning the acceptance of foreign territorial demands . 
 = = Scene description = = 
 The painting portrays this scene , although as usual with Matejko 's work , it sacrifices some historical reality for more dramatic presentation . It serves as an allegory for all three Partitions of Poland ( 1772 , 1793 , 1795 ) and portrays a number of major historical figures of this era . Rejtan is the most visible , occupying the entire right side of the painting , in the midst of his dramatic pose which has been compared to Liberty Leading the People . His position on this painting exemplifies the golden ratio . 
 To his left , in the center , are the " traitors " , many of them on the Russian payroll , and future members of the Targowica Confederation . Adam Poniński , marshal of the Sejm , pointing in red court dress , either demands that Rejtan leaves or points to the armed Russian guards outside the door ; he holds a simple wooden walking stick instead of a more elaborate marshall 's staff , which Rejtan stole a day earlier . Behind him are bishop Ignacy Massalski and Prince Antoni Stanisław Czetwertyński @-@ Światopełk . To his right , Hetman Franciszek Ksawery Branicki hides his face in his hands ; which likely was Matejko 's solution for a prosaic problem — he probably did not have access to a likeness of Branicki . Szczęsny Potocki , with the blue sash , looks to the ground , embarrassed . Behind the overturned chair , his father , Franciszek Salezy Potocki , also embarrassed , drops a quill pen and looks away . Between the two <unk> Jacek Małachowski is engaged in discussion with Samuel Korsak , while Karol Radziwiłł simply observes the situation , amused . On the ground , turned over , lies an <unk> , with Branicki 's hat and a coin purse , from which the coins spill towards Poniński , alluding to the real reason he is intent on concluding the debate . 
 To the left of the elder Potocki , the seated primate of Poland , Michał Jerzy Poniatowski , is engaged in a conversation with the chancellor Michał Fryderyk Czartoryski , both ignoring the disruption . Behind them in the blue waistcoat , King Stanisław August Poniatowski , annoyed , stands up from the throne , wanting to leave , and looking at his pocket watch . 
 From the gallery , the scene is observed by one of the main architects of the partitions , Russian ambassador Nicholas Repnin . He is seated between two ladies , likely Izabela Lubomirska and either Elżbieta Grabowska or Izabela Czartoryska . To his right , another important symbol is shown in the painting of Russian Tsarina Catherine of Russia . Finally , in the open doors , behind Rejtan , stands a Russian soldier ( although in reality the Sejm was " guarded " not by Russian , but by Prussian troops ) . 
 The only person clearly sympathetic to Rejtan is a young man in the middle of the room , holding in his hands a saber and a <unk> , symbolizing the supporters of the anti @-@ Russian Bar Confederation , and future insurgents from the Polish Uprisings in the Russian partition . 
 = = History , reception and significance = = 
 Matejko began work on this painting in August 1864 and finished it in November 1866 . It was one of many paintings portraying key historical moments in the history of Poland that he would create over his life . Matejko however did not simply illustrate the history , he intended his paintings to have powerful educational and emotional values . 
 The work caused a scandal in contemporary , still @-@ partitioned Poland ; it was discussed even before its unveiling . It offended a number of society figures , many tracing direct lineage to the major magnate families whose members are portrayed in the painting as traitors to the Polish cause . There were a number of critical reviews of the work in the contemporary press , Matejko received anonymous threats , and some aristocrats are said to have considered buying the painting only to destroy it . Some accused him of defeatism , pessimism , exploiting public sentiment over a historical scandal for contemporary publicity ; it was thus criticized by notable artists such as Józef Ignacy Kraszewski and Cyprian Norwid . In Paris , a French @-@ Polish aristocrat , Count Alexandre Joseph Colonna @-@ Walewski , campaigned against including it in an exhibition . The painting , however , quickly garnered supporters , who in turn reproduced modified copies of it , replacing historical figures with major contemporary critics . Responding to the public outcry , Matejko painted a response — a painting titled Judgement on Matejko ( <unk> na <unk> , 1867 ) , in which he portrayed his execution by some of his most vocal critics . 
 Serious art critics had less emotional , but also mixed , opinions of the work . It was received less favourably by Józef Szujski and Stanisław Tarnowski , but praised by painters Henryk <unk> and Artur <unk> . Comments of Wojciech Korneli Stattler are interpreted by different authors as either praise , or critique . In Paris , displayed at Exposition Universelle , 1867 the painting received a gold medal . While in Poland the painting 's context and message was clearly understood , the work , displayed in Paris , proved to be too obscure for the audience there , with few understanding the complex , historical context ; some French critics interpreted it as a painting of a gambling hall . It is said , however , to have been well understood by the Russian visitors to the French gallery , some of whom are said to have been interested in acquiring the painting , which was commended by Poles as " they bought the real ones , might as well buy the painted ones , too " . Eventually , however , the painting was acquired by Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria for 50 @,@ 000 <unk> . It was shown at a gallery in Vienna , and eventually ended up at the <unk> . Thanks to the efforts of minister Juliusz Twardowski it was purchased by the government of the Second Polish Republic in 1920 . As part of the Wawel Royal Castle National Art Collection it has been on a public display in the Royal Castle in Warsaw since 1931 , with the exception of the period of World War II , when it was briefly looted by the Nazis . 
 The painting is usually interpreted as criticism of the Russian interference in Polish political affairs , and the collaboration of treasonous Polish aristocrats . By the end of World War I it was already seen as a priceless artifact of Polish culture . The painting was positively interpreted in communist Poland as a symbol of critique of the Polish nobility , blamed for their selfishness leading to the partitions . More recently , the painting has been interpreted as the symbol of solitary protest , and a moral justification of dissent , even when such a protest is known to be futile , ignored by most . It has also been described as an iconic picture of an emotional protest and a symbol of desperate , patriotic protest . In the 1980s the painting inspired a protest song by Jacek Kaczmarski . Over time , the painting has become famous in Poland ; Walter M. Cummins notes that the scene from this work was " made familiar to every Polish child by [ this ] frequently reproduced painting " . 
 = Summerhill ( book ) = 
 Summerhill : A Radical Approach to Child Rearing is a book about the English boarding school Summerhill School by its headmaster A. S. Neill . It is known for introducing his ideas to the American public . It was published in America on November 7 , 1960 , by the Hart Publishing Company and later revised as Summerhill School : A New View of Childhood in 1993 . Its contents are a repackaged collection from four of Neill 's previous works . The foreword was written by psychoanalyst Erich Fromm , who distinguished between authoritarian coercion and Summerhill . 
 The seven chapters of the book cover the origins and implementation of the school , and other topics in childrearing . Summerhill , founded in the 1920s , is run as a children 's democracy under Neill 's educational philosophy of self @-@ regulation , where kids choose whether to go to lessons and how they want to live freely without imposing on others . The school makes its rules at a weekly schoolwide meeting where students and teachers each have one vote alike . Neill discarded other <unk> for one of the innate goodness of the child . 
 Despite selling no advance copies in America , Summerhill brought Neill significant renown in the next decade , wherein he sold three million copies . The book was used in hundreds of college courses and translated into languages such as German . Reviewers noted Neill 's charismatic personality , but doubted the project 's general replicability elsewhere and its overstated generalizations . They put Neill in a lineage of experimental thought , but questioned his lasting contribution to psychology . The book begat an American <unk> following , cornered an education criticism market , and made Neill into a folk leader . 
 = = Background = = 
 Summerhill : A Radical Approach to Child Rearing was written by A. S. Neill and published by Hart Publishing Company in 1960 . In a letter to Neill , New York publisher Harold Hart suggested a book specific for America devised of parts from four of Neill 's previous works : The Problem Child , The Problem Parent , The Free Child , and That Dreadful School . Neill liked his idea and gave the publisher wide liberties in the manuscript 's preparation , preferring to write a preface or appendix in reflection on the writings . In rereading his work , he realized he disagreed with his earlier statements on Freudian child analysis . Neill later regretted the liberties he afforded the publisher , particularly his removal of Wilheim Reich 's name from the book and index , since Neill saw Reich as an influential figure . They also struggled over issues of copyrights . Neill did not contest his disagreements , as he was eager to see the book published . 
 The publisher and Neill disagreed over the choice of author for the book 's foreword . Seeing forewords as more of an American tradition , Neill preferred not to have one , but suggested Henry Miller , an American author who had recently written Neill a fan letter and whose Tropic series was banned in the United States . Hart didn 't think Miller 's introduction would help the book and approached Margaret Mead , who refused on the grounds of Neill 's connection with Reich . Several months later , psychoanalyst and sociologist Erich Fromm agreed to the project , and found consensus with Neill and the publisher . Fromm 's introduction placed Summerhill in a history of backlash against progressive education and claimed that the " perverted " implementation of child freedom was more at fault than the idea of child freedom itself . He wrote that Summerhill was one of few schools that provided education without fear or hidden coercion , and that it carried the goals of " the Western humanistic tradition " : " reason , love , integrity , and courage " . Fromm also highlighted adult confusion about non @-@ authoritarianism and how they mistook coercion for genuine freedom . 
 A revised edition was edited by Albert Lamb and released by St. Martin 's Press as Summerhill School : A New View of Childhood in 1993 . 
 = = Summary = = 
 Summerhill is A. S. Neill 's " aphoristic and anecdotal " account of his " famous " " early progressive school experiment in England " founded in the 1920s , Summerhill School . The book 's intent is to demonstrate the origins and effects of unhappiness , and then show how to raise children to avoid this unhappiness . It is an " affirmation of the goodness of the child " . Summerhill is the story of Summerhill School 's origins , its programs and pupils , how they live and are affected by the program , and Neill 's own educational philosophy . It is split into seven chapters that introduce the school and discuss parenting , sex , morality and religion , " children 's problems " , " parents ' problems " , and " questions and answers " . 
 The school is run as a democracy , with students deciding affairs that range from the curriculum to the behavior code . Lessons are non @-@ compulsory . Neill emphasizes " self @-@ regulation " , personal responsibility , freedom from fear , " freedom in sex play " , and loving understanding over moral instruction or force . In his philosophy , all attempts to mold children are coercive in nature and therefore harmful . Caretakers are advised to " trust " in the natural process and let children self @-@ regulate such that they live by their own rules and consequently treat with the highest respect the rights of others to live by their own rules . Neill 's " self @-@ regulation " constitutes a child 's right to " live freely , without outside authority in things psychic and somatic " — that children eat and come of age when they wants , are never hit , and are " always loved and protected " . Children can do as they please until their actions affect others . In an example , a student can skip French class to play music , but cannot disruptively play music during the French class . Against the popular image of " go as you please schools " , Summerhill has many rules . However , they are decided at a schoolwide meeting where students and teachers each have one vote apiece . This does not necessarily mean total cessation to the children , as Neill thought adults were right to bemoan child destruction of property . He considered this tension between adult and child living styles to be natural . Neill felt that most schoolwork and books kept children from their right to play , and that learning should only follow play and not be mixed " to make [ work ] palatable " . Neill found that those students interested in college would complete the prerequisites in two years and of their own volition . 
 The 45 @-@ person coeducational school with pupils aged five to fifteen is presented as successful and having reformed " problem children " into " successful human beings " . Some became professionals and academics . In Summerhill , Neill blames many of society 's problems on the " <unk> in conventional schools " . He felt that society 's institutions prevented " real freedom in individuals " . Thus , Summerhill was created as a place for children to be free to be themselves . Neill discarded many kinds of dogma ( " discipline , ... direction , ... suggestion , ... moral training , .. religious instruction " ) and put sole faith in the belief of the innate goodness of children . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The book debuted in America on November 7 , 1960 during the week of John Kennedy 's election . At the time of the book 's release , Neill was unknown in the United States , and not a single bookseller purchased an advance copy . Summerhill brought him international renown over the next decade . The book sold 24 @,@ 000 copies in its first year , 100 thousand in 1968 , 200 thousand in 1969 , two million total by 1970 , and three million by 1973 . Summerhill was included in over 600 American university courses , and a 1969 translation for West Germany ( The Theory and Practice of Anti @-@ Authoritarian Education ) sold over a million copies in three years . In the wake of the book 's success , publisher Harold Hart started the American Summerhill Society in New York City , of which Paul Goodman was a founding member . 
 Multiple reviewers stressed the school 's reliance on Neill as a charismatic figure , which begat doubts of the institution 's general replicability . Sarah Crutis ( The Times Literary Supplement ) asked whether teachers would have the " time , patience , and personality " to use Neill 's methods . " Their extremes of endurance may sometimes sound masochistic " , wrote D. W. Harding ( New Statesman ) , and Richard E. Gross ( The Social Studies ) added that Neill 's " extremes ... go far beyond good sense " . Danica Deutsch ( Journal of Individual Psychology ) concluded that the school 's lessons curbed the child 's sense of social responsibility and other society @-@ preserving functions . Jacob Hechler ( Child Welfare ) said that what Neill described as love — a combination of " caring and noninterference " — was very hard to bring to bear . The New Yorker called Neill " a fiery crusader " with " deep understanding of children " , and Morris Fritz Mayer ( Social Service Review ) read Neill as having the " wrath and eloquence of a biblical prophet " with a belief in children and " unyielding attack against pathological and phony values in education " that " one cannot help admiring " . Willard W. Hartup ( Contemporary Psychology ) positioned Neill as closer to a psychotherapist than a teacher , especially as the philosophy undergirding Summerhill " derives from Freud " . Gene Phillips ( The Annals of the American Academy ) described Neill as the " essential ingredient of the democratic ethic that ... America needs " . 
 Margaret Mead ( American Sociological Review ) considered the book more of a historical document for later generations to analyze " than anything that can be taken at its face value " . She wrote the school to be " unique " and " counter @-@ pointed to the emphases and excesses " of its era , which she credited to Neill 's " rare charismatic personality " . To Mead , Summerhill 's moral battles had passed since the 1920s , as Neill 's audience already agreed with his views on frank discussions about sex and the primacy of student interest . She added that his contemporaries had moved on to " rebelling against a <unk> freedom " that prioritized emotional education over intellectual lessons . Similarly , Crutis ( The Times Literary Supplement ) noted Neill 's approach as less " sensational " in its method than expected , and asserted that 1960s psychologists would agree with the stance to not guilt children for masturbating and to tell the truth about the origin of babies . Morton Reisman ( The Phi Delta Kappan ) upheld the book 's subtitle and agreed that the book was " radical " in comparison to conventional American morality and education . 
 Multiple reviewers noted points of <unk> in the book . Crutis continued that criticism of individual aspects of the school , such as its stance against uniform curriculum , was justified . R. G. G. Price ( Punch ) remarked that the school was presented as having little intellectual or aesthetic zeal , and that Neill 's statement against teaching algebra to eventual repairmen was " the most shameful sentence ever written by an educational pioneer " . Hartup ( Contemporary Psychology ) and Harding ( New Statesman ) saw no evidence towards whether Summerhill students were successful by standards other than Neill 's , particularly in academic distinction . The Saturday Review quoted from the British Inspectors report that the school was " unimpressive " — despite laudatory student " will and ... interest , ... their achievements are rather meager . " Mead presaged that Summerhill could create " uncritical behavior " among parents unfamiliar with the pedagogical field , and that the book 's " essential positive contribution " , belief in child self @-@ regulation , could be forgotten within the book 's radicalism . 
 John Vaizey ( The Spectator ) spotlighted the book 's emphasis on " the innate goodness of children " and how the progressive school movement 's emphasis on freedom had spread into the public schools . Vaizey put Neill 's Summerhill in a disappearing lineage of post @-@ World War I experimental schools that focused on freedom from directed games , classics curriculum , and prudery . He wrote in 1962 that " Summerhill is clearly one of England 's greatest schools " and that the decline of this experimental school tradition was a tragedy . Still , Deutsch ( Journal of Individual Psychology ) wrote that Summerhill had not been " duplicated " in the four decades since its creation . The Booklist noted Neill 's " scant credit " awarded to prior progressive and experimental schools , and added that the addition of a British inspection report added objective credibility to the book . Hartup ( Contemporary Psychology ) described Neill 's style as " <unk> direct , even epigrammatic " though also " patchy " , leaving many discussions incomplete . 
 Reviewers described the book as both convincing and not . The New Yorker wrote that skeptical readers would find the book convincing . Crutis ( The Times Literary Supplement ) thought the book would lead readers to ask why " the principles of progressive education " were not more accepted in England . Reisman ( The Phi Delta Kappan ) wrote that even the sections dedicated to the origins of neuroses were " still noteworthy , challenging , and provocative " . He wrote that the book 's impact is in its " realistic demonstration of how children can be helped to become happy people " without guilt , hate , and fear . On the other hand , the Saturday Review doubted children wanted or benefitted from lack of adult authority . Hartup ( Contemporary Psychology ) thought that the book , while stimulating , left questions as to its actual contribution past an " experiment in applied psychoanalysis " , with " clinical procedure ... alternatively inspired , naive , and hair @-@ raising " . He called Neill " an excellent devil 's advocate for educators " but unhelpful in resolving the ailments of mass education . 
 Harry Elmer Barnes called the book one of the most exciting and challenging in the field of education since Émile . ( This said , Hartup of Contemporary Psychology said Summerhill was closer to Freud 's Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality than to Émile and criticized Neill 's psychoanalytic <unk> . ) The psychoanalyst Benjamin <unk> put Neill 's work alongside that of John Dewey , and Sir Herbert Read likened Neill to Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi and Henry Caldwell Cook . David Carr characterized the book as centered on moral education , despite Neill 's recurrent insistence on the danger of moral teachings . Scholar Richard Bailey agreed with Carr 's characterization . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Richard Bailey wrote that the book " marked the birth of an American cult " with Neill and Summerhill at its center as Americans began to emulate the school and form support institutions . Bailey added that Summerhill 's style was accessible and humorous compared to the era 's moralizing literature , and unpretentious and simple compared to <unk> thought . The book cornered an education criticism market , and made Neill into a " reluctant " folk leader . Timothy Gray wrote that the book aroused an education reform movement with directives advocated by Herb Kohl , Jonathan Kozol , Neil Postman , and Ivan Illich . Fifty years after the book was first released , Astra Taylor wrote that the idea of Summerhill selling millions of copies in the 2012 American education climate " seems absurd " . 
 = Accurate News and Information Act = 
 The Accurate News and Information Act was a statute passed by the Legislative Assembly of Alberta , Canada , in 1937 , at the instigation of William Aberhart 's Social Credit government . It would have required newspapers to print " clarifications " of stories that a committee of Social Credit legislators deemed inaccurate , and to reveal their sources on demand . 
 The act was a result of the stormy relationship between Aberhart and the press , which dated to before the 1935 election , in which the Social Credit League was elected to government . Virtually all of Alberta 's newspapers — especially the Calgary Herald — were critical of Social Credit , as were a number of publications from elsewhere in Canada . Even the American media had greeted Aberhart 's election with derision . 
 Though the act won easy passage through the Social Credit @-@ dominated legislature , Lieutenant @-@ Governor of Alberta John C. Bowen reserved royal assent until the Supreme Court of Canada evaluated the act 's legality . In 1938 's Reference re Alberta Statutes , the court found that it was unconstitutional , and it never became law . 
 = = Aberhart and the press = = 
 = = = Before the 1935 election = = = 
 William Aberhart 's Social Credit League , running candidates for the first time , won a large majority in the 1935 Alberta election on the strength of promises to use a new economic theory called social credit to end depression conditions in the province . It did so against the almost uniform opposition of the news media . Some of the province 's major newspapers were loyal to one of the traditional parties : the Edmonton Bulletin , for example , had supported the Liberals since its inception . 
 Aberhart initially laid out his economic agenda in only vague terms , and by early 1935 his opponents , including Premier Richard Gavin Reid of the United Farmers of Alberta , were trying to force him to commit to a specific plan . The Calgary Herald took up this call , going so far as to offer Aberhart a full page to lay out his approach in detail . Aberhart refused , on the grounds that he considered the Herald 's coverage of him to be unfair . He frequently attacked the newspaper in speeches around the province , and on April 28 suggested that his followers boycott it and other unfriendly newspapers . The boycott was successful to the extent that it drove at least one newspaper out of business . The Herald responded to the boycott by asking " Is everyone opposed to the political opinions and plans of Mr. Aberhart to be boycotted ? He has invoked a most dangerous precedent and has given the people of this province a foretaste of the Hitlerism which will prevail if he ever secures control of the provincial administration . " 
 Shortly before the election , the Herald began to run cartoons by Stewart Cameron , a virulently anti @-@ Aberhart cartoonist . The day before the election , it ran one featuring a car , labelled " the people " , travelling along " Aberhart Highway No. 1 " and arriving at a railway crossing . A train , labelled " common sense " , was approaching from around the bend , along tracks labelled " fundamental facts " . Aberhart leans out the " S.C. Signal Tower " advising the car " All 's clear . Don 't stop , look or listen . " 
 Though the Herald was the most strident in its opposition to Aberhart and Social Credit , the Bulletin , the Edmonton Journal , the Medicine Hat News , the Lethbridge Herald , and many smaller papers all , in the words of Athabasca University historian Alvin Finkel , " attacked Social Credit viciously as a chimera which , if placed in power , would wreck Alberta 's chances for economic recovery . " Of the province 's major papers , only the Calgary Albertan provided even lukewarm support . 
 So frustrated were the Social Crediters with the newspapers ' hostility that in 1934 they founded their own , the Alberta Social Credit Chronicle , to spread their views . The Chronicle , in addition to acting as Aberhart 's mouthpiece , carried guest editorials by such figures as British fascist leader Oswald Mosley and anti @-@ semitic priest Charles Coughlin . 
 = = = Post @-@ election = = = 
 Media reaction to Social Credit 's 1935 victory , in which it won 56 of 63 seats in the Legislative Assembly of Alberta , was almost uniformly negative . The Herald opined that " the people of Alberta have made a most unfortunate decision and may soon see the folly of it . " Even the Albertan expressed its wish that social credit be first tried in " Scotland , or Ethiopia or anywhere but Alberta . " Reaction across Canada was also negative ; the St. Catharines Standard called the results " a nightmare that passeth all understanding " and the Montreal Star accused Albertans of voting for " an untried man and a policy whose workings he ostentatiously refused to explain before polling day . " American newspapers were less restrained : the Chicago Tribune asked " Greetings to the Canadians . Who 's loony now ? " and the Boston Herald 's headline screamed " Alberta goes crazy " . 
 The relationship did not improve once Aberhart took office . In January 1935 , H. Napier Moore wrote two articles for Maclean 's casting doubt on Aberhart 's honesty and his ability to follow through on his election promises . The American Collier 's Weekly ran a profile that mocked Aberhart 's appearance , taking note of his " vast colorless face " and his " narrow , left slanted mouth with soft , extra @-@ heavy , bloodless lips which don 't quite meet and through which he breathes <unk> . " Finkel , finding fault with both sides of the Aberhart @-@ press feud , states 
 The major newspapers of the province opposed virtually everything the government did . Virtually every reform instituted was made to sound more draconian than it actually was . The conservative views of the owners and editors often interfered with the objective presentation of news reports , although perhaps not to the extent that the government claimed . In many cases , the papers simply concentrated on the very real chaos and confusion in government ranks and required few embellishments to make the government look bad . 
 The Herald lured Stewart Cameron away from working on Disney 's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs to make him its first ever staff cartoonist ; Cameron devoted himself full @-@ time to the ridicule of Aberhart . Though Social Credit staffer turned journalistic historian John Barr argues that the media 's unswerving hostility to Aberhart may have benefited him politically by allowing him to " depict the press as a mere tool of Eastern financial and commercial interests " , by January 1936 Aberhart was telling the listeners of his weekly gospel radio show that he was " glad there will be no newspapers in heaven . " 
 To help combat the negative press , Aberhart resolved to gain control of the Albertan , the one paper of note to show him any support . He formed a company that acquired an option to purchase it , and used his radio program to promote the purchase of shares by Social Credit supporters . The other newspapers criticized him for using what was nominally a gospel program to promote stock sales . The plan came to naught , as most Social Credit supporters were too poor to buy newspaper stock , and the only interested buyers were beneficiaries of government patronage , chiefly liquor interests . Even so , the Albertan became the official organ of Social Credit , an editorial decision that doubled its circulation . 
 Aberhart reacted bitterly to the media 's hostility . In a September 20 , 1937 , radio broadcast , he said of the press " these creatures with mental hydrophobia will be taken in hand and their biting and barking will cease . " Four days later , a special session of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta opened , with the Accurate News and Information Act figuring prominently on its order paper . 
 = = Statute = = 
 The 1937 Social Credit backbenchers ' revolt had forced Aberhart to abdicate a portion of his power to the newly created Social Credit Board , which consisted of five Social Credit backbenchers charged with supervising a commission of experts . While the initial plan was to have this commission headed by C. H. Douglas , social credit 's British founder , Douglas did not like Aberhart and did not view his approach to social credit as consistent with its true form . He refused to come . Instead , he sent two subordinates , L. D. Byrne and G. F. Powell . These surrogates were charged with recommending legislation to implement social credit in Alberta . Their first round of proposals , which included measures imposing government control on banks and prohibiting any person from challenging the constitutionality of any Alberta law in court without receiving the approval of the Lieutenant @-@ Governor in Council , was disallowed by the federal government . The second round included the Accurate News and Information Act . 
 The act empowered the chair of the Social Credit Board to require a newspaper to reveal the names and addresses of its sources , as well as the names and addresses of any writers , including of unsigned pieces . Non @-@ compliance would result in fines of up to $ 1 @,@ 000 per day , and prohibitions on the publishing of the offending newspaper , of stories by offending writers , or of information emanating from offending sources . The act also required newspapers to print , at the instruction of the chair of the Social Credit Board , any statement " which has for its object the correction or amplification of any statement relating to any policy or activity of the Government of the Province . " 
 The act was attacked by opposition politicians as evidence of the government 's supposed fascism , and alienated even the Albertan . The international press was also cutting : one British paper referred to Aberhart as " a little Hitler " . Later commentators have been no more favourable : Finkel calls the act evidence of the " increasingly authoritarian nature of the Aberhart regime " , and even Barr , generally sympathetic to Social Credit , calls it " a harsh blow to free speech " . 
 Lieutenant @-@ Governor John C. Bowen , mindful of the federal government 's disallowance of the Social Credit Board 's earlier legislation , reserved royal assent of the act and its companions until their legality could be tested at the Supreme Court of Canada . This was the first use of the power of reservation in Alberta history , and in the summer of 1938 Aberhart 's government announced the elimination of Bowen 's official residence , his government car , and his secretarial staff . Aberhart biographers David Elliott and Iris Miller and Ernest Manning biographer Brian Brennan attribute this move to revenge for Bowen 's reservation of assent . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Bowen put a stop to the Accurate News and Information Act , at least temporarily , but Aberhart 's fight against the press continued : on March 25 , 1938 , a resolution of the Social Credit @-@ dominated legislature ordered that Don Brown , a reporter for the Edmonton Journal , be jailed " during the pleasure of the assembly " for allegedly misquoting Social Credit backbencher John Lyle Robinson on the inclusion of chiropractors in the Workman 's Compensation Act . Brown was never actually jailed ; the next day , in response to negative publicity from across Canada , the legislature passed another resolution , ordering " the release of Mr. Don C. Brown from custody . " In Barr 's view , " the government was made to look less ominous than silly . " 
 Around the same time , the Supreme Court ruled on the Reference re Alberta Statutes . It found that the Accurate News and Information Act , along with the others submitted to it for evaluation , was ultra vires ( beyond the powers of ) the Alberta government . In the case of the Accurate News and Information Act , the court found that the Canadian constitution included an " implied bill of rights " that protected freedom of speech as being critical to a parliamentary democracy . 
 For its leadership in the fight against the act , the Pulitzer Prize committee awarded the Edmonton Journal a bronze plaque , the first time it honoured a non @-@ American newspaper . Ninety @-@ five other newspapers , including the Calgary Albertan , Edmonton Bulletin , Calgary Herald , Lethbridge Herald , and Medicine Hat News , were presented with engraved certificates . 
 = Taare Zameen Par = 
 Taare Zameen Par ( titled Like Stars on Earth internationally ) is a 2007 Indian drama film produced and directed by Aamir Khan . Darsheel Safary stars as eight @-@ year @-@ old Ishaan , and Khan plays his art teacher . Creative director and writer Amole Gupte initially developed the idea with his wife Deepa Bhatia , who served as the film 's editor . Visual effects are by Tata Elxsi 's Visual Computing Labs , and the title animation — the first use of clay animation in a Bollywood film — was created by <unk> Vyas . Shankar – Ehsaan – Loy composed the film 's score , and Prasoon Joshi wrote the lyrics for many of the songs . Principal photography took place in Mumbai and in Panchgani 's New Era High School , and some of the school 's students make appearances . 
 The film explores the life and imagination of Ishaan , an eight @-@ year @-@ old dyslexic child . Although he excels in art , his poor academic performance leads his parents to send him to a boarding school . Ishaan 's new art teacher suspects that he is dyslexic and helps him to overcome his disability . The film made its theatrical debut in India on 21 December 2007 , and UTV Home Entertainment released a DVD for Indian audiences in 2008 . Disney 's later release of the international edition DVD marked the first purchase of distribution rights for an Indian film by a global company . 
 Taare Zameen Par has received numerous awards , including the Filmfare Best Film Award for 2008 and the 2008 National Film Award for Best Film on Family Welfare . It was India 's official entry for the 2009 Academy Awards Best Foreign Film , but did not progress to the short @-@ list . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ishaan Nandkishore Awasthi ( Darsheel Safary ) is an eight @-@ year @-@ old boy who dislikes school and fails every test or exam . He finds all subjects difficult , and is belittled and berated by his teachers and classmates . But Ishaan 's internal world is full of wonders that he is unable to convey to others , magical lands filled with colour and animated animals . He is an artist whose talent is unrecognised . 
 Ishaan 's father , Nandkishore Awasthi ( Vipin Sharma ) , is a successful executive who expects his children to excel . His mother , housewife Maya Awasthi ( Tisca Chopra ) , is frustrated by her inability to educate her son . Ishaan 's elder brother , Yohaan ( Sachet Engineer ) , is an exemplary scholar and athlete , which Ishaan is frequently reminded of . 
 After receiving a particularly poor academic report , Ishaan 's parents send him to a boarding school . There he sinks into a state of fear and depression , despite being befriended by Rajan ( <unk> <unk> ) , a physically disabled boy and one of the top students in the class . 
 Ishaan 's situation changes when a new art teacher , Ram Shankar Nikumbh ( Aamir Khan ) , joins the school 's faculty . An instructor at the Tulips School for young children with developmental disabilities , Nikumbh 's teaching style is markedly different from that of his strict predecessor , and he quickly observes that Ishaan is unhappy and contributes little to class activities . He reviews Ishaan 's work and concludes that his academic shortcomings are indicative of dyslexia . 
 On his day off , Nikumbh sets off to Mumbai , to visit Ishaan 's parents . Nikumbh is surprised to learn that Ishaan is passionate about painting , and shows great talent in art . Nikumbh then asks Mr Awasthi as to why he sent Ishaan to a boarding school . Mr Awasthi replies that Ishaan was an ill mannered boy and was a poor student . Nikumbh shows Ishaan 's mother her son 's notebooks and gives an analysis of the script . Nikumbh deduces that Ishaan has severe difficulty in understanding letters and words . Mr Awasthi tries to dismiss it as a mere excuse for Ishaan 's laziness . Nikumbh demonstrates what Ishaan experiences every day at school . He states that Ishaan has dyslexia as well as he may be having other conditions , which make him a difficult child . 
 Mr Awasthi bluntly categorizes it as mental retardation , but Nikumbh criticizes him . Nikumbh argues that Ishaan is an above average child and processes information differently . He further states that Mr Awasthi failed to understand Ishaan and as a result the latter is facing low self @-@ esteem and no longer paints . 
 Nikumbh returns , and subsequently brings up the topic of dyslexia in class , and offers a list of famous people who were dyslexic . Later , Nikumbh reveals to Ishaan , that he too is a dyslexic and faced problems similar to Ishaan . Nikumbh then visits the school 's principal and obtains his permission to become Ishaan 's tutor . He attempts to improve Ishaan 's reading and writing by using remedial techniques developed by dyslexia specialists ; Ishaan soon develops an interest in language and mathematics , and his grades improve . 
 Towards the end of the school year Nikumbh organises an art fair for the staff and students . The competition is judged by artist Lalita Lajmi . Ishaan , with his strikingly creative style , is declared the winner and Nikumbh , who paints Ishaan 's portrait , the runner @-@ up . The principal announces that Nikumbh has been hired as the school 's permanent art teacher . When Ishaan 's parents meet his teachers on the last day of school they are left speechless by the transformation they see in him . Overcome with emotion , Ishaan 's father thanks Nikumbh . As Ishaan is getting into the car to leave with his parents for summer vacations , he turns around and runs toward Nikumbh . The film ends with a freeze frame shot of Nikumbh tossing Ishaan into the air . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Darsheel Safary as Ishaan Nandkishore Awasthi : In looking for an actor to play the central figure of Ishaan , writer Amole Gupte turned to Shiamak Davar 's Summer Funk workshops . Gupte had several boys informally audition by explaining to him how they would react to scripted situations from the film . Of his decision to cast Darsheel Safary , Gupte recalls that " it was a tough call . But Darsheel has the mischief in his eyes to be Ishaan . Everyone just naturally gravitated towards him . " 
 Aamir Khan as Ram Shankar Nikumbh ( " Nikumbh Sir " ) : Gupte , who based the character on his art teacher Ramdas <unk> Nikumbh , initially asked Akshaye Khanna to play the role . 
 <unk> <unk> as Rajan <unk> : Ishaan 's classmate at New Era High School . 
 Sachet Engineer as Yohaan Nandkishore Awasthi ( " Dada " ) : Ishaan 's elder brother . 
 Tisca Chopra as Maya Awasthi ( " Maa " ) : Ishaan 's mother , who gave up her career to raise her children . Chopra tended to speak softly during filming and was subsequently required to re @-@ record some scenes using automated dialogue replacement . 
 Vipin Sharma as Nandkishore Awasthi ( " Papa " ) : Ishaan 's " strict , hard , dominating father " . Part of the reason for Sharma 's casting was his " extremely strong and dominating " face that " exudes harshness . " Described by Khan as " naturally polite " and sensitive , Sharma was instructed to lower his voice to sound " harsh " and " dominating " . 
 Girija Oak as <unk> , Nikumbh 's co @-@ worker 
 Bugs Bhargava and Shankar Sachdev as Sen Sir and Tiwari Sir : Two teachers at New Era High School , whose attitude towards Ishaan softens as his grades improve and he wins the art contest . The roles are caricatures of teachers in general . 
 M. K. Raina as the principal of New Era High School . 
 Lalita Lajmi as herself in a cameo role . It was her first appearance as an actor . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The husband and wife team of Amole Gupte and Deepa Bhatia developed the story that would eventually become Taare Zameen Par as a way of understanding why some children cannot conform to a conventional educational system . Their initial work began as a short story that evolved into a screenplay over seven years . Deepa Bhatia later stated in an interview with The Hindu that her original inspiration was not dyslexia but rather the childhood of Japanese filmmaker Akira Kurosawa , who performed poorly in school . Her goal was thus to explore the story of " a child who did not fit into the school stream . " She referenced a specific moment in Kurosawa 's biography where he began to excel after meeting an attentive art teacher , and noted that this scene " became the inspiration for how a teacher could transform the life of a student " . 
 In developing the character of a young boy based on Kurosawa , Bhatia and Gupte explored some possible reasons why he failed in school . Their research led them to groups such as the Maharashtra Dyslexia Association and Parents for a Better Curriculum for the Child ( PACE ) . Dyslexia eventually became the central topic and theme of the film . The pair worked with dyslexic children to research and develop the screenplay , basing characters and situations on their observations . Bhatia and Gupte carefully concealed the children 's identities in the final version of the script . 
 Khan and Gupte first met in college . Khan has said that he admired Gupte 's abilities as an actor , writer , and painter . Three years before the film 's release Gupte brought Khan to the project as a producer and actor . Gupte himself was to direct , but the first week 's dailies were a great disappointment to Khan , who " lost faith in Amol and his capability of translating on screen what he had so beautifully written on paper " . Khan was on the verge of withdrawing his participation in the film because of these " creative differences " , but Gupte kept him onboard by stepping down as director . Contrary to Khan 's claim , Gupte lashed out saying that after the wrap @-@ up party , Khan announced that he was the director of the film , despite Gupte acting as director . Had it been necessary to hire a third party , production would have been postponed for 6 – 8 months as the new director prepared for the film . Keen to keep Safary as Ishaan — the actor might have aged too much for the part had production been delayed — Khan took over the role of director . Taare Zameen Par was Khan 's first experience in the dual role of actor and director . He has admitted that the transition was challenging , stating that while he had always wanted to direct a film , it was unknown territory for him . Gupte remained on set , " guiding [ Khan ] and , at times , even correcting [ him ] " . 
 = = = Title and translation = = = 
 Initially the film was to retain the short story 's title of " High Jump " , because of Ishaan 's inability to achieve the high jump in gym class . This subplot — filmed but later cut — tied into the original ending for the movie . In this rendition , a " ghost image " separates from Ishaan after the art competition and runs to the sports field ; the film would end on a freeze frame of Ishaan successfully making the leap . Khan , however , was unhappy with that proposed ending and convinced Gupte to rewrite it . 
 With the working title no longer relevant , Khan , Gupte , and Bhatia discussed several alternatives , eventually deciding on Taare Zameen Par . Possible translations of this title include Stars on the Ground and Stars on Earth . According to Khan : 
 Taare Zameen Par is a film about children and it is a film which celebrates the abilities of children . Taare Zameen Par is a title which denotes that aspect . It is a title with a very positive feel to it . All the kids are special and wonderful . They are like stars on earth . This particular aspect gave birth to the title . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for the film took place in India over five months . Khan spent his first two days as director blocking the first scene to be filmed — Ishaan returning home from school and putting away his recently collected fish — and becoming comfortable with his new responsibilities . Believing that the audience should not be aware of the camera , he chose a simple shooting style for the film that involved relatively little camera movement . 
 At the same time , Khan also made use of illusory camera tricks . For example , the opening scene of Ishaan collecting fish outside his school was shot on location and at Film City . Shots focusing on Ishaan took place at the former , while those involving the gutter terrarium were filmed at a water tank at the latter . The tank 's water often became murky because the mud would rise to the top , forcing production to constantly empty and refill it . Due to this hindrance , the scene took eight hours to film . The film 's next sequence involved Ishaan playing with two dogs . To compensate for the " absolutely petrified " Safary , most joint shots used a body double , though other portions integrated close @-@ up shots of the actor . Ishaan 's nightmare — he becomes separated from his mother at a train station and she departs on a train while he is trapped in a crowd — was filmed in Mumbai on a permanent railway @-@ station set . To work around the train set piece 's immobility , production placed the camera on a moving trolley to create the illusion of a departing train . For the sequences related from the mother 's point of view — shot from behind the actress — Chopra stood on a trolley next to a recreated section of the train 's door . 
 All the school sequences were filmed on location . The production team searched for a Mumbai school with an " oppressive " feel to establish the " heaviness of being in a metropolitan school " , and eventually chose St. Xavier 's School . As the school is situated along a main road filming took place on weekends , to minimise the background noise , but an early scene in which Ishaan is sent out of the classroom was filmed on the day of the Mumbai Marathon . The production staff placed acrylic sheets invisible to the naked eye on the classroom windows to mask the sounds of nearby crowds and helicopters . New Era High School served as Ishaan 's boarding school . The change of setting was a " breath of fresh air " for the production crew , who moved from Ishaan 's small house in Chembur to the " vast , beautiful environs " of Panchgani . 
 Production relied on stock footage for the brief scene of a bird feeding its babies . Khan carefully selected a clip to his liking , but learned three weeks before the film 's release that the footage was not available in the proper format . With three days to replace it or else risk delaying the release , Khan made do with what he could find . He says that he " cringes " every time he sees it . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 Real schoolchildren participated throughout the movie 's filming . Khan credited them with the film 's success , and was reportedly very popular with them . Furthermore , Khan placed a high priority on the day @-@ to @-@ day needs of his child actors , and went to great lengths to attend to them . The production staff made sure that the students were never idle , and always kept them occupied outside of filming . New Era Faculty Coordinator Douglas Lee thought the experience not only helped the children to learn patience and cooperation , but also gave them a better understanding of how they should behave towards children like Ishaan who have problems in school . Because filming at New Era High School occurred during the winter holiday , those portraying Ishaan 's classmates gave up their vacation to participate . To fill out the campus background , students from nearby schools were also brought in . A total of 1 @,@ 500 children were used for wide @-@ shots of the film 's art @-@ fair climax ; medium shots only required 400 students . 
 New to acting , the children often made errors such as staring into the camera , and Khan resorted to unorthodox methods to work around their rookie mistakes . For example , an early scene in the film featured a school assembly ; Khan wanted the students to act naturally and to ignore the principal 's speech , but recognised that this would be a difficult feat with cameras present . First Assistant Director Sunil Pandey spoke continuously in an attempt to " bore the hell out of [ them ] " , and they eventually lost interest in the filming and behaved normally . A later scene involved Nikumbh enlightening his class about famous people who suffer from dyslexia , and the children 's responses to his speech were the last portion to be filmed . Having already spent 3 – 4 days hearing the dialogue the children 's reactions were " jaded " . Khan opted to film them while he recited a tale , and manipulated his storytelling to achieve the varying spontaneous reactions . The following scene had the children playing around a nearby pond . Horrified when he learned that the water was 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) deep , Khan recruited four lifeguards in case a child fell in . 
 Khan found it important that the audience connect the film to real children , and had Pandey travel throughout India filming documentary @-@ style footage of children from all walks of life . Those visuals were integrated into the end credits . 
 = = = Art and animation = = = 
 While claymation has been used in Indian television commercials , the film 's title sequence — a representation of Ishaan 's imagination — marked its first instance in a Bollywood film . Khan gave claymation artist <unk> Vyas free rein over the various elements . The storyboarding took one and a half months and the shooting required 15 days . The " 3 into 9 " sequence , in which Ishaan delves into his imagination to solve a math problem , was originally conceived as a 3D animation . Halfway through its creation , however , Khan felt it was not turning out as he had envisioned it . Khan scrapped the project and hired Vaibhav <unk> , who hand @-@ drew the scene as a 2D animation . 
 Artist Samir Mondal composed Ishaan and Nikumbh 's art @-@ fair watercolour paintings . He held a workshop with the schoolchildren , and incorporated elements from their artwork into Ishaan 's . Mondal also instructed Khan on a painter 's typical mannerisms and movements . Gupte created the rest of Ishaan 's artwork and Assistant Art Director Veer Nanavati drew Ishaan 's <unk> . The art department 's designs for Ishaan 's school notebooks disappointed Khan , who had familiarised himself with dyslexic writing . Using his left hand , Khan instead wrote it himself . 
 = = = Musical sequences = = = 
 The musical sequence of " Jame Raho " establishes the characters of the four members of Ishaan 's family ; for example , the father is hardworking and responsible , and Yohaan is an " ideal son " who does all the right things . A robotic style of music overlaps most of the sequence — this is mirrored by the machine @-@ like morning routines of the mother , father , and Yohaan — but changes for Ishaan 's portion to imply that he is different from the rest . This concept is furthered by speed ramping and having the camera sway with the music to create a distinct style . The twilight scenes of " Maa " were a particular issue for the production crew . Because the specific lighting only lasted ten to fifteen minutes a day , the scenes took nearly ten evenings to film . Production at one time considered having a child singing , but ultimately deemed it too over the top and felt it would connect to more people if sung by an adult . Shankar initially performed the song as a sample — they planned to replace him with another singer — but production eventually decided that his rendition was best . 
 Ishaan 's truancy scene — he leaves school one day after realising that his mother has not signed his failed math test — originally coincided with the song " Kholo Kholo , " but Khan did not believe it worked well for the situation . In his opinion , the accompanying song should focus on what a child wants — to be free — and be told from the first @-@ person perspective instead of " Kholo Kholo " ' s second person . When Khan took over as director , he opted to use " Mera Jahan " — a song written by Gupte — and moved " Kholo Kholo " to the art fair . Viewers of test screenings were divided over the truancy scene . Half thoroughly enjoyed it but the rest complained that it was too long , did not make sense , and merely showed " <unk> " visuals of Mumbai . Khan nevertheless kept the scene , because he " connected deeply " with it and felt that it established Ishaan 's world . 
 Shiamak Davar choreographed the dance sequence of " Bum Bum Bole , " and was given free rein over its design . He had intended to use 40 students from his dance school , but Khan did not want trained dancers . Davar gave the children certain cues and a general idea of what to do , but left the style and final product up to them to avoid a choreographed appearance . Time constraints meant that while Khan was busy filming " Bum Bum Bole , " Ram Madhvani took over as director for " <unk> Kum " . The latter sequence , containing a " fun @-@ filled " song of rhythmic dialogue , allowed the audience to perceive how Ishaan sees the world and written languages . It was intended to represent " a young boy 's worst nightmare , in terms of ... the worst thing that he can think of " ; Madhvani based the visual concept on his son 's fear of " creepy @-@ crawlies " such as cockroaches , dragonflies , and lizards . Tata Elxsi 's Visual Computing Labs made the creatures out of the English alphabet and numbers , although Khan insisted they include the Hindi alphabet as not all the audience would be familiar with English . The chalkboard writing 's transformation into a snake was included to surprise the audience and " end the song on a high note . " 
 In writing the song " Taare Zameen Par , " lyricist Prasoon Joshi followed the theme of " however much you talk about children , it 's not enough . " Every line throughout the song describes children , and only one repeats : " Kho Naa <unk> Yeh / Taare Zameen Par " ( " Let us not lose these / Little stars on earth " ) . The song is mostly set to the annual day performance by the developmentally disabled children of Tulips School . Actual students from Tulips School and Saraswati Mandir participated , and were filmed over a period of five days . The sequence originally featured numerous dance performances , but was trimmed down when test audiences found it too long . A song accompanying the scene in which Ishaan 's mother is watching home videos of her son was also cut , and replaced with background music after test audiences expressed their opposition to yet another song . 
 = = = Background music = = = 
 Timing and other aspects are usually planned when scoring a film , but Khan chose to take a more improvised approach . Instead of using a studio , he and the trio Shankar – Ehsaan – Loy recorded it at Khan 's home in Panchgani , to clear their heads and not be in the mindset of the city . As they watched the film , Khan pointed out when he wanted music to begin and of what type . Ehsaan Noorani noted that this strategy allowed the score to have a " spontaneity to it . " 
 Different styles of background music were used to convey certain things . For example , a guitar is played when Ishaan is tense or upset , sometimes with discordant notes . The music of the opening scene — the recurring " Ishaan 's Theme , " which represents the character 's peace of mind — overpowers the background noise to show that Ishaan is lost in his own world ; the noise becomes louder after he snaps back to reality . But the scene in which Nikumbh explains dyslexia to Ishaan 's family took the opposite approach . Silent at first , the music is slowly introduced as the father begins to understand his son 's dilemma . The almost seven @-@ minute long scene scarcely used any background music , to slow the pace and make it seem more realistic . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Taare Zameen Par was released worldwide on 21 December 2007 , although countries such as Australia , Malaysia , New Zealand , and Fiji opened it on 20 December . It debuted in India with 425 prints , although revenue @-@ sharing issues between the film 's distributors and theatre owners caused some slight delays . The movie grossed ₹ 150 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 2 million ) domestically within the first three days . Its theatre occupancy in Mumbai dropped to 58 percent during its third week , but climbed back to 62 percent the following week — this brought the total to ₹ 770 million ( US $ 11 million ) — after the Maharashtra government granted the film exemption from the entertainment tax . Anticipating further tax exemption in other states , world distributor PVR Pictures circulated 200 more prints of the film . The film completed its domestic run with $ 19 @,@ 779 @,@ 215 . To reach more audiences , the film was later dubbed in the regional languages of Tamil and Telugu . Both were scheduled for release on 12 September 2008 , the former under the title <unk> <unk> . It grossed $ 1 @,@ 223 @,@ 869 in the US by its seventh week , and £ 351 @,@ 303 in the UK by its ninth week . Reports regarding the film 's worldwide gross have conflicted , with sources citing ₹ 889 @.@ 7 million ( US $ 13 million ) , ₹ 1 @.@ 07 billion ( US $ 16 million ) , ₹ 1 @.@ 31 billion ( US $ 19 million ) , and ₹ 1 @.@ 35 billion ( US $ 20 million ) . 
 = = = Protests in Gujarat = = = 
 In response to Khan 's support for the Narmada Bachao Andolan and his criticism of Chief Minister Narendra Modi , approximately 50 activists of the Sardar Patel Group conducted protests outside of PVR and INOX theatres in Vadodara , Gujarat . The group also issued statements to all the multiplexes of Gujarat , suggesting that the film not be screened unless Khan apologised for his comments . The INOX cinema eventually boycotted the film ; INOX Operations Manager <unk> Singh Rathod stated that " INOX is with Gujarat , and not isolated from it " . 
 = = = International Dyslexia Association = = = 
 The International Dyslexia Association screened Taare Zameen Par on 29 October 2008 in Seattle , Washington . Khan noted in his official blog that there were about 200 people in the audience and that he was " curious to see the response of a non @-@ Indian audience to what we had made . " He felt some concern that Taare Zameen Par was shown in a conference room rather than a cinema hall and was projected as a DVD rather than as a film . He said that the showing concluded to an " absolutely thunderous standing ovation " which " overwhelmed " him and that he " saw the tears streaming down the cheeks of the audience . " Khan also noted that the reaction to the film " was exactly as it had been with audiences back home in India " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Taare Zameen Par received several positive reviews . Subhash K. Jha suggests that the film is " a work of art , a water painting where the colors drip into our hearts , which could easily have fallen into the motions of over @-@ sentimentality . Aamir Khan holds back where he could easily resort to an extravagant display of drama and emotions . " Rajeev Masand of CNN @-@ IBN argued that the true power of the film lies in its " remarkable , rooted , rock @-@ solid script which provides the landscape for such an emotionally engaging , heart @-@ warming experience . " Manish Gajjar from the BBC stated that the film " touches your heart and moves you deeply with its sterling performances . [ It is ] a film full of substance ! " Jaspreet Pandohar , also of BBC , posited that Taare Zameen Par is a " far cry from the formulaic masala flicks churned out by the Bollywood machine , " and is " an inspirational story that is as emotive as it is entertaining ; this is a little twinkling star of a movie . " Furthermore , <unk> Anil of Screen gave the film four stars and stated , " Taare Zameen Par cannot be missed . Because it is different . Because it is delightful . Because it would make everyone think . Because it would help everyone grow . Because very rarely do performances get so gripping . And of course because the ' perfectionist ' actor has shaped into a ' perfectionist ' director . " In addition , filmmaker Anurag Kashyap stated that , " Taare Zameen Par took me back to my hostel days . If you take away the dyslexia , it seems like my story . The film affected me so deeply that I was almost left speechless . After watching the film , I was asked how I liked Taare Zameen Par . I could not talk as I was deeply overwhelmed . " 
 However , there were some criticisms . Jha 's only objection to the film was Nikumbh 's " sanctimonious lecture " to Ishaan 's " rather theatrically @-@ played " father . Jha found this a jarring " deviation from the delectable delicacy " of the film 's tone . Although she applauded the film overall and recommended " a mandatory viewing for all schools and all parents " , Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India believed the second half was " a bit repetitive , " the script needed " taut editing , " and Ishaan 's trauma " [ seemed ] a shade too prolonged and the treatment simplistic . " Despite commending the " great performances " and excellent directing , Gautaman Bhaskaran of The Hollywood Reporter , too , suggested that the movie " suffers from a weak script . " Likewise , Derek Kelly of Variety criticised it for what he described as its " touchy @-@ feely @-@ ness " attention to " a special needs kid 's plight . " Kelly also disliked the film for being " so resolutely caring ... and devoid of real drama and interesting characters " that " it should have ' approved by the Dyslexia <unk> . ' stamped on the posters . " 
 = = = Scholarly response = = = 
 In his article " Taare Zameen Par and dyslexic savants " featured in the Annals of Indian Academy of Neurology , Ambar Chakravarty noted the general accuracy of Ishaan 's dyslexia . Though Chakravarty was puzzled by Ishaan 's trouble in simple arithmetic — a trait of <unk> rather than dyslexia — he reasoned it was meant to " enhance the image of [ Ishaan 's ] helplessness and disability " . Labeling Ishaan an example of " dyslexic savant syndrome " , he especially praised the growth of Ishaan 's artistic talents after receiving help and support from Nikumbh , and deemed it the " most important ( and joyous ) neurocognitive phenomenon " of the film . This improvement highlights cosmetic neurology , a " major and therapeutically important issue " in cognitive neuroscience and neuropsychology . 
 Likewise , in their article " Wake up call from ' Stars on the Ground ' " for the Indian Journal of Psychiatry , T. S. Sathyanarayana Rao and V. S. T. Krishna wrote that the film " deserves to be vastly appreciated as an earnest endeavor to portray with sensitivity and empathetically diagnose a malady in human life " . They also felt it blended " modern professional knowledge " with a " humane approach " in working with a dyslexic child . However , the authors believed the film expands beyond disabilities and explores the " present age where everyone is in a restless hurry " . The pair wrote , " This film raises serious questions on mental health perspectives . We seem to be heading to a state of mass scale mindlessness even as children are being pushed to ' perform ' . Are we seriously getting engrossed in the race of ' achievement ' and blissfully becoming numb to the crux of life i.e. , experiencing meaningful living in a broader frame rather than merely existing ? " The film depicts how " threats and coercion are not capable of unearthing rich human potentialities deeply embedded in children " , and that teachers should instead map their strengths and weakness . With this in mind , the author felt that Khan " dexterously drives home the precise point that our first priority ought to be getting to know the child before making any efforts to fill them with knowledge and abilities " . Overall , the pair found a " naive oversimplification " in the film . With India " only recently waking to recognizing the reality and tragedy of learning disability " , however , they " easily [ forgave the film 's fault ] under artistic license " . 
 = = = Public response = = = 
 The film raised awareness of the issue of dyslexia , and prompted more open discussions among parents , schools , activists , and policymakers . <unk> Bawa , a parent @-@ activist and founder of Action Dyslexia Delhi , said that the number of parents who visit her office increased tenfold in the months following the film 's release . Many began taking a more proactive approach by contacting her after noticing problems , rather than using her as a last resort . Gupte himself received " many painful letters and phone calls " from Indian parents . He noted , " Fathers weep on the phone and say they saw the film and realized that they have been wrong in the way they treated their children . This is catharsis . " 
 These reactions have also brought about a change in policies . The film , only ten days after its debut , influenced the Central Board of Secondary Education to provide extra time to special children — including the visually impaired , physically challenged and dyslexic — during exams . In 2008 , Mumbai 's civic body also opened 12 classrooms for autistic students . In Chandigarh , the education administration started a course to educate teachers on how to deal with children with learning disabilities . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Among its many awards , Taare Zameen Par won the Filmfare Best Film Award for 2008 , as well as the National Film Award for Best Film on Family Welfare . Khan 's directorial role and Safary 's performance were recognized at the 2008 Zee Cine Awards , 2008 Filmfare Awards , and 4th Apsara Film & Television Producers Guild Awards . 
 = = = = 2009 Academy Awards submission and Slumdog Millionaire = = = = 
 Taare Zameen Par was initially acclaimed as India 's official entry for the 2009 Academy Awards Best Foreign Film , but after it failed to progress to the short list , a debate began in the Indian media as to why Indian films never win Academy Awards . Speculation for the reasons behind Taare Zameen Par 's failed bid included Rediff.com 's Arthur J. Pai 's observation that it lacked mainstream media attention ; AMPAS jury member Krishna Shah criticised its length and abundance of songs . 
 Khan claimed that he was " not surprised " that Taare Zameen Par was not included in the Academy Award shortlist , and argued , " I don ’ t make films for awards . I make films for the audience . The audience , for which I have made the film , really loved it and the audiences outside India have also loved it . What I am trying to say is that film has been well loved across the globe and that for me it is extremely heartening and something that I give very high value to . " 
 The Indian news media also frequently compared Taare Zameen Par 's nomination failure with the British film Slumdog Millionaire 's multiple Academy Award nominations and wins , and noted that other Indian films in the past were overlooked . Film critic Rajeev Masand argued that it is difficult to compare the two films and noted that Slumdog Millionaire was being marketed in a way that Indian films such as Taare Zameen Par could not compete with . In this context , Slumdog Millionaire actor Mahesh Manjrekar stated , " I ’ m sad that Aamir ’ s Taare Zameen Par didn ’ t make it to the final round of the Oscars . I thought it to be way better than Slumdog [ Millionaire ] ... , without taking away anything from Boyle and the kids . But , Indian movies are underestimated there . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 UTV Home Entertainment released the film on DVD in India on 25 July 2008 . It was launched at Darsheel Safary 's school , Green Lawns High School , in Mumbai . Aamir Khan , Tisca Chopra , Vipin Sharma , Sachet Engineer , and the rest of the cast and crew were present . In his speech , Khan stated , " Darsheel is a very happy child , full of life and vibrant . I am sure it 's because of the way his parents and teachers have treated him . I must say Darsheel 's principal Mrs. Bajaj has been extremely supportive and encouraging . The true test of any school is how happy the kids are and by the looks of it , the children here seem really happy . " 
 Walt Disney Company Home Entertainment , which acquired 33 percent of UTV Software Communications , bought the DVD rights for distribution in North America , the United Kingdom , and Australia for ₹ 70 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 0 million ) . This marked " the first time an international studio has bought the video rights of an Indian film . " <unk> it Like Stars on Earth , Disney released the film in Region 2 on 26 October 2009 , in Region 1 on 12 January 2010 , and in Region 4 on 29 March 2010 . A three @-@ disc set , the Disney version features the original Hindi audio soundtrack with English subtitles or another dubbed in English , as well as bonus material such as audio commentary , deleted scenes , and the musical soundtrack . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack for Taare Zameen Par was released on 4 November 2007 under the label T @-@ Series . The music is mainly composed by Shankar @-@ Ehsaan @-@ Loy , with lyrics by Prasoon Joshi . However , " Mera Jahan " was scored by <unk> <unk> and written by Gupte , with the latter also composing " Ishaan 's Theme . " Joshi received the National Film Award for Best Lyrics , and Shankar Mahadevan won the National Film Award for Best Male Playback Singer for " Maa . " 
 Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama praised the variety of genres present in the soundtrack and the lack of remixes . He gave it an overall rating of 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars , calling it a " zero compromise album " that " stays true to the film 's spirit " . Planet Bollywood 's Atta Khan rated it 9 out of 10 , noting that the soundtrack " unquestionably lives up to all expectations " . He felt that it maintained an " all round polished nature " and " is destined to become a classic " . Although he , too , enjoyed the musical variety , he believed the composers overused the guitar and synthesizers . Sukanya Verma of Rediff.com gave the soundtrack a score of 3 out of 5 , commenting , " Taare Zameen Par isn 't your regular soundtrack about fluttering hearts and sleepless nights . What makes these delicate and whimsical creations special is their underlying innocence . " 
 = = DVD references = = 
 Khan , Aamir ( 12 January 2010 ) . Like Stars on Earth DVD commentary ( DVD ) . Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment . 
 Various ( 12 January 2010 ) . Like Stars on Earth Bonus Disc : The Making ... ( DVD ) . Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment . 
 = Boiling frog = 
 The boiling frog is an anecdote describing a frog slowly being boiled alive . The premise is that if a frog is put suddenly into boiling water , it will jump out , but if it is put in cold water which is then brought to a boil slowly , it will not perceive the danger and will be cooked to death . The story is often used as a metaphor for the inability or unwillingness of people to react to or be aware of threats that rise gradually . 
 While some 19th @-@ century experiments suggested that the underlying premise is true if the heating is sufficiently gradual , according to contemporary biologists the premise is false : a submerged frog gradually heated will jump out . 
 = = The science = = 
 As part of advancing science , several experiments observing the reaction of frogs to slowly heated water took place in the 19th century . In 1869 , while doing experiments searching for the location of the soul , German physiologist Friedrich Goltz demonstrated that a frog that has had its brain removed will remain in slowly heated water , but an intact frog attempted to escape the water when it reached 25 ° C. 
 Other experiments showed that frogs did not attempt to escape gradually heated water . An 1872 experiment by <unk> demonstrated that a normal frog would not attempt to escape if the water was heated slowly enough , which was corroborated in 1875 by <unk> . 
 Goltz raised the temperature of the water from 17 @.@ 5 ° C to 56 ° C in about ten minutes , or 3 @.@ 8 ° C per minute , in his experiment which prompted normal frogs to attempt to escape , whereas <unk> heated the frogs over the course of 90 minutes from about 21 ° C to 37 @.@ 5 ° C , a rate of less than 0 @.@ 2 ° C per minute . In " On the Variation of Reflex <unk> in the Frog induced by changes of Temperature " ( 1882 ) William Thompson Sedgwick writes : " in one experiment by Scripture the temperature was raised at a rate of 0 @.@ 002 ° C per second , and the frog was found dead at the end of 2 ½ hours without having moved . " 
 In 1888 Sedgwick explained the apparent contradiction between the results of these experiments as a consequence of different heating rates used in the experiments : " The truth appears to be that if the heating be sufficiently gradual , no reflex movements will be produced even in the normal frog ; if it be more rapid , yet take place at such a rate as to be fairly called ' gradual ' , it will not secure the response of the normal frog under any circumstances " . 
 Modern sources tend to dispute that the phenomenon is real . In 1995 , Professor Douglas Melton , of the Harvard University Biology department , said , " If you put a frog in boiling water , it won 't jump out . It will die . If you put it in cold water , it will jump before it gets hot — they don 't sit still for you . " Dr. George R. Zug , curator of reptiles and amphibians at the National Museum of Natural History , also rejected the suggestion , saying that " If a frog had a means of getting out , it certainly would get out . " 
 In 2002 Dr. Victor H. Hutchison , Professor Emeritus of Zoology at the University of Oklahoma , with a research interest in thermal relations of amphibians , said that " The legend is entirely incorrect ! " . He described how the critical thermal maximum for many frog species has been determined by contemporary research experiments : as the water is heated by about 2 ° F , or 1 @.@ 1 ° C , per minute , the frog becomes increasingly active as it tries to escape , and eventually jumps out if the container allows it . 
 = = Use = = 
 = = = As metaphor = = = 
 The boiling frog story is generally offered as a metaphor cautioning people to be aware of even gradual change lest they suffer eventual undesirable consequences . It may be invoked in support of a slippery slope argument as a caution against creeping normality . It is also used in business to reinforce that change needs to be gradual to be accepted . Oppositely , the expression " boiling frog syndrome " is sometimes used as shorthand to invoke the pitfalls of standing pat . 
 The story has been retold many times and used to illustrate widely varying viewpoints . Among them : in 1960 about sympathy towards the Soviet Union during the Cold War ; in 1980 about the impending collapse of civilization anticipated by survivalists ; in the 1990s about inaction in response to climate change and staying in abusive relationships . It has also been used by libertarians to warn about slow erosion of civil rights . 
 In the 1996 novel The Story of B , environmentalist author Daniel Quinn spends a chapter on the metaphor of the boiling frog , using it to describe human history , population growth and food surplus . Pierce Brosnan 's character Harry Dalton mentioned it in the 1997 disaster movie Dante 's Peak in reference to the accumulating warning signs of the volcano 's reawakening . Al Gore used a version of the story in a New York Times op ed , in his presentations and the 2006 movie An Inconvenient Truth to describe ignorance about global warming . In the movie version the frog is rescued before it is harmed . This use of the story was referenced ironically by writer / director Jon Cooksey in the title of his 2010 comedic documentary How to Boil a Frog . 
 Christopher Brookmyre used Boiling a Frog as the title of his novel that used gradual political corruption as a background to the thriller . 
 Law professor and legal commentator Eugene Volokh commented in 2003 that regardless of the behavior of real frogs , the boiling frog story is useful as a metaphor , comparing it to the metaphor of an ostrich with its head in the sand . Economics Nobel laureate and New York Times op @-@ ed writer Paul Krugman used the story as a metaphor in a July 2009 column , while pointing out that real frogs behave differently . Journalist James Fallows has been advocating since 2006 for people to stop retelling the story , describing it as a " stupid canard " and a " myth " . But following Krugman 's column , he declared " peace on the boiled frog front " and said that using the story is fine as long as you point out it 's not literally true . 
 = = = In philosophy = = = 
 In philosophy the boiling frog story has been used as a way of explaining the <unk> paradox . It describes a hypothetical heap of sand from which individual grains are removed one at a time , and asks if there is a specific point when it can no longer be defined as a heap . 
 = SMS Magdeburg = 
 SMS Magdeburg ( " His Majesty 's Ship Magdeburg " ) was a lead ship of the Magdeburg class of light cruisers in the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) . Her class included three other ships : Breslau , Strassburg , and Stralsund . Magdeburg was built at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen from 1910 to August 1912 , when she was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet . The ship was armed with a main battery of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns and had a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . Magdeburg was used as a torpedo test ship after her commissioning until the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , when she was brought to active service and deployed to the Baltic . 
 In the Baltic , Magdeburg fired the first shots of the war against the Russians on 2 August , when she shelled the port of Libau . She participated in a series of bombardments of Russian positions until late August . On the 26th , she participated in a sweep of the entrance to the Gulf of Finland ; while steaming off the Estonian coast , she ran aground off the island of Odensholm and could not be freed . A pair of Russian cruisers appeared and seized the ship . Fifteen crew members were killed in the brief engagement . They recovered three intact German code books , one of which they passed to the British . The ability to decrypt German wireless signals provided the British with the ability to ambush German units on several occasions during the war , including the Battle of Jutland . The Russians partially scrapped Magdeburg while she remained grounded before completely destroying the wreck . 
 = = Design = = 
 Magdeburg was ordered under the contract name " Ersatz Bussard " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1910 and launched on 13 May 1911 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 20 August 1912 . The ship was 138 @.@ 7 meters ( 455 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 5 m ( 44 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 4 m ( 14 ft ) forward . She displaced 4 @,@ 570 t ( 4 @,@ 500 long tons ; 5 @,@ 040 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of AEG @-@ Vulcan steam turbines driving two 3 @.@ 4 @-@ meter ( 11 ft ) propellers . They were designed to give 25 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 000 kW ) , but reached 33 @,@ 482 shp ( 24 @,@ 968 kW ) in service . These were powered by sixteen coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers , although they were later altered to use fuel oil that was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . These gave the ship a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . Magdeburg carried 1 @,@ 200 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 200 long tons ) of coal , and an additional 106 tonnes ( 104 long tons ) of oil that gave her a range of approximately 5 @,@ 820 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 780 km ; 6 @,@ 700 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 18 officers and 336 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , eight were located amidships , four on either side , and two were side by side aft . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 12 @,@ 700 m ( 41 @,@ 700 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 800 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . She was also equipped with a pair of 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes submerged in the hull on the broadside . She could also carry 120 mines . The ship was protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with up to 60 mm thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning , Magdeburg was used as a torpedo test ship . Following the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , she was assigned to the Baltic Sea , under the command of Rear Admiral Robert Mischke . Magdeburg fired the first shots of the war with Russia on 2 August when she shelled the Russian port of Libau while Augsburg laid a minefield outside the harbor . The Russians had in fact already left Libau , which was seized by the German Army . The minefield laid by Augsburg was poorly marked and hindered German operations more than Russian efforts . Magdeburg and the rest of the Baltic forces then conducted a series of bombardments of Russian positions , including one ten days later , on 12 August , where Magdeburg shelled the Dagerort lighthouse . On 17 August , Magdeburg , Augsburg , three destroyers , and the minelayer Deutschland encountered a pair of powerful Russian armored cruisers , Admiral Makarov and Gromoboi . The Russian commander , under the mistaken assumption that the German armored cruisers Roon and Prinz Heinrich were present , did not attack and both forces withdrew . 
 Prince Heinrich , the overall commander of the Baltic naval forces , replaced Mischke with Rear Admiral Behring . Behring ordered another operation for 26 August to sweep for Russian reconnaissance forces in the entrance to the Gulf of Finland . Early that morning , Magdeburg ran aground off the lighthouse at Odensholm on the Estonian coast . Her escorting destroyer , <unk> , attempted to pull her free but was unable to do so and began taking off part of Magdeburg 's crew . While the evacuation was going on , the Russian cruisers Bogatyr and Pallada appeared and shelled the stranded cruiser . The Germans destroyed the forward section of the ship , but could not complete her destruction before the Russians reached the ship . Fifteen crew members from Magdeburg were killed in the attack . The German code books were also not destroyed ; the Russians were able to recover three of the books along with the current encryption key . They passed one copy to the British Royal Navy via a pair of Russian couriers on 13 October . The Russian Navy partially scrapped the ship in situ and eventually destroyed the wreck . 
 The capture of the code books proved to provide a significant advantage for the Royal Navy . The Admiralty had recently created a deciphering department known as Room 40 to process intercepted German wireless signals . With the code books and cipher key , the British were able to track the movements of most German warships ; this information could be passed on to the Admiral John Jellicoe , the commander of the Grand Fleet . This allowed the British to ambush parts of or the entire German fleet on several occasions , most successfully at the Battles of Dogger Bank in January 1915 and Jutland in May 1916 . 
 = Russian battleship Potemkin = 
 The Russian battleship Potemkin ( Russian : Князь Потёмкин Таврический , Kniaz Potemkin Tavricheskiy , " Prince Potemkin of Tauris " ) was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the Imperial Russian Navy 's Black Sea Fleet . She became famous when the crew rebelled against the officers in June 1905 ( during that year 's revolution ) , now viewed as a first step towards the Russian Revolution of 1917 . The mutiny later formed the basis of Sergei Eisenstein 's 1925 silent propaganda film The Battleship Potemkin . 
 After the mutineers sought asylum in Constanța , Romania , and the Russians recovered the ship , her name was changed to Panteleimon . She accidentally sank a Russian submarine in 1909 and was badly damaged when she ran aground in 1911 . During World War I , Panteleimon participated in the Battle of Cape Sarych in late 1914 . She covered several bombardments of the Bosphorus fortifications in early 1915 , including one where she was attacked by the Turkish battlecruiser Yavuz Sultan Selim – Panteleimon and the other Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts present drove her off before she could inflict any serious damage . The ship was relegated to secondary roles after the first dreadnought battleship entered service in late 1915 . She was by then obsolete and was reduced to reserve in 1918 in Sevastopol . 
 Panteleimon was captured when the Germans took Sevastopol in May 1918 and was handed over to the Allies after the Armistice in November 1918 . Her engines were destroyed by the British in 1919 when they withdrew from Sevastopol to prevent the advancing Bolsheviks from using them against the White Russians . She was abandoned when the Whites evacuated the Crimea in 1920 and was finally scrapped by the Soviets in 1923 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 Planning began in 1895 for a new battleship that would utilize a slipway slated to become available at the Nikolayev Admiralty Shipyard in 1896 . The Naval Staff and the commander of the Black Sea Fleet , Vice Admiral K. P. <unk> , agreed on a copy of the Peresvet @-@ class battleship design , but they were overruled by General Admiral Grand Duke Alexei Alexandrovich . The General Admiral decided that the long range and less powerful 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) guns of the Peresvet class were inappropriate for the narrow confines of the Black Sea , and ordered the design of an improved version of the battleship Tri Sviatitelia instead . The improvements included a higher forecastle to improve the ship 's seakeeping qualities , Krupp cemented armour and Belleville boilers . The design process was complicated by numerous changes demanded by various departments of the Naval Technical Committee . The ship 's design was finally approved on 12 June 1897 , although design changes continued to be made that slowed the ship 's construction . 
 = = = Construction and sea trials = = = 
 Construction of Potemkin began on 27 December 1897 and she was laid down at the Nikolayev Admiralty Shipyard on 10 October 1898 . She was named in honour of Prince Grigory Potemkin , a Russian soldier and statesman . The ship was launched on 9 October 1900 and transferred to Sevastopol for fitting out on 4 July 1902 . She began sea trials in September 1903 and these continued , off and on , until early 1905 when her gun turrets were completed . 
 = = Description = = 
 Potemkin was 371 feet 5 inches ( 113 @.@ 2 m ) long at the waterline and 378 feet 6 inches ( 115 @.@ 4 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 73 feet ( 22 @.@ 3 m ) and a maximum draught of 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . She displaced 12 @,@ 900 long tons ( 13 @,@ 100 t ) , 420 long tons ( 430 t ) more than her designed displacement of 12 @,@ 480 long tons ( 12 @,@ 680 t ) . Potemkin 's crew consisted of 26 officers and 705 enlisted men . 
 = = = Power = = = 
 The ship had a pair of three @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each of which drove one propeller , that had a total designed output of 10 @,@ 600 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 900 kW ) . Twenty @-@ two Belleville boilers provided steam to the engines at a pressure of 15 atm ( 1 @,@ 520 kPa ; 220 psi ) . The eight boilers in the forward boiler room were oil @-@ fired and the remaining 14 were coal @-@ fired . During her sea trials on 31 October 1903 , she reached a top speed of 16 @.@ 5 knots ( 30 @.@ 6 km / h ; 19 @.@ 0 mph ) . Leaking oil caused a serious fire on 2 January 1904 that caused the navy to convert her boilers to coal firing at a cost of 20 @,@ 000 rubles . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 100 long tons ( 1 @,@ 100 t ) of coal at full load that provided a range of 3 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 900 km ; 3 @,@ 700 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main armament consisted of four 40 @-@ calibre 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns mounted in twin gun turrets fore and aft of the superstructure . The electrically operated turrets were derived from the design of those used by the Petropavlovsk @-@ class battleships . These guns had a maximum elevation of + 15 ° and their rate of fire was very slow , only one round every four minutes during gunnery trials . They fired a 745 @-@ pound ( 337 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 792 ft / s ( 851 m / s ) . At an elevation of + 10 ° the guns had a range of 13 @,@ 000 yards ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) . Potemkin carried 60 rounds for each gun . 
 The sixteen 45 @-@ calibre , six @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Canet Pattern 1891 quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns were mounted in casemates . Twelve of these were placed on the sides of the hull and the other four were positioned at the corners of the superstructure . They fired shells that weighed 91 @.@ 4 lb ( 41 @.@ 46 kg ) with a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ( 792 m / s ) . They had a maximum range of 12 @,@ 602 yards ( 11 @,@ 523 m ) when fired at an elevation of + 20 ° . The ship stowed 160 rounds per gun . 
 Smaller guns were carried for close @-@ range defence against torpedo boats . These included fourteen 50 @-@ calibre Canet QF 75 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns : four in hull embrasures and the remaining 10 mounted on the superstructure . The ship carried 300 shells for each gun . They fired an 11 @-@ pound ( 4 @.@ 9 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ( 820 m / s ) to a maximum range of 7 @,@ 005 yards ( 6 @,@ 405 m ) . She also mounted six 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns . Four of these were mounted in the fighting top and two on the superstructure . They fired a 2 @.@ 2 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 00 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 400 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) . 
 Potemkin had five underwater 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) torpedo tubes : one in the bow and two on each broadside . She carried three torpedoes for each tube . While the model of torpedo in use changed over time , the first torpedo that the ship would have been equipped with was the <unk> . It had a warhead weight of 150 pounds ( 70 kg ) and a speed of 33 knots ( 61 km / h ; 38 mph ) with a maximum range of 870 yards ( 800 m ) . 
 In 1907 , telescopic sights were fitted for the 12 @-@ inch and 6 @-@ inch guns . Either later that year , or in 1908 , 2 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 8 ft 2 in ) rangefinders were installed . The bow torpedo tube was removed in 1910 – 11 as was the fighting top . The following year , the main gun turret machinery was upgraded and the guns were modified to improve their rate of fire to one round every 40 seconds . 
 Two 57 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns were mounted on the ship 's superstructure on 3 – 6 June 1915 and they were supplemented by two 75 mm AA guns , one on top of each turret , probably during 1916 . In February of that year , the ship 's four remaining torpedo tubes were removed . At some point during World War I , her 75 mm guns were also removed . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 The maximum thickness of the Krupp cemented armour waterline belt was nine inches ( 229 mm ) which reduced to eight inches ( 203 mm ) abreast the magazines . It covered 237 feet ( 72 @.@ 2 m ) of the ship 's length and two @-@ inch ( 51 mm ) plates protected the waterline to the ends of the ship . The belt was 7 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) high , of which 5 feet ( 2 m ) was below the waterline , and tapered down to a thickness of five inches ( 127 mm ) at its bottom edge . The main part of the belt terminated in seven @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) transverse bulkheads . 
 Above the belt was the upper strake of six @-@ inch armour that was 156 feet ( 47 @.@ 5 m ) long and closed off by six @-@ inch transverse bulkheads fore and aft . The upper casemate protected the six @-@ inch guns and was five inches thick on all sides . The sides of the turrets were ten inches ( 254 mm ) thick and they had a two @-@ inch roof . The conning tower 's sides were nine inches thick . The nickel @-@ steel armour deck was two inches thick on the flat amidships , but 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick on the slope connecting it to the armour belt . Fore and aft of the armoured citadel , the deck was three inches ( 76 mm ) to the bow and stern . In 1910 – 11 , additional one @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) armour plates were added fore and aft ; their exact location is unknown , but they were probably used to extend the height of the two @-@ inch armour strake at the ends of the ship . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = The mutiny = = = 
 During the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 , many of the Black Sea Fleet 's most experienced officers and enlisted men were transferred to the ships in the Pacific to replace losses . This left the fleet with primarily raw recruits and less capable officers . With the news of the disastrous Battle of Tsushima in May 1905 morale dropped to an all @-@ time low , and any minor incident could be enough to spark a major catastrophe . Taking advantage of the situation , plus the disruption caused by the ongoing riots and uprisings , the Central Committee of the Social Democratic Organization of the Black Sea Fleet , called " Tsentralka " , had started preparations for a simultaneous mutiny on all of the ships of the fleet , although the timing had not been decided . 
 On 27 June 1905 , Potemkin was at gunnery practice near Tendra Island off the Ukrainian coast when many enlisted men refused to eat the borscht made from rotten meat partially infested with maggots . The uprising was triggered when <unk> Giliarovsky , the ship 's second in command , allegedly threatened to shoot crew members for their refusal . He summoned the ship 's marine guards as well as a tarpaulin to protect the ship 's deck from any blood in an attempt to intimidate the crew . Giliarovsky was killed after he mortally wounded Grigory Vakulinchuk , one of the mutiny 's leaders . The mutineers killed seven of the Potemkin 's eighteen officers , including Captain Evgeny Golikov , and captured the torpedo boat Ismail ( No. 627 ) . They organized a ship 's committee of 25 sailors , led by Afanasi Matushenko , to run the battleship . 
 The committee decided to head for Odessa flying a red flag and arrived there later that day at 22 : 00 . A general strike had been called in the city and there was some rioting as the police tried to quell the strikers . The following day the mutineers refused to land armed sailors to help the striking revolutionaries take over the city , preferring instead to await the arrival of the other battleships of the Black Sea Fleet . Later that day the mutineers aboard the Potemkin captured a military transport , <unk> , that had arrived in the city . The riots continued as much of the port area was destroyed by fire . On the afternoon of 29 June , Vakulinchuk 's funeral turned into a political demonstration and the army attempted to ambush the sailors who participated in the funeral . In retaliation , the ship fired two six @-@ inch shells at the theatre where a high @-@ level military meeting was scheduled to take place , but missed . 
 The government issued an order to send two squadrons to Odessa either to force the Potemkin crew to give up or sink the battleship . Potemkin sortied on the morning of 30 June to meet the three battleships Tri Sviatitelia , Dvenadsat Apostolov , and Georgii Pobedonosets of the first squadron , but the loyal ships turned away . The second squadron arrived with the battleships Rostislav and Sinop later that morning , and Vice Admiral Aleksander Krieger , acting commander of the Black Sea Fleet , ordered the ships to proceed to Odessa . Potemkin sortied again and sailed through the combined squadrons as Krieger failed to order his ships to fire . Captain Kolands of Dvenadsat Apostolov attempted to ram Potemkin and then detonate his ship 's magazines , but he was thwarted by members of his crew . Krieger ordered his ships to fall back , but the crew of Georgii Pobedonosets mutinied and joined Potemkin . 
 The following morning , loyalist members of Georgii Pobedonosets retook control of the ship and ran it aground in Odessa harbor . The crew of Potemkin , together with Ismail , decided to sail for Constanța later that day where they could restock food , water and coal . The Romanians refused to provide the supplies , backed by the presence of their small protected cruiser Elisabeta , so the ship 's committee decided to sail for the small , barely defended port of Theodosia in the Crimea where they hoped to resupply . The ship arrived on the morning of 5 July , but the city 's governor refused to give them anything other than food . The mutineers attempted to seize several barges of coal the following morning , but the port 's garrison ambushed them and killed or captured 22 of the 30 sailors involved . They decided to return to Constanța that afternoon . 
 Potemkin reached its destination at 23 : 00 on 7 July and the Romanians agreed to give asylum to the crew if they would disarm themselves and surrender the battleship . Ismail 's crew decided the following morning to return to Sevastopol and turn themselves in , but Potemkin 's crew voted to accept the terms . Captain Negru , commander of the port , came aboard at noon and hoisted the Romanian flag and then allowed the ship to enter the inner harbor . Before the crew disembarked , Matushenko ordered that the Potemkin 's Kingston valves be opened so Potemkin would sink to the bottom . 
 = = = Later service = = = 
 When Rear Admiral <unk> reached Constanța on the morning of 9 July , he found the Potemkin half sunk in the harbor and flying the Romanian flag . After several hours of negotiations with the Romanian Government , the battleship was handed over to the Russians . Later that day , the Saint Andrew 's flag was raised over the battleship . She was then easily refloated by the navy , but the salt water had damaged her engines and boilers . She left Constanța on 10 July , having to be towed back to Sevastopol , where she arrived on 14 July . The ship was renamed Panteleimon ( Russian : <unk> ) , after Saint Pantaleon , on 12 October 1905 . Some members of Panteleimon 's crew joined a mutiny that began aboard the cruiser Ochakov in November , but it was easily suppressed as both ships had been earlier disarmed . 
 Panteleimon received an experimental underwater communications set in February 1909 . Later that year , she accidentally rammed and sank the submarine Kambala at night on 11 June , killing the 16 crewmen aboard the submarine . 
 While returning from a port visit to Constanța in 1911 , Panteleimon ran aground on 2 October . It took several days to refloat her and make temporary repairs , and the full extent of the damage to her bottom was not fully realized for several more months . The ship participated in training and gunnery exercises for the rest of the year ; a special watch was kept to ensure that no damaged seams were opened while firing . Permanent repairs , which involved replacing her boiler foundations , plating , and a large number of her hull frames , lasted from 10 January to 25 April 1912 . The navy took advantage of these repairs to overhaul her engines and boilers . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Panteleimon , flagship of the 1st Battleship Brigade , accompanied by the pre @-@ dreadnoughts Evstafi , Ioann Zlatoust , and Tri Sviatitelia , covered the pre @-@ dreadnought Rostislav while she bombarded Trebizond on the morning of 17 November 1914 . They were intercepted the following day by the Ottoman battlecruiser Yavuz Sultan Selim ( the ex @-@ German SMS Goeben ) and the light cruiser <unk> on their return voyage to Sevastopol in what came to be known as the Battle of Cape Sarych . Despite the noon hour the conditions were foggy ; the capital ships initially did not spot each other . Although several other ships opened fire , hitting the Goeben once , Panteleimon held fire because her turrets could not see the German ships before they disengaged . 
 Tri Sviatitelia and Rostislav bombarded Ottoman fortifications at the mouth of the Bosphorus on 18 March 1915 , the first of several attacks intended to divert troops and attention from the ongoing Gallipoli Campaign , but fired only 105 rounds before sailing north to rejoin Panteleimon , Ioann Zlatoust and Evstafi . Tri Sviatitelia and Rostislav were intended to repeated the bombardment the following day , but were hindered by heavy fog . On 3 April , Yavuz Sultan Selim and several ships of the Turkish navy raided the Russian port at Odessa ; the Russian battleship squadron sortied to intercept them . The battleships chased Yavuz Sultan Selim the entire day , but were unable to reach effective gunnery range and were forced to break off the chase . On 25 April Tri Sviatitelia and Rostislav repeated their bombardment of the Bosporus forts . Tri Sviatitelia , Rostislav and Panteleimon bombarded the forts again on 2 and 3 May . This time a total of 337 main gun rounds were fired in addition to 528 six @-@ inch shells between the three battleships . 
 On 9 May 1915 , Tri Sviatitelia and Panteleimon returned to bombard the Bosphorus forts , covered by the remaining pre @-@ dreadnoughts . Yavuz Sultan Selim intercepted the three ships of the covering force , although no damage was inflicted by either side . Tri Sviatitelia and Pantelimon rejoined their consorts and the latter scored two hits on Yavuz Sultan Selim before she broke off the action . The Russian ships pursued her for six hours before giving up the chase . On 1 August , all of the Black Sea pre @-@ dreadnoughts were transferred to the 2nd Battleship Brigade , after the more powerful dreadnought Imperatritsa Mariya entered service . On 1 October the new dreadnought provided cover while Ioann Zlatoust and Pantelimon bombarded Zonguldak and Evstafi shelled the nearby town of Kozlu . The ship bombarded Varna twice in October 1915 ; during the second bombardment on 27 October , she entered Varna Bay and was unsuccessfully attacked by two German submarines stationed there . 
 Panteleimon supported Russian troops in early 1916 as they captured Trebizond and participated in an anti @-@ shipping sweep off the northwestern Anatolian coast in January 1917 that destroyed 39 Ottoman sailing ships . On 13 April 1917 , after the February Revolution , the ship was renamed Potemkin @-@ Tavricheskiy ( Russian : Потёмкин @-@ Таврический ) , and then on 11 May renamed Borets za svobodu ( Russian : <unk> за <unk> – Freedom Fighter ) . 
 = = = Reserve and decommissioning = = = 
 She was placed in reserve in March 1918 and was captured by the Germans at Sevastopol in May . They handed the ship over to the Allies in December 1918 after the Armistice . The British wrecked her engines on 19 April 1919 when they left the Crimea to prevent the advancing Bolsheviks from using her against the White Russians . Thoroughly obsolete by this time , the ship was captured by both sides during the Russian Civil War , but was abandoned by the White Russians when they evacuated the Crimea in November 1920 . Borets za svobodu was scrapped beginning in 1923 , although she was not stricken from the Navy List until 21 November 1925 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The immediate effects of the mutiny are difficult to assess . It may have influenced Tsar Nicholas II 's decisions to end the Russo @-@ Japanese War and accept the October Manifesto , as the mutiny demonstrated that his régime no longer had the unquestioning loyalty of the military . The mutiny 's failure did not stop other revolutionaries from inciting insurrections later that year , including the Sevastopol Uprising . Vladimir Lenin , leader of the Bolshevik Party , called the 1905 Revolution , including the Potemkin mutiny , a " dress rehearsal " for his successful revolution in 1917 . The Communists seized upon it as a propaganda symbol for their party and unduly emphasized their role in the mutiny . In fact , Matushenko explicitly rejected the Bolsheviks because he and the other leaders of the mutiny were Socialists of one type or another and cared nothing for Communism . 
 The mutiny was memorialized most famously by Sergei Eisenstein in his 1925 silent film Battleship Potemkin , although the French silent film " La Révolution en Russe " ( " Mutiny on a Man @-@ of @-@ War in Odessa " or " Revolution in Odessa " , 1905 ) , directed by Ferdinand Zecca or Lucien <unk> ( or both ) , was the first film to depict the mutiny , preceding Eisenstein 's far more famous film by 20 years . Filmed shortly after the Bolshevik victory in the Russian Civil War of 1917 – 22 , with the derelict battleship Dvenadsat Apostolov standing in for the broken @-@ up Potemkin , Eisenstein recast the mutiny into a predecessor of the November Revolution of 1917 that swept the Bolsheviks to power . He emphasized their role , and implied that the mutiny failed because Matushenko and the other leaders were not better Bolsheviks . Eisenstein made other changes to dramatize the story , ignoring the major fire that swept through Odessa 's dock area while Potemkin was anchored there , combining the many different incidents of rioters and soldiers fighting into a famous sequence on the steps ( today known as Potemkin Stairs ) , and showing a tarpaulin thrown over the sailors to be executed . 
 In accordance with the Marxist doctrine that history is made by collective action , not individuals , Eisenstein <unk> to single out any person in his film , but rather focused on the " mass protagonist " . Soviet film critics hailed this approach , including the dramaturge and critic , Adrian Piotrovsky , writing for the Leningrad newspaper " <unk> <unk> " : 
 The hero is the sailors ' battleship , the Odessa crowd , but characteristic figures are snatched here and there from the crowd . For a moment , like a conjuring trick , they attract all the sympathies of the audience : like the sailor Vakulinchuk , like the young woman and child on the Odessa Steps , but they emerge only to dissolve once more into the mass . This signifies : no film stars but a film of real @-@ life types . 
 Similarly , theatre critic Alexei <unk> wrote in the journal Artistic Life ( Zhizn <unk> ) : " In Potemkin there is no individual hero as there was in the old theatre . It is the mass that acts : the battleship and its sailors and the city and its population in revolutionary mood . " 
 = IQ classification = 
 IQ classification is the practice by IQ test publishers of labeling IQ score ranges with category names such as " superior " or " average " . There are several publishers of tests of cognitive abilities . No two publishers use exactly the same classification labels , which have changed from time to time since the beginning of intelligence testing in the early twentieth century . 
 IQ scores have been derived by two different methods since the advent of cognitive ability tests . The first method historically was the " ratio IQ " , based on estimating a " mental age " of the test @-@ taker ( rounded to a specified number of years and months ) , which was then divided by the test @-@ taker 's " chronological age " ( rounded to a specified number of years and months ) . For example , a mental age score of thirteen years and zero months for a test @-@ taker with the chronological age ten years and zero months results in a quotient of 1 @.@ 3 after doing the division . The division result was then multiplied by 100 so that scores could be reported without decimal points . Thus the score in the example would be reported as IQ 130 . 
 The current scoring method for all IQ tests is the " deviation IQ " . In this method , an IQ score of 100 means that the test @-@ taker 's performance on the test is at the median level of performance in the sample of test @-@ takers of about the same age used to norm the test . An IQ score of 115 means performance one standard deviation above the median , a score of 85 performance one standard deviation below the median , and so on . Lewis Terman and other early developers of IQ tests noticed that most child IQ scores come out to approximately the same number by either procedure . Deviation IQs are now used for standard scoring of all IQ tests in large part because they allow a consistent definition of IQ for both children and adults . By the current " deviation IQ " definition of IQ test standard scores , about two @-@ thirds of all test @-@ takers obtain scores from 85 to 115 , and about 5 percent of the population scores above 125 . 
 Historically , even before IQ tests were invented , there were attempts to classify people into intelligence categories by observing their behavior in daily life . Those other forms of behavioral observation are still important for validating classifications based primarily on IQ test scores . Both intelligence classification by observation of behavior outside the testing room and classification by IQ testing depend on the definition of " intelligence " used in a particular case and on the reliability and error of estimation in the classification procedure . 
 All IQ tests show variation in scores even when the same person takes the same test over and over again . IQ scores also differ for a test @-@ taker taking tests from more than one publisher at the same age . The various test publishers do not use uniform names or definitions for IQ score classifications . All these issues must be kept in mind when interpreting an individual 's IQ scores , because they all can result in different IQ classifications for the same person at different times . 
 = = <unk> in individual IQ classification = = 
 IQ tests generally are reliable enough that most people ages ten and older have similar IQ scores throughout life . Still , some individuals score very differently when taking the same test at different times or when taking more than one kind of IQ test at the same age . For example , many children in the famous longitudinal Genetic Studies of Genius begun in 1921 by Lewis Terman showed declines in IQ as they grew up . Terman recruited school pupils based on referrals from teachers , and gave them his Stanford – Binet IQ test . Children with an IQ above 140 by that test were included in the study . There were 643 children in the main study group . When the students who could be contacted again ( 503 students ) were retested at high school age , they were found to have dropped 9 IQ points on average in Stanford – Binet IQ . More than two dozen children dropped by 15 IQ points and six by 25 points or more . Yet parents of those children thought that the children were still as bright as ever , or even brighter . 
 Because all IQ tests have error of measurement in the test @-@ taker 's IQ score , a test @-@ giver should always inform the test @-@ taker of the confidence interval around the score obtained on a given occasion of taking each test . IQ scores are ordinal scores and are not expressed in an interval measurement unit . Besides the inherent error band around any IQ test score because tests are a " sample of learned behavior " , IQ scores can also be misleading because test @-@ givers fail to follow standardized administration and scoring procedures . In cases of test @-@ giver mistakes , the usual result is that tests are scored too leniently , giving the test @-@ taker a higher IQ score than the test @-@ taker 's performance justifies . Some test @-@ givers err by showing a " halo effect " , with low @-@ IQ individuals receiving IQ scores even lower than if standardized procedures were followed , while high @-@ IQ individuals receive inflated IQ scores . 
 IQ classifications for individuals also vary because category labels for IQ score ranges are specific to each brand of test . The test publishers do not have a uniform practice of labeling IQ score ranges , nor do they have a consistent practice of dividing up IQ score ranges into categories of the same size or with the same boundary scores . Thus psychologists should specify which test was given when reporting a test @-@ taker 's IQ . Psychologists and IQ test authors recommend that psychologists adopt the terminology of each test publisher when reporting IQ score ranges . 
 IQ classifications from IQ testing are not the last word on how a test @-@ taker will do in life , nor are they the only information to be considered for placement in school or job @-@ training programs . There is still a dearth of information about how behavior differs between persons with differing IQ scores . For placement in school programs , for medical diagnosis , and for career advising , factors other than IQ must also be part of an individual assessment . 
 The lesson here is that classification systems are necessarily arbitrary and change at the whim of test authors , government bodies , or professional organizations . They are statistical concepts and do not correspond in any real sense to the specific capabilities of any particular person with a given IQ . The classification systems provide descriptive labels that may be useful for communication purposes in a case report or conference , and nothing more . 
 = = IQ classification tables for current tests = = 
 There are a variety of individually administered IQ tests in use in the English @-@ speaking world . Not all report test results as " IQ " , but most now report a standard score with a median score level of 100 . When a test @-@ taker scores higher or lower than the median score , the score is indicated as 15 standard score points higher or lower for each standard deviation difference higher or lower in the test @-@ taker 's performance on the test item content . 
 = = = Wechsler Intelligence Scales = = = 
 The Wechsler intelligence scales were originally developed from earlier intelligence scales by David Wechsler . The first Wechsler test published was the Wechsler – Bellevue Scale in 1939 . The Wechsler IQ tests for children and for adults are the most frequently used individual IQ tests in the English @-@ speaking world and in their translated versions are perhaps the most widely used IQ tests worldwide . The Wechsler tests have long been regarded as the " gold standard " in IQ testing . The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale — Fourth Edition ( WAIS – IV ) was published in 2008 by The Psychological Corporation . The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children — Fifth Edition ( <unk> – V ) was published in 2014 by The Psychological Corporation , and the Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence — Fourth Edition ( <unk> – IV ) was published in 2012 by The Psychological Corporation . Like all current IQ tests , the Wechsler tests report a " deviation IQ " as the standard score for the full @-@ scale IQ , with the norming sample median raw score defined as IQ 100 and a score one standard deviation higher defined as IQ 115 ( and one deviation lower defined as IQ 85 ) . 
 Psychologists have proposed alternative language for Wechsler IQ classifications . Note especially that the term " borderline " , which implies being very close to being intellectually disabled , is replaced in the alternative system by a term that doesn 't imply a medical diagnosis . 
 = = = Stanford – Binet Intelligence Scale Fifth Edition = = = 
 The current fifth edition of the Stanford – Binet scales ( SB5 ) was developed by Gale H. Roid and published in 2003 by Riverside Publishing . Unlike scoring on previous versions of the Stanford – Binet test , SB5 IQ scoring is deviation scoring in which each standard deviation up or down from the norming sample median score is 15 points from the median score , IQ 100 , just like the standard scoring on the Wechsler tests . 
 = = = Woodcock – Johnson Test of Cognitive Abilities = = = 
 The Woodcock – Johnson III NU Tests of Cognitive Abilities ( WJ III NU ) was developed by Richard W. Woodcock , Kevin S. McGrew and Nancy Mather and published in 2007 by Riverside . Note that the WJ III classification terms are not applied to the same score ranges as for the Wechsler or Stanford – Binet tests . 
 = = = Kaufman Tests = = = 
 The Kaufman Adolescent and Adult Intelligence Test was developed by Alan S. Kaufman and Nadeen L. Kaufman and published in 1993 by American Guidance Service . Kaufman test scores " are classified in a symmetrical , <unk> fashion " , in other words the score ranges for classification are just as wide above the median as below the median , and the classification labels do not purport to assess individuals . 
 The Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children , Second Edition was developed by Alan S. Kaufman and Nadeen L. Kaufman and published in 2004 by American Guidance Service . 
 = = = Cognitive Assessment System = = = 
 The Das @-@ <unk> Cognitive Assessment System test was developed by Jack <unk> and J. P. Das and published in 1997 by Riverside . 
 = = = Differential Ability Scales = = = 
 The Differential Ability Scales Second Edition ( DAS – II ) was developed by Colin D. Elliott and published in 2007 by Psychological Corporation . The DAS @-@ II is a test battery given individually to children , normed for children from ages two years and six months through seventeen years and eleven months . It was normed on 3 @,@ 480 <unk> , English @-@ speaking children in that age range . The DAS @-@ II yields a General Conceptual Ability ( GCA ) score scaled like an IQ score with the median standard score set at 100 and 15 standard score points for each standard deviation up or down from the median . The lowest possible GCA on the is DAS – II is 44 , and the highest is 175 . 
 = = = Reynolds Intellectual Ability Scales = = = 
 Reynolds Intellectual Ability Scales ( RIAS ) were developed by Cecil Reynolds and Randy <unk> . The RIAS was published in 2003 by Psychological Assessment Resources . 
 = = Historical IQ classification tables = = 
 Lewis Terman , developer of the Stanford – Binet Intelligence Scales , based his English @-@ language Stanford – Binet IQ test on the French @-@ language Binet – Simon test developed by Alfred Binet . Terman believed his test measured the " general intelligence " construct advocated by Charles Spearman ( 1904 ) . Terman differed from Binet in reporting scores on his test in the form of intelligence quotient ( " mental age " divided by chronological age ) scores after the 1912 suggestion of German psychologist William Stern . Terman chose the category names for score levels on the Stanford – Binet test . When he first chose classification for score levels , he relied partly on the usage of earlier authors who wrote , before the existence of IQ tests , on topics such as individuals unable to care for themselves in independent adult life . Terman 's first version of the Stanford – Binet was based on norming samples that included only white , American @-@ born subjects , mostly from California , Nevada , and Oregon . 
 Rudolph Pintner proposed a set of classification terms in his 1923 book Intelligence Testing : Methods and Results . Pintner commented that psychologists of his era , including Terman , went about " the measurement of an individual 's general ability without waiting for an adequate psychological definition . " Pintner retained these terms in the 1931 second edition of his book . 
 Albert Julius Levine and Louis Marks proposed a broader set of categories in their 1928 book Testing Intelligence and Achievement . Some of the terminology in the table came from contemporary terms for classifying individuals with intellectual disabilities . 
 The second revision ( 1937 ) of the Stanford – Binet test retained " quotient IQ " scoring , despite earlier criticism of that method of reporting IQ test standard scores . The term " genius " was no longer used for any IQ score range . The second revision was normed only on children and adolescents ( no adults ) , and only " American @-@ born white children " . 
 A data table published later as part of the manual for the 1960 Third Revision ( Form L @-@ M ) of the Stanford – Binet test reported score distributions from the 1937 second revision standardization group . 
 David Wechsler , developer of the Wechsler – Bellevue Scale of 1939 ( which was later developed into the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale ) popularized the use of " deviation IQs " as standard scores of IQ tests rather than the " quotient IQs " ( " mental age " divided by " chronological age " ) then used for the Stanford – Binet test . He devoted a whole chapter in his book The Measurement of Adult Intelligence to the topic of IQ classification and proposed different category names from those used by Lewis Terman . Wechsler also criticized the practice of earlier authors who published IQ classification tables without specifying which IQ test was used to obtain the scores reported in the tables . 
 In 1958 , Wechsler published another edition of his book Measurement and Appraisal of Adult Intelligence . He revised his chapter on the topic of IQ classification and commented that " mental age " scores were not a more valid way to score intelligence tests than IQ scores . He continued to use the same classification terms . 
 The third revision ( Form L @-@ M ) in 1960 of the Stanford – Binet IQ test used the deviation scoring pioneered by David Wechsler . For rough comparability of scores between the second and third revision of the Stanford – Binet test , scoring table author Samuel <unk> set 100 for the median standard score level and 16 standard score points for each standard deviation above or below that level . The highest score obtainable by direct look @-@ up from the standard scoring tables ( based on norms from the 1930s ) was IQ 171 at various chronological ages from three years six months ( with a test raw score " mental age " of six years and two months ) up to age six years and three months ( with a test raw score " mental age " of ten years and three months ) . The classification for Stanford – Binet L @-@ M scores does not include terms such as " exceptionally gifted " and " profoundly gifted " in the test manual itself . David <unk> , reviewing the Stanford – Binet Third Revision in 1970 for the <unk> Seventh Mental Measurements Yearbook ( published in 1972 ) , commented that the test was obsolete by that year . 
 The first edition of the Woodcock – Johnson Tests of Cognitive Abilities was published by Riverside in 1977 . The classifications used by the WJ @-@ R Cog were " modern in that they describe levels of performance as opposed to offering a diagnosis . " 
 The revised version of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale ( the WAIS @-@ R ) was developed by David Wechsler and published by Psychological Corporation in 1981 . Wechsler changed a few of the boundaries for classification categories and a few of their names compared to the 1958 version of the test . The test 's manual included information about how the actual percentage of persons in the norming sample scoring at various levels compared to theoretical expectations . 
 The Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children ( K @-@ ABC ) was developed by Alan S. Kaufman and Nadeen L. Kaufman and published in 1983 by American Guidance Service . 
 The fourth revision of the Stanford – Binet scales ( S @-@ B IV ) was developed by Thorndike , Hagen , and Sattler and published by Riverside Publishing in 1986 . It retained the deviation scoring of the third revision with each standard deviation from the median being defined as a 16 IQ point difference . The S @-@ B IV adopted new classification terminology . After this test was published , psychologist Nathan Brody lamented that IQ tests had still not caught up with advances in research on human intelligence during the twentieth century . 
 The third edition of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale ( WAIS @-@ III ) used different classification terminology from the earliest versions of Wechsler tests . 
 = = Classification of low @-@ IQ individuals = = 
 The earliest terms for classifying individuals of low intelligence were medical or legal terms that preceded the development of IQ testing . The legal system recognized a concept of some individuals being so cognitively impaired that they were not responsible for criminal behavior . Medical doctors sometimes encountered adult patients who could not live independently , being unable to take care of their own daily living needs . Various terms were used to attempt to classify individuals with varying degrees of intellectual disability . Many of the earliest terms are now considered very offensive . 
 In current medical diagnosis , IQ scores alone are not conclusive for a finding of intellectual disability . Recently adopted diagnostic standards place the major emphasis on adaptive behavior of each individual , with IQ score just being one factor in diagnosis in addition to adaptive behavior scales , and no category of intellectual disability being defined primarily by IQ scores . Psychologists point out that evidence from IQ testing should always be used with other assessment evidence in mind : " In the end , any and all interpretations of test performance gain diagnostic meaning when they are corroborated by other data sources and when they are empirically or logically related to the area or areas of difficulty specified in the referral . " 
 In the United States , a holding by the Supreme Court in the case Atkins v. Virginia , 536 U.S. 304 ( 2002 ) bars states from imposing capital punishment on persons with mental retardation , defined in subsequent cases as persons with IQ scores below 70 . This legal standard continues to be actively litigated in capital cases . 
 = = Classification of high @-@ IQ individuals = = 
 = = = IQ classification and genius = = = 
 Francis Galton ( 1822 – 1911 ) was a pioneer in investigating both eminent human achievement and mental testing . In his book Hereditary Genius , writing before the development of IQ testing , he proposed that hereditary influences on eminent achievement are strong , and that eminence is rare in the general population . Lewis Terman chose " ' near ' genius or genius " as the classification label for the highest classification on his 1916 version of the Stanford – Binet test . By 1926 , Terman began publishing about a longitudinal study of California schoolchildren who were referred for IQ testing by their schoolteachers , called Genetic Studies of Genius , which he conducted for the rest of his life . Catherine M. Cox , a colleague of Terman 's , wrote a whole book , The Early Mental Traits of 300 Geniuses , published as volume 2 of The Genetic Studies of Genius book series , in which she analyzed biographical data about historic geniuses . Although her estimates of childhood IQ scores of historical figures who never took IQ tests have been criticized on methodological grounds , Cox 's study was thorough in finding out what else matters besides IQ in becoming a genius . By the 1937 second revision of the Stanford – Binet test , Terman no longer used the term " genius " as an IQ classification , nor has any subsequent IQ test . In 1939 , Wechsler specifically commented that " we are rather hesitant about calling a person a genius on the basis of a single intelligence test score . " 
 The Terman longitudinal study in California eventually provided historical evidence on how genius is related to IQ scores . Many California pupils were recommended for the study by schoolteachers . Two pupils who were tested but rejected for inclusion in the study because of IQ scores too low for the study grew up to be Nobel Prize winners in physics , William Shockley , and Luis Walter Alvarez . Based on the historical findings of the Terman study and on biographical examples such as Richard Feynman , who had an IQ of 125 and went on to win the Nobel Prize in physics and become widely known as a genius , the current view of psychologists and other scholars of genius is that a minimum level of IQ , no lower than about IQ 125 , is strictly necessary for genius ; but that level of IQ is sufficient for development of genius only when combined with the other influences identified by Cox 's biographical study : opportunity for talent development along with the characteristics of drive and persistence . Charles Spearman , bearing in mind the influential theory that he originated of conceiving intelligence as made up of a " general factor " as well as " special factors " more specific to particular mental tasks , may have summed up the research the best when he wrote in 1927 , " Every normal man , woman , and child is , then , a genius at something , as well as an idiot at something . " 
 = = = IQ classification and giftedness = = = 
 A major point of consensus among all scholars of intellectual giftedness is that there is no generally agreed definition of giftedness . Although there is no scholarly agreement about identifying gifted learners , there is a de @-@ facto reliance on IQ scores for identifying participants in school gifted education programs . In practice , many school districts in the United States use an IQ score of 130 , including about the upper 2 or 3 percent of the national population , as a cut @-@ off score for inclusion in school gifted programs . 
 As long ago as 1937 , Lewis Terman pointed out that error of estimation in IQ scoring increases as IQ score increases , so that there is less and less certainty about assigning a test @-@ taker to one band of scores or another as one looks at higher bands . Current IQ tests also have large error bands for high IQ scores . As an underlying reality , such distinctions as those between " exceptionally gifted " and " profoundly gifted " have never been well established . All longitudinal studies of IQ have shown that test @-@ takers can bounce up and down in score , and thus switch up and down in rank order as compared to one another , over the course of childhood . Some test @-@ givers claim that IQ classification categories such as " profoundly gifted " are meaningful , but those are based on the obsolete Stanford – Binet Third Revision ( Form L @-@ M ) test . The highest reported standard score for most IQ tests is IQ 160 , approximately the <unk> percentile ( leaving aside the issue of the considerable error in measurement at that level of IQ on any IQ test ) . IQ scores above this level are dubious as there are insufficient normative cases upon which to base a statistically justified rank @-@ ordering . Moreover there has never been any validation of the Stanford – Binet L @-@ M on adult populations , and there is no trace of such terminology in the writings of Lewis Terman . Although two current tests attempt to provide " extended norms " that allow for classification of different levels of giftedness , those norms are not based on well validated data . 
 = Undisputed Attitude = 
 Undisputed Attitude is the seventh studio album by American thrash metal band Slayer . The album consists almost entirely of punk rock / hardcore punk cover songs . Also included are two songs written by guitarist Jeff Hanneman in 1984 and 1985 for a side project called Pap Smear , and the closing track , Gemini , the only Slayer original on the record . The cover songs on the album were originally recorded by the bands Minor Threat , T.S.O.L. , D.R.I. , D.I. , Dr. Know , The Stooges and Verbal Abuse , whose work was prominently featured with the inclusion of cover versions of five of their songs . A video was also released of Slayer 's version of the song " I Hate You " by Verbal Abuse . Released on May 28 , 1996 through American Recordings , Undisputed Attitude peaked at number 34 on the Billboard 200 chart . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Undisputed Attitude was recorded at Capital Studios in Los Angeles , California with producer Dave Sardy , while Reign in Blood producer Rick Rubin served as executive producer . Recorded in three to four weeks , the album was largely the brainchild of guitarist Kerry King , who stated that the songs chosen were from highly influential bands who " made Slayer what it is " . The album was initially to feature material from classic heavy metal artists such as Judas Priest , UFO , and Deep Purple . However , after several rehearsals " things didn 't pan out " according to King , so the band instead elected to cover punk songs . 
 Slayer considered covering 1960s psychedelic rock band The Doors as they were an influence to vocalist and bassist Tom Araya . When asked which track they considered recording , Araya responded , " Maybe ' When the Music 's Over ' , ' Five to One ' , something like that . " A cover of Black Flag 's " Rise Above " was suggested by Rubin , although was shelved after the band was not sure how to arrange it musically . 
 Guitarist Jeff Hanneman had written four unreleased songs in 1984 – 1985 while in the side project Pap Smear with Slayer drummer Dave Lombardo and Suicidal Tendencies guitarist Rocky George . The band chose the best two , namely " <unk> ( Drunk Drivers Against Mad Mothers ) " and " Can 't Stand You " . " Gemini " was written by King and Araya several months before entering the recording studio . King asserts it is the only Slayer song on the album . The song begins as a sludge / doom number , before becoming a more typical Slayer song . 
 The band 's cover of Minor Threat 's " Guilty of Being White " raised questions about a possible message of white supremacy . The controversy involved the changing of the refrain " guilty of being white " to " guilty of being right " , at the song 's ending . This incensed Minor Threat frontman Ian MacKaye , who stated " that is so offensive to me " . King said the lyric was altered for " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " humor , saying that the band thought racism was " ridiculous " at the time . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Undisputed Attitude was released on May 28 , 1996 , and peaked at number 34 on the Billboard 200 album chart . Paul Kott of AllMusic commented that " Undisputed Attitude , while not perfect , is a fitting tribute to the bands that inspired Slayer to break from the traditional metal mold . " Sandy Masuo of Rolling Stone reasoned : " some punk purists will undoubtedly cry foul , but when the dust settles it 's hard to argue with Slayer 's mettle . " Entertainment Weekly 's Chuck Eddy dubbed Slayer 's cover interpretations " generic hardcore @-@ punk " , and observed that the group " seem to think that playing as fast and rigidly as possible makes for harder rock -- but it 's just lazy shtick . " 
 Reviewing 2003 Slayer box set Soundtrack to the Apocalypse , Adrien Begrand of PopMatters dismissed the effort as " easily the weakest album in the Slayer catalogue " , while Westword Online 's Michael Roberts dubbed the record their " biggest mistake . " Araya has since stated that he " knew it wouldn 't do very well , people want to hear Slayer ! The real die @-@ hards picked up on it and that was expected . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = European edition = = = 
 Tracks 1 @-@ 9 remain the same . 
 = = = Japanese edition = = = 
 Tracks 1 @-@ 9 remain the same . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Slayer = = = 
 Tom Araya – lead vocals , bass 
 Jeff Hanneman – guitar 
 Kerry King – guitar 
 Paul Bostaph – drums 
 = = = Production and artwork = = = 
 Dave Sardy – producer , mixing 
 Rick Rubin – executive producer 
 Greg Gordon – engineer 
 Ralph <unk> ; Bryan Davis ; Jim Giddens ; Bill Smith – assistant engineers 
 Stephen Marcussen – mastering 
 Wes Benscoter – artwork , illustrations 
 Dennis Keeley – photography 
 Michael Lavine – front cover photo , photography 
 Dirk Walter – art direction , design 
 = Cindy McCain = 
 Cindy Lou Hensley McCain ( born May 20 , 1954 ) is an American businesswoman , philanthropist , and humanitarian , and the wife of United States Senator and 2008 Republican presidential nominee John McCain of Arizona . 
 She was born and raised in Phoenix , Arizona , as the daughter of wealthy beer distributor Jim Hensley . After receiving bachelor 's and master 's degrees from the University of Southern California , she became a special education teacher . She married John McCain in 1980 and they had three children together , in addition to adopting another . From 1988 to 1995 , she founded and operated a nonprofit organization , the American Voluntary Medical Team , which organized trips by medical personnel to disaster @-@ stricken or war @-@ torn third @-@ world areas . During this time , she became addicted to painkillers for several years and resorted to having a physician write illegal prescriptions on her behalf . She reached an agreement with the government in which no charges were filed against her . 
 Upon her father 's death in 2000 , she inherited majority control and became chair of Hensley & Co . , one of the largest Anheuser @-@ Busch beer distributors in the United States . She participated in both of her husband 's presidential campaigns and , in 2008 , drew both positive and negative scrutiny for her appearance , demeanor , wealth , spending habits , and financial obligations . She continues to be an active philanthropist and serves on the boards of Operation Smile , Eastern Congo Initiative , CARE and HALO Trust , frequently making overseas trips in conjunction with their activities . During the 2010s she has become prominent in the fight against human trafficking . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Cindy Lou Hensley was born in Phoenix , Arizona , to James Hensley , who founded Hensley & Co . , and Marguerite " Smitty " Hensley ( née Johnson ) . She was raised as the only child of her parents ' second marriages and grew up on Phoenix 's North Central Avenue in affluent circumstances . ( Dixie L. Burd , who is the daughter of Marguerite Smith through a prior relationship , is her half @-@ sister , as is Kathleen Hensley <unk> , daughter of Jim Hensley and his first wife , Mary Jeanne Parks . ) Cindy Hensley was named Junior Rodeo Queen of Arizona in 1968 . She went to Central High School in Phoenix , where she was named Best Dressed as a senior and graduated in 1972 . 
 Hensley enrolled at the University of Southern California . She joined the socially conservative Kappa Alpha Theta sorority as a freshman , and had many leadership roles in the house during her four years there . Hensley graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in education in 1976 . She continued on at USC , and received a Master of Arts in special education in 1978 . There she participated in a movement therapy pilot program that laid the way for a standard treatment for children with severe disabilities ; she published the work Movement Therapy : A Possible Approach in 1978 . Declining a role in the family business , she worked for a year as a special education teacher dealing with children with Down syndrome and other disabilities at Agua Fria High School in Avondale , Arizona . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 Hensley met John McCain in April 1979 at a military reception in Hawaii . He was the U.S. Navy liaison officer to the United States Senate and almost eighteen years her senior . McCain and Hensley quickly began a relationship , traveling between Arizona and Washington to see each other . John McCain then pushed to end his marriage of fourteen years ; Carol McCain and John McCain stopped cohabiting in January 1980 , and Carol accepted a divorce in February 1980 , effective in April 1980 . John and Cindy were married on May 17 , 1980 at the Arizona Biltmore Hotel in Phoenix . They signed a prenuptial agreement that kept most of her family 's assets under her name ; they have since kept their finances apart and file separate income tax returns . 
 Her father 's business and political contacts helped John McCain to gain a foothold in Arizona politics . She campaigned with her husband door to door during his successful first bid for U.S. Congress in 1982 , and was heavily involved in campaign strategy . Her wealth from an expired trust from her parents provided significant loans to the campaign and helped it survive a period of early debt . 
 Once John McCain was elected , the couple moved to Alexandria , Virginia . She spent two months in late 1983 writing handwritten notes on over 4 @,@ 000 Christmas cards to be sent to constituents and others . She was considered an outsider who was snubbed by the Washington congressional social scene , in part because Carol McCain was a popular figure in town , and she grew homesick for Arizona . She had several miscarriages . 
 She moved back to Arizona in early 1984 and gave birth to the couple 's daughter , Meghan , later that year . She subsequently gave birth to sons John Sidney IV ( known as " Jack " ) in 1986 and James ( known as " Jimmy " ) in 1988 . Their fourth child , Bridget , was adopted in 1991 . Cindy McCain 's parents lived across the street and helped her raise the children ; her husband was frequently in Washington and she typically only saw him on weekends . In his absence , she organized elaborate fund @-@ raisers for him and expanded their home . 
 In April 1986 , Cindy and her father invested $ 359 @,@ 100 in a shopping center project with Phoenix banker Charles Keating . This , combined with her role as a bookkeeper who later had difficulty finding receipts for family trips on Keating 's jet , caused complications for her husband during the Keating Five scandal , when he was being examined for his role regarding oversight of Keating 's bank . 
 = = American Voluntary Medical Team = = 
 = = = Founding and mission = = = 
 In 1988 , inspired by a vacation that she took four years earlier to substandard medical facilities on Truk Lagoon , Cindy McCain founded the American Voluntary Medical Team ( AVMT ) . It was a non @-@ profit organization that organized trips for doctors , nurses and other medical personnel to provide MASH @-@ like emergency medical care to disaster @-@ struck or war @-@ torn third @-@ world areas such as Micronesia , Vietnam ( before relations were normalized between them and the U.S. ) , Kuwait ( arriving five days after the conclusion of the Gulf War ) , Zaire ( to help refuges from the Rwandan genocide ) , Iraq , Nicaragua , India , Bangladesh , and El Salvador . She led 55 of these missions over the next seven years , each of which were at least two weeks in duration . AVMT also supplied treatment to poor sick children around the world . In 1993 , Cindy McCain and the AVMT were honored with an award from Food for the Hungry . 
 = = = Adoption = = = 
 In 1991 , the AVMT went to Dhaka , Bangladesh , to provide assistance following the 1991 Bangladesh cyclone . While at Mother Teresa 's Dhaka orphanage , the Sisters of Charity of Mother Teresa Children 's Home , McCain met two infant girls she felt needed to be brought to the United States for medical treatment . She decided to adopt one of the girls , later named Bridget , with her husband readily agreeing ; the adoption became final in 1993 . She helped coordinate the adoption of the other little girl for family friend Wes Gullett . 
 = = = Prescription drug addiction = = = 
 In 1989 , Cindy McCain developed an addiction to <unk> and Vicodin , opioid painkillers , which she initially took to alleviate pain following two spinal surgeries for ruptured discs and to ease emotional stress during the Keating Five affair . The addiction progressed to where she was taking upwards of twenty pills a day , and she resorted to having an AVMT physician write illegal prescriptions in the names of three AVMT employees without their knowledge . In 1992 , her parents staged an intervention to force her to get help ; she told her husband about her problem , attended a drug treatment facility , began outpatient sessions and ended her three years of addiction . Surgery in 1993 resolved her back pain . 
 In January 1993 , Tom Gosinski , an AVMT employee who had discovered her illegal drug use , was terminated on budgetary grounds . Subsequently , he tipped off the Drug Enforcement Administration about her prior actions and a federal investigation ensued . McCain 's defense team , led by John McCain 's Keating Five lawyer John Dowd , secured an agreement with the U.S. Attorney 's office for McCain , a first @-@ time offender , which avoided charges while requiring her to pay financial restitution , enroll in a diversion program and do community service . Meanwhile , in early 1994 , Gosinski filed a wrongful termination lawsuit against McCain , in which he alleged she ordered him to conceal " improper acts " and " misrepresent facts in a judicial proceeding " ; he told her he would settle for $ 250 @,@ 000 . In response , Dowd characterized this request as blackmail , and requested Maricopa County attorney Rick <unk> to investigate Gosinski for extortion . In the end , Gosinski 's credibility was undermined by testimony in <unk> 's report from other charity staffers who asserted Gosinski privately vowed to blackmail McCain were he ever fired , and both Gosinski 's lawsuit and the extortion investigation against him were dropped . 
 Knowing that prosecutors were about to publicly disclose her past addiction , McCain preemptively revealed the story to reporters , saying that she was doing so willingly : " Although my conduct did not result in compromising any missions of AVMT , my actions were wrong , and I regret them ... if what I say can help just one person to face the problem , it 's worthwhile . " 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 AVMT concluded its activities in 1995 in the wake of the McCain prescription narcotics controversy . That year , McCain founded a new organization , the Hensley Family Foundation , which donates monies towards children 's programs in Arizona and nationally . She was largely a stay @-@ at @-@ home mom during the balance of the 1990s . She also held positions as vice president , director , and vice chair of Hensley & Co . In the mid @-@ 1990s , she began suffering from severe migraine headaches , for a while keeping them secret from her husband and minimizing their effect to the rest of her family . Her attacks often resulted in trips to the emergency room , were caused by many different triggers , and she tried many different treatments . 
 = = Role in 2000 presidential campaign = = 
 Although wary of the media and still having no love for the political world , McCain was active in her husband 's eventually unsuccessful campaign for President of the United States in 2000 . She mostly provided good cheer , without discussing her opinions about national policy . She impressed Republican voters with her elegance at coffee shops and other small campaign settings , where she frequently referred to her children , carpooling and charity work . 
 McCain was upset by the notorious smear tactics against her husband in the South Carolina primary that year . These included allegations involving her adopted daughter Bridget that she found " despicable " , as well as insinuations that McCain herself was currently a drug addict . Though deeply wounded by the attacks for a long time , Cindy McCain eventually forgave those responsible . She was chosen as the chair of the Arizona delegation to the 2000 Republican National Convention . 
 = = Between presidential campaigns = = 
 In 2000 , she became chair of the now $ 300 million @-@ a @-@ year Hensley & Co. following her father 's death . It is one of the largest Anheuser @-@ Busch beer distributors in the United States . Cindy , her children , and one of John McCain 's children from his first marriage , together own 68 percent of the company . As chair , her role takes the form of consultations with the company CEO on major initiatives such as new products , new plants or employee welfare , rather than that of an active physical presence . She does not have operational control of Hensley , and Anheuser @-@ Busch considers her to be an absentee owner . By 2007 , she had an annual income of over $ 400 @,@ 000 from Hensley and an estimated net worth of $ 100 million . She also owned at least $ 2 @.@ 7 million worth of shares of Anheuser @-@ Busch stock . With her children , she owns a minority stake in the Arizona Diamondbacks baseball team . 
 McCain became actively involved with Operation Smile in 2001 , taking parts in its medical missions to Morocco , Vietnam and India . She was honored by the organization in 2005 and sits on its board of directors . McCain joined the board of directors of CARE in 2005 . She is on the board of the HALO Trust , and has visited operations to remove landmines in Cambodia , Sri Lanka , Mozambique , and Angola . She makes financial contributions to these organizations via her family trust and views her role as watching them in the field to ensure they are frugal and their money is being spent effectively . On occasion she has criticized foreign regimes on human rights grounds , such as Myanmar 's military junta . 
 In April 2004 , McCain suffered a near @-@ fatal stroke caused by high blood pressure , although she was still able to attend some events . After several months of physical therapy to overcome leg and arm limitations , she made a mostly full recovery , although she still suffered from some short @-@ term memory loss and difficulties in writing . She owns a home in Coronado , California , next to the Hotel del Coronado ; her family had vacationed in Coronado growing up , and she has gone there for recuperation and family get @-@ togethers . She or her family own other residential and commercial real estate in California , Arizona and Virginia and , including rental properties , McCain herself owns ten homes and part of three office complexes . She is an amateur pilot and race car driver . 
 = = Role in 2008 presidential campaign = = 
 She was active and visible in her husband 's second presidential campaign during 2007 and 2008 , despite not wanting her husband to run initially due to bad memories of their 2000 experience and worries the effect on her children , especially son Jimmy who was headed to serve in the Iraq War . She eventually supported her husband in his goals , but defined her own campaign roles ; she frequently returned to Arizona to attend to domestic duties or interrupted campaigning for her overseas charitable work . She preferred to travel with her husband and introduce him rather than act as a campaign surrogate with a separate schedule . She wore her hair in a fashionable but severe style and was sometimes seen with an unsmiling countenance in her appearances . In August 2008 , a member of the public shook her hand very vigorously , aggravating her existing carpal tunnel syndrome condition and causing her to slightly sprain her wrist . The campaign exacerbated her migraine headaches and she sometimes had to wear dark glasses to shield herself from bright lights . The pressures of the campaign also brought out a range of behaviors between her and her husband , varying from moments of great tenderness and concern to raging arguments that dismayed their staffs . 
 McCain stated that the American public wanted a First Lady of the United States who would tend toward a traditional role in that position . She would not attend Cabinet meetings , but would continue her involvement in overseas non @-@ profit organizations and would urge Americans to do the same globally or locally . She envisioned herself as a possible figurehead for humanitarian work , along the lines of Diana , Princess of Wales . She continued to expand her roles in such organizations , joining in April 2008 the board of Grateful Nation Montana , which provides scholarships and services to the children of Montana service personnel killed in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
 She made statements critical of the Bush administration for not deploying enough troops during the Iraq War . Her close examination of the financial books of the McCain campaign during the first part of 2007 convinced the candidate that its profligate spending could not go on and led to the drastic mid @-@ year reduction of the campaign 's staff and scope . In February 2008 , McCain made news by being critical of Michelle Obama , the wife of Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama , who had said , " And let me tell you something : For the first time in my adult lifetime I am really proud of my country . " McCain , who was genuinely offended by the remark , replied : " I am proud of my country . I don 't know about you — if you heard those words earlier — I am very proud of my country . " Also in February 2008 , she publicly appeared beside her husband during a press conference in response to a newspaper report regarding his connection to a lobbyist . 
 McCain faced media scrutiny about her wealth , spending habits , and financial obligations . At first declining to release her separate income tax returns , saying it was a privacy issue and that she would not do so even if she became First Lady , she later released the first two pages of her 2006 return , which showed $ 6 million in income for that year ( including nearly $ 570 @,@ 000 in itemized deductions and more than $ 1 @.@ 7 million paid in federal income taxes ) . The campaign said that any decisions about how to handle her role in Hensley & Co. if she became First Lady would not be made until that time . While she stood to gain a considerable profit from the agreed @-@ upon acquisition of Anheuser @-@ Busch by the Belgian company InBev , she was initially under some political pressure to help oppose the deal and keep Anheuser @-@ Busch under American ownership . 
 In June 2008 , a Rasmussen Reports poll found that 49 percent of voters viewed Cindy McCain favorably and 29 percent unfavorably , while an ABC News / Washington Post poll found figures of 39 percent and 25 percent respectively . Her style and fashion sense was the subject of much media scrutiny . McCain was compared to former first lady Nancy Reagan , due to both her style and wardrobe as well as her demeanor . Early in the campaign , some recipes attributed to Cindy McCain turned out to be copied from other sources ; the campaign attributed the problem to an error by an intern . 
 Cindy McCain spoke on both the opening and final nights of the early September 2008 Republican National Convention . On the first night , truncated due to national attention regarding Hurricane Gustav , she appeared with First Lady Laura Bush to deliver short remarks encouraging support for hurricane relief efforts along the Gulf Coast , and on the last night , she introduced the seven McCain children and spoke about how her husband 's love for his country had been passed on to them . In October 2008 , she increased the intensity of her public remarks against Obama 's candidacy , speaking with surprising vitriol in accusing the Obama campaign of being the dirtiest in history and saying of his position against a war @-@ funding bill , " The day that Senator Obama cast a vote not to fund my son when he was serving sent a cold chill through my body . " The stresses of the campaign caused the 5 @-@ foot @-@ 7 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 70 m ) McCain 's weight to fall under 100 pounds ( 45 kg ) . On November 4 , 2008 , she fought back tears in an appearance as the McCain campaign reached its final day and subsequent loss to Obama . 
 = = Subsequent activities = = 
 After the election , Cindy McCain was approached about appearing on Dancing With the Stars . She seriously considered participating , but according to John McCain , was concerned that her surgically replaced knee would not be able to withstand the rigors of the competition . 
 Continuing her humanitarian aid work with a January 2009 trip to Dubai , India , and Cambodia , she said that she was relieved that the campaign was over and that , while it had been " wild and nuts " at times , it had also been " a remarkable experience to be a contender for the highest office in the land . " She said the ongoing global economic crisis was adversely affecting humanitarian organizations , and she expressed hope that President Obama would be successful in dealing with it . 
 She expressed support for LGBT rights by appearing alongside her daughter Meghan at an April 2009 convention of the Log Cabin Republicans , and posing for the NOH8 Campaign , a gay rights project opposed to California Proposition 8 , a ballot measure banning same @-@ sex marriage . The following year she appeared in another NOH8 public service announcement against bullying , and in it appeared to break with her husband 's position and express support for repeal of the " Don 't ask , don 't tell " policy prohibiting gays from serving openly in the U.S. military . But she subsequently tweeted that " I fully support the NOH8 campaign and all it stands for and am proud to be a part of it . But I stand by my husband 's stance on DADT . " 
 In September 2009 , she spoke about her migraines publicly for the first time and decided to speak at the International Headache Congress about raising awareness for sufferers . During her husband 's eventually successful 2010 senatorial re @-@ election campaign , she rarely made public appearances . 
 McCain appeared in March 2011 alongside Eastern Congo Initiative founder Ben Affleck to testify before a panel of the House Foreign Affairs Committee on behalf of continued monetary assistance to the Democratic Republic of Congo , in an environment where the Republican @-@ controlled House was looking to make significant cuts to foreign aid . She has noted the difficulty of getting attention to some of the topics she feels most strongly about ; at a Futures Without Violence summit in 2012 , she said , " When I talk about rape in Congo , people turn their backs and run , especially the men . " 
 In late 2013 and early 2014 , McCain used the occasion of Super Bowl XLVIII to highlight her concerns about sex trafficking in the United States , an issue that she had begun working on in conjunction with The McCain Institute . She campaigned for legislation to address the problem at both the federal and state levels . She also served as co @-@ chair of the Arizona Governor Jan Brewer 's Task Force on Human Trafficking . 
 In April 2015 , during the Sedona Forum , Cindy McCain and actress Demi Moore discussed ways to end sex trafficking . Later in that year she staged appearances with Heidi <unk> , Democratic Senator from North Dakota , to discuss human trafficking in that state and elsewhere . She said of trafficking , " Everybody has seen it ; they just didn 't know what they were looking at . " She praised Obama and Congress for passage of the Justice for Victims of Trafficking Act of 2015 and , together with Malika <unk> Saar , executive director of the Human Rights Project for Girls , started the No Such Thing Campaign to end the use of the term " child prostitute " , saying " there are only victims and survivors of child rape . " 
 = The X @-@ Files ( season 7 ) = 
 The seventh season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files commenced airing on the Fox network in the United States on November 7 , 1999 , concluded on May 21 , 2000 , and consists of twenty @-@ two episodes . Taking place after the destruction of the Syndicate , this season marks the end of various other story lines ; during this season , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) learned the true fate of his sister , Samantha . The season concludes with Mulder being abducted by aliens and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) learning that she is pregnant . 
 Before the broadcasting for the season began , Duchovny sued Fox and eventually announced his decision to leave the show . As a result , the season would be the last to feature Duchovny in a full @-@ time capacity , although he would return in later seasons as an intermittent main character . Due to this eventual character change , this season would be the last to feature the original opening sequence for the series , as the two later years updated the intro in an attempt to renew and revive the series . 
 The seventh season premiere " The Sixth Extinction " , debuted with a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 6 and was viewed by 17 @.@ 82 million viewers , marking a noticeable drop in viewership since the sixth season . The series fell from number 12 to number 29 for the 1999 – 2000 television year . Critically , the show 's seventh season received mixed to positive reviews ; many reviewers felt that the show still produced good episodes , but that it was the weakest of the Duchovny and Anderson seasons of the show . 
 = = Plot overview = = 
 After the events of the season six finale , Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) and Michael Kritschgau ( John Finn ) are desperately attempting to find the truth behind the so @-@ called alien object . Meanwhile , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) is still imprisoned by his own frenetic brain activity . Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and Skinner are unaware of FBI Special Agent Diana Fowley 's ( Mimi Rogers ) duplicity — she is working for Cigarette Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) . Scully then travels to Africa to unravel the secrets of the alien artifacts , finding something that looks like a spaceship buried under the shoreline off the Côte d 'Ivoire coast . The object may prove that life originated elsewhere , and all religion is based on the Navajo contact with alien life . Unsuccessful , Scully returns from Africa to revisit Mulder in Washington , D.C. , but instead she finds out that he has disappeared . She contacts Kritschgau and Skinner to find her partner . Cigarette Smoking Man has taken Mulder to a place where all his problems seem to have disappeared . Fowley helps Scully locate Mulder , which leads to her death at the hands of Cigarette Smoking Man . 
 While investigating a bizarre disappearance of a young girl from her home , Mulder becomes obsessed with the number of children who have vanished in similar circumstances . Scully fears that he is emotionally involved due to his sister 's disappearance . At the same time it is revealed to him that his mother , Teena Mulder ( Rebecca Toolan ) , committed suicide . He then tries to prove that his mother did not take her own life , but is ultimately forced to accept that his mother 's death was by her own hand . He is led by a man whose son disappeared years earlier to another truth — that his sister may be among the souls taken by " walk @-@ ins " , saving the souls of children doomed to live unhappy lives . Together they locate evidence that proves that Samantha was abducted by Cigarette Smoking Man and was forced to live in a now @-@ abandoned US Army base . It is later revealed that Samantha had become a " walk @-@ in " spirit . 
 Mulder and Scully investigate a case which leads them back to Oregon , the site of their first case together . With a series of Alien abductions taking place , Mulder and Scully are contacted by Billy Miles ( Zachary Ansley ) . Scully falls ill during the investigation and returns to Washington , D.C. Cigarette Smoking Man contacts Marita Covarrubias ( Laurie Holden ) and Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) , in an attempt to revive the government conspiracy . With Covarrubias unwilling to assist , and Krycek seeking revenge , they contact Mulder after he visits an alien crash site . Skinner and Mulder return to Oregon , while Scully is hospitalized in Washington , D.C. Mulder becomes trapped by an alien device , and is abducted by an Alien Bounty Hunter ( Brian Thompson ) together with Miles and several others . Skinner returns to Washington , D.C. where Scully informs him that she is pregnant . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 After five seasons in Vancouver , Canada , production of The X @-@ Files moved to Los Angeles . The X @-@ Files ' sixth season was the first season of the show to be filmed in the new location . The move was instigated by Duchovny in order to facilitate his work in films as well as to give him a chance to be nearer to his wife , Téa Leoni . Series creator Chris Carter opposed the move , but Fox network officials eventually made the decision to film in California . Although the move was unpopular with some members of the cast and crew , both series director Kim Manners and Anderson supported the move , although less vocally than Duchovny . Many fans accused the show of " Hollywood @-@ izing " by adding notable guests stars as well as making the plots simpler and more enjoyable for mass audiences . Furthermore , the move to Los Angeles also meant a drastic increase in production costs . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Originally , the mythology for season seven was supposed to continue from and show the ramifications of the " Two Fathers " / " One Son " story arc . Frank Spotnitz , in an interview , explained that the mythology episodes for season seven would feature " characters you saw in ' One Son ' coming back " and explore " what happens now that the conspiracy has been destroyed , what are the politics of the new landscape that exists . [ … ] There are aliens from outer space , two different races that are warring with each other . " In addition , he said that the then @-@ planned series finale would feature " the big idea that Chris [ Carter ] had in the beginning . " However , these ideas never came to pass , and the season finale , " Requiem " , segued directly into the eighth season premiere " Within " . Duchovny later revealed that , had the show ended , the final three episodes would have been devoted to the myth @-@ arc . 
 While filming was underway for the seventh season , many members of the crew felt that the show had entered into its final season . Executive producer Frank Spotnitz later explained , " There was a pretty strong sentiment inside and outside the show that it was time to call it a day . " Because the show 's producers felt that the show was nearing its end , many story arcs were ended in the season . The fourth episode , " Millennium " was written as a way to bring closure to the recently cancelled Carter @-@ created series of the same name . The episode features Lance Henriksen reprising his role as Frank for the last time . The eleventh episode , " Closure " , features Mulder discovering what happened to his sister . The idea to close the story arc received mixed reactions from various production and crew members . However , many of the show 's producers realized that the time had come to answer one of the show 's biggest questions . Paul Rabwin noted that , " It 's been seven years . I don 't think any of us are going to miss Samantha Mulder . That device and motivation were very strong in the early years of the show . But as the years have gone by , the speculation kind of melted away . " As the season progressed , however , the idea of producing another season emerged . Paul Rabwin explained that , " we found ourselves starting to get energized again . [ ... ] As we got toward the end of the season , everyone was kind of hopeful . " 
 The season also saw several of the show 's cast write their own episodes . Series co @-@ star Gillian Anderson directed and wrote her first episode of the series , " all things " . Anderson originally approached Carter about writing and directing an episode of the series during the sixth season . Anderson crafted a script that would see Scully pursuing a " deeply personal X @-@ File , one which in [ she ] is taken down a spiritual path when logic fails her " . Anderson had only a rough outline of the script until one day she wrote a majority of the story in one sitting . She explained , " A certain concept began to form , [ and ] I just wrote the entire outline for ' all things ' right then and there . It all just kind of came together on the page " . The next day , Anderson pitched the script to Carter , who approved of the " personal and quiet " characteristics of the story . In addition , series regular Davis wrote his only episode , " En Ami " . Davis approached Carter with his idea about Cigarette Smoking Man trying to seduce Scully with medical knowledge , and Carter , who was intrigued , responded positively to the idea . He assigned executive producer Spotnitz to work with Davis and craft a full @-@ fledged script . The script went through many revisions . Because Cigarette Smoking Man was able to manipulate Scully , Carter later referred to the " En Ami " as " the creepiest episode of the year . " 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 Before the season aired , David Duchovny filed a lawsuit against 20th Century Fox . Duchovny was upset because , he claimed , that Fox had undersold the rights to its own affiliates , thereby costing him huge sums of money . Originally , in the contract , Duchovny was eligible for an estimated five percent , but , according to him , he " had seen only a fraction " of the money . Eventually , the lawsuit was settled , and Duchovny was awarded a settlement of about $ 20 million . The lawsuit put strain on Duchovny 's professional relationships . Although his lawsuit never called Chris Carter a defendant , their friendship was notably impacted . One anonymous source noted that " the whole lawsuit thing revealed that Carter knew ( Duchovny ) was getting screwed and didn 't warn him . Carter proved where his loyalties lay with his actions . " 
 Neither Carter nor Duchovny were contracted to work on the series beyond the seventh season ; however , Fox entered into negotiations near the end of season in order to bring the two on board for an eighth season . After the airing of " Requiem " , Duchovny expressed his intentions to leave the series . He explained , " I was kind of a free agent after season seven , and to me , there was not much else to do in terms of the character . So it was really about me wanting to pursue other parts of my career as a writer , director , and actor . " Rumors began spreading — and were eventually confirmed — that , since Duchovny had not expressed an interest to appear as a main character in the eighth season , that another character would take Mulder 's place . Many fans on the internet believed that Mitch Pileggi , who portrayed Walter Skinner , would take the role ; Pileggi later called this guess " ridiculous . " 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Series creator Chris Carter also served as executive producer and showrunner and wrote six episodes . Spotnitz continued as executive producer and wrote five episodes . Vince Gilligan continued as co @-@ executive producer and wrote six episodes . John Shiban was promoted to supervising producer and wrote two episodes . David Amann was promoted to co @-@ producer and wrote two episodes . Jeffrey Bell was promoted to story editor and wrote two episodes . Cyberpunk novelists William Gibson and Tom Maddox returned to write their second of two episodes for the series . Cast member Duchovny wrote two episodes in the season , while other cast members Anderson and Davis also wrote an episode each . New writers in the seventh season included Steven Maeda and Greg Walker , who wrote one episode ; and Chip Johannessen who wrote a single freelance episode . Other producers included Paul Rabwin and Bernadette Caulfield , and Michelle MacLaren who joined as co @-@ executive producer . 
 Producing @-@ directors for the show included producer Rob Bowman , supervising producer Manners , and co @-@ executive producer Michael Watkins , who directed the bulk of the episodes for the season . Bowman directed two episodes for his final season on the series , Manners directed seven , and Watkins directed three . Cast members David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson each directed one episode each . Series creator Chris Carter directed a single episode , while series writer Vince Gilligan made his television directorial debut . Other directors for the season included Thomas J. Wright who directed three episodes , with Robert Lieberman , Cliff Bole , and Paul Shapiro each directing one . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 David Duchovny as Special Agent Fox Mulder ( 22 episodes ) 
 Gillian Anderson as Special Agent Dana Scully ( 22 episodes ) 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = = = Also starring = = = = 
 Mitch Pileggi as Walter Skinner ( 11 episodes ) 
 William B. Davis as Cigarette Smoking Man ( 4 episodes ) 
 Nicholas Lea as Alex Krycek ( 2 episodes ) 
 = = = = Guest starring = = = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Episodes marked with a double dagger ( ) are episodes in the series ' Alien Mythology arc . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The seventh season of The X @-@ Files debuted with " The Sixth Extinction " on November 7 , 1999 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 6 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 6 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned into the episode . The episode was viewed by 17 @.@ 82 million people , an increase from the sixth season 's finale , " Biogenesis " , which was viewed by 15 @.@ 86 million viewers . However , the debut marked a decrease from the sixth season debut , " The Beginning " , which garnered 20 @.@ 34 million viewers . As the season continued , however , ratings began to drop . The season hit a low with the eighteenth episode , " Brand X " , which was viewed by 10 @.@ 81 million viewers . The season finale , " Requiem " , earned a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 9 , with a 14 share , and was viewed by 15 @.@ 26 million viewers , marking a 14 percent drop in viewers when compared to the season premiere , and a 4 percent drop in viewers when compared to the previous season finale . The series was ranked at number 29 during the 1999 – 2000 television season , finishing with an average of 14 @.@ 2 million viewers . 
 During 2000 , companies were paying Fox $ 225 @,@ 000 for every 30 @-@ second spot that would air between acts of The X @-@ Files . Many Information technology ( IT ) companies were buying commercials during the show , largely due to the fact that " many [ ' coders IT geeks ' ] get their weekly fix of science fiction from this prime @-@ time show . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The seventh season received moderately positive reviews from critics , although increasingly critical reviews were more common this season . While critics enjoyed many of the episodes , many also felt that , as a whole , the season was the weakest of the show 's original seven . Eric Mink of the New York Daily News praised the season , noting that it was " proof that The X @-@ Files still has more than enough creative life in it to justify an eighth season " . He called many of the stand @-@ alone episodes " wonderfully creepy " and noted that the season possessed a " terrific bunch of episodes " . Thomas Doherty from Cinefantastique gave the season a mixed review and noted that the series was hurt by the partnership between Mulder and Scully " settl [ ing ] into the comfortable groove of a modern two career marriage — supportive , professionally rewarding , and utterly sexless . " Further , he noted that " the most entertaining episode lately have been the self parodies , where killer cockroaches scurry and living dead roam , or where ( in the Duchovny written and directed episode ) Scully and Mulder are played by Téa Leoni and Garry Shandling in a motion picture only slightly more ludicrous than a 1998 motion picture called The X @-@ Files . " Doherty argued that the " self @-@ parody " style of the series caused viewers to not take it seriously anymore , explaining that , " No longer going for the big chill , Carter and company are winking at their audience , as if to say : even we can 't pretend to believe in this muddled mishmash anymore . " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files , was positive towards the first half of the season , but soon saw the episodes in more of a negative light . He wrote , " A season that began with such hope ended with a sense of sorrow given the end result of the season @-@ long backstage wheeling and dealing [ a reference to David Duchovny 's lawsuit ] . Not even the magnificent season finale [ … ] could erase the nagging doubts I had that a series that had been so amazing for so long would soon embark upon a new course wrought with pitfalls and turmoil . " The A.V. Club noted that while the first eight seasons of The X @-@ Files were " good @-@ to @-@ great " , the seventh season of the show was " flagging " and possessed " significant problems . 
 The episodes themselves received a variety of reviews . Some were positively received : several reviews praised the episode " X @-@ Cops " , the show 's highly promoted cross @-@ over with the police reality show COPS . One review from the New York Daily News called the outing " exceptionally clever " whereas Starpulse named the episode the funniest of the series . The Duchovny @-@ penned " Hollywood A.D. " was praised for its self @-@ reflexive comedy by several reviews . Other episodes were more harshly received . Anderson 's writing debut , " all things " was critiqued for being " dull " and " heavy @-@ handed " . " Brand X " , on the other hand , was called " a waste of an episode . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The seventh season earned the series six Primetime Emmy Award nominations , with three wins . The episode " First Person Shooter " won for Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Drama Series and Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series . The episode " Theef " won for Outstanding Makeup for a Series . Other nominations included Mark Snow for Outstanding Music Composition for a Series ( Dramatic Underscore ) for " Theef " , the episode " First Person Shooter " for Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series , and " Rush " for Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series . The series , as well as Gillian Anderson , won a <unk> Entertainment Award for Best Drama Series and Best Actress in a Series , respectively . Other nominations included two Screen Actors Guild Award nominations for David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson , an Environmental Media Awards nomination for " Brand X " , and an International Monitor Award nomination for " Rush " . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 = Baleen whale = 
 Baleen whales ( systematic name Mysticeti ) , known earlier as whalebone whales , form a parvorder of the infraorder Cetacea ( whales , dolphins and porpoises ) . They are a widely distributed and diverse parvorder of carnivorous marine mammals . Mysticeti comprise the families Balaenidae ( right whales ) , Balaenopteridae ( rorquals ) , Cetotheriidae ( the pygmy right whale ) , and Eschrichtiidae ( the gray whale ) . There are currently 15 species of baleen whale . While cetaceans were historically thought to have descended from mesonychids , molecular evidence supports them as relatives of even @-@ toed ungulates ( Artiodactyla ) . Baleen whales split from toothed whales ( Odontoceti ) around 34 million years ago . 
 Baleen whales range in size from the 20 ft ( 6 m ) and 6 @,@ 600 lb ( 3 @,@ 000 kg ) pygmy right whale to the 112 ft ( 34 m ) and 190 t ( 210 short tons ) blue whale , which is also the largest creature on earth . They are sexually dimorphic . Baleen whales can have streamlined or large bodies , depending on the feeding behavior , and two limbs that are modified into flippers . Though not as flexible and agile as seals , baleen whales can swim very fast , with the fastest able to travel at 23 miles per hour ( 37 km / h ) . Baleen whales use their baleen plates to filter out food from the water by either lunge @-@ feeding or gulp @-@ feeding . Baleen whales have fused neck vertebrae , and are unable to turn their head at all . Baleen whales have two blowholes . Some species are well adapted for diving to great depths . They have a layer of fat , or blubber , under the skin to keep warm in the cold water . 
 Although baleen whales are widespread , most species prefer the colder waters around the Northern and Southern poles . Gray whales are specialized for feeding on bottom @-@ dwelling mollusks . Rorquals are specialized at lunge @-@ feeding , and have a streamlined body to reduce drag while accelerating . Right whales gulp @-@ feed , meaning they use their enlarged head to effectively take in a large amount of water and sieve the slow @-@ moving prey . Males typically mate with more than one female ( polygyny ) , although the degree of polygyny varies with the species . Male strategies for reproductive success vary between performing ritual displays ( whale song ) or lek mating . Calves are typically born in the spring and summer months and females bear all the responsibility for raising them . Mothers fast for a relatively long period of time over the period of migration , which varies between species . Baleen whales produce a number of vocalizations , notably the songs of the humpback whale . 
 The meat , blubber , baleen , and oil of baleen whales have traditionally been used by the indigenous peoples of the Arctic . Once relentlessly hunted by commercial industries for these products , cetaceans are now protected by international law . However , the North Atlantic right whale is ranked critically endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature . Besides hunting , baleen whales also face threats from marine pollution and ocean acidification . It has been speculated that man @-@ made sonar results in strandings . They have rarely been kept in captivity , and this has only been attempted with juveniles or members of one of the smallest species . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Baleen whales are cetaceans classified under the parvorder Mysticeti , and consist of four extant families : Balaenidae ( right whales ) , Balaenopteridae ( rorquals ) , Cetotheriidae ( pygmy right whale ) , and Eschrichtiidae ( gray whale ) . Balaenids are distinguished by their enlarged head and thick blubber , while rorquals and gray whales generally have a flat head , long throat pleats , and are more streamlined than Balaenids . Rorquals also tend to be longer than the latter . Cetaceans ( whales , dolphins , and porpoises ) and artiodactyls are now classified under the order Cetartiodactyla , often still referred to as Artiodactyla ( given that the cetaceans are deeply nested with the artiodactyls ) . The hippopotamus and pygmy hippopotamus are the closest living relatives to baleen whales , aside from toothed whales , and together with cetaceans form the suborder Whippomorpha . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Balaenidae consists of two genera : Eubalaena ( right whales ) and Balaena ( the bowhead whale , B. mysticetus ) . Balaenidae was thought to have consisted of only one genus until studies done through the early 2000s reported that bowhead whales and right whales are morphologically ( different skull shape ) and <unk> different . According to a study done by H. C. Rosenbaum ( of the American Museum of Natural History ) and colleagues , the North Pacific ( E. japonica ) and Southern right ( E. australis ) whales are more closely related to each other than to the North Atlantic right whale ( E. glacialis ) . 
 Rorquals consist of two genera ( Balaenoptera and Megaptera ) and nine species : the fin whale ( B. physalus ) , the Sei whale ( B. borealis ) , Bryde 's whale ( B. <unk> ) , Eden 's whale ( B. <unk> ) , the blue whale ( B. musculus ) , the common minke whale ( B. acutorostrata ) , the Antarctic minke whale ( B. <unk> ) , Omura 's whale ( B. <unk> ) , and the humpback whale ( M. novaeangliae ) . In a 2012 review of cetacean taxonomy , Alexandre <unk> ( of the Muséum National d 'Histoire Naturelle ) and colleagues suggested that , based on phylogenic criteria , there are four extant genera of rorquals . They recommend that the genus Balaenoptera be limited to the fin whale , have minke whales fall under the genus <unk> , and have <unk> contain the Sei whale , Bryde 's whale , Eden 's whale , the blue whale , and Omura 's whale . 
 Cetotheriidae consists of only one living member : the pygmy right whale ( Caperea marginata ) . The first descriptions date back to the 1840s of bones and baleen plates resembling a smaller version of the right whale , and was named Balaena marginata . In 1864 , it was moved into the genus Caperea after a skull of another specimen was discovered . Six years later , the pygmy right whale was classified under the family Neobalaenidae . Despite its name , the pygmy right whale is more genetically similar to rorquals and gray whales than to right whales . A study published in 2012 , based on bone structure , moved the pygmy right whale from the family Neobalaenidae to the family Cetotheriidae , making it a living fossil ; Neobalaenidae was elevated down to subfamily level as <unk> . 
 Eschrichtiidae consists of only one living member : the gray whale ( Eschrichtius robustus ) . The two populations , one in the Sea of Okhotsk and Sea of Japan and the other in the Mediterranean Sea and East Atlantic , are thought to be genetically and physiologically dissimilar . The gray whale is traditionally placed as the only living species in its genus and family . However , DNA analysis by studies , such as the one by Takeshi Sasaki ( of the Tokyo Institute of Technology ) and colleagues , indicates certain rorquals , such as the humpback whale , Megaptera novaeangliae , and the fin whale , Balaenoptera physalus , are more closely related to the gray whale than they are to some other rorquals , such as the minke whale , Balaenoptera acutorostrata . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The taxonomic name " Mysticeti " ( / <unk> / ) apparently derives from a translation error in early copies of Aristotle 's Historia Animalium ( in Ancient Greek ) , in which " ὁ μῦς τὸ <unk> " ( ho mus to <unk> , " the mouse , the whale so called " ) was mistakenly translated as " ὁ <unk> " ( ο <unk> , " the <unk> " ) , which D. W. Rice ( of the Society for Marine Mammalogy ) in his 1998 work assumed was an ironic reference to the animals ' great size . An alternate name for the parvorder is " <unk> " ( from Greek <unk> " mustache " + <unk> " whale " ) , which , although obviously more appropriate and occasionally used in the past , has been superseded by " Mysticeti " ( junior synonym ) . 
 Mysticetes are also known as baleen whales because of the presence of baleen . These animals rely on their baleen plates to sieve plankton and other small organisms from the water . The term " baleen " ( Middle English <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , etc . ) is an archaic word for " whale " , derived from the Latin word <unk> . 
 Right whales got their name because of whalers preferring them over other species ; they were essentially the " right whale " to catch . 
 = = = Differences between families = = = 
 Rorquals use throat pleats to expand their mouth which allows them to feed more effectively . However , rorquals need to build up water pressure in order to expand their mouth , leading to a lunge @-@ feeding behavior . <unk> @-@ feeding is where a whale rams a bait ball ( a swarm of small fish ) at high speeds . Rorquals generally have a streamlined physique to reduce drag in the water while doing this . Balaenids rely on their huge head , as opposed to the rorquals ' throat pleats , to feed effectively . This feeding behavior allows them to grow very big and bulky , without the necessity for a streamlined body . They have callosities , unlike other whales , with the exception of the bowhead whale . Rorquals have a higher proportion of muscle tissue and tend to be negatively buoyant , whereas right whales have a higher proportion of blubber and are positively buoyant . The gray whale is easily distinguished from other extant cetaceans by its sleet @-@ gray color , a dorsal ridge ( knuckles on the back ) , and its gray @-@ white scars left from parasites . Like in the rorquals , their throat pleats increase the capacity of their throat , allowing them to filter larger volumes of water at once . Gray whales are bottom @-@ feeders , meaning they sift through sand to get their food . They usually turn on their side and scoop up sediment into their mouth and filter out benthic creatures like amphipods , which leaves a noticeable mark on their head . The pygmy right whale is easily confused with minke whales because of their similar characteristics , such as its small size , throat pleats , dark gray top , light gray bottom , and a light eye @-@ patch . 
 = = = Evolutionary history = = = 
 Mysticeti split from Odontoceti ( toothed whales ) 34 million years ago during the Eocene . Their evolutionary link to archaic toothed cetaceans ( Archaeoceti ) remained unknown until the extinct Janjucetus <unk> was discovered in the early 1990s in Victoria , Australia . Like a modern baleen whale , Janjucetus had baleen in its jaw and had very little biosonar capabilities . However , its jaw also contained teeth , with incisors and canines built for stabbing and molars and premolars built for tearing . These early mysticetes were exceedingly small compared to modern baleen whales , with species like Mammalodon measuring no greater than 10 feet ( 3 m ) . It is thought that their size increased with their dependence on baleen . The discovery of Janjucetus and others like it suggests that baleen evolution went through several transitional phases . Species like Mammalodon <unk> had little to no baleen , while later species like <unk> <unk> had both baleen and teeth , suggesting they had limited filter feeding capabilities ; later genera like <unk> had no teeth in their mouth , meaning they were fully dependent on baleen and could only filter feed . 
 <unk> <unk> is the earliest mysticete , dating back to 33 million years ago ( mya ) . Measuring only 6 @.@ 6 feet ( 2 m ) , it is the smallest extant baleen whale . It is only known from its teeth ; they suggest a suction feeding behavior , much like that of beaked whales . Like other early toothed mysticetes , or " <unk> " , F. <unk> had heterodont dentition . <unk> from the Oligocene are the <unk> ( Mammalodon and Janjucetus ) from Australia . They were small with shortened rostra , and a primitive dental formula ( 3 @.@ 1 @.@ 4 @.@ 33 @.@ 1 @.@ 4 @.@ 3 ) . In baleen whales , enlarged mouths adapted for suction feeding evolved before specializations for bulk filter feeding . In the toothed Oligocene <unk> Janjucetus , the symphysis is short and the mouth enlarged , the rostrum is wide , and the edges of the maxillae are thin , indicating an adaptation for suction feeding . The <unk> <unk> still had teeth , but the presence of a groove on the interior side of each mandible indicates the symphysis was elastic , which would have enabled rotation of each mandible , an initial adaptation for bulk feeding like in modern mysticetes . 
 The lineages of rorquals and right whales split almost 20 mya . It is unknown where this occurred , but it is generally believed that they , like their descendants , followed plankton migrations . These primitive mysticetes had lost their heterodont dentition in favor of baleen , and are believed to have lived on a specialized benthic , plankton , or copepod diet like modern mysticetes . Mysticetes experienced their first radiation in the mid @-@ Miocene . Balaenopterids grew bigger during this time , with species like Balaenoptera <unk> rivaling the blue whale in terms of size . It is thought this radiation was caused by global climate change and major tectonic activity ( the Antarctic Circumpolar Current ) . 
 The first toothless ancestors of Mysticetes appeared before the first radiation in the late Oligocene . <unk> and others like it showed no evidence in the skull of echolocation abilities , suggesting they mainly relied on their eyesight for navigation . The <unk> had long , flat rostra that lacked teeth and had external nares located halfway up the dorsal side of the snout . Though the palate is not well @-@ preserved in these specimens , they are thought to have had baleen and been filter feeders . Miocene baleen whales were preyed upon by larger predators like killer sperm whales and Megalodon . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 = = = Motion = = = 
 When swimming , baleen whales rely on their flippers for locomotion in a wing @-@ like manner similar to penguins and sea turtles . Flipper movement is continuous . While doing this , baleen whales use their tail fluke to propel themselves forward through vertical motion while using their flippers for steering , much like an otter . Some species leap out of the water , which may allow them to travel faster . Because of their great size , baleen whales are not flexible or agile like dolphins , and none can move their neck because of the fused cervical vertebrae ; this sacrifices speed for stability in the water . The hind legs are enclosed inside the body , and are thought to be vestigial organs . However , a 2014 study suggests that the pelvic bone serves as support for whale genitalia . 
 Rorquals , needing to build speed to feed , have several adaptions for reducing drag , including a streamlined body ; a small dorsal fin , relative to its size ; and lack of external ears or long hair . The fin whale , the fastest among baleen whales , can travel at 23 miles per hour ( 37 km / h ) . While feeding , the rorqual jaw expands to a volume that can be bigger than the whale itself ; to do this , the mouth inflates . The inflation of the mouth causes the <unk> <unk> , the throat pleats on the underside stretching to the navel , to expand , increasing the amount of water that the mouth can store . The mandible is connected to the skull by dense fibers and cartilage ( fibrocartilage ) , allowing the jaw to swing open at almost a 90 ° angle . The mandibular symphysis is also <unk> , allowing the jaw to bend which lets in more water . To prevent stretching the mouth too far , rorquals have a sensory organ located in the middle of the jaw to regulate these functions . 
 = = = External anatomy = = = 
 Baleen whales have two flippers on the front , near the head . Like all mammals , baleen whales breathe air and must surface periodically to do so . Their nostrils , or blowholes , are situated at the top of the cranium . Baleen whales have two blowholes , as opposed to toothed whales which have one . These paired blowholes are longitudinal slits that converge anteriorly and widen posteriorly , which causes a V @-@ shaped blow . They are surrounded by a fleshy ridge that keeps water away while the whale breathes . The septum that separates the blowholes has two plugs attached to it , making the blowholes water @-@ tight while the whale dives . 
 Like other mammals , the skin of baleen whales has an epidermis , a dermis , a hypodermis , and connective tissue . The epidermis , the pigmented layer , is 0 @.@ 2 inches ( 5 mm ) thick , along with connective tissue . The epidermis itself is only 0 @.@ 04 inches ( 1 mm ) thick . The dermis , the layer underneath the epidermis , is also thin . The hypodermis , containing blubber , is the thickest part of the skin and functions as a means to conserve heat . Right whales have the thickest hypodermis of any cetacean , averaging 20 inches ( 51 cm ) , though , as in all whales , it is thinner around openings ( such as the blowhole ) and limbs . Blubber may also be used to store energy during times of fasting . The connective tissue between the hypodermis and muscles allows only limited movement to occur between them . Unlike in toothed whales , baleen whales have small hairs on the top of their head , stretching from the tip of the rostrum to the blowhole , and , in right whales , on the chin . Like other marine mammals , they lack sebaceous and sweat glands . 
 The baleen of baleen whales are keratinous plates . They are made of a calcified hard α @-@ keratin material , a fiber @-@ reinforced structure made of intermediate filaments ( proteins ) . The degree of calcification varies between species , with the sei whale having 14 @.@ 5 % hydroxyapatite , a mineral that coats teeth and bones , whereas minke whales have 1 – 4 % hydroxyapatite . In most mammals , keratin structures , such as wool , air @-@ dry , but aquatic whales rely on calcium salts to form on the plates to stiffen them . Baleen plates are attached to the upper jaw and are absent in the mid @-@ jaw , forming two separate combs of baleen . The plates decrease in size as they go further back into the jaw ; the largest ones are called the " main baleen plates " and the smallest ones are called the " accessory plates " . Accessory plates taper off into small hairs . 
 Unlike other whales ( and most other mammals ) , the females are larger than the males . Sexual dimorphism is usually reversed , with the males being larger , but the females of all baleen whales are usually five percent larger than males . Sexual dimorphism is also displayed through whale song , notably in humpback whales where the males of the species sing elaborate songs . Male right whales have bigger callosities than female right whales . The males are generally more scarred than females which is thought to be because of aggression during mating season . 
 = = = Internal systems = = = 
 The unique lungs of baleen whales are built to collapse under the pressure instead of resisting the pressure which would damage the lungs , enabling some , like the fin whale , to dive to a depth of − 1 @,@ 540 feet ( − 470 m ) . The whale lungs are very efficient at extracting oxygen from the air , usually 80 % , whereas humans only extract 20 % of oxygen from inhaled air . Lung volume is relatively low compared to terrestrial mammals because of the inability of the respiratory tract to hold gas while diving . Doing so may cause serious complications such as embolism . Unlike other mammals , the lungs of baleen whales lack lobes and are more <unk> . Like in humans , the left lung is smaller than the right to make room for the heart . To conserve oxygen , blood is rerouted from pressure @-@ tolerant @-@ tissue to internal organs , and they have a high concentration of myoglobin which allows them to hold their breath longer . 
 The heart of baleen whales functions similarly to other mammals , with the major difference being the size . The heart can reach 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 454 kg ) , but is still proportional to the whale 's size . The muscular wall of the ventricle , which is responsible for pumping blood out of the heart , can be 3 to 5 inches ( 7 @.@ 6 to 12 @.@ 7 cm ) thick . The aorta , an artery , can be .75 inches ( 1 @.@ 9 cm ) thick . Their resting heart rate is 60 to 140 beats per minute ( bpm ) , as opposed to the 60 to 100 bpm in humans . When diving , their heart rate will drop to 4 to 15 bpm to conserve oxygen . Like toothed whales , they have a dense network of blood vessels ( rete mirabile ) which prevents heat @-@ loss . Like in most mammals , heat is lost in their extremities , so , in baleen whales , warm blood in the arteries is surrounded by veins to prevent heat loss during transport . As well as this , heat inevitably given off by the arteries warms blood in the surrounding veins as it travels back into the core . This is otherwise known as countercurrent exchange . To counteract overheating while in warmer waters , baleen whales reroute blood to the skin to accelerate heat @-@ loss . They have the largest blood corpuscles ( red and white blood cells ) of any mammal , measuring 4 @.@ 1 × 10 − 4 inches ( 10 µm ) in diameter , as opposed to human 's 2 @.@ 8 × 10 − 4 @-@ inch ( 7 @.@ 1 µm ) blood corpuscles . 
 When sieved from the water , food is swallowed and travels through the esophagus where it enters a three @-@ chambered @-@ stomach . The first compartment is known as the fore @-@ stomach ; this is where food gets ground up into an acidic liquid , which is then squirted into the main stomach . Like in humans , the food is mixed with hydrochloric acid and protein @-@ digesting enzymes . Then , the partly digested food is moved into the third stomach , where it meets fat @-@ digesting enzymes , and is then mixed with an alkaline liquid to neutralize the acid from the fore @-@ stomach to prevent damage to the intestinal tract . Their intestinal tract is highly adapted to absorb the most nutrients from food ; the walls are folded and contain copious blood vessels , allowing for a greater surface area over which digested food and water can be absorbed . Baleen whales get the water they need from their food ; however , the salt content of most of their prey ( invertebrates ) are similar to that of seawater , whereas the salt content of a whale 's blood is considerably lower ( three times lower ) than that of seawater . The whale kidney is adapted to excreting excess salt ; however , while producing urine more concentrated than seawater , it wastes a lot of water which must be replaced . 
 Baleen whales have a relatively small brain compared to their body mass . Like other mammals , their brain has a large , folded cerebrum , the part of the brain responsible for memory and processing sensory information . Their cerebrum only makes up about 68 % of their brain 's weight , as opposed to human 's 83 % . The cerebellum , the part of the brain responsible for balance and coordination , makes up 18 % of their brain 's weight , compared to 10 % in humans , which is probably due to the great degree of control necessary for constantly swimming . <unk> on the brains of gray whales revealed iron oxide particles , which may allow them to find magnetic north like a compass . 
 Unlike most animals , whales are conscious breathers . All mammals sleep , but whales cannot afford to become unconscious for long because they may drown . They are believed to exhibit <unk> slow @-@ wave sleep , in which they sleep with half of the brain while the other half remains active . This behavior was only documented in toothed whales until footage of a humpback whale sleeping ( vertically ) was shot in 2014 . 
 It is largely unknown how baleen whales produce sound because of the lack of a melon and vocal cords . In a 2007 study , it was discovered that the larynx had U @-@ shaped folds which are thought to be similar to vocal cords . They are positioned parallel to air flow , as opposed to the perpendicular vocal cords of terrestrial mammals . These may control air flow and cause vibrations . The walls of the larynx are able to contract which may generate sound with support from the <unk> cartilages . The muscles surrounding the larynx may expel air rapidly or maintain a constant volume while diving . 
 = = = Senses = = = 
 The eyes of baleen whales are relatively small for their size and are positioned near the end of the mouth . This is probably because they feed on slow or immobile prey , combined with the fact that most sunlight does not pass 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) , and hence they do not need acute vision . A whale 's eye is adapted for seeing both in the euphotic and aphotic zones by increasing or decreasing the pupil 's size to prevent damage to the eye . As opposed to land mammals which have a flattened lens , whales have a spherical lens . The retina is surrounded by a reflective layer of cells ( tapetum lucidum ) , which bounces light back at the retina , enhancing eyesight in dark areas . However , light is bent more near the surface of the eye when in air as opposed to water ; consequently , they can see much better in the air than in the water . The eyeballs are protected by a thick outer layer to prevent abrasions , and an oily fluid ( instead of tears ) on the surface of the eye . Baleen whales appear to have limited color vision , as they lack S @-@ cones . 
 The mysticete ear is adapted for hearing underwater , where it can hear sound frequencies as low as 7 Hz and as high as 22 kHz , with the exception of the 52 @-@ hertz whale . It is largely unknown how sound is received by baleen whales . Unlike in toothed whales , sound does not pass through the lower jaw . The auditory meatus is blocked by connective tissue and an ear plug , which connects to the eardrum . The inner @-@ ear bones are contained in the tympanic bulla , a bony capsule . However , this is attached to the skull , suggesting that vibrations passing through the bone is important . Sinuses may reflect vibrations towards the cochlea . It is known that when the fluid inside the cochlea is disturbed by vibrations , it triggers sensory hairs which send electrical current to the brain , where vibrations are processed into sound . 
 Baleen whales have a small , yet functional , vomeronasal organ . This allows baleen whales to detect chemicals and pheromones released by their prey . It is thought that ' tasting ' the water is important for finding prey , and track down other whales . They are believed to have an impaired sense of smell due to the lack of the olfactory bulb , but they do have an olfactory tract . Baleen whales have few if any taste buds , suggesting they have lost their sense of taste . They do retain salt @-@ receptor taste @-@ buds suggesting that they can taste saltiness . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Migration = = = 
 It is thought that plankton blooms dictate where whales migrate . This usually occurs in the polar regions during the sunny spring and summer months , bringing along other plankton such as euphausiids which whales feed on . They also migrate to calving grounds in tropical waters during the winter months when plankton populations are low . As well as this , newborns , with underdeveloped blubber , would likely die of frostbite in the winter temperatures . It is also postulated by a 2008 study that these take place to avoid calves being predated on by killer whales . The migration cycle is repeated annually . The gray whale has the longest recorded migration of any mammal , with one traveling 14 @,@ 000 miles ( 23 @,@ 000 km ) from the Sea of Okhotsk to the Baja Peninsula . 
 = = = Foraging = = = 
 All baleen whales are carnivorous ; however a 2015 study revealed they house gut flora similar to that of terrestrial herbivores . Different kinds of prey are found in different abundances depending on location , and each type of whale is adapted to a specialized way of foraging . There are two types of feeding behaviors : gulp @-@ feeding and lunge @-@ feeding , but some species do both depending on the type and amount of food . For example , Antarctic residents mostly feed on <unk> ; however , this is mainly effective for lunge @-@ feeders , whereas gulp @-@ feeders , like the right whales , feed primarily on copepods . They feed alone or in small groups . Baleen whales get the water they need from their food , and their kidneys excrete excess salt . 
 The lunge @-@ feeders are the rorquals and the pygmy right whale . To feed , lunge @-@ feeders expand the volume of their jaw to a volume bigger than the original volume of the whale itself ; to do this , the mouth inflates to expand the mouth . The inflation of the mouth causes the throat pleats to expand , increasing the amount of water that the mouth can store . Just before they ram the <unk> , the jaw swings open at almost a 90 ° angle and bends which lets in more water . To prevent stretching the mouth too far , rorquals have a sensory organ located in the middle of the jaw to regulate these functions . Then they must decelerate . This process takes a lot of mechanical work , and is only energy @-@ effective when used against a large <unk> . The gulp @-@ feeders , or skim @-@ feeders , are right whales and gray whales . To feed , gulp @-@ feeders swim with an open mouth , filling it with water and prey . Prey must occur in sufficient numbers to trigger the whale 's interest , be within a certain size range so that the baleen plates can filter it , and be slow enough so that it cannot escape . The " skimming " may take place on the surface , underwater , or even at the ocean 's bottom , indicated by mud occasionally observed on right whales ' bodies . Gray whales feed primarily on the ocean 's bottom , feeding on benthic creatures . 
 = = = Predation and parasitism = = = 
 Adult baleen whales , because of their great size , do not have any natural predators . However , calves can be preyed on by the killer whale . It is thought that annual whale migration occurs to protect the calves from the killer whales . There have also been reports of a pod of killer whales attacking and killing an adult bowhead whale , by holding down its flippers , covering the blowhole , and ramming and biting until death . Generally , a mother and calf pair , when faced with the threat of a killer whale pod , will either fight or flee . Fleeing only occurs in species that can swim away quickly , the rorquals . Slower whales must fight the pod alone or with a small family group . There has been one report of a shark attacking and killing a whale calf . This occurred in 2014 during the sardine run when a shiver of dusky sharks attacked a humpback whale calf . Usually , the only shark that will attack a whale is the cookie cutter shark , which leaves a small , non @-@ fatal bite mark . 
 Many parasites latch onto whales , notably whale lice and whale barnacles . Almost all species of whale lice are specialized towards a certain species of whale , and there can be more than one species per whale . Whale lice eat dead skin , resulting in minor wounds in the skin . Whale louse infestations are especially evident in right whales , where colonies propagate on their callosities . Though not a parasite , whale barnacles latch onto the skin of a whale during their larval stage . However , in doing so it does not harm nor benefit the whale , so their relationship is often labeled as an example of commensalism . Some baleen whales will deliberately rub themselves on substrate to dislodge parasites . Some species of barnacle , such as <unk> <unk> and whale barnacles , attach to the baleen plates , though this seldom occurs . A species of copepod , <unk> unisetus , inhabits baleen plates of whales in tropical waters . A species of Antarctic diatom , <unk> <unk> , forms a film on the skin , which takes a month to develop ; this film causes minor damage to the skin . They are also plagued by internal parasites such as stomach worms , cestodes , nematodes , liver flukes , and <unk> . 
 = = = Reproduction and development = = = 
 Before reaching adulthood , baleen whales grow at an extraordinary rate . In the blue whale , the largest species , the fetus grows by some 220 lb ( 100 kg ) per day just before delivery , and by 180 lb ( 80 kg ) per day during suckling . Before weaning , the calf increases its body weight by 17 t ( 17 long tons ; 19 short tons ) and grows from 23 to 26 ft ( 7 to 8 m ) at birth to 43 to 52 ft ( 13 to 16 m ) long . When it reaches sexual maturity after 5 – 10 years , it will be 66 to 79 ft ( 20 to 24 m ) long and possibly live as long as 80 – 90 years . Calves are born precocial , needing to be able to swim to the surface at the moment of their birth . 
 Most rorquals mate in warm waters in winter to give birth almost a year later . A 7 @-@ to @-@ 11 month lactation period is normally followed by a year of rest before mating starts again . Adults normally start reproducing when 5 – 10 years old and reach their full length after 20 – 30 years . In the smallest rorqual , the minke whale , 10 ft ( 3 m ) calves are born after a 10 @-@ month pregnancy and weaning lasts until it has reached about 16 to 18 ft ( 5 to 5 @.@ 5 m ) after 6 – 7 months . Unusual for a baleen whale , female minkes ( and humpbacks ) can become pregnant immediately after giving birth ; in most species , there is a two @-@ to @-@ three @-@ year calving period . In right whales , the calving interval is usually three years . They grow very rapidly during their first year , after which they hardly increase in size for several years . They reach sexual maturity when 43 to 46 ft ( 13 to 14 m ) long . Baleen whales are K @-@ strategists , meaning they raise one calf at a time , have a long life @-@ expectancy , and a low infant mortality rate . Some 19th century harpoons found in harvested bowheads indicate this species can live more than 100 years . Baleen whales are promiscuous , with none showing pair bonds . They are polygynous , in that a male may mate with more than one female . The scars on male whales suggest they fight for the right to mate with females during breeding season , somewhat similar to lek mating . 
 Baleen whales have <unk> ( connective tissue ) penises , similar to those of artiodactyls . The tip of the penis , which tapers toward the end , is called the pars <unk> or terminal cone . The blue whale has the largest penis of any organism on the planet , typically measuring 8 – 10 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 – 3 @.@ 0 m ) . Accurate measurements of the blue whale are difficult to take because the whale 's erect length can only be observed during mating . The penis on a right whale can be up to 2 @.@ 7 m ( 8 @.@ 9 ft ) – the testes , at up to 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) in length , 78 cm ( 2 @.@ 56 ft ) in diameter , and weighing up to 525 lb ( 238 kg ) , are also the largest of any animal on Earth . 
 = = = Whale song = = = 
 All baleen whales use sound for communication and are known to " sing " , especially during the breeding season . Blue whales produce the loudest sustained sounds of any animals : their low @-@ frequency ( about 20 Hz ) moans can last for half a minute , reach almost 190 decibels , and be heard hundreds of kilometers away . Adult male humpbacks produce the longest and most complex songs ; sequences of moans , groans , roars , sighs , and chirps sometimes lasting more than ten minutes are repeated for hours . Typically , all humpback males in a population sing the same song over a breeding season , but the songs change slightly between seasons , and males in one population have been observed adapting the song from males of a neighboring population over a few breeding seasons . 
 = = = Intelligence = = = 
 Unlike their toothed whale counterparts , baleen whales are hard to study because of their immense size . Intelligence tests such as the mirror test cannot be done because their bulk and lack of body language makes a reaction impossible to be definitive . However , studies on the brains of humpback whales revealed spindle cells , which , in humans , control theory of mind . Because of this , it is thought that baleen whales , or at least humpback whales , have consciousness . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 = = = History of whaling = = = 
 Whaling by humans has existed since the Stone Age . Ancient whalers used harpoons to spear the bigger animals from boats out at sea . People from Norway started hunting whales around 4 @,@ 000 years ago , and people from Japan began hunting whales in the Pacific at least as early as that . Whales are typically hunted for their meat and blubber by aboriginal groups ; they used baleen for baskets or roofing , and made tools and masks out of bones . The Inuit hunted whales in the Arctic Ocean . The Basques started whaling as early as the 11th century , sailing as far as Newfoundland in the 16th century in search of right whales . 18th and 19th century whalers hunted down whales mainly for their oil , which was used as lamp fuel and a lubricant , and baleen ( or whalebone ) , which was used for items such as corsets and skirt hoops . The most successful whaling nations at this time were the Netherlands , Japan , and the United States . 
 Commercial whaling was historically important as an industry well throughout the 19th and 20th centuries . Whaling was at that time a sizable European industry with ships from Britain , France , Spain , Denmark , the Netherlands , and Germany , sometimes collaborating to hunt whales in the Arctic . By the early 1790s , whalers , namely the British ( Australian ) and Americans , started to focus efforts in the South Pacific ; in the mid 1900s , over 50 @,@ 000 humpback whale were taken from the South Pacific . At its height in the 1880s , U.S. profits turned to <unk> , equivalent to <unk> today . Commonly exploited species included arctic whales such as the gray whale , right whale , and bowhead whale because they were close to the main whaling ports , like New Bedford . After those stocks were depleted , rorquals in the South Pacific were targeted by nearly all whaling organizations ; however , they often out @-@ swam whaling vessels . Whaling rorquals was not effective until the harpoon cannon was invented in the late 1860s . Whaling basically stopped when stocks of all species were depleted to a point that they could not be harvested on a commercial scale . Whaling was controlled in 1982 when the International Whaling Commission ( IWC ) placed a moratorium setting catch limits to protect species from dying out from over @-@ exploitation , and eventually banned it : 
 Notwithstanding the other provisions of paragraph 10 , catch limits for the killing for commercial purposes of whales from all stocks for the 1986 coastal and the 1985 / 86 pelagic seasons and thereafter shall be zero . This provision will be kept under review , based upon the best scientific advice , and by 1990 at the latest the Commission will undertake a comprehensive assessment of the effects of this decision on whale stocks and consider modification of this provision and the establishment of other catch limits . 
 – IWC Commission Schedule , paragraph 10 ( e ) 
 = = = Conservation and management issues = = = 
 As of 2013 , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) recognizes 15 mysticete species . One species — the North Atlantic right whale — is Endangered with only around 400 ( ± 50 ) individuals left , and four more are also classified as Endangered ( North Pacific right whale , the blue whale , the fin whale , and the Sei whale ) , and another 5 ranked as Data deficient ( Bryde 's whale , Eden 's whale , Omura 's whale , Southern minke whale , and pygmy right whale ) . Species that live in polar habitats are vulnerable to the effects of ongoing climate change , particularly declines in sea ice , as well as ocean acidification . 
 The whale watching industry and anti @-@ whaling advocates argue that whaling catches " friendly " whales that are curious about boats , as these whales are the easiest to catch . This analysis claims that once the economic benefits of hotels , restaurants and other tourist amenities are considered , hunting whales is a net economic loss . This argument is particularly contentious in Iceland , as it has among the most @-@ developed whale @-@ watching operations in the world and the hunting of minke whales resumed in August 2003 . Brazil , Argentina and South Africa argue that whale watching is a growing billion @-@ dollar industry that provides more revenue than commercial whaling would provide . Peru , Uruguay , Australia , and New Zealand also support proposals to permanently forbid whaling south of the Equator , as Solor ( an island of Indonesia ) is the only place of the Southern Hemisphere that takes whales . Anti @-@ whaling groups claim that developing countries which support a pro @-@ whaling stance are damaging their economies by driving away anti @-@ whaling tourists . 
 Commercial whaling was historically important for the world economy . All species were exploited , and as one type 's stock depleted , another type was targeted . The scale of whale harvesting decreased substantially through the 1960s as all whale stocks had been depleted , and practically stopped in 1988 after the International Whaling Commission placed a moratorium which banned whaling for commercial use . Several species that were commercially exploited have rebounded in numbers ; for example , gray whales may be as numerous as they were prior to whaling , making it the first marine mammal to be taken off the Endangered species list . The Southern right whale was hunted to near extinction in the mid @-@ to @-@ late 20th century , with only a small ( unknown ) population around Antarctica . Because of international protection , the Southern right whale 's population has been growing 7 % annually since 1970 . Conversely , the eastern stock of North Atlantic right whale was extirpated from much of its former range , which stretched from the coast of North Africa to the North Sea and Iceland ; it is thought that the entire stock consists of only ten individuals , making the eastern stock functionally extinct . 
 Baleen whales continue to be harvested . However , only three nations take whales : Iceland , Norway , and Japan . All these nations are part of the IWC , with Norway and Iceland rejecting the moratorium and continuing commercial whaling . Japan , being part of the IWC , whales under the Scientific Permit stated in Article VIII in the Convention for the Regulation of Whaling , which allows the taking of whales for scientific research . Japan has had two main research programs : the Joint Aquatic Resources Permit Application ( JARPA ) and the Japanese Research Program in the North ( JARPN ) . JARPN is focused in the North Pacific and JARPA around the Antarctic . JARPA mainly caught Antarctic minke whales , catching nearly 7 @,@ 000 ; to a far lesser extent , they also caught fin whales . Animal @-@ rights activist groups , such as the Greenpeace , object to Japan 's scientific whaling , with some calling it a substitute for commercial whaling . In 2014 , the International Court of Justice ( the UN judicial branch ) banned the taking of whales for any purpose in the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary ; however , Japan refuses to stop whaling and has only promised to cut their annual catches by a third ( around 300 whales per year ) . 
 Baleen whales can also be affected by humans in more indirect ways . For species like the North Atlantic right whale , which migrates through some of the world 's busiest shipping lanes , the biggest threat is from being struck by ships . The Lloyd 's mirror effect results in low frequency propeller sounds not being discernible near the surface , where most accidents occur . Combined with spreading and acoustic shadowing effects , the result is that the whale is unable to hear an approaching vessel before it has been run over or entrapped by the hydrodynamic forces of the vessel 's passage . A 2014 study noted that a lower vessel speed correlated with lower collision rates . The ever @-@ increasing amount of ocean noise , including sonar , drowns out the vocalizations produced by whales , notably in the blue whale which produces the loudest vocalization , which makes it harder for them to communicate . Blue whales stop producing foraging D calls once a mid @-@ frequency sonar is activated , even though the sonar frequency range ( 1 – 8 kHz ) far exceeds their sound production range ( 25 – 100 Hz ) . Poisoning from toxic substances such as <unk> biphenyl ( PCB ) is generally low because of their low trophic level . Some baleen whales can become victims of bycatch , which is especially serious for North Atlantic right whales considering there are only 450 left . Right whales feed with a wide @-@ open mouth , risking entanglement in any rope or net fixed in the water column . Rope wraps around their upper jaw , flippers and tail . Some are able to escape , but others remain entangled . If observers notice , they can be successfully disentangled , but others die over a period of months . Other whales , such as humpback whales , can also be entangled . 
 = = = In captivity = = = 
 Baleen whales have rarely been kept in captivity . Their large size and appetite make them expensive creatures to maintain . Pools of proper size would also be very expensive to build . For example , a single gray whale calf would need to eat 475 pounds ( 215 kg ) of fish per day , and the pool would have to accommodate the 13 @-@ foot ( 4 m ) calf , along with ample room to swim . Only two species have survived being kept in captivity for over a year : gray whales and minke whales . The first gray whale , who was captured in Scammon 's Lagoon , Baja California Sur , in 1965 , was named Gigi and died two months later from an infection . The second gray whale , who was captured in 1972 from the same lagoon , was named Gigi II and was released a year later after becoming too big . The last gray whale , J.J. , beached herself in Marina del Rey , California , where she was rushed to SeaWorld San Diego and , after 14 months , was released because she got too big to take care of . Reaching 19 @,@ 200 pounds ( 8 @,@ 700 kg ) and 31 feet ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) , J.J. was the largest creature to be kept in captivity . The Mito Aquarium in <unk> , Shizuoka , Japan , housed three minke whales in the nearby bay enclosed by nets . One survived for three months , another ( a calf ) survived for two weeks , and another was kept for a year before breaking through the nets . 
 = Louis F. Menage = 
 Louis Francois Menage ( August 3 , 1850 – March 18 , 1924 ) was a real estate speculator and prominent figure in early Minneapolis , Minnesota history . Originally born in Rhode Island , he settled in Minneapolis in 1874 . Characterized as a " tycoon " and " robber baron , " Menage earned a fortune developing land on the city 's borders into residential housing and financing the mortgages to enable people to buy his properties . During the 1870s and 1880s , he developed large areas of South Minneapolis including much of the area around Lake Calhoun and Lake Harriet . He also developed a luxury resort on Lake Calhoun and built a corporate headquarters which was at the time the city 's tallest skyscraper . 
 After a costly legal battle over a real estate deal with William S. King and the financial downturn of the Panic of 1893 , Menage 's real estate empire collapsed and he fled the country to avoid prosecution on charges of embezzlement . The charges against Menage were eventually dropped after several key witnesses had died or become hesitant to testify against him . He spent the later portion of his life working in real estate in the New York City area and never worked in Minnesota again . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Menage was born in Providence , Rhode Island in 1850 . His father , John Menage , was the descendant of French immigrants ; his mother Mary was a descendant of Mayflower passenger John Howland . The family moved to New Bedford , Massachusetts , when Menage was young . While in Menage was high school , his father died of tuberculosis , leaving Louis and his brother to take over the family 's confectionery business . In 1871 , a doctor diagnosed Menage with " weak lungs " and suggested he move west to avoid falling ill with tuberculosis himself . Menage moved to Minnesota shortly thereafter . After a brief time teaching classes in shorthand at a Minneapolis business school , he found work as a business clerk in Northern Minnesota at a logging camp near <unk> Lake . 
 = = Real estate empire = = 
 In 1874 , Menage returned to Minneapolis and entered the real estate business with partner H. C. Brackett . Menage gradually built an empire by purchasing farmland at the fringes of the city , platting and developing the property into residential neighborhoods , then financing the mortgages for people to purchase the homes . He also worked with Thomas Lowry , head of the city 's streetcar system , to ensure that new lines were built to serve the outlying areas he was developing . Much of the present day Prospect Park neighborhood , and the areas surrounding Lake Harriet and Lake Calhoun , were developed by Menage and his companies . 
 A small inclusion in the title of every property Menage sold was a covenant stating that it would revert to Menage or his descendants if alcohol was ever sold there . Menage would release this covenant in exchange for a small cash payment .. This so @-@ called " Menage forfeiture clause " remained in force on thousands of properties for decades . The cash payments to release it generated a significant side income for Menage and his successors . In 1937 , the Minnesota Legislature passed a law nullifying the clause . 
 On September 13 , 1876 Menage married Amanda A. Bull , daughter of local businessman and Minneapolis pioneer Benjamin S. Bull . They had one daughter , Bessie ( 1877 – 1940 ) . 
 In June 1883 , he opened the luxurious Lyndale Hotel near Lake Calhoun . One of the city 's first luxury resorts , the hotel featured multi @-@ room suites and luxurious common areas including a dining room , music hall and two verandas . The hotel 's opening was celebrated with a gala attended by many of the city 's leaders and elites . A streetcar was specially arranged to take guests back to Minneapolis after the night 's festivities had ended . 
 = = Lyndale Farm = = 
 Menage ran into legal trouble with the purchase of a large plot of land south of Minneapolis known as " Lyndale Farm . " Owned by William S. King , the land had been placed in trust with New York financier Philo Remington in 1875 after King had fallen into financial trouble . Remington ( joined later by a partner , Robert Innes ) advanced King a sum of money in exchange for managing the land and seeing that it was developed or sold for a fair price . When King declared bankruptcy in 1877 , Remington and Innes purchased the Lyndale Farm land from King for a token sum but promised to honor their previous agreement . 
 Remington and Innes later met with Menage and , in 1882 , devised a plan to sell King 's land to Menage for development without telling King . Menage also negotiated a separate deal with Innes ( likely behind Remington 's back ) where he agreed to pay him one @-@ third of the profits made from the land as a finder 's fee and in exchange for Innes ' help keeping Remington and King at bay . Menage proceeded to develop the land into housing and profited handsomely . 
 By 1885 , King became aware of the scheme and retained lawyer John Van Voorhis to sue Menage . Menage claimed ignorance of the first agreement between King , Remington and Innes and asserted that he had purchased the property outright from the two . After a lengthy trial in Minnesota District Court , Menage lost and was ordered to return the land to King along with all proceeds from the development of the land . Menage appealed to the Minnesota Supreme Court in 1886 , however the lower court 's decision was upheld . 
 The total amount Menage paid to King was approximately $ 2 million ( $ 52 @.@ 67 million in 2015 ) . While at the time Menage maintained he was not burdened by the judgment , he later recalled the protracted legal battle and subsequent loss " threatened bankruptcy and ruin . " 
 = = Northwestern Guaranty Loan Company = = 
 In 1889 , Menage founded the Northwestern Guaranty Loan Company to handle the mortgage side of his real estate business . Among the members of the company 's board were : John S. Pillsbury , William D. Washburn , Thomas Lowry , William Henry Eustis , Loren Fletcher , and many other important political and business figures . His real estate business was handled by a separate company called the Menage Realty Company . In 1890 , Menage further cemented his place in the city by building the Northwestern Guaranty Loan Building ( more commonly known as the Metropolitan Building ) , the city 's tallest skyscraper , at a cost of more than $ 1 million ( $ 26 @.@ 34 million in 2015 ) . The building was home to all of Menage 's various companies as well as other offices , a rooftop restaurant , and a private law library . 
 While Minneapolis was the center of Menage 's empire , he also owned land and property elsewhere in the Midwest and western states including Bozeman , Montana , Galveston , Texas , Gary , Indiana , and Madison , Wisconsin . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Menage contributed to various charitable and philanthropic causes in Minneapolis . He donated funds toward the construction of the first Minneapolis Public Library building , provided a temporary home for the Ripley Memorial Hospital , and also sponsored a new bell in the First Baptist Church which he attended . 
 In 1890 , Menage sponsored a scientific expedition to the Philippines in partnership with the Minnesota Academy of Natural Sciences . The expedition , led primarily by Dean Conant Worcester and Frank Swift Bourns , collected thousands of specimens of birds and animals ; some , such as the Philippine slow loris ( Nycticebus menagensis ) and the Sulu bleeding @-@ heart ( Gallicolumba menagei ) , were named in honor of Menage . While many of the specimens from the expedition appear to have been lost or discarded , some remain in the collections of the Bell Museum of Natural History and the Field Museum of Natural History . 
 = = Financial collapse and later life = = 
 In the early 1890s , Menage had begun to purchase land near Puget Sound in Washington , accumulating several thousand acres which he planned to develop into an iron mine , smelter and steel mill , along with housing for the workers . To finance the development he sold an early form of mortgage @-@ backed security to investors in New England and Europe . When the Panic of 1893 occurred , investors found that Menage 's properties were fraudulent . Many of the deeds were held by random names taken from the Minneapolis and Saint Paul telephone books , the properties themselves were unimproved , and the payments to investors were being made out of the bank 's funds . 
 His Northwestern Guaranty Loan Company ( and , by the law of the era , its shareholders ) were liable for the losses . Menage was indicted on charges of embezzlement but fled to Guatemala before a warrant for his arrest was issued . Menage 's assistant , Donald Streeter , was tried twice but both trials ended with a hung jury . In an 1895 letter , Menage protested his innocence , blaming the Lyndale Farm lawsuit for hurting his finances and also noting ( correctly ) that : " the practice of using another 's name on a note or mortgage is not unknown in the business world . " In 1899 , the charges against Menage were dropped after several key witnesses had died and others appeared reluctant to testify . By some accounts Menage was present in the courtroom at the time ; others suggest he never returned to Minneapolis . 
 Menage spent the rest of his life living in New Jersey and working in real estate in the New York City area . He died in 1924 . He is buried in Lakewood Cemetery in Minneapolis . 
 = James Dutton ( Royal Marines officer ) = 
 Lieutenant General Sir James Benjamin " Jim " Dutton , KCB , CBE , ADC ( born 21 February 1954 ) is the former Governor of Gibraltar and a retired Royal Marines officer . He held various staff positions in his early career , before commanding 40 Commando . As a brigadier , he held two high @-@ level staff posts — the first at the Ministry of Defence in London , as Director of NATO policy , and the second as a British liaison to The Pentagon shortly after the September 11 attacks , where he was involved in the planning for the subsequent invasion of Afghanistan . A newspaper later pinpointed this as the moment when Dutton 's career " took off " . 
 After the planning for the invasion , Dutton took command of 3 Commando Brigade , which was already serving in Afghanistan . In 2003 , he led the brigade into the start of Iraq War , supported by units from the British Army as well as the United States Marine Corps , making Dutton the first British officer to command American troops since the Second World War . He commanded his men through heavy resistance from Iraqi forces in the early days of the war . 
 As a general officer , he served as Commandant General Royal Marines , the professional head of the Royal Marines and a dual @-@ hatted appointment with Commander UK Amphibious Forces , for two years . While in this post , Dutton returned to Iraq to command Multi @-@ national Division ( South @-@ East ) in 2005 , where he attracted media attention through outspoken remarks alleging Iranian support for the insurgents in Iraq . His last field post , as a lieutenant general , was as Deputy Commander of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan . He held the position from 2008 to 2009 , during the peak of the Taliban insurgency , and assisted American General Stanley A. McChrystal , then commander of ISAF , in redesigning the military strategy to combat the insurgency . Dutton retired in 2010 but was later appointed Governor of Gibraltar , taking up office on 6 December 2013 , where he retired early , in September 2015 . 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Dutton , the son of Edgar and Aileen Dutton , was educated at The King 's School , Chester , before attending City University London , where he gained a Bachelor of Science degree in Systems and Management . He is married to Elizabeth ( née Waddell ) . The couple have one son , who is also an officer in the Royal Marines , and one daughter . Dutton lists his interests as sailing and running . 
 = = Early military career = = 
 Dutton originally applied to join the British Army but failed the selection process . He applied to join , and was commissioned into , the Royal Marines in 1972 . He was promoted to acting lieutenant in 1975 , before being granted the substantive rank in 1976 , with seniority from October 1975 . He served as a signals officer in the Falklands War and , after holding a variety of staff positions in the junior ranks , was promoted to major in 1990 . In 1996 he assumed command of 40 Commando , in which position he served on manoeuvres in Asia and South Africa . 
 As a brigadier , Dutton served at the Ministry of Defence as Director , NATO policy , a senior staff post , prior to attending the Royal College of Defence Studies . He was pulled off the course before completion and seconded to The Pentagon in Washington , DC to act as liaison between the British Chief of the Defence Staff and the American Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the immediate aftermath of the terrorist attacks on the United States . 
