 While seconded to The Pentagon , Dutton was involved in the joint American and British planning for the subsequent " War on Terror " . The Times called this assignment the moment Dutton 's career " took off " . " Keen " to command the Royal Marines in action in Afghanistan , Dutton took command of 3 Commando Brigade in 2002 and deployed to Afghanistan in command of 1700 personnel , succeeding Roger Lane . The replacement was controversial and led to speculation that it was politically motivated by Lane 's criticism of the Ministry of Defence and public contradiction of Geoff Hoon , then Secretary of State for Defence , over the readiness of troops . 
 The brigade had a tour of duty in Iraq in early 2003 , at the very beginning of the Iraq War . Dutton led 3 Commando , as well as supporting units from the Royal Engineers , 7 Armoured Division , 16 Air Assault Brigade along with troops from multiple other nations , including US Marines , the first time American troops had been under the operational command of a British officer since the Second World War . Royal Marines from 40 Commando under Dutton 's overall command , along with United States Navy SEALs , secured oil fields on the Al @-@ Faw Peninsula to prevent them from being burned in the first days of the ground operation , after which 40 Commando and others from 3 Commando Brigade moved up the peninsula and took the port city of Umm Qasr , where they encountered resistance into the fifth day of the ground campaign . 
 Dutton also commanded the brigade through heavy fighting on the outskirts of Basra and commented that the fighting had been more intense there than predicted , saying " the planning assumption had always been that the advancing coalition forces would simply sweep past Basra and it would implode by itself " . Dutton 's calmness during the invasion prompted journalist Tim Butcher , who reported on the war while attached to 3 Commando Brigade , to describe him as " a lean , thinking man with none of the tub @-@ thumping machismo of some officers " and " coldly professional in his job " . 
 While still under Dutton 's command in late 2003 , 3 Commando Brigade conducted the Royal Marines ' first visit to Slovenia , prior to the country 's ascension to the European Union and NATO , for alpine warfare training led by Slovenian troops and culminating in the five @-@ day Exercise Royal Chamois . With the brigade , Dutton also undertook cold @-@ weather training in Norway in 2004 . He was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in October 2003 . 
 In 2002 , Dutton was given the honorary appointment of Aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the Queen . 
 = = High command = = 
 Dutton attained general officer status with promotion to major general on 4 May 2004 , and was appointed to the double @-@ hatted post of Commandant General Royal Marines ( <unk> ) and Commander UK Amphibious Forces ( <unk> ) . He relinquished <unk> / <unk> in June 2006 , succeeded by Major General Garry Robison , taking a staff post as Chief of Staff ( Capability ) , before appointment to Chief of Staff ( Operations ) . He was appointed Honorary Colonel of 131 Independent Commando Squadron Royal Engineers in March 2006 , succeeding Lieutenant General Sir Robert Fry . 
 In 2005 , he deployed to Basra , Iraq , taking command of Multi @-@ national Division ( South @-@ East ) . While there , he was outspoken on the subject of improvised explosive devices , responsible for many coalition casualties , and accusing neighbouring Iran of aiding , or failing to prevent , the smuggling of munitions across the border into Iraq . Dutton added " I simply don 't know whether this is Iranian government policy or whether this is simply groups who are using Iran for their own purposes and not being controlled " . 
 Having been promoted to lieutenant general in November 2008 , Dutton succeeded Army Lieutenant General Jonathon Riley as Deputy Commander of the International Security Assistance Force ( ISAF ) in Afghanistan , a position he occupied until November 2009 . During his tenure , the insurgency in Afghanistan peaked . Dutton helped American General Stanley A. McChrystal , then overall commander of troops in the country , formulate a new strategy to combat the insurgency , which included an increase in the number of troops . Dutton was succeeded in his post at ISAF by Lieutenant General ( later General Sir ) Nick Parker at the end of 2009 . 
 Upon his return from Afghanistan , Dutton wrote an article for The Guardian newspaper , in which he opined that the NATO @-@ led forces in the country were making a difference and the situation was improving , but that the Afghan government still required assistance . He argued that more troops did not necessarily mean more violence , saying that " experience shows that after an initial spike as the insurgents are cleared out , violence reduces to much lower levels " and that " providing a sense of security depends on much more than physical troop presence , but it has to start with that . We need sufficient troops to protect the people and convince them that Afghan government control ( supported by [ ISAF ] for the moment ) is sufficient to prevent the return of the insurgents . He went on to say that " the backbone of the NATO alliance gives the coalition a steadfastness which " coalitions of the willing " cannot match . It also gives unparalleled authority and legitimacy based on the consensus of its members " . Dutton concluded that " given the strength of this unparalleled military coalition , and the political and financial commitment to building the long @-@ term stability of Afghanistan and the region , failure should not be contemplated " . He was awarded the American Legion of Merit ( Degree of Officer ) , and given permission to wear the decoration , " in recognition of meritorious , gallant and distinguished services during coalition operations in Afghanistan " . 
 Dutton retired from active service on 3 May 2010 . He was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath ( KCB ) in the 2010 Queen 's Birthday Honours . 
 = = Civilian career = = 
 After retiring from the Royal Marines in 2010 , Dutton joined Bechtel Corporation as an operations manager , dealing with issues in the Middle East , and went on to become the company 's programme director for Gabon in 2011 . After three years with Bechtel , he was appointed governor of the British Overseas Territory of Gibraltar , and took office on 6 December 2013 . 
 On 26 May 2015 it was announced that Dutton would relinquish the post early . Dutton resigned effectively on 28 September 2015 , concluding his civilian career working with the British Foreign Office . Dutton cited that his resignation was due to his frustration over the British Government 's lack of action towards the Spanish aggression in Gibraltar 's sovereign waters , his disenchantment with the largely ceremonial office of Governor ( later denied ) and his personal inability to act on these events . 
 With Dutton 's leaving of office , his Deputy Governor , Alison MacMillan , was sworn in as interim Governor of Gibraltar on the same day as his official departure . Mrs MacMillan had already served as interim Governor , doing so when Sir Adrian Johns resigned in 2013 . It was announced on 1 October 2015 by the Foreign Office that Lieutenant General Ed Davis will be succeeding Dutton as Governor of Gibraltar effective 2016 . 
 = HMS Havock ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Havock was an H @-@ class destroyer built for the British Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1930s . During the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 1939 , the ship enforced the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides as part of the Mediterranean Fleet . During the first few months of the Second World War , Havock searched for German commerce raiders in the Atlantic Ocean and participated in the First Battle of Narvik during the Norwegian Campaign of April – June 1940 before she was transferred back to the Mediterranean Fleet in May where she escorted a number of convoys to Malta . The ship took part in the Battle of Cape Spada in July 1940 , the Battle of Cape Matapan in March 1941 and the evacuation of Greece in April 1941 . She was damaged during the Battle of Crete the following month , but participated in the Syria – Lebanon Campaign in June . 
 Havock began escorting supply convoys in June to Tobruk , Libya until the ship was damaged in October . She was repaired in time to escort a convoy to Malta during the First Battle of Sirte in December and was badly damaged by the Italian battleship Littorio whilst protecting another convoy during the Second Battle of Sirte in March 1942 . Repairs were attempted in Malta , but the ship was further damaged in an air raid in early April . The Admiralty decided that further attempts to repair her at Malta were pointless and ordered her to Gibraltar for permanent repairs . On 6 April , while on passage to Gibraltar , Havock ran aground near Cape Bon , Tunisia , and her crew was interned by the Vichy French at <unk> in the Sahara . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 Havock displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 883 long tons ( 1 @,@ 913 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers . Havock carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 137 officers and men in peacetime , but this increased to 146 in wartime . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk IX guns in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Havock had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mk III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . By mid @-@ 1940 , this had increased to 44 depth charges . 
 Ordered on 13 December 1934 from William Denny & Brothers , Havock was laid down at their shipyard at Dumbarton , Scotland on 15 May 1935 . She was launched on 7 July 1936 and completed on 16 January 1937 . Excluding government @-@ furnished equipment like the armament , the ship cost £ 248 @,@ 470 . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 Most ships of Havock 's class had the rear torpedo tubes replaced by a 12 @-@ pounder AA gun after the evacuation of Dunkirk in 1940 , but it is not clear if she received this modification . Other changes may have included exchanging her two quadruple .50 @-@ calibre Vickers machine guns mounted between her funnels for two Oerlikon 20 mm AA guns , the addition of two Oerlikon guns to her searchlight platform and another pair on the wings of the ship 's bridge . 
 = = Service = = 
 Havock was assigned to the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet upon commissioning . She patrolled Spanish waters during the Spanish Civil War enforcing the policies of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee . On the night of 31 August / 1 September 1937 , she was unsuccessfully attacked by the Italian submarine Iride with torpedoes , between the Gulf of Valencia and the Balearic Islands . The ship was refitted in Gibraltar between 19 October and 13 November and required repairs between 16 April and 6 May 1938 after hitting the stone side of a quay . Havock was given a brief refit at Sheerness Dockyard between 15 and 26 August 1939 before returning to Gibraltar . 
 The ship sailed to Freetown , Sierra Leone on 30 August and arrived on 4 September to search for German commerce raiders . She was transferred back to the UK in November for a more thorough refit at Sheerness between 18 December and 23 March 1940 . In the meantime , the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla had been assigned to the Home Fleet and Havock rejoined them when her refit was finished . On 6 April Havock and the rest of the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla escorted the four destroyer minelayers of the 20th Destroyer Flotilla as they sailed to implement Operation Wilfred , an operation to lay mines in the Vestfjord to prevent the transport of Swedish iron ore from Narvik to Germany . The mines were laid on the early morning of 8 April , before the Germans began their invasion , and the destroyers joined the battlecruiser Renown and her escorts . 
 During the First Battle of Narvik on 10 April 1940 , Havock and four other H @-@ class ships of the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla attacked the German destroyers that had transported German troops to occupy Narvik in northern Norway the previous day . The flotilla leader Hardy led four of her half @-@ sisters down Ofotfjord in a surprise dawn attack on Narvik harbour during a blinding snowstorm . Hotspur and Hostile were initially left at the entrance , but Havock was third into the harbour and fired five of her torpedoes into the mass of shipping . One torpedo hit the German destroyer Z22 Anton Schmitt in the stern . In addition , the ship hit Z18 Hans Lüdemann twice with 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) shells . As the British ships were withdrawing , they encountered five German destroyers at close range . Two of the German ships crossed the T of the British ships and quickly set Hardy on fire and forced her to run aground . Havock was next in line and fired torpedoes at the German destroyers , but they all missed . She was hit in return , but not significantly damaged . In the confusion and limited visibility , Havock pulled out of the line to find out what happened to Hardy and to protect the rear of the British formation from the other three German destroyers in pursuit , but then had to then to turn again to allow her rear guns to fire when her forward guns failed . Havock and Hostile turned back to protect their badly damaged sister , Hotspur , and all three continued to withdraw down the Ofotfjord . En route , they encountered the German supply ship <unk> , loaded with artillery and ammunition , whose crew ran her aground and abandoned ship after Hostile fired at the ship . A boarding party from Havock found the ship on fire and she blew up after the ship fired two shells into her . The ship remained in Norwegian waters until May , when she escorted the light cruiser Birmingham on an unsuccessful sweep of the North Sea looking for German ships , early in the month . 
 Havock was assigned to the Nore Command shortly afterwards and bombarded German troops occupying Waalhaven Airfield on 10 May together with her sister Hyperion . She rescued survivors from the sunken ferry <unk> Juliana off the Dutch coast and returned them to the Hook of Holland where she recovered a number of British demolition parties . On 16 May , the ship ordered to reinforce the Mediterranean Fleet at Malta and was assigned to the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla . During the Battle of Cape Spada on 19 July , the ship escorted the Australian light cruiser HMAS Sydney and rescued some of the 525 survivors from the Italian cruiser Bartolomeo Colleoni together with the other escorting destroyers . Her boiler room was flooded after an attack by Italian aircraft after this battle and she was repaired at Suez from 29 July to 15 September . Havock and her sister Hasty surprised the Italian submarine Berillo on the surface on 2 October off the coast of Egypt and forced her to scuttle herself . The destroyers rescued 47 survivors between them . 
 Havock was engaged on escort duties for the next six months , including escorting the carrier Illustrious during the Battle of Taranto on the night of 11 / 12 November , aside from a refit in Malta from 22 December to 20 February 1941 . During the Battle of Cape Matapan , she torpedoed and sank the Italian destroyer Alfieri on 28 March . The ship evacuated Commonwealth troops from Greece at the end of April and was one of three destroyers escorting the light cruiser Ajax when they bombarded Benghazi on the night of 7 / 8 May . Havock was damaged by dive bombers on 23 May , killing 15 and wounding 10 men , after a patrol off Heraklion , Crete . She was under repair at Alexandria until 16 June . The ship bombarded Vichy French positions in Lebanon in early July and then began escorting ships to Tobruk until October when her propeller shafts and propellers were damaged . Havock was under repair from 21 October to 4 December at Alexandria . 
 In mid @-@ December , the ship escorted the supply ship Breconshire to Malta during the brief engagement known as First Battle of Sirte and then joined Force K in an attempt to intercept an Italian convoy to Tripoli , Libya . On the night of 18 / 19 December , the reinforced Force K ran over an Italian minefield that sank one cruiser and damaged two others . Havock escorted the badly damaged light cruiser Aurora back to Malta . Havock was one of four destroyers that escorted Breconshire back to Alexandria in early January 1942 . Whilst escorting another convoy to Malta , the ship was diverted to escort the damaged freighter <unk> from Benghazi back to Alexandria , but the latter was attacked and sunk by Axis aircraft en route on 19 January . Havock rescued some 350 survivors before <unk> sank . The ship was transferred to the 22nd Destroyer Flotilla in February and continued to escort convoys to Malta . On 22 March 1942 , several splinters from a 15 @-@ inch ( 38 cm ) near miss from the Italian battleship Littorio perforated one of her boilers during the Second Battle of Sirte , and Havock was forced to make for Malta for repairs . Whilst in dock , the ship had become a major target for Axis aircraft and sustained some damage on 3 April , so she was ordered to Gibraltar before her repairs were complete . Havock ran aground off Kelibia , Tunisia , in the Strait of Sicily on 6 April and was wrecked . One crewman was killed in the incident . Her crew and passengers were interned by the Vichy French at <unk> in the Sahara , but were released in November as a result of Operation Torch . Her wreck was later torpedoed by the Italian submarine <unk> . 
 = U.S. Route 25 in Michigan = 
 US Highway 25 ( US 25 ) was a part of the United States Numbered Highway System in the state of Michigan that ran from the Ohio state line near Toledo and ended at the tip of The Thumb in Port Austin . The general routing of this state trunkline highway took it northeasterly from the state line through Monroe and Detroit to Port Huron . Along this southern half , it followed undivided highways and ran concurrently along two freeways , Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) and I @-@ 94 . Near the foot of the Blue Water Bridge in Port Huron , US 25 turned north and northwesterly along the Lake Huron shoreline to Port Austin . 
 Created with the initial US Highway System on November 11 , 1926 , US 25 replaced several previous state highway designations . Some of the preceding highways followed roadways created in the 19th and the early 20th centuries . It initially was only routed as far north as Port Huron ; the northern extension to Port Austin happened in 1933 . By the end of the 1950s , the entire route was paved . Starting in the early 1960s , segments of I @-@ 75 and I @-@ 94 were built , and US 25 was shifted to follow them south of Detroit to Port Huron . A business loop was created when the main highway bypassed downtown Port Huron , and then in 1973 , the entire designation was removed from the state . The final routing of the highway is still maintained by the state under eight different designations , some unsigned . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = State line to Downriver = = = 
 In its final configuration before it was decommissioned in the state , US 25 entered Michigan south of Erie and followed Dixie Highway north @-@ northeasterly away from the state line . The highway ran parallel to US 24 ( Telegraph Road ) about 2 ⁄ 3 mile ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) to the east of that roadway . At LaSalle , the roadway turned more to the northeast toward Monroe . US 25 then turned back to the north @-@ northeast and followed Monroe Street next to Lake Monroe and through downtown Monroe over the River Raisin . North of town , Dixie Highway turned due north and terminated at an intersection with US 24 ; US 25 merged onto Telegraph Road , and the two highways ran concurrently northeasterly through rural Monroe County . At the crossing of the Huron River , US 24 / US 25 entered Flat Rock and Wayne County . 
 The highway followed Telegraph Road through downtown Flat Rock and continued into the suburban area of Downriver . At the intersection with Dix – Toledo Road near Woodhaven , US 25 separated from US 24 and continued northeasterly for about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to an interchange with I @-@ 75 where it merged onto the freeway . I @-@ 75 / US 25 continued on the Fisher Freeway through the Downriver suburbs of Taylor , Southgate , Allen Park , Lincoln Park , and Melvindale before entering the city of Detroit . The freeway curved to run east @-@ northeasterly and passed through an industrial area of the city , crossing the River Rouge . At Clark Avenue , US 25 left the freeway to turn a block south and run along Fort Street parallel to I @-@ 75 . The highway continued along Fort Street running under the approaches to the Ambassador Bridge and into downtown . 
 = = = Downtown Detroit to Port Huron = = = 
 In Downtown Detroit , Fort Street ended at Campus Martius Park at M @-@ 1 ( Woodward Avenue ) . US 25 looped around the park and followed the street named Cadillac Square over to Randolph Street , turning north to connect to Gratiot Avenue , a major thoroughfare on the east side of Detroit . The highway followed Gratiot through the east side of Detroit running north @-@ northeasterly . US 25 intersected the eastern end of the there @-@ unnumbered Fisher Freeway . Gratiot Avenue carried the highway through residential neighborhoods and connected it to the Detroit City Airport . East of the airport , the highway intersected the southern end of M @-@ 97 as well . At M @-@ 102 ( 8 Mile Road ) , US 25 exited Detroit and entered East Detroit , a suburb in Macomb County . The highway continued , roughly parallel to I @-@ 94 through Roseville and Mount Clemens . At Hall Road near Selfridge Air National Guard Base , M @-@ 59 merged with US 25 to follow Gratiot Avenue . At 23 Mile Road west of New Baltimore , US 25 / M @-@ 59 turned eastward onto 23 Mile to an interchange with I @-@ 94 . At that interchange , US 25 turned northeasterly onto the I @-@ 94 freeway while M @-@ 59 terminated ; 23 Mile continued eastward as M @-@ 29 into New Baltimore . 
 I @-@ 94 / US 25 ran northeasterly through rural areas of Macomb County , intersecting the southern end of M @-@ 19 near New Haven . The freeway crossed into rural southern St. Clair County south of Richmond and continued northeastward to Marysville , where it turned northward , crossing Gratiot Avenue . A business loop , Business US 25 ( Bus . US 25 ) ran northeasterly from the freeway along Gratiot Avenue to run parallel to the St. Clair River . From Marysville , the freeway skirted the western side of the Port Huron area , intersecting the M @-@ 21 freeway immediately east of the city before turning eastward to curve around the north side of town . After the freeway crossed the Black River , US 25 turned northward to separate from I @-@ 94 . 
 = = = Along Lake Huron = = = 
 North of downtown Port Huron , US 25 followed Pine Grove Avenue to the eastern terminus of M @-@ 136 and then followed 24th Avenue out of town . South of Lakeport , the highway changed names to Lakeshore Road and ran along the Lake Huron shoreline in The Thumb region of the state . US 25 stayed close to the shoreline and passed Lakeport State Park in the town of the same name . North of the park , the highway crossed into southern Sanilac County and followed the shoreline to the community of Lexington where it intersected the eastern end of M @-@ 90 . Further north , the highway intersected the eastern end of M @-@ 46 in Port Sanilac . 
 North of the community of Richmondville , US 25 passed Sanilac State Park , and then north of Forestville , it crossed into Huron County . On the other side of the county line , the highway passed through the community of White Rock and continued along the lake to Harbor Beach . There , US 25 intersected the eastern end of M @-@ 142 and began to curve around to the northwest to follow the northern tip of The Thumb . About 8 miles ( 13 km ) north of Harbor Beach , the highway passed through Port Hope and turned even more to the northwest on Lakeshore Road . US 25 turned due west at Huron City and passed south of Grindstone City on Grindstone Road . The highway was further inland on this east – west segment as it ran south of Pointe Aux <unk> to Port Austin . At an intersection with M @-@ 53 ( Van Dyke Road ) , US 25 merged with M @-@ 53 to run five blocks north along Lake Street to the waterfront in Port Austin . At the intersection with Spring Street just south of the marina , US 25 / M @-@ 53 jointly terminated while M @-@ 25 continued westward along Spring Street . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Before the state highways = = = 
 The chief transportation routes in 1701 were the Indian trails that crossed the future state of Michigan ; the one connecting what are now Detroit and Port Huron was one of these 13 trails at the time . Detroit created 120 @-@ foot ( 37 m ) rights @-@ of @-@ way for the principal streets of the city , the modern Gratiot Avenue included , in 1805 . This street plan was devised by Augustus Woodward and others following a devastating fire in Detroit . Gratiot Avenue , then also called Detroit – Port Huron Road , was authorized by the US Congress on March 2 , 1827 , as a supply road from Detroit to Port Huron for Fort Gratiot . Construction started in Detroit in 1829 , and the roadway was completed in the same year to Mount Clemens . The rest was finished in 1833 . The road was named for the fort near Port Huron , which was in turn named for Colonel Charles Gratiot , the supervising engineer in charge of construction of the structure in the aftermath of the War of 1812 . 
 Telegraph lines were first installed from the Detroit area south to the Monroe area in the mid @-@ 19th century with additional lines north to Pontiac completed around 1868 . As these communication lines were installed , roadways were added as needed to provide access for maintenance . The parallel road from Dearborn south was named for these lines , becoming Telegraph Road . In 1915 , the Dixie Highway , an auto trail that ran south from Detroit to Miami , Florida , was extended to Detroit , and later in 1919 northward to the Straits of Mackinac . 
 = = = Initial state highways to US Highway = = = 
 When the state highway system was first signed in 1919 , five separate highways were designated along US 25 's general route from the state line north through Detroit and Port Huron to Port Austin . From the state line north to Monroe , the roadway was given the first M @-@ 56 designation . From there northward , there was no state highway that corresponded to the future US 25 , but the first M @-@ 10 followed the future US 24 into the Detroit area . Near Dearborn , M @-@ 10 ran further inland than the future US 25 and included a concurrency with M @-@ 17 into Detroit . From Detroit northward , Gratiot Avenue was assigned the M @-@ 19 number into the Port Huron area . Through downtown Port Huron , the future US 25 was numbered as the first M @-@ 27 and along the lakeshore north to Harbor Beach , the highway was M @-@ 31 . From Harbor Beach into Port Austin , M @-@ 27 took over the route . 
 When the US Highway System was created on November 11 , 1926 , US 25 was included in Michigan 's section of the system . The US Highway designation was assigned to run along Dixie Highway replacing that segment of M @-@ 56 . From Monroe northward , US 25 overlapped US 24 on Telegraph Road to the Dearborn area and then followed M @-@ 17 ( Ecorse Road ) to Fort Street and into Downtown Detroit . From there , the highway replaced M @-@ 19 to Marysville and overlapped M @-@ 29 into Port Huron to an intersection with M @-@ 21 ; the remainder of the highway to Port Austin was numbered M @-@ 29 only . The highway was rerouted off Telegraph Road along Dix – Toledo Highway into downtown Detroit in 1929 . By the end of 1932 , US 25 was rerouted from downtown Monroe along Dixie Highway north to US 24 instead of turning westward in the city . The next year , US 25 was extended northward from Port Huron to Port Austin , replacing that section of M @-@ 29 in the process . The remainder of M @-@ 29 westward to Bay City was renumbered M @-@ 25 . 
 In 1936 , US 25 was changed to traffic along a one @-@ way pairing of streets on the southwest side of Port Huron . Northbound traffic remained on Military Avenue while southbound traffic was diverted to Electric Avenue . Two US 25A routings were created in the late 1930s and early 1940s . The first , near Erie , was numbered in 1937 , and renumbered US 24A by 1945 . The second in Port Huron provided access to the Blue Water Bridge from the mainline of the highway starting in 1940 . That last segment of US 25 to be paved was completed near Port Hope at the end of the 1950s . 
 = = = Freeway era = = = 
 With the completion of a segment of I @-@ 94 between Roseville and Marysville in 1963 , US 25 was rerouted to follow I @-@ 94 from the Mount Clemens area north to Marysville . The next year , an additional freeway from the northern end of I @-@ 94 at Marysville to Port Huron was completed . I @-@ 94 / US 25 was extended north and east , replacing part of M @-@ 146 to the Blue Water Bridge . The former route of US 25 through downtown was redesignated Bus . US 25 while US 25A became a part of the mainline highway to connect to I @-@ 94 . In 1967 , another segment , this time south of Detroit , was rerouted to follow another freeway , I @-@ 75 . 
 Six years later , the US 25 designation was decommissioned in Michigan , although all sections of it are still state highways . The southern section from the state line northward through Monroe was renumbered M @-@ 125 and the US 25 designation was removed from US 24 ( Telegraph Road ) . In the Detroit area , the connection between US 24 and I @-@ 75 in Woodhaven was redesignated as an unsigned connector highway ( now Connector 24 ) . The US 25 designation was removed from I @-@ 75 northward into Detroit , while the routing along Clark Street became an unsigned connector highway ( now Connector 850 ) . The routing along Fort Street and Gratiot Avenue was numbered as M @-@ 3 . The US 25 designation was removed from I @-@ 94 , and the routing through Port Huron and northward to Port Austin became part of an extended M @-@ 25 . One segment of highway near Port Huron became an unsigned highway now designed Connector 25 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 All exits are unnumbered . 
 = = Related trunklines = = 
 There were three additional trunkline highways related to US 25 in Michigan , two alternate routes and a business loop . 
 = = = Erie alternate route = = = 
 US Highway 25A ( US 25 ) was an alternate route that started at the Michigan – Ohio state line south of Erie and ran northward along Summit Street to an intersection with US 25 near Erie . The highway was designated in 1937 , and it was replaced by US 24A in 1945 . The southern half of the highway was later designated as part of I @-@ 75 in 1959 , and the northern half is now an unsigned highway designated Connector 75 by MDOT . 
 = = = Port Huron alternate route = = = 
 US Highway 25A ( US 25A ) was an alternate route near Port Huron that provided a connection to the Blue Water Bridge to Canada . The highway split from its parent north of Port Huron and followed 24th Avenue south to connect to M @-@ 51 ( Pine Grove Avenue ) while US 25 followed Lakeshore Road and Gratiot Avenue into Port Huron . The parent highway crossed under the approaches to the Blue Water Bridge , and the alternate route , along with M @-@ 51 , provided a signed path between US 25 and the bridge . The designation was created in early 1940 and was deleted when US 25 was rerouted in 1963 through Port Huron and over the alternate route . 
 = = = Port Huron business loop = = = 
 Business US 25 ( Bus . US 25 ) was an 8 @.@ 4 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 13 @.@ 5 km ) business loop serving the cities of Marysville and Port Huron . It started southwest of Marysville near St. Clair County International Airport at I @-@ 94 / US 25 and ran northeasterly along Gratiot Avenue into Marysville . It then passed through the city 's downtown area and turned northward along Gratiot Boulevard near the St. Clair River . North of Ravenswood Road , Bus . US 25 split into the one @-@ way pairing of Military Street ( northbound ) and Electric Avenue ( southbound ) until the two directions merged on the south side of Port Huron . The business loop continued northward along through downtown Port Huron and across the Black River near its mouth . North of the river. the business loop followed Huron Avenue through the northern side of downtown Port Huron and turned northwesterly onto Pine Grove Avenue . The business loop passed under the approaches to the Blue Water Bridge before terminating at an intersection with US 25 . 
 In 1963 , the route of US 25 through the Port Huron area was realigned . In the process , that highway replaced its alternate route , and the former alignment through downtown was redesignated as a business loop . This arrangement lasted until 1973 when US 25 itself was decommissioned in Michigan . The former routing of Bus . US 25 through downtown Port Huron became part of an extended M @-@ 25 . In 1986 , the former business loop was redesignated Business Loop I @-@ 94 . 
 = Les Chouans = 
 Les Chouans ( French pronunciation : ​ [ le <unk> ̃ ] , The Chouans ) is an 1829 novel by French novelist and playwright Honoré de Balzac ( 1799 – 1850 ) and included in the Scènes de la vie militaire section of his novel sequence La Comédie humaine . Set in the French region of Brittany , the novel combines military history with a love story between the aristocratic Marie de Verneuil and the Chouan royalist Alphonse de Montauran . It takes place during the 1799 post @-@ war uprising in Fougères . 
 Balzac conceived the idea for the novel during a trip to Brittany arranged by a family friend in 1828 . Intrigued by the people and atmosphere of the region , he began collecting notes and descriptions for later use . After publishing an Avertissement for the novel , he released three editions – each of them revised significantly . The first novel Balzac published without a pseudonym , he used many titles as he wrote and published , including Le Gars , Les Chouans ou la Bretagne il y a <unk> ans , and Le Dernier Chouan ou la Bretagne en 1800 . 
 Following closely in the footsteps of Sir Walter Scott , the novel uses its truthful historical backdrop to tell a fictional story of people who sculpted the past . The novel addresses themes of passionate love , vengeful trickery , and social status . While it is disdained by critics in favor of Balzac 's later work , the novel marks a turning point in his life and artistry . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the wake of the French Revolution , groups of royalists loyal to the House of Bourbon rose up against the new government . One group was the Chouans of Brittany , led by Jean Chouan . They allied themselves with counter @-@ revolutionary forces in Vendée and by 1793 the Revolt in the Vendée had begun . The insurrection was put down by the republic , and within two years the royalist forces had been routed . 
 Royalist sentiment did not evaporate , however , and in Brittany , violence between the two sides – " Blue " Revolutionaries against " White " Chouans – continued as the <unk> , even when Napoleon took power in 1799 . The Bonaparte forces responded as the republic had , and the Chouans were defeated – although political divisions and resentment lingered for more than a century . 
 At the start of the nineteenth century , the works of Sir Walter Scott were best @-@ sellers in France . His novels captured the ebb and flow of society , and he demonstrated the far @-@ reaching impact of major historical changes . A slew of authors in France attempted to replicate Scott 's success , but their works were isolated from one another and divorced from their surroundings . 
 Honoré de Balzac was profoundly influenced by Scott ( as well as Irish writer Maria Edgeworth ) , and decided to write novels using France 's turbulent history as a literary backdrop in the same way they had used the history of Scotland and Ireland . Balzac had previously only published potboiler novels under a variety of pseudonyms , books designed to excite readers and sell copies . He had also engaged in a series of ill @-@ fated speculative investments , which left him in considerable debt . Nevertheless , he believed in his skills as a writer , and awaited success around every corner . 
 = = Preparations and publications = = 
 In September 1828 Balzac visited the home of a family friend and retired general , the Baron de Pommereul , in Fougères . He spent several weeks learning about the insurrection ( which Pommereul had fought against ) . He pored over his host 's books and interviewed the townspeople about their experiences during the time of the uprising . Pommereul owned a castle which had been the headquarters of the Comte de <unk> , a royalist leader involved with a failed invasion of royalist exiles at Quiberon . This incursion had been aided by the Chouans , and Balzac began collecting events and people as inspiration for his novel . 
 While staying with Pommereul , he was given a room with a desk facing the <unk> Mountain , which Balzac used as the setting for the book 's first scene . He wandered around the city , taking in details to use in his descriptions of the landscape . In researching recent history , Balzac was examining events from his first years on the planet . Biographer Graham Robb notes that the original subtitle of the book was La Bretagne en 1799 – the year of Balzac 's birth . As Robb puts it , " the discovery of contemporary history took Balzac back to his childhood . " 
 As he neared completion of his novel – originally titled Le Gars – Balzac wrote an announcement heralding its imminent publication . Under the pseudonym " Victor Morillon " and writing in the third person , he describes his intent to " place his country 's history in the hands of the man in the street … to illuminate and make the ordinary mind realize the repercussions that entire populations feel of royal discord , feudal dissension and popular uprising … . " In the Avertissement , he praises Scott as " a man of genius " while noting his limitations , especially when writing of romance : " on his lyre the strings are missing that can sing of love … . " Balzac – or , rather , " Morillon " – also declares his intention to write a companion volume entitled Le Capitaine des <unk> ( The Captain of the Firebrands ) , about war in fifteenth @-@ century Paris . This later work was never completed . 
 By the time the novel was published in March 1829 , Balzac had changed its title ( in response to complaints from Mme. de Pommereul ) to Le <unk> Chouan ou La Bretagne en 1800 , and signed the novel " M. Honoré Balzac " . It was the first book he published without a pseudonym . 
 In 1834 a second edition was published under the name Les Chouans ou La Bretagne en 1799 . It had been heavily revised , as per Balzac 's style of constantly reworking texts , even after their release . He had been corresponding with Ewelina Hańska , who wrote to him anonymously in 1832 . In an attempt to please her , he changed some of the language in Les Chouans for its second edition . " If only you knew , " he wrote to her , " how much there is of you in every altered phrase of Chouans ! " The second edition also demonstrates the author 's maturing political philosophy ( softening his representation of the royalists ) , and the evolved female characters testify to his relationship with Hańska . 
 When the third edition was published in 1845 , Balzac was in love with his own creation . He had written two years earlier to Hańska : " There 's no doubt about it – it is a magnificent poem . I had never really read it before . … The passion is sublime , and I now understand why you have a cherished and special devotion to this book . … All in all , I am very pleased with it . " In a preface to the third edition , he described his plans for a part of La Comédie Humaine called Scènes de la vie militaire ( Scenes from Military Life ) . In addition to Les Chouans with its focus on guerrilla combat , he planned another called Les <unk> about the earlier full @-@ scale civil war . Although in 1844 he discussed traveling to western France to write the book , it was never written . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 At the start of the novel , the Republican Commander Hulot is assaulted by Chouan forces , who convert dozens of conscripts . An aristocrat , Marie de Verneuil , is sent by Joseph <unk> to subdue and capture the royalist leader , the Marquis de Montauran , also known as " Le Gars " . She is aided by a detective named Corentin . 
 Eventually , Marie becomes smitten with her target . In defiance of Corentin and the Chouans whom she detests , she devises a plan to marry the Chouan leader . Fooled by Corentin into believing that Montauran loves her mortal enemy Madame du Gua , Marie orders Hulot to destroy the rebels . She discovers her folly too late and tries , unsuccessfully , to save her husband the day after their marriage . 
 = = Style = = 
 Scott 's influence is felt throughout the novel . Lengthy descriptions of the countryside are interrupted constantly by tangents explaining the history of Brittany and its people . The pastoral setting is integrated into the plot , particularly the guerrilla combat of the Chouans . In complementing individual with environs Balzac also shows the influence of James Fenimore Cooper , whose The Last of the Mohicans had impressed the French author . Like the Mahicans of Cooper 's novel , the Chouan insurgents are skilled at using their surroundings , coming out of the woods in more ways than one . 
 Some critics claim that Balzac surpassed Scott in some respects . In his introduction to the 1901 edition , poet and critic George Saintsbury writes that the character of Montauran enjoys " a freedom from the flatness which not infrequently characterizes Sir Walter 's own good young men . " By foregrounding the affair between Montauran and Marie , Balzac indicates passion as the central theme of history . As he writes in the 1842 foreword to La Comédie Humaine : " [ L ] a passion est toute l <unk> . Sans elle religion , l 'histoire , le roman , l 'art <unk> <unk> . " ( " [ P ] <unk> is all of humanity . Without it religion , history , literature , and art would be useless . " ) 
 Because of its extended conversations , intricate descriptions and lengthy asides , the book is considered " heavy " by some critics . In later editions its chapter breaks were removed ( though some versions now restore them ) , and the work is in three sections – the final of which comprises nearly half the novel . The novel 's feel is compounded by the lack of clarity on some points ; some characters ' motives are unclear even at the end , and the chaotic sequence of events is difficult to track . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Passionate history = = = 
 Although he venerated Scott 's writing skill and use of history as backdrop , Balzac worked to more accurately depict the turbulence of the human heart – and its effect on history . He considered Scott 's view of women unrefined , and believed this led to a stale representation of human behavior as a result . In Les Chouans , Balzac places the romance of Montauran and Marie de Verneuil at the center of the narrative , around which all other elements revolve . 
 For this reason ( and owing to the florid descriptions of romantic elements ) , the novel has been compared to William Shakespeare 's play Romeo and Juliet . Both stories explore love among feuding parties ; both involve vengeful , scheming individuals ; and both end in tragedy for the newly @-@ wed couple . As the translator Marion Ayton Crawford puts it : " Hero and heroine are star @-@ crossed lovers , whose fate is brought about by forces of the times acting on their own internal weaknesses … . " 
 Although Balzac himself did not marry until 1850 , he was fascinated by the subject . Soon after Les Chouans was published in 1829 , he released a treatise about the institution called Physiologie du Mariage . His attention to the details of relationships – failed and successful – are woven into Les Chouans , and Marie herself is based on a woman with whom he had had an affair . 
 = = = Devious ferocity = = = 
 Corentin and Madame du Gua , foils to the happy couple , plot and scheme endlessly to bring about the misery and downfall of those who will not love them . Du Gua is at first a sympathetic character , but by the end of the novel she is presented as sharing a face with a spirit from hell . She represents revenge and hatred chiseled from romantic injury , and has been noted as a rough sketch of the title character in Balzac 's La Cousine Bette . Corentin , meanwhile , stands in contrast to Montauran 's romantic nature as much as to Hulot 's military prowess . Rebuffed by Marie and unable to wield the might of the commandant , Corentin relies on trickery and deception to achieve his ruthless ends . 
 Marie herself begins the operation on a quest to seduce and betray her target . Her reversal ( followed by two subsequent changes of heart , back to the original mission and then in opposition to it ) counterbalance the wickedness of Madame du Gua and Corentin . Her ultimate fidelity to the object of her desire demonstrates the possibility of sincere passion , even as the other pair speak to the venom of the slighted heart . 
 = = = Social hierarchy = = = 
 The allure of class respectability is another constant in Les Chouans , as it is for Balzac 's entire oeuvre . Marie 's birth as an illegitimate child contributes to her position at the start of the novel . The ups and downs of her young adult life land her in Corentin 's hands , yearning for the 300 @,@ 000 @-@ franc reward promised to her on the capture of Montauran . Marie 's focus changes from money to marriage , a sign of hope amid the tragedy of circumstances . When she first considers Montauran , she recognizes that a return of the king would bring privileges ; still , her oscillating actions follow the path of her passions , not rational self @-@ interest . 
 Montauran , on the other hand , is devoted wholly to the royalist cause , and <unk> against the ignorant nobles supporting it . He fights for the Chouan cause because he believes in it , not for the personal gain sought by the aristocrats in whose midst he works . He gives up the cause for Marie , but only as a result of an unclear series of events , the product of everyone 's intertwined double @-@ crossing . 
 = = Reception and impact = = 
 Les Chouans is considered Balzac 's first real success as a writer – a milestone for which he was prepared , evidenced by his willingness to sign his own name . Saintsbury proclaims that publishing Les Chouans was how he " first emerged from the purgatory of anonymous hack @-@ writing . " Still , revenues from the book were not sufficient to cover Balzac 's modest living expenses . 
 Although he never finished the other works intended to comprise Scenes from a Military Life , Balzac returned to the people and politics of Les Chouans in later works . Corentin reappears in his 1841 novel Une <unk> <unk> ( A <unk> Business ) , and Hulot is featured in 1843 's La Muse du département ( The Provincial Muse ) . Later novels mention additional royalist uprisings , connecting them thematically to Les Chouans . 
 As a literary work , the novel is not singled out by critics from the rest of La Comédie Humaine . Balzac 's emerging style ( some time before he refined his renowned realist idiom ) and unsteady pacing are representative of his early career . Still , critics hail it as a turning point and it has even been called " a strong favorite " among readers . 
 = = Adaptation = = 
 In 1947 the novel was adapted into a French film The Royalists directed by Henri Calef and starring Paul Amiot and Roland <unk> . 
 = Palpatine = 
 <unk> Palpatine ( also known as Darth Sidious or simply The Emperor ) is a fictional character of the Star Wars universe , mainly portrayed by Ian McDiarmid . In the original trilogy , he is depicted as the aged , pale @-@ faced and cloaked Emperor of the Galactic Empire . In the prequel trilogy , he is portrayed as a charismatic Senator from Naboo who uses deception and political manipulation to rise to the position of Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic . 
 Though outwardly appearing to be a well @-@ intentioned public servant and supporter of democracy prior to becoming Emperor , he is in fact Darth Sidious , the Dark Lord of the Sith – a cult of practitioners of the dark side of the Force previously thought to have been extinct in the Star Wars galaxy for a millennium . As Sidious , he instigates the Clone Wars , nearly destroys the Jedi , and transforms the Republic into the Empire . He also corrupts Anakin Skywalker to serve at his side as Darth Vader . Palpatine 's reign is brought to an end by Luke Skywalker and the redeemed Anakin Skywalker . 
 Since the initial theatrical run of Return of the Jedi , Palpatine has become a widely recognized popular culture symbol of evil , sinister deception , tyranny , and the subversion of democracy . 
 = = Appearances in the main saga = = 
 = = = Original trilogy = = = 
 The Emperor first appears in The Empire Strikes Back . In hologram form , he is revealed to be the Sith master of Darth Vader . He tells Vader that Luke Skywalker is becoming a serious threat to the Empire and must not become a Jedi . Vader convinces him that Luke would be a great asset if turned to the dark side . 
 In 1983 's Return of the Jedi , the Emperor appears in person to oversee the last stages of the second Death Star 's construction . He assures Darth Vader that they will together turn Luke , now revealed to be Vader 's son , to the dark side . Unknown to Vader , the Emperor plans to replace his apprentice with Luke . When Vader brings Luke before his master , the Emperor tempts Luke to join the dark side by appealing to the young Jedi 's fear for his friends , whom he has lured into a trap . This leads to a lightsaber duel in which Luke defeats and nearly kills Vader . The Emperor tells Luke to kill Vader and take his place , but Luke refuses and declares himself a Jedi . Enraged , the Emperor attacks Luke with Force lightning . Moved by his son 's cries for help , Vader throws the Emperor into the Death Star 's reactor shaft to his death . 
 = = = Prequel trilogy = = = 
 In the 1999 prequel The Phantom Menace , which is set 32 years before Star Wars , Palpatine is depicted as a middle @-@ aged Galactic Senator from the planet Naboo who is secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious . As Sidious , he influences the corrupt Trade Federation to blockade and invade Naboo . Queen Padmé Amidala of Naboo flees to the planet Coruscant to receive counsel from Palpatine , unaware that he actually engineered the invasion . After a plea for help from the senate results in bureaucratic delays , Palpatine persuades the queen to make a motion to have Supreme Chancellor Finis Valorum removed from office . 
 When Padmé attempts to liberate Naboo , Sidious sends his Sith apprentice Darth Maul there to capture her . The invasion is eventually thwarted and Maul is defeated in a lightsaber duel with Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi . Using the crisis to be elected the new Chancellor of the Republic , Palpatine returns to Naboo , where he befriends Anakin Skywalker , telling him that he " will watch [ his ] career with great interest " . 
 In the 2002 sequel Attack of the Clones , Palpatine exploits constitutional loopholes to remain in office even after the official expiration of his term . Meanwhile , as Darth Sidious , he continues to manipulate events from behind the scenes by having his new Sith apprentice Count Dooku lead a movement of planets in seceding from the Republic to form the Confederacy of Independent Systems . 
 Since the Separatists are secretly building a battle droid army , Palpatine uses the situation to have himself granted emergency powers . Palpatine feigns reluctance to accept this authority , promising to return it to the Senate once the crisis has ended . His first act is to allow the creation of Clone Troopers , which were discovered by Obi @-@ Wan , to counter the Separatist threat ; this results in the opening salvo of the Clone Wars . With the galaxy now at war as Sidious planned , Dooku brings him the secret plans for a new superweapon . 
 In the 2005 sequel Revenge of the Sith , Palpatine is captured by Separatist commander General Grievous , as part of a plan created by Sidious . Palpatine is rescued by Anakin and Obi @-@ Wan , but not before the Jedi confront Count Dooku again . A duel ensues in which Dooku gets defeated at the hands of Anakin . Although initially hesitant , the young Jedi follows up with Palpatine 's orders to kill the unarmed Dooku in cold blood . Palpatine then escapes with his Jedi rescuers and returns to Coruscant . By this point , Palpatine has become a virtual dictator , able to take any action in the Senate . The Jedi Council is troubled by Palpatine 's near @-@ absolute power and fears he will not relinquish it when the Clone Wars end . Palpatine tells Anakin the story of Darth Plagueis , a powerful Sith Lord who was able to manipulate life and death but was killed by his own apprentice . Eventually , Palpatine reveals his secret Sith identity to Anakin ; he knows that Anakin has been having prophetic visions of Padmé , his pregnant secret wife , dying in childbirth , and offers to teach him Plagueis ' secrets to save her life . 
 Anakin informs Jedi Master Mace Windu of Palpatine 's treachery . Windu and three other Jedi Masters attempt to arrest Palpatine and haul him before the Senate for trial . Palpatine pulls a lightsaber out of his sleeve and kills everyone but Windu , whom he engages in a fierce duel . Windu eventually subdues the Sith Lord and deflects a blast of Force lightning back into Palpatine 's face with his lightsaber , disfiguring Palpatine 's face into the pale , wizened visage seen in the original trilogy . Anakin appears and intercedes on Palpatine 's behalf by cutting off Windu 's arm , allowing Palpatine to kill the Jedi Master with a blast of Force lightning . Anakin then pledges himself to the dark side as Palpatine 's new Sith apprentice , Darth Vader . 
 Palpatine orders the clone troopers to turn on their Jedi Generals , while dispatching Vader to kill everyone inside the Jedi Temple and then assassinate the Separatist leaders on the planet Mustafar . Palpatine then <unk> the Republic into the Galactic Empire , with himself as Emperor . Jedi Master Yoda confronts him in his Senate office and engages the Sith Lord in a lightsaber duel that ends in a stalemate . Sensing that his new apprentice is in danger , Palpatine travels to Mustafar and finds Vader near death following a duel with Obi @-@ Wan . After returning to Coruscant , he rebuilds Vader 's ruined body with the black armored suit from the original trilogy . Palpatine then tells Vader that Padmé was killed in the heat of Vader 's anger , breaking what remains of his apprentice 's spirit . Palpatine is last seen watching the original Death Star 's construction , with Vader and <unk> Tarkin at his side . 
 = = Appearances in other works = = 
 Palpatine has appeared in other works , outside of the main films , including the Star Wars Expanded Universe . The Expanded Universe ( also known as the EU ) encompasses all of the officially licensed , fictional material of the Star Wars saga , outside of the seven feature films , The Clone Wars film and series , Rebels series produced by Lucasfilm , and the 2015 Marvel Comics . The expanded universe includes books , comic books , video games , toys , and other assorted media . The EU is no longer official canon . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Star Wars expanded universe literature elaborates on Palpatine 's role in Star Wars fiction outside of the films . The first appearance of Palpatine in Star Wars literature was in Alan Dean Foster 's ( writing as George Lucas ) novelization of the script of A New Hope , published as Star Wars : From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker ( 1976 ) . Foster characterizes Palpatine as a cunning senator who " caused himself " to be elected president of the Republic , and then declared himself Emperor and isolated himself from his subjects , eventually becoming a pawn of his advisers . 
 Palpatine made his first major appearance in the Expanded Universe in 1991 and 1992 with the Dark Empire series of comic books written by Tom Veitch and illustrated by Cam Kennedy . In the series ( set six years after Return of the Jedi ) , Palpatine is resurrected as the Emperor Reborn or " Palpatine the Undying " . His spirit returns from the netherworld of the Force with the aid of Sith ghosts on Korriban and possesses the body of <unk> Droga , one of Palpatine 's elite spies and assassins known as the Emperor 's Hands . Droga flees to a secret Imperial base on the planet Byss , where the Emperor 's advisor <unk> <unk> exorcises Palpatine 's spirit and channels it into one of many clones created by Palpatine before his death . Palpatine attempts to resume control of the galaxy , but Luke Skywalker , now a senior Jedi Knight , sabotages his plans . Luke destroys most of Palpatine 's cloning tanks , but is only able to defeat the Emperor with help from Leia Organa Solo , who has received rudimentary Jedi training from Luke . The two repel a Force storm Palpatine had created and turn it back onto him , once again destroying his physical form . 
 Palpatine 's ultimate fate is further chronicled in the Dark Empire II and Empire 's End series of comics . The Dark Empire II series , published from 1994 to 1995 , details how the Emperor is once again reborn on Byss into a clone body . Palpatine tries to rebuild the Empire as the Rebel Alliance grows weak . In Empire 's End ( 1995 ) , a traitorous Imperial guard bribes Palpatine 's cloning supervisor to tamper with the Emperor 's stored DNA samples . This causes the clones to deteriorate at a rapid rate . Palpatine attempts to possess the body of Anakin Solo , the infant son of Leia Organa and Han Solo , before the clone body dies , but is thwarted once again by Luke Skywalker . Palpatine is killed by a blaster shot fired by Han , and his spirit is captured by wounded Jedi <unk> Brand . When Brand dies , he takes Palpatine 's spirit with him , destroying the Sith Lord once and for all . 
 Novels and comics published before 1999 focus on Palpatine 's role as Galactic Emperor . Shadows of the Empire ( 1996 ) by Steve Perry and The Mandalorian Armor ( 1998 ) by K. W. Jeter — all set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi — show how Palpatine uses crime lords such as Prince <unk> and bounty hunters like Boba Fett to fight his enemies . Barbara Hambly 's novel Children of the Jedi ( 1995 ) , set eight years after Return of the Jedi , features a woman named <unk> <unk> who claims that Palpatine fathered her son Irek . The Jedi Prince series of novels introduces an insane , three @-@ eyed mutant named Triclops who is revealed to be Palpatine 's illegitimate son . Created from DNA extracted from Palpatine and placed into a woman , he was born mutated , cast away and forgotten . Triclops had a son named Ken who became known as the " Jedi Prince " . 
 Beginning in 1999 with Terry Brooks ' novelization of The Phantom Menace , Star Wars writers chronicled the role of Palpatine prior to A New Hope as a politician and Sith Lord . The comic " Marked " by Rob Williams , printed in Star Wars Tales 24 ( 2005 ) , and Michael Reaves ' novel Darth Maul : Shadow Hunter ( 2001 ) explain Darth Sidious ' relationship with his apprentice Darth Maul . Cloak of Deception ( 2001 ) by James Luceno follows Reaves ' novel and details how Darth Sidious encourages the Trade Federation to build an army of battle droids in preparation for the invasion of Naboo . Cloak of Deception also focuses on Palpatine 's early political career , revealing how he becomes a confidante of Chancellor Finis Valorum and acquainted with Padmé Amidala , newly elected queen of Naboo . Palpatine 's role during the Clone Wars as Chancellor of the Republic and Darth Sidious is portrayed in novels such as Matthew Stover 's <unk> ( 2003 ) , Steven Barnes ' The Cestus Deception ( 2004 ) , Sean Stewart 's Yoda : Dark Rendezvous ( 2004 ) , and Luceno 's Labyrinth of Evil ( 2005 ) and Darth Plagueis ( 2012 ) . 
 Following the theatrical release of Revenge of the Sith , Star Wars literature focused on Palpatine 's role after the creation of the Empire . John Ostrander 's comic Star Wars Republic 78 : Loyalties ( 2005 ) chronicles how , shortly after seizing power , Emperor Palpatine sends Darth Vader to assassinate <unk> <unk> , an Imperial captain who plans to defect from the Empire . In Luceno 's novel Dark Lord : The Rise of Darth Vader ( 2005 ) ( set shortly after Revenge of the Sith ) , the Emperor sends Darth Vader to the planet <unk> to discover why clone troopers there refused to carry out Order 66 against their Jedi generals . Palpatine hopes these early missions will teach Vader what it means to be a Sith and crush any remnants of Anakin Skywalker . 
 With the 2012 acquisition of Lucasfilm by The Walt Disney Company , most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the originating 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded as Star Wars Legends and declared non @-@ canon to the franchise in April 2014 . Star Wars : Lords of the Sith was subsequently announced as one of the first four canon novels to be released in 2014 and 2015 . In Lords of the Sith , Vader and Palpatine find themselves hunted by revolutionaries on the Twi 'lek planet Ryloth . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Palpatine / Darth Sidious is a central character in Genndy Tartakovsky 's Star Wars : Clone Wars micro @-@ series , which is set between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith . The character 's likeness in the series is based on that in The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones . In the first chapter , Palpatine is informed by Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi that the Jedi have discovered that the <unk> Banking Clan has established battle droid factories on the planet <unk> . Palpatine agrees to send a strike force that includes Anakin Skywalker , and suggests that Anakin be given " special command " of Obi @-@ Wan 's fighters . Yoda and Obi @-@ Wan initially speak against the idea , but reluctantly concede . In the seventh chapter , a holographic image of Sidious appears shortly after Dooku trains Dark Jedi Asajj Ventress . Sidious orders Ventress to track down and kill Anakin . He remarks to Dooku that Ventress is certain to be defeated , but that the point of her mission is to test Anakin . In the final chapters , a hologram of Sidious again appears and orders General Grievous to begin an assault on the galactic capital . Later , the Separatist invasion of Coruscant begins and Palpatine watches from his apartment in the 500 Republica . Grievous breaks through the Chancellor 's window and attempts to kidnap him , leading to a long chase while Palpatine is protected by Jedi Shaak Ti , <unk> <unk> and Foul <unk> . After Grievous apprehends the Jedi , Palpatine is taken on board the Invisible Hand , setting the stage for Revenge of the Sith . 
 In the 2008 animated film Star Wars : The Clone Wars ( also set between Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith ) , Darth Sidious engineers a Separatist plot where Count Dooku turns Jabba the Hutt against the Republic by kidnapping his son Rotta and framing the Jedi for it . Meanwhile , Palpatine suggests that the Republic ally itself with the <unk> . Although Anakin Skywalker and Padawan Ahsoka <unk> foil the plot , the outcome suits Palpatine 's ends : Jabba places Hutt hyperspace routes at the Republic 's disposal . 
 In the subsequent animated series , Palpatine continues to serve as Supreme Chancellor while his Sith identity remains behind the scenes via holograms . In the second season , Sidious hires bounty hunter Cad Bane to infiltrate the Jedi Temple and steal a <unk> . He then takes a valuable <unk> memory crystal that contains the names of thousands of Force @-@ sensitive <unk> - the future of the Jedi Order - from around the galaxy . The final stage of the plot : to bring four Force @-@ sensitive children to Sidious 's secret facility on Mustafar . Anakin and Ahsoka again foil the plot , but Bane escapes and all evidence of Sidious ' involvement is lost . In the fifth season , Sidious personally travels to the planet <unk> to confront his former apprentice Darth Maul after becoming leader of Death Watch , killing Savage <unk> before torturing Maul with the intent to make use of him . In the final season , Sidious goes to lengths to conceal the full nature of his plan from the Jedi by attempting to silence the Clone Trooper Fives when he learns of Order 66 and having Dooku wipe out anything tied to Jedi Master Sifo @-@ Dyas . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 In Star Wars fiction , Palpatine is a cunning politician , a ruthless emperor , and an evil Sith Lord . The Star Wars Databank describes him as " the supreme ruler of the most powerful tyrannical regime the galaxy had ever witnessed " and Stephen J. <unk> 's Star Wars Encyclopedia calls him " evil incarnate . " 
 As a senator , Palpatine is " unassuming , yet ambitious " . In Cloak of Deception , James Luceno writes that Palpatine carefully guards his privacy and " others found his reclusiveness intriguing , as if he led a secret life " . Despite this , he has many allies in the government . Luceno writes , " What Palpatine lacked in charisma , he made up for in candor , and it was that directness that had led to his widespread appeal in the senate . ... For in his heart he judged the universe on his own terms , with a clear sense of right and wrong . " In Terry Brooks ' novelization of The Phantom Menace , Palpatine claims to embrace democratic principles . He tells Queen Amidala , " I promise , Your Majesty , if I am elected [ chancellor of the Republic ] , I will restore democracy to the Republic . I will put an end to the corruption that has plagued the Senate . " A Visual Dictionary states that he is a self @-@ proclaimed savior . 
 As Emperor , however , Palpatine abandons any semblance of democracy , as noted in Star Wars , when he abolishes the Imperial Senate . <unk> states , " His Empire ... is based on tyranny " 
 Revenge of the Sith suggests that Palpatine was the apprentice of Darth Plagueis , while later Expanded Universe materials say explicitly that he was . Palpatine is characterized as " the most powerful practitioner of the Sith ways in modern times . " Palpatine is so powerful that he is able to mask his true identity from the Jedi for decades . In the novel <unk> , Mace Windu remarks to Yoda , " A shame [ Palpatine ] can 't touch the Force . He might have been a fine Jedi . " 
 The Star Wars Databank explains that the Force " granted him inhuman dexterity and speed , agility enough to quickly kill three Jedi Masters " ( as depicted in Revenge of the Sith ) . Stover describes the duel between Yoda and Palpatine in his novelization of Revenge of the Sith thus : " From the shadow of a black wing , a small weapon ... slid into a withered hand and spat a flame @-@ colored blade [ . ] When the blades met it was more than Yoda against Palpatine , more the millennia of Sith against the legions of Jedi ; this was the expression of the fundamental conflict of the universe itself . Light against dark . Winner take all . " During the duel , Yoda realizes that Sidious represents a small but powerful Sith Order that had changed and evolved over the years , while the Jedi had not : " He had lost before he started . " 
 According to the Databank and New Essential Guide to Characters , Palpatine possesses great patience and his maneuverings are as a <unk> grandmaster moves pieces on a board . He is depicted as a diabolical genius . 
 Palpatine was not given a first name in any canonical or " Star Wars Legends " sources until 2014 , when the character 's first name — <unk> — was revealed in the novel Tarkin , written by James Luceno . The Lucasfilm Story Group approached Del Rey Books and asked if they wanted to use the name , which was created by George Lucas , in the Tarkin novel , to which Del Rey agreed . 
 = = = Character creation = = = 
 Lucas ' conceptualization of Palpatine and the role the character plays in Star Wars changed over time . From Return of the Jedi onwards , Palpatine became the ultimate personification of evil in Star Wars , replacing Darth Vader as the central villain . 
 When the original Star Wars trilogy was filmed , the Emperor was unnamed and his throne @-@ world unidentified . The name would not be used in film until the prequel trilogy and the first mention of the name Palpatine came from the prologue of Alan Dean Foster 's 1976 novelization of A New Hope , which detailed the Emperor 's rise to power . Foster writes , 
 Aided and abetted by restless , power @-@ hungry individuals within the government , and the massive organs of commerce , the ambitious Senator Palpatine caused himself to be elected President of the Republic . He promised to reunite the disaffected among the people and to restore the remembered glory of the Republic . Once secure in office he declared himself Emperor , shutting himself away from the populace . Soon he was controlled by the very assistants and boot @-@ <unk> he had appointed to high office , and the cries of the people for justice did not reach his ears . 
 However , it is unclear whether Lucas intended Palpatine to be the reigning Emperor or just the first of a succession of Emperors . Michael Kaminski , author of The Secret History of Star Wars , claims that Lucas ' initial notes discuss a line of corrupt Emperors , not just one . If Palpatine was the first , Kaminski infers , he would therefore not be the current . Later Lucas would abandon this idea , opting instead to focus on a sole villainous ruler . 
 During story conferences for The Empire Strikes Back , Lucas and Leigh Brackett decided that " the Emperor and the Force had to be the two main concerns in the [ Empire Strikes Back ] ; the Emperor had barely been dealt with in the first movie , and the intention in the sequel was to deal with him on a more concrete level . " Lucas ultimately decided instead to feature the Emperor in Return of the Jedi . 
 In that film , the initial conception of Palpatine was superseded by his depiction as a dictatorial ruler adept in the dark side of the Force . The Emperor was inspired by the villain Ming the Merciless from the Flash Gordon comic books . The rise of Palpatine involving an ambitious and ruthless politician dismantling a democratic republic to achieve supreme power is in part inspired by the real @-@ world examples of Julius Caesar , Napoleon Bonaparte and Adolf Hitler . Other elements of the character come from historical figures such as Vladimir Lenin and Richard Nixon . Lucas said , " The whole point of the movies , the underlying element that makes the movies work , is that you , whether you go backwards or forwards , you start out in a democracy , and democracy turns into a dictatorship , and then the rebels make it back into a democracy . " 
 Lucas wanted to establish the Emperor as the true source of evil in Star Wars . Screenwriter Lawrence Kasdan noted , " My sense of the relationship [ between Darth Vader and the Emperor ] is that the Emperor is much more powerful ... and that Vader is very much intimidated by him . Vader has dignity , but the Emperor in Jedi really has all the power . " He explained that the climax of the film is a confrontation between Darth Vader and his master . In the first scene that shows the Emperor , he arrives at the Death Star and is greeted by a host of stormtroopers , technicians , and other personnel . Lucas states he wanted it to look like the military parades on " May Day in Russia . " 
 Lucas fleshed out the Emperor in the prequel films . According to Lucas , Palpatine 's role in The Phantom Menace is to explain " how Anakin Skywalker came to be [ Palpatine 's ] apprentice " and the events that lead to his rise to power . The true identity of Darth Sidious — the phantom menace — is left a mystery , and his relationship to Palpatine is not clear , though popular consensus agreed that Darth Sidious and Palpatine were one and the same . Film critic Jonathan L. Bowen remarks , " Debates raged on the Internet concerning the relationship between Darth Sidious and Senator Palpatine . Most fans believed the two characters are actually the same person with logic seeming to support their conclusion . " Bowen notes that the debate was fueled by the fact that " suspiciously Darth Sidious does not appear in the credits . " 
 In Star Wars and History published by Lucasfilm , it describes Palpatine 's consolidation of power as being similar to the Roman political figure Augustus , named Octavian before renaming himself . Both legitimized authoritarian rule by saying that corruption in the Senate was hampering the powers of the head of state ; both pressured the Senate to grant extraordinary powers to deal with a crisis , falsely claiming that they would rescind those powers once the crisis was over ; and both relied on their strong control over military force . 
 = = = Portrayal = = = 
 When the Emperor first appeared in The Empire Strikes Back , he was portrayed by Elaine Baker , the wife of make @-@ up designer Rick Baker . Chimpanzee eyes were superimposed into darkened eye sockets during post @-@ production " in order to create a truly unsettling image " . The character was voiced by Clive Revill . 
 " With Kershner , " Revill said , " you had to keep the reins tight — you couldn 't go overboard . It was the perfect example of the old adage ' less is more ' — the Emperor doesn 't say very much . But when he finally appears , it 's at a point in the saga when everyone 's waiting to see him . It 's the Emperor , the arch villain of all time , and when he says there 's a great disturbance in the Force , I mean , that 's enough oomph ! " Years later , during production of Revenge of the Sith , Lucas decided to shoot new footage for The Empire Strikes Back to create continuity between the prequels and original trilogy . Thus , in the 2004 DVD release of The Empire Strikes Back Special Edition , the original version of the Emperor was replaced by McDiarmid , and the dialogue between the Emperor and Darth Vader was revised . 
 Lucas and director Richard Marquand cast Scottish Shakespearean actor Ian McDiarmid to play Emperor Palpatine for Return of the Jedi . He was in his late 30s and had never played a leading role in a feature film , though he had made minor appearances in films like Dragonslayer ( 1981 ) . After Return of the Jedi , he resumed stage acting in London . In an interview with <unk> , McDiarmid revealed that he " never had his sights set on a film career and never even auditioned for the role of Palpatine . " He elaborated , " I got called in for the interview after a Return of the Jedi casting director saw me perform in the Sam Shepard play Seduced at a studio theatre at the Royal Court . I was playing a dying Howard Hughes . " 
 McDiarmid was surprised when Lucas approached him 16 years after Return of the Jedi to reprise the role of Palpatine . In an interview , he stated , " When we were doing Return of the Jedi there was a rumor that George Lucas had nine films in his head , and he 'd clearly just completed three of them . " McDiarmid added , " Someone said that , ' Oh , I think what he might do next is go back in time , and show how Vader came to be . ' It never occurred to me in a million years that I would be involved in that , because I thought , ' oh well , then he 'll get a much younger actor [ to play Palpatine ] . ' That would be obvious . " However , " I was the right age , ironically , for the first prequel when it was made . ... So I was in the very strange and rather wonderful paradox of playing myself when young at my own age , having played myself previously when 100 @-@ and @-@ I @-@ don 't @-@ know @-@ what . " 
 Palpatine 's role in the prequel films required McDiarmid to play two dimensions of the same character . Recalling the initial days of shooting The Phantom Menace , McDiarmid stated , " Stepping onto the set of Episode I for the first time was like going back in time , due to my experience in Jedi . Palpatine 's an interesting character ; he 's conventional on the outside , but demonic on the inside — he 's on the edge , trying to go beyond what 's possible . " McDiarmid added another layer to the character in Attack of the Clones . He noted , " [ Palpatine ] is a supreme actor . He has to be even more convincing than somebody who isn 't behaving in a schizophrenic fashion , so he 's extra charming , or extra professional — and for those who are looking for clues , that 's almost where you can see them . " McDiarmid illuminated on the scene where Padmé Amidala is almost assassinated : 
 There 's a moment in one scene of the new film where tears almost appear in his eye . These are crocodile tears , but for all those in the movie , and perhaps watching the movie itself , they 'll see he is apparently moved — and of course , he is . He can just do it . He can , as it were , turn it on . And I suppose for him , it 's also a bit of a turn @-@ on — the pure exercise of power is what he 's all about . That 's the only thing he 's interested in and the only thing that can satisfy him — which makes him completely fascinating to play , because it is an evil soul . He is more evil than the devil . At least Satan fell — he has a history , and it 's one of revenge . 
 In Revenge of the Sith , McDiarmid played a darker interpretation of the character . He explained that " [ ... ] when you 're playing a character of solid blackness , that in itself is very interesting , in the sense that you have no other motivation other than the accumulation of power . It 's not so much about not having a moral center , it 's just that the only thing that mattered is increasing power . " He admitted , " I 've been trying to find a redeeming feature to Palpatine , and the only one I 've got so far is that he 's clearly a patron of the arts because he goes to the opera . " McDiarmid compared the character to Iago from William Shakespeare 's Othello : 
 Everything he does is an act of pure hypocrisy , and that 's interesting to play . I suppose it 's rather like playing Iago . All the characters in the play — including Othello until the end — think that " Honest Iago " is a decent guy doing his job , and he 's quite liked . But at the same time there 's a tremendous evil subconscious in operation . 
 McDiarmid noticed that the script for Revenge of the Sith demanded more action from his character than in previous films . Lightsaber combat was a challenge to the 60 @-@ year @-@ old actor , who , like his costars , took fencing lessons . The close @-@ up shots and non @-@ acrobatic sequences of the duel between Palpatine and Mace Windu were performed by McDiarmid . Advanced fencing and acrobatic stunts were executed by McDiarmid 's doubles , Michael Byrne , Sebastian Dickins , and Bob Bowles . 
 McDiarmid 's performance as Palpatine was generally well received by critics . Todd McCarthy of Variety commented , " Entertaining from start to finish and even enthralling at times , ' Sith ' has some acting worth writing home about , specifically McDiarmid 's dominant turn as the mastermind of the evil empire . " A reviewer for The Village Voice wrote that " Ian McDiarmid 's unctuous Emperor turns appropriately vampiric as he attempts to draw Anakin into the Sith fold with promises of eternal life . " Still , his performance was not without detractors ; David Edelstein of Slate critiqued , " McDiarmid isn 't the subtlest of satanic tempters . With his lisp and his clammy little leer , he looks like an old queen keen on trading an aging butt @-@ boy ( Count Dooku ) for fresh meat — which leaves Anakin looking more and more like a 15 @-@ watt bulb . " 
 = = = Make @-@ up and costumes = = = 
 Ian McDiarmid required little make @-@ up in The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones . He recalled , " I 'm ... slightly aged [ in Attack of the Clones ] . In the last film , I had a fairly standard make @-@ up on , but now , they 're starting to crinkle my face . " Transforming McDiarmid into Emperor Palpatine in Return of the Jedi and Revenge of the Sith , however , required extensive make @-@ up . McDiarmid remarked in an interview with Star Wars Insider magazine , " Yes — that was a four @-@ hour job , initially , although we got it down to about two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half in the end . But this was just a little bit of latex here and there , a little bit of skin @-@ <unk> . " He told the Homing Beacon newsletter , " When my face changes in the film , my mind went back to the early silent movie of The Phantom of the Opera with Lon Chaney , Sr .. " Film critic Roger Ebert wrote that he " looks uncannily like Death in The Seventh Seal " ( 1957 ) and film historian Robin Wood compares him to the hag from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) . 
 Palpatine 's wardrobe , tailored by costume designer Trisha Biggar , played an important part in the development of the character throughout the films . In Attack of the Clones , explained McDiarmid , " The costumes ... have got much more edge to them , I think , than the mere senator had [ in The Phantom Menace ] . So we see the trappings of power . " In the next episode , McDiarmid remarked , " To wear the costumes as the character I play is wonderfully empowering . " McDiarmid 's favorite costume in Revenge of the Sith was a high @-@ collared jacket that resembles snake or lizard skin . He stated that " it just feels reptilian , which is exactly right for [ Palpatine ] . " According to Trisha Biggar , Palpatine 's costumes proved the most daunting challenge . She said , " His six costumes get progressively darker and more ornately decorated throughout the movie . He wears greys and browns , almost going to black , taking him toward the dark side . " 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 With the premiere of Return of the Jedi and the prequel films and the accompanying merchandising campaign , Palpatine became an icon in American popular culture . Kenner / Hasbro produced and marketed a series of action figures of the character from 1983 to 2005 . According to John Shelton Lawrence and Robert Jewett , " These action figures allow children ( ' 4 & up ' ) to handle the symbols of the Force . " 
 Academics have debated the relationship of Palpatine to modern culture . Religion scholars Ross Shepard Kraemer , William Cassidy , and Susan Schwartz compare Palpatine and Star Wars heroes to the theological concept of dualism . They insist , " One can certainly picture the evil emperor in Star Wars as Satan , complete with his infernal powers , leading his faceless minions such as his red @-@ robed Imperial Guards . " Lawrence and Jewett argue that the killing of Palpatine in Return of the Jedi represented " the permanent subduing of evil " . 
 Since Return of the Jedi and the prequel films , Palpatine 's name has been invoked as a caricature in politics . The liberal website <unk> remarked in 2004 , " When we saw ... [ Senator ] Zell Miller [ of Georgia ] giving his invective at the RNC , we knew it reminded us of someone . We just couldn 't place it until we realized it was the hate in Zell 's eyes , his skin and the way it looks like that hate is eating his soul . Then we remembered : he reminded us of the evil Emperor Palpatine from Star Wars . ( We didn 't know the Emperor had a name until this morning . ) " A Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer editorial noted that anti @-@ pork bloggers were caricaturing West Virginia Senator Robert Byrd as " the Emperor Palpatine of pork " with Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska having " clear aspirations to be his Darth Vader . " The charge followed a report that linked a secret hold on the Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act of 2006 to the two senators . Politicians have made comparisons as well . In 2005 , Democratic Senator Frank Lautenberg of New Jersey compared Republican Majority Leader Bill Frist of Tennessee to Palpatine in a speech on the Senate floor , complete with a visual aid . 
 A Fox News editorial stated " no cultural icon can exist without someone trying to stuff it into a political ideology . The Star Wars saga , the greatest pop culture icon of the last three decades , is no exception ... Palpatine 's dissolution of the Senate in favor of imperial rule has been compared to Julius Caesar 's marginalization of the Roman Senate , Hitler 's power @-@ grab as chancellor , and FDR 's court @-@ packing scheme and creation of the imperial presidency . " 
 = Greater Manchester = 
 Greater Manchester is a metropolitan county in North West England , with a population of 2 @.@ 8 million . It encompasses one of the largest metropolitan areas in the United Kingdom and comprises ten metropolitan boroughs : Bolton , Bury , Oldham , Rochdale , Stockport , Tameside , Trafford , Wigan , and the cities of Manchester and Salford . Greater Manchester was created on 1 April 1974 as a result of the Local Government Act 1972 ; and designated a City Region on 1 April 2011 . 
 Greater Manchester spans 493 square miles ( 1 @,@ 277 km2 ) , which roughly covers the territory of the Greater Manchester Built @-@ up Area , the second most populous urban area in the UK . It is landlocked and borders Cheshire ( to the south @-@ west and south ) , Derbyshire ( to the south @-@ east ) , West Yorkshire ( to the north @-@ east ) , Lancashire ( to the north ) and Merseyside ( to the west ) . There is a mix of high @-@ density urban areas , suburbs , semi @-@ rural and rural locations in Greater Manchester , but land use is mostly urban — the product of concentric urbanisation and industrialisation which occurred mostly during the 19th century when the region flourished as the global centre of the cotton industry . It has a focused central business district , formed by Manchester city centre and the adjoining parts of Salford and Trafford , but Greater Manchester is also a polycentric county with ten metropolitan districts , each of which has at least one major town centre and outlying suburbs . 
 For the 12 years following 1974 the county had a two @-@ tier system of local government ; district councils shared power with the Greater Manchester County Council . The county council was abolished in 1986 , and so its districts ( the metropolitan boroughs ) effectively became unitary authority areas . However , the metropolitan county has continued to exist in law and as a geographic frame of reference , and as a ceremonial county , has a Lord Lieutenant and a High Sheriff . Being within the Lancashire county palatine they are appointed by the monarch in their capacity as Duke of Lancaster . Several county @-@ wide services were co @-@ ordinated through the Association of Greater Manchester Authorities until April 2011 , when the Greater Manchester Combined Authority was established as the strategic county @-@ wide authority for Greater Manchester , taking on functions and responsibilities for economic development , regeneration and transport . A further devolution of powers to Greater Manchester is set to take place upon the election of the inaugural Mayor of Greater Manchester scheduled for 2017 . 
 Before the creation of the metropolitan county , the name SELNEC was used for the area , taken from the initials of " South East Lancashire North East Cheshire " . Greater Manchester is an amalgamation of 70 former local government districts from the former administrative counties of Lancashire , Cheshire , the West Riding of Yorkshire and eight independent county boroughs . Since deindustrialisation in the mid @-@ 20th century , Greater Manchester has emerged as an exporter of media and digital content , guitar and dance music , and association football . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Although the modern county of Greater Manchester was not created until 1974 , the history of its constituent settlements and parts goes back centuries . There is evidence of Iron Age habitation , particularly at Mellor , and Celtic activity in a settlement named <unk> , believed to have been an area of Wigan settled by the Brigantes . Stretford was also part of the land believed to have been occupied by the Celtic Brigantes tribe , and lay on their border with the Cornovii on the southern side of the River Mersey . The remains of 1st @-@ century forts at Castlefield in Manchester , and Castleshaw Roman fort in Saddleworth , are evidence of Roman occupation . The area was settled by Anglo @-@ Saxons , who named it " <unk> " . Much of the region was omitted from the Domesday Book of 1086 ; Redhead states that this was because only a partial survey was taken , rather than sparsity of population . 
 During the Middle Ages , much of what became Greater Manchester lay within the hundred of Salfordshire – an ancient division of the county of Lancashire . Salfordshire encompassed several parishes and townships , some of which , like Rochdale , were important market towns and centres of England 's woollen trade . The development of what became Greater Manchester is attributed to a shared tradition of domestic flannel and fustian cloth production , which encouraged a system of cross @-@ regional trade . In the late @-@ 18th century , the Industrial Revolution transformed the local domestic system ; mechanisation enabled the industrialisation of the region 's textile trade , triggering rapid growth in the cotton industry and expansion in ancillary trades . Infrastructure such as rows of terraced housing , factories and roads were constructed to house labour , transport goods , and produce cotton goods on an industrial scale for a global market . The townships in and around Manchester began expanding " at an astonishing rate " around the turn of the 19th century as part of a process of unplanned urbanisation brought on by a boom in industrial textile production and processing . This population increase resulted in the " <unk> concentric growth " of a conurbation between Manchester and an arc of surrounding mill towns , formed from a steady <unk> of houses , factories and transport infrastructure . Places such as Bury , Oldham and Bolton played a central economic role nationally , and by the end of the 19th century had become some of the most important and productive cotton @-@ producing towns in the world . However , it was Manchester that was the most populous settlement , a major city , the world 's largest marketplace for cotton goods , and the natural centre of its region . By 1835 " Manchester was without challenge the first and greatest industrial city in the world " ; and by 1848 urban sprawl had fused the city to its surrounding towns and hinterland to form a single continuous conurbation . In the 1910s , local government reforms to administer this conurbation as a single entity were proposed . 
 In the 18th century , German traders had coined the name <unk> to cover the region in and around Manchester . However , the English term " Greater Manchester " did not appear until the 20th century . One of its first known recorded uses was in a 1914 report put forward in response to what was considered to have been the successful creation of the County of London in 1889 . The report suggested that a county should be set up to recognise the " Manchester known in commerce " , and referred to the areas that formed " a substantial part of South Lancashire and part of Cheshire , comprising all municipal boroughs and minor authorities within a radius of eight or nine miles of Manchester " . In his 1915 book Cities In Evolution , urban planner Sir Patrick Geddes wrote " far more than Lancashire realises , is growing up another Greater London " . 
 Most of Greater Manchester lay within the ancient county boundaries of Lancashire ; those areas south of the Mersey and Tame were in Cheshire . The Saddleworth area and a small part of Mossley are historically part of Yorkshire and in the south @-@ east a small part in Derbyshire . The areas that were incorporated into Greater Manchester in 1974 previously formed parts of the administrative counties of Cheshire , Lancashire , the West Riding of Yorkshire and of eight independent county boroughs . By the early 1970s , this system of demarcation was described as " archaic " and " grossly inadequate to keep pace both with the impact of motor travel , and with the huge increases in local government responsibilities " . 
 The Manchester Evening Chronicle brought to the fore the issue of " regional unity " for the area in April 1935 under the headline " Greater Manchester – The Ratepayers ' Salvation " . It reported on the " increasing demands for the exploration of the possibilities of a greater merger of public services throughout Manchester and the surrounding municipalities " . The issue was frequently discussed by civic leaders in the area at that time , particularly those from Manchester and Salford . The Mayor of Salford pledged his support to the idea , stating that he looked forward to the day when " there would be a merging of the essential services of Manchester , Salford , and the surrounding districts constituting Greater Manchester . " Proposals were halted by the Second World War , though in the decade after it , the pace of proposals for local government reform for the area quickened . In 1947 , Lancashire County Council proposed a three " ridings " system to meet the changing needs of the county of Lancashire , including those for Manchester and surrounding districts . Other proposals included the creation of a Manchester County Council , a directly elected regional body . In 1951 , the census in the UK began reporting on South East Lancashire as a homogeneous conurbation . 
 = = = Redcliffe @-@ Maud Report = = = 
 The Local Government Act 1958 designated the south east Lancashire area ( which , despite its name , included part of north east Cheshire ) , a Special Review Area . The Local Government Commission for England presented draft recommendations , in December 1965 , proposing a new county based on the conurbation surrounding and including Manchester , with nine most @-@ purpose boroughs corresponding to the modern Greater Manchester boroughs ( excluding Wigan ) . The review was abolished in favour of the Royal Commission on Local Government before issuing a final report . 
 The Royal Commission 's 1969 report , known as the Redcliffe @-@ Maud Report , proposed the removal of much of the then existing system of local government . The commission described the system of administering urban and rural districts separately as outdated , noting that urban areas provided employment and services for rural dwellers , and open countryside was used by town dwellers for recreation . The commission considered interdependence of areas at many levels , including travel @-@ to @-@ work , provision of services , and which local newspapers were read , before proposing a new administrative metropolitan area . The area had roughly the same northern boundary as today 's Greater Manchester ( though included Rossendale ) , but covered much more territory from Cheshire ( including Macclesfield , Warrington , Alderley Edge , Northwich , Middlewich , Wilmslow and Lymm ) , and Derbyshire ( the towns of New Mills , Whaley Bridge , Glossop and Chapel @-@ en @-@ le @-@ Frith – a minority report suggested that Buxton be included ) . The metropolitan area was to be divided into nine metropolitan districts , based on Wigan , Bolton , Bury / Rochdale , Warrington , Manchester ( including Salford and Old Trafford ) , Oldham , Altrincham , Stockport and Tameside . The report noted " The choice even of a label of convenience for this metropolitan area is difficult " . Seven years earlier , a survey prepared for the British Association intended to define the " South @-@ East Lancashire conurbation " noted that " Greater Manchester it is not ... One of its main characteristics is the marked individuality of its towns , ... all of which have an industrial and commercial history of more than local significance " . The term Selnec ( or SELNEC ) was already in use as an abbreviation for south east Lancashire and north east Cheshire ; Redcliffe @-@ Maud took this as " the most convenient term available " , having modified it to south east Lancashire , north east and central Cheshire . 
 Following the Transport Act 1968 , in 1969 the SELNEC Passenger Transport Executive ( an authority to co @-@ ordinate and operate public transport in the region ) was set up , covering an area smaller than the proposed Selnec , and different again to the eventual Greater Manchester . Compared with the Redcliffe @-@ Maud area , it excluded Macclesfield , Warrington , and Knutsford but included Glossop and Saddleworth in the West Riding of Yorkshire . It excluded Wigan , which was in both the Redcliffe @-@ Maud area and in the eventual Greater Manchester ( but had not been part of the 1958 act 's review area ) . 
 Redcliffe @-@ Maud 's recommendations were accepted by the Labour @-@ controlled government in February 1970 . Although the Redcliffe @-@ Maud Report was rejected by the Conservative government after the 1970 general election , there was a commitment to local government reform , and the need for a metropolitan county centred on the conurbation surrounding Manchester was accepted . The new government 's original proposal was much smaller than the Redcliffe @-@ Maud Report 's Selnec , with areas such as Winsford , Northwich , Knutsford , Macclesfield and Glossop retained by their original counties to ensure their county councils had enough revenue to remain competitive ( Cheshire County Council would have ceased to exist ) . Other late changes included the separation of the proposed Bury / Rochdale authority ( retained from the Redcliffe @-@ Maud report ) into the Metropolitan Borough of Bury and the Metropolitan Borough of Rochdale . Bury and Rochdale were originally planned to form a single district ( dubbed " <unk> " by local MP Michael Fidler ) but were divided into separate boroughs . To re @-@ balance the districts , the borough of Rochdale took Middleton from Oldham . During the passage of the bill , the towns of Whitworth , Wilmslow and Poynton successfully objected to their incorporation in the new county . 
 = = = 1974 – 1997 = = = 
 The Local Government Act 1972 reformed local government in England by creating a system of two @-@ tier metropolitan and non @-@ metropolitan counties and districts throughout the country . The act formally established Greater Manchester on <unk> 1974 , although Greater Manchester County Council ( GMCC ) had been running since elections in 1973 . The leading article in The Times on the day the Local Government Act came into effect noted that the " new arrangement is a compromise which seeks to reconcile familiar geography which commands a certain amount of affection and loyalty , with the scale of operations on which modern planning methods can work effectively " . <unk> noted that the creation of Greater Manchester " was the official unifying of a region which , through history and tradition , had forged for itself over many centuries bonds ... between the communities of town and village , each of which was the embodiment of the character of this region " . The name Greater Manchester was adopted , having been favoured over Selnec by the local population . 
 By January 1974 , a joint working party representing Greater Manchester had drawn up its county Structure Plan , ready for implementation by the Greater Manchester County Council . The plan set out objectives for the forthcoming metropolitan county . The highest priority was to increase the quality of life for its inhabitants by improving the county 's physical environment and cultural facilities which had suffered following deindustrialisation — much of Greater Manchester 's basic infrastructure dated from its 19th @-@ century growth , and was unsuited to modern lifestyles . Other objectives were to reverse the trend of depopulation in central @-@ Greater Manchester , to invest in country parks to improve the region 's poor reputation on leisure facilities , and to improve the county 's transport infrastructure and patterns . 
 Because of political objection , particularly from Cheshire , Greater Manchester covered only the inner , urban 62 of the 90 former districts that the Royal Commission had outlined as an effective administrative metropolitan area . In this capacity , GMCC found itself " planning for an arbitrary metropolitan area ... abruptly truncated to the south " , and so had to negotiate several land @-@ use , transport and housing projects with its neighbouring county councils . However a " major programme of environmental action " by GMCC broadly succeeded in reversing social <unk> in its inner city slums . Leisure and recreational successes included the Greater Manchester Exhibition Centre ( better known as the G @-@ Mex centre and now branded Manchester Central ) , a converted former railway station in Manchester city centre used for cultural events , and GMCC 's creation of five new country parks within its boundaries . GMCC was , however , criticised for being too Manchester @-@ centric by representatives from the outer suburbs . 
 Unlike most other modern counties ( including Merseyside and Tyne and Wear ) , Greater Manchester was never adopted as a postal county by the Royal Mail . A review in 1973 noted that " Greater Manchester " would be unlikely to be adopted because of confusion with the Manchester post town . The component areas of Greater Manchester held on to their pre @-@ 1974 postal counties until 1996 , when they were abolished . 
 A decade after they were established , the mostly Labour @-@ controlled metropolitan county councils and the Greater London Council ( GLC ) had several high profile clashes with the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher , with regards overspending and high rates charging . Government policy on the issue was considered throughout 1982 , and the Conservative Party put a " promise to scrap the metropolitan county councils " and the GLC , in their manifesto for the 1983 general election . Greater Manchester County Council was abolished on 31 March 1986 under the Local Government Act 1985 . That the metropolitan county councils were controlled by the Labour Party led to accusations that their abolition was motivated by party politics : the general secretary of the National Association of Local Government Officers described it as a " completely cynical manoeuvre " . Most of the functions of GMCC were devolved to the ten Greater Manchester metropolitan district councils , though functions such as emergency services and public transport were taken over by joint boards and continued to be run on a county @-@ wide basis . The Association of Greater Manchester Authorities ( AGMA ) was established to continue much of the county @-@ wide services of the county council . The metropolitan county continues to exist in law , and as a geographic frame of reference , for example as a NUTS 2 administrative division for statistical purposes within the European Union . Although having been a Lieutenancy area since 1974 , Greater Manchester was included as a ceremonial county by the <unk> Act 1997 on 1 July 1997 . 
 = = = Combined Authority = = = 
 In 1998 , the people of Greater London voted in a referendum in favour of establishing a new Greater London Authority , with mayor and an elected chamber for the county . The New Local Government Network proposed the creation of a new Manchester City Region based on Greater Manchester and other metropolitan counties as part of on @-@ going reform efforts , while a report released by the Institute for Public Policy Research 's Centre for Cities proposed the creation of two administrative city regions based on Manchester and Birmingham . In July 2007 , The Treasury published its Review of sub @-@ national economic development and regeneration , which stated that the government would allow those city regions that wished to work together to form a statutory framework for city regional activity , including powers over transport , skills , planning and economic development . In January 2008 , AGMA suggested that a formal government structure be created to cover Greater Manchester . The issue resurfaced in June 2008 with regards to proposed congestion charging in Greater Manchester ; Sir Richard Leese ( leader of Manchester City Council ) said " I 've come to the conclusion that [ a referendum on congestion charging should be held ] because we don 't have an indirectly or directly elected body for Greater Manchester that has the power to make this decision " . On 14 July 2008 the ten local authorities in Greater Manchester agreed to a strategic and integrated cross @-@ county Multi @-@ Area Agreement ; a voluntary initiative aimed at making district councils " work together to challenge the artificial limits of boundaries " in return for greater autonomy from the central government of the UK . A referendum on the Greater Manchester Transport Innovation Fund was held in December 2008 , in which voters " overwhelmingly rejected " plans for public transport improvements linked to a peak @-@ time weekday @-@ only congestion charge . 
 Following a bid from AGMA highlighting the potential benefits in combatting the late @-@ 2000s financial crisis , it was announced in the 2009 United Kingdom Budget that Greater Manchester and the Leeds City Region would be awarded Statutory City Region Pilot status , allowing ( if they desired ) for their constituent district councils to pool resources and become statutory Combined Authorities with powers comparable to the Greater London Authority . The stated aim of the pilot was to evaluate the contributions to economic growth and sustainable development by Combined Authorities . The Local Democracy , Economic Development and Construction Act 2009 enabled the creation of a Combined Authority for Greater Manchester with devolved powers on public transport , skills , housing , regeneration , waste management , carbon neutrality and planning permission , pending approval from the ten councils . Such strategic matters would be decided on via an enhanced majority rule voting system involving ten members appointed from among the councillors of the metropolitan boroughs ( one representing each borough with each council nominating one substitute ) without the input of central government . The ten district councils of Greater Manchester approved the creation of the Greater Manchester Combined Authority ( GMCA ) on 29 March 2010 , and submitted final recommendations for a constitution to the Department for Communities and Local Government and the Department for Transport . On 31 March 2010 the Communities Secretary John Denham approved the constitution and launched a 15 @-@ week public consultation on the draft bill together with the approved constitution . Following requests by the Association of Greater Manchester Authorities , which was superseded by the GMCA , the new authority came into being on 1 April 2011 . On the same day , the Transport for Greater Manchester Committee was also formed from a pool of 33 councillors allocated by council population ( roughly one councillor per 75 @,@ 000 residents ) to scrutinise the running of Greater Manchester 's transport bodies and their finances , approve the decisions and policies of said bodies and form strategic policy recommendations or projects for the approval of the Combined Authority . On 3 November 2014 , George Osborne , the Chancellor of the Exchequer , announced that there would be an eleventh member of the GMCA — a directly elected Mayor of Greater Manchester , with " powers over transport , housing , planning and policing " from 2017 . This announcement was followed up on 25 February 2015 with news that Greater Manchester would be the first part of England to " get full control of its health spending " with a devolution deal from April 2016 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Greater Manchester is a landlocked county spanning 493 square miles ( 1 @,@ 277 km2 ) . The South Pennines rise along the northeastern side of the county , through parts of Oldham , Rochdale and Tameside . The West Pennine Moors and several coalfields ( mainly sandstones and shales ) lie in the northwest and west respectively , and the Cheshire Plain fringes the south . The rivers Mersey , Irwell and Tame run through Greater Manchester , all of which rise in the Pennines . Other rivers traverse the region as tributaries to the major rivers , including the Douglas , the Irk , and the Roch . Black Chew Head is the highest point in Greater Manchester which forms part of the Peak District National Park , rising 1 @,@ 778 feet ( 542 m ) above sea @-@ level , within the parish of Saddleworth . 
 Greater Manchester is characterised by dense urban and industrial development , which includes centres of commerce , finance , retail and administration , as well as commuter suburbs and housing , interspersed with transport infrastructure such as light rail , roads and motorway , and canals . There is a mix of high density urban areas , suburbs , semi @-@ rural and rural locations in Greater Manchester , but land use is mostly urban . The built environment of Greater Manchester utilises red brick and sandstone prominently as a building material , alongside structures composed of modern materials , high @-@ rise towers , and landmark 19th- , 20th- and 21st @-@ century buildings in the city and town centres . Manchester city centre is the commercial and geographic heart of Greater Manchester , and with the adjoining parts of Salford and Trafford , is defined as Greater Manchester 's " Regional Centre " for purposes of urban planning and public transport . Political and economic ties between the city centre and neighbouring Salford and Trafford have strengthened with the shift from town and district centres to metropolitan @-@ level centres in England , and this area 's high @-@ rise landmark buildings provide a visual orientation point of reference as a central business district . However , Greater Manchester is also a polycentric county with ten metropolitan districts , each of which has a major town centre – and in some cases more than one – and many smaller settlements . The major towns encircle Manchester city centre , and between them are smaller towns ( such as Denton , Middleton and Failsworth ) which are suburban to both the Regional Centre and the major town centres . Combined , these factors make Greater Manchester the most complex " polycentric functional urban region " in the UK outside London . 
 The Greater Manchester Built @-@ up Area is the conurbation or continuous urban area based around Greater Manchester , as defined by the Office for National Statistics . In 2011 , it had an estimated population of 2 @,@ 553 @,@ 379 , making it the second most populous built @-@ up area in the UK , and occupied an area of 630 @.@ 3 square kilometres ( 243 @.@ 4 sq mi ) at the time of the 2011 census . The European Union designate the conurbation as a single <unk> urban city region . The Built @-@ up Area includes most of Greater Manchester , omitting areas of countryside and small villages , as well as noncontiguous urban towns such as Wigan and Marple . Outside the boundary of Greater Manchester it includes several adjacent areas of settlement and a few outliers connected to the urban sprawl by ribbon development , such as Wilmslow and Alderley Edge in Cheshire , Glossop and Hadfield in Derbyshire , and Whitworth in Lancashire . This conurbation forms part of a megalopolis of 9 @.@ 4 million across northern England . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Greater Manchester experiences a temperate maritime climate , like most of the British Isles , with relatively cool summers and mild winters . The county 's average annual rainfall is 806 @.@ 6 millimetres ( 31 @.@ 76 in ) compared to the UK average of 1 @,@ 125 @.@ 0 millimetres ( 44 @.@ 29 in ) , and its mean rain days are 140 @.@ 4 mm ( 5 @.@ 53 in ) per annum , compared to the UK average of 154 @.@ 4 mm ( 6 @.@ 08 in ) . The mean temperature is slightly above average for the United Kingdom . Greater Manchester also has a relatively high humidity level , which lent itself to the optimised and breakage @-@ free textile manufacturing which took place around the county . Snowfall is not a common sight in the built up areas , due to the urban warming effect . However , the Pennine and Rossendale Forest hills around the eastern and northern edges of the county receive more snow , and roads leading out of the county can be closed due to heavy snowfall , notably the A62 road via Standedge , the A57 ( Snake Pass ) towards Sheffield , and the M62 over Saddleworth Moor . In the most southern point of Greater Manchester , Woodford 's Met Office weather station recorded a temperature of − 17 @.@ 6 ° C ( 0 @.@ 3 ° F ) on 8 January 2010 , during the Winter of 2009 @-@ 2010 in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Flora and fauna = = = 
 Contrary to its reputation for urban sprawl , Greater Manchester has a green belt , constraining urban drift , and a " wide and varied range " of wildlife and natural habitats . For instance , the wooded valleys of Bolton , Bury and Stockport , the moorlands north and east of Rochdale , Oldham and Stalybridge , and the reed beds between Wigan and Leigh , harbour flora and fauna of national importance . Mature woodland , scrubland , grassland , high moorland , mossland , agricultural land , lakes , wetlands , river valleys , embankments , urban parks and suburban gardens are habitats found in Greater Manchester which further contribute to biodiversity . The Greater Manchester Ecology Unit classifies Sites of Biological Importance . 
 The 21 Sites of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) in Greater Manchester , and the 12 @.@ 1 square miles ( 31 km2 ) of common land in Greater Manchester are of particular interest to organisations such as the Greater Manchester Local Record Centre , the Greater Manchester Biodiversity Project and the Manchester Field Club , which are dedicated to wildlife conservation and the preservation of the region 's natural history . Among the SSSIs are Astley and Bedford Mosses which form a network of ancient peat bog on the fringe of Chat Moss , which in turn , at 10 @.@ 6 square miles ( 27 km2 ) comprises the largest area of prime farmland in Greater Manchester and contains the largest block of semi @-@ natural woodland in the county . The Wigan Flashes , such as those at Pennington Flash Country Park , are the by @-@ product of coal mining , where subsidence has led to waterbodies collecting in the resulting hollows which form an important reed bed resource in Greater Manchester . Opened in 1979 , Sale Water Park is a 152 @-@ acre ( 62 ha ) area of countryside and parkland in Sale which includes a 52 @-@ acre ( 21 ha ) artificial lake by the River Mersey . 
 Clover , sorrel , nettle and thistle are common , and grow wild in Greater Manchester . Common heather ( Calluna vulgaris ) dominates the uplands , such as Saddleworth Moor , which lies within the South Pennines and Dark Peak area of the Peak District National Park . The Rochdale Canal harbours floating water @-@ plantain ( <unk> ) , an endangered aquatic plant . In 2002 , Plantlife International launched its County Flowers campaign , asking members of the public to nominate and vote for a wild flower emblem for their county . Common cottongrass ( Eriophorum angustifolium ) , a plant with fluffy white plumes native to wet hollows on high moors , was announced as the county flower of Greater Manchester . The house sparrow , common starling , and common blackbird are among the most populous bird species in Greater Manchester ; Eurasian magpie and feral pigeon are common and breed in habitats across the county . The South Pennines support internationally important numbers of European golden plover , curlew , merlin and twite . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The Greater Manchester Combined Authority ( GMCA ) is the top @-@ tier administrative body for the local governance of Greater Manchester . It was established on 1 April 2011 as a pilot combined authority , unique to local government in the United Kingdom . It consists of ten indirectly elected members , each a directly elected councillor from one of the ten metropolitan boroughs that comprise Greater Manchester . The authority derives most of its powers from the Local Government Act 2000 and Local Democracy , Economic Development and Construction Act 2009 , and replaced a range of single @-@ purpose joint boards and <unk> in 2011 , to provide a formal administrative authority for Greater Manchester with powers over public transport , skills , housing , regeneration , waste management , carbon neutrality and planning permission . Functional executive bodies , such as Transport for Greater Manchester , are responsible for delivery of services in these areas . On 3 November 2014 , the Devolution to the Greater Manchester Combined Authority agreement was signed to pass further powers and responsibilities , as well as the establishment of an elected Mayor of Greater Manchester with the first election to be held in 2017 . From April 2016 , Greater Manchester will be the first part of England to " get full control of its health spending " with a devolution deal which aims to unite the region 's health and social care systems under one budget under the control of local leaders , including Greater Manchester 's new directly elected mayor . 
 Beneath the GMCA are the ten councils of Greater Manchester 's ten districts , which are Bolton , Bury , the City of Manchester , Oldham , Rochdale , the City of Salford , Stockport , Tameside , Trafford and Wigan . These district councils have the greatest powers over public services , and control matters such as council tax , education provision , social housing , libraries and healthcare . Eight of the ten metropolitan boroughs were named after the eight former county boroughs that now compose the largest centres of population and greater historical and political prominence . As an example , the Metropolitan Borough of Stockport is centred on the town of Stockport , a former county borough , but includes other smaller settlements , such as Cheadle , Gatley , and Bramhall . The names of two of the metropolitan boroughs were given a neutral name because , at the time they were created , there was no agreement on the town to be put forward as the administrative centre and neither had a county borough . These boroughs are Tameside and Trafford , centred on Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne and Stretford , respectively , and are named with reference to geographical and historical origins . The lowest formal tier of local government in Greater Manchester are the parish councils , which cover the various civil parishes in Greater Manchester , and have limited powers over upkeep , maintenance and small grants . 
 For the first 12 years after the county was created in 1974 , Greater Manchester had a two @-@ tier system of local government , and the metropolitan borough councils shared power with the Greater Manchester County Council . The Greater Manchester County Council , a strategic authority based in what is now Westminster House off Piccadilly Gardens , comprised 106 members drawn from the ten metropolitan boroughs of Greater Manchester . It was a sub @-@ regional body running regional services such as transport , strategic planning , emergency services and waste disposal . In 1986 , along with the five other metropolitan county councils and the Greater London Council , the Greater Manchester County Council was abolished , and most of its powers were devolved to the boroughs . Between 1986 and 2011 , the boroughs were effectively unitary authority areas , but opted to co @-@ operate voluntarily under the Association of Greater Manchester Authorities ( AGMA ) , which served to create a co @-@ ordinated county @-@ wide approach to issues of common interest to Greater Manchester , such as public transport and the shared labour market , as well as making representations to central government and the European Union . 
 Although used as a " successful brand " , Greater Manchester 's politics have been characterised by " entrenched localism and related rivalries " , historically resistant to regionalism . The major towns in Greater Manchester retain a " fierce independence " , meaning Greater Manchester is administered using " inter @-@ municipal coordination " on a broadly voluntary basis . That eight of the ten borough councils have ( for the most part ) been Labour @-@ controlled since 1986 , has helped maintain this informal co @-@ operation between the districts at a county @-@ level . After the abolition of the county council , the ten authorities of Greater Manchester co @-@ operated voluntarily on policy issues like Local Transport Plans as well as funding the Greater Manchester County Record Office , and local services were administered by statutory joint boards . Now under the direction of the Greater Manchester Combined Authority , these joint boards are Transport for Greater Manchester ( TfGM ) which is responsible for planning and co @-@ ordinating public transport across the county ; the Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service , who are administered by a joint Fire and Rescue Authority ; and the Greater Manchester Waste Disposal Authority . These joint boards are made up of councillors appointed from each of the ten boroughs ( except the Waste Disposal Authority , which does not include the Metropolitan Borough of Wigan ) . Greater Manchester Police was formerly overseen by a joint police authority , but is now overseen by the Greater Manchester Police and Crime Commissioner owing to reforms introduced in 2012 . The ten borough councils are joint @-@ owners of the Manchester Airport Group which controls Manchester Airport and three other UK airports . Other services are directly funded and managed by the local councils . 
 Greater Manchester is a ceremonial county with its own Lord @-@ Lieutenant who is the personal representative of the monarch . The Local Government Act 1972 provided that the whole of the area to be covered by the new metropolitan county of Greater Manchester would also be included in the Duchy of Lancaster – extending the duchy to include areas which were formerly in the counties of Cheshire and the West Riding of Yorkshire . Until 31 March 2005 , Greater Manchester 's Keeper of the Rolls was appointed by the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster ; they are now appointed by the Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain . The first Lord Lieutenant of Greater Manchester was Sir William Downward who held the title from 1974 to 1988 . The current Lord Lieutenant is Warren James Smith . As a geographic county , Greater Manchester is used by the government ( via the Office for National Statistics ) for the gathering of county @-@ wide statistics , and organising and collating general register and census material . 
 In terms of representation in the Parliament of the United Kingdom , Greater Manchester is divided into 28 parliamentary constituencies – 18 borough constituencies and 10 county constituencies . Most of Greater Manchester is controlled by the Labour party , and is generally considered a Labour stronghold , . At the 2015 UK General Election in Greater Manchester , Labour won 22 seats and the Conservatives won 5 . 
 = = Demography = = 
 Greater Manchester has a population of 2 @,@ 732 @,@ 854 ( 2014 est . , ) , making it the third most populous county in England after Greater London and the West Midlands and the highest ever for the county . It is the sixth most densely populated county of England . The demonym of Greater Manchester is " Greater Mancunian " . The Manchester accent and dialect , native to Manchester , is common in the city and adjacent areas , but gives way to " slower , deeper accents " towards Greater Manchester 's fringes and suburbs . 
 Greater Manchester is home to a diverse population and is a multicultural agglomeration with an ethnic minority population comprising 8 @.@ 5 % of the total population in 2001 . In 2008 , there were over 66 refugee nationalities in the county . At the 2001 UK census , 74 @.@ 2 % of Greater Manchester 's residents were Christian , 5 @.@ 0 % Muslim , 0 @.@ 9 % Jewish , 0 @.@ 7 % Hindu , 0 @.@ 2 % Buddhist , and 0 @.@ 1 % Sikh . 11 @.@ 4 % had no religion , 0 @.@ 2 % had an alternative religion and 7 @.@ 4 % did not state their religion . This is similar to the rest of the country , although the proportions of Muslims and Jews are nearly twice the national average . It contains the Heaton Park Hebrew Congregation , a large Ashkenazi Orthodox synagogue located in North Manchester . Greater Manchester is covered by the Roman Catholic Dioceses of Salford and Shrewsbury , and the Archdiocese of Liverpool . Most of Greater Manchester is part of the Anglican Diocese of Manchester , apart from Wigan which lies within the Diocese of Liverpool . 
 Following the deindustrialisation of Greater Manchester in the mid @-@ 20th century , there was a significant economic and population decline in the region , particularly in Manchester and Salford . Vast areas of low @-@ quality squalid terraced housing that were built throughout the Victorian era were found to be in a poor state of repair and unsuited to modern needs ; many inner @-@ city districts suffered from chronic social deprivation and high levels of unemployment . Slum clearance and the increased building of social housing overspill estates by Salford and Manchester City Councils lead to a decrease in population in central Greater Manchester . During the 1970s , 1980s and 1990s , the population of Greater Manchester declined by over 8 @,@ 000 inhabitants a year . While Manchester 's population shrank by about 40 % during this time ( from 766 @,@ 311 in 1931 to 452 @,@ 000 in 2006 ) , the total population of Greater Manchester decreased by only 8 % . 
 Greater Manchester 's housing stock comprises a variety of types . Manchester city centre is noted for its high @-@ rise apartments , while Salford has some of the tallest and most densely populated tower block estates in Europe . Saddleworth has stone @-@ built properties , including farmhouses and converted weavers ' cottages . Throughout Greater Manchester , rows of terraced houses are common , most of them built during the Victorian and Edwardian periods . House prices and labour markets differ in Greater Manchester between north and south , such that in the 2000s , the Housing Market Renewal Initiative identified Manchester , Salford , Rochdale and Oldham as areas with terraced housing unsuited to modern needs . In contrast , towns and villages in southern Greater Manchester , from Bramhall through Woodford to Altrincham constitute an arc of wealthy commuter towns . Altrincham in particular , with its neighbours Bowdon and Hale , forms a " stockbroker belt , with well @-@ appointed dwellings in an area of sylvan opulence " . 
 = = Education = = 
 Greater Manchester has five universities : the Manchester Metropolitan University , the University of Bolton , the University of Law , the University of Manchester and the University of Salford . Together with the Royal Northern College of Music they had a combined population of students of 101 @,@ 165 in 2007 – the third highest number in England behind Greater London ( 360 @,@ 890 ) and the West Midlands ( 140 @,@ 980 ) , and the thirteenth highest in England per head of population . The majority of students are concentrated on Oxford Road in Manchester , Europe 's largest urban higher education precinct . 
 As of 2010 , further education in Greater Manchester is co @-@ ordinated by the Greater Manchester Colleges Group , a joint venture composed of an association of 24 colleges in the region . Primary and secondary education within Greater Manchester are the responsibility of the constituent boroughs which form local education authorities and administer schools . The county has several independent schools such as Bolton School , Bury Grammar School , Manchester Grammar School , Oldham Hulme Grammar School , St Bede 's College and Stockport Grammar School . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Much of Greater Manchester 's wealth was generated during the Industrial Revolution , particularly textile manufacture . The world 's first cotton mill was built in the town of Royton , and the county encompasses several former mill towns . An Association for Industrial Archaeology publication describes Greater Manchester as " one of the classic areas of industrial and urban growth in Britain , the result of a combination of forces that came together in the 18th and 19th centuries : a phenomenal rise in population , the appearance of the specialist industrial town , a transport revolution , and weak local lordship " . Much of the county was at the forefront of textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution and into the early @-@ 20th century ; Peter Smith , Baron Smith of Leigh , chair of the Greater Manchester Combined Authority said " clearly , all of the Greater Manchester area was once at the heart of a very vibrant [ textiles ] industry " , represented by former textile mills found throughout the county . The territory that makes up Greater Manchester experienced a rapid decline of these traditional sectors , partly during the Lancashire Cotton famine brought on by the American Civil War , but mainly as part of the post @-@ war economic depression and deindustrialization of Britain that occurred during the 20th century . 
 Considerable industrial restructuring has helped the region to recover from deindustrialisation and the demise of the mass production of textiles . Historically , the docks at Salford Quays were an industrial port , though are now ( following a period of disuse ) a commercial and residential area which includes the Imperial War Museum North and The Lowry theatre and exhibition centre . The BBC is now established in their new home at MediaCityUK , at Salford Quays . This is home to BBC North West , several BBC departments , including BBC Sport , Blue Peter and , since April 2012 , BBC Breakfast . Rochdale and Manchester are connected to the history of the cooperative movement ; the Rochdale Society of Equitable Pioneers ( an early consumer co @-@ operative ) was founded in Rochdale in 1844 , and The Co @-@ operative Group , the UK 's largest mutual business and North West England 's biggest company , is headquartered at One Angel Square in central Manchester . Despite this economic diversification , as of November 2012 , government plans are under development to revive textile production in Greater Manchester , and restore it as the national home of British textile manufacture . 
 Today , Greater Manchester is the economic centre of the North West region of England and is the largest sub @-@ regional economy in the UK outside London and South East England . Greater Manchester represents more than £ 42 billion of the UK regional GVA , more than Wales , Northern Ireland or North East England . Manchester city centre , the central business district of Greater Manchester , is a major centre of trade and commerce and provides Greater Manchester with a global identity , specialist activities and employment opportunities ; similarly , the economy of the city centre is dependent upon the rest of the county for its population as an employment pool , skilled workforce and for its collective purchasing power . Manchester today is a centre of the arts , the media , higher education and commerce . In a poll of British business leaders published in 2006 , Manchester was regarded as the best place in the UK to locate a business . A report commissioned by Manchester Partnership , published in 2007 , showed Manchester to be the " fastest @-@ growing city " economically . It is the third most visited city in the United Kingdom by foreign visitors and is now often considered to be the second city of the UK . The Trafford Centre is one of the largest shopping centres in the United Kingdom , and is located within the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford . 
 At the 2001 UK census , there were 1 @,@ 805 @,@ 315 residents of Greater Manchester aged 16 to 74 . The economic activity of these people was 40 @.@ 3 % in full @-@ time employment , 11 @.@ 3 % in part @-@ time employment , 6 @.@ 7 % self @-@ employed , 3 @.@ 5 % unemployed , 5 @.@ 1 % students without jobs , 2 @.@ 6 % students with jobs , 13 @.@ 0 % retired , 6 @.@ 1 % looking after home or family , 7 @.@ 8 % permanently sick or disabled and 3 @.@ 5 % economically inactive for other reasons . The figures follow the national trend , although the percentage of self @-@ employed people is below the national average of 8 @.@ 3 % . The proportion of unemployment in the county varies , with the Metropolitan Borough of Stockport having the lowest at 2 @.@ 0 % and Manchester the highest at 7 @.@ 9 % . In 2001 , of the 1 @,@ 093 @,@ 385 residents of Greater Manchester in employment , the industry of employment was : 18 @.@ 4 % retail and wholesale ; 16 @.@ 7 % manufacturing ; 11 @.@ 8 % property and business services ; 11 @.@ 6 % health and social work ; 8 @.@ 0 % education ; 7 @.@ 3 % transport and communications ; 6 @.@ 7 % construction ; 4 @.@ 9 % public administration and defence ; 4 @.@ 7 % hotels and restaurants ; 4 @.@ 1 % finance ; 0 @.@ 8 % electricity , gas , and water supply ; 0 @.@ 5 % agriculture ; and 4 @.@ 5 % other . This was roughly in line with national figures , except for the proportion of jobs in agriculture which is only about a third of the national average of 1 @.@ 5 % , due to the overwhelmingly urban , built @-@ up land use of Greater Manchester . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Public transport services in Greater Manchester are co @-@ ordinated by Transport for Greater Manchester ( TfGM ) , a public body with powers between those of a passenger transport executive and Transport for London , established as SELNEC PTE in 1969 in accordance with the Transport Act 1968 . The original SELNEC Passenger Transport Executive was renamed as the Greater Manchester Passenger Transport Executive ( GMPTE ) when taken over by the Greater Manchester County Council on 1 April 1974 to co @-@ ordinate public transport modes within the new county . The council had overall responsibility for strategic planning and all policy decisions covering public transport ( such as bus and rail services ) and highways . GMPTE 's purpose was to secure the provision of a completely integrated and efficient system of passenger transport for Greater Manchester on behalf of the county council . In 1977 , it was noted as the largest authority for public transport in the United Kingdom after London Transport . GMPTE was renamed as Transport for Greater Manchester in April 2011 when it became a functional body of the Greater Manchester Combined Authority and obtained powers additional to those of a regular passenger transport executive from central government . 
 Greater Manchester lies at the heart of the North West transport network . Much of the infrastructure converges at Manchester city centre with the Manchester Inner Ring Road , an amalgamation of several major roads , circulating the city centre . The county is the only place in the UK to have a fully orbital motorway , the M60 , which passes through all of the boroughs except Bolton and Wigan . Greater Manchester has a higher percentage of the motorway network than any other county in the country , and according to the Guinness Book of World Records , it has the most traffic lanes side by side ( 17 ) , spread across several parallel carriageways ( M61 at <unk> in Walkden , close to the M60 interchange ) . Greater Manchester 's 85 miles ( 137 km ) of motorway network saw 5 @.@ 8 billion vehicle kilometres in 2002 – about 6 % of the UK 's total , or 89 @,@ 000 vehicles a day . The A580 " East Lancs " road is a primary A road that connects Manchester and Salford with Liverpool . It was the UK 's first purpose @-@ built intercity highway and was officially opened by George V on 18 July 1934 . Throughout 2008 , there were proposals for congestion charging in Greater Manchester . Unlike the London scheme , two cordons would have been used , one covering the main urban core of the Greater Manchester Urban Area and another covering Manchester city centre . 
 Metrolink is Greater Manchester 's light rail system , which began operating in 1992 . Principally used for suburban commuting , as of December 2014 the 57 @-@ mile ( 92 km ) long network consists of seven lines which radiate from Manchester city centre and terminate at Altrincham , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Bury , Didsbury , Eccles , Manchester Airport and Rochdale . The system is owned by TfGM and operated and maintained under contract by RATP Group . Greater Manchester has a heavy rail network of 142 route miles ( 229 km ) with 98 stations , forming a central hub to the North West rail network . Train services are provided by private operators and run on the national rail network which is owned and managed by Network Rail . There is an extensive bus network which radiates from Manchester city centre . The largest providers are First Greater Manchester for the northern parts of the county and Stagecoach Manchester for the southern parts . An extensive canal network also remains from the Industrial Revolution . 
 Manchester Airport , which is the third busiest in the United Kingdom , serves the county and wider region with flights to more worldwide destinations than any other airport in the UK . Since June 2007 it has served 225 routes . The airport handled 21 @.@ 06 million passengers in 2008 . 
 The three modes of public surface transport in the area are heavily used . 19 @.@ 7 million rail journeys were made in the then GMPTE @-@ supported area in the 2005 / 2006 financial year – an increase of 9 @.@ 4 % over 2004 / 2005 ; there were 19 @.@ 9 million journeys on Metrolink ; and the bus system carried 219 @.@ 4 million passengers . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Manchester hosted the 2002 Commonwealth Games which was , at a cost of £ 200M for the sporting facilities and a further £ <unk> for local infrastructure , by far the biggest and most expensive sporting event held in the UK and the first to be an integral part of urban regeneration . A mix of new and existing facilities were used . New amenities included the Manchester Aquatics Centre , Bolton Arena , the National Squash Centre , and the City of Manchester Stadium . The Manchester Velodrome was built as part of the Manchester bid for the 2000 Summer Olympics . After the Commonwealth Games the City of Manchester Stadium was converted for football use , and the adjacent warm @-@ up track upgraded to become the Manchester Regional Arena . Other facilities continue to be used by elite athletes . Cambridge Policy Consultants estimate 4 @,@ 500 full @-@ time jobs as a direct consequence , and Grattan points to other long @-@ term benefits accruing from publicity and the improvement of the area 's image . 
 Association football is " woven into the cultural fabric of Greater Manchester " , by way of its numerous football clubs – two of which play in the Premier League - which draw support , visitors and economic benefits to Greater Manchester valued at £ 330 million per year as of 2013 . The Manchester Football Association is the sport 's governing body in Greater Manchester , and is committed to its promotion and development . Manchester United F.C. are one of the world 's best @-@ known football teams , and in April 2008 Forbes estimated that they were the world 's richest club . They have won the League Championship a record twenty times ( most recently in 2012 @-@ 2013 ) , the FA Cup a record twelve times , the Football League Cup four times and have been European Champions three times . Their Old Trafford ground has hosted the FA Cup Final England international matches and the 2003 UEFA Champions League Final between Juventus and A.C. Milan . Manchester City F.C. moved from Maine Road to the City of Manchester Stadium after the 2002 Commonwealth Games . They have won the league championship four times ( most recently in 2013 @-@ 2014 ) and the FA Cup five times . In addition , Wigan Athletic F.C. are one of the county 's younger sides , and won their first major title in 2013 , defeating Manchester City F.C. in the FA Cup final . They currently play in the Championship . There is also Bolton Wanderers F.C. , who also play in the Championship . Oldham Athletic A.F.C. ( founding members of Premier League ) and Bury F.C. ( two FA Cup wins ) who play in League One , Rochdale A.F.C. who play in League One , Stockport County F.C. and F.C. United of Manchester who both play in the National League North . 
 In rugby league , the Wigan Warriors and the Salford Red Devils compete in the Super League , the top @-@ level professional rugby league football club competition in Europe . Wigan have won the Super League / Rugby Football League Championship eighteen times , the Challenge Cup seventeen times , and the World Club Challenge three times . Leigh Centurions and the Swinton Lions take part in the Championship , the sport 's second tier , with 5 times Rugby Football League Championship and 3 times Challenge Cup winners Oldham Roughyeds and local rivals Rochdale Hornets in the third @-@ tier Championship 1 . There is also a large network of junior / community rugby league clubs across the metropolitan area which act as feeder teams to the elite sides . In rugby union , Stockport 's Sale Sharks compete in the Guinness Premiership , and won the league in 2006 . Whitefield based Sedgley Park RUFC compete in National Division One , Manchester RUFC in National Division Two and Wigan side Orrell R.U.F.C. in National Division Three North . 
 Lancashire County Cricket Club began as Manchester Cricket Club and represents the ( ancient ) county of Lancashire . Lancashire contested the original 1890 County Championship . The team has won the County Championship nine times , most recently in 2011 . Their Old Trafford ground , near the football stadium of the same name , regularly hosts test matches . Possibly the most famous took place in 1956 , when Jim Laker took a record nineteen wickets in the fourth test against Australia . Cheshire County Cricket Club are a minor counties club who sometimes play in the south of the county . 
 The Kirkmanshulme Lane stadium in Belle Vue is the home to top @-@ flight speedway team the Belle Vue Aces and regular greyhound racing . Professional ice hockey returned to the area in early 2007 with the opening of a purpose @-@ designed rink in Altrincham , the Altrincham Ice Dome , to host the Manchester Phoenix . Their predecessor , Manchester Storm , went out of business in 2002 because of financial problems that led to them being unable to pay players ' wages or the rent for the Manchester Arena in which they played . 
 Horse racing has taken place at several sites in the county . The two biggest courses were both known as Manchester Racecourse – though neither was within the boundaries of Manchester – and ran from the 17th century until 1963 . Racing was at Kersal Moor until 1847 when the racecourse at Castle Irwell was opened . In 1867 racing was moved to New Barnes , Weaste , until the site was vacated ( for a hefty price ) in 1901 to allow an expansion to Manchester Docks . The land is now home to Dock 9 of the re @-@ branded Salford Quays . Racing then moved back to Castle Irwell which later staged a Classic – the 1941 St. Leger – and was home to the Lancashire Oaks ( nowadays run at Haydock Park ) and the November Handicap , which was traditionally the last major race of the flat season . Through the late 50s and early 60s the track saw Scobie Breasley and Lester Piggott annually battle out the closing acts of the jockey 's title until racing ceased on 7 November 1963 . 
 The Greater Manchester Athletics Association is the governing body of athletics in Greater Manchester , and organises events and competitions within Greater Manchester . The Greater Manchester Marathon is a long @-@ distance running event along a 26 @-@ mile and 385 @-@ yard course throughout the borough of Trafford . Professional athletics takes place at the Regional Athletics Arena in <unk> , which has hosted numerous national trials , Robin Park in Wigan , Longford Park in Stretford ( home to Trafford Athletic Club ) , Woodbank Stadium in Stockport ( home to Stockport Harriers ) and the <unk> Track in Winton ( home to Salford Harriers ) . As of 2008 , new sports facilities including a 10 @,@ 000 capacity stadium and athletics venue are being constructed at Leigh Sports Village . 
 The Greater Manchester Community Basketball Club is an association which represents Greater Manchester in basketball . It supports a variety of teams , including Manchester Magic . The Greater Manchester County Crown Green Bowling Association appoints Junior , Senior and Veteran teams to represent Greater Manchester in the sport of bowls . Founded by Greater Manchester 's ten district councils in 1996 , <unk> is the County Sports Partnership for Greater Manchester which works closely with the sports and physical activity sectors and coordinates events such as the Greater Manchester Youth Games . The Greater Manchester Sports Fund aims to ensure that people in Greater Manchester aged 12 – 21 competing in any kind of sport , irrespective of background , are able to obtain grants of up to £ 750 so that they can better fulfil their potential . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Art , tourism , culture and sport provide 16 % of employment in Greater Manchester , with the proportion highest in Manchester . In 2014 , Will Straw remarked that " Greater Manchester is a creative powerhouse " , recognised for its cultural output in areas such as association football , media and digital content , and guitar and dance music . 
 = = = Cuisine = = = 
 There are several delicacies native to Greater Manchester . Savoury dishes include Black pudding , a blood sausage typically associated with Bury and Bury Market ; Pasty <unk> , a combined pasty @-@ <unk> cake created in Bolton ; and Rag pudding , a suet pastry pudding from Oldham filled with steak and onion and steamed in a cloth or wrapper to cook ; the Manchester egg was introduced in 2010 . Sweet dishes include Eccles cake — native to Eccles — a small round flaky pastry cake filled with currants , sugar and spice ; Manchester tart , a baked tart which consists of a shortcrust pastry shell spread with raspberry jam , covered with a custard filling and topped with flakes of coconut ; and Uncle Joe 's Mint Balls , traditional sweet mild mints manufactured in Wigan since their inception in 1898 . <unk> and <unk> are soft drinks invented in Manchester in 1908 and 1924 respectively . Boddingtons is a bitter developed in Manchester and promoted as the " Cream of Manchester " in a popular 1990s advertising campaign credited with raising the city 's profile . 
 The Greater Manchester Campaign for Real Ale is a branch of the national Campaign for Real Ale , an advocacy group that supports , promotes and preserves the beer and drinks industry , and recognising outstanding venues with awards ; The Nursery in Heaton Norris was its National Pub of the Year in 2001 , and The Baum in Rochdale was its National Pub Of The Year in 2012 . The Manchester Food and Drink Festival was launched in 1997 as an urban beverage and gastronomy fair , principally held in Manchester city centre with further events throughout Greater Manchester ; smaller separate local events include the Prestwich Food and Drink Festival , the annual World Pie Eating Championship in Wigan , and the annual Ramsbottom Chocolate Festival . As of 2012 , Greater Manchester has no Michelin @-@ starred restaurants , but three eateries in the Bib Gourmand category . 
 = = = Galleries , museums and exhibitions = = = 
 The Greater Manchester Museums Group ( <unk> ) is a partnership of eight of the ten Museum Services in Greater Manchester . Its exhibition centres include : Gallery Oldham , which has in the past featured work by Pablo Picasso ; Salford Museum and Art Gallery , a local museum with a recreated Victorian street ; and Bolton Museum , which houses material from private collectors , including geological specimens from the estate of Caroline Birley . Separate from the <unk> is The Lowry at Salford Quays , which has a changing display of L. S. Lowry 's work alongside travelling exhibitions . Manchester Art Gallery is a major provincial art gallery noted for its collection of Pre @-@ Raphaelite art and housed in a Grade I listed building by Charles Barry . 
 Greater Manchester 's museums showcase the county 's industrial and social heritage . The Hat Works in Stockport is the UK 's only museum dedicated to the <unk> industry ; the museum moved in 2000 to a Grade II listed Victorian mill , previously a hat factory . The Museum of Science and Industry in Manchester , amongst other displays , charts the rise of science and industry and especially the part Manchester played in its development ; the Museums , Libraries and Archives Council described the displays as " pre @-@ eminent collections of national and international importance " . Urbis began its life as a museum of the modern city , which attempted to explain the effects and experiences of life in the city . It was then transformed into an exhibition centre , which had its most successful year in 2006 . Urbis entered its third phase since opening in 2012 as the National Football Museum . Stockport Air Raid Shelters uses a mile of underground tunnels , built to accommodate 6 @,@ 500 people , to illustrate life in the Second World War 's air raid shelters . The Imperial War Museum North in Trafford Park is one of the Imperial War Museum 's five branches . Alongside exhibitions of war machinery are displays describing how people 's lives are affected by war . The Museum of Transport in Manchester , which opened in 1979 , has one of the largest collections of vehicles in the country . The People 's History Museum is " the national centre for the collection , conservation , interpretation and study of material relating to the history of working people in Britain " ; the museum is closed for redevelopment and will reopen in 2009 . The Pankhurst Museum is based in the early feminist Emmeline Pankhurst 's former home and includes a parlour laid out in contemporary style . Manchester United , Manchester City , and Lancashire CCC all have dedicated museums illustrating their histories . Wigan Pier , best known from George Orwell 's book The Road to Wigan Pier , was the name of a wharf on the Leeds and Liverpool Canal in Wigan . The name has been reused to describe an industrial @-@ based visitor attraction , partly closed for redevelopment as of 2008 . 
 = = = Media , film and television = = = 
 The Greater Manchester Film Festival was launched in 2012 . It is an international film festival designed to capitalise on Greater Manchester 's " huge strengths in film and television , along with its growing media presence " . MediaCityUK , a host venue of the Greater Manchester Film Festival , is a 200 @-@ acre ( 81 ha ) mixed @-@ use property development site at Salford Quays ; its principal tenants are mass media organisations such as ITV Granada and the BBC . One of Greater Manchester 's most lucrative and acclaimed television exports is Coronation Street , which is a televised soap opera set in Weatherfield , a fictional borough of Greater Manchester , inspired by life in Salford . Created by Tony Warren , Coronation Street was first broadcast on 9 December 1960 , making it the world 's longest @-@ running TV soap opera in production . It has been filmed in Manchester at Granada Studios since its inception , but filming is now done at a new set at MediaCityUK . Launched in 2004 by the Guardian Media Group , Channel M is a television station that broadcast local news and content about Greater Manchester . It effectively closed in 2010 . In January 2011 Culture Secretary Jeremy Hunt stated that a new Greater Manchester channel will be available on Freeview by around 2013 . 
 The Manchester Evening News is a regional daily newspaper covering Greater Manchester , published every day except Sunday . It is owned by Trinity Mirror and produced by MEN Media . It sells around 81 @,@ 000 copies a day and gives away nearly 100 @,@ 000 , making it the market leader in Greater Manchester . The paper was first published in 1868 by Mitchell Henry as part of his Parliamentary election campaign for the Manchester constituency . MEN Media " dominates Greater Manchester " , reaching 7 out of 10 adults each week within the region through its portfolio of products which also includes the Oldham Advertiser , the Rochdale Observer , and the Salford Advertiser . 
 = = = Music , theatre and performing arts = = = 
 Greater Manchester has the highest number of theatre seats per head of population outside London . Most , if not all , of the larger theatres are subsidised by local authorities or the North West Regional Arts Board . The Royal Exchange Theatre formed in the 1970s out of a peripatetic group staging plays at venues such as at the University [ of Manchester ] Theatre and the Apollo Theatre . A season in a temporary stage in the former Royal Exchange , Manchester was followed by funding for a theatre in the round , which opened in 1976 . The Lowry — Greater Manchester 's most visited tourist attraction — houses two theatres , used by travelling groups in all the performing arts . The Opera House is a 1 @,@ 900 @-@ seat venue hosting travelling productions , often musicals just out of the West End . Its sister venue , The Palace , hosts generally similar shows . The Oldham Playhouse , one of the older theatres in the region , helped launch the careers of Stan Laurel and Charlie Chaplin . Its productions are described by the 2007 <unk> guide as ' staunchly populist ' – and popular . There are many other venues scattered throughout the county , of all types and sizes . 
 Greater Manchester has four professional orchestras , all based in Manchester . The Hallé Orchestra is the UK 's oldest symphony orchestra ( and the fourth oldest in the world ) , supports a choir and a youth orchestra , and releases its recordings on its own record label . The Hallé is based at the Bridgwater Hall but often tours , typically giving 70 performances " at home " and 40 on tour . The BBC Philharmonic Orchestra , one of five BBC orchestras , can trace its history back to the early days of radio broadcasting in 1926 . As of 2008 it is based at the BBC 's Oxford Road studios , but is expected to move to MediaCityUK in Salford . The Manchester Camerata and the Northern Chamber Orchestra are smaller , though still professional , organisations . The main classical venue is the 2 @,@ 341 @-@ seat Bridgewater Hall in Manchester , opened in 1996 at a cost of £ <unk> . Manchester is also a centre for musical education , via the Royal Northern College of Music and Chetham 's School of Music . 
 The Manchester Arena seats over 21 @,@ 000 , and is the largest indoor arena in Europe . It has been voted International Venue of the Year , and for several years was the most popular venue in the world . The sports grounds in the county also host large pop concerts . A new flexible , large @-@ scale cultural , arts , and exhibition space named The Factory is to be built on the former site of Granada Studios in central Manchester . It is named with reference to Factory Records , a Manchester @-@ based independent record label , founded in 1978 by Tony Wilson and Alan Erasmus . Factory Records — which featured acts such as Joy Division , New Order , and the Happy Mondays — and The Haçienda , served as a catalyst in the late @-@ 1980s for a blending of alternative rock , psychedelic rock and electronic dance music known as Madchester . Greater Manchester continues to be associated with guitar and dance music . 
 = Computer City ( song ) = 
 " Computer City " ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a song recorded by Japanese girl group Perfume for their first greatest hits compilation , Perfume : Complete Best ( 2006 ) . It was written , composed , arranged , and produced by Japanese musician and Capsule member Yasutaka Nakata . The single also included the B @-@ side track " Perfume " , which appeared on the parent album . It premiered on January 11 , 2006 as the second single from the album in Japan . It was also released on June 19 , 2013 through European and Oceanic regions , and June 25 in North America . Musically , " Computer City " is a technopop song , influenced by electronic music . 
 Upon its release , the track garnered generally favourable reviews from music critics . Some critics highlighted the song as one of Perfume 's best singles , and commended the composition . It achieved minor success in Japan , peaking at number 45 on the Oricon Singles Chart and 35 on TBS ' Count Down TV chart . An accompanying music video was shot by Kazuaki Seki ; it features the girls performing the song in a black room . With additional promotion through Japanese commercials , the song has been performed on several concert tours by Perfume , including their 2007 Seventh Heaven tour and 2008 Game Tour . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Computer City " was written , composed , arranged , and produced by Japanese musician and Capsule member Yasutaka Nakata . Alongside this , it was recorded , mixed , and mastered by Nakata . The song was recorded in 2005 at Contemode Studios , Shibuya , Tokyo by Nakata . Alongside the album ’ s remaining material , " Computer City " has partial rights by Nakata through <unk> Music Communications . The single also included the B @-@ side track " Perfume " , which also appeared on the parent album . It premiered on January 11 , 2006 as the second single from the groups first greatest hits compilation , Perfume : Complete Best ( 2006 ) . The single was also released on June 19 , 2013 through European and Oceanic regions , and June 25 in North America . 
 The CD single contains both " Computer City " and " Perfume " . The artwork features Perfume , posing for the song 's music video ; Perfume member A @-@ Chan is sitting down , Nocchi is leaning behind A @-@ Chan , and Kashiyuka is standing behind them both . The maxi CD features an extra lyric booklet , printed on plain white paper . Musically , " Computer City " is a technopop song , influenced by electronic music . A staff editor from Amazon Japan noted that the song contained elements of technopop and 8 @-@ bit music . Ian Martin from AllMusic stated that the song , alongside their back catalogue from Tokuma Japan Communications , " adopt [ ed ] a vocoder @-@ heavy production style strongly influenced by European electro and house " . Similarly , a staff editor at CD Journal labelled the songs composition as " addictive technopop " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Computer City " received generally favourable reviews from most music critics . A writer from CD Journal complimented the " tight " composition , and praised the production and songwriting by Yasutaka Nakata . Another reviewer from the same publication reviewed the single release , and highlighted the songs " pop catchy " melody and its lyrical content . A staff editor from Amazon was positive in their review , praising the composition of the track , and highlighted it as one of the best songs on the album . Channel @-@ Ai staff editors awarded the song five stars out of five , stating " ' Computer City ' is a great improvement ; it starts off with vocals only before it dives into a heavy beat . Although some parts turn a little monotone , most of the song remains catchy and melodic . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In Japan , " Computer City " debuted at number 45 on the Oricon Singles Chart ; it sold 1 @,@ 853 units within its first week of sales . It became the group 's highest charting single and first top 50 charting performance at the time . It lasted five weeks in the top 200 chart , and sold over 4 @,@ 000 units by the end of 2006 . It was the group 's highest charting and selling single until their 2007 effort , " <unk> " . The song debuted at number 35 on the TBS Count Down TV chart , and lasted two weeks there . 
 = = Music video and live performances = = 
 An accompanying music video was shot by Kazuaki Seki ; it features the girls performing the song in a black room . There are several intercut scenes of computer generated imagery ( CGI ) , which include the overlapping of digital circuits and other patterns . The music video also appeared on Perfume 's DVD compilation sets for Perfume : Complete Best , and Perfume Clips ( 2014 ) . " Computer City " was used for a Japanese commercial promoting the television show Tokyo Brigade . 
 The single has been performed on several tours conducted by Perfume . It first appeared on two of the group 's promotional concerts ; the Seventh Heaven tour in 2007 , and the Socks Fix Make tour in 2008 . The song was included on their Game Tour , group 's first nationwide concert tour , and eventually included on the live DVD , released on October 15 , 2008 . Since then , " Computer City " has been performed on their 2009 <unk> Tour in Japan , 2009 Second Concert tour , and their 2010 Tokyo Dome tour . In 2010 , four years after its original release , the group was invited to perform " Computer City " on the Japanese music television show , Music Station . This marked the only single previous to the release and subsequent breakthrough of their single " <unk> " that has been performed on Japanese television . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Details adapted from the liner notes of the Perfume : Complete Best album . 
 Ayano Ōmoto – vocals 
 Yuka Kashino – vocals 
 Ayaka Nishiwaki – vocals 
 Yasutaka Nakata – producer , composer , arranger , mixing , mastering . 
 Seki Kazuaki – video director 
 = = Charts and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Ellen Roberts = 
 Ellen Stuart Roberts ( born August 27 , 1959 ) is an attorney and Republican legislator in the U.S. State of Colorado . From 2006 @-@ 2010 , Roberts served as the State Representative for House District 59 . In 2010 , she was elected to Senate District 6 and is the current Senator for that district , which encompasses Archuleta , Dolores , La Plata , Montezuma , Montrose , <unk> , San Juan , and San Miguel counties . In 2015 , she was elected to serve as the President Pro @-@ Tem for the Colorado State Senate . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Born in Hudson , New York , Roberts was raised in Rhinebeck , where she was elected class president in high school . She earned a self @-@ designed undergraduate degree in environmental policy from Cornell University in 1981 . During college , she spent a semester as an intern in Washington DC , working for her Congressional representative and for the Republican National Committee . 
 She moved to Colorado upon graduation and worked as a ranger in Rocky Mountain National Park until 1984 . In 1982 , Roberts married ; she and her husband , Rick , have two children : Caitlin and Ben , both of whom have attended Fort Lewis College in Durango , Colorado . 
 After being hired by a law firm in Granby , Colorado , Roberts returned to school to earn a J.D. from the University of Colorado in 1986 . She worked as an attorney in private practice in Granby and Hot Sulphur Springs , specializing in estate , probate and business law . 
 A resident of Durango , Colorado since 1989 , she joined the Southwest Colorado Bar Association in 1986 and served as its president , and as president of the Southwest Colorado Women 's Bar Association . As an attorney , Roberts advocated for increased legal services for immigrants and Spanish @-@ speakers in southwestern Colorado 
 Roberts has focused on health care , constitutional reform , judicial , and financial issues in the state legislature , and , despite being in the minority party , has seen almost all legislation she sponsored signed into law . She has also carried legislation to strengthen private property rights surrounding oil and gas drilling , and to create a legislative youth advisory council . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Roberts began to re @-@ enter politics after the death of her father in 1992 , first focusing on hospice and health care issues . As a member ( since 1999 ) and later chairman of the board of Mercy Regional Medical Center , she pushed for the construction of a new hospital in Durango . She chaired Healthy 58 , a rural health care task force , and in 2001 , was appointed to the Task Force to <unk> Health Care Needs for Colorado , a commission formed by the legislature to study health @-@ care needs in rural Colorado communities . 
 Roberts sat on the Sixth Judicial District Nominating Commission , and co @-@ chaired the Durango Citizens Steering Committee for a New Library , a successful effort to push for a new local public library that was eventually built on the site of Mercy Medical Center , the hospital Roberts had worked to help replace . She was a member of the Citizens Health Advisory Council , the High Noon Rotary Club , and sat on the boards of First National Bank and the Community Foundation Serving Southwest Colorado . In 2004 , she won the Durango Chamber of Commerce 's Athena Award for professional women in business . 
 = = Colorado House of Representatives = = 
 = = = 2006 Election = = = 
 In December 2004 , only a month after Larson was elected to his fourth and final term in the state house , Roberts filed for a 2006 candidacy to seek his seat . She announced her campaign formally in January 2005 . She was endorsed by Larson , and won the Republican nomination unopposed . 
 As Representative Mark Larson neared the end of his term @-@ limited tenure in the Colorado House of Representatives , Roberts began to work with him on learning the legislative process , in preparation for seeking elected office herself . She instigated a bill , introduced by Larson and eventually signed into law , to require that remains be handled in accordance with the wishes of the deceased . She also lobbied the legislature , unsuccessfully , for the creation of an interim committee to study palliative care . 
 During the general election campaign , Roberts emphasized her work on health care issues and her experience working with Representative Larson in the legislature , and criticized the passage of constitutional amendments creating conflicting fiscal obligations . Although both Roberts and her main opponent , Democrat Joe Colgan , signed a clean campaign pledge , controversy arose over advertisements run by outside sources . In particular , Roberts denounced as " misleading " and " unacceptable " a television advertisement criticizing Colgan 's record as mayor of Durango . The ad , which was run by a political group associated with the Colorado Association of Home Builders , was later pulled off the air . Direct mail flyers sent by right @-@ leaning outside groups during the last weeks of the campaign also misrepresented both candidates ' stances on immigration , exaggerating the contrast between their positions . 
 In addition to her Democratic opponent , Roberts faced unaffiliated write @-@ in candidate Christopher <unk> . <unk> withdrew from the race in October 2006 and endorsed Colgan . Roberts significantly outraised her opponents , donating over $ 8 @,@ 000 to her own campaign , and ultimately winning the November 2006 general election with 52 percent of the vote . 
 = = = 2007 Legislative Session = = = 
 In the 2007 session of the Colorado General Assembly , Roberts was a member of the House Health and Human Services Committee , the Joint Legal Services Committee , and the House Judiciary Committee . 
 Roberts was one of the most successful Republican legislators at passing legislation through the Democrat @-@ controlled legislature , and has been identified by media reports and commentators as a " standout " legislator and a potential candidate for higher office . She also organized bowling outings for legislators during her first year in the legislature . 
 Roberts carried legislation which revised Colorado 's surface rights laws , requiring oil and gas companies to minimize the impacts of drilling . The bill was weakened by lobbying from the Colorado Oil and Gas Association , but represented a breadth of reform that had failed to pass in previous legislative sessions . 
 During her first legislative session , Roberts also sponsored bills to revise the process by which special health care districts are created and to expand eligibility for Korean War special license plates ; she cosponsored legislation to fund study of a methane seep in southwestern Colorado . 
 Her only unsuccessful bill was a measure to tighten the rules under which cigar bars could claim exemptions from Colorado 's indoor smoking ban . After being killed in committee , the measure was revived in the Colorado Senate by Democrats , but was again unsuccessful . 
 Following the 2007 session , Roberts was named by House Republican leadership to the newly formed Criminal and Juvenile Justice Commission . In November 2007 , she was named a Legislator of Merit by the Colorado Behavioral Health Council . She joined with other Republicans to criticize an executive order issued by Governor Bill Ritter allowing collective bargaining with government employee unions as a betrayal of Ritter 's promise of bipartisan cooperation on major issues . 
 = = = 2008 Legislative Session = = = 
 In the 2008 session of the Colorado General Assembly , Roberts sat on the House Health and Human Services Committee and the House Judiciary Committee . She introduced eight bills during the session , all of which were passed by the legislature . 
 During the 2008 legislative session , Roberts introduced a bill , drafted and lobbied for by Colorado students , to create a legislative youth advisory council . The bill stalled in the legislature until its minimal cost was approved by the House Appropriations Committee , after which it cleared both the House and Senate , and Governor Bill Ritter signed it into law . She was later appointed by Minority Leader Mike May to be one of the legislative members of the council . 
 Roberts introduced a bill which would grant advanced practice nurses power to sign off on additional medical forms , in response to shortages of doctors in portions of rural Colorado , a measure which garnered support from both nurses ' and doctors ' associations . In March , she backed a proposal to require that insurance companies offer low @-@ cost health care benefit packages for <unk> , as part of a " public @-@ private " plan towards achieving universal coverage . 
 Roberts was the sponsor of a legislative resolution urging the Federal Communications Commission to support including southwestern Colorado , including portions of her district , within the Denver media market , a resolution she introduced again in 2010 . 
 Before the session began , Roberts had expressed interest in sponsoring legislation to revise the process by which the Colorado Constitution is amended through ballot measures , proposing that supermajority popular votes be required to enact amendments . She proposed extending the public hearing process as a means of providing additional input on ballot measures , and , in February 2008 , was appointed to a six @-@ member legislative panel tasked with developing recommendations for constitutional reform . She was ultimately a cosponsor of the panel 's proposal to create distinctions in the petition process between constitutional and statutory amendments , ; the proposal which was referred by the legislature to voters and appeared on the November 2008 Colorado ballot as Referendum O. Roberts campaigned in support of Referendum O during the fall campaign . 
 Roberts was one of a few Republicans to back a measure to reform spending requirements in Colorado 's state constitution . The proposal , which would have diverted excess revenues under TABOR to K @-@ 12 education , was regarded as a sweeping revision to competing constitutional mandates ; it was not passed by the General Assembly , but was advanced as a citizens ' initiative . 
 = = = 2008 Election = = = 
 Roberts was nominated by the Republican Party for a second term in the state house ; she faced no challengers either in the Republican primary or in the general election . 
 Roberts stood against some fellow Republicans by opposing Amendment 52 , a ballot measure on the November ballot that would reallocate some severance tax revenue from water projects to transportation . She also backed Republican presidential candidate John McCain and spoke before McCain at an October rally in Durango , Colorado . 
 Following her re @-@ election , Roberts was nominated for the post of House Minority Caucus Chair , but lost the caucus ' vote for the post to Rep. Amy Stephens . After losing the vote , Roberts publicly lamented the lack of rural representation in legislative leadership and alleged that Republican lawmakers were threatened with primaries if they voted for her leadership bid . 
 = = = 2009 Legislative Session = = = 
 For the 2009 legislative session , Roberts was appointed to the House Health and Human Services Committee and the House Judiciary Committee , where she was the ranking Republican member . Roberts was also named to a Republican task force charged with making recommendations on resolving the state 's projected budget shortfall . In 2009 , Roberts also sat on the Colorado Commission on Criminal and Juvenile Justice and co @-@ chaired the Colorado Youth Advisory Council . 
 During the 2009 session , Roberts sponsored several bills relating to juvenile criminal offenders , including legislation to allow more juveniles to have their criminal records expunged , and to allow young adults to serve sentences within the Youth Offender System instead of correctional facilities . Roberts also sponsored legislation to make minor adjustment to the statutes concerning the Colorado Youth Advisory Council , legislation to create a regional self @-@ insurance plan within the San Luis Valley , and legislation revising statutes surrounding end @-@ of @-@ life care . 
 = = = 2010 Legislative Session = = = 
 Following the 2009 legislative session , Roberts sat on an interim committee dealing with hospice and palliative care issues , and carried legislation originating from that committee during the 2010 session , including two bills that clarified policies surrounding end @-@ of @-@ life care and advance directives . Other legislation that Roberts carried in 2010 included a bill to allow voluntary income tax contributions to support 2 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 services , and she fought against cuts to the Native American tuition waiver program at Fort Lewis College . Roberts was one of only three Republican House members to vote in support of Colorado 's 2010 budget , after successfully sponsoring an amendment that removed restrictions on Fort Lewis College 's ability to set its own out @-@ of @-@ state tuition rates . 
 Roberts had planned to introduce legislation to place a one @-@ year moratorium on new Colorado health insurance mandates with independent Rep. Kathleen Curry , as part of a proposal to overhaul the states insurance mandate commission . However , they announced at the start of the session that their proposal would not include an immediate moratorium on insurance mandates , and the legislation was killed on its first hearing in a House committee . Roberts also withdrew one of her proposals to continue a pilot program for training of Certified Nursing Assistants , on account of its cost . Roberts also sponsored a contentious piece of legislation with general election opponent Sen. Bruce Whitehead , negotiated by Governor Ritter 's office , to require utilities to convert some Front Range coal @-@ fired power plants to natural gas . 
 = = Colorado Senate = = 
 = = = 2010 Election = = = 
 In June 2009 , Roberts announced her intention to seek the Colorado State Senate seat held by term @-@ limited Democratic Sen. Jim <unk> in the 2010 legislative elections , Senate District 6 . After <unk> resigned from the legislature in July 2009 to head the U.S. Department of Agriculture 's Rural Development office in Colorado , Democrats appointed civil engineer Bruce Whitehead to the seat ; Whitehead declared his intention to run for a full term in 2010 , setting up a race that Colorado Republicans viewed as one of their best opportunities to pick up a seat in the Democrat @-@ controlled legislature . 
 Roberts ' 2010 campaign for the Senate seat also faced a challenge in the Republican primary from former Norwood , Colorado town marshal Dean <unk> , who campaigns as a self @-@ described " true conservative ; " <unk> received 67 percent of delegate votes at the Republican district assembly to Roberts ' 33 , earning him the top spot on the August primary ballot . Roberts won the primary race with 54 % of the vote and went on to win the general election with 61 % of the vote . 
 = = = 2011 Legislative Session = = = 
 As state senator , Roberts served on several committees , including the Health and Human Services , Judiciary , and Legislative Legal Services Committees and also acted as ranking Republican on the Senate Local Government Committee . She served on two interim committees , the Water Resources Review Committee and the Legislative Health Benefit Exchange Implementation Review Committee until the end of the 2012 legislative session . 
 In addition to her responsibilities at the Colorado legislature , Roberts was appointed to the National Conference of State Legislatures ’ ( NCSL ) Federal Deficit Reduction Task Force and , in August 2011 , was elected to NCSL ’ s Executive Committee . She is the only Colorado legislator to serve on either of these committees . 
 = = = 2012 Legislative Session = = = 
 Senator Roberts proposed legislation at the start of session regarding the surety bond required for towing carriers in rural areas . SB12 @-@ 049 would have lowered the surety bond from $ 50 @,@ 000 to $ 10 @,@ 000 for local entities . The bill was assigned to the Senate Transportation Committee , but was postponed indefinitely after it was introduced . However , after the bill was killed , public upheaval caused Roberts to introduce a new bill , this time in the House , which resolved the same issue . <unk> @-@ 1347 passed the second time around with a resounding 98 @-@ 1 vote . 
 Senator Roberts was appointed to the National Conference of State Legislatures Budgets and Revenue Committee . In addition , she was re @-@ elected to the Executive Committee for NCSL . Senator Roberts was also awarded the Legislator of the Year Award for the 2012 legislative session by the Economic Development Council of Colorado . 
 During the 2012 legislative session , Roberts was award a handful of awards : 2012 Champion of Conservation Award from the Colorado Coalition of Land Trusts , the 2012 Pinnacle Award from the Colorado Farm Bureau , the 2012 Common Sense in the Courtroom Award from the Colorado Civil Justice League , and the 2012 Green Colorado Legislator of the Year Award . She was also honored to win the 2012 Legislator of the Year Award from the Colorado Economic Development Council . 
 Due to the wild fires in the state of Colorado in 2012 , Senator Roberts was elected as Chairwoman of the bipartisan Lower North Fork Fire Commission , which convened during the interim and which proposed four pieces of legislation to address the threat of wildfire risk and damage in Colorado . 
 = = = 2013 Legislative Session = = = 
 Roberts was appointed to serve on the Senate Health and Human Services Committee . 
 = = = 2015 Legislative Session = = = 
 As state senator , Senator Roberts serves on several committees . She serves as Vice Chair of the Agriculture , Natural Resources and Energy Committee as well as Chair of the Judiciary Committee . Senator Roberts also serves on the Committee Legal Services , Water Resources Review Committee , Joint Judiciary Committee and the Joint Agriculture and Natural Resources Committee . 
 = = Legislative Initiatives = = 
 = = = COYAC = = = 
 In 2008 , Senator Roberts sponsored <unk> @-@ 1157 , a bill that sought to create a state legislative youth advisory council in Colorado . Prior to the 2008 legislative session , Senator Roberts had met with a group of high school students from Cortez , Durango , and <unk> Springs in order to gauge the scope of the soon to be legislation as well as the group that would form after the legislation had been passed . The bill was passed in May 2008 , creating the Colorado Youth Advisory Council also known as COYAC . 
 During the 2012 legislative session , Roberts brought forth legislation that stemmed from her youth council initiative as well : <unk> @-@ 1004 , a resolution that recognized the struggle Colorado faces surrounding teen suicides . This joint resolution sought to identify teen suicides and focus on suicide prevention as well , particularly via COYAC and through COYAC initiatives . 
 = Maurício Gugelmin = 
 Maurício Gugelmin ( born April 20 , 1963 in Joinville ) is a former racing driver from Brazil . He took part in both Formula One and the Champ Car World Series . He participated in 80 Formula One grands prix , debuting in 1988 for the March team . He achieved one top @-@ three finish and scored a total of ten championship points in the series . He competed in the Champ Car series between 1993 and 2001 , starting 147 races . He won one race , in 1997 in Vancouver , finishing fourth in the championship that year . His best result in the Indianapolis 500 was in 1995 where he started and finished in sixth position , leading 59 laps . For a period , he held the world speed record for a closed race track , set at California Speedway in 1997 at a speed of 240 @.@ 942 mph ( 387 @.@ 759 km / h ) . Gugelmin retired at the end of 2001 after a year that included the death of his son . 
 = = Personal and early life = = 
 Gugelmin was born in Joinville , Brazil on April 20 , 1963 into a wealthy family . His father is a timber merchant and a collector of antique cars . Gugelmin is married to Stella Maris and they have two sons , Bernardo and Gabriel . Their third son , Giuliano , who was Bernardo 's twin , died from cerebral palsy in April 2001 at the age of six . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Formula One = = = 
 Gugelmin started racing go @-@ karts as a child in Brazil in 1971 , winning his local championship nine years in a row from 1971 to 1979 . He progressed to the Brazilian national championship in 1980 , which he also won . He progressed to single @-@ seater racing cars in 1981 , when he won the Brazilian Formula Fiat Championship . 
 In 1982 Gugelmin , like many Brazilian drivers of his generation , moved to the United Kingdom to further his racing career . He was a longtime friend of future Formula One world champion Ayrton Senna , who was already racing in the UK , and the two shared a house from 1982 to 1987 . Senna , having previously been a Formula Ford driver with the Van Diemen team , used his influence within the organisation to secure Gugelmin a race seat with them for 1982 . By the end of the year , Gugelmin was British Formula Ford 1600 cc champion . He followed this up by finishing as runner @-@ up in the British Formula Ford 2000 cc series the following year . He moved to the European Formula Ford series in 1984 , and won the title at his first attempt . A step up to Formula Three followed in 1985 with West Surrey Racing , winning the British championship and the prestigious Macau Grand Prix . Gugelmin then spent two years in Formula 3000 , the final step before Formula One . Gugelmin took one victory in Formula 3000 , at Silverstone in 1986 while driving for the Ralt factory team . 
 = = = Formula One = = = 
 Related Articles : March Engineering , Leyton House Racing , Jordan Grand Prix 
 Gugelmin entered Formula One , the highest category of circuit racing defined by the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) , motorsport 's world governing body , with the March team in 1988 , as team @-@ mate to Ivan Capelli . He had previously been in contention for a drive with Lotus in 1986 but was overlooked in favour of Johnny Dumfries . The season started badly as Gugelmin suffered five retirements from the first six races due to mechanical failure , but soon afterwards he took his first points scoring finish with fourth place at the British Grand Prix . Gugelmin scored points in one other race with fifth place at the Hungarian Grand Prix . He finished the season as the highest @-@ scoring newcomer in the Formula One World Championship , ending the year in 13th position overall . 
 1989 was barren for the March team , and Gugelmin took their only points scoring finish of the year at the Brazilian Grand Prix . He finished in third position ; an excellent result given that March were financially troubled . At the French Grand Prix , Gugelmin was involved in a large accident at the start of the race which resulted in a spectacular barrel roll . A photograph of the accident was later selected for a London Exhibition as one of Formula One 's most striking photographs . The race was stopped as a result ; Gugelmin took the restart from the pit lane and set the race 's fastest lap , the only one of his F1 career . 
 In 1990 the March team was sold , and became known as Leyton House . Gugelmin was once again partnered by Capelli , but the team 's <unk> chassis proved troublesome and between them they failed to qualify six times , including at the Mexican Grand Prix . However , at the next race , the French Grand Prix , modifications had been made to the car which improved the performance . Running the whole race without changing their tyres , Capelli and Gugelmin ran first and second during the race . Gugelmin retired mid @-@ race with engine problems and Capelli was passed by Alain Prost for the lead late in the race . Gugelmin also scored a point for finishing sixth in Belgium . 
 1991 saw internal turmoil at the team with several key staff leaving . The car lacked pace and both Gugelmin and Capelli struggled ; the team scored just one point all season . Gugelmin 's best result amounted to three seventh @-@ place finishes , although he retired from eight of the season 's sixteen races . In September , the team 's principal , Akira Akagi , was arrested on suspicion of fraud . Money was tight and Gugelmin made the decision to leave the team at the end of the year . A switch to the Jordan team for 1992 did not improve Gugelmin 's fortunes . The team struggled with financial difficulties and scored only one point all year . The team 's Yamaha engine suffered from a lack of power , and the car was unreliable . Gugelmin failed to finish eleven out of the sixteen races , and scored no points . 
 = = = Champ Car = = = 
 Related Articles : Chip Ganassi Racing , PacWest Racing 
 Gugelmin signed with Dick Simon Racing to take part in the North American Champ Car racing series for the last three races of 1993 . Although races at Mid Ohio and Nazareth resulted in non @-@ finishes , Gugelmin finished 13th at Laguna Seca although this was not high enough to receive any points . Despite this , Gugelmin demonstrated promise . In 1994 , Gugelmin signed with Chip Ganassi Racing to partner Michael Andretti who returned to the series after a season in Formula One . Andretti was more successful than Gugelmin , and took two wins , including Reynard 's first win in Champ Car at Surfers Paradise . Gugelmin was hindered by a lack of cooperation between his and Andretti 's crews , and his first full @-@ time year in the Champ Car World Series resulted in seven points finishes and 16th in the points standings . 
 1995 started promisingly as Gugelmin finished as runner @-@ up to Jacques Villeneuve in the opening round at Miami . He had a strong race at the Indianapolis 500 , finishing in sixth place after leading the most laps of all the drivers . Eight additional points finishes , including a third place at the final round at Laguna Seca , meant he finished tenth in the final points standings , nine places ahead of experienced team mate and former series champion Danny Sullivan . 
 For 1996 , Gugelmin was partnered at PacWest by the British driver , Mark Blundell . He established a reputation for being quick at superspeedway tracks after taking a second and a third place at the two events at Michigan International Speedway . On top of this he took four other points finishes , finishing mid @-@ table in 14th place . For 1997 , the PacWest team switched to using Firestone tyres and Mercedes @-@ Benz engines . The package was competitive throughout the year and Gugelmin and Blundell finished fourth and sixth in the championship respectively . Gugelmin 's notable races of the year include the Detroit Indy Grand Prix , where Gugelmin was leading the race on the last lap when he ran out of fuel , and the Molson Indy Vancouver , where Gugelmin won his first Champ Car race . One of the most popular men in the championship , virtually the entire pit @-@ lane was full of happiness for him . In qualifying for the final race of the season at the California Speedway , Gugelmin set a world record for the fastest ever lap of a closed race track at 240 @.@ 942 mph ( 387 @.@ 759 km / h ) . This record stood until the year 2000 when Gil de Ferran surpassed it with a lap of 241 @.@ 428 mph ( 388 @.@ 541 km / h ) , also at California Speedway . Gugelmin went on to finish the race in fourth place . 
 1998 proved not to be as successful . <unk> plagued the team and they struggled to get to grips with the new chassis . Gugelmin showed determination , and scored nine points @-@ scoring finishes . A highlight was Gugelmin leading 40 laps during the final event at California Speedway , en route to fifth place . Gugelmin was unable to reproduce his race @-@ winning form , and finished no higher than 15th position in the final standings over the next three years . In 2000 , Gugelmin was named as the chairman of the Championship Drivers Association , the organisation set up to represent the interests of the drivers in the Champ Car World Series . 
 2001 proved to be a difficult year for Gugelmin . During the practice session for the race at Texas Motor Speedway , he crashed after he lost control in the second turn and hit the wall with a force of 66 @.@ 2 g , before a second impact with the wall which exerted a force of 113 @.@ 1 g . The event was eventually called off after drivers complained of dizziness , nausea and blurred vision , which were caused by the high g @-@ forces experienced when driving at speed on the track . During the week before the race at Nazareth Speedway , Gugelmin 's son , Giuliano , died from respiratory complications . Giuliano was quadriplegic and a lifelong sufferer from cerebral palsy owing to complications at birth . The PacWest team announced that Gugelmin would not be taking part in the race . Gugelmin 's team mate at PacWest , Scott Dixon , won the race beating Kenny Bräck into second place . At the end of 2001 , Gugelmin decided to retire from the sport , stating " I definitely want to spend more time with my family . After those two big accidents , and Alex [ Zanardi ] ' s deal in Germany , I said , ' That 's it . Forget it . ' " Zanardi lost both legs in a crash during a Champ Car race at the <unk> in Germany in September 2001 . 
 = = Post @-@ Champ Car = = 
 In 2003 Gugelmin was announced as a competitor by the organizers of the new Renault <unk> Super Cup in his native Brazil . However , the series didn 't launch and since then Gugelmin has made no competitive appearances in motorsport . Following his retirement , Gugelmin put his Florida mansion in Coral Gables up for sale for $ 17 million , and moved back to live in Brazil full @-@ time . He runs the family business along with his brother , <unk> , and has also done consultancy work for Mercedes @-@ Benz subsidiary AMG . Both his surviving sons compete in go @-@ kart events . 
 = = Motorsports career results = = 
 = = = Complete International Formula 3000 results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ; races in italics indicate fastest lap . ) 
 = = = Complete Formula One results = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ) 
 = = = American Open @-@ Wheel = = = 
 ( key ) ( Races in bold indicate pole position ) 
 = = = = CART = = = = 
 = In the Hands of the Prophets = 
 " In the Hands of the Prophets " is the twentieth and final episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . Written by Robert Hewitt Wolfe and directed by David Livingston , the episode originally aired in broadcast syndication on June 20 , 1993 . Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures on Deep Space Nine , a space station located near a stable wormhole between the Alpha and Gamma quadrants of the Milky Way Galaxy . In this episode , friction escalates when Bajoran cleric Vedek Winn ( Louise Fletcher ) arrives on the station and finds Keiko O 'Brien ( Rosalind Chao ) teaching Bajoran children that their gods are wormhole aliens . 
 The story was originally proposed as a crossover episode with Star Trek : The Next Generation , but this idea was abandoned in favor of ending the season with the same religious theme initially raised in " Emissary " , the series premiere . " In the Hands of the Prophets " first introduces the audience to Bajoran politics and religion and highlights what happens when the values and beliefs of one culture are imposed on another . The episode features the first appearance of Louise Fletcher as Vedek Winn and Philip Anglim as Vedek Bareil . 8 @.@ 8 million people viewed the episode on its first broadcast , the lowest of any first @-@ run episode during season one . Critical reception to the episode was positive with Fletcher and Avery Brooks receiving praise for their performance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Chief Miles O 'Brien ( Colm Meaney ) walks his wife Keiko ( Rosalind Chao ) along the promenade to the school where she teaches students on the station . They discuss Bajoran culture , a topic Miles learned about from Neela ( Robin Christopher ) , his Bajoran assistant . At the school , Keiko teaches her class about the science of the Bajoran wormhole and the aliens that live inside it . This scientific view is different from the religious approach taken by the Bajorans , who believe the wormhole is the legendary Celestial Temple inhabited by their " Prophets " , whom they worship as gods . Her class is interrupted by one of Bajor 's spiritual leaders , Vedek Winn ( Louise Fletcher ) . Winn questions why Keiko doesn 't teach Bajoran religion in her classroom . Afterwards , Keiko reports the incident to Commander Benjamin Sisko ( Avery Brooks ) . When Sisko asks Winn about the dispute , she says there may be consequences if Keiko refuses to teach religion . Meanwhile , Miles discovers an important engineering tool is missing , but is distracted when he and Neela discover the remains of a Starfleet ensign . 
 Outside the school , Winn and a group of Bajorans protest Keiko 's teaching methods . Winn offers Keiko a solution — all she has to do is simply stop teaching about the wormhole . When Keiko refuses to accept Winn 's proposal , Winn leads the Bajoran parents to take their children out of school . Sisko visits Vedek Bareil ( Philip Anglim ) for advice on the problem . Bareil opposes Winn 's views but he cannot support Sisko as he is attempting to become the next Kai , the leader of the Bajoran religion . Sisko returns to DS9 and asks for help from Major Kira Nerys ( Nana Visitor ) , but she also refuses to help . Meanwhile , Odo ( René Auberjonois ) and Doctor Julian Bashir ( Alexander Siddig ) finish investigating the remains of the Starfleet ensign Miles and Neela found earlier . They discover that the ensign had been murdered by a phaser when he became aware of someone tampering with the Runabout security controls . 
 Later , an explosion occurs inside the empty school , destroying it . Sisko confronts Winn , blaming her actions for increasing the risk of violence on the station . Neela meets with Winn , revealing that the two had been working together . She informs Winn that her escape plan with the Runabout will no longer work . Winn tells Neela to continue with the plan , even if it means Neela must sacrifice herself . Bareil arrives at the station to help , and at the same time , Miles and Lt. Jadzia Dax ( Terry Farrell ) discover a hidden sub @-@ program on the station 's computer created by Neela . The program controls a timed delay of <unk> running from the promenade to the <unk> . They alert Sisko who is nearby , just as Bareil and Winn begin to address a crowd of Bajorans on the promenade . Sisko searches the crowd just in time to see Neela raising her phaser at Bareil . Sisko tackles Neela to the ground and saves Bareil 's life . Kira suggests that the assassination attempt was planned by Winn to secure her position as the new Kai , but Neela insists she was working alone . Kira later apologises to Sisko , and agrees with his earlier sentiment about Winn 's actions . 
 = = Production = = 
 Prior to the scripting of " In the Hands of the Prophets " , a crossover episode was considered with the crew of the Enterprise from Star Trek : The Next Generation . However , this idea was dropped in favor of an episode which would end the season on a religious note similar to " Emissary " , the series premiere . During the writing of the episode , executive producer Michael Piller was concerned that it was not going to be as good as the previous episode , " Duet " . Ira Steven Behr credited this as setting a challenge for the writing team which improved the episode . " It gave us even more grist for the mill than ' Duet ' did , and together they provided a great one @-@ two punch to the end of the first season " , Behr recalled . 
 The episode marked the debut of Philip Anglim as Vedek Bareil and Louise Fletcher as Vedek Winn . Bareil and Winn became recurring characters throughout the rest of the series . Fletcher , best known for playing the role of Nurse Ratched in One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest ( 1975 ) , received the Academy Award for Best Actress , the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture , Drama and the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role in recognition of her work . She did not have to read for the role of Vedek Winn , nor was she familiar with the Star Trek series or its heritage before accepting the role . Robin Christopher makes her appearance in this episode for the second and last time as Neela , first appearing in the previous episode , " Duet " . 
 " In the Hands of the Prophets " is the third episode directed by David Livingston . With a budget larger than most of the other first season episodes , Livingston used more extras which allowed him to create larger crowd scenes . Livingston 's first location shoot took place during Bareil 's sanctuary scene on Bajor . Filmed on location at Fern Dell at Griffith Park , Los Angeles , Livingston found it difficult to shoot the scene due to the density of the foliage and access to the dell . This same location previously appeared in the holodeck scenes used in " Encounter At Farpoint " , the pilot episode of The Next Generation . 
 Filmed in full scale , the school explosion used drywall around the interior of the set to protect it from the fire . Physical effects supervisor Gary <unk> oversaw the explosion . The destruction surprised the cast as they were more used to optical effects in the series . Costume designer Robert Blackman created the Vedek costumes . Crew @-@ members suggested that Blackman based his Vedek hats on the form of the Sydney Opera House , but Blackman denied the design was deliberate . 
 = = Themes = = 
 " In the Hands of the Prophets " is the first episode in the series to examine the conflict between elements of the Bajoran religion and the secularism of Starfleet . Writer Robert Hewitt Wolfe says the episode maintains the consistency of Gene Roddenberry 's vision for Star Trek : 
 I have no argument with someone having a fundamentalist belief in Christianity or Islam or Judaism or Buddhism or anything else , but I do have a serious objection to people trying to impose their values on other people . And that 's what this episode is about . No one has the right to force anyone to believe the things that they believe . That 's one of the beautiful things about Gene Roddenberry 's vision of <unk> ( Infinite Diversity in Infinite Combinations ) , and that was one of the things that we really wanted to hammer home here . Sisko does everything he can not to impose his values on the Bajorans , but Vedek Winn is determined to impose her values on everyone . 
 The episode showed the unwillingness of Sisko to accept his position as a religious figure within the Bajoran culture . This theme was first explored in " Emissary " , the pilot of the series . The ongoing theme for Bajoran politics and religion began with " In the Hands of the Prophets " and ran through the rest of the series . Wolfe was raised as a Catholic , and he attributes the religious theme of the episode to this influence , as well as his interest in history . He compares the religious intrigue of the story to the history of Catholicism in the 15th and 16th century , a time when members of various families jostled for power to become Pope . When asked to describe the character of Winn , Louise Fletcher said , " Think the Pope in space , except she 's like an ancient Pope , from the old days when Popes were ruthless and powerful and exerted their powers and fought wars and did all kinds of naughty things . " 
 Matt Rorie in <unk> said the writers examined the politics of the Bajoran religion by " planting pious but open @-@ minded Bajorans like Kira against the orthodox , intolerant , fundamentalist majority , as represented by Kai Winn , who was willing to bomb schools and attempt assassinations on her political rivals to stay in power . " Zack Handlen in his review for the A.V. Club compared the actions in the episode to the " ideological battles [ which ] are fought over what 's appropriate in the classroom " in the United States . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " In the Hands of the Prophets " first aired in broadcast syndication on June 20 , 1993 . It received Nielsen ratings of 8 @.@ 8 million , placing it in fifth place in the timeslot . It was the least viewed episode of the first season during its initial broadcast . This rating was a slight decrease from the previous week 's episode " Duet " , which received a rating of 8 @.@ 9 million . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . Zack Handlen reviewed the episode for the A.V. Club , noting that while the episode wasn 't subtle , it did " a good job expanding the show 's world , and playing off of undercurrents and themes which have been built in throughout DS9 's first season . " He described Winn as the " most unsettling of enemies , a true believer whose faith doesn 't prevent her from manipulation and deceit " . Handlen described the character of Vedek Winn as " terrific " . In her analysis of the episode , Michelle Erica Green of TrekNation said she thought the episode was " pretty fantastic " when she originally watched it . Upon re @-@ watching it years later , she thought it had improved even further . Green described the episode as " a no @-@ holds @-@ barred story about the hypocrisy of religious leaders which seems less influenced by the Scopes Trial than by contemporary creationist politicians . " She described Fletcher as one of her favourite actresses and thought that she portrayed Vedek Winn as the older sister of Nurse Ratched from One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest . 
 Writing for Jammer 's Reviews , Jamahl Epsicokhan said there was a great deal of plot to cover in the episode and that the strands successfully came together . He singled out Avery Brooks for praise , but thought there were a number of stand @-@ out performances by the cast . Epsicokhan gave the episode a score of 3 @.@ 5 / 4 and thought that it demonstrated the direction that the series intended to go in . In his review of the episode for Tor.com , Keith DeCandido praised the performance of Fletcher and called her " deliciously evil " . He thought that Anglim gave one of his better performances as Vedek Bareil and that the speech by Brooks to Fletcher at the end of the episode was particularly well done . 
 " In the Hands of the Prophets " was first released as a two episode VHS cassette alongside " Duet " in the United Kingdom on January 10 , 1994 . A single episode release followed in the United States and Canada on July 8 , 1997 . It was released on DVD as part of the season one box set on June 3 , 2003 . 
 = John W. Stevenson = 
 John White Stevenson ( May 4 , 1812 – August 10 , 1886 ) was the 25th governor of Kentucky and represented the state in both houses of the U.S. Congress . The son of future Speaker of the House and U.S. diplomat Andrew Stevenson , John Stevenson graduated from the University of Virginia in 1832 and studied law under his cousin , future Congressman Willoughby Newton . After briefly practicing law in Mississippi , he relocated to Covington , Kentucky , and was elected county attorney . After serving in the Kentucky legislature , he was chosen as a delegate to the state 's third constitutional convention in 1849 and was one of three commissioners charged with revising its code of laws , a task finished in 1854 . A Democrat , he was elected to two consecutive terms in the U.S. House of Representatives where he supported several proposed compromises to avert the Civil War and blamed the Radical Republicans for their failure . 
 After losing his reelection bid in 1861 , Stevenson , a known Confederate sympathizer , stayed out of public life during the war and was consequently able to avoid being imprisoned , as many other Confederate sympathizers were . In 1867 , just five days after John L. Helm and Stevenson were elected governor and lieutenant governor , respectively , Helm died and Stevenson became acting governor . Stevenson subsequently won a special election in 1868 to finish Helm 's term . As governor , he opposed federal intervention in what he considered state matters but insisted that blacks ' newly granted rights be observed and used the state militia to quell post @-@ war violence in the state . Although a fiscal conservative , he advocated a new tax to benefit education and created the state bureau of education . 
 In 1871 , Stevenson defeated incumbent Thomas C. McCreery for his seat in the U.S. Senate after criticizing McCreery for allegedly supporting the appointment of Stephen G. Burbridge , who was hated by most Kentuckians , to a federal position . In the Senate , he opposed internal improvements and defended a constructionist view of the constitution , resisting efforts to expand the powers expressly granted in that document . Beginning in late 1873 , Stephenson functioned as the first chairman ( later called floor leader ) of the Senate Democratic caucus . He did not seek reelection in 1877 , returning to his law practice and accepting future Kentucky Governor William Goebel as a law partner . He chaired the 1880 Democratic National Convention and was elected president of the American Bar Association in 1884 . He died in Covington on August 10 , 1886 , and was buried in Spring Grove Cemetery at Cincinnati , Ohio . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 John White Stevenson was born May 4 , 1812 , in Richmond , Virginia . He was the only child of Andrew and Mary Page ( White ) Stevenson . His mother — the granddaughter of Carter Braxton , a signer of the Declaration of Independence — died during childbirth . Stevenson was sent to live with his maternal grandparents , John and Judith White , until he was eleven ; by then , his father had remarried . His father , a prominent Virginia lawyer , rose to political prominence during Stevenson 's childhood . He was elected to Congress , eventually serving as Speaker of the House and was later appointed Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary to the Court of St. James 's ( now called the United States Ambassador to the United Kingdom ) by President Martin Van Buren , where he engendered much controversy by his pro @-@ slavery practices . Because of his father 's position , young Stevenson had met both Thomas Jefferson and James Madison . 
 Stevenson was educated by private tutors in Virginia and Washington , D.C. , where he frequently lived while his father was in Congress . In 1828 , at the age of 14 , he matriculated from the Hampden – Sydney Academy ( now Hampden – Sydney College ) . Two years later , he transferred to University of Virginia , where he graduated in 1832 . After graduation , he read law with his cousin , Willoughby Newton , who would later serve in the U.S. Congress . In 1839 , Stevenson was admitted to the bar in Virginia . 
 Following Madison 's advice , Stevenson decided to settle in the west . He traveled on horseback through the western frontier until he reached the Mississippi River , settling at Vicksburg , Mississippi . Vicksburg was a small settlement at the time and did not provide enough work to satisfy him , and , in 1840 , he decided to travel to Covington , Kentucky , settling there permanently in 1841 . In Covington , he formed a law partnership with Jefferson Phelps , a respected lawyer in the area ; the partnership lasted until Phelps ' death in 1843 . 
 A devout Episcopalian , Stevenson frequently attended the conventions of that denomination . He was elected as a vestryman of the Trinity Episcopal Church in Covington on November 24 , 1842 . In 1843 , he married <unk> Wilson of Newport , Kentucky . They had five children : Sally C. ( Stevenson ) Colston , Mary W. ( Stevenson ) Colston , Judith W. ( Stevenson ) Winslow , Samuel W. Stevenson , and John W. Stevenson . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Soon after arriving in Covington , Stevenson was elected county attorney for Kenton County . He was chosen as a delegate to the 1844 Democratic National Convention and was elected to represent Kenton County in the Kentucky House of Representatives the following year . He was reelected in 1846 and 1848 . In 1849 , he was chosen as a delegate to the state constitutional convention that produced Kentucky 's third state constitution . In 1850 , he , Madison C. Johnson , and James Harlan were appointed as commissioners to revise Kentucky 's civic and criminal code . Their work , Code of Practise in Civil and Criminal Cases was published in 1854 . He was again one of Kentucky 's delegates to the Democratic National Conventions in 1848 , 1852 , and 1856 , serving as a presidential elector in 1852 and 1856 . 
 = = = U.S. Representative = = = 
 In 1857 , Stevenson was elected to the first of two consecutive terms in the U.S. House of Representatives . For the duration of his tenure in that body , he served on the Committee on Elections . He favored admitting Kansas to the Union under the Lecompton Constitution . 
 Like many Kentuckians , Stevenson was sympathetic to the southern states ' position in the lead @-@ up to the Civil War , but he opposed secession as a means of dealing with sectional tensions . In the 1860 presidential election , he supported his close friend , John C. Breckinridge . Desiring to avert the Civil War , he advocated acceptance of the several proposed compromises , including the Crittenden Compromise , authored by fellow Kentuckian John J. Crittenden . He blamed the Radical Republicans ' rigid adherence to their demands for the failure of all such proposed compromises , and on January 30 , 1861 , denounced them in a speech that the Dictionary of American Biography called the most notable of his career in the House . 
 Stevenson was defeated for reelection in 1861 . For the duration of the war , which lasted until April 1865 , he stayed out of public life in order to avoid being arrested as many other Confederate sympathizers were . After the war , he was a delegate to the National Union Party 's convention in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , in 1865 . He was a supporter of the Reconstruction policies of President Andrew Johnson . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 Ex @-@ Confederates dominated the Kentucky Democratic convention that met in Frankfort on February 22 , 1867 . John L. Helm , father of the late Confederate general Benjamin Hardin Helm , was nominated for governor and Stevenson was nominated for lieutenant governor . The entire Democratic slate of candidates was elected , including Stevenson , who received 88 @,@ 222 votes to R. <unk> Baker 's 32 @,@ 505 and H. Taylor 's 11 @,@ 473 . The only non @-@ Confederate sympathizer to win election that year was George Madison Adams , congressman for the state 's 8th district who , although a Democrat , was a former federal soldier . Helm took the oath of office on his sick bed at his home in Elizabethtown , Kentucky , on September 3 , 1867 . He died five days later , and Stevenson was sworn in as governor on September 13 . Among his first acts as governor were the appointments of Frank Lane Wolford , a former Union soldier , as adjutant general and Fayette Hewitt , a former Confederate soldier , as state quartermaster general . 
 Because Helm died so soon after taking office , a special election for the remainder of his term was set for August 1868 . Democrats held a convention in Frankfort on February 22 , 1868 and nominated Stevenson to finish out Helm 's term . R. <unk> Baker , formerly Stevenson 's opponent in the election for lieutenant governor , was the choice of the Republicans . The Republicans faced many disadvantages , including the national party 's persecution of President Johnson and a lack of local organization in many Kentucky counties . Despite Stevenson 's shortcomings as a public speaker , he was elected in a landslide — 115 @,@ 560 to 26 @,@ 605 . At the time , it was the largest majority obtained by any candidate in a Kentucky election . 
 = = = = Civil rights = = = = 
 Post @-@ war Kentucky Democrats had split into two factions — the more conservative Bourbon Democrats and the more progressive New Departure Democrats . Stevenson governed moderately , giving concessions to both sides . He urged the immediate restoration of all rights to ex @-@ Confederates and denounced Congress for failing to seat a portion of the Kentucky delegation because they had sided with the Confederacy . A champion of states ' rights , he resisted federal measures he saw as violating the sovereignty of the states and vehemently denounced the proposed Fifteenth Amendment . Following Stevenson 's lead , the General Assembly refused to pass either the Fourteenth or Fifteenth Amendment , but after their passage by a constitutional majority of the states Stevenson generally insisted that blacks ' newly granted rights not be infringed upon . He was silent , however , when state legislators and officials from various cities used lengthy residency restrictions and redrawn district and municipal boundaries to exclude black voters from specific elections . His 1867 plea for legislators to call a constitutional convention to revise the state 's pro @-@ slavery constitution to better conform to post @-@ war reality was completely ignored . 
 Stevenson opposed almost every effort to expand blacks ' rights beyond the minimums assured by federal amendments and legislation . The Civil Rights Act of 1866 guaranteed that blacks could testify against whites in federal courts , but he opposed New Departure Democrats when they insisted that Kentucky amend its laws to also allow black testimony against whites in state courts , and the measure failed in the 1867 legislative session . Later that year , the Kentucky Court of Appeals declared the Civil Rights Act unconstitutional , but a federal court soon overturned that decision . Stevenson backed Bourbon Democrats ' appeal of that decision to the Supreme Court of the United States . By 1871 , however , he had changed his mind and supported blacks ' right to testify . Despite Stevenson 's support , the measure failed in the General Assembly again in 1871 , but it passed the following year , after Stevenson had left office . 
 In the 1870 election , the first state in which blacks were allowed to vote , Stevenson warned that violence against them would not be tolerated . Although he relied on local authorities to suppress any incidents , he offered rewards for the apprehension of perpetrators of election @-@ related violence . Stevenson also recommended that the carrying of concealed weapons be outlawed . The General Assembly passed the requested legislation on March 22 , 1871 . The law imposed small fines for the first offense , but the amount rapidly increased for subsequent infractions in order to deter repeat offenders . 
 = = = = State matters = = = = 
 In Stevenson 's first message to the legislature , he called on legislators to finally decide whether the state capital would remain at Frankfort or be moved to Lexington or Louisville , as some had wanted . His address made it clear that he favored keeping the capital at Frankfort , but he noted that additional space was needed at the present capitol building because the existing building could not continue to house enough room both the state treasurer and auditor . He laid out a vision for an addition to the capitol that would make it more spacious and more grandiose . To pay for the expansion , the fiscally conservative Stevenson pressed the federal government to pay claims due Kentucky from Civil War expenses . By the end of his term , the state had collected over $ 1 @.@ 5 million in claims . The legislature , however , disregarded his plan for expanding the capitol , instead opting to construct a separate executive office building next to the capitol . 
 Stevenson also advocated careful study of the state 's finances to deal with increasing expenditures . He insisted that the state stop covering its short @-@ term indebtedness using bonds . However , Stevenson was willing to tax to benefit segregation in schools , and helped create the state bureau of education in 1870 . Because most blacks possessed little property of significant value , the new tax yielded little revenue to support their educational institutions . State legislators rejected his 1870 proposal to create a state bureau of immigration and statistics to spur interest in and migration to the state . He did persuade the legislators to make some improvements in the state 's penal and <unk> institutions , including establishing a House of Reform for juvenile offenders . 
 Mob violence , much of it perpetrated by vigilantes calling themselves " Regulators " who felt that local authorities had failed in their duties to protect the people , was an ongoing problem during Stevenson 's administration . In September 1867 , Stevenson urged all Kentuckians to defer to local authorities and ordered that all vigilante groups be disbanded . On October 1 , however , a group calling themselves " Rowzee 's band " began perpetrating anti @-@ Regulator violence in Marion County . He dispatched Adjutant General Wolford to Marion County , authorizing him to use the state militia to quell the violence if necessary . Wolford called out three companies of militia who suppressed " Rowzee 's band " and sent another to put down a similar movement in Boyle County . Later in October , Stevenson dispatched the state militia to Mercer County , and militiamen were dispatched to Boyle , Garrard , and Lincoln counties in 1869 . The governor declared that he would never hesitate to send troops " whenever it becomes necessary for the arrest and bringing to justice of all those who combine together , no matter under what pretense , to trample the law under their feet by acts of personal violence . " 
 = = = U.S. Senator = = = 
 Beginning in late 1869 , Stevenson attacked Kentucky Senator Thomas C. McCreery and Representative Thomas Laurens Jones for allegedly supporting President Ulysses S. Grant 's nomination of former Union General Stephen G. Burbridge to a federal position in the revenue service . Although born in northern Kentucky , Burbridge had commanded colored troops during the Civil War , and had also been specifically ordered to suppress Confederate guerillas in his home state . Kentucky 's General Assembly had sought to bring him to trial for war crimes in 1863 and 1864 . Historian E. Merton Coulter wrote of Burbridge : " [ The people of Kentucky ] relentlessly pursued him , the most bitterly hated of all Kentuckians , and so untiring were their efforts , that it finally came to the point where he had not a friend left in the state who would raise his voice to defend him . " Stevenson 's attacks on McCreery and Jones were likely designed to discredit them both in advance of the expiration of McCreery 's Senate term in 1870 . McCreery vigorously denied Stevenson 's charges and eventually challenged him to a duel . Stevenson declined the challenge , citing his Christian beliefs . The General Assembly met to choose McCreery 's successor in December 1869 and , on the fifth ballot , chose Stevenson over McCreery for the six @-@ year Senate term . Stevenson resigned the governorship on February 13 , 1871 , in advance of the March congressional session . 
 In the Senate , Stevenson was a conservative stalwart , steadfastly opposing spending on internal improvements and maintaining a strict constructionist view of the constitution . He urged his fellow senators to oppose the Civil Rights Act of 1871 , claiming that its provision that the president could suspend the right of habeas corpus in cases where he believed violence was imminent amounted to giving the chief executive the powers of a dictator . He also opposed the appropriation of federal money to fund the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , because he did not believe Congress was given the authority to make such an allocation under the Constitution . 
 At the 1872 Democratic National Convention , Stevenson received the votes of Delaware 's six delegates for the Democratic vice @-@ presidential nomination , although Benjamin Gratz Brown was ultimately nominated . In February 1873 , Vice @-@ President Schuyler Colfax named Stevenson as one of five members of the Morrill Commission to investigate New Hampshire Senator James W. Patterson 's involvement in the Crédit Mobilier of America scandal . Stevenson and fellow Senator John P. Stockton of New Jersey both asked to be removed from the commission , but the Senate refused to grant their request . On February 27 , 1873 , the commission recommended Patterson 's expulsion from the Senate , but the chamber adjourned on March 4 without acting on the recommendation . Patterson 's term ended with the end of the session , and he was not re @-@ elected , rendering moot further consideration of the matter . 
 From December 1873 until the expiration of his term in 1877 , Stevenson was generally recognized as the chairman ( later known as the floor leader ) of the minority Democratic caucus in the Senate ; he was the first person to have acted in the capacity . During the Forty @-@ fourth Congress , he chaired the Committee on Revolutionary Claims . He did not seek reelection at the end of his term . In the disputed 1876 presidential election , he was one of the visiting statesmen who went to New Orleans , Louisiana , and concluded that the election had been fairly conducted in that state . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After his service in the Senate , Stevenson returned to his law practice in Covington . In addition , he accepted a position teaching criminal law and contracts at the University of Cincinnati College of Law . He remained interested in politics and was chosen chairman of the 1879 Democratic state convention in Louisville and president of the 1880 Democratic National Convention in Cincinnati , Ohio . 
 In 1883 , the American Bar Association began exploring the concept of dual federalism . Because of his personal acquaintance with James Madison , whom he characterized as a proponent of dual federalism , Stevenson delivered an address on the subject at the Association 's annual meeting . Stevenson maintained that Madison believed strongly in the rights of the sovereign states and regarded a Supreme Court appeal as " a remedy for trespass on the reserved rights of the states by unconstitutional acts of Congress . " Stevenson was elected its president that year 's and his address published . Association member Richard Vaux characterized Stevenson 's presidential report reviewing state and federal legislation in 1885 as " most interesting and valuable to the profession " . 
 Among the men who studied law under Stevenson in his later years were future U.S. Treasury Secretary John G. Carlisle and future Kentucky Governor William Goebel . Goebel eventually became Stevenson 's law partner and the executor of his will . 
 In early August 1886 , Stevenson traveled to Sewanee , Tennessee , to attend the commencement ceremonies of Sewanee University . While there , he fell ill and was rushed back to his home in Covington , where he died on August 10 , 1886 . He was buried in Spring Grove Cemetery in Cincinnati . 
 = I Do , Adieu = 
 " I Do , Adieu " is the fifth season finale of the American television sitcom Cheers , written by Glen and Les Charles and directed by James Burrows . It originally aired on May 7 , 1987 on NBC at 9 : 00pm ( Eastern ) / 8 : 00pm ( Central ) . During the fifth season , Sam Malone ( Ted Danson ) repeatedly proposes to Diane , and she refuses repeatedly until she accepts engagement in " Chambers vs. Malone " ( 1987 ) . In the previous episode , " A House Is Not a Home " , Sam and Diane bought a house together . Before this episode aired , Ted Danson decided to renew his contract with the show as Sam Malone , while Shelley Long decided to quit the series , which could conclude the on @-@ and @-@ off romance of " Sam and Diane " that went on for the first five years since 1982 . Ideas were attempted to write Diane off and to end the story arc , but some ideas were kept in and others thrown out . 
 In this episode , Diane is offered an opportunity to finish one of her novels . However , she must choose between her talents and her man , Sam . After she becomes persuaded into honing her talents , Diane leaves the job , the bar , the relationship , and the city behind for that . In the 1993 series finale , " One for the Road " , Shelley Long makes her special guest appearance as Diane Chambers and the " Sam and Diane " story line is there resurfaced . Meanwhile , with Long 's departure , producers of the series made plans to reconstruct the show by introducing a new female lead who does not resemble Shelley Long . Highlights of this episode from reception are Diane Chambers 's departure and the end of Sam and Diane 's constant on @-@ and @-@ off romance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Sumner Sloane ( Michael McGuire ) , Diane 's ex @-@ fiancé who jilted her in the series pilot , returns to Cheers , surprising bar patrons . Alone in the billiard room , Sumner tells Diane that , against her will , he submitted one of her unfinished manuscripts to one of his colleagues , who praised it , and was sent to publishers . At first , she becomes excited . However , Sumner persuades her to leave everyone and everything behind , including Sam , in order to hone her talents . He warns her that finishing the novel is impossible and that her potentials will be wasted if she marries Sam . Diane tells Sumner to leave the bar and never return again . Unbeknownst to them , Sam overhears this conversation under the pool table whose underneath is covered by drapes . 
 At home , in the house they bought together in the previous episode , " A House Is Not a Home " , Sam and Diane discuss her talents and their relationship that are both at stake , which they admit . Then Diane suggests that they be married immediately , but Sam is yet reluctant , so she leaves him alone for a moment . Later , Sam daydreams about their own elderly selves living in what would have been if Diane chooses Sam over her career . In that fantasy , Sam and Diane are happily married elderly couple with children and grandchildren . Moreover , Diane has not finished her novel but assures Sam that she has no regrets and that abandoning her talents does not affect their marriage and her happiness with him . Back into reality , then they decide to set the wedding at the bar , where people know about their relationship . 
 The following day , at the wedding , commissioned by the Justice of the Peace ( William Addison ) , a phone call , picked up by Woody , announces that Diane 's unfinished novel was praised by publishers and , if finished , will likely be published . Unaffected Diane still wants to marry , but Sam convinces her to set her writing talents first before marriage . After failures , like ballet and filmmaking , and becoming convinced to hone and cherish her writing skills , Diane decides to give writing career a chance , putting a wedding to an end . At closing time , Sam and Diane alone embrace each other for the last time together . Diane promises him that she will return to him in six months . Sam tells her to " have a good life , " but Diane attests to her promise and leaves the bar . Now alone in the bar , Sam again tells her to " have a good life , " then he daydreams elderly versions of himself and Diane embracing and dancing to the music . 
 = = Production = = 
 The producers intended Cheers to be a comedy about the bar itself , but , as Burrows claimed , the " Sam and Diane " romance predominated the show for five years and , as he hypothesized , would have made the bar more of a minor role and more irrelevant if Shelley Long had not left the show as Diane Chambers in this episode . With Long leaving the series , the producers made plans to revamp the show with the bar as a central setting , as originally intended , and then they credited Long 's departure for saving the series from cancellation . After years of writing Sam as a " straight man " , especially to Diane , the writers would transform Sam into becoming more " carefree " and a " goof @-@ off " in season six . The creators , in February 1987 , decided to find a female lead replacement whose hair is not blonde and who does not resemble Shelley Long . Brunette @-@ haired Kirstie Alley debuts as Rebecca Howe in the next episode , " Home Is the Sailor " ( 1987 ) . 
 This episode was written by Glen and Les Charles and directed by James Burrows . On December 15 , 1986 , Shelley Long decided to leave Cheers as the regular character Diane Chambers , even though she and Ted " [ had ] done some really terrific work at Cheers " , for her movie career and family , while Ted Danson signed a contract for the next season ( 1987 – 1988 ) , which led producers , the Charles brothers and Burrows , to separate Sam and Diane . An idea to keep Sam in and write Diane out without risk of ruining the quality and losing viewers had been developed . Before Diane was written out by having her leave Boston for a writing career , some ideas were attempted and discarded , like Sam and Diane 's child in the next season , as Sam would have been a single father , and another ideal man for Diane . Three endings were filmed , in part to attempt to keep the actual one a secret , and because it was possible that Long might decide to stay : 1 ) Sam and Diane become married ; 2 ) Diane accepts an offer to finish a novel ; 3 ) not revealed by the producers . The alternate ending in which Sam and Diane get married aired on May 27 , 1998 as part of a 90 @-@ minute Fox special produced by the Paley Center called Behind the Laughs : The Untold Stories of Television 's Favorite Comedies : A Museum of Television and Radio Special . 
 Steve Giannelli is credited for his background appearance in the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 This episode originally aired on May 7 , 1987 , on NBC at 9 : 00pm ( Eastern ) / 8 : 00pm ( Central ) and scored a 28 @.@ 4 rating and 45 share , was watched by 24 @.@ 8 million homes , and ranked # 1 in Nielsen ratings . After the episode originally aired , Kathy Carlisle of Los Angeles Times called this episode " hilarious , but somewhat contrived and very disappointing " and felt that Sam and Diane should have been married at the end . Monica Collins from USA Today called Diane a " <unk> , selfish snob " and was relieved that the character left the series . According to Collins , she has not made friends with people in Cheers onscreen . More often , she has not befriended women , and she has " [ teased ] men more than [ pleased ] them " . 
 Later reviews analyzed the departure of Diane Chambers and the end of her relationship with Sam Malone . Gillian Flynn from Entertainment Weekly called Sam and Diane 's breakup in this episode one of the " all @-@ time best breakup scenes " in history . David Hofstede in the guide 5000 Episodes and No Commercials and Jeffrey Robinson of DVD Talk found Diane 's departure poorly done . Jane Boursaw from Huffington Post and Amy K. <unk> from The Talking Box blog called the wedding of Sam and Diane one of their favorite " weddings that [ did not ] happen " . IGN placed it as number one of the top ten Cheers episodes . 
 = Something Old , Something New ( The Hills ) = 
 " Something Old , Something New " is the tenth episode of the fifth season of The Hills . It originally aired on MTV on May 31 , 2009 . In the episode , Heidi Montag and Spencer Pratt prepare for their upcoming wedding , while Lauren Conrad and Lo Bosworth move out of their house . After much deliberation , Conrad decides to attend the nuptials , where she reconciles with Montag after being estranged with one another since the third season . It is the final episode in which Conrad appears , and also marks the entrance of her replacement Kristin Cavallari . 
 " Something Old , Something New " was produced by Adam DiVello , Liz Gateley , Kristofer Lindquist , Sara Mast , and Sean Travis . After the season was retroactively divided into Part I and Part II , respectively separating installments featuring Conrad and Cavallari , the episode became the conclusion of Part I. Additionally , it is the second episode in the series ' history with a one @-@ hour running time , the first being " Paris Changes Everything " in the third season . 
 " Something Old , Something New " was met with generally mixed reviews from critics , who felt that Cavallari 's introduction overshadowed Conrad 's departure . According to Nielsen ratings , it was watched by 2 @.@ 7 million viewers in its original airing . The episode was released on DVD on October 6 , 2009 , packaged with the remainder of Part I of the fifth season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lauren and Lo decide to host a farewell party as they prepare to move out of their house . As wedding preparations continue , Stephanie becomes upset after learning that Heidi has chosen her sister Holly as her maid @-@ of @-@ honor . During the bridal shower , Stephanie assumes the responsibilities after she becomes increasingly displeased with Holly 's poor performance . After she makes amends with Spencer , Darlene gives him her blessing for the nuptials . While out for dinner , Brody tries to convince Lauren to attend the wedding , knowing that Heidi would appreciate her presence . In a later outing , Spencer tells Brody of his couples ' therapy sessions with Heidi , but is displeased that he is not taken seriously . At the fashion public relations firm People 's Revolution , Lauren tells Kelly that she will be leaving the company , which Kelly advocates as a smart decision that will help her to determine her next career endeavors . 
 As an intoxicated Holly displays erratic behavior at Heidi and Spencer 's rehearsal dinner , Stephanie is dismayed by her lack of irresponsibility . After Spencer explains that her behavior was inappropriate , Holly tearfully leaves the restaurant . The next morning , she apologizes to Heidi for her actions , and confirms that an invitation has been sent to a special guest . Charlie later tells Spencer that he invited Stacie , the bartender that Heidi clashed with for flirting with Spencer , to the wedding . Meanwhile , Brody and Stephanie make peace at Lauren and Lo 's farewell party , while Lauren tells Stephanie that she will not be attending the ceremony . 
 The following morning , the day of the wedding , Heidi and Spencer are getting ready , while guests begin entering the church . Lauren surprises Heidi in her dressing room and explains that Heidi 's happiness is important to her . Meanwhile , Kristin Cavallari unexpectedly walks into the church and sits next to Justin , to the surprise of the attendees . After leaving Heidi , Lauren appears displeased after Lo tells her that Kristin is seated across from them . After the wedding has finished , Kristin tells Lo that she needs help finding a boyfriend , and to Audrina 's disapproval , adds that Justin seems to be a " stand up guy " . Lauren makes her final appearance on the series quietly leaving the church , while Kristin catches Heidi 's bouquet . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Something Old , Something New " was produced by Adam <unk> , Liz Gateley , Kristofer Lindquist , Sara Mast , and Sean Travis . The episode became the second in the series ' history with a one @-@ hour running time , preceded by " Paris Changes Everything " in the third season . Despite presenting Conrad and Bosworth 's house departure as taking place the evening prior to Montag and Pratt 's nuptials , the former event was filmed in January 2009 , while the latter took place on April 25 , 2009 . 
 Conrad first indicated that she wished to leave The Hills upon the conclusion of its fourth season in December 2008 , looking to pursue other career opportunities . She commented that " five years on TV is a really , really long time " , adding that she was " ready to walk away " . However , per the producers ' requests , Conrad filmed ten episodes for the fifth season , in which she closed her storylines . She added that the season was potentially its last , stating that series personnel felt her presence would " give the show some sort of closure " . In the July 2009 issue of Cosmopolitan , Conrad stated that producers had pressured her into a reconciliation with Montag throughout the season , adding that she was displeased when they would not allow otherwise . 
 " Something Old , Something New " was initially billed as the fifth season finale . However , in April 2009 , MTV announced an extension of the season , and confirmed Cavallari as Conrad 's replacement the following month . Consequentially , the first ten episodes of the season were retroactively labeled Part I , while Cavallari 's forthcoming episodes were titled Part II . 
 = = Reception and release = = 
 " Something Old , Something New " was met with generally mixed reviews from critics , many of whom were ambivalent towards Conrad 's departure and Cavallari 's introduction . Emma Rosenblum from New York was pleased with Conrad 's exit , commenting that she was emotional watching her " moving on and distancing herself from the follies of her overexposed youth " . However , she opined that Cavallari 's appearance at the wedding " does not bode well for the future of The Hills " . A writer for Entertainment Weekly described the reconciliation between Conrad and Montag an " ideal end " to the series , and noted Cavallari 's addition as a " questionable choice " . Furthermore , it was included on the magazine 's list of " 25 TV Shows That Missed Cue for a Graceful Exit " . In contrast , Jim Cantiello of MTV News noted that Conrad " came to the realization that she had been replaced " , and complimented the manner in which Cavallari was integrated into the series . Carrie Bell from People was pleased that " the bitch [ Cavallari ] is back and [ she could ] already tell it ’ s going to make for some great trashy TV " . 
 In its original broadcast in the United States on May 31 , 2009 , " Something Old , Something New " was watched by 2 @.@ 7 million viewers . It experienced a 10 @-@ percent ratings drop from the season premiere " Don 't Cry on Your Birthday " , which garnered 3 million viewers on April 6 , 2009 . In the country , Season 5 , Part I was released as a two @-@ disc DVD set on October 6 , 2009 . 
 = SMS Danzig = 
 SMS Danzig was a light cruiser of the Imperial German Navy . Named for the city of Danzig ( Gdańsk ) , she was the seventh and last ship of the Bremen class . She was begun by the Imperial Dockyard in her namesake city in 1904 , launched on 23 September 1905 and commissioned on 1 December 1907 . Armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , Danzig was capable of a top speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . 
 Danzig spent the first ten years of her career in the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . The ship saw extensive service during the First World War ; she was present at the Battle of Heligoland Bight in August 1914 , but did not engage British warships . She also saw action in the Baltic Sea against Russian forces , and was badly damaged by a Russian mine in November 1915 . Danzig was also involved in Operation Albion , the seizure of the islands at the entrance of the Gulf of Riga , in September 1917 . She was thereafter withdrawn from service , and surrendered to Britain after the end of the war as a war prize . Danzig was dismantled for scrap starting in 1921 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Danzig was ordered under the contract name Ersatz Alexandrine and was laid down at the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig in 1904 and launched on 23 September 1905 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 1 December 1907 . The ship was 111 @.@ 1 meters ( 365 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 3 m ( 44 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 68 m ( 18 @.@ 6 ft ) forward . She displaced 3 @,@ 783 t ( 3 @,@ 723 long tons ; 4 @,@ 170 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple @-@ expansion engines , designed to give 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) for a top speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . The engines were powered by ten coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers . Danzig carried up to 860 tonnes ( 850 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 4 @,@ 690 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 690 km ; 5 @,@ 400 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 14 officers and 274 – 287 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 40 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes . They were submerged in the hull on the broadside . Danzig was also fitted to carry fifty naval mines . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was up to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning , Danzig served in the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . In 1910 , she was used as a training ship for the fleet 's gunners . She returned to fleet service in August 1914 after the outbreak of World War I. She was moored in Brunsbüttel with her sister @-@ ship München , en route to Kiel via the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal on the morning of 28 August 1914 , when the British attacked the German patrol line in the Heligoland Bight . During the ensuing Battle of Heligoland Bight , Danzig and München were recalled and ordered to steam to the mouth of the Elbe and wait for further orders . Danzig reached the stricken cruiser Ariadne shortly before 15 : 00 and lowered boats to rescue survivors . Konteradmiral Franz von Hipper , the commander of the I Scouting Group , issued an order for all cruisers to regroup on the approaching battlecruisers Von der Tann and Moltke , but Fregattenkapitän <unk> , Danzig 's commander , refused , replying that he was " Rescuing people from Ariadne . " 
 On 7 May 1915 , the IV Scouting Group , which by then consisted of Danzig , München , Stettin , and Stuttgart , and twenty @-@ one torpedo boats was sent into the Baltic Sea to support a major operation against Russian positions at Libau . The operation was commanded by Rear Admiral Hopman , the commander of the reconnaissance forces in the Baltic . The IV Scouting Group was tasked with screening to the north to prevent any Russian naval forces from moving out of the Gulf of Finland undetected , while several armored cruisers and other warships bombarded the port . The Russians did attempt to intervene with a force of four cruisers : Admiral Makarov , Bayan , Oleg , and Bogatyr . The Russian ships briefly engaged München , but both sides were unsure of the others ' strength , and so both disengaged . Shortly after the bombardment , Libau was captured by the advancing German army , and Stettin and the rest of the IV Scouting Group were recalled to the High Seas Fleet . On 8 May , Danzig joined the old pre @-@ dreadnought battleships of the IV Battle Squadron on a reconnaissance toward Gotland ; the operation lasted until 10 May , but encountered no Russian forces . Danzig ran into a Russian minefield on the evening of 25 November 1915 , and was badly damaged by one of the mines . She was towed back to port , however , and repaired . 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to eliminate the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . The Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) planned an operation to seize the Baltic island of Ösel , and specifically the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint operation with the army to capture Ösel and Moon Islands ; the primary naval component was to comprise the flagship , Moltke , along with the III and IV Battle Squadrons of the High Seas Fleet . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Danzig had by this time been transferred to the II Scouting Group , which was tasked with screening for the invasion force . During the operation , Prince Adalbert , Kaiser Wilhelm II 's son , was the ship 's commander . Danzig 's only significant action during the operation came on the 19th , when she and Königsberg and Nürnberg were sent to intercept two Russian torpedo boats reported to be in the area . The Germans could not locate the vessels , and broke off the operation . 
 Danzig was withdrawn from active service in late 1917 . She survived the end of the war , and was stricken from the naval register on 5 November 1919 . The ship was surrendered to the United Kingdom as the war prize R on 15 September 1920 , and broken up for scrap in Whitby in 1921 – 1922 . 
 = Tamil language = 
 Tamil / <unk> / ( <unk> ் , tamiḻ , [ t ̪ <unk> ] ? ) is a Dravidian language predominantly spoken by the Tamil people of India and Sri Lanka , and also by the Tamil diaspora , Sri Lankan Moors , Burghers and <unk> . Tamil is an official language of two countries , Singapore and Sri Lanka . It has official status in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu and the Indian Union Territory of Puducherry . It is also used as one of the languages of education in Malaysia , along with English , Malay and Mandarin . In India , outside of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry , Tamil is also spoken in the states of Kerala , Puducherry and Andaman and Nicobar Islands as a secondary language , and by minorities in Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh . It is one of the 22 scheduled languages of India . It was declared as a classical language by the Government of India in 2004 . 
 The language is also spoken by Tamil minorities among the diaspora in Malaysia , the United Arab Emirates , the United States , United Kingdom , Mauritius , Canada , South Africa , Fiji , Germany , the Philippines , the Netherlands , Indonesia and France , as well as smaller emigrant communities elsewhere . 
 Tamil is one of the longest @-@ surviving classical languages in the world . Tamil @-@ Brahmi inscriptions from 500 BC have been found on <unk> and 2 @,@ 200 @-@ year @-@ old Tamil @-@ Brahmi inscriptions have been found on <unk> . It has been described as " the only language of contemporary India which is recognizably continuous with a classical past . " The variety and quality of classical Tamil literature has led to it being described as " one of the great classical traditions and literatures of the world " . 
 A recorded Tamil literature has been documented for over 2000 years . The earliest period of Tamil literature , Sangam literature , is dated from ca . 300 BC – AD 300 . It has the oldest extant literature among other Dravidian languages . The earliest epigraphic records found on rock edicts and hero stones date from around the 3rd century BC . More than 55 % of the epigraphical inscriptions ( about 55 @,@ 000 ) found by the Archaeological Survey of India are in the Tamil language . Tamil language inscriptions written in Brahmi script have been discovered in Sri Lanka , and on trade goods in Thailand and Egypt . The two earliest manuscripts from India , acknowledged and registered by UNESCO Memory of the World register in 1997 and 2005 , were written in Tamil . 
 In 1578 , Portuguese Christian missionaries published a Tamil prayer book in old Tamil script named ' <unk> Vanakkam , ' thus making Tamil the first Indian language to be printed and published . In 2014 Tamil Lexicon , published by the University of Madras , was the first among the dictionaries published in any Indian language . Tamil is used as a sacred language of <unk> and in Tamil Hindu traditions of Shaivism and Vaishnavism . According to a 2001 survey , there were 1 @,@ 863 newspapers published in Tamil , of which 353 were dailies . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Tamil belongs to the southern branch of the Dravidian languages , a family of around 26 languages native to the Indian subcontinent . It is also classified as being part of a Tamil language family , which alongside Tamil proper , also includes the languages of about 35 ethno @-@ linguistic groups such as the Irula and <unk> languages ( see SIL Ethnologue ) . 
 The closest major relative of Tamil is Malayalam ; the two began diverging around the 9th century CE . Although many of the differences between Tamil and Malayalam demonstrate a pre @-@ historic split of the western dialect , the process of separation into a distinct language , Malayalam , was not completed until sometime in the 13th or 14th century . 
 = = History = = 
 According to linguists like Bhadriraju Krishnamurti , Tamil , as a Dravidian language , descends from Proto @-@ Dravidian , a Proto @-@ language . Linguistic reconstruction suggests that Proto @-@ Dravidian was spoken around the third millennium BC , possibly in the region around the lower Godavari river basin in peninsular India . The material evidence suggests that the speakers of Proto @-@ Dravidian were of the culture associated with the Neolithic complexes of South India . The next phase in the reconstructed proto @-@ history of Tamil is Proto @-@ South Dravidian . The linguistic evidence suggests that Proto @-@ South Dravidian was spoken around the middle of the second millennium BC , and that proto @-@ Tamil emerged around the 3rd century BC . The earliest epigraphic attestations of Tamil are generally taken to have been written shortly thereafter . Among Indian languages , Tamil has the most ancient non @-@ Sanskritised Indian literature . Scholars categorise the attested history of the language into three periods , Old Tamil ( 300 BC – AD 700 ) , Middle Tamil ( 700 – 1600 ) and Modern Tamil ( 1600 – present ) . In November 2007 , an excavation at <unk> @-@ al @-@ Qadim revealed Egyptian pottery dating back to first century BC with ancient Tamil Brahmi inscriptions . John Guy states that Tamil was the lingua franca for early maritime traders from India . 
 = = = Legend = = = 
 According to Hindu legend , Tamil or in personification form Tamil <unk> ( Mother Tamil ) was created by Lord Shiva . Murugan , revered as the Tamil God , along with sage Agastya , brought it to the people . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The earliest extant Tamil literary works and their commentaries celebrate the Pandiyan Kings for the organization of long @-@ termed Tamil Sangams , which researched , developed and made amendments in Tamil language . Even though the name of the language which was developed by these Tamil Sangams is mentioned as Tamil , the exact period when the name " Tamil " came to be applied to the language is unclear , as is the precise etymology of the name . The earliest attested use of the name is found in <unk> , which is dated as early as 1st century BC . Southworth suggests that the name comes from tam @-@ <unk> > tam @-@ iḻ ' self @-@ speak ' , or ' one 's own speech ' . ( see Southworth 's derivation of Sanskrit term for " others " or <unk> ) Kamil <unk> suggests an etymology of tam @-@ iḻ , with tam meaning " self " or " one 's self " , and " <unk> " having the connotation of " unfolding sound " . Alternatively , he suggests a derivation of tamiḻ < tam @-@ iḻ < * tav @-@ iḻ < * tak @-@ iḻ , meaning in origin " the proper process ( of speaking ) " . 
 The Tamil Lexicon of University of Madras defines the word ' Tamil ' as ' sweetness ' . <unk> Subramanian suggests the meaning ' sweet sound ' from ' tam ' - sweet and ' il ' - ' sound ' . 
 = = = Old Tamil = = = 
 Old Tamil is the period of the Tamil language spanning the 5th century BCE to the 8th century CE . The earliest records in Old Tamil are short inscriptions from between the 5th and 2nd century BCE in caves and on pottery . These inscriptions are written in a variant of the Brahmi script called Tamil Brahmi . The earliest long text in Old Tamil is the Tolkāppiyam , an early work on Tamil grammar and poetics , whose oldest layers could be as old as the 1st century BC . A large number of literary works in Old Tamil have also survived . These include a corpus of 2 @,@ 381 poems collectively known as Sangam literature . These poems are usually dated to between the 1st and 5th centuries AD , 
 = = = Middle Tamil = = = 
 The evolution of Old Tamil into Middle Tamil which is generally taken to have been completed by the 8th century , was characterized by a number of phonological and grammatical changes . In phonological terms , the most important shifts were the virtual disappearance of the <unk> ( <unk> ) , an old phoneme , the coalescence of the alveolar and dental nasals , and the transformation of the alveolar plosive into a rhotic . In grammar , the most important change was the emergence of the present tense . The present tense evolved out of the verb kil ( <unk> ் ) , meaning " to be possible " or " to befall " . In Old Tamil , this verb was used as an aspect marker to indicate that an action was micro @-@ <unk> , non @-@ sustained or non @-@ lasting , usually in combination with a time marker such as <unk> ( ன ் ) . In Middle Tamil , this usage evolved into a present tense marker – <unk> ( <unk> ் <unk> ) – which combined the old aspect and time markers . 
 = = = Modern Tamil = = = 
 The <unk> remains the standard normative grammar for modern literary Tamil , which therefore continues to be based on Middle Tamil of the 13th century rather than on Modern Tamil . Colloquial spoken Tamil , in contrast , shows a number of changes . The negative conjugation of verbs , for example , has fallen out of use in Modern Tamil – negation is , instead , expressed either morphologically or syntactically . Modern spoken Tamil also shows a number of sound changes , in particular , a tendency to lower high vowels in initial and medial positions , and the disappearance of vowels between plosives and between a plosive and rhotic . 
 Contact with European languages also affected both written and spoken Tamil . Changes in written Tamil include the use of European @-@ style punctuation and the use of consonant clusters that were not permitted in Middle Tamil . The syntax of written Tamil has also changed , with the introduction of new aspectual auxiliaries and more complex sentence structures , and with the emergence of a more rigid word order that resembles the syntactic argument structure of English . Simultaneously , a strong strain of linguistic purism emerged in the early 20th century , culminating in the Pure Tamil Movement which called for removal of all Sanskritic and other foreign elements from Tamil . It received some support from Dravidian parties . This led to the replacement of a significant number of Sanskrit loanwords by Tamil equivalents , though many others remain . 
 = = Geographic distribution = = 
 Tamil is the first language of the majority of the people residing in Tamil Nadu , Puducherry , in India and Northern Province , Eastern Province , in Sri Lanka . The language is also spoken among small minority groups in other states of India which include Karnataka , Andhra Pradesh , Kerala , Maharashtra and in certain regions of Sri Lanka such as Colombo and the hill country . Tamil or dialects of it were used widely in the state of Kerala as the major language of administration , literature and common usage until the 12th century AD . Tamil was also used widely in inscriptions found in southern Andhra Pradesh districts of Chittoor and Nellore until the 12th century AD . Tamil was also used for inscriptions from the 10th through 14th centuries in southern Karnataka districts such as Kolar , Mysore , Mandya and Bangalore . 
 There are currently sizeable Tamil @-@ speaking populations descended from colonial @-@ era migrants in Malaysia , Singapore , Philippines , Mauritius , South Africa , Indonesia , Thailand , Burma , and Vietnam . A large community of Pakistani Tamils speakers exists in Karachi , Pakistan , which includes Tamil @-@ speaking Hindus as well as Christians and Muslims – including some Tamil @-@ speaking Muslim refugees from Sri Lanka . Many in Réunion , Guyana , Fiji , Suriname , and Trinidad and Tobago have Tamil origins , but only a small number speak the language . In Reunion where the Tamil language was forbidden to be learnt and used in public space by France it is now being <unk> by students and adults . It is also used by groups of migrants from Sri Lanka and India , Canada ( especially Toronto ) , United States ( especially New Jersey and New York City ) , Australia , many Middle Eastern countries , and some Western European countries . 
 = = Legal status = = 
 Tamil is the official language of the Indian state of Tamil Nadu and one of the 22 languages under schedule 8 of the constitution of India . It is also one of the official languages of the union territory of Puducherry and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands . Tamil is also one of the official languages of Singapore . Tamil is one of the official and national languages of Sri Lanka , along with Sinhala . It was once given nominal official status in the state of Haryana , purportedly as a rebuff to Punjab , though there was no attested Tamil @-@ speaking population in the state , and was later replaced by Punjabi , in 2010 . In Malaysia , 543 primary education government schools are available fully in Tamil medium . The establishments of Tamil medium schools have been currently in process in Myanmar to provide education completely in Tamil language by the Tamils who settled there 200 years ago . Tamil language is taught in Canada and South Africa for the local Tamil minority populations . In Ontario , Canada , the month of January has been declared " Tamil Heritage Month " per legislation . 
 In addition , with the creation in October 2004 of a legal status for classical languages by the Government of India and following a political campaign supported by several Tamil associations , Tamil became the first legally recognised Classical language of India . The recognition was announced by the contemporaneous President of India , Abdul Kalam , in a joint sitting of both houses of the Indian Parliament on 6 June 2004 . 
 = = Dialects = = 
 = = = Region @-@ specific variations = = = 
 The socio @-@ linguistic situation of Tamil is characterised by diglossia : there are two separate registers varying by socioeconomic status , a high register and a low one . Tamil dialects are primarily differentiated from each other by the fact that they have undergone different phonological changes and sound shifts in evolving from Old Tamil . For example , the word for " here " — <unk> in <unk> ( the classic variety ) — has evolved into <unk> in the Kongu dialect of Coimbatore , inga in the dialect of Thanjavur , and <unk> in some dialects of Sri Lanka . Old Tamil 's <unk> ( where <unk> means place ) is the source of <unk> in the dialect of Tirunelveli , Old Tamil <unk> is the source of <unk> in the dialect of Madurai , and <unk> in various northern dialects . Even now , in the Coimbatore area , it is common to hear " <unk> " meaning " that place " . Although Tamil dialects do not differ significantly in their vocabulary , there are a few exceptions . The dialects spoken in Sri Lanka retain many words and grammatical forms that are not in everyday use in India , and use many other words slightly differently . The various Tamil dialects include Central Tamil dialect , Kongu Tamil , Madras <unk> , Madurai Tamil , Nellai Tamil , <unk> Tamil in India and Batticaloa Tamil dialect , Jaffna Tamil dialect , Negombo Tamil dialect in Sri Lanka . <unk> dialect in Karnataka has been heavily influenced by Kannada . 
 = = = = <unk> variations = = = = 
 The dialect of the district of Palakkad in Kerala has a large number of Malayalam loanwords , has been influenced by Malayalam 's syntax and also has a distinctive Malayalam accent . Similarly , Tamil spoken in Kanyakumari District has more unique words and phonetic style than Tamil spoken at other parts of Tamil Nadu . The words and phonetics are so different that a person from Kanyakumari district is easily identifiable by their spoken Tamil . <unk> and <unk> dialects , spoken by groups of Tamil Vaishnavites who migrated to Karnataka in the 11th century , retain many features of the Vaishnava <unk> , a special form of Tamil developed in the 9th and 10th centuries that reflect Vaishnavite religious and spiritual values . Several castes have their own <unk> which most members of that caste traditionally used regardless of where they come from . It is often possible to identify a person 's caste by their speech . Tamil in Sri Lanka incorporates loan words from Portuguese , Dutch , and English . 
 = = Spoken and literary variants = = 
 In addition to its various dialects , Tamil exhibits different forms : a classical literary style modelled on the ancient language ( <unk> ) , a modern literary and formal style ( centamiḻ ) , and a modern colloquial form ( koṭuntamiḻ ) . These styles shade into each other , forming a stylistic continuum . For example , it is possible to write centamiḻ with a vocabulary drawn from <unk> , or to use forms associated with one of the other variants while speaking koṭuntamiḻ . 
 In modern times , centamiḻ is generally used in formal writing and speech . For instance , it is the language of textbooks , of much of Tamil literature and of public speaking and debate . In recent times , however , koṭuntamiḻ has been making inroads into areas that have traditionally been considered the province of centamiḻ . Most contemporary cinema , theatre and popular entertainment on television and radio , for example , is in koṭuntamiḻ , and many politicians use it to bring themselves closer to their audience . The increasing use of koṭuntamiḻ in modern times has led to the emergence of unofficial ‘ standard ' spoken dialects . In India , the ‘ standard ' koṭuntamiḻ , rather than on any one dialect , but has been significantly influenced by the dialects of Thanjavur and Madurai . In Sri Lanka , the standard is based on the dialect of Jaffna . 
 = = Writing system = = 
 After Tamil Brahmi fell out of use , Tamil was written using a script called the <unk> amongst others such as Grantha and Pallava script . The current Tamil script consists of 12 vowels , 18 consonants and one special character , the āytam . The vowels and consonants combine to form 216 compound characters , giving a total of 247 characters ( 12 + 18 + 1 + ( 12 x 18 ) ) . All consonants have an inherent vowel a , as with other Indic scripts . This inherent vowel is removed by adding a tittle called a <unk> , to the consonantal sign . For example , ன is <unk> ( with the inherent a ) and ன ் is <unk> ( without a vowel ) . Many Indic scripts have a similar sign , generically called <unk> , but the Tamil script is somewhat different in that it nearly always uses a visible <unk> to indicate a dead consonant ( a consonant without a vowel ) . In other Indic scripts , it is generally preferred to use a ligature or a half form to write a syllable or a cluster containing a dead consonant , although writing it with a visible <unk> is also possible . The Tamil script does not differentiate voiced and unvoiced plosives . Instead , plosives are articulated with voice depending on their position in a word , in accordance with the rules of Tamil phonology . 
 In addition to the standard characters , six characters taken from the Grantha script , which was used in the Tamil region to write Sanskrit , are sometimes used to represent sounds not native to Tamil , that is , words adopted from Sanskrit , Prakrit and other languages . The traditional system prescribed by classical grammars for writing loan @-@ words , which involves respelling them in accordance with Tamil phonology , remains , but is not always consistently applied . 
 = = Phonology = = 
 Tamil phonology is characterised by the presence of retroflex consonants and multiple rhotics . Tamil does not distinguish phonologically between voiced and unvoiced consonants ; phonetically , voice is assigned depending on a consonant 's position in a word . Tamil phonology permits few consonant clusters , which can never be word initial . Native grammarians classify Tamil phonemes into vowels , consonants , and a " secondary character " , the āytam . 
 = = = Vowels = = = 
 Tamil has five vowel qualities , namely / a / , / e / , / i / , / o / and / u / . Each may be long or short . There are two diphthongs , / aɪ / and / <unk> / . Long vowels are about twice as long as short vowels . The diphthongs are usually pronounced about 1 @.@ 5 times as long as short vowels . Most grammatical texts place them with the long vowels . 
 = = = Consonants = = = 
 Tamil consonants are presented as hard , soft and medial in some grammars which roughly corresponds to plosives , approximants and nasals . Unlike most Indian languages , Tamil does not distinguish aspirated and unaspirated consonants . In addition , the voicing of plosives is governed by strict rules in centamiḻ . Plosives are unvoiced if they occur word @-@ initially or doubled . Elsewhere they are voiced , with a few becoming fricatives <unk> . <unk> and approximants are always voiced . 
 Tamil is characterised by its use of more than one type of coronal consonants : like many of the other languages of India , it contains a series of retroflex consonants . Notably , the Tamil retroflex series includes the retroflex approximant / ɻ / ( <unk> ) ( example Tamil ; often transcribed ' zh ' ) , which is absent in the Indo @-@ Aryan languages . Among the other Dravidian languages , the retroflex approximant also occurs in Malayalam ( for example in ' Kozhikode ' ) , disappeared from spoken Kannada around 1000 AD ( although the character is still written , and exists in Unicode ) , and was never present in Telugu . In many dialects of colloquial Tamil , this consonant is seen as disappearing and shifting to the alveolar lateral approximant / l / . Dental and alveolar consonants also historically contrasted with each other , a typically Dravidian trait not found in the neighbouring Indo @-@ Aryan languages . While this distinction can still be seen in the written language , it has been largely lost in colloquial spoken Tamil , and even in literary usage the letters <unk> ( dental ) and ன ( alveolar ) may be seen as allophonic . Likewise , the historical alveolar stop has transformed into a trill consonant in many modern dialects . 
 A chart of the Tamil consonant phonemes in the International Phonetic Alphabet follows : 
 The plosives have voiced allophones in predictable contexts . The sounds / f / and / ʂ / are peripheral to the phonology of Tamil , being found only in loanwords and frequently replaced by native sounds . There are well @-@ defined rules for elision in Tamil categorised into classes based on the phoneme which undergoes elision . 
 = = = Āytam = = = 
 Classical Tamil also had a phoneme called the Āytam , written as ‘ <unk> ' . Tamil grammarians of the time classified it as a dependent phoneme ( or restricted phoneme ) ( <unk> ) , but it is very rare in modern Tamil . The rules of pronunciation given in the Tolkāppiyam , a text on the grammar of Classical Tamil , suggest that the āytam could have glottalised the sounds it was combined with . It has also been suggested that the āytam was used to represent the voiced implosive ( or closing part or the first half ) of geminated voiced plosives inside a word . The Āytam , in modern Tamil , is also used to convert p to f when writing English words using the Tamil script . 
 = = = Numerals and symbols = = = 
 Apart from the usual numerals , Tamil also has numerals for 10 , 100 and 1000 . Symbols for day , month , year , debit , credit , as above , rupee , and numeral are present as well . Tamil also uses several historical fractional signs . 
 = = Grammar = = 
 Tamil employs agglutinative grammar , where suffixes are used to mark noun class , number , and case , verb tense and other grammatical categories . Tamil 's standard <unk> terminology and scholarly vocabulary is itself Tamil , as opposed to the Sanskrit that is standard for most Aryan languages . 
 Much of Tamil grammar is extensively described in the oldest known grammar book for Tamil , the Tolkāppiyam . Modern Tamil writing is largely based on the 13th century grammar <unk> which restated and clarified the rules of the Tolkāppiyam , with some modifications . Traditional Tamil grammar consists of five parts , namely <unk> , sol , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> . Of these , the last two are mostly applied in poetry . 
 Tamil words consist of a lexical root to which one or more affixes are attached . Most Tamil affixes are suffixes . Tamil suffixes can be derivational suffixes , which either change the part of speech of the word or its meaning , or inflectional suffixes , which mark categories such as person , number , mood , tense , etc . There is no absolute limit on the length and extent of agglutination , which can lead to long words with a large number of suffixes . 
 = = = Morphology = = = 
 Tamil nouns ( and pronouns ) are classified into two super @-@ classes ( <unk> ) — the " rational " ( <unk> ) , and the " irrational " ( <unk> ) — which include a total of five classes ( pāl , which literally means ‘ gender ' ) . Humans and deities are classified as " rational " , and all other nouns ( animals , objects , abstract nouns ) are classified as irrational . The " rational " nouns and pronouns belong to one of three classes ( pāl ) — masculine singular , feminine singular , and rational plural . The " irrational " nouns and pronouns belong to one of two classes : irrational singular and irrational plural . The pāl is often indicated through suffixes . The plural form for rational nouns may be used as an honorific , gender @-@ neutral , singular form . 
 Suffixes are used to perform the functions of cases or postpositions . Traditional grammarians tried to group the various suffixes into eight cases corresponding to the cases used in Sanskrit . These were the nominative , accusative , dative , <unk> , genitive , instrumental , locative , and ablative . Modern grammarians argue that this classification is artificial , and that Tamil usage is best understood if each suffix or combination of suffixes is seen as marking a separate case . Tamil nouns can take one of four prefixes , i , a , u , and e which are functionally equivalent to the demonstratives in English . 
 Tamil verbs are also inflected through the use of suffixes . A typical Tamil verb form will have a number of suffixes , which show person , number , mood , tense , and voice . 
 Person and number are indicated by suffixing the oblique case of the relevant pronoun . The suffixes to indicate tenses and voice are formed from grammatical particles , which are added to the stem . 
 Tamil has two voices . The first indicates that the subject of the sentence undergoes or is the object of the action named by the verb stem , and the second indicates that the subject of the sentence directs the action referred to by the verb stem . 
 Tamil has three simple tenses — past , present , and future — indicated by the suffixes , as well as a series of perfects indicated by compound suffixes . Mood is implicit in Tamil , and is normally reflected by the same morphemes which mark tense categories . Tamil verbs also mark evidentiality , through the addition of the hearsay clitic <unk> . 
 Traditional grammars of Tamil do not distinguish between adjectives and adverbs , including both of them under the category <unk> , although modern grammarians tend to distinguish between them on morphological and syntactical grounds . Tamil has a large number of <unk> that act as adverbs indicating the way the object in a given state " says " or " sounds " . 
 Tamil does not have articles . <unk> and indefiniteness are either indicated by special grammatical devices , such as using the number " one " as an indefinite article , or by the context . In the first person plural , Tamil makes a distinction between inclusive pronouns <unk> ் <unk> ( we ) , <unk> <unk> ( our ) that include the addressee and exclusive pronouns <unk> ் கள ் <unk> ( we ) , <unk> <unk> ( our ) that do not . 
 = = = Syntax = = = 
 Tamil is a consistently head @-@ final language . The verb comes at the end of the clause , with a typical word order of subject – object – verb ( SOV ) . However , word order in Tamil is also flexible , so that surface permutations of the SOV order are possible with different pragmatic effects . Tamil has postpositions rather than prepositions . <unk> and modifiers precede the noun within the noun phrase . Subordinate clauses precede the verb of the matrix clause . 
 Tamil is a null @-@ subject language . Not all Tamil sentences have subjects , verbs , and objects . It is possible to construct grammatically valid and meaningful sentences which lack one or more of the three . For example , a sentence may only have a verb — such as <unk> ( " completed " ) — or only a subject and object , without a verb such as <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " That [ is ] my house " ) . Tamil does not have a copula ( a linking verb equivalent to the word is ) . The word is included in the translations only to convey the meaning more easily . 
 = = Vocabulary = = 
 The vocabulary of Tamil is mainly Dravidian . A strong sense of linguistic purism is found in Modern Tamil , which opposes the use of foreign loanwords . Nonetheless , a number of words used in classical and modern Tamil are loanwords from the languages of neighbouring groups , or with whom the Tamils had trading links , including Munda ( for example , <unk> " frog " from Munda <unk> ) , Malay ( e.g. <unk> " sago " from Malay <unk> ) , Chinese ( for example , <unk> " skiff " from Chinese san @-@ pan ) and Greek ( for example , ora from Greek <unk> ) . In more modern times , Tamil has imported words from Urdu and Marathi , reflecting groups that have influenced the Tamil area at various points of time , and from neighbouring languages such as Telugu , Kannada , and Sinhala . During the modern period , words have also been adapted from European languages , such as Portuguese , French , and English . 
 The strongest impact of purism in Tamil has been on words taken from Sanskrit . During its history , Tamil , along with other Dravidian languages like Telugu , Kannada , Malayalam etc . , was influenced by Sanskrit in terms of vocabulary , grammar and literary styles , reflecting the increased trend of <unk> in the Tamil country . Tamil vocabulary never became quite as heavily Sanskritised as that of the other Dravidian languages , and unlike in those languages , it was and remains possible to express complex ideas ( including in science , art , religion and law ) without the use of Sanskrit loan words . In addition , <unk> was actively resisted by a number of authors of the late medieval period , culminating in the 20th century in a movement called <unk> tamiḻ <unk> ( meaning " pure Tamil movement " ) , led by <unk> Kalaignar and Maraimalai Adigal , which sought to remove the accumulated influence of Sanskrit on Tamil . As a result of this , Tamil in formal documents , literature and public speeches has seen a marked decline in the use Sanskrit loan words in the past few decades , under some estimates having fallen from 40 – 50 % to about 20 % . As a result , the Prakrit and Sanskrit loan words used in modern Tamil are , unlike in some other Dravidian languages , restricted mainly to some spiritual terminology and abstract nouns . 
 In the 20th century , institutions and learned bodies have , with government support , generated technical dictionaries for Tamil containing neologisms and words derived from Tamil roots to replace loan words from English and other languages . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Words of Tamil origin occur in other languages . A notable example of a word in worldwide use with Dravidian ( not specifically Tamil ) etymology is orange , via Sanskrit <unk> from a Dravidian predecessor of Tamil <unk> " fragrant fruit " . Anaconda is word of Tamil origin <unk> @-@ <unk> meaning elephant killer Examples in English include cheroot ( <unk> meaning " rolled up " ) , mango ( from <unk> ) , <unk> ( from <unk> <unk> , " pepper water " ) , pariah ( from <unk> ) , curry ( from kari ) , and catamaran ( from <unk> <unk> , " bundled logs " ) . <unk> ( from Kanji - rice porridge or gruel ) 
 = Ahimsa = 
 Ahimsa ( Sanskrit : अहिंसा ; IAST : ahimsā , Pāli : <unk> ) is a term meaning ' not to injure ' and ' compassion ' . The word is derived from the Sanskrit root hiṃs – to strike ; hiṃsā is injury or harm , a @-@ hiṃsā is the opposite of this , i.e. cause no injury , do no harm . Ahimsa is also referred to as nonviolence , and it applies to all living beings — including all animals — according to many Indian religions . 
 Ahimsa is one of the cardinal virtues and an important tenet of 3 major religions ( Jainism , Hinduism , and Buddhism ) . Ahimsa is a multidimensional concept , inspired by the premise that all living beings have the spark of the divine spiritual energy ; therefore , to hurt another being is to hurt oneself . Ahimsa has also been related to the notion that any violence has karmic consequences . While ancient scholars of Hinduism pioneered and over time perfected the principles of Ahimsa , the concept reached an extraordinary status in the ethical philosophy of Jainism . Most popularly , Mahatma Gandhi strongly believed in the principle of ahimsa . 
 Ahimsa 's precept of ' cause no injury ' includes one 's deeds , words , and thoughts . Classical literature of Hinduism such as Mahabharata and Ramayana , as well as modern scholars debate principles of Ahimsa when one is faced with war and situations requiring self @-@ defence . The historic literature from India and modern discussions have contributed to theories of Just War , and theories of appropriate self @-@ defence . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word Ahimsa — sometimes spelled as <unk> — is derived from the Sanskrit root hiṃs – to strike ; hiṃsā is injury or harm , a @-@ hiṃsā is the opposite of this , i.e. non harming or nonviolence . 
 There is a debate on the origins of the word Ahimsa , and how its meaning evolved . <unk> as well as <unk> suggest the root word may be han which means kill , which leads to the interpretation that ahimsa means do not kill . Schmidt as well as <unk> explain the proper root word is hiṃs and the Sanskrit verb <unk> , which leads to the interpretation ahimsa means do not injure , or do not hurt . <unk> @-@ <unk> concur with the latter explanation . 
 Ancient texts use ahimsa to mean non @-@ injury , a broader concept than non @-@ violence . Non @-@ injury implies not killing others , as well as not hurting others mentally or verbally ; it includes avoiding all violent means — including physical violence — anything that injures others . In classical Sanskrit literature of Hinduism , another word <unk> is sometimes used instead of Ahimsa , as one of the cardinal virtues necessary for moral life . One example is in <unk> <unk> 2 @.@ 6 @.@ 23 : <unk> ् <unk> @-@ <unk> ् म @-@ <unk> ् <unk> ् <unk> ् <unk> ् <unk> ( One who does not injure others with words , thoughts or acts is named <unk> ) . 
 = = Hinduism = = 
 = = = Ancient Vedic Texts = = = 
 Ahimsa as an ethical concept evolved in Vedic texts . The oldest scripts , along with discussing ritual animal sacrifices , indirectly mention Ahimsa , but do not emphasise it . Over time , the Hindu scripts revise ritual practices and the concept of Ahimsa is increasingly refined and emphasised , ultimately Ahimsa becomes the concept that describes the highest virtue by the late Vedic era ( about 500 BC ) . For example , hymn 10 @.@ 22 @.@ 13 in the Rig Veda uses the words Satya ( truthfulness ) and Ahimsa in a prayer to deity Indra ; later , the Yajur Veda dated to be between 1000 BC and 600 BC , states , " may all beings look at me with a friendly eye , may I do likewise , and may we look at each other with the eyes of a friend " . 
 The term Ahimsa appears in the text Taittiriya Shakha of the Yajurveda ( TS 5 @.@ 2 @.@ 8 @.@ 7 ) , where it refers to non @-@ injury to the sacrificer himself . It occurs several times in the Shatapatha Brahmana in the sense of " non @-@ injury " . The Ahimsa doctrine is a late Vedic era development in Brahmanical culture . The earliest reference to the idea of non @-@ violence to animals ( " <unk> @-@ Ahimsa " ) , apparently in a moral sense , is in the <unk> Katha Samhita of the Yajurveda ( <unk> 31 @.@ 11 ) , which may have been written in about the 8th century BCE . 
 Bowker states the word appears but is uncommon in the principal Upanishads . Kaneda gives examples of the word Ahimsa in these Upanishads . Other scholars suggest Ahimsa as an ethical concept that started evolving in the Vedas , becoming an increasingly central concept in Upanishads . 
 The Chāndogya Upaniṣad , dated to the 8th or 7th century BCE , one of the oldest Upanishads , has the earliest evidence for the use of the word Ahimsa in the sense familiar in Hinduism ( a code of conduct ) . It bars violence against " all creatures " ( <unk> ) and the practitioner of Ahimsa is said to escape from the cycle of metempsychosis ( CU 8 @.@ 15 @.@ 1 ) . A few scholars are of the opinion that this might have been a concession to the growing influence of Jainism , in Vedic Hinduism . 
 Chāndogya Upaniṣad also names Ahimsa , along with <unk> ( truthfulness ) , <unk> ( sincerity ) , <unk> ( charity ) , <unk> ( penance / meditation ) , as one of five essential virtues ( CU 3 @.@ 17 @.@ 4 ) . 
 The <unk> Upanishad lists ten <unk> : Ahimsa , Satya , Asteya , Brahmacharya , Daya , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . According to Kaneda , the term Ahimsa is an important spiritual doctrine shared by Hinduism , Buddhism and Jainism . It literally means ' non @-@ injury ' and ' non @-@ killing ' . It implies the total avoidance of harming of any kind of living creatures not only by deeds , but also by words and in thoughts . 
 = = = The Epics = = = 
 The Mahabharata , one of the epics of Hinduism , has multiple mentions of the phrase Ahimsa <unk> Dharma ( अहिंसा <unk> <unk> ् <unk> ) , which literally means : non @-@ violence is the highest moral virtue . For example , <unk> Parva has the verse : 
 The above passage from Mahabharata emphasises the cardinal importance of Ahimsa in Hinduism , and literally means : Ahimsa is the highest virtue , Ahimsa is the highest self @-@ control , Ahimsa is the greatest gift , Ahimsa is the best suffering , Ahimsa is the highest sacrifice , Ahimsa is the finest strength , Ahimsa is the greatest friend , Ahimsa is the greatest happiness , Ahimsa is the highest truth , and Ahimsa is the greatest teaching . Some other examples where the phrase Ahimsa <unk> Dharma are discussed include Adi Parva , Vana Parva and Anushasana Parva . The Bhagavad Gita , among other things , discusses the doubts and questions about appropriate response when one faces systematic violence or war . These verses develop the concepts of lawful violence in self @-@ defence and the theories of just war . However , there is no consensus on this interpretation . Gandhi , for example , considers this debate about non @-@ violence and lawful violence as a mere metaphor for the internal war within each human being , when he or she faces moral questions . 
 = = = Self @-@ defence , criminal law , and war = = = 
 The classical texts of Hinduism devote numerous chapters discussing what people who practice the virtue of Ahimsa , can and must do when they are faced with war , violent threat or need to sentence someone convicted of a crime . These discussions have led to theories of just war , theories of reasonable self @-@ defence and theories of proportionate punishment . Arthashastra discusses , among other things , why and what constitutes proportionate response and punishment . 
 War 
 The precepts of Ahimsa under Hinduism require that war must be avoided , with sincere and truthful dialogue . Force must be the last resort . If war becomes necessary , its cause must be just , its purpose virtuous , its objective to restrain the wicked , its aim peace , its method lawful . War can only be started and stopped by a legitimate authority . Weapons used must be proportionate to the opponent and the aim of war , not indiscriminate tools of destruction . All strategies and weapons used in the war must be to defeat the opponent , not designed to cause misery to the opponent ; for example , use of arrows is allowed , but use of arrows smeared with painful poison is not allowed . Warriors must use judgment in the battlefield . Cruelty to the opponent during war is forbidden . Wounded , unarmed opponent warriors must not be attacked or killed , they must be brought to your realm and given medical treatment . Children , women and civilians must not be injured . While the war is in progress , sincere dialogue for peace must continue . 
 Self @-@ defence 
 In matters of self @-@ defence , different interpretations of ancient Hindu texts have been offered . For example , Tähtinen suggests self @-@ defence is appropriate , criminals are not protected by the rule of Ahimsa , and Hindu scriptures support the use of violence against an armed attacker . Ahimsa is not meant to imply pacifism . 
 Alternate theories of self @-@ defence , inspired by Ahimsa , build principles similar to theories of just war . Aikido , pioneered in Japan , illustrates one such principles of self @-@ defence . Morihei Ueshiba , the founder of Aikido , described his inspiration as Ahimsa . According to this interpretation of Ahimsa in self @-@ defence , one must not assume that the world is free of aggression . One must presume that some people will , out of ignorance , error or fear , attack other persons or intrude into their space , physically or verbally . The aim of self @-@ defence , suggested Ueshiba , must be to neutralise the aggression of the attacker , and avoid the conflict . The best defence is one where the victim is protected , as well as the attacker is respected and not injured if possible . Under Ahimsa and Aikido , there are no enemies , and appropriate self @-@ defence focuses on neutralising the immaturity , assumptions and aggressive strivings of the attacker . 
 Criminal law 
 Tähtinen concludes that Hindus have no misgivings about death penalty ; their position is that evil @-@ doers who deserve death should be killed , and that a king in particular is obliged to punish criminals and should not hesitate to kill them , even if they happen to be his own brothers and sons . 
 Other scholars conclude that the scriptures of Hinduism suggest sentences for any crime must be fair , proportional and not cruel . 
 Pacifism 
 There is no universal consensus on pacifism among Hindu scholars of modern times . The conflict between pacifistic interpretations of Ahimsa and the theories of just war prescribed by the Gita has been resolved by some scholars such as Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi , as being an allegory , wherein the battlefield is the soul and Arjuna , the war is within each human being , where man 's higher impulses struggle against his own evil impulses . 
 = = = Non @-@ human life = = = 
 The Hindu precept of ' cause no injury ' applies to animals and all life forms . This precept isn ’ t found in the oldest verses of Vedas , but increasingly becomes one of the central ideas between 500 BC and 400 AD . In the oldest texts , numerous ritual sacrifices of animals , including cows and horses , are highlighted and hardly any mention is made of Ahimsa to non @-@ human life . 
 Hindu scriptures , dated to between 5th century and 1st century BC , while discussing human diet , initially suggest ‘ ‘ kosher ’ ’ meat may be eaten , evolving it with the suggestion that only meat obtained through ritual sacrifice can be eaten , then that one should eat no meat because it hurts animals , with verses describing the noble life as one that lives on flowers , roots and fruits alone . 
 Later texts of Hinduism declare Ahimsa one of the primary virtues , declare any killing or harming any life as against ‘ ‘ dharma ’ ’ ( moral life ) . Finally , the discussion in Upanishads and Hindu Epics shifts to whether a human being can ever live his or her life without harming animal and plant life in some way ; which and when plants or animal meat may be eaten , whether violence against animals causes human beings to become less compassionate , and if and how one may exert least harm to non @-@ human life consistent with ahimsa precept , given the constraints of life and human needs . The Mahabharata permits hunting by warriors , but opposes it in the case of hermits who must be strictly non @-@ violent . Sushruta Samhita , a Hindu text written in the 3rd or 4th century , in Chapter XLVI suggests proper diet as a means of treating certain illnesses , and recommends various fishes and meats for different ailments and for pregnant women , and the Charaka Samhita describes meat as superior to all other kinds of food for convalescents . 
 Across the texts of Hinduism , there is a profusion of ideas about the virtue of Ahimsa when applied to non @-@ human life , but without a universal consensus . Alsdorf claims the debate and disagreements between supporters of vegetarian lifestyle and meat eaters was significant . Even suggested exceptions – ritual slaughter and hunting – were challenged by advocates of Ahimsa . In the Mahabharata both sides present various arguments to substantiate their viewpoints . Moreover , a hunter defends his profession in a long discourse . 
 Many of the arguments proposed in favor of non @-@ violence to animals refer to the bliss one feels , the rewards it entails before or after death , the danger and harm it prevents , as well as to the karmic consequences of violence . 
 The ancient Hindu texts discuss Ahimsa and non @-@ animal life . They discourage wanton destruction of nature including of wild and cultivated plants . Hermits ( sannyasins ) were urged to live on a <unk> diet so as to avoid the destruction of plants . Scholars claim the principles of ecological non @-@ violence is innate in the Hindu tradition , and its conceptual fountain has been Ahimsa as their cardinal virtue . 
 The classical literature of Hinduism exists in many Indian languages . For example , Tirukkuṛaḷ written between 200 BC and 400 AD , and sometimes called the Tamil Veda , is one of the most cherished classics on Hinduism written in a South Indian language . Tirukkuṛaḷ dedicates Chapter 32 and 33 of Book 1 to the virtue of Ahimsa . Tirukkuṛaḷ suggests that Ahimsa applies to all life forms . 
 = = = Modern times = = = 
 In the 19th and 20th centuries , prominent figures of Indian spirituality such as Swami Vivekananda , Ramana Maharshi , Swami Sivananda , A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami and in the present time <unk> <unk> emphasised the importance of Ahimsa . 
 Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi promoted the principle of Ahimsa , very successful by applying it to all spheres of life , particularly to politics ( Swaraj ) . His non @-@ violent resistance movement satyagraha had an immense impact on India , impressed public opinion in Western countries , and influenced the leaders of various civil and political rights movements such as the American civil rights movement 's Martin Luther King , Jr. and James Bevel . In Gandhi ’ s thought , Ahimsa precludes not only the act of inflicting a physical injury , but also mental states like evil thoughts and hatred , unkind behavior such as harsh words , dishonesty and lying , all of which he saw as manifestations of violence incompatible with Ahimsa . Gandhi believed Ahimsa to be a creative energy force , encompassing all interactions leading one 's self to find satya , " Divine Truth " . Sri Aurobindo criticised the Gandhian concept of Ahimsa as unrealistic and not universally applicable ; he adopted a pragmatic non @-@ pacifist position , saying that the justification of violence depends on the specific circumstances of the given situation . Sri Aurobindo also indicated that Gandhi 's Ahimsa led to partition of India as it blocked the forceful action that the Indian people were engaged in during the 1920s and 30s , which caused delay in independence , allowing other forces to take root , including those who wanted India divided . 
 Gandhi stated that he viewed " Ahimsa is in Hinduism , it is in Christianity as well as in Islam . " He added , " Nonviolence is common to all religions , but it has found the highest expression and application in Hinduism ( I do not regard Jainism or Buddhism as separate from Hinduism ) . " When questioned whether violence and non @-@ violence is both taught in Quran , he stated , " I have heard it from many Muslim friends that the Koran teaches the use of non @-@ violence . ( ... The ) argument about non @-@ violence in the Holy Koran is an interpolation , not necessary for my thesis . " 
 A historical and philosophical study of Ahimsa was instrumental in the shaping of Albert Schweitzer 's principle of " reverence for life " . Schweitzer praised Indian philosophical and religious traditions for ethics of Ahimsa as , " the laying down of the commandment not to kill and not to damage is one of the greatest events in the spiritual history of mankind " , but suggested that " not @-@ killing and not @-@ harming " is not always practically possible as in self @-@ defence , nor ethical as in chronic starving during a famine case . 
 = = = Yoga = = = 
 Ahimsa is imperative for practitioners of Patañjali ’ s eight limb Raja yoga system . It is included in the first limb and is the first of five Yamas ( self restraints ) which , together with the second limb , make up the code of ethical conduct in Yoga philosophy . Ahimsa is also one of the ten Yamas in Hatha Yoga according to verse 1 @.@ 1 @.@ 17 of its classic manual Hatha Yoga Pradipika . The significance of Ahimsa as the very first restraint in the very first limb of Yoga ( Yamas ) , is that it defines the necessary foundation for progress through Yoga . It is a precursor to Asana , implying that success in <unk> can be had only if the self is purified in thought , word and deed through the self @-@ restraint of Ahimsa . 
 = = Jainism = = 
 In Jainism , the understanding and implementation of <unk> is more radical , scrupulous , and comprehensive than in any other religion . Killing any living being out of passions is considered hiṃsā ( to injure ) and abstaining from such an act is ahimsā ( <unk> ) . The vow of ahimsā is considered the foremost among the ' five vows of Jainism ' . Other vows like truth ( satya ) are meant for safeguarding the vow of ahimsā . In the practice of Ahimsa , the requirements are less strict for the lay persons ( <unk> ) who have undertaken <unk> ( Smaller Vows ) than for the Jain monastics who are bound by the <unk> " Great Vows " . The statement ahimsā <unk> <unk> is often found inscribed on the walls of the Jain temples . Like in Hinduism , the aim is to prevent the accumulation of harmful karma . When Mahavira revived and reorganised the Jain faith in the 6th or 5th century BCE , Ahimsa was already an established , strictly observed rule . Rishabhanatha ( <unk> ) , the first Jain Tirthankara , whom modern Western historians consider to be a historical figure , followed by Parshvanatha ( <unk> ) the twenty @-@ third Tirthankara lived in about the 8th century BCE . He founded the community to which Mahavira ’ s parents belonged . Ahimsa was already part of the " <unk> Restraint " ( <unk> ) , the vows taken by <unk> ’ s followers . In the times of Mahavira and in the following centuries , Jains were at odds with both Buddhists and followers of the Vedic religion or Hindus , whom they accused of negligence and inconsistency in the implementation of Ahimsa . According to the Jain tradition either lacto vegetarianism or veganism is mandatory . 
 The Jain concept of Ahimsa is characterised by several aspects . It does not make any exception for ritual sacrificers and professional warrior @-@ hunters . Killing of animals for food is absolutely ruled out . Jains also make considerable efforts not to injure plants in everyday life as far as possible . Though they admit that plants must be destroyed for the sake of food , they accept such violence only inasmuch as it is indispensable for human survival , and there are special instructions for preventing unnecessary violence against plants . Jains go out of their way so as not to hurt even small insects and other minuscule animals . For example , Jains often do not go out at night , when they are more likely to step upon an insect . In their view , injury caused by carelessness is like injury caused by deliberate action . Eating honey is strictly outlawed , as it would amount to violence against the bees . Some Jains abstain from farming because it inevitably entails unintentional killing or injuring of many small animals , such as worms and insects , but agriculture is not forbidden in general and there are Jain farmers . 
 Theoretically , all life forms are said to deserve full protection from all kinds of injury , Jains recognise a hierarchy of life . Mobile beings are given higher protection than immobile ones . For the mobile beings , they distinguish between one @-@ sensed , two @-@ sensed , three @-@ sensed , four @-@ sensed and five @-@ sensed ones ; a one @-@ sensed animal has touch as its only sensory modality . The more senses a being has , the more they care about non @-@ injuring it . Among the five @-@ sensed beings , the precept of non @-@ injury and non @-@ violence to the rational ones ( humans ) is strongest in Jain Ahimsa . 
 Jains agree with Hindus that violence in self @-@ defence can be justified , and they agree that a soldier who kills enemies in combat is performing a legitimate duty . Jain communities accepted the use of military power for their defence , there were Jain monarchs , military commanders , and soldiers . 
 = = Buddhism = = 
 In Buddhist texts Ahimsa ( or its Pāli cognate <unk> ) is part of the Five Precepts ( <unk> ) , the first of which has been to abstain from killing . This precept of Ahimsa is applicable to both the Buddhist layperson and the monk community . 
 The Ahimsa precept is not a commandment and transgressions did not invite religious sanctions for layperson , but their power has been in the Buddhist belief in karmic consequences and their impact in afterlife during rebirth . Killing , in Buddhist belief , leads to rebirth in the hellish realm , and for a longer time in more severe conditions if the murder victim was a monk . Saving animals from slaughter for meat , is believed to be a way to acquire merit for better rebirth . These moral precepts have been voluntarily self @-@ enforced in lay Buddhist culture through the associated belief in karma and rebirth . The Buddhist texts not only recommended Ahimsa , but suggest avoiding trading goods that contribute to or are a result of violence : 
 These five trades , O monks , should not be taken up by a lay follower : trading with weapons , trading in living beings , trading in meat , trading in intoxicants , trading in poison . 
 Unlike lay Buddhists , transgressions by monks do invite sanctions . Full expulsion of a monk from sangha follows instances of killing , just like any other serious offense against the monastic <unk> code of conduct . 
 = = = War = = = 
 Violent ways of punishing criminals and prisoners of war was not explicitly condemned in Buddhism , but peaceful ways of conflict resolution and punishment with the least amount of injury were encouraged . The early texts condemn the mental states that lead to violent behavior . 
 Nonviolence is an overriding theme within the Pali Canon . While the early texts condemn killing in the strongest terms , and portray the ideal king as a pacifist , such a king is nonetheless flanked by an army . It seems that the Buddha 's teaching on nonviolence was not interpreted or put into practice in an uncompromisingly pacifist or anti @-@ military @-@ service way by early Buddhists . The early texts assume war to be a fact of life , and well @-@ skilled warriors are viewed as necessary for defensive warfare . In Pali texts , injunctions to abstain from violence and involvement with military affairs are directed at members of the sangha ; later Mahayana texts , which often generalise monastic norms to laity , require this of lay people as well . 
 The early texts do not contain just @-@ war ideology as such . Some argue that a <unk> in the <unk> <unk> rules out all military service . In this passage , a soldier asks the Buddha if it is true that , as he has been told , soldiers slain in battle are reborn in a heavenly realm . The Buddha reluctantly replies that if he is killed in battle while his mind is seized with the intention to kill , he will undergo an unpleasant rebirth . In the early texts , a person 's mental state at the time of death is generally viewed as having a great impact on the next birth . 
 Some Buddhists point to other early texts as justifying defensive war . One example is the Kosala <unk> , in which King Pasenadi , a righteous king favored by the Buddha , learns of an impending attack on his kingdom . He arms himself in defence , and leads his army into battle to protect his kingdom from attack . He lost this battle but won the war . King Pasenadi eventually defeated King Ajatasattu and captured him alive . He thought that , although this King of Magadha has transgressed against his kingdom , he had not transgressed against him personally , and Ajatasattu was still his nephew . He released Ajatasattu and did not harm him . Upon his return , the Buddha said ( among other things ) that Pasenadi " is a friend of virtue , acquainted with virtue , intimate with virtue " , while the opposite is said of the aggressor , King Ajatasattu . 
 According to Theravada commentaries , there are five requisite factors that must all be fulfilled for an act to be both an act of killing and to be <unk> negative . These are : ( 1 ) the presence of a living being , human or animal ; ( 2 ) the knowledge that the being is a living being ; ( 3 ) the intent to kill ; ( 4 ) the act of killing by some means ; and ( 5 ) the resulting death . Some Buddhists have argued on this basis that the act of killing is complicated , and its <unk> is predicated upon intent . Some have argued that in defensive postures , for example , the primary intention of a soldier is not to kill , but to defend against aggression , and the act of killing in that situation would have minimal negative karmic repercussions . 
 According to Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar , there is circumstantial evidence encouraging Ahimsa , from the Buddha 's doctrine , " Love all , so that you may not wish to kill any . " Gautama Buddha distinguished between a principle and a rule . He did not make Ahimsa a matter of rule , but suggested it as a matter of principle . This gives Buddhists freedom to act . 
 = = = Laws = = = 
 The emperors of Sui dynasty , Tang dynasty and early Song dynasty banned killing in Lunar calendar 1st , 5th , and 9th month . Empress Wu Tse @-@ Tien banned killing for more than half a year in 692 . Some also banned fishing for some time each year . 
 There were bans after death of emperors , Buddhist and Taoist prayers , and natural disasters such as after a drought in 1926 summer Shanghai and an 8 days ban from August 12 , 1959 after the August 7 flood ( <unk> ) , the last big flood before the 88 Taiwan Flood . 
 People avoid killing during some festivals , like the Taoist Ghost Festival , the Nine Emperor Gods Festival , the Vegetarian Festival and many others . 
 = Canterbury Castle ( Portland , Oregon ) = 
 Canterbury Castle , also known as Arlington Castle , was a private house located in southwest Portland , Oregon and listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Constructed during 1929 – 1931 , the house was designed by Jeter O. Frye to resemble England 's Canterbury Castle on the exterior and to evoke the Art Deco styling of Hollywood of the 1920s on the interior . The house included castle features such as a moat , drawbridge and turret and attracted paying tourists immediately following its completion . 
 Canterbury Castle , Portland 's only castle structure built in the 1930s , was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1987 . The property was also designated as a Portland Historic Landmark . The house underwent major renovation efforts in the 2000s , but those efforts were not completed , and the house was demolished in 2009 after failing to meet municipal safety codes . The razing of Canterbury made Piggott 's Castle the city 's only remaining castle . Canterbury Castle was removed from the National Register of Historic Places in October 2010 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Canterbury Castle was a private 6 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 560 m2 ) , three @-@ story house located in Arlington Heights near Washington Park , offering views of downtown Portland . Constructed from basalt stone quarried from Rocky Butte , the house featured characteristics of a castle such as a moat , a drawbridge and a copper @-@ topped turret . The wooden drawbridge covered a moat seven feet wide by more than three feet deep . A single @-@ car garage , built into the hillside , was constructed during the same time as the house . The concrete foundation supported a rectangular ground plan . Canterbury featured " buttressing wing walls , cylindrical corner bays and a crenellated parapet of uncut stone " . Round , arched and straight @-@ topped frameless windows were often fitted with steel sashes . <unk> were also frameless , narrow and round or parabolic in shape . Doors had wrought iron hinges , handles and lock plates . The leaded glass slit window at the stair tower 's top level featured a spiderweb pattern , a signature element of castle designer Jeter O. Frye 's work . Windmill palms surrounding the property added to its exotic appearance . 
 The Art Deco @-@ style interior , meant to evoke a 1920s Hollywood style , featured mahogany woodwork , tile floors and chandeliers . The inside also contained Spanish @-@ style white stucco , spiral staircases and wrought iron features including stair rails , built @-@ in cabinetry door and window hardware and lighting fixtures . The house included a basement pool ( which eventually closed due to water leaks ) , a stone fireplace 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in width , and small square windows . Also in the basement were the furnace , a storage room , and spaces for laundry and billiards . The main floor housed the garage , a kitchen and breakfast bay , the living and dining rooms and a music room . The master bedroom was adjacent to a deck above the dining and music rooms at the southwest corner of the property . <unk> and hallway floors featured brown ceramic tile ; black glazed ceramic tile was used in the master bathroom , while black , red and yellow tiles were used in the breakfast bay . One of the castle 's bathrooms was said to be modeled on Charlie Chaplin 's . The interior was arranged around a central stair tower capped with a conical roof clad in copper . Chimneys vented the centrally located furnace and rose from fireplaces in the house 's west hall . 
 = = History = = 
 Canterbury Castle was designed by Jeter O. Frye and constructed between 1929 and 1931 . Immediately following construction , Frye was unable to sell the house and left Portland in bankruptcy to resume his career in California . Visitors immediately showed interest in touring the house . The castle attracted paying tourists and school groups , became a stop on the Washington Park bus tour and hosted Halloween parties for a local radio station . The house became known as Canterbury Castle over time due to the plat and name of the street on which it was situated . The terraced garden was eliminated in the 1950s when a portion of the land was sold . The property was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1987 under the ownership of Dale and Karen Bernards , who had submitted an application for listing one year prior . 
 Sidney Lynne and John <unk> purchased the house for $ 469 @,@ 900 in 2004 after it had been unoccupied for more than a year . By then , the structure had developed leaks and displayed cracks along the foundation , walls and ceiling . In 2006 , a falling tree caused stones to break away , damaging the house 's main gas line . The couple spent $ 200 @,@ 000 over four years to reinforce the walls . Lynne and <unk> also constructed exterior stairs and an underground retaining wall . However , the renovation process was not completed , as they were unable to pay for all repairs required by the city , which had issued $ 20 @,@ 000 in fines on the property . The couple also struggled to pay for costly landslide prevention efforts , rising property taxes and high heating bills . Canterbury Castle was listed for sale in the summer of 2008 for $ 2 million . Lynne invited local interior design students and contractors to upgrade the house 's interior , without success . The couple left the house in January 2009 , and ownership was turned over to JPMorgan Chase . Lynne began a " one @-@ woman crusade " to save the castle , seeking assistance from Portland City Commissioner Randy Leonard and from home improvement expert and This Old House host Bob Vila . In February 2009 , the city 's bureau of development services found that unstable soil and the risk of stones separating from sheeting underneath posed a landslide risk . The property had missing stones and thick cracks several feet long , which presented hazards to residents and the street below . Rumors of demolition began to surface in March 2009 . 
 In April 2009 , the house was purchased by Robert Stansel , who had lived next door to the house for several years , at a foreclosure auction for $ 280 @,@ 000 . Demolition began in May 2009 ; the house was considered " structurally unsound " by the local government , a determination that permitted demolition despite the house 's listing on the National Register of Historic Places . Lynne said of the house and its demolition : " It 's totally like a death and completely unnecessary . It 's a magical property that invokes hope and imagination in people . We had a really great time with it . " Residents shared mixed feelings about the demolition . Stansel was able to salvage 21 tiles with neo @-@ Aztec designs . In 2009 , The Oregonian reported that Stansel would wait until the economy and housing market improved before deciding whether to sell the land or build a new structure . 
 Canterbury Castle was removed from the National Register of Historic Places on October 13 , 2010 . The demolition of Canterbury Castle made Piggott 's Castle in southwest Portland the last remaining castle in the city . The property had also been listed as a Portland Historic Landmark and was the city 's only castle structure constructed in the 1930s . Two stones from Canterbury Castle serve as steps in the zen garden of Stansel 's home in East Hampton , New York . 
 = Vikos – Aoös National Park = 
 The Vikos – Aoös National Park ( Greek : <unk> <unk> <unk> – <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> – <unk> ) is a national park in the region of Epirus in northwestern Greece . The park , founded in 1973 , is one of ten national parks in mainland Greece and is located 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) north of the city of Ioannina in the northern part of the Pindus mountain range . It is named after the two major gorges of the area and encompasses 12 @,@ 600 hectares ( 31 @,@ 135 acres ) of mountainous terrain , with numerous rivers , lakes , caves , deep canyons , dense coniferous and deciduous forest . The park is part of the Natura 2000 ecological network and one of UNESCO Geoparks and spans an elevation range from 550 to 2 @,@ 497 meters ( 1 @,@ 804 to 8 @,@ 192 ft ) . Over 100 @,@ 000 people visit the park each year and take part in activities including rafting , canoe @-@ kayaking , hiking and mountain biking . 
 The core of the park , an area of 3 @,@ 400 hectares ( 8 @,@ 402 acres ) , comprises the spectacular Vikos Gorge , carved by the Voidomatis river . The gorge 's main part is 12 km ( 7 mi ) long and attains a depth of 1 @,@ 000 meters ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) . The Aoös gorge , mount Tymfi ( 2 @,@ 497 meters ( 8 @,@ 192 ft ) at Gamila peak ) , and a number of traditionally preserved settlements form the park 's peripheral zone . The park 's remoteness and relatively small human population , combined with the great variation of biotopes and <unk> conditions favors the existence of a rich variety of flora ( 1 @,@ 800 species ) in the area . Vikos – Aoös National Park supports a wide diversity of fauna , with a plethora of large mammals such as the brown bear , for which the park is one of the last European strongholds , and a variety of natural habitats and ecosystems that rank it among the most valuable parks for nature conservation in Greece . 
 The first evidence of human presence in the area is dated between 17 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 years ago . The area of the park has been sparsely populated throughout historical times , however from the 17th to the 19th century the local communities of Zagori acquired an autonomous status , flourished economically due to increased trade , and became a major center of folk medicine . In recent decades , ecotourism is seen as a remedy to the economic decline of heavily depopulated local settlements , while preserving the natural environment and local architecture . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 = = = Vikos Gorge = = = 
 Vikos Gorge is located on the southern slopes of mount Tymfi . Its main part is located between the villages of Vikos and <unk> and attains a depth of about 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 281 ft ) , with a southeast @-@ northwest direction . The landscape of the 20 km ( 12 mi ) long gorge , 12 km ( 7 mi ) which belongs to the park 's core zone , presents a diverse relief and is characterized by abrupt changes in altitude . At one point the gorge measures 900 m ( 2 @,@ 953 ft ) deep and 1 @,@ 100 m ( 3 @,@ 609 ft ) wide from rim to rim , and as a result is listed by the Guinness Book of Records as the deepest canyon in the world in proportion to its width , though some gorge lobbyists contest that claim . Steep slopes and precipitous rocky cliffs dominate in the middle and higher zones respectively . Numerous gullies dissect both sides of the gorge and the weathering action of water down its walls creates extended screes . 
 The Vikos Gorge has been carved over millions of years by the Voidomatis river , a tributary of the Aoös . The Voidomatis is mostly seasonal , with year @-@ round flow occurring only in the lower part of the gorge . Due to its nature , the area of the gorge is precipitous and impassable most of the year . 
 As the Vikos Gorge is a deep cross section of the mountain , its slopes expose a series of rock formations of various ages . The upper layers , at a depth of 0 – 200 m ( 660 ft ) , consist of relatively young Eocene limestone , at a depth of 200 m ( 660 ft ) – 700 m ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) they consist of a stratum from the Campanian era , while below 700 m ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) they consist of Jurassic and Cretaceous limestone . In the deepest layers , grey Jurassic dolomite is dominant . Sedimentary and <unk> investigation in the Voidomatis basin revealed that the innermost alluvial deposits consist of limestone @-@ derived material , carried by the Voidomatis river from higher elevations by glacial action about 30 @,@ 000 years ago . The subsequent ( middle ) deposits are the product of de @-@ glaciation and the extended run @-@ off from the uplands about 20 @,@ 000 years ago , while the outer unit is attributed to human activities associated with pastoralism , which caused extended deforestation and soil erosion . The Voidomatis basin contains evidence for three major phases of glaciation , with the two largest and earliest taking place during the Middle Pleistocene . The final phase of glacial activity probably occurred during the Last Glacial Maximum , between 22 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 ago . 
 A special feature of the limestone , resulting from its weathering by water , is its karstic nature . During the large Middle Pleistocene glaciations , surface runoff from glacial meltwaters would have fed directly into the river channel network because much of the upland limestone terrain was covered by ice , and many conduits in the karst would have been choked with sediment or permanently frozen . As a result , the glacier snouts came close to the modern valley bottoms . In contrast , during interglacial and <unk> periods , more effective coupling occurred between the surface drainage network and the internal karst drainage system . Since limestone dissolves as the water percolates through its pores , an extended underground drainage system has developed , with caves and channels that enlarge with time when their roofs collapse , producing rocky exposures and perpendicular slopes , which is also the reason why the water is scarce . Only when an impenetrable stratum is met , does water appear on the surface . 
 = = = Aoös Gorge = = = 
 In the northern part of the Park , and very close to the town of <unk> , the Aoös river passes through channels formed by the bulges of the nearby mountains of <unk> 2 @,@ 022 m ( 6 @,@ 634 ft ) , Tymfi and <unk> 1 @,@ 957 m ( 6 @,@ 421 ft ) , creating another gorge that is 10 km ( 6 mi ) long . The canyon has an east @-@ west direction and features numerous stone single @-@ arched bridges from the 17th to 19th centuries as well as monasteries built in the local architectural style . It is characterized by the great number of secondary gullies and currents , while the southern part of the gorge is steeper than the northern part . Deep and steep ravines within the perpendicular walls bring down to the Aoös large quantities of limestone @-@ weathering material . The compact dolomite rocks that lie on the bottom of the gorge date to the Early Jurassic period and are the oldest rock formations in the Park . Their age has been determined by means of sea fossils found inside them . 
 = = = Tymfi = = = 
