 Between the two gorges lies the Tymfi mountain range . Its highest peaks are Gamila 2 @,@ 497 m ( 8 @,@ 192 ft ) , Astraka 2 @,@ 436 m ( 7 @,@ 992 ft ) , <unk> 2 @,@ 400 m ( 7 @,@ 874 ft ) , and <unk> 2 @,@ 251 m ( 7 @,@ 385 ft ) . A unique feature of this area are the natural pools formed by the erosion of local stream beds . In the high @-@ altitude zone of Tymfi , a number of alpine lakes home to several rare amphibian species are found surrounded by alpine pasture . The biggest lake of the National Park , <unk> ( " <unk> " ) , a formation that was created after the retreat of the glaciers , is located at a height of 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 562 ft ) on mount Tymfi . Its maximum depth is 4 @.@ 95 m ( 16 ft ) , while its surface covers 1 ha ( 2 acres ) . 
 A number of vertical caves and precipices are found in the area around the village of Papingo , which lies near Gamila and Astraka peaks . Some of them bear names inspired from mythology , such as the Hole of Odysseus and Chasm of <unk> . These are being studied and explored by caving enthusiasts . The cave of " <unk> " ( " Ewe 's Cave " ) , with a depth of 408 m ( 1 @,@ 339 ft ) , one of the deepest worldwide , was first discovered in 1965 by British speleologists of the Cambridge University Caving Club , and has since then been surveyed by a large number of expeditions . The nearby Chasm of <unk> , with a depth of 451 m ( 1 @,@ 480 ft ) , drains the water coming from the surrounding plateaus . 
 Mount Tymfi represents a series of uplifted fault blocks and faulted escarpments and is largely composed of Palaeocene @-@ Eocene limestone , with some exposures of Campanian @-@ Jurassic dolomite and limestone on the northern scarp . The lower slopes are dominated by younger flysch rocks , which consist of thin beds of graded sandstones intercalated with softer , fissile siltstones . Extended glacial conditions prevailed on the uplands of Mount Tymfi during the Late Quaternary period , ca . 28 @,@ 000 years ago . The glacial landscape is well @-@ developed , especially on the southern slopes of Mount Tymfi , across the Astraka @-@ Gamila plateau , and in the upland terrain above the villages of <unk> and <unk> , where lateral and terminal moraines form major landscape features . Additional forms of glacial deposits , which extend down to 850 m ( 2 @,@ 789 ft ) above sea level , include rock glaciers and limestone pavements . 
 = = = Settlements = = = 
 There are four villages inside the Vikos – Aoös National Park , and an additional nine near the borders of the peripheral zone . All of these settlements , in the western part of the Zagori region , are sparsely populated with a total population of 1 @,@ 515 people . The villages have a nucleus @-@ like form , with the houses situated around the central square and interconnected by rocky pathways . Historically , all the villages of the Zagori region were connected by a system of paths or small roads and they functioned more like a single entity rather than as separate communities . 
 The economic affluence of Zagori 's past is still reflected in the architecture of the villages , while today the preservation of the local architectural legacy is enshrined in a law which dictates that all buildings in the area must be constructed with local traditional materials and in compliance with local architecture . One of the characteristic features of the National Park are its stone bridges , which were the only connection to the outside world until roads were built in the 1950s . Sixteen of these stone bridges and seven churches in the region have been listed as protected historical monuments . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The climate of the Vikos – Aoös National Park is Mediterranean , transitioning to continental . The Mediterranean character is characterized by the annual distribution of precipitation , high in the winter months and experiencing a drought period of two to three months in summer . The continental climatic element is attributed to the high amplitude of annual temperature variation , to such a degree that the difference between mean maximum and mean minimum annual temperature , exceeds 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) . The climate of the area is quite unique due to the complex relief , variation in altitude , and the position of the area with regard to the Ionian Sea coastline . The mean annual temperature and annual precipitation are 11 @.@ 9 ° C ( 53 ° F ) and 1 @,@ 100 @.@ 9 mm ( 43 @.@ 34 in ) respectively . Extremely low temperatures occur in the area during the winter months . Compared to Mediterranean bioclimatic divisions , the area belongs to the humid zone with cold winters . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 The park 's varied geology and topography have resulted in a unique variety of flora and fauna . There are three main habitat zones : Sub @-@ mediterranean woodland which mainly consists of deciduous broadleaf forests and woodlands and extends up to an elevation of about 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 921 ft ) . Combined areas of agricultural land with tree hedges and various woodlots , in addition to semi @-@ open shrublands and rocky sites of the lower and middle slopes near human settlements . Uplands with subalpine grasslands and rocky cliffs . This habitat is found above 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 921 ft ) altitude and hosts important bird species such as the Mediterranean golden eagle . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The forests are composed of diverse species of deciduous and coniferous trees and a great variety of wildflowers . An important element of the region 's flora , apart from the rich variety of plant species , is the high degree of endemism in Balkan ( 23 % ) and Greek species ( 5 @.@ 8 % ) . Recent studies on the flora of the National Park counted 873 vascular plants , including more than 250 medicinal , aromatic , and poisonous taxa . The park 's forests are abundant in species associated with the cool local climate , such as Wych Elm , Nettle @-@ leaved Bellflower , Horse @-@ chestnut and Large @-@ leaved Linden . In the valley of the Vikos Gorge , Platanus orientalis form an <unk> gallery forest along the banks of the Voidomatis . The woodland in the mountain area around the village of Papingo is characterized by the predominance of different juniper species , such as Juniperus communis , foetidissima , oxycedrus and excelsa . In the upper hills Juniperus foetidissima dominates , with exceptionally high ( more than 10 m ( 33 ft ) ) trees . At higher altitudes , pure conifer forests of either pine or fir are found . 
 Studies on the non @-@ vascular flora recorded the presence of about 150 moss species in the area of the national park , including one newly described taxon . Many herbs of the Vikos Gorge and other areas within the park were regarded to have medicinal properties and were once harvested by local healers , colloquially referred to as " Vikos doctors " ( Greek : <unk> , " <unk> " ) . These herbal healers used special recipes that were often copies of ancient Greek recipes of Hippocrates or Dioscorides and became famous beyond the borders of Greece . The plants used in these recipes include the lemon balm Melissa officinalis , Tilia tomentosa , the spearmint Mentha spicata , the gas @-@ plant <unk> albus , St John ’ s Wort Hypericum <unk> , <unk> Artemisia <unk> , the very popular <unk> <unk> , known colloquially in Greece as “ mountain tea ” , and the elder bush <unk> nigra . A chemical screening of these native plant species has shown that a high number of them are characterized by biologically active ingredients . A collection of 2 @,@ 500 dried species of local plants and herbs is exhibited in the local natural history museum in the village of <unk> . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Vikos – Aoös National Park preserves one of the richest mountain and forest ecosystems in terms of wildlife diversity in Greece . Numerous species of large mammals such as wolves , foxes , wild horses , and roe deer are found in the area year @-@ round . Otters and wild cats live around the area of Tymfi , with the latter being quite rare . The Pindus range , of which Vikos – Aoös is part , is home to the endangered brown bear and lynx , and is also the southernmost point of their European habitat . One of the park 's special attractions is the existence of the chamois ( <unk> <unk> ) , a rare species that lives at higher altitudes far from human activity , especially at the rocky cliffs of the gorges , for example in Megas <unk> , a secondary ravine of the Vikos Gorge . 
 A total of 121 bird species have been observed in the park , with twenty @-@ six of them being considered of conservation priority . The area hosts fifteen raptor species and populations of bird species with limited distribution in Greece , such as the hazel grouse , <unk> 's owl , wallcreeper and willow tit . The two bird communities that inhabit the subalpine and forest ecosystems are considered among the most complete in Greece : The first community includes species that nest and feed in the subalpine area , like the alpine chough , shore lark , western rock nuthatch and alpine swift , while the second comprises birds of prey like the <unk> vulture , Egyptian vulture , peregrine falcon and common kestrel , that search for food in a wider zone . 
 Vikos @-@ Aoös also contains a variety of suitable habitats that support dense populations of amphibians and reptiles . Vipera <unk> lives in the subalpine meadows and is considered a threatened taxon . The amphibian alpine newts ( Triturus alpestris ) , living in the alpine lakes of the Tymfi region , mostly in <unk> , are associated with local folktales of dragons and dragon battles . Yellow @-@ bellied toads ( Bombina variegata ) are also common in that same area . Numerous fish , such as brown trout , roach , and barbel are to be found in the park 's rivers . Regarding invertebrate species , due to the structural complexity of the forests and the co @-@ existence of various small biotopes , i.e. streams , ponds , forest openings , rocky sites , dead trees , old <unk> , and coppices , a very diverse fauna exists . This occurs especially at the various ecotones , including often very specialized species . 
 = = Human history = = 
 The first evidence of human presence in the area is dated to between 17 @,@ 000 and 10 @,@ 000 years ago . During this period , favorable climatic conditions prevailed that permitted the hunting of the ibex and the chamois on a seasonal basis . Important <unk> artifacts have been unearthed from a rock shelter on the banks of the Voidomatis . During the 9th – 4th centuries B.C. , a small Molossian settlement existed between <unk> and <unk> , including stone houses and two cemeteries that have yielded important findings . However , for most of the historical period the local population was sparse . The land was mainly used for pastoralism and supplying firewood . 
 In the era of Ottoman rule , and especially from the 17th to the 19th century , the local Greek Orthodox communities were granted special privileges by the Ottoman authorities . At that time the area of Zagori acquired an autonomous status inside the Ottoman Empire , whereby the locals were exempt from the fiscal extortion that crippled the more prosperous lowland communities . During this period large groups of villagers emigrated to metropolitan centers . Many among them became members of successful professional classes before finally returning to their home villages , endowing the region with wealth and building luxurious mansions . In such an environment , the art of herbal healing by the so @-@ called Vikos doctors developed and flourished . This was accompanied by an impressive cultural and intellectual life that produced many renowned scholars and benefactors of Greece . 
 The area is nowadays sparsely populated as the result of urbanization after World War II . Many of the dwellings now remain shut , while abandonment of the traditional rural economy has affected the cultural landscape . Epirus , of which Vikos – Aoös is part , is considered one of the most underdeveloped regions in Greece . Tourism constitutes the principal source of revenue for the local economy , although it has a highly seasonal character . Intense development in terms of accommodation and tourism infrastructure occurred in the 1980s , mainly through state initiatives . 
 = = Park management = = 
 Vikos – Aoös was designated as a National Park in 1973 , in an effort by the Greek Government to conserve the richness of the local fauna and flora and the geological formations of the area . 
 The administration and management of the Vikos – Aoös National Park belongs to two district forest offices , supervised by a forest directorate at the prefecture level . Moreover , the office of World Wide Fund for Nature ( WWF ) in the village of Papingo plays an essential role in management issues . Apart from government efforts , incentives have been given to local management organizations and the local population to participate in the protection of the park . In the park 's core , according to the law , forestry activities , grazing , hunting , and fishing are prohibited . In the peripheral zone there are no such restrictions , but the Forest Service can take any necessary measure for the realization of the aims of the park . Apart from the above @-@ mentioned activities , dangers to the park include land erosion , landslides , and wildfires which threaten the local flora and fauna . Another issue is the impact of tourism in recent decades . On the other hand , extreme geophysical conditions make the construction and maintenance of the necessary infrastructure network , mainly access routes and telecommunications , difficult . 
 The vast area of the National Park and the present lack of road infrastructure make remote sensing the only means for monitoring the human activities in the area and their impact on the ecosystem . An analysis has begun by taking a detailed picture of the territory covering at least the following items : <unk> and slopes , road networks , land cover and use , human settlements , and tourist sites . The use of remote sensing and geographic information system techniques is of essential value for the park 's management and constitutes the basis for further evaluations and impact analysis . 
 The objective of the present state and regional policy is to carefully combine tourism development in the area with the preservation of its natural and cultural heritage . Ecotourism poses an ideal solution , since it has the potential of bringing about the desired balance between socio @-@ economic development and environmental protection . Specific objectives of ecotourism development include reviving traditional activities such as small @-@ scale farming and stock @-@ raising , as well as establishing a network of communities of chamois biotopes . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Vikos – Aoös National Park is a natural tourist attraction , with high ecotourism and <unk> potential . The local tourism industry has been favored by national and European funds and provides modest accommodation and tourism services , with respect to the local tradition and culture . Characteristically , the Federation of Nature and National Parks of Europe ( <unk> ) stated that " the need for a sustainable form of tourism has never been greater in the area " . 
 The rivers in the Vikos – Aoös area are a destination for rafting and canoe @-@ kayaking . Additional forms of adventure sports include climbing , hiking and mountain biking along local paths in order to observe the area 's natural features and architecture . Popular trails in the region include the crossing of the Vikos Gorge , which lasts approximately six to seven hours and is considered of medium difficulty , as well as hiking around the peaks of Tymfi . Several viewpoint are accessible only on foot , such as the <unk> and <unk> outlooks , and the 15th century Monastery of Saint <unk> that offer panoramic views to the Vikos Gorge . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Farthest South = 
 Farthest South was the most southerly latitudes reached by explorers before the conquest of the South Pole in 1911 . Significant steps on the road to the pole were the discovery of lands south of Cape Horn in 1619 , Captain James Cook 's crossing of the Antarctic Circle in 1773 , and the earliest confirmed sightings of the Antarctic mainland in 1820 . From the late 19th century onward , the quest for Farthest South latitudes became in effect a race to reach the pole , which culminated in Roald Amundsen 's success in December 1911 . 
 In the years before reaching the pole was a realistic objective , other motives drew adventurers southward . Initially , the driving force was the discovery of new trade routes between Europe and the Far East . After such routes had been established and the main geographical features of the earth had been broadly mapped , the lure for mercantile adventurers was the great fertile continent of " Terra Australis " which , according to myth , lay hidden in the south . Belief in the existence of this supposed land of plenty persisted well into the 18th century ; explorers were reluctant to accept the truth that slowly emerged , of a cold , harsh environment in the lands of the Southern Ocean . 
 James Cook 's voyages of 1771 – 74 demonstrated conclusively the likely hostile nature of any hidden lands . This caused a shift of emphasis in the first half of the 19th century , away from trade and towards exploration and discovery . After the first overwintering on continental Antarctica in 1899 , the prospect of reaching the South Pole appeared realistic , and the race for the pole began . The British were pre @-@ eminent in this endeavour , which was characterised by the rivalry between Robert Falcon Scott and Ernest Shackleton during the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration . Shackleton 's efforts fell short ; Scott reached the pole in January 1912 only to find that he had been beaten by the Norwegian Amundsen . 
 = = Early voyagers = = 
 In 1494 , the principal maritime powers , Portugal and Spain , signed a treaty which drew a line down the middle of the Atlantic Ocean and allocated all trade routes to the east of the line to Portugal . That gave Portugal dominance of the only known route to the east — via the Cape of Good Hope and Indian Ocean , which left Spain , and later other countries , to seek a western route to the Pacific . The exploration of the south began as part of the search for such a route . 
 Unlike the Arctic , there is no evidence of human visitation or habitation in Antarctica or the islands around it prior to European exploration . However , the most southerly parts of South America were already inhabited by tribes such as the <unk> <unk> / Ona , the <unk> / <unk> , the <unk> and the <unk> . The <unk> in particular made regular trips to Isla de los Estados , which was 29 kilometres ( 18 mi ) from the main island of Tierra del Fuego , suggesting that some of them may have been capable of reaching the islands near Cape Horn . Fuegian Indian artefacts and canoe remnants have also been discovered on the Falkland Islands , suggesting the capacity for even longer sea journeys . 
 While the natives of Tierra del Fuego were not capable of true oceanic travel , there is some evidence of Polynesian visits to some of the subantarctic islands to the south of New Zealand , although these are further from Antarctica than South America . There are also remains of a Polynesian settlement dating back to the 13th century on Enderby Island in the Auckland Islands . According to ancient legends , around the year 650 the Polynesian traveller Ui @-@ te @-@ Rangiora led a fleet of Waka <unk> south until they reached " a place of bitter cold where rock @-@ like structures rose from a solid sea " . It is unclear from the legends how far south Ui @-@ te @-@ Rangiora penetrated , but it appears that he observed ice in large quantities . A shard of undated , unidentified pottery , reported as found in 1886 in the Antipodes Islands , has been associated with this expedition . 
 = = = Ferdinand Magellan = = = 
 Although Portuguese by birth , Ferdinand Magellan transferred his allegiance to King Charles I of Spain , on whose behalf he left Seville on 10 August 1519 , with a squadron of five ships , in search of a western route to the Spice Islands in the East Indies . Success depended on finding a strait or passage through the South American land masses , or finding the southern tip of the continent and sailing around it . The South American coast was sighted on 6 December 1519 , and Magellan moved cautiously southward , following the coast to reach latitude 49 ° S on 31 March 1520 . Little if anything was known of the coast south of this point , so Magellan decided to wait out the southern winter here , and established the settlement of Puerto San Julian . 
 In September 1520 , the voyage continued down the uncharted coast , and on 21 October reached 52 ° S. Here Magellan found a deep inlet which proved to be the strait he was seeking , later to be known by his name . Early in November 1520 , as the squadron navigated through the strait , they reached its most southerly point at approximate latitude 54 ° S. This was a record Farthest South for a European navigator , though not the farthest southern penetration by man ; the position was north of the Tierra del Fuego archipelago , where there is evidence of human settlement dating back thousands of years . 
 = = = Francisco de Hoces = = = 
 The first sighting of an ocean passage to the Pacific south of Tierra del Fuego is sometimes attributed to Francisco de Hoces of the <unk> Expedition . In January 1526 his ship San <unk> was blown south from the Atlantic entrance of the Magellan Strait to a point where the crew thought they saw a headland , and water beyond it , which indicated the southern extremity of the continent . It is speculation as to which headland they saw ; conceivably it was Cape Horn . In parts of the Spanish @-@ speaking world it is believed that de Hoces may have discovered the strait later known as the Drake Passage more than 50 years before Sir Francis Drake , the British privateer . 
 = = = Sir Francis Drake = = = 
 Sir Francis Drake sailed from Plymouth on 15 November 1577 , in command of a fleet of five ships under his flagship Pelican , later renamed the Golden Hinde . His principal objective was plunder , not exploration ; his initial targets were the unfortified Spanish towns on the Pacific coasts of Chile and Peru . Following Magellan 's route , Drake reached Puerto San Julian on 20 June . After nearly two months in harbour , Drake left the port with a reduced fleet of three ships and a small pinnace . His ships entered the Magellan Strait on 23 August and emerged in the Pacific Ocean on 6 September . 
 Drake set a course to the north @-@ west , but on the following day a gale scattered the ships . The Marigold was sunk by a giant wave ; the Elizabeth managed to return into the Magellan Strait , later sailing eastwards back to England ; the pinnace was lost later . The gales persisted for more than seven weeks . The Golden Hinde was driven far to the west and south , before clawing its way back towards land . On 22 October , the ship anchored off an island which Drake named " Elizabeth Island " , where wood for the galley fires was collected and seals and penguins captured for food . 
 According to Drake 's Portuguese pilot , Nuno da Silva , their position at the anchorage was 57 ° S. However , there is no island at that latitude . The as yet undiscovered Diego Ramírez Islands , at 56 ° 30'S , are treeless and cannot have been the islands where Drake 's crew collected wood . This indicates that the navigational calculation was faulty , and that Drake landed at or near the then unnamed Cape Horn , possibly on Horn Island itself . His final southern latitude can only be speculated as that of Cape Horn , at 55 ° <unk> . In his report , Drake wrote : " The <unk> Cape or headland of all these islands stands near 56 degrees , without which there is no main island to be seen to the southwards but that the Atlantic Ocean and the South Sea meet . " This open sea south of Cape Horn became known as the Drake Passage even though Drake himself did not traverse it . 
 = = = Willem Schouten = = = 
 On 14 June 1615 , Willem Schouten , with two ships Eendracht and Hoorn , set sail from Texel in the Netherlands in search of a western route to the Pacific . Hoorn was lost in a fire , but Eendracht continued southward . On 29 January 1616 , Schouten reached what he discerned to be the southernmost cape of the South American continent ; he named this point <unk> Hoorn ( Cape Horn ) after his hometown and his lost ship . Schouten 's navigational readings are inaccurate — he placed Cape Horn at 57 ° 48 ' south , when its actual position is 55 ° 58 ' . His claim to have reached 58 ° south is unverified , although he sailed on westward to become the first European navigator to reach the Pacific via the Drake Passage . 
 = = = Garcia de Nodal expedition = = = 
 The next recorded navigation of the Drake Passage was achieved in February 1619 , by the brothers Bartolome and Gonzalo Garcia de Nodal . The Garcia de Nodal expedition discovered a small group of islands about 60 nautical miles ( 100 km ; 70 mi ) south @-@ west of Cape Horn , at latitude 56 ° 30'S . They named these the Diego Ramirez Islands after the expedition 's pilot . The islands remained the most southerly known land on earth until Captain James Cook 's discovery of the South Sandwich Islands in 1775 . 
 = = = Other discoveries = = = 
 Other voyages brought further discoveries in the southern oceans ; in August 1592 , the English seaman John Davis had taken shelter " among certain Isles never before discovered " — presumed to be the Falkland Islands . In 1675 , the English merchant voyager Anthony de la Roché sighted South Georgia ; in 1739 the Frenchman Jean @-@ Baptiste Bouvet de Lozier discovered the remote Bouvet Island , and in 1772 his compatriot , Yves @-@ Joseph de Kerguelen de <unk> , found the Kerguelen Islands . 
 = = Early Antarctic explorers = = 
 = = = Captain James Cook = = = 
 The second of James Cook 's historic voyages , 1772 – 1775 , was primarily a search for the elusive Terra Australis Incognita that was still believed to lie somewhere in the unexplored latitudes below 40 ° S. Cook left England in September 1772 with two ships , HMS Resolution and HMS Adventure . After pausing at Cape Town , on 22 November the two ships sailed due south , but were driven to the east by heavy gales . They managed to edge further south , encountering their first pack ice on 10 December . This soon became a solid barrier , which tested Cook 's seamanship as he manoeuvered for a passage through . Eventually , he found open water , and was able to continue south ; on 17 January 1773 , the expedition reached the Antarctic Circle at 66 ° <unk> , the first ships to do so . Further progress was barred by ice , and the ships turned north @-@ eastwards and headed for New Zealand , which they reached on 26 March . 
 During the ensuing months , the expedition explored the southern Pacific Ocean before Cook took Resolution south again — Adventure had retired back to South Africa after a fracas with the New Zealand native population . This time Cook was able to penetrate deep beyond the Antarctic Circle , and on 30 January 1774 reached 71 ° <unk> , his Farthest South , but the state of the ice made further southward travel impossible . This southern record would hold for 49 years . 
 In the course of his voyages in Antarctic waters , Cook had encircled the world at latitudes generally above 60 ° S , and saw nothing but bleak inhospitable islands , without a hint of the fertile continent which some still hoped lay in the south . Cook wrote that if any such continent existed it would be " a country doomed by nature " , and that " no man will venture further than I have done , and the land to the South will never be explored " . He concluded : " Should the impossible be achieved and the land attained , it would be wholly useless and of no benefit to the discoverer or his nation " . 
 = = = Searching for land = = = 
 Despite Cook 's prediction , the early 19th century saw numerous attempts to penetrate southward , and to discover new lands . In 1819 , William Smith , in command of the brigantine Williams , discovered the South Shetland Islands , and in the following year Edward Bransfield , in the same ship , sighted the Trinity Peninsula at the northern extremity of Graham Land . A few days before Bransfield 's discovery , on 27 January 1820 , the Russian captain Fabian von Bellingshausen , in another Antarctic sector , had come within sight of the coast of what is now known as Queen Maud Land . He is thus credited as the first person to see the continent 's mainland , although he did not make this claim himself . Bellingshausen made two circumnavigations mainly in latitudes between 60 and 67 ° S , and in January 1821 reached his most southerly point at 70 ° S , in a longitude close to that in which Cook had made his record 47 years earlier . In 1821 the American sealing captain John Davis led a party which landed on an uncharted stretch of land beyond the South Shetlands . " I think this Southern Land to be a Continent " , he wrote in his ship 's log . If his landing was not on an island , his party were the first to set foot on the Antarctic continent . 
 = = = James Weddell = = = 
 James Weddell was an Anglo @-@ Scottish seaman who saw service in both the Royal Navy and the merchant marine before undertaking his first voyages to Antarctic waters . In 1819 , in command of the 160 @-@ ton brigantine Jane which had been adapted for whaling , he set sail for the newly discovered whaling grounds of the South Sandwich Islands . His chief interest on this voyage was in finding the " Aurora Islands " , which had been reported at 53 ° S , 48 ° W by the Spanish ship Aurora in 1762 . He failed to discover this non @-@ existent land , but his sealing activities showed a handsome profit . 
 In 1822 Weddell , again in command of Jane and this time accompanied by the smaller ship Beaufoy , set sail for the south with instructions from his employers that , should the sealing prove barren , he was to " investigate beyond the track of former navigators " . This suited Weddell 's exploring instincts , and he equipped his vessel with chronometers , thermometers , compasses , barometers and charts . In January 1823 he probed the waters between the South Sandwich Islands and the South Orkney Islands , looking for new land . Finding none , he turned southward down the 40 ° W meridian , deep into the sea that now bears his name . The season was unusually calm , and Weddell reported that " not a particle of ice of any description was to be seen " . On 20 February 1823 , he reached a new Farthest South of 74 ° 15'S , three degrees beyond Cook 's former record . Unaware that he was close to land , Weddell decided to return northward from this point , convinced that the sea continued as far as the South Pole . Another two days ' sailing would likely have brought him within sight of Coats Land , which was not discovered until 1904 , by William Speirs Bruce during the Scottish National Antarctic Expedition , 1902 – 04 . On his return to England , Weddell 's claim to have exceeded Cook 's record by such a margin " caused some raised eyebrows " , but was soon accepted . 
 = = = Benjamin Morrell = = = 
 In November 1823 , the American sealing captain Benjamin Morrell reached the South Sandwich Islands in the schooner Wasp . According to his own later account he then sailed south , unconsciously following the track taken by James Weddell a month previously . Morrell claimed to have reached 70 ° 14'S , at which point he turned north because the ship 's stoves were running short of fuel — otherwise , he says , he could have " reached 85 ° without the least doubt . " After turning , he claimed to have encountered land which he described in some detail , and which he named New South Greenland . This land proved not to exist . Morrell 's reputation as a liar and a fraud means that most of his geographical claims have been dismissed by scholars , although attempts have been made to rationalise his assertions . 
 = = = James Clark Ross = = = 
 James Clark Ross 's 1839 – 43 Antarctic expedition in HMS Erebus and HMS Terror was a full @-@ scale Royal Naval enterprise , the principal function of which was to test current theories on magnetism , and to try to locate the South Magnetic Pole . The expedition had first been proposed by leading astronomer Sir John Herschel , and was supported by the Royal Society and the British Association for the Advancement of Science . Ross had considerable past experience in magnetic observation and Arctic exploration ; in May 1831 he had been a member of a party that had reached the location of the North Magnetic Pole , and he was an obvious choice as commander . 
 The expedition left England on 30 September 1839 , and after a voyage that was slowed by the many stops required to carry out work on magnetism , it reached Tasmania in August 1840 . Following a three @-@ month break imposed by the southern winter , they sailed south @-@ east on 12 November 1840 , and crossed the Antarctic Circle on 1 January 1841 . On 11 January a long mountainous coastline that stretched to the south was sighted . Ross named the land Victoria Land , and the mountains the Admiralty Range . He followed the coast southwards and passed Weddell 's Farthest South point of 74 ° 15'S on 23 January . A few days later , as they moved further eastward to avoid shore ice , they were met by the sight of twin volcanoes ( one of them active ) , which were named Mount Erebus and Mount Terror , in honour of the expedition 's ships . 
 The Great Ice Barrier ( later to be called the " Ross Ice Shelf " ) stretched away east of these mountains , forming an impassable obstacle to further southward progress . In his search for a strait or inlet , Ross explored 300 nautical miles ( 560 km ; 350 mi ) along the edge of the barrier , and reached an approximate latitude of 78 ° S on or about 8 February 1841 . He failed to find a suitable anchorage that would have allowed the ships to over @-@ winter , so he returned to Tasmania , arriving there in April 1841 . 
 The following season Ross returned and located an inlet in the Barrier face that enabled him , on 23 January 1842 , to extend his Farthest South to 78 ° 09 ' 30 " S , a record which would remain unchallenged for 58 years . Although Ross had not been able to land on the Antarctic continent , nor approach the location of the South Magnetic Pole , on his return to England in 1843 he was knighted for his achievements in geographical and scientific exploration . 
 = = Explorers of the Heroic Age = = 
 The oceanographic research voyage known as the Challenger Expedition , 1872 – 76 , explored Antarctic waters for several weeks , but did not approach the land itself ; its research , however , proved the existence of an Antarctic continent beyond reasonable doubt . 
 The impetus for what would become known as the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration came in 1893 , when in a lecture to the Royal Geographical Society Professor Sir John Murray called for a resumption of Antarctic exploration : " a steady , continuous , laborious and systematic exploration of the whole southern region " . He followed this call with an appeal to British patriotism : " Is the last great piece of maritime exploration on the surface of our Earth to be undertaken by Britons , or is it to be left to those who may be destined to succeed or supplant us on the Ocean ? " During the following quarter @-@ century , fifteen expeditions from eight different nations rose to this challenge . In the patriotic spirit engendered by Murray 's call , and under the influence of RGS president Sir Clements Markham , British endeavours in the following years gave particular weight to the achievement of new Farthest South records , and began to develop the character of a race for the South Pole . 
 = = = Carsten Borchgrevink = = = 
 The Norwegian @-@ born Carsten Egeberg Borchgrevink had emigrated to Australia in 1888 , where he worked on survey teams in Queensland and New South Wales before accepting a <unk> post . In 1894 he joined a sealing and whaling expedition to the Antarctic , led by Henryk Bull . In January 1895 Borchgrevink was one of a group from that expedition that claimed the first confirmed landing on the Antarctic continent , at Cape Adare . Borchgrevink determined to return with his own expedition , which would overwinter and explore inland , with the location of the South Magnetic Pole as an objective . 
 Borchgrevink went to England , where he was able to persuade the publishing magnate Sir George Newnes to finance him to the extent of £ 40 @,@ 000 , equivalent to £ 3 million as of 2008 , with the sole stipulation that , despite the shortage of British participants , the venture be styled the " British Antarctic Expedition " . This was by no means the grand British expedition envisaged by Markham and the geographical establishment , who were hostile and dismissive of Borchgrevink . On 23 August 1898 the expedition ship Southern Cross left London for the Ross Sea , reaching Cape Adare on 17 February 1899 . Here a shore party was landed and was the first to over @-@ winter on the Antarctic mainland , in a prefabricated hut . 
 In January 1900 , Southern Cross returned , picked up the shore party and , following the route which Ross had taken 60 years previously , sailed southward to the Great Ice Barrier , which they discovered had retreated some 30 miles ( 48 km ) south since the days of Ross . A party consisting of Borchgrevink , William Colbeck and a Sami named Per Savio landed with sledges and dogs . This party ascended the Barrier and made the first sledge journey on the barrier surface ; on 16 February 1900 they extended the Farthest South record to 78 ° 50'S . On its return to England later in 1900 , Borchgrevink 's expedition was received without enthusiasm , despite its new southern record . Historian David Crane commented that if Borchgrevink had been a British naval officer , his contribution to Antarctic knowledge might have been better received , but " a Norwegian seaman / schoolmaster was never going to be taken seriously " . 
 = = = Robert Falcon Scott = = = 
 The Discovery Expedition of 1901 – 04 was Captain Scott 's first Antarctic command . Although according to Edward Wilson the intention was to " reach the Pole if possible , or find some new land " , there is nothing in Scott 's writings , nor in the official objectives of the expedition , to indicate that the pole was a definite goal . However , a southern journey towards the pole was within Scott 's formal remit to " explore the ice barrier of Sir James Ross ... and to endeavour to solve the very important physical and geographical questions connected with this remarkable ice formation " . 
 The southern journey was undertaken by Scott , Wilson and Ernest Shackleton . The party set out on 1 November 1902 with various teams in support , and one of these , led by Michael Barne , passed Borchgrevink 's Farthest South mark on 11 November , an event recorded with great high spirits in Wilson 's diary . The march continued , initially in favourable weather conditions , but encountered increasing difficulties caused by the party 's lack of ice travelling experience and the loss of all its dogs through a combination of poor diet and overwork . The 80 ° S mark was passed on 2 December , and four weeks later , on 30 December 1902 , Wilson and Scott took a short ski trip from their southern camp to set a new Farthest South at ( according to their measurements ) 82 ° 17'S . Modern maps , correlated with Shackleton 's photograph and Wilson 's drawing , put their final camp at 82 ° <unk> , and the point reached by Scott and Wilson at 82 ° 11'S , 200 nautical miles ( 370 km ; 230 mi ) beyond Borchgrevink 's mark . 
 = = = Ernest Shackleton = = = 
 After his share in the Farthest South achievement of the Discovery Expedition , Ernest Shackleton suffered a physical collapse on the return journey , and was sent home with the expedition 's relief vessel on orders from Scott ; he bitterly resented it , and the two became rivals . Four years later , Shackleton organised his own polar venture , the Nimrod Expedition , 1907 – 09 . This was the first expedition to set the definite objective of reaching the South Pole , and to have a specific strategy for doing so . 
 To assist his endeavour , Shackleton adopted a mixed transport strategy , involving the use of Manchurian ponies as pack animals , as well as the more traditional dog @-@ sledges . A specially adapted motor car was also taken . Although the dogs and the car were used during the expedition for a number of purposes , the task of assisting the group that would undertake the march to the pole fell to the ponies . The size of Shackleton 's four @-@ man polar party was dictated by the number of surviving ponies ; of the ten that were embarked in New Zealand , only four had survived the 1908 winter . 
 Ernest Shackleton and three companions ( Frank Wild , Eric Marshall and Jameson Adams ) began their march on 29 October 1908 . On 26 November they surpassed the farthest point reached by Scott 's 1902 party . " A day to remember " , wrote Shackleton in his journal , noting that they had reached this point in far less time than on the previous march with Captain Scott . Shackleton 's group continued southward , discovering and ascending the Beardmore Glacier to the polar plateau , and then marching on to reach their Farthest South point at 88 ° <unk> , a mere 97 nautical miles ( 180 km ; 112 mi ) from the pole , on 9 January 1909 . Here they planted the Union Jack presented to them by Queen Alexandra , and took possession of the plateau in the name of King Edward VII , before shortages of food and supplies forced them to turn back north . This was , at the time , the closest convergence on either pole . The increase of more than six degrees south from Scott 's previous record was the greatest extension of Farthest South since Captain Cook 's 1773 mark . Shackleton was treated as a hero on his return to England . His record was to stand for less than three years , being passed by Amundsen on 7 December 1911 . 
 = = Polar conquest = = 
 In the wake of Shackleton 's near miss , Captain Scott organised the Terra Nova Expedition , 1910 – 13 , in which securing the South Pole for the British Empire was an explicitly stated prime objective . As he planned his expedition , Scott saw no reason to believe that his effort would be contested . However , the Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen , who had been developing plans for a North Pole expedition , changed his mind when , in September 1909 , the North Pole was claimed in quick succession by the Americans Frederick Cook and Robert Peary . Amundsen resolved to go south instead . 
 Amundsen concealed his revised intentions until his ship , Fram , was in the Atlantic and beyond communication . Scott was notified by telegram that a rival was in the field , but had little choice other than to continue with his own plans . Meanwhile , Fram arrived at the Ross Ice Shelf on 11 January 1911 , and by 14 January had found the inlet , or " Bay of Whales " , where Borchgrevink had made his landing eleven years earlier . This became the location of Amundsen 's base camp , Framheim . 
 After nine months ' preparation , Amundsen 's polar journey began on 20 October 1911 . Avoiding the known route to the polar plateau via the Beardmore Glacier , Amundsen led his party of five due south , reaching the Transantarctic Mountains on 16 November . They discovered the Axel Heiberg Glacier , which provided them with a direct route to the polar plateau and on to the pole . Shackleton 's Farthest South mark was passed on 7 December , and the South Pole was reached on 14 December 1911 . The Norwegian party 's greater skills with the techniques of ice travel , using ski and dogs , had proved decisive in their success . Captain Scott 's five @-@ man team reached the same point 33 days later , and perished during their return journey . Since Cook 's journeys , every expedition that had held the Farthest South record before Amundsen 's conquest had been British ; however , the final triumph indisputably belonged to the Norwegians . 
 = = Later history = = 
 After Scott 's retreat from the pole in January 1912 , the location remained unvisited for nearly 18 years . On 28 November 1929 , US Navy Commander ( later Rear @-@ Admiral ) Richard E. Byrd and three others completed the first aircraft flight over the South Pole . Twenty @-@ seven years later , Rear @-@ Admiral George J. Dufek became the first person to set foot on the pole since Scott , when on 31 October 1956 he and the crew of <unk> @-@ 5 Skytrain " Que Sera Sera " landed at the pole . Between November 1956 and February 1957 , the first permanent South Pole research station was erected and christened the Amundsen – Scott South Pole Station in honour of the pioneer explorers . Since then the station had been substantially extended , and in 2008 was housing up to 150 scientific staff and support personnel . Dufek gave considerable assistance to the Commonwealth Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition , 1955 – 58 , led by Vivian Fuchs , which on 19 January 1958 became the first party to reach the pole overland since Scott . 
 = = Farthest South records = = 
 Table of Farthest South records , 1521 to 1911 ( letters in " Map key " column relate to adjoining map ) 
 = Occupy ( book ) = 
 Occupy is a short study of the Occupy movement written by the American academic and political activist Noam Chomsky . Initially published in the United States by the Zuccotti Park Press as the first title in their Occupied Media Pamphlet Series in 2012 , it was subsequently republished in the United Kingdom by Penguin Books later that year . 
 An academic linguist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Chomsky first achieved fame for his work as a political activist during the 1960s and 1970s . A libertarian socialist , Chomsky was a prominent critic of capitalism , the role of western media and the foreign policy of the U.S. government , dealing with such issues in bestsellers like Manufacturing Consent ( 1988 ) , Hegemony or Survival ( 2003 ) and Failed States ( 2006 ) . With the birth of the Occupy Movement – devoted to socio @-@ political change – in 2011 , Chomsky became a vocal supporter for the protesters , writing articles and giving speeches on their behalf , several of which were collected together and published as Occupy . 
 The book opens with an introductory editor 's note by Greg Ruggiero , praising the Occupy movement and its potential for the greater democratization of society . This is followed by the text to Chomsky 's Howard Zinn Memorial Lecture , which he gave at Occupy Boston in Massachusetts . The third part of the book comprises Chomsky 's interview with the New York University student Edward Radzivilovskiy , while the fourth contains the text of the <unk> conference call with Chomsky by Mikal Kamil and Ian Escuela . Part five offers an interview with Chomsky undertaken at the University of Maryland , while the book is rounded off by Chomsky 's tribute to the late activist Howard Zinn and the National Lawyers Guild 's legal advice to Occupy protesters . 
 Throughout the book , Chomsky discusses what the Occupy movement is and what it is demanding , as well as advocating ways in which it could gain greater support and achieve governmental reforms , using historical examples as evidence . Press reviews were largely positive , with some noting that Chomsky had taken a more moderate , reformist position than they expected of him . 
 = = Background = = 
 Noam Chomsky ( 1928 – ) was born in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , to Jewish immigrants from Eastern Europe . Becoming academically involved in the field of linguistics , Chomsky eventually secured a job as Professor of Department of Linguistics & Philosophy at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . In the field of linguistics , he is credited as the creator or co @-@ creator of the Chomsky hierarchy , the universal grammar theory , and the Chomsky – <unk> theorem . Politically , Chomsky had held radical leftist views since childhood , identifying himself with anarcho @-@ syndicalism and libertarian socialism . He was particularly known for his critiques of U.S. foreign policy and contemporary capitalism , and he has been described as a prominent cultural figure . 
 First emerging in New York City in 2011 , the Occupy movement was an international protest movement against social and economic inequality , its primary goal being to make the economic structure and power relations in society more favorable to the <unk> . Different local groups have different foci , but among the prime concerns is the claim that large corporations and the global financial system control the world in a way that disproportionately benefits a minority , undermines democracy and is unstable . It was widely seen as a reaction to the 2008 – 2012 global recession , an economic crisis that had led to high unemployment across the western world , and was also inspired by the Arab Spring , in which popular protest movements overthrew the governments of several countries in the Arab world . Chomsky became a supporter for the Occupy movement , joining protesters at some of their camps and advocating their cause in the mainstream press . 
 The book 's original publisher , <unk> Park Press , was founded by <unk> Alliance , a Brooklyn @-@ based non profit cultural and advocacy organization devoted to the Spanish @-@ speaking community . Occupy was the first of a series of publications known as the Occupied Media Pamphlet Series . According to the Press , its purpose was to " produce accessible , affordable , pamphlet @-@ size works by well @-@ known and emerging voices who are inspired by a vision for a new society . " Chomsky dedicated his book to " the 6 @,@ 705 people who have been arrested supporting Occupy " between September 24 , 2011 to March 6 , 2012 . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The book includes an editor 's note , a brief section providing legal advice for American Occupy activists , and five sections written by Chomsky <unk> opens with an editor 's note written by Greg Ruggiero , in which he explains the basics to Chomsky 's views on the Occupy Movement , drawing quotes from his various public speeches in order to do so . Ruggiero also discusses Occupy 's success in the United States , stating that it has helped to change media discussions by introducing terms like " the 99 % " into popular discourse and also by bringing national attention to the plight of the impoverished . He remarks that the protest movement has not only helped to highlight the " heartlessness and inhumanity " of the socio @-@ political system , but that it has also helped to provide solidarity with those " being crushed " under that system . Suggesting reasons for the movement 's success , he optimistically describes the manner in which " People are waking up and coming out . " 
 The introduction is followed by a transcript of Chomsky 's Howard Zinn Memorial Lecture , originally given to Occupy Boston in Dewey Square on October 22 , 2011 . Contrasting the hope of the working classes in the Great Depression of the 1930s with the pessimism of their contemporaries in the current recession , Chomsky discusses the changes to the U.S. economy that have occurred since the 1970s ; de @-@ industrialization , de @-@ development and the rise of the financial sector at the expense of other parts of the economy . He notes how both Adam Smith and David Ricardo partly foresaw this situation . Highlighting the work of Tom Ferguson , he discusses how the political parties have come under the increasing control of the corporate sector . Proceeding to look at corruption among the 1 % , he makes reference to both Citigroup and Alan Greenspan , before discussing the role that worker sit @-@ ins and industry takeovers could play in democratizing the U.S. economy , as well as the threat posed by both nuclear war and environmental catastrophe , both problems exacerbated by the current capitalist system . Finally , he responds to questions posed by the audience , discussing the concept of corporate personhood , rejecting the idea that the U.S. elite could resort to fascism , and discussing the possibility of a general strike , arguing that that would be " a possible idea at a time when the population is ready for it . " 
 The third section of the book , entitled " After thirty years of class war " , comprises the text of an interview with Chomsky conducted at MIT on January 6 , 2012 by a New York University student , Edward Radzivilovskiy . Responding to Radzivilovskiy 's questions , Chomsky lays out what the Occupy movement represents , and what its demands are , arguing that it is primarily a popular protest against income stagnation for the majority and the increasing concentration of wealth among an elite minority . He contrasts it with the Tea Party movement , which he argues only represents the interests of a small Euro @-@ American minority , being backed by the corporate support that Occupy rejects . He then draws comparisons between Occupy and the Arab Spring , arguing that the latter had been far more successful in bringing down governments because it had the backing of organized labor movements , all of which had been decimated by corporate power in the U.S. , and calls for a renewed revival of the American labor movement . Rejecting the idea that Occupy is an anarchist movement , he notes that its primary demands require reform rather than revolution , advocating governmental support for economic growth over austerity measures . 
 Section four , " <unk> " , contains the transcript of a conference call with Chomsky chaired by Mikal Kamil and Ian Escuela on January 31 , 2012 , in which he answered pre @-@ selected questions from the Occupy community . Beginning with a discussion of the media coverage of Occupy , he moves on to discuss the police repression that the movement has faced , arguing that the best way to avoid such repression was to gain " active public support " for their cause . He considers one of the primary achievements of Occupy to have been to bring together communities to discuss and debate in a democratic forum , thereby rejecting the ideologies of selfishness proposed by the likes of Ayn Rand . Chomsky then discusses how to get the corporate sector out of politics and how to introduce greater democracy to the U.S. He rounds off this chapter with a discussion of the nature of the Republican and Democratic parties , the work of Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci and the role of the U.S. housing bubble in the global depression . 
 Section five is titled " Occupying Foreign Policy " , an question @-@ and @-@ answer session that Chomsky gave at the University of Maryland on January 27 , 2012 . Chomsky discusses how the Occupy movement could hope to influence and control the foreign policy of the United States , directing it away from its support for autocratic regimes and military interventionism . Proceeding to discuss the successes that popular protest have had in influencing government decisions , he argues that the protests of the 1930s led to the formation of the New Deal , and that the protests against the Iraq War – although unable to stop the conflict – helped to moderate the use of weaponry used by U.S. troops . Praising America Beyond Capitalism ( 2004 ) , a book by the political economist Gar <unk> , he then discusses ways in which the Occupy movement can influence the public discourse into accepting and understanding their views and arguments . This is followed by " Remembering Howard Zinn " , Chomsky 's reminiscences of his late friend Howard Zinn ( 1922 – 2010 ) , a historian and social activist who authored the influential book , A People 's History of the United States ( 1980 ) . Chomsky 's text is then followed by " Occupy Protest Support " , a set of legal advice for protesters facing arrest and prosecution authored by the National Lawyers Guild . 
 = = Main arguments = = 
 = = = What is the Occupy Movement ? = = = 
 In Occupy , Chomsky explores both the context to the Occupy movement , and highlights its primary aims . He describes it as a reaction by members of the working and middle classes to the " class war " that has been waged against them by the upper class who control the commercial sector since the 1970s . During those 30 years , Chomsky argues , the nation 's wealth has become increasingly concentrated among a tiny percentage of the population , primarily those in control of the financial sector . Chomsky argues that this process has been furthered by government policies implemented by both the Republican and Democrat administrations , with both parties being financed by that same financial and commercial sector . According to Chomsky , while the wealth has been increasingly focused in the socio @-@ economic elite who control the financial sector , the rest of the population have suffered higher workloads , unsustainable debt , a weakening benefits system and stagnating incomes and real wages , causing them to be " angry , frustrated , [ and ] bitter " . It is this inequality – Chomsky argues – that has led to the Occupy movement . 
 Chomsky states that the Occupy movement 's demands are those of the majority of the U.S. population : to solve the problem of social inequality in the country . More specifically , he argues that their precise demands include greater regulation of financial transaction taxes , and reversing the rules of corporate governance that have led to the current situation . Nonetheless , he also argues that many Occupy members would be hesitant to directly state what their objectives are , because " they are essentially crafting a point of view from many disparate sources . " 
 = = = How to spread Occupy and democratize society = = = 
 Chomsky argues that the multi @-@ party , representative , liberal democracy that governs the United States is insufficiently democratic , instead advocating a form of participatory , direct democracy through which the ordinary citizens have a direct say in public policy . As such , he advocates that communities take a different approach to the upcoming primary elections ; instead of simply listening to speeches given by the politicians hoping to be elected , they should get together in democratic councils and discuss what issues they want addressing . That done , Chomsky argues , they should approach the politicians , informing them that they have no interest in their speeches , but that if they want to get elected , they must come and listen to the demands of the people ; alternately , he argues , these communities should select their own representatives whom they could then vote for . 
 Chomsky also argues for economic democratization , with the workers themselves controlling the means of production through worker cooperatives . As an example of how this might be achieved , he highlights the situation in 1977 when U.S. Steel decided to close down its facility in Youngstown , Ohio , leaving the steel workers unemployed ; the local community attempted to purchase the factory from the company , and then run it as a " worker @-@ run , worker @-@ managed facility . " They failed in their attempt , but Chomsky argues that had there been a sufficient amount of public support behind their cause – for instance like the Occupy protesters – then they might have succeeded . He noted a similar situation that occurred in a suburb of Boston in the early 21st century , when a multinational decided to close down a manufacturing facility because it was not producing sufficient profit . When the worker 's trade union attempted to purchase the factory , the multinational refused , for reasons that Chomsky speculated were due to class consciousness . 
 Chomsky also provides other suggestions for reforming the U.S. political system . He advocates health care reform and " reining in our crazed military system . " He also argues that in the time of economic recession , the government should focus on job creation and growth – just as they did in the 1930s with the New Deal – rather than on imposing unpopular austerity measures on the population . He also describes it as important to rebuild an organized labor movement in the United States , in order to more effectively combat the domination of the ruling classes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Press reviews = = = 
 The Foreign Policy in Focus 's co @-@ director John <unk> reviewed Occupy for the group 's website , asserting that " What makes Chomsky 's perspective so interesting , aside from the wealth of his political experience , is the range of his interests " , evident through the way that he brings in examples from across the world . Ultimately , <unk> described the volume as a " valuable set of remarks and interviews " . 
 Writing in the New Statesman , George Eaton stated that he was surprised by the moderate stance that Chomsky took in Occupy , remarking that the " self @-@ described anarchist sounds very much like a social democrat " , offering the " cautious , provisional response one might expect from a Labour shadow cabinet minister " rather than the words of a radical revolutionary . Arguing that he was exhibiting " passionate sanity " at a time when much of the Left was gripped by conspiracy theories , he also criticized Chomsky for being " maddeningly banal " at points during the book , but ultimately thought that there was " much to commend Chomsky 's radical pessimism . " In a brief review in The Independent , <unk> Akbar highlighted that although Chomsky 's claims regarding class war carried with them " the ring of an old Marxist manifesto " , the notion that we ourselves need to change in order to allow the state to change was " very contemporary " . 
 British Trotskyite publication , the Socialist Review , praised Chomsky 's discussion of the impact of neoliberalism in the US , however they asserted that " when it comes to crucial questions - how do we fight and what are we fighting for - Chomsky 's response is lacking . " They assert that his claims that communities can challenge the Republican and Democrat domination of the electoral system are " somewhat bizarre " given that he has already established how " corrupt and biased " that system is . Criticising him for not looking at the concept of a potential revolution , they also express disagreement with his view that the " solution for the 99 % " can be found within " the framework of capitalism " . 
 In The Coffin Factory literary magazine , Occupy was reviewed by Laura <unk> , with Ruggiero 's editor 's note being described as a " powerful " introduction . <unk> asserts that in this booklet , Chomsky " sets the record straight " in his own " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek tone " , following decades of being marginalized by the establishment . Robert <unk> reviewed the book in August 2013 for the Mortgage Strategy website . He opined that Occupy felt " nostalgic " , largely because the Occupy movement itself " has largely run out of steam . " Nevertheless , he thought much of what Chomsky had to say was " practical " and that it was " difficult to refute much of what he says about the way Western society is set up . " 
 = The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs = 
 " The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs " is the second episode of the fourteenth season of the American animated television series South Park , and the 197th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on March 24 , 2010 . In the episode , the South Park boys write a vulgar book with the sole intention of getting it banned . When Stan 's parents discover the manuscript , the boys accuse Butters of writing it , then are enraged when it is hailed as a literary masterpiece . 
 The episode was written and directed by series co @-@ creator Trey Parker , and was rated TV @-@ MA L in the United States . It serves as a satire of pop culture criticism , and mocks people who find hidden messages in works where there are none . The episode includes other themes , including the lack of interest in reading among American youths , and mocks the idea that a book alone causes people to commit violent crimes . 
 The novel The Catcher in the Rye by J. D. Salinger plays a major part in the episode , as the South Park boys are inspired to write their own book when they feel Salinger 's book does not live up to its controversial reputation . The episode also mocks actress Sarah Jessica Parker and the Kardashian family from the reality series Keeping Up with the Kardashians . 
 " The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs " received generally positive reviews , with many commentators praising the episode 's themes of the over @-@ analysis into works of culture , although some said the vomiting jokes were too old and grew redundant . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was seen by 3 @.@ 24 million viewers . After the episode aired , Kim , Kourtney and Khloé Kardashian praised their portrayal and on @-@ screen deaths . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The students at South Park Elementary are assigned to read The Catcher in the Rye , and grow excited when Mr. Garrison tells them that the book has caused so much controversy , it has been banned from public schools in the past . However , after reading the book , Stan , Kyle , Cartman , and Kenny are angry to find the content completely inoffensive , and feel the school has " tricked " them into reading . They decide to write their own offensive novel , The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs ( which they originally called The Tale of Scrotie <unk> ) , with the intention of disgusting as many people as possible . Later , Stan 's parents find the first draft and read it . They find it so disgusting that they repeatedly vomit while reading . However , they both consider it the best book they have ever read . Fearful they will get into trouble for the book 's content , Stan and the boys tell Butters he actually wrote the book . Butters believes them because ever since reading The Catcher in the Rye , he has been entering into altered states of consciousness that make him want to kill John Lennon , before he finds out Lennon is already dead . Later on , after learning that The Catcher in the Rye inspired someone to shoot Ronald Reagan , Butters tries to kill him too but is disappointed by the fact he is dead as well . 
 Butters confesses to writing the novel himself . However , Stan and the boys are furious to learn that not only do the South Park adults love the book , a publisher has agreed to sign Butters for a book deal . The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs becomes a huge success , and everybody who reads it vomits profusely , but declares it a masterpiece nonetheless . As Butters becomes a literary icon , the four boys unsuccessfully campaign to have the book banned . They are angered to find readers interpreting passages from the novel as allegories for contentious political issues , even though the boys never intended to convey such messages . Since the book made many references to the unattractiveness of actress Sarah Jessica Parker , Cartman and Kenny plan to get her killed , believing the negative publicity will cause the book to be banned . They dress Parker as a moose ( they just put antlers on her as she already resembles a moose ) , then lead her into the woods during hunting season . 
 Butters soon does , in fact write a novel of his very own , The Poop That Took a Pee , which consists solely of simple descriptions of scatological acts . The four boys are convinced the book will be a disaster and expose Butters as a fraud over the first book . However , much to their surprise , readers actually find it an even deeper , more profound book , and continue reading their own allegorical messages into the text . After finishing the book , one crazed reader storms on to the set of reality television series Keeping Up with the Kardashians and murders the entire Kardashian family with a pump @-@ action shotgun . Both The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs and The Poop That Took a Pee are banned as a result , and Butters is horrified because he considered Kim Kardashian " the most beautiful woman in the world " ( along with her sisters ) . Stan and Kyle suggest that instead of reading books and possibly discovering the wrong message in them , people should simply watch television instead . Cartman also claims Sarah Jessica Parker has also been killed because Butters accidentally dressed her in a moose costume while sleepwalking . Butters is at first horrified , but then decides he does not care because she was ugly . 
 = = Production and theme = = 
 " The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs " was written and directed by series co @-@ founder Trey Parker , and was rated TV @-@ MA in the United States . It originally aired on Comedy Central in the United States on March 24 , 2010 . The episode serves primarily as a satire of pop culture criticism . Although the South Park boys wrote The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs simply to shock and offend people , readers delve too deeply into the meaning behind the book , finding hidden allegories and symbolism that the actual authors insist are not present . People with conflicting philosophies , including liberals and conservatives , and pro @-@ choice and pro @-@ life advocates , attempt to claim that the same work conveys and validates their own ideology . The script serves as a criticism of people who take such works of pop culture too seriously . Although this is demonstrated specifically through literary criticism in the episode , the theme can be extended to film criticism and television criticism as well . The episode suggests people are so desperate for inspiration , they are willing to impose their hopes and dreams into works of art , even if they completely lack those qualities . Some commentators thought South Park creators Parker and Matt Stone were implicitly mocking the amount of analysis into deeper meaning South Park itself often receives in its reviews . Others have suggested this over @-@ analysis is a reference to the number of adult themes identified in the Harry Potter and Twilight young adult novel series . 
 " The Tale of Scrotie <unk> " portrays young children as almost entirely uninterested in reading . The South Park boys only exhibit excitement for their reading assignment based on the promise of offensive and controversial material in the book . Rather than finding any merit in the book , the boys are angry when they find the material inoffensive , prompting Cartman to declare he has been " tricked " into reading an entire book . Through the rise and fall of Butters ' career as an author , the episode also demonstrates the perils of literary success and hoaxes . The episode also mocks the idea that a book can be identified as the sole causation for a reader to commit violent crimes , particularly through Butters ' reaction to The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs . Butters experiences blackouts after reading The Catcher in the Rye and plans to kill both John Lennon and Ronald Reagan , until he <unk> learns they are already dead . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The Catcher in the Rye , the 1951 novel about teenage confusion and alienation by J.D. Salinger , plays a large part in " The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs " . The episode references the controversial reception the book has received over the years for its risqué elements and vulgar language . Mr. Garrison tells the students the book has only recently been lifted from the South Park Elementary 's banned books list , a reference to past censorship the book has received in public schools . The episode also refers to the alleged role The Catcher in the Rye played in inspiring Mark David Chapman to shoot and kill musician John Lennon , and John Hinckley , Jr. to attempt to assassinate former U.S. President Ronald Reagan . Lennon , a former member of The Beatles and long @-@ time peace activist , is referred to by Cartman as " the king of hippies " . Butters and the eventual murderer rail against ' phonies ' in the same manner as Holden Caulfield in Salinger 's book . " The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs " aired two months after the death of author J.D. Salinger , and just weeks after letters by J.D. Salinger went on display at The Morgan Library & Museum in New York City . 
 The episode also prominently features the Kardashian family , who are the focus of the E ! reality series Keeping Up with the Kardashians . Sarah Jessica Parker , an actress who has been mocked on South Park before , is also lampooned in the story . 
 During one scene , Butters appears on Today , a morning talk show on NBC ( referred to as HBC in the episode , but with NBC 's peacock logo ) , to promote his book . Television hosts Matt Lauer and Meredith Vieira are featured in the scene , during which both vomit for a particularly long time in response to some of the more vulgar passages in The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs . Morgan Freeman , an actor known for his narration work , conducts a reading in the episode of Butters ' second book , The Poop That Took a Pee . Trey Parker provided the voice of Freeman in " The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs " . During one scene , Butters ' father can be seen reading a newspaper with a front page story about a historic health care bill passing , a reference to the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , which was passed and signed the same week the South Park episode first aired . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on March 24 , 2010 , " The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs " was watched by 3 @.@ 24 million viewers , according to the Nielsen Media Research , making it the most watched cable television show of the night . The episode received an overall 1 @.@ 9 rating / 3 share . Among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , it received a 1 @.@ 8 rating / 5 share , and among male viewers between 18 and 34 , it received a 3 @.@ 5 rating / 12 share . As a result of the episode , the phrase " Scrotie McBoogerballs " was the top trending topic for March 25 on the social networking and microblogging website Twitter . " The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs " , along with the thirteen other episodes from South Park 's fourteenth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set and two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set in the United States on April 26 , 2011 . 
 " The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs " received generally positive reviews . Carlos Delgado of iF Magazine called the episode a potential classic and a " phenomenal follow up showing " to the season premiere " Sexual Healing " , which he did not enjoy . Delgado said the script was intelligent and praised the theme of over @-@ analyzing art . He also praised the vomiting jokes , and said he could not remember the last time he laughed so hard during a South Park episode . Entertainment Weekly television columnist Ken Tucker said it was better than the season premiere , which he also praised . Tucker particularly enjoyed the satire of pop culture criticism , and wrote , " I 'd compare the Scrotie episode to the work of Rabelais , Henry Miller , and Dennis Cooper , but then I 'd be part of the boys ' satire , wouldn 't I ? " 
 TV Fanatic said the episode was not as strong as previous seasons , but an improvement over " Sexual Healing " . The site praised the emphasis on Butters and the pop culture references to The Catcher in the Rye , John Lennon , Sarah Jessica Parker and " the useless Kardashian Klan " . The A.V. Club writer Sean O 'Neal said he " chuckled a few times " , but found the vomit jokes acted like a substitute for " actual dialogue " . However , O 'Neal praised the satire of people looking too deeply into the meaning of meaningless art , and how easily that theme can be applied to South Park itself . Not all reviews were entirely positive . Ramsey Isler of IGN said Butters was " awesome , as usual " , and thought the jokes about the Kardashians were funny , but that the positive elements of the episode were " not enough to balance out the failures " . He particularly criticized the Sarah Jessica Parker jokes as " flat and random " , and the constant vomiting as " just one long @-@ running ' joke ' that was just plain awful " . 
 The day after " The Tale of Scrotie McBoogerballs " aired , members of the Kardashian family responded positively to their portrayal and on @-@ screen deaths . On her blog , Kim Kardashian wrote that the family found the episode very funny and were honored to be featured in the episode . She wrote , " We were all dying when we saw this clip from South Park that aired last night ... literally , LOL . They killed us all ! ! ! " She also wrote , " I managed to survive the longest ... of course ! " Kourtney Kardashian joked on her Twitter page , " How rude ! <unk> ! ! " , Khloé Kardashian wrote she did not know about her appearance on the show until she suddenly received numerous messages on her Twitter page . Khloé also said she found the scene funny , and laughed at how <unk> she and her sisters were portrayed , although she said the Bruce Jenner cartoon looked very realistic . She wrote , " Even though we all weren 't portrayed as the most attractive South Park characters , I was still so flattered since I love that show <unk> . " 
 = The Concert for Bangladesh ( album ) = 
 The Concert for Bangladesh – originally titled The Concert for Bangla Desh – is a live triple album by George Harrison and celebrity friends , released on Apple Records in December 1971 in America and January 1972 in Britain . The album followed the two concerts of the same name , held on 1 August 1971 at New York 's Madison Square Garden , featuring Harrison , Bob Dylan , Ravi Shankar , Ali Akbar Khan , Ringo Starr , Billy Preston , Leon Russell and Eric Clapton . The shows were a pioneering charity event , in aid of the homeless Bengali refugees of the Bangladesh Liberation War , and set the model for future multi @-@ artist rock benefits such as Live Aid ( 1985 ) and the Concert for New York City ( 2001 ) . 
 Co @-@ produced by Phil Spector and featuring the latter 's signature Wall of Sound in a live setting , the fundraiser album was delayed for three months due to protracted negotiations between Harrison and two record companies keen to protect their business interests , Capitol and Columbia / CBS . Besides the main performers , the musicians and singers on the recording include Badfinger , Jim Horn , Klaus Voormann , Alla Rakha , Jim Keltner , Jesse Ed Davis and Claudia Linnear . The box set 's original packaging included a 64 @-@ page book containing photos from the concerts ; the album cover , designed by Tom Wilkes , consisted of an image of a malnourished child sitting beside an empty food bowl . 
 On release , The Concert for Bangladesh was a major critical and commercial success , topping albums charts around the world , and went on to win the Grammy Award for Album of the Year in March 1973 . Together with the 1972 Apple concert film directed by Saul Swimmer , the album gained Indian classical music its largest Western audience up until that time . The album was reissued in 2005 , in remastered form , featuring a new cover . 
 Among the many words of acclaim that have been written about The Concert for Bangladesh since its release , author Tom Moon describes it as an album to play " whenever your faith in the power of music begins to wane " . Sales of The Concert for Bangladesh continue to benefit the George Harrison Fund for UNICEF , which raised $ 1 @.@ 2 million for children in the Horn of Africa , in a 2011 campaign marking the album 's 40th anniversary . 
 = = The concerts = = 
 While in Los Angeles in June 1971 , and after being made aware of the gravity of the situation in what was then known as East Pakistan by friend and musician Ravi Shankar , George Harrison set about organising two fundraising concerts at Madison Square Garden , New York , to aid the war @-@ ravaged and disaster @-@ stricken country . In the middle of these hurried preparations , he composed the song " Bangla Desh " in order to call further attention to the Bengalis ' cause , and rush @-@ released it as a charity single four days before the shows . Riding high with the recent success of his All Things Must Pass triple album , Harrison then headlined the all @-@ star UNICEF benefit concerts , backed by a 24 @-@ piece band of musicians and singers , on Sunday , 1 August 1971 . Equally notable were appearances by fellow ex @-@ Beatle Ringo Starr and Bob Dylan , both of whom , like Harrison , had been mostly unavailable to concert audiences for several years . In Dylan 's case , it was his first appearance on a major US concert stage in five years , and his participation in the event had been uncertain until he walked on for his segment midway through the afternoon show . 
 The concerts were highly successful in raising international awareness of the plight of the refugees – thought to number up to 10 million – and a cheque for over US $ 243 @,@ 000 was soon sent to UNICEF for relief . The media lavished praise on Harrison as an ambassador for rock altruism and hailed the event as proof that " the Utopian spirit of the Sixties was still flickering " , as Rolling Stone magazine put it . With concert recording having been carried out at Madison Square Garden by Gary Kellgren , using the Record Plant 's 16 @-@ track mobile unit , Harrison intended to raise significantly more money via a live album of the event , to be issued on the Beatles ' Apple Records label , followed by Apple Films ' concert documentary , also to be titled The Concert for Bangladesh . 
 = = Album preparation = = 
 During his and Shankar 's press conference in New York on 27 July , Harrison had stated that a live album might be ready for release within ten days of the shows . Although this estimate would turn out to be highly optimistic , the following year , in an effort to foil concert bootleggers , Elvis Presley succeeded in delivering a live album just eight days after his own , much @-@ publicised Madison Square Garden shows . 
 Harrison and co @-@ producer Phil Spector began working on the Bangladesh recordings on 2 August , and work continued there at the Record Plant for around a week . Spector later talked of them spending " six months " mixing what amounted to a total of four hours of music ; in fact , the process took just over a month , as Harrison told talk @-@ show host Dick Cavett that November . In their book Eight Arms to Hold You , Chip Madinger and Mark Easter question the extent of Spector 's involvement , citing Harrison 's subsequent lauding of Kellgren 's role in " capturing the performances " on 1 August , as well as the fact that Spector was " in and out of hospital " during this time , similar to his erratic attendance at the All Things Must Pass sessions in 1970 . 
 = = = Concert recordings = = = 
 Speaking in 2011 , Spector identified two issues that prolonged the live album 's preparation , both of them reflective of the haste with which the concerts came together : " It was chaos [ setting up at Madison Square Garden ] – we had three hours to mic the band , then the audience came in , and we didn 't know how to mic the audience . " And rather than a standard " band " , this was a full Wall of Sound orchestra : two drummers ( Ringo Starr and Jim Keltner ) , two keyboard players ( Billy Preston and Leon Russell ) , six horn players ( led by Jim Horn ) , three electric guitarists ( Harrison , Eric Clapton and Jesse Ed Davis ) , a trio of acoustic guitars to be " felt but not heard " ( Badfinger 's Pete Ham , Tom Evans and Joey Molland ) , the seven members of Don Nix 's " Soul Choir " , together with bassist Klaus Voormann and a dedicated percussion player , Mike Gibbins of Badfinger . In his review of the Concert for Bangladesh film for NME , John Pidgeon described the scene as " a roadie 's nightmare of instruments , mikes , amps and speakers " . 
 Before the Western portion of the concerts , there were the traditionally hard @-@ to @-@ record Indian string instruments of Ravi Shankar and Ali Akbar Khan to amplify , together with Alla Rakha 's tabla and the drone @-@ enhancing tambura , played by Kamala Chakravarty – each offering natural musical tones so easily lost in the " cavernous Garden " . An additional challenge for Kellgren had been the need to capture the dynamics of a well @-@ paced show designed around professionally presented hit songs , rather than a loose superstar jam . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 With ongoing friendships a priority , Harrison had promised the main participants that , should things turn out badly on 1 August , they could be excluded from any album or film release . According to Madinger and Easter , he took early mixes of the concert tapes to Dylan for the latter 's approval . Of all the featured performers , only Leon Russell chose to intervene , necessitating a reworking of his " Jumpin ' Jack Flash / Youngblood " medley , which he apparently remixed himself . Post @-@ production on the Madison Square Garden recordings was minimal , the known examples being Harrison 's double @-@ tracked lead vocal on the bridges of " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , and a composite edit of his opening song , " Wah @-@ Wah " , which was assembled from both the shows . In addition , it is possible that Shankar and Khan 's " Bangla Dhun " was severely edited down : Harrison later described their set as having lasted 45 minutes , yet the running time on the album is under seventeen minutes and in the film just fifteen . 
 The final mix down of the recordings , for album and film use , was carried out in Los Angeles in September , by A & M Studios engineers Norman Kinney and Steve Mitchell . In their joint interview for the 2005 Concert for Bangladesh Revisited documentary , Kinney and Mitchell confirm that music from both the afternoon ( matinee ) and evening performances was used for the concert film and live album ; they also state that Spector repeatedly instructed them to increase the volume of the audience in the mixes , in a search for more " feel of the room " in the end result . The second show was preferred when it came to selecting the best concert audio . The exceptions are as follows : " Wah @-@ Wah " , which starts off with the evening version but cuts to the matinee at 2 : 53 ; Harrison 's band introduction and " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , both sourced from the first show ; and Russell 's medley , which is also from the matinee on the album , but in the concert film , the audio cuts to the evening show during " Youngblood " . 
 Harrison 's geniality as a host was well represented on the recordings . As with Shankar 's pre- " Bangla Dhun " address , Harrison 's band introductions , complete with Russell and Voormann breaking into " Yellow Submarine " when Starr 's name is mentioned , and his other on @-@ stage dialogue – particularly the concert @-@ sealing " Like to bring on a friend of us all ... Mr Bob Dylan " – would become as integral to the legacy of the event as the music itself . 
 = = Record company obstruction = = 
 On 23 August , press reports appeared citing " legal problems " as the reason behind the delaying of the much @-@ anticipated live album – problems that would turn out to be a disagreement between EMI @-@ owned Capitol Records ( Apple 's US distributor ) and Columbia Records ( Dylan 's label ) over who had a rightful claim to release the album . Columbia / CBS were eventually mollified with the granting of tape distribution rights in North America , and record and tape distribution in the rest of the world . Another stumbling block was Capitol 's insistence that they receive monetary compensation , thought to be around $ 400 @,@ 000 , for what the company perceived to be vast production and distribution costs for the boxed three @-@ record set . It was a position from which EMI chairman Bhaskar Menon refused to budge , while Harrison was equally adamant that , since all the artists were providing their services for free and Apple was supplying the album packaging at no charge , the record company " must give up something " also . 
 With the sound mix being completed in LA , Harrison spent most of September 1971 in New York working on the problematic film footage of the concert , before heading to London . There he attended the re @-@ opening of Apple Studio on 30 September and produced new signing Lon & Derrek Van Eaton 's debut single , as well as enduring a fruitless meeting with the British Treasury 's financial secretary – the latter activity in an attempt to have the government waive its standard purchase tax , and so keep the album affordable to record @-@ buyers . Harrison returned to New York on 5 October and announced that the Bangladesh live album would be issued during the following month . At this time , with concert bootlegs now on the market , posters were placed in record shops bearing the slogan : " Save a starving child . Don 't buy a bootleg ! " 
 In the fourth week of November – well into the lucrative Christmas sales period and close to four months after the concerts – Harrison voiced his frustration at the stalemate with Capitol on ABC 's late @-@ night chat show , The Dick Cavett Show . Harrison was on the program to promote the Raga documentary with Shankar , but after making a surprise guest performance with Gary Wright 's new band <unk> , he launched into a complaint about his US record company 's interference and threatened to take the whole album package to Columbia . With the outburst attracting unfavourable attention in the press , where Capitol were viewed as " profiteering on the backs of famine victims " , the company eventually backed down and agreed to release the album on Harrison 's terms . Of all the labels involved , only Columbia would make any money from The Concert for Bangladesh – 25 cents on every copy sold . Although none of these royalties went to the artist , Dylan and his record company were already benefiting from the exposure provided by the Bangladesh concerts , through the timely release of Bob Dylan 's Greatest Hits Vol . II . Of the other featured artists at the Concert for Bangladesh , the careers of both Preston ( A & M Records ) and Russell ( Shelter ) likewise prospered as a result of their participation , but their record companies imposed no such conditions on Apple and Capitol . In January 1972 , Melody Maker 's Richard Williams remarked in his Concert for Bangladesh album review : " Between them , Capitol and CBS have proved that , when it comes to awareness and enlightenment , the business is still several years behind the musicians . " 
 Once the album had been granted a release date , Apple 's financial terms ensured that as much money as possible would be raised from each copy sold , but that it would be difficult for retailers to profit financially . Some retailers responded with " shameless price gouging " on the three @-@ record set , apparently at Capitol 's recommendation . Following the protracted negotiations surrounding the live album 's distribution , Harrison 's disaffection with EMI / Capitol was a key factor behind his signing with A & M Records in January 1976 . 
 = = Album artwork = = 
 The album 's packaging was designed by Camouflage Productions partners Tom Wilkes and Barry Feinstein , the same team responsible for All Things Must Pass , rock music 's first boxed triple album . Along with Alan Pariser , both Wilkes and Feinstein had taken stills photographs at Madison Square Garden , at the soundcheck on 31 July and during the concerts the next day , the results filling the 64 @-@ page full @-@ colour booklet accompanying the original album . Also used as the Concert for Bangladesh movie poster , the album @-@ cover photograph – the " haunting " image of a malnourished young child sitting naked behind a wide , empty food bowl , author Bruce Spizer writes – was a still taken from news agency film footage and airbrushed extensively by Wilkes . Having created the provocative , headline @-@ filled picture sleeve for Harrison 's " Bangla Desh " single earlier in the year , Wilkes was keen to capture " real human compassion " in this cover and poster image . 
 The booklet 's back @-@ cover picture showed an open guitar case filled with food and medical supplies , below a copy of the cheque for the Madison Square Garden box @-@ office takings . Wilkes intended this image to convey a sense of hope , signifying the completion of the task that the participants had set out to achieve for the refugees from East Pakistan . 
 The three vinyl LPs and booklet were housed inside a deep orange @-@ coloured box . The 1991 CD release placed the cover photo on a white background , however , replicating the front of the original album booklet . As commentators noted in 1991 , the necessary downsizing to CD dimensions meant that much of the effectiveness of the booklet photography was lost , not least because the contents had also been trimmed down to just 36 pages . 
 Further changes to Camouflage 's design concept occurred for the 2005 CD remaster and DVD release . In 1971 , Capitol executives had been concerned that the cover image was too " depressing " and uncommercial , according to Jon Taplin , who served as production manager at the Madison Square concerts ; Harrison had been resolute , however , and so Wilkes 's design was used . In October 2005 , four years after Harrison 's death , the remastered Concert for Bangladesh releases appeared with a photo of him on the cover , although the special @-@ edition DVD retained the original image . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Concert for Bangladesh was released in the United States on 20 December 1971 , and in Britain on 10 January 1972 , with the same Apple Records catalogue number ( <unk> <unk> ) in both territories . The retail price for the lavishly packaged triple album was set at $ 12 @.@ 98 in America and an extraordinarily high £ 5 @.@ 50 in the UK , due to the purchase tax surcharge there . The prices drew some criticism , from Harrison for one , even if it was accepted that the proceeds were going to those in desperate need – or , as Beatles Forever author Nicholas Schaffner wrote in 1977 , to " a nation still viewed as the worst pocket of misery on earth " . Similarly , the relief project 's funds controversy and tax problems , which came to light shortly after the release of the live album , were a source of frustration and embarrassment to Harrison , but commentators have noted that these problems took nothing away from the " resounding success " of Harrison and Shankar 's Bangladesh relief project . 
 Despite the cost , the album was an immediate commercial success . In America , it spent six weeks at number 2 on the Billboard Top LPs chart , kept from the top by Don McLean 's American Pie , which was one of the top @-@ selling albums there for 1972 . On the other US charts , compiled by Cash Box and Record World , the live album peaked at number 2 and number 1 , respectively . In the UK , The Concert for Bangladesh became Harrison 's second number 1 album , after All Things Must Pass in early 1971 . The album was certified gold by the RIAA on 4 January 1972 for sales of over 500 @,@ 000 units . 
 In March 1973 , The Concert for Bangladesh 's significance was further underlined when it won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year . In Harrison 's absence , Ringo Starr attended the awards ceremony in Nashville and carried off a tray of Grammys , one for each of the featured performers . Author Peter Lavezzoli writes that , with the success of the live album and Saul Swimmer 's concert documentary , which opened in US cinemas in March 1972 , Indian classical music reached its largest Western audience to date through the Concert for Bangladesh . 
 = = = Reissue = = = 
 The Concert for Bangladesh was first issued on CD on 30 July 1991 in America and 19 August in Britain . It was presented as a two @-@ disc set , with significant editing of the breaks between songs . Having stated his disappointment in a 1988 interview that the album had been allowed to go out of print , Harrison recorded a promotional interview on the 20th anniversary of the concerts , to accompany the CD release . 
 Harrison was working on a reissue of the album and film before his death in November 2001 . Although the project was due for release the following year , the new editions were not made available until 24 October 2005 . The album was remastered for this release , with the heavily revised packaging credited to Wherefore Art ? , and the addition of Dylan 's afternoon @-@ show performance of " Love Minus Zero / No Limit " as a bonus track . The reissue coincided with the concert film 's first international release on DVD , accompanied by the Concert for Bangladesh Revisited with George Harrison and Friends making @-@ of documentary , which was directed by Claire Ferguson and co @-@ produced by Olivia Harrison . 
 Sales of the album and DVD continue to benefit the George Harrison Fund for UNICEF . In 2011 , as one of the fund 's projects to mark the 40th anniversary of the concerts and the live album 's release , and in conjunction with UNICEF 's " Month of Giving " campaign , the George Harrison Fund for UNICEF raised over $ 1 @.@ 2 million in emergency relief for children in <unk> and drought @-@ stricken areas of the Horn of Africa . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = On release and through the 1970s = = = 
 " If you buy only one LP in 1972 , make it this one , " Richard Williams wrote in Melody Maker , echoing the goodwill felt throughout the music press towards the Bangladesh relief project . Williams lavished praise on every one of the triple album 's seventeen selections : Ravi Shankar and Ali Akbar Khan 's interplay towards the end of " Bangla Dhun " made for a " marvellous opening " ( like " Charlie Parker trading licks with Johnny Hodges " , he noted ) ; Harrison 's trio of All Things Must Pass tracks were " [ u ] <unk> ... in some ways even better " than the originals , with Ringo Starr and Jim Keltner 's drumming " just breathtaking " on " Awaiting on You All " ; Billy Preston 's " That 's the Way God Planned It " was " feverishly exciting " , the audience " absolutely wild " by the end of the song . " Can all this be happening ? " Williams asked , even before moving on to the second of the three discs . 
 Rolling Stone magazine continued its near @-@ deification of the event as a defining moment in the evolution of rock ' n ' roll , with Jon Landau declaring : " The Concert for Bangla Desh is rock reaching for its manhood " , and as for Harrison : " the spirit he creates through his own demeanor is inspirational . From the personal point of view , Concert for Bangla Desh was George 's moment . He put it together ; and he pulled it off , and for that he deserves the admiration of all of us . " To the Rolling Stone writer , the highpoint of the album was the closing " Bangla Desh " , whose lyrics were no longer " an expression of intent but of an accomplished mission " . Landau had praise for the pacing and professionalism of the entire show , the only " incongruous " moment being Leon Russell 's " Jumpin ' Jack Flash " / " Youngblood " segment , since it was straight from the singer 's usual repertoire . 
 The NME 's Roy Carr and Tony Tyler were equally generous in their appraisal of " probably the greatest indoor rock ' n ' roll event ever held " ; to them , Bob Dylan 's five @-@ song set " easily justified " the album 's price tag . As at the time of the concerts , much was made by album reviewers of the change in Dylan 's singing voice , as well as his choice of songs , which harked back to the so @-@ called " protest period " of 1962 – 64 and the subsequent creative zenith that culminated in his Blonde on Blonde album ( 1966 ) . 
 Having attended the concerts six months before , Ed Kelleher of Circus magazine was relieved to discover that the live album didn 't just do justice to the " magic ... the sheer joy " of the event , but rather its music " practically jumps right out into your life " . After singling out as defining moments Dylan 's " Just Like a Woman " ( " it 's enough to make you cry and smile at once " ) , Russell 's medley and Harrison 's " Here Comes the Sun " , along with the talents of Shankar – " the most masterful and accomplished of them all " – Kelleher admitted to the futility of trying to identify " individual highlights " on an album that was " one consistent high " . In fact , almost every selection on the three @-@ record set was named as a highlight by one reviewer or another : Preston 's " That 's the Way God Planned It " coming as a " sheer delight " to Landau , Harrison 's " Something " especially " delicate and moving " to Playboy 's album reviewer , Dylan 's " A Hard Rain 's A @-@ Gonna Fall " resonating most with Nicholas Schaffner , while to Richard Williams , " Just Like a Woman " was " the masterpiece " . 
 " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " was a track that received significant attention , thanks to the guitar " duelling " between Harrison and his ailing friend , Eric Clapton . Writing in Rolling Stone Press ' Harrison tribute , Greg Kot views the performance as " a snapshot of early @-@ Seventies rock royalty " ; yet their joint soloing was about friendship , writes musical biographer Simon Leng , rather than the " six @-@ string ego battles " or " macho showdowns " so typical of that decade . Author Tom Moon describes their interplay as two guitarists " finish [ ing ] each other 's thoughts " . In The Village Voice 's inaugural Pazz & Jop poll , critics voted The Concert for Bangladesh the eighth best album out of all releases for that year . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 While the technical imperfections of the concert recordings were overlooked in 1972 – or even applauded for their adding to the " honesty " of the moment , in the case of Starr forgetting the lyrics to " It Don 't Come Easy " – reviewers of the first CD @-@ format album remarked on the relatively poor sound quality . In his review for AllMusic in 2001 , Bruce Eder noted the " less @-@ than @-@ perfect sound " while still viewing the album as a " unique live document showcasing Harrison near his best " . Another point of contention , though mainly among Harrison 's biographers , concerns Leon Russell . Alan Clayson bristles at the omnipresence of the Oklahoman singer and musician – " the epitome of the self @-@ satisfied sexism of the Delaney and Bonnie super @-@ sidemen " , Clayson writes – and the fact that his turn in the spotlight so blatantly became " The Leon Russell Show " . Leng likewise bemoans Russell 's " consciously extreme <unk> ' " , and finds his delivery pales beside the " unaffected naïveté " of Billy Preston and particularly the " knife @-@ edge emotions " of Harrison and Shankar , which only Dylan can match . In The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 1992 ) , Paul Evans gave the record three stars and preferred the Dylan set over Harrison 's songs . 
 The Concert for Bangladesh is continually viewed in a highly favourable light by critics in retrospective reviews . Among reviews of the 2005 reissue , Mojo described the remastered sound as " sumptuous " while AllMusic 's Richard Ginell wrote : " Hands down , this epochal concert ... was the crowning event of George Harrison 's public life , a gesture of great goodwill that captured the moment in history and , not incidentally , produced some rousing music as a permanent legacy . " Writing in Rolling Stone that year , Anthony DeCurtis said : " The Concert for Bangladesh is rightly enshrined in rock history as the model for Band Aid , Live Aid , Live 8 and every other superstar benefit concert of the last three decades ... In emphasizing the concert 's idealism , however , it 's easy to overlook what a musical gem this two @-@ disc set is . " Dan Ouellette of Billboard considered that " The star @-@ studded package holds up well as a live greatest @-@ hits collection " , before concluding : " But the revelation is the exhilarating concert lift @-@ off , the improv @-@ laced eastern Indian classical tune ' Bangla Dhun , ' featuring sitar master Ravi Shankar . " 
 In his entry for the album in 1 @,@ 000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die , Tom Moon advises his readers : " Pull this out whenever your faith in the power of music begins to wane . " The Concert for Bangladesh also features in Sean Egan 's 2006 book 100 Albums That Changed Music and in The Mojo Collection : The Greatest Albums of All Time . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Original release = = = 
 = = = 2005 remaster = = = 
 Disc one 
 The first disc contains the ten tracks from side one to side three of the original release . 
 Disc two 
 The second disc contains the nine tracks from side four to side six of the original release , together with : 
 = = = 2011 40th anniversary reissue = = = 
 A download @-@ only version of the album per the 2005 remaster , with a second bonus track exclusive to iTunes : 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credited as " The Artists " : 
 George Harrison – vocals , electric and acoustic guitars , backing vocals 
 Ravi Shankar – sitar 
 Bob Dylan – vocals , acoustic guitar , harmonica 
 Leon Russell – piano , vocals , bass , backing vocals 
 Ringo Starr – drums , vocals , tambourine 
 Billy Preston – Hammond organ , vocals 
 Eric Clapton – electric guitar 
 Ali Akbar Khan – sarod 
 Alla Rakha – tabla 
 Kamala Chakravarty – tambura 
 The Band : 
 Jesse Ed Davis – electric guitar 
 Klaus Voormann – bass 
 Jim Keltner – drums 
 Pete Ham – acoustic guitar 
 Tom Evans – twelve @-@ string acoustic guitar 
 Joey Molland – acoustic guitar 
 Mike Gibbins – tambourine , maracas 
 Don Preston – electric guitar , vocals ( on " Jumpin ' Jack Flash " / " Young Blood " and " Bangla Desh " only ) 
 Carl Radle – bass ( on " Jumpin ' Jack Flash " / " Young Blood " only ) 
 The Hollywood Horns : 
 Jim Horn – saxophones , horn arrangements 
 Chuck Findley – trumpet 
 Jackie Kelso – saxophones 
 Allan Beutler – saxophones 
 Lou McCreary – trombone 
 Ollie Mitchell – trumpet 
 The Backing Vocalists / Soul Choir : 
 Claudia Linnear , Jo Green , Jeanie Greene , Marlin Greene , Dolores Hall , Don Nix , Don Preston – backing vocals , percussion 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = = = Grammy Awards = = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = Lockdown ( 2005 ) = 
 Lockdown ( 2005 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion , which took place on April 24 , 2005 , at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the first event under the Lockdown chronology and the fourth event in the 2005 TNA PPV schedule . Eight professional wrestling matches and one pre @-@ show match were featured on the event 's card . Every match took place inside a six sided steel structure known as the Six Sides of Steel . As a result , Lockdown was the first @-@ ever all steel cage event held in professional wrestling . 
 The main event was for a NWA World Heavyweight Championship match at TNA 's Hard Justice PPV event between A.J. Styles and Abyss . Styles won the match , thus earning his title shot against then @-@ champion Jeff Jarrett at Hard Justice . TNA held the first @-@ ever Lethal Lockdown match during the event . It pitted Team Nash ( Diamond Dallas Page , Sean Waltman , and B.G. James ) against Team Jarrett ( Jeff Jarrett , Monty Brown , and The Outlaw ) , which Team Nash won . Kevin Nash was originally supposed to take part in the match but was removed due to sickness and was replaced with James . The TNA X Division Championship defense by Christopher Daniels against Elix Skipper was another highly promoted match for the event . Daniels won the bout and successfully retained the title . Jeff Hardy versus Raven in a Six Sides of Steel Tables match was featured on the card , which Hardy won . 
 This event marked the introduction of the Lethal Lockdown and Xscape matches , which became annually held matches at future Lockdown events . During the event , Chris Candido received an injury during his tag team match with Lance Hoyt against Apolo and Sonny Siaki , which later led to Candido 's death from a blood clot as a result of surgery for the injury . Jason Clevett of the professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer rated the event a 6 out of 10 , two marks lower than the 2006 event 's ranking by Chris Sokol . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 TNA announced in a January 24 , 2005 , press release that they planned to host a PPV titled Lockdown on April 24 , 2005 at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . In late @-@ February 2005 , In Demand ran a preview and stated that there would be two steel cage matches held at Lockdown . A Six Man Tag Team match that featured Sean Waltman was thrown around prior to the event . TNA created a section for the event on their official website before it started . On the April 8 , 2005 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! , Director of Authority ( DOA ) Dusty Rhodes announced that all matches at Lockdown would be held inside a six sided steel structure known as the Six Sides of Steel . TNA followed up with a press release through their website that confirmed this . TNA issued a parental advisory a few days after the announcement due to violence associated with steel cage matches . A thirty @-@ minute pre @-@ show was planned before the spectacle that featured a Three Way Tag Team match between 3Live Kru ( Ron Killings and Konnan ) , David Young and Lex Lovett , and The Naturals ( Andy Douglas and Chase Stevens ) . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Lockdown featured eight professional wrestling matches and one pre @-@ show match that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and that culminated into a wrestling match or series of matches . Every match was contested inside the Six Sides of Steel . 
 Before the announcement that all matches be held inside the Six Sides of Steel , TNA advertised that only two would be under such rules . These two matches later became the headlining bouts for the card . The first was announced on the March 25 episode of Impact ! as Team Nash ( Kevin Nash , Sean Waltman , and Diamond Dallas Page ) versus Team Jarrett ( Jeff Jarrett , Monty Brown , and The Outlaw ) . Abyss versus A.J. Styles for a future NWA World Heavyweight Championship match was the second announced on the April 1 episode of Impact ! , which became the main event of the gathering . The storyline behind Styles versus Abyss began at TNA 's Against All Odds PPV event on February 13 , where Abyss defeated Jeff Hardy in a Full Metal Mayhem match to earn a future NWA World Heavyweight Championship title shot . During a backstage segment on the February 18 episode of Impact ! , Abyss gave the title match contract to Traci , wanting it given to DOA Dusty Rhodes as she was trying to become Rhodes ' personal assistant at the time . On the March 25 episode of Impact ! , Abyss tried to retrieve his contract from now co @-@ assistant to Rhodes , Traci . This led to a brawl with Styles as he tried to defend Traci and co @-@ assistant Trinity as they fled in fear from Abyss . The match was then announced on the April 1 episode of Impact ! . Rhodes announced on the April 8 episode of Impact ! that the winner of the bout would get their title shot at TNA 's Hard Justice PPV event on May 15 . 
 Team Nash versus Team Jarrett began on the March 18 episode of Impact ! when Nash requested a six man tag team cage match at Lockdown from Rhodes . The following week , Rhodes granted the request and officially announced it for the Lockdown card . On the April 8 episode of Impact ! , Rhodes proclaimed that the encounter was now a Lethal Lockdown match , in which weapons were legal and one wrestler from each team started the match . Afterwards , members from each team entered at time intervals until all wrestlers were involved in the bout so a pinfall or submission could occur . The storyline behind this encounter revolved around Jarrett and his reign as NWA World Heavyweight Champion . At Against All Odds , Jarrett successfully defended the title against Nash , which Waltman and The Outlaw interfered with by aiding Nash and Jarrett , respectively . At TNA 's previous PPV event Destination X on March 13 , Jarrett defended the title against Page , in which Brown turned on Page by helping Jarrett retain the title . 
 Elix Skipper challenged Christopher Daniels for the TNA X Division Championship at Lockdown . The build to this encounter began on the March 18 episode of Impact ! , when Skipper interrupted Daniels after a match and hinted at a future encounter . On the March 25 episode of Impact ! , TNA commentator Mike Tenay announced that a four way elimination match involving Chris Sabin , Michael Shane , Skipper , and Petey Williams would be held on the April 1 episode of Impact ! to determine Daniels ' opponent for the title at Lockdown . Skipper went on to win the match the following week , earning the opportunity to challenge for the title . The main surrounding storyline was that Daniels and Skipper used to be tag team partners as part of the group Triple X , which disbanded after losing a Six Sides of Steel Cage match against America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) at TNA 's Turning Point PPV event on December 5 , 2004 . Jeff Hardy fought Raven in a Six Sides of Steel Tables match at Lockdown . On the March 25 episode of Impact ! , Raven offered Hardy an alliance , which Hardy turned down . On the April 1 episode of Impact ! , Raven attacked Hardy during an incident between Hardy and Abyss . Rhodes announced that the two would face at Lockdown in a Six Sides of Steel Tables match on the April 8 episode of Impact ! . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Show = = = 
 Prior to the event 's commencement , TNA held a thirty @-@ minute pre @-@ show . It featured a Three Way Tag Team match between the 3Live Kru ( Ron Killings and Konnan ) , the team of David Young and Lex Lovett , and The Naturals ( Andy Douglas and Chase Stevens ) , who were accompanied by Chris Candido , which lasted 6 minutes and 34 seconds . 3Live Kru were the victors in the contest after Killings gained the pinfall by forcing Young 's face into the mat . 
 = = = On @-@ air employees = = = 
 The event featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . Mike Tenay and Don West were the commentators for the telecast . Jeremy Borash and David Penzer were ring announcers for the event . Andrew Thomas , Rudy Charles , and Mark " Slick " Johnson participated as referees for the encounters . Besides employees who appeared in a wrestling role , Kevin Nash , Coach D 'Amore , A @-@ 1 , Traci , Trinity , and DOA Dusty Rhodes all appeared on camera , either in backstage or in ringside segments . TNA announced via their official website a few days prior to the event that Kevin Nash would be unable to appear in the Lethal Lockdown match due to a staph infection . This was explained at the start of the telecast , and DOA Rhodes would announce Nash 's replacement later during the event . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The show opened with a Six Sides of Steel Tag Team Cage match that pitted the team of Apolo and Sonny Siaki against Chris Candido and Lance Hoyt , which lasted 6 minutes and 58 seconds . This was originally promoted as a bout between Hoyt and Apolo but was changed at the event . During the opening minutes , Candido suffered a bad fall and was helped to the backstage area . Siaki and Apolo won the contest after Siaki performed a splash from the top of a padded turnbuckle on Hoyt . 
 Dustin Rhodes fought Bobby Roode , who was accompanied by Coach D 'Amore and A @-@ 1 , in what was billed as a Prince of Darkness match next . The duration of the bout was 15 minutes and 20 seconds . In this contest , there would be three falls , but the third fall would be contested under blindfold match rules , in which both wrestlers wore hoods over their heads . Roode earned the first fall with a roll @-@ up pin , and Dustin earned the second one when he forced Roode face @-@ first into the mat from the top rope . During the third fall , both wrestlers wore black hoods that impaired their vision , causing Dustin to accidentally knock the referee unconscious in storyline terms . Due to this , D 'Amore opened the cage door and passed Roode a steel folding chair . Roode then attempted to bash Dustin with it but instead mistakenly struck D 'Amore . Dustin then grabbed the chair and struck Roode with it , which gave him the pinfall as the referee came to . 
 TNA held the first @-@ ever Xscape match between Shocker , Michael Shane ( who was accompanied Trinity ) , Sonjay Dutt , and Chris Sabin in the following bout . It lasted 15 minutes and 42 seconds . In this match , the four competitors fought until two were eliminated by pinfall or submission ; the two remaining wrestlers then fought to escape from the cage , with the first to do so the winner . Dutt was the first wrestler eliminated after Shocker slammed him into the steel cage . After this elimination , Trinity climbed up to the top of the cage and performed a backflip off the top onto the three wrestlers below . Traci then entered the arena and forced Trinity to the backstage area . The second eliminated was Shane , after Sabin forced him back @-@ first into the mat with his signature maneuver the Cradle Shock . Sabin and Shocker remained as they both fought to escape the cage , which Shocker did first to win the contest . 
 The fourth encounter was a Six Sides of Steel Tables match between Jeff Hardy and Raven , which lasted 11 minutes and 51 seconds . In a tables match , two opponents fight until one is forced through a table by the other . At one point during the contest , Hardy laid Raven on a table then ascended to the top of the cage . Hardy followed by jumping off and performing a front @-@ flip towards Raven , who moved out of the way and caused Hardy to crash through the table . Due to not being forced through by Raven , the match continued until Hardy laid Raven on a stack of four tables . Hardy then jumped off the top of the cage onto Raven in a seated position , forcing him through all the tables and winning the encounter . 
 America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) defended the NWA World Tag Team Championship against Team Canada ( Eric Young and Petey Williams ) , who were accompanied by A @-@ 1 , in a Six Sides of Steel Strap match next . It lasted 14 minutes even . In a strap match , wrestlers are attached by a strap for the duration of the match , but they mainly used it as a weapon . AMW retained the titles after forcing Williams into the mat by performing their signature maneuver , the Death Sentence . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The TNA X Division Championship was defended in a bout that lasted 15 minutes and 28 seconds between then @-@ champion Christopher Daniels and Elix Skipper . During the encounter , Daniels performed his signature backflip , the Best Moonsault Ever , on Skipper , which earned him a near @-@ fall . Skipper later jumped off the top of the cage and bashed Daniels in the back of the head with his forearm . This also gained Skipper a near @-@ fall . Daniels went on to perform his signature maneuver , the Angel Wings , on Skipper , which forced him face @-@ first into the mat and allowed him to gain the pinfall and to retain the title . 
 Team Nash ( Diamond Dallas Page , Sean Waltman , and an unknown member ) fought Team Jarrett ( Jeff Jarrett , Monty Brown , and The Outlaw ) in the first @-@ ever three @-@ on @-@ three Lethal Lockdown match , which ran 15 minutes and 35 seconds . Waltman and Jarrett started the match by fighting through the crowd before entering the cage . After five minutes , The Outlaw joined the match and helped Jarrett attack Waltman . Diamond Dallas Page entered the match two minutes later and attacked Jarrett and The Outlaw with a cane . Following another two minutes , Brown joined the fray , finished out Team Jarrett , and threw Waltman into the cage wall . The final member of Team Nash was revealed after the final two minutes , as B.G. James was thrown into the mix that allowed a pinfall or submission to occur . Brown gained a near @-@ fall for Team Jarrett on James after forcing him into a trash can with his signature maneuver , the Pounce . Eventually , Waltman performed a move called a hurricanrana on Brown , leading to the pinfall and victory . 
 The main event was between A.J. Styles and Abyss , in which the winner received an NWA World Heavyweight Championship match at Hard Justice . Its duration was 18 minutes even . The match began on the outside as Styles performed a front @-@ flip onto Abyss , who was standing in the doorway of the cage . Later , as Styles was about to enter the cage , Abyss slammed the door twice into Styles , while the second door slam the second hit him in the face and caused him to crash to the floor and to bleed from the forehead . During the contest , Abyss used a steel chain as a weapon to help open up Styles ' wound more . At one point , Abyss opened a bag and poured a large number of thumbtacks onto the mat , then proceeding to try to slam Styles into them . Styles countered and slammed Abyss face @-@ first into the tacks instead with his signature maneuver , the Styles Clash . Near the end of the contest , Styles climbed the steel cage and stood on the top , but Abyss grabbed and threw the referee into the cage wall , causing Styles to fall and barely hang on . Abyss then followed by climbing the cage and by hanging Styles by the neck for a brief time with the steel chain . Then , Styles performed a sunset flip powerbomb and slammed Abyss into the tacks back @-@ first . He followed by covering for the three count , winning of the encounter and earning his future title match . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A total of 775 people attended the event . Canadian Online Explorer writer Jason Clevett rated the entire event a 6 out of 10 , which was lower than the 8 out of 10 given to the 2006 Lockdown event by Chris Sokol . A rating was not given to TNA 's previous event Destination X , but Clevett gave a rating of 7 out of 10 in his review of TNA 's Against All Odds . Compared to rival World Wrestling Entertainment 's WrestleMania 21 PPV event held on April 4 , Lockdown was rated lower , Dale Plummer and Nick Tylwalk gave WrestleMania a 7 out of 10 . Regarding the overall event , Clevett felt the all cage match format was " too much of a good thing " . He went on to state that by the end of the event he " was tired of seeing the cage " , but that Styles and Abyss " quickly brought my interest back with a brutal and fun bout that ended off the show on a positive note " . When speaking of the TNA X Division Championship match , Clevett wrote that he felt it " was technically a very good match " , but he " expected more considering the talent involved " . However , he felt that the psychological aspect was " excellent " regarding the two former Triple X partners ' counters of each other 's moves . Clevett gave the highest match rating of 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 to the main event , while he gave the lowest rating of 2 out of 10 to the Prince of Darkness match . He gave the Lethal Lockdown match a 5 out of 10 , while he gave the X Division Title match an 8 out of 10 . 
 Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch rated the main event and the X Division Championship match 3 and a half stars out of 5 , while he rated the Lethal Lockdown match a 2 and three @-@ fourths out of 5 . He gave the lowest ranking to the Prince of Darkness match , at a fourth of a star . Keller commented on the main event as not being " bad at all , but not quite at a four @-@ star level " . He felt that if there had not been " any other cage matches or stunt bumps , it might have been four @-@ stars @-@ plus " . Regarding the Lethal Lockdown match , Keller believed the bout " felt rushed " . As for the X Division Championship defense , Keller stated that it was a " good match " . When speaking on Candido 's injury , Keller stated it was " absolutely brutal looking " and felt it was an " obvious full snapping of his ankle bone " . 411Mania 's Ronnie <unk> rated Lockdown an overall 8 out of 10 . The main event was given 4 and three @-@ fourths stars out of 5 , the Lethal Lockdown match 2 and a half stars , and the X Division Championship defense 3 and a half stars . <unk> felt the event " just seemed to get better and better as it went on " , but felt it was a " pretty average PPV leading up into the main event " . On August 19 , 2005 , the event was released on DVD by TNA Home Video . A DVD boxset called " TNA Anthology : The Epic Set " , including Lockdown , TNA 's November 2004 Victory Road PPV event , and the 2004 Turning Point event was also released on September 20 , 2005 . TNA released a DVD counting down the top 50 moments in their history in 2007 , and Lockdown was the first all steel cage PPV listed at number 23 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After Lockdown on the April 29 episode of Impact ! , DOA Dusty Rhodes announced that A.J. Styles would face Jeff Jarrett for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship at Hard Justice with Tito Ortiz as the Special Guest Referee . Styles went on to Hard Justice to defeat Jarrett and win the championship . Styles held the title until TNA 's Slammiversary PPV event on June 19 , where he lost the title in a five @-@ man King of the Mountain match to Raven , which also involved Abyss , Sean Waltman , and Monty Brown . Raven continued his feud with Jeff Hardy following Lockdown . On the May 13 episode of Impact ! , it was announced that Raven would face Hardy in a Clockwork Orange House of Fun match at Hard Justice . Hardy ended up not appearing at the event ; Raven instead faced and defeated Waltman in the encounter . Raven then replaced Jarrett in the King of the Mountain match at Slammiversary , where he won the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . 
 TNA held a Twenty @-@ Man Gauntlet for the Gold at Hard Justice to determine the number one contender to the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . The match was announced on the April 29 episode of Impact ! . Abyss , Bobby Roode , Zach Gowen , Eric Young , Cassidy Riley , Elix Skipper , Shark Boy , A @-@ 1 , Chris Sabin , Petey Williams , Sonny Siaki , Lance Hoyt , Michael Shane , Jerrelle Clarke , Mikey Batts , The Outlaw , Trytan , Ron Killings , Apolo , and B.G. James all participated in the bout . Abyss pinned Killings to win the contest . 
 Following Lockdown , Shocker was named number one contender to the TNA X Division Championship . On the April 29 episode of Impact ! , Christopher Daniels ' defense of the TNA X Division Championship against Shocker was promoted for Hard Justice . Shocker failed to win the championship at the event . America 's Most Wanted lost the NWA World Tag Team Championship on the April 29 episode of Impact ! to The Naturals , who were aided by Chris Candido . On the May 6 episode of Impact ! it was announced The Naturals would defend the tag team championship against AMW at Hard Justice . The Naturals retained the titles over AMW at the PPV event . 
 = = = Death of Chris Candido = = = 
 Besides Chris Candido suffering a leg injury during his tag team match , Abyss also suffered a dislocated shoulder during the main event against A.J. Styles . Abyss ' injury was taken care of backstage after the event , but Candido was diagnosed with a dislocated ankle , broken tibia , and a broken fibula that required surgery . Candido had an operation on April 25 to have a plate , screws , and pins placed in his ankle to fix the problem . Candido was reported to be sidelined for 2 to 3 months . According to reports , Candido suffered the injury from taking a dropkick by Sonny Siaki and landing on his leg improperly . After the surgery , he hoped to be recovered in 6 to 8 weeks . On April 28 , Candido was rushed to the hospital after he collapsed where he died a short time later . Cause of death was released by his brother Johnny afterwards as a blood clot due to the surgery a few days prior . TNA released a public statement on April 29 regarding the subject . TNA paid tribute to Candido on the April 29 episode of Impact ! as well as at TNA 's Hard Justice PPV event . The April 29 episode of Impact ! opened and ended with a memorial to Candido . At Hard Justice , a ten @-@ bell salute was held while a photo of Candido , a pair of boots , and one @-@ half of the NWA World Tag Team Championship positioned on a steel chair sat in the center of the ring . In TNA 's 50 Greatest Moments DVD , Candido 's aiding The Naturals to win the NWA World Tag Team Championship was listed as number 10 . A portion of the Lockdown DVD sale profits were donated by TNA to the Chris Candido Memorial Fund . TNA originally planned to remove Candido 's match from the DVD , but were given the blessing of his family to include it on the publication . A tribute to Candido was included on the DVD by TNA . 
 = = Results = = 
 Xscape match 
 1 . ^ 
 Lethal Lockdown entrances 
 2 . ^ 
 = Silver Reef , Utah = 
 Silver Reef is a ghost town in Washington County , Utah , United States , about 15 miles ( 24 km ) northeast of St. George and 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of Leeds . Silver Reef was established after John Kemple , a prospector from Nevada , discovered a vein of silver in a sandstone formation in 1866 . At first , geologists were uncertain about Kemple 's find because silver is not usually found in sandstone . In 1875 , two bankers from Salt Lake City sent William Barbee to the site to stake mining claims . He staked 21 claims , and an influx of miners came to work Barbee 's claims and to stake their own . To accommodate the miners , Barbee established a town called Bonanza City . Property values there were high , so several miners settled on a ridge to the north of it and named their settlement " Rockpile " . The town was renamed Silver Reef after silver mines in nearby Pioche closed and businessmen arrived . 
 By 1879 , about 2 @,@ 000 people were living in Silver Reef . The town had a mile @-@ long Main Street with many businesses , among them a Wells Fargo office , the Rice Building , and the Cosmopolitan Restaurant . Although adjacent to many settlements with a majority of Mormon residents , the town never had a meeting house for Latter @-@ day Saints , only a Catholic church . In 1879 , a fire destroyed several businesses , but the residents rebuilt them . Mines were gradually closed , most of them by 1884 , as the worldwide price of silver dropped . By 1901 , most of the buildings in town had either been demolished or moved to Leeds . 
 In 1916 , mining operations in Silver Reef resumed under the direction of Alex Colbath , who organized the area 's mines into the Silver Reef Consolidated Mining Company . These mines were purchased by American Smelting and Refining Company in 1928 , but the company did minimal work as a result of the Great Depression . The Western Gold & Uranium Corporation purchased Silver Reef 's mines in 1948 , and in 1951 , they began mining uranium in the area . These operations did not last long either , and the Western Gold & Uranium Corporation sold their mines to the 5M Corporation in 1979 . Today , the Wells Fargo office , the Cosmopolitan Restaurant , the Rice Building , and numerous foundations and walls remain in the town site , and a few dozen homes have been constructed in the area . 
 = = Geology and geography = = 
 The sandstone formations from which Silver Reef gets its name were formed when tectonic stresses forced long , longitudinally aligned sections of Navajo Sandstone to buckle and stand on their sides , giving them the appearance of ocean reefs . Over long periods of time silver ore , sediments , and vegetation were carried in water runoff from the Chinle Formation to the White , Buckeye , and East reefs . The ore settled as deposits and the vegetation became petrified . The Silver Reef Mining District 's geologic resources consist mainly of silver deposits , with smaller deposits of copper , gold , lead , and uranium oxide . Iron oxide deposits in the soil rocks cause a red coloration , and dinosaur tracks from the early Jurassic period have been found in the area . 
 Silver Reef is close to the western border of the Colorado Plateau and about 15 miles ( 24 km ) northeast of St. George and 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of Leeds . Dixie National Forest , Leeds Creek , the White Reef , and the Pine Valley Mountain Wilderness lie directly west of Silver Reef . The Pine Valley Mountain Wilderness has sage steppe , mountain brush , pinyon pine , coniferous trees , and ponderosa pine . Interstate 15 and <unk> are 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) and 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) east of Silver Reef , respectively . <unk> is 9 @.@ 5 miles ( 15 @.@ 3 km ) north of Silver Reef , and Quail Creek State Park , the ghost town of Harrisburg , the Buckeye Reef , and Red Cliffs Recreation Area are south of Silver Reef . The elevation of Red Cliffs Recreation Area is between 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) and 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Silver Reef is located in one of the driest and hottest parts of the state of Utah ; summer temperatures often rise above 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) . Temperatures of 50 ° F ( 10 ° C ) or above can occur during the winter , but nighttime winter temperatures occasionally drop below 0 ° F ( − 18 ° C ) . Silver Reef receives about 12 inches ( 30 cm ) of precipitation annually . It is not unusual to see an inch or more of snow in the winter . July has the warmest average temperature , 99 ° F ( 37 ° C ) , and December is coldest , with an average temperature of 53 ° F ( 12 ° C ) . The highest recorded temperature was 114 ° F ( 46 ° C ) , in July 2001 , and the lowest recorded temperature was − 2 ° F ( − 19 ° C ) , in January 1963 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Silver Reef was first settled in 1875 ; by the 1880 Census , 1 @,@ 046 people were living there , and a local census taken in 1884 gave a population of 1 @,@ 500 . By 1890 , after most of the mines had closed , the population had dropped to 177 , and by 1900 , only lessees of the mines were living there . In 1916 , Alex Colbath organized the Silver Reef Consolidated Mining Company . Several miners moved in to work for Colbath , who lived in the town with his wife , <unk> , until the 1950s . After the <unk> ' departure , Silver Reef was completely abandoned . Subdivision of the land , planned in the 1960s , was finalized by 1980 . During the Census of 1990 , 50 people lived in Silver Reef , and today Silver Reef is considered a part of Leeds . 
 = = History = = 
 The Silver Reef area was first inhabited by Anasazi Native Americans between about 200 AD and 1300 AD . The Anasazi were nomads who followed the migration of the animals they hunted , typically deer , mountain sheep , elk , and jackrabbits . They were also farmers and gardeners , growing corn , wheat , rye , and barley . Many were potters , and pottery can be found in abandoned villages . The Anasazi usually constructed temporary dwellings out of sticks and leaves , often using bark for the roofs . Occasionally they built more permanent dwellings out of rocks , usually along the side of a mountain , often large enough to accommodate several families . Storage pits were often placed behind the rock dwellings . Settlements were typically small , as food was scarce . A group of Virgin Anasazi lived in what is now the Red Cliffs Anasazi Site in Red Cliffs Recreation Area . 
 Silver was discovered in the area in the 1860s . One commonly accepted story is that a prospector named John Kemple came to the area in 1866 from Montana . While staying at the home of Orson B. Adams in the settlement of Harrisburg , Kemple decided to do some prospecting , and soon located a vein of silver a few hundred yards southwest of the home . He did not find enough ore to interest him , so he left for Nevada . Five years later , Kemple returned to the Silver Reef area , staked a few mining claims , and organized them under the Union Mining District . The Union Mining District was abandoned , but in 1874 , Kemple returned with a group of miners , reorganized the claims under the Harrisburg Mining District , and began developing a mine . Kemple later became discouraged with his claims and sold them . 
 According to a less accepted story , a man known as " <unk> " Murphy , an assayer from Pioche , Nevada , was brought a piece of a grindstone made of sandstone from the Silver Reef area by miners in Pioche . After performing tests on the sample , Murphy stated that it contained over $ 200 of silver per ton . After some investigation , Murphy discovered that the samples had come from the area that was to become Silver Reef . There is no record of Murphy ever staking a claim , but he did allegedly attract the attention of miners . 
 Geologists and other miners refused at first to believe the news that silver had been found in sandstone . When brought an actual sample from the area , the Smithsonian Institution called it an " interesting fake " . In 1875 , news of the silver discovery reached the Walker brothers , well @-@ known bankers from Salt Lake City . They hired William T. Barbee , who had previously staked mining claims in Ophir , to stake claims on their behalf . He staked 21 claims and published an article on the claims in The Salt Lake Tribune . In the article , Barbee mentioned that the area had " an abundance of rich silver mines " . This set off a silver rush , and by late 1875 , Barbee had established a town called Bonanza City . Several businessmen then came into the area , inflating property values . Many miners and businessmen looking for inexpensive land set up a tent city north of Bonanza City and called it " Rockpile " . When the mines in nearby Pioche were closed in November 1875 , many of the miners and business owners who had worked there came into the area of " Rockpile " in what is known as the " Pioche Silver Stampede " , and the name of the settlement was changed to Silver Reef . As construction of the St. George LDS Temple ended in mid @-@ 1877 , labor opportunities for the workers became available in Silver Reef . Pine Valley Mills and Mount Trumbull in the Arizona Strip supplied most of the lumber used to construct the buildings . During its first year , Silver Reef did not have a smelter ; as a result , the silver ore mined in Silver Reef was taken to Pioche and Salt Lake City for smelting . 
 Immediately following the initial silver rush , a town site was platted and the town was built . The first permanent business building established in Silver Reef was a store at the intersection of the roads from the Buckeye , White , and East reefs . By 1878 , the town 's business district consisted of a hotel , boarding houses , nine stores , six saloons , five restaurants , a bank , two dance halls , a newspaper called The Silver Echo ( which later became the Silver Reef Miner ) , and eight dry goods stores . Two cemeteries , one Catholic and one Protestant , were located south of Silver Reef 's business district . Most of the businesses in Silver Reef were situated along a mile @-@ long Main Street . The mining district consisted of 37 mines and five stamp mills : the Christy , Stormont , Leeds , Buckeye and Barbee & Walker mills . Although it was surrounded by settlements with large Mormon populations , the town never had a Mormon meeting house . A Catholic church was the only church located within the town . After the First Transcontinental Railroad was completed in 1869 , many of the Chinese workers who had been hired to build it were out of work . Some returned to China , but others remained in Utah . A group of 250 of these workers set up a Chinatown in a level area just south of Silver Reef . Silver Reef 's Chinatown had a Chinese mayor and several businesses . By 1879 , Silver Reef 's population had reached 2 @,@ 000 , and the town also had a horse race track , a brewery , and a brass band . Shooting matches among members of the Silver Reef Rifle Club and sometimes residents of nearby towns took place on the horse race track . 
 Although most of the residents of Silver Reef were not Mormon , they had good relations with residents of the nearby Mormon settlements . A lot of the cotton and other agricultural items produced in the area were transported by wagon to Silver Reef . Many of the town 's buildings were constructed by Mormon labor workers . Reverend Lawrence Scanlan was invited to say Mass in the St. George Tabernacle of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints before the Catholic church in Silver Reef was constructed . To assist Scanlan , the Mormon choir learned Latin chants . When politics were involved , however , these good relations were forgotten . Most Mormons were members of the People 's Party , and most people in Silver Reef were members of the Liberal Party . As Silver Reef grew , the townspeople wanted to change the county seat of Washington County from St. George to Silver Reef . This alarmed the members of the People 's Party , the main figures in the territorial legislature . The legislature moved the county line eastward in 1882 ; this maintained the People 's Party majority in Washington County by transferring such Mormon farming communities as Grafton , Rockville , and Springdale from Kane County to Washington County . 
 Although it had good relations with other towns , Silver Reef had the usual labor disputes between mining camp wage laborers and mine owners . After a major dispute with the Stormont Mining Company , the Silver Reef Miners Union was formed to support wages . Gambling , prostitution , and shootouts were also commonplace . One shootout involved Town Marshal Johnny Diamond and mine guard Jack Truby . Tensions between Diamond and Truby temporarily shut down the Kinner mine . Truby was hired by Colonel Enos Wall , foreman and owner of the Kinner , to guard the mine until told otherwise . Diamond went to the Kinner mine to serve the closure warrant , but Truby refused to allow Diamond into the mine , and forced Diamond to leave the property immediately . 
 The gunfight started during court proceedings in the back room of a saloon . Diamond and Truby argued about Truby wearing his hat inside , and continued the argument outside . When Diamond asked for Truby 's gun , Truby shot at Diamond , Diamond returned fire , and both men died . An inquest on both men , held in the saloon , found that the bodies each contained bullet wounds from the .41 caliber revolvers that were used , and powder burns caused by the proximity of the shootout . Truby also had .45 caliber bullet wounds in his back , indicating that somebody else had shot him during the shootout . 
 Another shootout occurred between Henry Clark and Sykes Griffen on December 1 , 1878 , at Cassidy 's Silver Reef Saloon . Although it is not known exactly what happened , it is believed that Griffen , a faro dealer at the saloon , and Clark , a regular patron , had previously argued over gambling matters . The shooting began when Griffen argued with Clark about a bet they had made . After arguing for several minutes , Griffen pulled a pistol on Clark and shot him . Several witnesses said that Clark pulled a pistol on Griffen and shot him , while other witnesses said that after Clark was shot , other patrons in the saloon , including Clark 's father , beat and shot Griffen . 
 Another instance of murder occurred on October 3 , 1880 , when Thomas Forrest stabbed Michael Carbis . Carbis , the foreman of the California mine , had fired Forrest the day before on account of his violent nature . The murder occurred near the Buckeye boarding house . Forrest initially had a pistol , but he put it away and drew a knife instead when he got within a few feet of Carbis . Carbis died soon after the stab wound was inflicted . Silver Reef 's residents were angered by the murder and soon lynch threats were delivered . Forrest , who had been arrested soon after the murder had been committed , was transferred to the jail in St. George for his own safety . Prior to the moving of Forrest , a lynch mob gathered and followed the sheriff 's escort to the St. George jail . Once there , they overpowered the sheriff , took Forrest out of his cell , and tried to hang him on a telegraph pole . When the pole broke , they took him to a cottonwood tree and hung him there . The residents of St. George were shocked at the sight of Forrest 's hanging , and one man was reputed to have said , " I have observed that tree growing there for the last 25 years . This is the first time I have ever seen it bearing fruit . " 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 On May 30 , 1879 , fire was discovered under a restaurant . Hundreds of Silver Reef 's residents threw buckets of water from nearby Leeds Creek on the fire and put wet blankets on the adjacent business buildings , but the fire spread to the Harrison House Hotel , one of the town 's most prominent buildings . The fire destroyed several other businesses along Main Street before it was finally extinguished . The Salt Lake Tribune reported that Silver Reef had been " <unk> " , and that a state of panic was felt even after the fire had been extinguished . 
 Silver Reef 's residents rebuilt the businesses that had been destroyed , but the town soon began to decline . In 1881 , the Stormont Mining Company and the Barbee & Walker Mining Company had to decrease wages from $ 4 per day to $ 3 @.@ 50 per day in all of their mines except the Savage mine ( a Stormont property ) . In response to the decrease in wages , the Silver Reef Miners Union was formed . In February 1881 , union members began talking about striking the mines , and as word of this potential strike spread , the Stormont Mining Company discharged those of its miners who were part of the Miners Union . In response , the discharged union members escorted the company 's superintendent , Washington Allen , out of Silver Reef . Allen immediately went to the Second District Court in Beaver and filed a lawsuit against the union members . Before they went to court , the union members held a meeting and decided to shut down the Savage mine . Led by Matthew O 'Loughlin , the president of the Silver Reef Miners Union , they walked through Silver Reef in rows of two , and , upon arriving at the Savage mine , O 'Loughlin and nine other men went into the hoisting works and ordered the engineer on duty to shut down the pumps that kept water from the water table out of the mine . After the pumps were shut down , the group of ten went into the Savage mine and ordered everyone out . 
 A few days later , the sheriff of St. George , accompanied by a posse of 30 men , arrested 25 members of the Miners Union , including Matthew O 'Loughlin . As Silver Reef 's jail was too small to hold all 25 prisoners , most of them were jailed in the Rice Building . The Rice Building could not hold all of the prisoners , so a line was drawn around the building , and anyone who crossed the line was threatened with shooting . The Miners Union members were transferred to Beaver , where they were tried for riot , conspiracy , and false imprisonment . Thirteen of the members were sentenced to imprisonment ; three were bailed out , while ten were sent to the Utah Territorial Penitentiary . Matthew O 'Loughlin was sentenced to twenty days in prison and was charged a $ 75 fine . 
 A few years after the strike , the world 's silver market dropped , causing the foreclosure of many of the mines . To compensate for the drop in prices , the mines ' stockholders reduced the wages of the miners . Instead of striking again , the miners accepted this . In addition , the miners inadvertently dug below the water table , and the mine shafts began filling with water faster than it could be pumped out . By 1884 , most of the mines were idle or closed ; the last was officially closed in 1891 , although lessees of the mines continued to operate them past that year . Many merchants went bankrupt and left town . The Silver Reef mines produced about $ 8 million worth of silver ore . Between 1891 and 1901 , another $ 250 @,@ 000 worth was mined . Several people attempted to restart mining operations in 1898 , 1909 , 1916 , and 1950 , but none of these attempts were successful . After Silver Reef 's mines were closed , many of the buildings were purchased for their lumber and building stone . One buyer dismantled the building he bought and discovered $ 10 @,@ 000 in gold coins . News of the find spread quickly , and most of the buildings in Silver Reef were demolished in hopes of discovering more gold , but none was found . 
 The Silver Reef Consolidated Mining Company was organized in 1916 by Alex Colbath , who owned most of the area 's mines . In 1928 , American Smelting and Refining Company purchased its mines , and in 1929 they sank a three @-@ compartment shaft on the White Reef . This new mine was connected with the flooded Savage mine , and the water was pumped out . Minimal work was done after that , however , as there was not enough ore to keep the operation profitable during the Great Depression . Ownership of the mines was then passed back to Alex Colbath , but in 1948 the Western Gold and Uranium Corporation purchased the claims from Colbath , and in 1951 they mined the sandstone for uranium oxide deposits . The first shipment of uranium oxide came from the Ann 's Pride mine , and in total , 2 @,@ 500 pounds ( 1 @,@ 100 kg ) of uranium oxide was shipped out of the region . The claims were bought in 1979 by the 5M Corporation , but the company did not operate in Silver Reef for long . 
 = = Tourism and popular culture = = 
 Following the closure of the district 's mines , the Wells Fargo office was used as a residence by Alex and <unk> Colbath until the 1950s . It was placed on the National Register of Historic Places on March 11 , 1971 , and currently serves as an art gallery and a museum . The Rice Building burned down , and was rebuilt in 1991 . The Cosmopolitan Restaurant was reconstructed to appear as it did in the 19th century , and it served European cuisine until it was closed in 2010 . There are many remnants of houses and other buildings , and there are also markers indicating where some buildings once stood , such as the Elk Horn Saloon . Some of the area has been preserved for its history . 
 Behind the Wells Fargo office is a powder house which , as of 2011 , contains models of the town , the town 's major mills , and its Catholic church . The Catholic and Protestant cemeteries were restored by the Leeds Lion 's Club in 1998 and can be visited . Several other original buildings remain , including the Clancy Market , McCormick Store , the two @-@ story Harrison House Hotel , and some of the mining buildings . Main Street , once a mile long , is now only a few hundred yards long and is surrounded by private homes . 
 Besides exploring the ghost town , visitors can explore the red rock country surrounding Silver Reef . <unk> , camping , fishing , mountain biking , birdwatching , and hunting are among the activities available . Visitors to Red Cliffs Recreation Area , located south of Silver Reef , can picnic in a designated area with cottonwood trees . A half @-@ mile hiking trail leads to the Red Cliffs Anasazi Site , the remains of an Anasazi habitation . The 6 @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) Red Reef Trail leads to the Cottonwood Wilderness Study Area . Dinosaur footprints that date back to the early Jurassic period can be found in the area , and the Orson Adams House in nearby Harrisburg allows visitors to study the pioneer history of Washington County . 
 Silver Reef has appeared in American films since the late 1960s . The area was scouted by corporate executives from Twentieth @-@ Century Fox for use in the 1969 film Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid and served as a backdrop in the 1979 film The Electric Horseman . Silver Reef was featured in the 1998 documentary Treasure House : The Utah Mining Story . 
 = 2010 United Kingdom government formation = 
 The events surrounding the formation of the United Kingdom 's government in 2010 took place between 7 May and 12 May 2010 , following the 2010 general election , which failed to produce an overall majority for any of the country 's three main political parties . The election , held on 6 May , resulted in the first hung parliament in the UK in 36 years , sparking a series of negotiations which would form the first coalition government since the Second World War . 
 The governing Labour administration led by Gordon Brown was defeated in the election and lost its overall majority after 13 years in office . The opposition Conservatives led by David Cameron won the largest number of seats in the new Parliament , but fell short of the number required to secure an overall majority . Consequently , senior figures from both parties embarked on a series of make @-@ or @-@ break meetings with representatives from the Liberal Democrats led by Nick Clegg , aimed at forming a coalition government . 
 As leader of the third largest party , Clegg had announced that the Liberal Democrats would enter talks with whichever party held the greater number of seats . A series of meetings with the Conservatives began shortly after the hung parliament was announced , and continued over the weekend after the election . Negotiations were also held with the Labour Party . The Scottish National Party ( SNP ) signalled its willingness to join Labour and the Liberal Democrats in government as part of a rainbow coalition , but it quickly became clear that Gordon Brown 's continued presence as Prime Minister was seen as a major obstacle to formulating a Labour – Liberal Democrat deal . 
 Although Brown relinquished his role as Labour leader on 10 May , the party failed to reach an agreement with the Liberal Democrats ; the latter instead struck a deal with the Conservatives the following day . Brown resigned as Prime Minister on the evening of 11 May , and the Conservative – Liberal Democrat Coalition government led by David Cameron took office shortly thereafter . The Liberal Democrats emerged from a meeting of their Parliamentary party and Federal Executive to announce that the coalition deal had been " approved overwhelmingly " shortly after midnight on 12 May , and later the same day the two parties published the Conservative – Liberal Democrat coalition agreement setting out the terms of their deal . While Cameron became Prime Minister , Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg was appointed as Deputy Prime Minister . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Labour Party came into government under the leadership of Tony Blair in May 1997 after the electoral <unk> of the Conservative government , led by John Major ; this ended 18 years of Conservative rule . Having secured a landslide victory with 418 seats in the House of Commons , the Party had a working majority of 179 seats , and went on to win the 2001 and 2005 elections . During its first term in office Blair 's government introduced many popular policies , including legislation to establish a national minimum wage , reducing the length of hospital waiting lists , and devolving lawmaking powers to Scotland and Wales . Blair also played a key role in the Northern Ireland peace process . But his decision to commit British troops to the 2003 invasion of Iraq turned public opinion against him and lost him the support of some of his own MPs . When Blair stepped down as Prime Minister in June 2007 he was succeeded by his Chancellor , Gordon Brown . Blair 's decade @-@ long premiership had been a time of economic boom for the United Kingdom , but Brown 's tenure as Prime Minister was dominated by the global recession of the latter part of the 2000s . Although commentators perceived Brown to have made some good decisions during the economic crisis , such as providing financial aid to several UK banks which found themselves in difficulty , his fiscal policy of borrowing and spending led to a dramatic increase in the country 's national debt . He was also viewed by the media as someone who lacked interpersonal skills . Another major event that occurred during Brown 's time in government was the 2009 scandal involving MPs expenses , which damaged the public 's trust in politicians . 
 By April 2010 almost five years had passed since the previous general election ( held on 5 May 2005 ) , requiring a fresh election to take place . On 6 April 2010 Brown went to Buckingham Palace to ask the Queen to dissolve Parliament on 12 April in preparation for a general election . In a live press conference at Downing Street , Brown announced the election would be held on 6 May . The time between the announcement of the election and the dissolution of Parliament , known as wash @-@ up , was to allow for the handling of any unfinished legislative business before the Parliamentary session 's conclusion . 
 Labour campaigned to secure a fourth consecutive term in office and to restore support lost since 1997 , while the Conservative Party sought to gain a dominant position in British politics after losses in the 1990s , and to replace Labour as the governing party . The Liberal Democrats hoped to make gains from both sides , and possibly hold the balance of power in a hung parliament . After the televised debates between the three leaders – the first of their type during an election campaign in the United Kingdom – their poll ratings had risen to the point where many considered the possibility of a Liberal Democrat role in Government . While Cameron and Clegg were generally well received by the viewers of the three debates , Brown 's performance was considered to have been less successful . Brown 's image was further harmed when he privately described Gillian Duffy , a 65 @-@ year @-@ old pensioner , as a " bigoted woman " after she raised the issue of benefits and immigration with him during a campaign trip to Rochdale , Greater Manchester . His remarks were recorded by a Sky News microphone he was still wearing as he was driven away from the visit , and were widely broadcast . 
 Polls just before election day showed a slight swing from the Liberal Democrats back to Labour and the Conservatives , with most of final polls falling within one point of Conservatives 36 % , Labour 28 % , Liberal Democrats 27 % . However , record numbers of undecided voters raised uncertainty about the outcome . The SNP , encouraged by its victory in the 2007 Scottish parliament elections , set itself a target of returning 20 MPs and hoped to find itself holding a balance of power . Equally , Plaid Cymru sought gains in Wales . In Northern Ireland the Democratic Unionist Party ( DUP ) aimed to maintain or increase its number of seats , having been the fourth largest party in the House of Commons . Smaller parties which had had successes at local elections and the 2009 European elections ( UK Independence Party , Green Party , British National Party ) aimed to extend their representation to seats in the House of Commons . 
 = = The election = = 
 The general election was held on Thursday 6 May 2010 and saw an increase in voter turnout from 61 % in 2005 to 65 % in 2010 . Throughout the day GfK <unk> and Ipsos MORI conducted an exit poll on behalf of the BBC , Sky and ITV news services – the results of which were announced as the polls closed at 10 : 00pm . Data gathered from individuals at 130 polling stations around the country suggested a hung parliament , with an initial estimate that the Conservative Party would achieve 307 seats – 19 seats short of a controlling majority . This deficit was later adjusted to 21 seats . The distribution of seats was initially predicted to be 307 to the Conservatives , 255 to Labour , 59 to the Liberal Democrats and 29 to the other parties , but these figures were later updated with a minor adjustment in Labour 's favour . The apparently poor prospects for the Liberal Democrats were a surprise to commentators , as many previous opinion polls had indicated they would receive more seats . A later BBC exit poll published at 5 : <unk> on Friday 7 May predicted the Conservatives on 306 , 20 short of an overall majority , with Labour on 262 , and the Liberal Democrats on 55 . 
 At 9 : <unk> on 7 May , the BBC confirmed a " hung parliament " , as it was by then impossible for the Conservative party to gain the number of seats needed to form a majority government . 326 seats were required for a technical majority , but only 323 were necessary for a practical majority , as the five Sinn Féin MPs were expected to boycott the House of Commons . At that time the Conservatives stood at 290 seats , Labour at 247 and Liberal Democrats at 51 . The final results put the Conservatives on 306 seats , Labour on 258 , and the Liberal Democrats on 57 . 
 Of the 532 seats contested in England , the Conservatives won an absolute majority of 61 seats and secured an average swing of 5 @.@ 6 % from Labour . The last seat to be elected , Thirsk and Malton , was contested on 27 May because one of the candidates died . All of Scotland 's 59 seats were won by the parties that won them at the 2005 election , with Labour regaining the two seats they lost in by @-@ elections since 2005 . Labour increased its share of the vote by 2 @.@ 5 % and the Conservatives by 0 @.@ 9 % , giving a swing from the Conservatives to Labour of 0 @.@ 8 % . The Conservatives won only one Scottish constituency , while the SNP – which had hoped to increase its share of seats from seven to 20 – failed to make any headway . 
 40 seats were contested in Wales , where the Conservative share rose from three seats to eight , taking one from the Liberal Democrats and four from Labour . Welsh nationalist party Plaid Cymru gained one extra seat , <unk> , from Labour . Overall , Labour lost four seats but remained the biggest party in Wales with 26 seats . 18 seats were contested in Northern Ireland , where both Irish nationalist parties , Sinn Féin and the SDLP , held their seats , the unionist <unk> ( in an electoral pact with the Conservatives ) lost their only seat and the DUP lost a seat . This left the nationalist parties with eight seats , the unionist parties with eight seats ( all DUP ) , the Alliance Party with one seat and an independent unionist with one seat . It was the first time since the Partition of Ireland that unionist parties had failed to secure a majority of Northern Ireland 's Westminster seats in a general election . 
 = = Initial statements and negotiations = = 
 With no single party having achieved an overall majority , the 2010 general election resulted in the first hung parliament since 1974 . When it became clear that no party would achieve the outright majority needed to form the next government , the three main party leaders made public statements offering to discuss the options for putting together an administration with the other parties . Liberal Democrat leader Nick Clegg called on Prime Minister Gordon Brown and Conservative leader David Cameron to act " in the national interest and not out of narrow party political advantage " . However , having stated before the election that the party with the most seats should have the initial say on forming a government , Clegg announced his intention to begin talks with the Conservative Party . Speaking outside the Liberal Democrat headquarters he said : " It is now for the Conservative Party to prove that it is capable of seeking to govern in the national interest . " Brown said he intended to play his part in securing " a stable , strong and principled government " , and indicated his willingness to speak with both Clegg and Cameron on how to achieve this , saying : " What we have seen are no ordinary election results . " But shortly after , Cameron held a press conference at which he invited the Liberal Democrats to talks , saying : " I want to make a big , open and comprehensive offer to the Liberal Democrats . I want us to work together in tackling our country 's big and urgent problems - the debt crisis , our deep social problems and our broken political system . " 
 Under the constitutional rules governing protocol in the event of a hung parliament , Brown , as the sitting Prime Minister , would remain in office until a new government could be formed , a process which could continue without resolution until the State Opening of Parliament , which was scheduled for 25 May . On Brown 's instructions , Cabinet Secretary Sir Gus O 'Donnell had updated the protocol for dealing with a hung parliament earlier in the year . Following confirmation that no party had achieved an overall majority , Brown authorised O 'Donnell to begin the process . Four @-@ member teams of civil servants were sent to liaise with the main political parties to facilitate negotiations . 
 Cameron 's willingness to hold talks with the Liberal Democrats was interpreted by BBC News political editor Nick Robinson as hinting at the possibility that Liberal Democrat MPs could serve as part of a Cabinet . On the afternoon of 7 May , Cameron and Clegg spoke by telephone and had what the BBC reported as a " very constructive " conversation . By that evening exploratory talks between teams of senior representatives from the Liberal Democrats and Conservatives had begun . The Liberal Democrats team consisted of Chris Huhne , Danny Alexander , Andrew <unk> and David Laws , while George Osborne , William Hague , Oliver Letwin and Ed Llewellyn made up the Conservative team . 
 = = Further talks = = 
 By the morning of Saturday 8 May , talks between the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats were fully underway . A 70 @-@ minute meeting at Admiralty House in Westminster was described by both parties as being " constructive and amicable " , and another meeting was scheduled for the following day . At a private meeting that evening , Cameron and Clegg held the first of a series of talks to discuss the negotiations . Members of the Liberal Democrat Parliamentary Party had earlier met at Local Government House to discuss the coalition talks . 
 One of the chief issues that the Liberal Democrats wished to address in any coalition agreement was that of electoral reform , and as Party members debated the negotiations , a 1 @,@ 000 strong crowd of protesters from the pressure group 38 Degrees gathered outside . Amid chants of " Fair votes now " and " We want to speak to Nick " , Clegg briefly left the meeting to accept a petition and told the protesters , " Reforming politics is one of the reasons I went into politics . " After the meeting , a Liberal Democrats negotiator , David Laws , said members had " endorsed in full " the strategy outlined by Clegg that the Conservatives should have first choice in negotiations on forming a government . Clegg also met with the Party 's federal executive , which also endorsed Clegg 's decision . 
 8 May 2010 was the 65th anniversary of V.E. Day – which marked the victory of the Allied Forces over Nazi Germany and the end of the Second World War in Europe – and celebrations were held to mark the occasion . The leaders of all three parties attended a ceremony at the Cenotaph in Whitehall , a duty which normally falls to the Prime Minister . After the ceremony , Brown flew to his family home in Scotland , but remained ready to negotiate with the Liberal Democrats if no deal with the Conservatives was reached . Labour denied reports of a heated telephone conversation between Brown and Clegg , and support among Brown 's Cabinet colleagues remained strong , but one backbencher , John Mann , urged Brown to step aside as Labour leader before the party conference in September , arguing that Brown 's continued leadership " rules out the credibility of a Lib / Lab pact " . 
 = = Negotiations continue = = 
 On Sunday 9 May , senior negotiators from the Liberal Democrats and Conservatives embarked on six hours of talks at the Cabinet Office , which were described as " very positive and productive " . William Hague emerged from the discussions to say , " The issues that we have covered have included political reform , economic issues and reduction of the deficit , banking reform , civil liberties , environmental issues . So , we 've had good discussions about all of those areas . We are agreed that a central part of any agreement that we make will be economic stability and the reduction of the budget deficit , but each negotiating team is now going to report to our party leaders . " 
 As the negotiations were taking place , Gordon Brown returned to Downing Street and held a meeting with Nick Clegg at the Foreign Office for talks . A Downing Street spokesman later confirmed the talks , together with the previous evening 's telephone conversation between Brown and Clegg , which was described as " an amicable discussion . " However , Paddy Ashdown – a previous Liberal Democrat leader – offered a different view of the Brown @-@ Clegg conference call , telling the BBC it " was a diatribe , a rant , and that Gordon Brown was threatening in his approach to Nick Clegg . " Following the success of the talks between their two parties , Clegg and Cameron held a second round of face @-@ to @-@ face discussions at Westminster that evening , lasting 45 minutes . 
 While negotiations continued to form the next administration , the business of government continued with the previous incumbents . In this respect Chancellor Alistair Darling flew to Brussels to attend a meeting of European finance ministers . In London , Brown held meetings with Business Secretary Peter Mandelson , his deputy leader Harriet Harman , Secretary of State for Energy Ed Miliband and Tony Blair 's former special adviser Alastair Campbell . Brown also sent an email to party activists in which he thanked them for their work during the election campaign . It concluded " The past few days have seen us enter a political landscape not considered possible a few short weeks ago - with the outcome of the election leading to no single party able to form a majority government . My duty as prime minister has been to seek to resolve this situation . " Several senior Labour backbenchers , including MP George Howarth called on Brown to step down . 
 = = Labour enters the picture = = 
 Monday 10 May saw another day of talks between the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats , but at a meeting with his MPs , Nick Clegg was urged to give assurances over offers which were being made by David Cameron 's team . They also wished him to continue negotiations with Labour . During the day it emerged that senior Labour and Liberal Democrat representatives had held discussions about forming a coalition , but that one of the barriers to this was the continued presence of Gordon Brown as Prime Minister . At <unk> that afternoon Brown announced that he would step down as Labour leader by September . In a statement he said that he intended to " [ A ] sk the Labour Party to set in train the processes needed for its own leadership election . " The statement went on to say , " I would hope that it would be completed in time for the new leader to be in post by the time of the Labour Party conference . I will play no part in that contest , I will back no individual candidate . " He also urged any prospective candidates for the position to wait until coalition negotiations were complete before announcing their candidacy . Following this announcement , formal talks began between Labour and the Liberal Democrats , but many in the Party felt that a Labour @-@ Liberal Democrat coalition was an unrealistic prospect since it would still fall short of the 326 seats needed to form a majority government , with 315 seats to the Conservatives ' 306 . Labour MP Graham Stringer said , " I don 't think it makes sense in the arithmetic – the numbers don 't add up . " However , in his account of Labour 's negotiations with the Liberal Democrats , Andrew Adonis – who participated in the talks – writes that the general consensus among members of Gordon Brown 's cabinet was that talks between the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats would reach an impasse . " [ The ] process would turn to our favour once the Tories and Lib Dems had rehearsed the extent of their differences " . 
 With Labour now attempting to form its own coalition government , the Conservatives promised the Liberal Democrats a referendum on changing the voting mechanism to the Alternative Vote ( AV ) system . In response Labour said that it would introduce AV then hold a public referendum to approve it . In a statement outlining his decision to negotiate with Labour , Clegg said that although his party had made progress with the Conservatives , they had not " reached a comprehensive partnership agreement for a full Parliament " and negotiating with Labour was the " responsible thing to do " . 
 The possibility of some SNP involvement in a Labour @-@ led government materialised when Angus Robertson , the SNP 's leader in the House of Commons suggested its MPs would be willing to join Labour , the Liberal Democrats , Plaid Cymru and MPs from other smaller parties to form a rainbow coalition . It was reported on 10 May that a meeting to discuss this scenario was held between Robertson , the SNP Chief Whip Stewart <unk> and Cabinet Office officials the previous evening . However , Labour 's Douglas Alexander said he could not foresee a situation in which Labour could enter into government with the SNP because the two parties had " fundamental differences " , and he made it clear that no senior Labour officials had been approached by anyone from the SNP . 
 = = Coalition deal reached = = 
 By 11 May , the possibility of a deal between the Liberal Democrats and Labour was looking unlikely . Talks between the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats continued , and after concluding that he would not be able to form a government , Brown announced his resignation that evening . He also resigned as leader of the Labour Party with immediate effect . He then left Downing Street with his wife and their children , and drove to Buckingham Palace where he tendered his resignation to the Queen and advised her to call for David Cameron . Cameron became Prime Minister one hour after the Queen accepted Brown 's resignation , and arrived at Downing Street with his wife , Samantha shortly afterwards . In his first address outside 10 Downing Street , he announced his intention to form a coalition government , the first since the Second World War , with the Liberal Democrats . Cameron appointed Nick Clegg as Deputy Prime Minister . Cameron met with his MPs in the Committee Room of the House of Commons at <unk> , where he was greeted with cheering that could be heard from the central hall of the Commons . 
 Cameron later told a BBC documentary that he had not expected to become Prime Minister , and the coalition agreement had not yet been completed when Brown resigned . Speaking on the programme , Five Days That Changed Britain , broadcast on 29 July , he said that when he went to meet the Queen at Buckingham Palace , the coalition deal had not been finalised . Formally , the monarch can only invite a prospective Prime Minister to form a Government ; the shape of the Government is for the new Prime Minister to decide . William Hague said that as Cameron travelled to the Palace , the coalition agreement was still being completed and signed . 
 Shortly after midnight on 12 May 2010 , the Liberal Democrats emerged from a meeting of their Parliamentary party and Federal Executive to announce that the coalition deal had been " approved overwhelmingly " , meaning that David Cameron would lead a coalition government of Conservatives and Liberal Democrats . Later that day , the two parties jointly published the Conservative – Liberal Democrat coalition agreement specifying the terms of the deal . Cameron appointed his first Cabinet , which included several senior Conservative and Liberal Democrat figures . From the Conservatives , George Osborne became Chancellor of the Exchequer , William Hague was named as Foreign Secretary and Oliver Letwin was appointed as Minister of State for the Cabinet Office . Liberal Democrat appointments included Danny Alexander as Secretary of State for Scotland , Chris Huhne as Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change , and David Laws became Chief Secretary to the Treasury . 
 Cameron and Clegg gave their first joint press conference in the Downing Street Rose Garden on the afternoon of 12 May , telling journalists the purpose of their government would be " [ T ] o give our country the strong , stable and decisive leadership we need " . The new Parliamentary session began with the State Opening of Parliament on 25 May . Cameron attended his first Prime Minister 's Questions as Prime Minister on Wednesday 2 June . 
 Labour became the Party of Opposition , and with Brown 's departure , Harriet Harman became its acting leader . On 18 May 2010 Labour 's National Executive Committee announced the details of the leadership election . Ed Miliband was elected as the party 's new leader at its annual national conference on 25 September 2010 . 
 = German battleship Bismarck = 
 Bismarck was the first of two Bismarck @-@ class battleships built for Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine . Named after Chancellor Otto von Bismarck , the primary force behind the unification of Germany in 1871 , the ship was laid down at the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg in July 1936 and launched in February 1939 . Work was completed in August 1940 , when she was commissioned into the German fleet . Bismarck and her sister ship Tirpitz were the largest battleships ever built by Germany , and two of the largest built by any European power . 
 In the course of the warship 's eight @-@ month career under its sole commanding officer , Capt. Ernst Lindemann , Bismarck conducted only one offensive operation , in May 1941 , codenamed Rheinübung . The ship , along with the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen , was to break into the Atlantic Ocean and raid Allied shipping from North America to Great Britain . The two ships were detected several times off Scandinavia , and British naval units were deployed to block their route . At the Battle of the Denmark Strait , Bismarck engaged and destroyed the battlecruiser HMS Hood , the pride of the Royal Navy , and forced the battleship HMS Prince of Wales to retreat ; Bismarck was hit three times and suffered an oil leak from a ruptured tank . 
 The destruction of Hood spurred a relentless pursuit by the Royal Navy involving dozens of warships . Two days later , heading for the relative safety of occupied France , Bismarck was attacked by obsolescent Fairey Swordfish biplane torpedo bombers from the aircraft carrier HMS Ark Royal ; one scored a hit that rendered the battleship 's steering gear inoperable . In her final battle the following morning , Bismarck was neutralised by a sustained bombardment from a British fleet , was scuttled by her crew , and sank with heavy loss of life . Most experts agree that the battle damage would have caused her to sink eventually . The wreck was located in June 1989 by Robert Ballard , and has since been further surveyed by several other expeditions . 
 = = Construction and characteristics = = 
 Bismarck was ordered under the name Ersatz Hannover ( " Hannover replacement " ) , a replacement for the old pre @-@ dreadnought SMS Hannover , under contract " F " . The contract was awarded to the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg , where the keel was laid on 1 July 1936 at Helgen IX . The ship was launched on 14 February 1939 and during the elaborate ceremonies was christened by Dorothee von <unk> , granddaughter of Chancellor Otto von Bismarck , the ship 's namesake . Adolf Hitler made the christening speech . Fitting @-@ out work followed the launch , during which time the original straight stem was replaced with a raked " Atlantic bow " similar to those of the Scharnhorst @-@ class battleships . Bismarck was commissioned into the fleet on 24 August 1940 for sea trials , which were conducted in the Baltic . Kapitän zur See Ernst Lindemann took command of the ship at the time of commissioning . 
 Bismarck displaced 41 @,@ 700 t ( 41 @,@ 000 long tons ) as built and 50 @,@ 300 t ( 49 @,@ 500 long tons ) fully loaded , with an overall length of 251 m ( 823 ft 6 in ) , a beam of 36 m ( 118 ft 1 in ) and a maximum draft of 9 @.@ 9 m ( 32 ft 6 in ) . The battleship was Germany 's largest warship , and displaced more than any other European battleship , with the exception of HMS Vanguard , commissioned after the end of the war . Bismarck was powered by three Blohm & Voss geared steam turbines and twelve oil @-@ fired Wagner superheated boilers , which developed a total of 148 @,@ 116 shp ( 110 @,@ 450 kW ) and yielded a maximum speed of 30 @.@ 01 knots ( 55 @.@ 58 km / h ; 34 @.@ 53 mph ) on speed trials . The ship had a cruising range of 8 @,@ 870 nautical miles ( 16 @,@ 430 km ; 10 @,@ 210 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . Bismarck was equipped with three FuMO 23 search radar sets , mounted on the forward and stern rangefinders and foretop . 
 The standard crew numbered 103 officers and 1 @,@ 962 enlisted men . The crew was divided into twelve divisions of between 180 and 220 men . The first six divisions were assigned to the ship 's armament , divisions one to four for the main and secondary batteries and five and six manning anti @-@ aircraft guns . The seventh division consisted of specialists , including cooks and carpenters , and the eighth division consisted of ammunition handlers . The radio operators , signalmen , and quartermasters were assigned to the ninth division . The last three divisions were the engine room personnel . When Bismarck left port , fleet staff , prize crews , and war correspondents increased the crew complement to over 2 @,@ 200 men . Roughly 200 of the engine room personnel came from the light cruiser Karlsruhe , which had been lost during Operation Weserübung , the German invasion of Norway . Bismarck 's crew published a ship 's newspaper titled Die <unk> ( The Ship 's Bell ) ; this paper was only published once , on 23 April 1941 , by the commander of the engineering department , Gerhard Junack . 
 Bismarck was armed with eight 38 cm ( 15 in ) SK C / 34 guns arranged in four twin gun turrets : two super @-@ firing turrets forward — " Anton " and " Bruno " — and two aft — " Caesar " and " Dora " . Secondary armament consisted of twelve 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) L / 55 guns , sixteen 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) L / 65 and sixteen 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) L / 83 , and twelve 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns . Bismarck also carried four Arado Ar 196 reconnaissance floatplanes , with a single large hangar and a double @-@ ended catapult . The ship 's main belt was 320 mm ( 12 @.@ 6 in ) thick and was covered by a pair of upper and main armoured decks that were 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) and 100 to 120 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 to 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick , respectively . The 38 cm ( 15 in ) turrets were protected by 360 mm ( 14 @.@ 2 in ) thick faces and 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 On 15 September 1940 , three weeks after commissioning , Bismarck left Hamburg to begin sea trials in Kiel Bay . Sperrbrecher 13 escorted the ship to Arcona on 28 September , and then on to Gotenhafen for trials in the Gulf of Danzig . The ship 's power @-@ plant was given a thorough workout ; Bismarck made measured @-@ mile and high speed runs . As the ship 's stability and manoeuvrability were being tested , a flaw in her design was discovered . When attempting to steer the ship solely through altering propeller revolutions , the crew learned that Bismarck could be kept on course only with great difficulty . Even with the outboard screws running at full power in opposite directions , they generated only a slight turning ability . Bismarck 's main battery guns were first test @-@ fired in late November . The tests proved she was a very stable gun platform . Trials lasted until December ; Bismarck returned to Hamburg , arriving on 9 December , for minor alterations and the completion of the fitting @-@ out process . 
 The ship was scheduled to return to Kiel on 24 January 1941 , but a merchant vessel had been sunk in the Kiel Canal and prevented use of the waterway . Severe weather hampered efforts to remove the wreck , and Bismarck was not able to reach Kiel until March . The delay greatly frustrated Lindemann , who remarked that " [ Bismarck ] had been tied down at Hamburg for five weeks ... the precious time at sea lost as a result cannot be made up , and a significant delay in the final war deployment of the ship thus is unavoidable . " While waiting to reach Kiel , Bismarck hosted Captain Anders <unk> , the Swedish naval attaché to Berlin . He returned to Sweden with a detailed description of the ship , which was subsequently leaked to Britain by pro @-@ British elements in the Swedish Navy . The information provided the Royal Navy with its first full description of the vessel , although it lacked important facts , including top speed , radius of action , and displacement . 
 On 6 March , Bismarck received the order to steam to Kiel . On the way , the ship was escorted by several Messerschmitt Bf 109 fighters and a pair of armed merchant vessels , along with an icebreaker . At 08 : 45 on 8 March , Bismarck briefly ran aground on the southern shore of the Kiel Canal ; she was freed within an hour . The ship reached Kiel the following day , where her crew stocked ammunition , fuel , and other supplies and applied a coat of dazzle paint to camouflage her . British bombers attacked the harbour without success on 12 March . On 17 March , the old battleship Schlesien , now used as an icebreaker , escorted Bismarck through the ice to Gotenhafen , where the latter continued combat readiness training . 
 The Naval High Command ( Oberkommando der Marine or OKM ) , commanded by Admiral Erich Raeder , intended to continue the practice of using heavy ships as surface raiders against Allied merchant traffic in the Atlantic Ocean . The two Scharnhorst @-@ class battleships were based in Brest , France , at the time , having just completed Operation Berlin , a major raid into the Atlantic . Bismarck 's sister ship Tirpitz rapidly approached completion . Bismarck and Tirpitz were to sortie from the Baltic and rendezvous with the two Scharnhorst @-@ class ships in the Atlantic ; the operation was initially scheduled for around 25 April 1941 , when a new moon period would make conditions more favourable . 
 Work on Tirpitz was completed later than anticipated , and she was not commissioned until 25 February ; the ship was not ready for combat until late in the year . To further complicate the situation , Gneisenau was torpedoed in Brest and damaged further by bombs when in drydock . Scharnhorst required a boiler overhaul following Operation Berlin ; the workers discovered during the overhaul that the boilers were in worse condition than expected . She would also be unavailable for the planned sortie . Attacks by British bombers on supply depots in Kiel delayed repairs to the heavy cruisers Admiral Scheer and Admiral Hipper . The two ships would not be ready for action until July or August . Admiral Günther Lütjens , <unk> ( Fleet Chief ) of the Kriegsmarine , chosen to lead the operation , wished to delay the operation at least until either Scharnhorst or Tirpitz became available , but the OKM decided to proceed with the operation , codenamed Operation Rheinübung , with a force consisting of only Bismarck and the heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen . At a final meeting with Raeder in Paris on 26 April , Lütjens was encouraged by his commander @-@ in @-@ chief to proceed and he eventually decided that an operation should begin as soon as possible to prevent the enemy gaining any respite . 
 = = = Operation Rheinübung = = = 
 On 5 May , Adolf Hitler and Wilhelm Keitel , with a large entourage , arrived to view Bismarck and Tirpitz in Gotenhafen . The men were given an extensive tour of the ships , after which Hitler met with Lütjens to discuss the upcoming mission . On 16 May , Lütjens reported that Bismarck and Prinz Eugen were fully prepared for Operation Rheinübung ; he was therefore ordered to proceed with the mission on the evening of 19 May . As part of the operational plans , a group of eighteen supply ships would be positioned to support Bismarck and Prinz Eugen . Four U @-@ boats would be placed along the convoy routes between Halifax and Britain to scout for the raiders . 
 By the start of the operation , Bismarck 's crew had increased to 2 @,@ 221 officers and enlisted men . This included an admiral 's staff of nearly 65 and a prize crew of 80 sailors , who could be used to crew transports captured during the mission . At 02 : 00 on 19 May , Bismarck departed Gotenhafen and made for the Danish straits . She was joined at 11 : 25 by Prinz Eugen , which had departed the previous night at 21 : 18 , off Cape Arkona . The two ships were escorted by three destroyers — Z10 Hans Lody , Z16 Friedrich Eckoldt , and Z23 — and a flotilla of minesweepers . The Luftwaffe provided air cover during the voyage out of German waters . At around noon on 20 May , Lindemann informed the ship 's crew via loudspeaker of the ship 's mission . At approximately the same time , a group of ten or twelve Swedish aircraft flying reconnaissance encountered the German force and reported its composition and heading , though the Germans did not see the Swedes . 
 An hour later , the German flotilla encountered the Swedish cruiser HSwMS Gotland ; the cruiser shadowed the Germans for two hours in the Kattegat . Gotland transmitted a report to naval headquarters , stating : " Two large ships , three destroyers , five escort vessels , and 10 – 12 aircraft passed Marstrand , course 205 ° / 20 ' . " The OKM was not concerned about the security risk posed by Gotland , though both Lütjens and Lindemann believed operational secrecy had been lost . The report eventually made its way to Captain Henry Denham , the British naval attaché to Sweden , who transmitted the information to the Admiralty . The code @-@ breakers at Bletchley Park confirmed that an Atlantic raid was imminent , as they had decrypted reports that Bismarck and Prinz Eugen had taken on prize crews and requested additional navigational charts from headquarters . A pair of Supermarine Spitfires was ordered to search the Norwegian coast for the flotilla . 
 German aerial reconnaissance confirmed that one aircraft carrier , three battleships , and four cruisers remained at anchor in the main British naval base at Scapa Flow , which confirmed to Lütjens that the British were unaware of his operation . On the evening of 20 May , Bismarck and the rest of the flotilla reached the Norwegian coast ; the minesweepers were detached and the two raiders and their destroyer escorts continued north . The following morning , radio @-@ intercept officers on board Prinz Eugen picked up a signal ordering British reconnaissance aircraft to search for two battleships and three destroyers northbound off the Norwegian coast . At 7 : 00 on the 21st , the Germans spotted four unidentified aircraft , which quickly departed . Shortly after 12 : 00 , the flotilla reached Bergen and anchored at Grimstadfjord , where the ships ' crews painted over the Baltic camouflage with the standard " outboard grey " worn by German warships operating in the Atlantic . 
 When Bismarck was in Norway , a pair of Bf 109 fighters circled overhead to protect her from British air attacks , but Flying Officer Michael Suckling managed to fly his Spitfire directly over the German flotilla at a height of 8 @,@ 000 m ( 26 @,@ 000 ft ) and take photos of Bismarck and her escorts . Upon receipt of the information , Admiral John Tovey ordered the battlecruiser HMS Hood , the newly commissioned battleship HMS Prince of Wales , and six destroyers to reinforce the pair of cruisers patrolling the Denmark Strait . The rest of the Home Fleet was placed on high alert in Scapa Flow . Eighteen bombers were dispatched to attack the Germans , but weather over the fjord had worsened and they were unable to find the German warships . 
 Bismarck did not replenish her fuel stores in Norway , as her operational orders did not require her to do so . She had left port 200 t ( 200 long tons ) short of a full load , and had since expended another 1 @,@ 000 t ( 980 long tons ) on the voyage from Gotenhafen . Prinz Eugen took on 764 t ( 752 long tons ) of fuel . At 19 : 30 on 21 May , Bismarck , Prinz Eugen , and the three escorting destroyers left Bergen . At midnight , when the force was in the open sea , heading towards the Arctic Ocean , Raeder disclosed the operation to Hitler , who reluctantly consented to the raid . The three escorting destroyers were detached at 04 : 14 on 22 May , while the force steamed off Trondheim . At around 12 : 00 , Lütjens ordered his two ships to turn toward the Denmark Strait to attempt the break @-@ out into the open Atlantic . 
 By 04 : 00 on 23 May , Lütjens ordered Bismarck and Prinz Eugen to increase speed to 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) to make the dash through the Denmark Strait . Upon entering the Strait , both ships activated their FuMO radar detection equipment sets . Bismarck led Prinz Eugen by about 700 m ( 770 yd ) ; mist reduced visibility to 3 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 to 4 @,@ 400 yd ) . The Germans encountered some ice at around 10 : 00 , which necessitated a reduction in speed to 24 knots ( 44 km / h ; 28 mph ) . Two hours later , the pair had reached a point north of Iceland . The ships were forced to zigzag to avoid ice floes . At 19 : 22 , hydrophone and radar operators aboard the German warships detected the cruiser HMS Suffolk at a range of approximately 12 @,@ 500 m ( 13 @,@ 700 yd ) . Prinz Eugen 's radio @-@ intercept team decrypted the radio signals being sent by Suffolk and learned that their location had been reported . 
 Lütjens gave permission for Prinz Eugen to engage Suffolk , but the captain of the German cruiser could not clearly make out his target and so held fire . Suffolk quickly retreated to a safe distance and shadowed the German ships . At 20 : 30 , the heavy cruiser HMS Norfolk joined Suffolk , but approached the German raiders too closely . Lütjens ordered his ships to engage the British cruiser ; Bismarck fired five salvoes , three of which straddled Norfolk and rained shell splinters on her decks . The cruiser laid a smoke screen and fled into a fog bank , ending the brief engagement . The concussion from the 38 cm guns ' firing disabled Bismarck 's FuMO 23 radar set ; this prompted Lütjens to order Prinz Eugen to take station ahead so she could use her functioning radar to scout for the formation . 
 At around 22 : 00 , Lütjens ordered Bismarck to make a 180 @-@ degree turn in an effort to surprise the two heavy cruisers shadowing him . Although Bismarck was visually obscured in a rain squall , Suffolk 's radar quickly detected the manoeuvre , allowing the cruiser to evade . The cruisers remained on station through the night , continually relaying the location and bearing of the German ships . The harsh weather broke on the morning of 24 May , revealing a clear sky . At 05 : 07 , hydrophone operators aboard Prinz Eugen detected a pair of unidentified vessels approaching the German formation at a range of 20 nmi ( 37 km ; 23 mi ) , reporting " Noise of two fast @-@ moving turbine ships at 280 ° relative bearing ! " 
 = = = = Battle of the Denmark Strait = = = = 
 At 05 : 45 , German lookouts spotted smoke on the horizon ; this turned out to be from Hood and Prince of Wales , under the command of Vice Admiral Lancelot Holland . Lütjens ordered his ships ' crews to battle stations . By 05 : 52 , the range had fallen to 26 @,@ 000 m ( 28 @,@ 000 yd ) and Hood opened fire , followed by Prince of Wales a minute later . Hood engaged Prinz Eugen , which the British thought to be Bismarck , while Prince of Wales fired on Bismarck . Adalbert Schneider , the first gunnery officer aboard Bismarck , twice requested permission to return fire , but Lütjens hesitated . Lindemann intervened , muttering " I will not let my ship be shot out from under my ass . " He demanded permission to fire from Lütjens , who relented and at 05 : 55 ordered his ships to engage the British . 
 The British ships approached the German ships head on , which permitted them to use only their forward guns ; Bismarck and Prinz Eugen could fire full broadsides . Several minutes after opening fire , Holland ordered a 20 ° turn to port , which would allow his ships to engage with their rear gun turrets . Both German ships concentrated their fire on Hood . About a minute after opening fire , Prinz Eugen scored a hit with a high @-@ explosive 20 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) shell ; the explosion detonated <unk> projectile ammunition and started a large fire , which was quickly extinguished . After firing three four @-@ gun salvoes , Schneider had found the range to Hood ; he immediately ordered rapid @-@ fire salvoes from Bismarck 's eight 38 cm guns . He also ordered the ship 's 15 cm secondary guns to engage Prince of Wales . Holland then ordered a second 20 ° turn to port , to bring his ships on a parallel course with Bismarck and Prinz Eugen . Lütjens ordered Prinz Eugen to shift fire and target Prince of Wales , to keep both of his opponents under fire . Within a few minutes , Prinz Eugen scored a pair of hits on the battleship that started a small fire . 
 Lütjens then ordered Prinz Eugen to drop behind Bismarck , so she could continue to monitor the location of Norfolk and Suffolk , which were still some 10 to 12 nmi ( 19 to 22 km ; 12 to 14 mi ) to the east . At 06 : 00 , Hood was completing the second turn to port when Bismarck 's fifth salvo hit . Two of the shells landed short , striking the water close to the ship , but at least one of the 38 cm armour @-@ piercing shells struck Hood and penetrated her thin deck armour . The shell reached Hood 's rear ammunition magazine and detonated 112 t ( 110 long tons ) of cordite propellant . The massive explosion broke the back of the ship between the main mast and the rear funnel ; the forward section continued to move forward briefly before the in @-@ rushing water caused the bow to rise into the air at a steep angle . The stern also rose as water rushed into the ripped @-@ open compartments . Schneider exclaimed " He is sinking ! " over the ship 's loudspeakers . In only eight minutes of firing , Hood had disappeared , taking all but three of her crew of 1 @,@ 419 men with her . 
 Bismarck then shifted fire to Prince of Wales . The British battleship scored a hit on Bismarck with her sixth salvo , but the German ship found her mark with her first salvo . One of the shells struck the bridge on Prince of Wales , though it did not explode and instead exited the other side , killing everyone in the ship 's command centre , save Captain John Leach , the ship 's commanding officer , and one other . The two German ships continued to fire upon Prince of Wales , causing serious damage . Guns malfunctioned on the recently commissioned British ship , which still had civilian technicians aboard . Despite the technical faults in the main battery , Prince of Wales scored three hits on Bismarck in the engagement . The first struck her in the forecastle above the waterline but low enough to allow the crashing waves to enter the hull . The second shell struck below the armoured belt and exploded on contact with the torpedo bulkhead , inflicting minimal damage . The third shell passed through one of the boats carried aboard the ship and then went through the floatplane catapult without exploding . 
 At 06 : 13 , Leach gave the order to retreat ; only two of his ship 's ten 14 in ( 360 mm ) guns were still firing and his ship had sustained significant damage . Prince of Wales made a 160 ° turn and laid a smoke screen to cover her withdrawal . The Germans ceased fire as the range widened . Though Lindemann strongly advocated chasing Prince of Wales and destroying her , Lütjens obeyed operational orders to shun any avoidable engagement with enemy forces that were not protecting a convoy , firmly rejecting the request , and instead ordered Bismarck and Prinz Eugen to head for the North Atlantic . In the engagement , Bismarck had fired 93 armour @-@ piercing shells and had been hit by three shells in return . The forecastle hit allowed 1 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 t ( 980 to 1 @,@ 970 long tons ) of water to flood into the ship , which contaminated fuel oil stored in the bow . Lütjens refused to reduce speed to allow damage control teams to repair the shell hole which widened and allowed more water into the ship . The second hit caused some additional flooding . Shell @-@ splinters from the second hit also damaged a steam line in the turbo @-@ generator room , but this was not serious , as Bismarck had sufficient other generator reserves . The combined flooding from these two hits caused a 9 @-@ degree list to port and a 3 @-@ degree trim by the bow . 
 = = = = Chase = = = = 
 After the engagement , Lütjens reported , " Battlecruiser , probably Hood , sunk . Another battleship , King George V or Renown , turned away damaged . Two heavy cruisers maintain contact . " At 08 : 01 , he transmitted a damage report and his intentions to OKM , which were to detach Prinz Eugen for commerce raiding and to make for Saint @-@ Nazaire for repairs . Shortly after 10 : 00 , Lütjens ordered Prinz Eugen to fall behind Bismarck to discern the severity of the oil leakage from the bow hit . After confirming " broad streams of oil on both sides of [ Bismarck 's ] wake " , Prinz Eugen returned to the forward position . About an hour later , a British Short Sunderland flying boat reported the oil slick to Suffolk and Norfolk , which had been joined by the damaged Prince of Wales . Rear Admiral Frederic Wake @-@ Walker , the commander of the two cruisers , ordered Prince of Wales to remain behind his ships . 
 The Royal Navy ordered all warships in the area to join the pursuit of Bismarck and Prinz Eugen . Tovey 's Home Fleet was steaming to intercept the German raiders , but on the morning of 24 May was still over 350 nmi ( 650 km ; 400 mi ) away . The Admiralty ordered the light cruisers Manchester , Birmingham , and Arethusa to patrol the Denmark Strait in the event that Lütjens attempted to retrace his route . The battleship Rodney , which had been escorting RMS Britannic and was due for a refit in the Boston Navy Yard , joined Tovey . Two old Revenge @-@ class battleships were ordered into the hunt : Revenge , from Halifax , and Ramillies , which was escorting Convoy HX 127 . In all , six battleships and battlecruisers , two aircraft carriers , thirteen cruisers , and twenty @-@ one destroyers were committed to the chase . By around 17 : 00 , the crew aboard Prince of Wales restored nine of her ten main guns to working order , which permitted Wake @-@ Walker to place her in the front of his formation to attack Bismarck if the opportunity arose . 
 With the weather worsening , Lütjens attempted to detach Prinz Eugen at 16 : 40 . The squall was not heavy enough to cover her withdrawal from Wake @-@ Walker 's cruisers , which continued to maintain radar contact . Prinz Eugen was therefore recalled temporarily . The cruiser was successfully detached at 18 : 14 . Bismarck turned around to face Wake @-@ Walker 's formation , forcing Suffolk to turn away at high speed . Prince of Wales fired twelve salvos at Bismarck , which responded with nine salvos , none of which hit . The action diverted British attention and permitted Prinz Eugen to slip away . After Bismarck resumed her previous heading , Wake @-@ Walker 's three ships took up station on Bismarck 's port side . 
 Although Bismarck had been damaged in the engagement and forced to reduce speed , she was still capable of reaching 27 to 28 knots ( 50 to 52 km / h ; 31 to 32 mph ) , the maximum speed of Tovey 's King George V. Unless Bismarck could be slowed , the British would be unable to prevent her from reaching Saint @-@ Nazaire . Shortly before 16 : 00 on 25 May , Tovey detached the aircraft carrier Victorious and four light cruisers to shape a course that would position her to launch her torpedo bombers . At 22 : 00 , Victorious launched the strike , which comprised six Fairey Fulmar fighters and nine Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers of 825 Naval Air Squadron , led by Lt Cdr Eugene Esmonde . The inexperienced aviators nearly attacked Norfolk on their approach ; the confusion alerted Bismarck 's anti @-@ aircraft gunners . 
 Bismarck also used her main and secondary batteries to fire at maximum depression to create giant splashes in the paths of the incoming torpedo bombers . None of the attacking aircraft were shot down . Bismarck evaded eight of the torpedoes launched at her , but the ninth struck amidships on the main armoured belt , throwing one man into a bulkhead and killing him and injuring five others . The explosion also caused minor damage to electrical equipment . The ship suffered more serious damage from manoeuvres to evade the torpedoes : rapid shifts in speed and course loosened collision mats , which increased the flooding from the forward shell hole and eventually forced abandonment of the port number 2 boiler room . This loss of a second boiler , combined with fuel losses and increasing bow trim , forced the ship to slow to 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . Divers repaired the collision mats in the bow , after which speed increased to 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) , the speed that the command staff determined was the most economical for the voyage to occupied France . 
 Shortly after the Swordfish departed the scene , Bismarck and Prince of Wales engaged in a brief artillery duel . Neither scored a hit . Bismarck 's damage control teams resumed work after the short engagement . The sea water that had flooded the number 2 port side boiler threatened to enter the number 4 turbo @-@ generator feedwater system , which would have permitted saltwater to reach the turbines . The saltwater would have destroyed the turbine blades and thus greatly reduced the ship 's speed . By morning on 25 May , the danger had passed . The ship slowed to 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) to allow divers to pump fuel from the forward compartments to the rear tanks ; two hoses were successfully connected and a few hundred tons of fuel were transferred . 
 As the chase entered open waters , Wake @-@ Walker 's ships were compelled to zig @-@ zag to avoid German U @-@ boats that might be in the area . This required the ships to steam for ten minutes to port , then ten minutes to starboard , to keep the ships on the same base course . For the last few minutes of the turn to port , Bismarck was out of range of Suffolk 's radar . At 03 : 00 on 25 May , Lütjens ordered an increase to maximum speed , which at this point was 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) . He then ordered the ship to circle away to the west and then north . This manoeuvre coincided with the period during which his ship was out of radar range ; Bismarck successfully broke radar contact and circled back behind her pursuers . Suffolk 's captain assumed that Bismarck had broken off to the west and attempted to find her by also steaming west . After half an hour , he informed Wake @-@ Walker , who ordered the three ships to disperse at daylight to search visually . 
 The Royal Navy search became frantic , as many of the British ships were low on fuel . Victorious and her escorting cruisers were sent west , Wake @-@ Walker 's ships continued to the south and west , and Tovey continued to steam toward the mid @-@ Atlantic . Force H , with the aircraft carrier Ark Royal and steaming up from Gibraltar , was still at least a day away . Unaware that he had shaken off Wake @-@ Walker , Lütjens sent long radio messages to Naval Group West headquarters in Paris . The signals were intercepted by the British , from which bearings were determined . They were wrongly plotted on board King George V , leading Tovey to believe that Bismarck was heading back to Germany through the Iceland @-@ Faeroe gap , which kept his fleet on the wrong course for seven hours . By the time the mistake had been discovered , Bismarck had put a sizeable gap between herself and the British ships . 
 British code @-@ breakers were able to decrypt some of the German signals , including an order to the Luftwaffe to provide support for Bismarck making for Brest , decrypted by Jane Fawcett on 25 May 1941 . The French Resistance provided the British with confirmation that Luftwaffe units were relocating there . Tovey could now turn his forces toward France to converge in areas through which Bismarck would have to pass . A squadron of Coastal Command PBY Catalinas based in Northern Ireland joined the search , covering areas where Bismarck might be headed in her attempt to reach occupied France . At 10 : 30 on 26 May , a Catalina piloted by Ensign Leonard B. Smith of the US Navy located her , some 690 nmi ( 1 @,@ 280 km ; 790 mi ) northwest of Brest . At her current speed , she would have been close enough to reach the protection of U @-@ boats and the Luftwaffe in less than a day . Most British forces were not close enough to stop her . 
 The only possibility for the Royal Navy was Ark Royal with Force H , under the command of Admiral James Somerville . Victorious , Prince of Wales , Suffolk and Repulse were forced to break off the search due to fuel shortage ; the only heavy ships remaining apart from Force H were King George V and Rodney , but they were too distant . Ark Royal 's Swordfish were already searching nearby when the Catalina found her . Several torpedo bombers also located the battleship , about 60 nmi ( 110 km ; 69 mi ) away from Ark Royal . Somerville ordered an attack as soon as the Swordfish returned and were rearmed with torpedoes . He detached the cruiser Sheffield to shadow Bismarck , though Ark Royal 's aviators were not informed of this . As a result , the Swordfish , which were armed with torpedoes equipped with new magnetic detonators , accidentally attacked Sheffield . The magnetic detonators failed to work properly and Sheffield emerged unscathed . 
 Upon returning to Ark Royal , the Swordfish loaded torpedoes equipped with contact detonators . The second attack comprised fifteen aircraft and was launched at 19 : 10 . At 20 : 47 , the torpedo bombers began their attack descent through the clouds . As the Swordfish approached , Bismarck fired her main battery at Sheffield , straddling the cruiser with her second salvo . Shell fragments rained down on Sheffield , killing three men and wounding several others . Sheffield quickly retreated under cover of a smoke screen . The Swordfish then attacked ; Bismarck began to turn violently as her anti @-@ aircraft batteries engaged the bombers . One torpedo hit amidships on the port side , just below the bottom edge of the main armour belt . The force of the explosion was largely contained by the underwater protection system and the belt armour but some structural damage caused minor flooding . 
 The second torpedo — fired by pilot John Moffat — struck Bismarck in her stern on the port side , near the port rudder shaft . The coupling on the port rudder assembly was badly damaged and the rudder could not be disengaged , locked in a 12 ° turn to port . The explosion also caused much shock damage . The crew eventually managed to repair the starboard rudder but the port rudder remained jammed . A suggestion to sever the port rudder with explosives was dismissed by Lütjens , as damage to the screws would have left the battleship helpless . At 21 : 15 , Lütjens reported that the ship was unmanoeuvrable . 
 = = = = Sinking = = = = 
 With the port rudder jammed , Bismarck was now steaming in a large circle , unable to escape from Tovey 's forces . Though fuel shortages had reduced the number of ships available to the British , the battleships King George V and Rodney were still available , along with the heavy cruisers Dorsetshire and Norfolk . Lütjens signalled headquarters at 21 : 40 on the 26th : " Ship unmanoeuvrable . We will fight to the last shell . Long live the Führer . " The mood of the crew became increasingly depressed , especially as messages from the naval command reached the ship . Intended to boost morale , the messages only highlighted the desperate situation in which the crew found itself . As dark fell , Bismarck briefly fired on Sheffield , though the cruiser quickly fled . Sheffield lost contact in the low visibility and Captain Philip Vian 's group of five destroyers was ordered to keep contact with Bismarck through the night . 
 The ships encountered Bismarck at 22 : 38 ; the battleship quickly engaged them with her main battery . After firing three salvos , she straddled the Polish destroyer ORP Piorun . The destroyer continued to close the range until a near miss at around 12 @,@ 000 m ( 39 @,@ 000 ft ) forced her to turn away . Throughout the night and into the morning , Vian 's destroyers harried Bismarck , illuminating her with star shells and firing dozens of torpedoes , none of which hit . Between 05 : 00 and 06 : 00 , Bismarck 's crew attempted to launch one of the Arado 196 float planes to carry away the ship 's war diary , footage of the engagement with Hood , and other important documents . The third shell hit from Prince of Wales had damaged the steam line on the aircraft catapult , rendering it inoperative . As it was not possible to launch the aircraft it had become a fire hazard , and was pushed overboard . 
 After daybreak on 27 May , King George V led the attack . Rodney followed off her port quarter ; Tovey intended to steam directly at Bismarck until he was about 8 nmi ( 15 km ; 9 @.@ 2 mi ) away . At that point , he would turn south to put his ships parallel to his target . At 08 : 43 , lookouts on King George V spotted her , some 23 @,@ 000 m ( 25 @,@ 000 yd ) away . Four minutes later , Rodney 's two forward turrets , comprising six 16 in ( 406 mm ) guns , opened fire , then King George V 's 14 in ( 356 mm ) guns began firing . Bismarck returned fire at 08 : 50 with her forward guns ; with her second salvo , she straddled Rodney . Thereafter , Bismarck 's gunnery became increasingly difficult as the ship moved erratically in the heavy seas , unable to steer , depriving Schneider of a predictable course for range calculations . 
 As the range fell , the ships ' secondary batteries joined the battle . Norfolk and Dorsetshire closed and began firing with their 8 in ( 203 mm ) guns . At 09 : 02 , a 16 @-@ inch shell from Rodney struck Bismarck 's forward superstructure , killing hundreds of men and severely damaging the two forward turrets . According to survivors , this salvo probably killed both Lindemann and Lütjens and the rest of the bridge staff . The main fire control director was also destroyed by this hit , which probably also killed Schneider . A second shell from this salvo struck the forward main battery was disabled , though it would manage to fire one last salvo at 09 : 27 . Lieutenant von Müllenheim @-@ Rechberg , in the rear control station , took over firing control for the rear turrets . He managed to fire three salvos before a shell destroyed the gun director , disabling his equipment . He gave the order for the guns to fire independently , but by 09 : 31 , all four main battery turrets had been put out of action . One of Bismarck 's shells exploded 20 feet off Rodney 's bow and damaged her starboard torpedo tube — the closest Bismarck came to a direct hit on her opponents . 
 By 10 : 00 , Tovey 's two battleships had fired over 700 main battery shells , many at very close range ; Bismarck had been reduced to a shambles , aflame from stem to stern . She suffered from a 20 ° list to port and was low in the water by the stern . Rodney closed to 2 @,@ 700 m ( 3 @,@ 000 yd ) , point @-@ blank range for guns of that size , and continued to fire . Tovey could not cease fire until the Germans struck their ensigns or it became clear they were abandoning ship . Rodney fired two torpedoes from her port @-@ side tube and claimed one hit . According to Ludovic Kennedy , " if true , [ this is ] the only instance in history of one battleship torpedoing another " . 
 First Officer Hans Oels ordered the men below decks to abandon ship ; he instructed the engine room crews to open the ship 's watertight doors and prepare scuttling charges . Gerhard Junack , the chief engineering officer , ordered his men to set the demolition charges with a 9 @-@ minute fuse but the intercom system broke down and he sent a messenger to confirm the order to scuttle the ship . The messenger never returned and Junack primed the charges and ordered the crew to abandon the ship . Junack and his comrades heard the demolition charges detonate as they made their way up through the various levels . Oels rushed throughout the ship , ordering men to abandon their posts . After he reached the deck a huge explosion killed him and about a hundred others . 
 The four British ships fired more than 2 @,@ 800 shells at Bismarck , and scored more than 400 hits , but were unable to sink Bismarck by gunfire . At around 10 : 20 , running low on fuel , Tovey ordered the cruiser Dorsetshire to sink Bismarck with torpedoes and sent his battleships back to port . Dorsetshire fired a pair of torpedoes into Bismarck 's starboard side , one of which hit . Dorsetshire then moved around to her port side and fired another torpedo , which also hit . By the time these torpedo attacks took place , the ship was already listing so badly that the deck was partly awash . It appears that the final torpedo may have detonated against Bismarck 's port side superstructure , which was by then already underwater . Around 10 : 35 , Bismarck capsized to port and slowly sank by the stern , disappearing from the surface at 10 : 40 . Some survivors reported they saw Captain Lindemann standing at attention at the stem of the ship as she sank . 
 Junack , who had abandoned ship by the time it capsized , observed no underwater damage to the ship 's starboard side . Von Müllenheim @-@ Rechberg reported the same but assumed that the port side , which was then under water , had been more significantly damaged . Around 400 men were now in the water ; Dorsetshire and the destroyer Maori moved in and lowered ropes to pull the survivors aboard . At 11 : 40 , Dorsetshire 's captain ordered the rescue effort abandoned after lookouts spotted what they thought was a U @-@ boat . Dorsetshire had rescued 85 men and Maori had picked up 25 by the time they left the scene . A U @-@ boat later reached the survivors and found three men , and a German trawler rescued another two . One of the men picked up by the British died of his wounds the following day . Out of a crew of over 2 @,@ 200 men , only 114 survived . 
 Bismarck was mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht ( armed forces report ) three times during Operation Rheinübung . The first was an account of the Battle of the Denmark Strait ; the second was a brief account of the ship 's destruction , and the third was an exaggerated claim that Bismarck had sunk a British destroyer and shot down five aircraft . In 1959 , C. S. Forester published his novel Last Nine Days of the Bismarck . The book was adapted for the movie Sink the Bismarck ! , released the following year . For dramatic effect the film showed Bismarck sinking a British destroyer and shooting down two aircraft , neither of which happened . That same year , Johnny Horton released the song " Sink the Bismarck " . 
 = = Wreckage = = 
 = = = Discovery by Robert Ballard = = = 
 The wreck of Bismarck was discovered on 8 June 1989 by Dr. Robert Ballard , the oceanographer responsible for finding RMS Titanic . Bismarck was found to be resting upright at a depth of approximately 4 @,@ 791 m ( 15 @,@ 719 ft ) , about 650 km ( 400 mi ) west of Brest . The ship struck an extinct underwater volcano , which rose some 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) above the surrounding abyssal plain , triggering a 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) landslide . Bismarck slid down the mountain , coming to a stop two @-@ thirds down . 
 Ballard 's survey found no underwater penetrations of the ship 's fully armoured citadel . Eight holes were found in the hull , one on the starboard side and seven on the port side , all above the waterline . One of the holes is in the deck , on the bow 's starboard side . The angle and shape indicates the shell that created the hole was fired from Bismarck 's port side and struck the starboard anchor chain . The anchor chain has disappeared down this hole . Six holes are amidships , three shell fragments pierced the upper splinter belt , and one made a hole in the main armour belt . Further aft a huge hole is visible , parallel to the aircraft catapult , on the deck . The submersibles recorded no sign of a shell penetration through the main or side armour here , and it is likely that the shell penetrated the deck armour only . Huge dents showed that many of the 14 inch shells fired by King George V bounced off the German belt armour . 
 Ballard noted that he found no evidence of the internal implosions that occur when a hull that is not fully flooded sinks . The surrounding water , which has much greater pressure than the air in the hull , would crush the ship . Instead , Ballard points out that the hull is in relatively good condition ; he states simply that " Bismarck did not implode . " This suggests that Bismarck 's compartments were flooded when the ship sank , supporting the scuttling theory . Ballard added " we found a hull that appears whole and relatively undamaged by the descent and impact " . They concluded that the direct cause of sinking was scuttling : sabotage of engine @-@ room valves by her crew , as claimed by German survivors . Ballard kept the wreck 's exact location a secret to prevent other divers from taking artefacts from the ship , a practice he considered a form of grave robbing . 
 The whole stern had broken away ; as it was not near the main wreckage and has not yet been found , it can be assumed this did not occur on impact with the sea floor . The missing section came away roughly where the torpedo had hit , raising questions of possible structural failure . The stern area had also received several hits , increasing the torpedo damage . This , coupled with the fact the ship sank " stern first " and had no structural support to hold it in place , suggests the stern detached at the surface . In 1942 Prinz Eugen was also torpedoed in the stern , which collapsed . This prompted a strengthening of the stern structures on all German capital ships . 
 = = = Subsequent expeditions = = = 
 In June 2001 , Deep Ocean Expeditions , partnered with Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution , conducted another investigation of the wreck . The researchers used Russian @-@ built mini @-@ subs . William N. Lange , a Woods Hole expert , stated , " You see a large number of shell holes in the superstructure and deck , but not that many along the side , and none below the waterline . " The expedition found no penetrations in the main armoured belt , above or below the waterline . The examiners noted several long gashes in the hull , but attributed these to impact on the sea floor . 
 An Anglo @-@ American expedition in July 2001 was funded by a British TV channel . The team used the volcano — the only one in that area — to locate the wreck . Using ROVs to film the hull , the team concluded that the ship had sunk due to combat damage . Expedition leader David Mearns claimed significant gashes had been found in the hull : " My feeling is that those holes were probably lengthened by the slide , but initiated by torpedoes " . 
 The 2002 documentary Expedition : Bismarck , directed by James Cameron and filmed in May – June 2002 using smaller and more agile Mir submersibles , reconstructed the events leading to the sinking . These provided the first interior shots . His findings were that there was not enough damage below the waterline to confirm that she had been sunk rather than scuttled . Close inspection of the wreckage confirmed that none of the torpedoes or shells had penetrated the second layer of the inner hull . Using small ROVs to examine the interior , Cameron discovered that the torpedo blasts had failed to shatter the torpedo bulkheads . 
 Despite their sometimes differing viewpoints , these experts generally agree that Bismarck would have eventually foundered if the Germans had not scuttled her first . Ballard estimated that Bismarck could still have floated for at least a day when the British vessels ceased fire and could have been captured by the Royal Navy , a position supported by the historian Ludovic Kennedy ( who was serving on the destroyer HMS Tartar at the time ) . Kennedy stated , " That she would have foundered eventually there can be little doubt ; but the scuttling ensured that it was sooner rather than later . " When asked whether Bismarck would have sunk if the Germans had not scuttled the ship , Cameron replied " Sure . But it might have taken half a day . " In Mearns ' subsequent book Hood and Bismarck , he conceded that scuttling " may have hastened the inevitable , but only by a matter of minutes . " Ballard later concluded that " As far as I was concerned , the British had sunk the ship regardless of who delivered the final blow . " 
 = Belle Vue Zoological Gardens = 
 Belle Vue Zoological Gardens was a large zoo , amusement park , exhibition hall complex and speedway stadium in Belle Vue , Manchester , England , opened in 1836 . The brainchild of John Jennison , the gardens were initially intended to be an entertainment for the genteel middle classes , with formal gardens and dancing on open @-@ air platforms during the summer , but they soon became one of the most popular attractions in Northern England . Before moving to Belle Vue , Jennison , a part @-@ time gardener , had run a small aviary at his home , the beginnings of the zoo that over the years grew to become the third @-@ largest in the United Kingdom . 
 Jennison set out a small amusements area in Belle Vue during the 1870s , which was expanded in the early 20th century to become what was advertised as the " showground of the world " . Popular rides included the 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) Bobs roller coaster and the Scenic Railway . Other entertainments included grand firework displays from 1852 and an annual Christmas circus from 1922 . Music and dancing were popular attractions in Belle Vue 's various ballrooms . The Kings Hall , opened in 1910 , housed the Hallé Orchestra for several years and hosted concerts by artists such as Jimi Hendrix , The Who , The Rolling Stones , Leonard Cohen , Johnny Cash and Led Zeppelin . 
 Catering for visitors at Belle Vue was on an industrial scale , ranging from the late 19th century hot water rooms , which accommodated up to 3 @,@ 000 diners each , providing crockery and hot water for those who brought their own picnics , to more upmarket themed restaurants . Belle Vue became a part of the caterer and hotelier Charles Forte 's business empire towards the end of its life in the 1960s . Although he made some improvements to the zoo , Forte 's interests lay in developing the gardens ' dining and exhibition facilities . The Kings Hall was then the largest exhibition space outside London , but competition from the G @-@ Mex exhibition and conference centre in central Manchester led directly to its closure in 1987 . 
 At its peak Belle Vue occupied 165 acres ( 0 @.@ 67 km2 ) and attracted more than two million visitors a year , up to 250 @,@ 000 of whom visited over the Easter weekend . The zoo closed in September 1977 after its owners decided they could no longer afford its losses of £ 100 @,@ 000 a year . The amusement park remained open on summer weekends until 1980 . The land was sold in 1982 , and the site finally cleared in 1987 . All that remains of Belle Vue today is a greyhound racing stadium and a snooker hall built in the stadium 's car park . 
 = = Commercial history = = 
 Belle Vue Zoological Gardens was the brainchild of entrepreneur and part @-@ time gardener John Jennison . He opened the grounds around his home in Adswood , Stockport to the public in 1826 , from where he and his wife Maria sold fruit and vegetables . He called his establishment Strawberry Gardens , later Jennison 's Gardens . Manchester 's increasing urban population encouraged the development of a thriving leisure industry , and public parks were popular . In 1828 or ' 29 Jennison purchased an adjacent 0 @.@ 5 acres ( 0 @.@ 20 ha ) of land on which he and his wife built an aviary , to which they charged admission ; its first occupant was a captured thrush . Jennison turned his home into a public house , the Adam and Eve , which he and his wife ran together . 
 In 1835 Jennison was approached by businessman George Gill , who suggested that he lease Belle Vue – a public house in 35 @.@ 75 acres ( 14 @.@ 47 ha ) of open land between Kirkmanshulme Lane and Hyde Road – as a more suitable site for his aviary . Jennison took out a mortgage of £ 300 to pay off the £ 80 mortgage on the Strawberry Gardens and spent the remainder on a trial six @-@ month lease of the Belle Vue property , in June 1836 . In December Jennison signed a 99 @-@ year lease at a rent of £ 135 per annum . For an extra £ 100 a year he leased additional land to extend the western boundary to Redgate Lane , close to Stockport Road , where he made a second entrance . To finance further expansion Jennison re @-@ mortgaged the site for £ 800 . 
 Except for their belongings , which fitted on a handcart , all the Jennisons took with them to Belle Vue was two or three <unk> containing parrots and other assorted birds . At its opening in 1836 , Belle Vue contained an Italian Garden , lakes , mazes and hothouses , as well as the aviary . The family decided that their zoological collection had to be expanded as a matter of priority , and by 1839 elephants , lions , and other exotic African animals had been added . Many other attractions were subsequently added , including a racecourse in 1847 . The gardens were an immediate success , but the neighbouring St James 's Church was offended that they were open on Sundays , and asked Jennison to close while services were being conducted ; he " politely but firmly refused " . 
 Admission to the gardens , which were open until 9 pm during the summer , was by subscription ticket priced at 10 shillings for a family and 5 shillings for an individual , beyond the means of most workers . Concerts of " genteel music " were staged , and there was dancing to various bands on a large open @-@ air wooden platform . Initially , the only public transport to Belle Vue was by horse @-@ drawn omnibus from what is now Piccadilly , in central Manchester , but the last departure time of 6 : 00 pm coincided with the end of most workers ' shifts . The first railway station was opened near Belle Vue in 1842 , allowing workers easier access to the gardens and their attractions , and by 1848 complaints began to appear in the press that " roughs " in coarse attire were embarrassing middle @-@ class ladies on the dancing platform by attempting to dance with them . There were also complaints about working @-@ class men dancing together , and increasing resentment from working @-@ class patrons about Belle Vue 's " forbidding dress requirements , its restricted opening hours , [ and ] its unwelcoming admission price " . In the words of historian David Mayer , Jennison was facing a crisis : " either keep Belle Vue Gardens an exclusive , class @-@ specific , genteel preserve for the gentry and the middle class – who would arrive and depart in their own carriages through the Hyde Road gate – or open the gardens to a popular crowd who would arrive by train at the Stockport Road ( Longsight ) gate " . For a time , Jennison sent carriages to the railway station to collect the first @-@ class passengers , but he also abandoned the idea of subscription tickets , settling instead on a general admission price of 4d , rising to 6d in 1851 . 
 = = = Financial difficulties = = = 
 Although the gardens thrived in their early years , by 1842 Jennison was in financial difficulties , and on 13 December bankruptcy proceedings were initiated . Jennison 's problems were caused by his failure to sell the Strawberry Gardens property , competition from the recently opened Manchester Zoological Gardens , and the Manchester and Birmingham Railway track cutting through the land Jennison had leased in December 1836 , restricting access to the gardens . Jennison twice tried unsuccessfully to sell Belle Vue , after which his creditors allowed him time to make a success of the gardens ; by the end of the 1843 season Jennison was able to repay his debts . The railway that had been a thorn in his side eventually proved to be an asset when Longsight railway station was re @-@ sited closer to Belle Vue in 1842 , making it easier for visitors to reach the gardens . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 An additional 13 acres ( 5 @.@ 3 ha ) of farmland at the western end of the site was incorporated into the gardens in 1843 . One of the ponds was enlarged to form a boating lake , which later became the Firework Lake . An island was created in the middle of the lake , which housed a natural history museum . In 1858 another 8 acres ( 3 @.@ 2 ha ) were leased , in the triangle between Kirkmanshulme Lane and Hyde Road , from which clay was extracted to make bricks for the gardens ' buildings . The result of the excavations was a large hole that Jennison filled with water , creating the Great Lake in 1858 . Two paddle steamers , the Little Eastern and the Little Britain , each capable of accommodating 100 passengers , offered trips around the lake for 1d ( equivalent to £ 0 @.@ 38 in 2015 ) . By 1905 Belle Vue consisted of 68 acres ( 28 ha ) of walled gardens , with an additional 97 acres ( 39 ha ) outside its walls . 
 = = = War years = = = 
 During the First World War the gardens were used by the Manchester Regiment for drilling , and a munitions factory complete with railway sidings was built . 
 At the start of the Second World War the gardens were closed at noon following Neville Chamberlain 's radio broadcast announcing that Britain was at war with Germany on Sunday , 3 September 1939 , forcing the cancellation of an " open rehearsal " by the Gorton Philharmonic Orchestra . The nation 's armed forces immediately sequestered the Exhibition Hall , the restaurants and most of the top floor of the administrative offices . They also took over the sports ground to use as a barrage balloon base , and dug several air @-@ raid shelters . The gardens were allowed to re @-@ open on 15 September 1939 , and remained open throughout the rest of war , although parts of the site were requisitioned by Manchester Corporation and converted into allotments . 
 Although the Second World War forced the cancellation of many events , and made it difficult to feed all the zoo 's animals , it was nevertheless very lucrative for the gardens . Profits steadily increased , and the company made several compensation claims for the requisitioning of its facilities . It was granted £ 4 @,@ 000 in 1941 ( equivalent to £ 179 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) and £ 7 @,@ 242 in 1942 ( equivalent to £ 304 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) ; in gratitude for the latter , the company presented the Civil Defence Service with a new mobile canteen . 
 = = = Changes in ownership = = = 
 The Jennisons had been considering setting up a limited company to administer the gardens since 1895 . Most were in agreement except for Richard , John Jennison Snr 's youngest son . After his death in 1919 , the remaining family members created John Jennison & Co Ltd with a capital of £ 253 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 10 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , comprising investments and loans totalling £ 63 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 2 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . George Jennison became chairman , secretary , treasurer and joint managing director with John Jennison Jnr , John Jennison Snr 's great @-@ grandson . John , William , Angelo and Richard Jennison Jnr were appointed to the board of directors which was reported to be a " very happy board with few meetings and an entire absence of quarrels " . 
 On 27 November 1924 the Jennisons agreed to sell Belle Vue for £ 250 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 12 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) to Harry George Skipp , but he was acting as an intermediary , and on 6 March 1925 a further contract was signed by the Jennisons , Skipp and a new company called Belle Vue ( Manchester ) Ltd . The agreement was for the new company to take over from 1 January 1925 , but the transfer did not take place until 28 March . Under the new managing director , John Henry Iles , the gardens expanded to include what became a world @-@ famous amusement park . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Belle Vue enjoyed a brief post @-@ war boom between the end of the Second World War and the early 1950s . During the early 1960s , it could still attract 150 @,@ 000 visitors on Easter Monday , but by the end of the decade that figure had dropped to about 30 @,@ 000 , as the competition from rival amusement parks increased . Sir Leslie Joseph and Charles Forte bought Belle Vue in 1956 , but by 1963 Forte was in sole control . Although he made some improvements to the zoo , Forte 's interests lay in developing the gardens ' dining and exhibition facilities . Fire became an " ever present hazard " during Belle Vue 's later years . The most devastating occurred in 1958 and destroyed many buildings , including the Coronation Ballroom . Although the zoo was spared , the fire almost reached the lion house , distressing one of the older lionesses so much that she had to be shot . Vandalism and theft also became serious and recurring problems ; intruders killed 38 of the zoo 's birds , including 9 penguins , in 1960 . 
 = = Zoo = = 
 Belle Vue was the first privately financed zoo in England , and grew to become the third @-@ largest in the UK . Jennison 's original idea was that the gardens should be primarily a botanical excursion , but it became clear that the public was interested in the animals as an attraction in their own right . The initial collection had consisted of domestic birds and a few exotic parrots , but Jennison probably also acquired those animals that could not be sold after the Manchester Zoological Gardens closed in 1842 . By 1856 , the Jennisons had added kangaroos , rhinos , lions , bears and gazelles . 
 In 1871 the zoo acquired four giraffes ; the following year an elephant , Maharajah , was bought for £ 680 from Wombwell 's Menagerie No.1 in Edinburgh . The plan to transport Maharajah from Edinburgh to Manchester by train was abandoned after the elephant destroyed the railway compartment in which he was to travel . It was therefore decided that Maharajah and his trainer , Lorenzo Lawrence , should walk to Manchester , a journey they completed in 10 days with little incident . Lorenzo became the zoo 's head elephant keeper , and stayed at Belle Vue for more than 40 years . Maharajah provided elephant rides to the public for ten years , until his death from pneumonia in 1882 . His skeleton was preserved and added to the gardens ' natural history museum . When the museum was decommissioned in 1941 , the skeleton , along with other exhibits , was transferred to the Manchester Museum . 
 In 1893 a chimpanzee was purchased from another of Wombwell 's Travelling <unk> in London . The four @-@ year @-@ old chimpanzee , Consul , was dressed in a smoking jacket and cap and puffed on a cob pipe ; he frequently accompanied James Jennison to business meetings . Consul proved to be exceptionally popular , and after his death on 24 November 1894 , the Jennisons immediately obtained a replacement , Consul II , who played a violin while riding a tricycle around the gardens , later graduating to a bicycle . 
 Food for the animals became difficult to obtain during the First World War , but for the most part the gardens carried on as usual . Following the declaration of peace , several monkeys originally destined for government experiments with poison gas were acquired , as was a hippo , a dromedary and a zebra . In 1921 and 1922 the zoo obtained two animals who became great favourites . Lil , an Indian elephant , arrived in 1921 accompanied by her British Malayan handler , Phil Fernandez . Phil and Lil provided entertainment , advertising , and elephant rides for 35 years . Frank , a brown bear , arrived in 1922 . By the time of his death , 40 years later , he was known as the " Father of the Zoo " . 
 Open @-@ air cages installed in the Monkey House resulted in a dramatic improvement in the life expectancy of its residents , but the potential for expansion and improvement after the First World War was limited by the post @-@ war economy . Rising labour costs and minimal profits resulted in the gardens ' increasing dilapidation . The zoo began to be neglected after the sale of Belle Vue in 1925 , but it was rejuvenated by the appointment of Gerald Iles as zoo superintendent in 1933 . A new Gibbon Cage and Monkey Mountain were created and the Reptile House was extended . 
 On the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 , the animal keepers were issued with rifles to deal with any dangerous animals who might escape if the gardens were bombed . A night shift was introduced to watch over the animals 24 hours a day . A list of dangerous animals that was drawn up included 13 lions , 6 tigers , 2 leopards , 1 cheetah , 2 tigons , 3 other small cats and several bears . Although the zoo 's administrators succeeded in convincing the local authorities that any danger from the animals was minimal , primarily because the perimeter walls were so high , the keepers were replaced in their sharp @-@ shooting role by soldiers who patrolled the grounds armed with tommy guns . 
 Stocks were increased by animals transferred from other zoos that had been forced to close . Initially the zoo was given favourable food rationing quotas , but certain foods became unavailable and the price of others increased dramatically . Bananas were impossible to obtain and the supply of fish was problematic . As a result , the keepers were forced to experiment . The <unk> became casualties of the food shortage when their keepers attempted to feed them strips of beef soaked in cod liver oil . Although they seemed to thrive on this diet , their digestive systems were unable to cope with the unusual food , and they eventually died of stomach ulcers . The lions ' new diet was green @-@ coloured horsemeat , and the monkeys were fed on boiled potatoes . The birds @-@ of @-@ paradise ( lack of millet ) , and the penguins ( lack of fish ) , were unable to adapt to their make @-@ do diet and also succumbed . Vegetables were not in short supply however , as the garden staff grew lettuce , cabbage and carrots in the kitchen gardens . 
 Wartime interruptions in the supply of gas for heating resulted in the deaths of all the zoo 's tropical fish and several other animals , including a lioness called Pearl and her litter of cubs . Although Manchester was heavily bombed during the Blitz , the gardens sustained only minor damage . The Scenic Railway was hit by an incendiary bomb and the Reptile House was damaged by shell splinters from ack @-@ ack guns , which also caused the death of a bull bison . 
 Iles remained as superintendent until 1957 , and proved to be a good publicist for the zoo , taking part in radio and television programmes such as Children 's Hour . A new attraction was introduced in 1963 , a <unk> ' Tea Party , which proved to be very popular . The zoo 's last superintendent , Peter Grayson , took over in 1971 , but by then the owners of Belle Vue had lost interest in the zoo , and closure seemed imminent . 
 News that Belle Vue Zoological Gardens would close on 11 September 1977 was announced on BBC Radio at 10 : 00 am on 4 August 1977 . The 24 keepers were informed an hour before the news report went on air . The reason given was that the company could no longer afford to cover losses of about £ 100 @,@ 000 per year . Shortly before the closure , a number of non @-@ poisonous reptiles were stolen from the Reptile House , only one of which , a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) python , was recovered . 
 A 15 @-@ year @-@ old elephant , Ellie May , had acquired an undeserved reputation for being dangerous , which made her extremely difficult to sell . Her food costs became difficult to justify , but Grayson refused to have her put down . Although he left the zoo in January 1978 , Grayson returned frequently to care for Ellie May , the last animal left at the zoo . Eventually Rotterdam Zoo agreed to take her , and plans were made to transport the elephant to the Netherlands . Ellie May refused to budge however , and overnight developed pneumonia and heart failure . Grayson and veterinary surgeon , David Taylor , felt that she would not recover , and decided to call in a marksman to euthanise her . 
 Public reaction to the zoo 's closure was one of " relative indifference " , with only a few minor protests . The doors remained open to visitors at a discounted admission price until early November , a little beyond the official closing date , by which time most of the animals had been sold for an estimated £ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Gardens and amusement park = = 
 Under the Jennisons , the main priorities for Belle Vue were the zoological and botanical gardens ; amusements were provided merely as a distraction . The Jennisons laid out formal gardens in various styles between 1836 and 1898 , including mazes , grottoes , an Italian garden , " billiard @-@ table lawns " and constructed Tropical Plant Houses . There were also exotic constructions like the Indian temple and grotto , designed by George Danson , Belle Vue 's scenic artist . Built to resemble a ruined temple , it housed snakes and crocodiles as well as flowers . At the end of the 19th century , " the resort relied almost entirely for its attraction on its delightful gardens " , but by 1931 the formalism had entirely disappeared . The gardens were also used to stage large political rallies for a wide spectrum of opinion , such as the Great Liberal Demonstration of 1924 , at which Lloyd George addressed a crowd of 50 @,@ 000 , the first political meeting at which loudspeakers were used . The British Union of Fascists , popularly known as the Blackshirts , also held a meeting there , in September 1934 . One contemporary commentator observed that " perhaps the Ku Klux Klan will be found in session there one day , for Belle Vue is nothing if not catholic " . 
 The Jennisons set out a small amusements area near the main entrance to the gardens in Hyde Road during the <unk> comprising steam @-@ driven attractions such as the Ocean Wave , installed in 1894 , which simulated a storm at sea . 
 John Henry Iles , who took over control of Belle Vue in 1925 , believed that expansion of the rides and the fun aspect of the park was the way forward , and added attractions such as <unk> , the Caterpillar , the Ghost Train , Jack & Jill , and the Flying Sea Planes . The Scenic Railway , purchased in 1925 but not fully operational until two years later , proved to be one of Belle Vue 's most popular rides , and remained in use until 1975 . 
 The Bobs rollercoaster was arguably the most popular ride of all , so named because it cost a bob ( shilling ) for admission . It had an 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) drop at a 45 degree angle , down which the cars travelled at 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) . It was built by Harry Traver and designed by Fredrick Church , who had to develop a series of engineering innovations to make the ride possible . The Bobs ' distinctive white @-@ painted wooden superstructure became an imposing element of the Belle Vue skyline . 
 During the 1960s and 70s " Professor " Len Tomlinson operated one of the UK 's last flea circuses in a small booth on the amusement park . The attraction consisted of harnessed human fleas racing chariots at the rate of an inch every few seconds , pulling a garden roller , riding a tricycle and " fencing fleas " scrabbling at pins stuck in pieces of cork in a semblance of a sword fight . The flea circus closed down in the late 1970s as improvements in domestic living conditions made human fleas more difficult to obtain . 
 When the zoo closed in 1977 , it was announced that the gardens and amusement park would be expanded with " new active leisure pursuits " . By 1978 the site had been renamed Belle Vue Leisure Park , and the Tropical River House had been converted to a skateboard arena in an attempt to cash in on the new craze from America . The arena turned out to be poor investment however , as there was virtually no demand after the first few months . The 1977 closure of the London Festival Gardens in Battersea , London , allowed Belle Vue the opportunity to buy their Jetstream ride , which opened the following year . 
 Other attractions that closed at about the same time as the zoo included the boating on Firework Lake , and the miniature railway . In 1979 the amusement park was leased to the main concessionaire , Alf <unk> , although by then it was only open at weekends during the summer season . The long @-@ promised restoration of the Scenic Railway had not happened and the Water Chute had closed . In August 1980 , <unk> was given notice to close down the park by 26 October 1980 and to have all his equipment removed by February 1981 . 
 = = Music and dancing = = 
 In 1853 Belle Vue staged the first British open brass band championships . Attended by a crowd of more than 16 @,@ 000 , it was the first of what became an annual event until 1981 . A revival occurred in the popularity of brass band contests during the 1970s ; competitions between local bands could attract crowds of up to 5 @,@ 000 . 
 Belle Vue contained several ballrooms , the first of which was constructed in 1851 , above a hotel at the Longsight entrance to the gardens . A larger structure , the Music Hall , was built in 1856 , underneath the firework viewing stand , capable of accommodating 10 @,@ 000 people on its 27 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 500 m2 ) of dance floor . A wooden open @-@ air dancing platform was opened in 1852 , and by 1855 had been extended to cover an area of 0 @.@ 5 acres ( 0 @.@ 20 ha ) . Throughout the summer , music was provided by bands such as the Belle Vue Military , the Belle Vue Quadrille and the Cheetham Hill Brass Band . Open @-@ air dancing continued until the 1940s , but by then the attraction had lost its appeal , and the platform was converted to a roller skating rink . It was destroyed by fire in 1958 . The same fire destroyed the Coronation Ballroom , which was replaced by a " huge ballroom complex " known as the New Elizabethan Ballroom in 1959 . With room for 4 @,@ 000 dancers on its two floors , and the largest Wurlitzer organ in Europe ( installed in 1967 ) , it was described as being " unsurpassed in Great Britain for size , comfort and elegance " . Many well @-@ known bands of the time regularly played for the dancers , including Geraldo and his Orchestra and the Joe Loss Orchestra . During the 1960s and ' 70s the ballroom also hosted discothèques , such as Jimmy Savile 's Top Ten Club . 
 = = Kings Hall = = 
 Opened in 1910 the Kings Hall was a converted tea room , enlarged in 1928 and reconstructed as a " saucer like arena " capable of seating 7 @,@ 000 people . The name " Kings " was chosen in reference to the two kings who reigned during the six @-@ week period of its construction : George V and Edward VII . The hall was designed to stage " Demonstrations , Exhibitions , Social Gatherings , etc " , and was a popular concert venue until the 1970s , with appearances by artists such Jimi Hendrix , The Who , The Rolling Stones and Led Zeppelin . The Kings Hall became home to the Hallé Orchestra in 1942 , when its previous base , the Free Trade Hall , was damaged by bombing during the Manchester Blitz ; the orchestra continued to perform concerts at Belle Vue for more than 30 years . 
 From 1961 until 1966 , bingo sessions were held in the hall . Able to accommodate up to 3 @,@ 500 players , it was advertised as the " largest bingo club in the world " . Many exhibitions were also held in the hall , which with its 100 @,@ 000 square feet ( 9 @,@ 300 m2 ) of floor space was one of the largest venues outside London . It was split into three separate halls in 1956 , to allow three exhibitions to be run simultaneously . 
 The last piece of live music played in the hall , on 14 February 1982 , was a performance by the Glossop School Band , who were taking part in the North West Amateur Brass Band Championship in front of a crowd of 1 @,@ 700 . The hall had been sold 18 months earlier to a development company , <unk> Tyas Development Group , and was by then scheduled for demolition to allow the site to be redeveloped . News of the sale had triggered the formation of local action groups , who organised a petition signed by 50 @,@ 000 people in an unsuccessful effort to save the hall . The exhibition halls were sold to Mullet Ltd. in 1983 , but competition from the newly opened G @-@ Mex exhibition and conference centre in central Manchester led directly to their closure . The site was sold to the British Car Auction Group in 1987 , and the buildings demolished to make way for a large car auction centre . 
 = = Catering = = 
 The gates were opened to visitors between 10 : 00 am and 10 : 30 pm . <unk> around the gardens sold snacks and ice cream , made in Belle Vue 's own ice cream factory . Families were catered for at lunchtimes by the hot @-@ water rooms , each of which could accommodate up to 3 @,@ 000 diners , providing hot water for drinks and crockery for visitors who brought their own picnics . The price was 2d per person , according to the 1892 guide book , and cakes and jams made in the gardens ' bakery and on @-@ site kitchens were also available , at extra cost . " One shilling tea rooms " , close to the hot water rooms , offered lunchtime deals such as a pot of tea , bread and butter , green salad and fruit cake for a shilling . The more expensive restaurants tended to open during the evening . Alcohol was available in the many licensed premises in the gardens , including , until its closure in 1928 , beer produced in Belle Vue 's on @-@ site brewery . Many public houses were also opened in the area immediately surrounding the gardens . 
 Licensed hotels were built at each of the three entrances to the gardens . The Longsight Hotel , built in 1851 and demolished in 1985 , was a part of the entrance . The Lake Hotel , built in 1876 , had facilities for the free stabling of horses belonging to Belle Vue 's visitors . It was extended in 1929 and then again in 1960 , when a concert room was added , offering late @-@ night entertainment . After its closure in the 1980s , the hotel was demolished . The Hyde Road Hotel and Restaurant at the main entrance , originally known as Belle Vue House , was renamed the Palm Court Restaurant in 1942 , and then Caesar 's Palace in 1969 . It housed a cabaret bar and a restaurant , which was converted to an amusement arcade in 1976 when it was once again renamed , to Jennison 's Ale House . The building was closed after a partial collapse in 1980 . 
 = = Firework displays = = 
 After a trip to London to visit The Great Exhibition of 1851 , Jennison 's ideas for Belle Vue became more ambitious . He decided to implement large , scheduled " fantastic " firework displays employing a scenic artist , George Danson , to design and create a 30 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 800 m2 ) canvas backdrop . The displays took place on an island in the middle of the Firework Lake , which also housed a small natural history museum . In keeping with Jennison 's desire for self @-@ sufficiency , the fireworks were made on @-@ site at Belle Vue . 
 The first display took place on 2 May 1852 , designed by " Signor Pietro " . The theme for the early displays was " battle enactment " , which proved to be popular with the paying public and resulted in Belle Vue becoming an all @-@ day entertainment venue . The firework displays incorporated real people and real weapons , some of which , 1866 @-@ vintage Snyder rifles , were issued to members of the local Home Guard during the Second World War . The first display , a re @-@ enactment of the Bombardment of Algiers involving 25 men , 300 rockets , 25 " large shells " , and 50 Roman candles , was watched by 18 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 The displays continued throughout the First World War , except that the use of rockets was prohibited under the Defence of the Realm Act . Reflecting contemporary events , the theme for the 1915 display was " The Battle of the Marne " ; in 1916 it was " The War in Flanders " , during which one spectator got so caught up in the action that he waded across the lake to join in with the " fighting " . Anticipating the outbreak of the Second World War , the theme for the 1933 display was " Air Raid on London " . 
 The last grand firework display took place in 1956 , on the theme of Robin Hood and His Merrie Men . 
 = = Circus = = 
 The first Belle Vue Circus took place in 1922 , but it was not considered a success . The next was staged in 1929 , after the company negotiated a deal with the Blackpool Tower Company to provide acts and equipment for what subsequently became a regular Christmas event held in the Kings Hall . One of the first arrivals from Blackpool was ringmaster George Lockhart , known as " the prince of <unk> " . Lockhart became synonymous with the Belle Vue Circus , and his face was used on many advertising posters . Zoo superintendent Gerald Iles included some of the zoo 's animals in the circus , in a feature called Noah 's Ark . 
 For the 1967 – 68 season , to celebrate his 39th consecutive year , the circus was temporarily renamed the " George Lockhart Celebration Circus " . Lockhart was the ringmaster for 43 years , until his retirement in 1970 at the age of 90 . His replacement , Danish @-@ born Nelly Jane , held the job for two years before being replaced by Norman Barrett , the last ringmaster . Another of the circus stalwarts was resident band leader and Belle Vue 's musical director Fred Bonelli , who started his career as a trumpet player for Barnum and Bailey 's circus band , and led various Belle Vue circus bands for 40 years . 
 Many of the acts featured animals , such as Eugene Weidmann 's mixed group of tigers and bears , Thorson <unk> and his Farmyard Friends , Willi Mullen 's Caucasian Cavalry & Ponies , Miss Wendy 's Performing Pigeons and Harry Belli 's Horse Riding Tiger – to say nothing of the Dog ! As well as the animal acts there was the usual collection of acrobats , strongmen and clowns , two of whom , Jacko the Clown and his partner " Little Billy " Merchant , performed at Belle Vue for thirty years . 
 The last circus to take place in the Kings Hall before its sale was in 1981 . For a few years afterwards the circus continued in the car park , then in a marquee on wasteland directly opposite the gardens ' main gates on Hyde Road . 
 = = Sports facilities = = 
 Sporting events became a permanent feature at Belle Vue after an athletics stadium was built in 1887 . 
 = = = Greyhound racing = = = 
 Greyhound racing was introduced to Belle Vue in 1926 , in the UK 's first purpose @-@ built greyhound stadium , constructed at a cost of £ 22 @,@ 000 . It was built on land leased by Belle Vue to the Greyhound Racing Association ( GRA ) , a company chaired by Sir William Gentle , who was also the chairman of Belle Vue ( Manchester ) Ltd . The site was sold to the GRA in 1937 , with the proviso that it had to be used for greyhound racing . 
 = = = Speedway = = = 
 One of the activities that became synonymous with Belle Vue was speedway ( known at the time as dirt track racing ) , which was introduced on 28 July 1928 in the recently built greyhound racing arena . The sport proved to be very popular , and the decision was taken to convert the 1887 athletics ground into a speedway stadium , which opened on 23 March 1929 . It was at the time the largest purpose @-@ built speedway stadium in the country , possibly in the world . Eventually it became the first home of the Belle Vue Aces , but it was also used for many other events , such as football , cricket , rugby league ( Belle Vue Rangers ) , baseball , stock car racing and tennis . The stadium had covered accommodation for 40 @,@ 000 spectators . As the speedway bikes ran on wood alcohol ( known as dope ) , they were unaffected by fuel rationing during the Second World War and racing was able to continue , although many other attractions in the gardens were forced to close . 
 Belle Vue sold the stadium in 1982 , but speedway continued there until 1987 ; the final event was a stock car race , held on 14 November 1987 , shortly before the stadium was demolished after having been sold to the British Car Auction Group . The Belle Vue Aces returned to their first home , the greyhound stadium , where they had begun in 1929 . 
 = = = Boxing and wrestling = = = 
 From the late 1920s until the outbreak of the Second World War , Belle Vue was " the boxing Mecca of Europe " . Bouts were held in the Kings Hall , and although popularity declined in the years following the war , Belle Vue staged a televised world championship fight in 1964 between Terry Downes and Willie <unk> . 
 The first wrestling contest took place in the Kings Hall on 15 December 1930 , and proved to be a popular attraction . Except for a break during the Second World War , events continued to be held until 1981 , watched by up to 5 @,@ 000 spectators . Popular performers included Jack Pye , Big Daddy , and Giant Haystacks . 
 = = = Rugby league = = = 
 The speedway stadium became the home of rugby league club , Broughton Rangers , who recruited international players including Frank Whitcombe ( who also worked in the zoo as a zookeeper ) , Billy Stott , and James Cumberbatch . When the club was taken over by Belle Vue in 1933 Broughton were given a 21 @-@ year lease for use of the stadium , at a rent to be based on attendances . The first Anglo @-@ Australian Test match of the 1933 – 34 Kangaroo tour of Great Britain was played at Belle Vue , with the home side 's victory attracting approximately 34 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 Games were suspended during the Second World War , and on their resumption in 1945 the club was renamed Belle Vue Rangers . Belle Vue declined to renew the lease when it expired in 1955 as the arrangement was proving to be a " financial burden " , and the team was disbanded . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 After a fire at Manchester City 's Hyde Road ground in 1920 , the club considered a move to the Belle Vue athletics stadium , but it was deemed too small . At the behest of Belle Vue director John Henry Iles and John Ayrton , Manchester Central , was formed , and played its home matches at the speedway stadium . One of Manchester Central 's first matches at Belle Vue was a visit by FA Cup holders Blackburn Rovers in September 1928 . The club attempted unsuccessfully to join The Football League in 1930 and in 1931 ; with momentum lost , the club faded , and folded in 1934 . 
 = = Present day = = 
 In 1963 the Top Lake , formerly known as the Great Lake , was filled in and a 32 @-@ lane ten @-@ pin bowling alley built on its site , just behind the Lake Hotel . Known as the Belle Vue Granada Bowl , it opened in 1965 , advertised as " the north 's leading luxury centre " . In 1983 , after the rest of Belle Vue had closed , it was sold to First Leisure Group , and bowling continued for a time . A snooker club was built in a corner of the car park in 1985 . All that remained of Belle Vue as of 2010 is the greyhound stadium and the snooker club ; the original gardens and amusement park are now an industrial and residential area . A road in the housing estate , Lockhart Close , was named after circus ringmaster George Lockhart . 
 In the aftermath of Manchester 's failed <unk> bid in 2008 , local groups began to lobby for the construction of a " linear park " in the area , building on " the legacy of Belle Vue " . It would have comprised a new zoo , deer park and amusement park . 
 = Walkabout ( Lost ) = 
 " Walkabout " is the fourth episode of the first season of Lost . The episode was directed by Jack Bender and written by David Fury . It first aired on October 13 , 2004 , on ABC . 
 The episode centers on the character of John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) , who in flashbacks is revealed , in one of the first plot twists of the show , to be paralyzed from the waist down as he attempts to join a walkabout tour . On the present day events , Locke leads a hunting mission after the wild boar in the jungle as the food supplies of the Oceanic 815 survivors starts to shorten , while other survivors decide to burn the plane 's fuselage . 
 John Locke 's backstory was conceived during the writing of the previous episode , " Tabula Rasa " , and director Jack Bender decided to shoot the flashbacks in a way it enhanced the contrast between Locke 's life before and after the crash . Problems involving the usage of real boar caused the producers to use computer @-@ generated replacements and shots that suggested the animals ' presence . " Walkabout " was watched by 18 @.@ 16 million people and was reviewed positively , later being considered one of the show 's best episodes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Flashbacks = = = 
 John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) is shown working in an office building for a box company . He has a cruel manager named Randy Nations ( Billy Ray <unk> ) who is constantly taunting and demeaning Locke . At one point Locke tells Randy off and feels great about it . He tells a woman named Helen on the phone about it , but it is revealed that she charges by the hour to talk with Locke , and that they have been conversing for eight months . Locke reveals to Helen that he is going on a walkabout and would like for Helen to go with him ; she tells him that she can 't meet customers in person and that his paid hour on the phone with her is up . 
 In a later flashback , Locke is in Australia talking to one of the leaders of a walkabout . He refuses to let Locke come on the walkabout because of his condition , saying it is too big of a risk for the insurance company . As the man gets up to leave for the trip , Locke is shown to be using a wheelchair . 
 Towards the end of the episode , a unique type of flashback is shown : one on the island . In the aftermath of Oceanic Flight 815 crash 's , Locke wakes up on the beach , and notices that his toes wiggle , making him realize that he is no longer paralyzed . He stands up and is called over by Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) to help with an injured person . 
 = = = On the Island = = = 
 It has been 4 days since the crash , September 25 , 2004 . Locke awakens from Oceanic Flight 815 's crash and wiggles his toes , realizing that he is no longer paralyzed . Boars raid the body @-@ filled fuselage , causing Jack to decide it should be burned . The next day , the survivors discover that their food is exhausted , and wonder what to do . Locke reveals to hold many hunting knives , and suggests to go after the boar in the jungle . On his hunting mission , Locke is accompanied by Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) – who was given by Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) an antenna , which after being set will help triangulate the signal of the French transmission heard two days before – and Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau ) . 
 While hunting the boar , Michael is wounded by one of the animals . Kate starts leading Michael back to the beach , while Locke goes on his own into the jungle . As Kate and Michael head back , she climbs up a tree to attach the antenna . However , before she can finish , she hears the sounds of the monster , causing her to drop and break the equipment . The Monster heads straight for Locke , who stares straight at it . 
 Throughout the episode , Jack has been talking to Rose Nadler ( L. Scott Caldwell ) . Rose 's husband , Bernard Nadler ( Sam Anderson ) , was in the tail section of the plane in the bathroom . He , along with the rest of the tail section 's passengers , is believed by the survivors to be dead , but Rose is convinced that he is alive and that the tail section of the plane thinks that the middle section is dead . 
 Michael and Kate return to camp , and when she goes to tell Jack about Locke , Jack sees a man in a suit walk into the jungle . Jack chases after him and Kate follows , but instead of the mysterious figure , they find Locke , who brings with him a dead boar . That night , the fuselage is burned while Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) holds a memorial service for the dead passengers using information she found in their passports , wallets , and luggage . Michael thanks Locke for hunting the boar and then asks Locke about the Monster , but Locke says that he did not see anything . Looking towards the fire , Locke sees his wheelchair against the flame and smiles . 
 = = Production = = 
 While writing " Tabula Rasa " , Damon Lindelof suggested that John Locke was in a wheelchair before going to the island , and while the rest of the writing team initially reacted with shock , they embraced the idea . Lindelof wanted to embrace how " what you think these people are is actually entirely different " , particularly since " Tabula Rasa " did not have many developments on Kate 's backstory or why she was a fugitive , " the Locke thing was a huge , big , reveal " . To enhance the plot twist , all the flashbacks were shot in a way that disguised the presence of a wheelchair . In the scene where Locke is sitting in his bed , the paralysis is alluded by the <unk> nerve stimulation machine on his <unk> . Lindelof also created a title for the episode , " Lord of the Files " , a pun on Lord of the Flies and Locke 's off @-@ island occupation , but the writers had already settled on " Walkabout " . 
 To enhance the contrast between Locke 's pre and post @-@ crash life , director Jack Bender decided to put very little green and blue imagery in the flashbacks since the two colors are the most present in the island – being the jungle and the sea , respectively . The flashbacks were also shot with fixed cameras and wider lenses , " Godfather @-@ style " , to display the bleakness and sterility of Locke 's world , and objects such as vending machines were put to remind of the " things taken for granted " that the castaways lack on the island . The flashback scenes featuring the day of the crash ( see above ' Flashbacks ' section above ) were shot in a way that looked similar to the ones from the pilot episode , with the only shot from the pilot being the one where Jack requests Locke 's assistance . 
 The scenes featuring boar were originally planned to use actual , domesticated animals . Since bringing domesticated boar from continental United States was expensive , and the animals available in Hawaii did not look like wild boar and rarely moved ( the script required them to run in most scenes ) , the producers decided to use computer @-@ generated boar instead , along with reaction shots from the actors and first @-@ person sequences from the animals ' point of view . Instead of having a stunt double for Kate climbing the tree to place the antenna , Evangeline Lilly climbed the tree herself . The Australian office that hosts the travel agency was filmed in an empty retail space in downtown Honolulu . 
 The episode is the first to feature Christian Shephard , but he is not portrayed by John Terry , who had not been cast yet . Late into writing , the producers decided to start setting up Sayid 's backstory by introducing the pictures of Nadia . The scenes where Sayid looks at the photos were reshot when production of " Solitary " began and Andrea Gabriel was selected for the role , as the original pictures depicted a different actress . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 Robert Dougherty writes that the episode possesses similar themes to " Tabula Rasa " – " Walkabout " is about " being able to overcome the past and start over . " It presents the dichotomy seen in much of the series ; while Jack is a man of science , Locke is a man of faith . Lindelof discussed that since Locke 's healing was interpreted by the character as a religious experience , " this character had been presented as this very sort of mystical figure moving forward " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Walkabout " received a 6 @.@ 5 in the ages 18 – 49 demographic in the Nielsen ratings . The episode was watched by 18 @.@ 16 million viewers , an improvement of 1 @.@ 6 million over the previous episode , " Tabula Rasa " . 
 Reviews for the episode were positive . Chris Carabott of IGN gave " Walkabout " a 9 @.@ 5 / 10 , stating that " Terry O 'Quinn puts in an exceptional performance " , and commenting that showing Locke , who " seemed like a confident and resourceful man with a mysterious and intriguing past " , to be a " shell of a human being that is trying desperately to find his place in the world " was " a perfect juxtaposition of the differences between Locke off and on the island " . He also praised the supporting stories , claiming that " Matthew Fox does a great job of playing the uneasy leader " as Jack Shephard and that the Shannon @-@ Charlie storyline " does supply a little comic relief " . Ryan Mcgee of Zap2it described the revelation that Locke was a paraplegic as being " one of the show 's signature moments " , and commented that the episode " cemented the show as ' Must @-@ See TV ' " and was " a five @-@ star effort . " 
 Robin Pierson of The TV Critic gave the episode a rating of 86 / 100 , saying that " Walkabout " is an episode " which seems to confirm all the promise of Lost ’ s pilot episodes " , and that the episode " both enhances and completely changes how we perceive both Locke and Lost . " Dan Kawa of Television Without Pity rated the episode as a ' B ' . Todd VanDerWerff of the Los Angeles Times said that ' Walkabout ' is one of the most confident episodes a series has ever unveiled that early in its run " and that the episode " cemented more ' Lost ' fans than just me , maybe more than any other episode . " 
 David Fury was nominated for an Emmy Award for " Outstanding Writing in a Drama Series " for writing this episode . O 'Quinn submitted his work in " Walkabout " and " The Moth " for the Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series . 
 = = Significance and legacy = = 
 " Walkabout " comprises a significant chapter in Lost 's history , persuading viewers of the series ' ability to exist in the long term . Viewers learned that the series would be full of surprises and mysteries , and Lindelof even considered it " a litmus test " for viewers , particularly regarding how after a twist like Locke 's past , " the show isn 't going to openly state what the implications of that are . " Entertainment Weekly considered " Walkabout " to be the best episode of Season 1 . IGN ranked " Walkabout " as the fifth best Lost episode ever , behind " The Life and Death of Jeremy Bentham " , the Pilot , " Through the Looking Glass " and " The Constant " . The episode was also featured in similar lists by the Los Angeles Times , TV Guide , National Post , and ABC2 . Jason Snell of The Incomparable thought similarly , saying " <unk> ? Are you kidding ? If you could watch only one first @-@ season episode of “ Lost , ” this might be it . " 
 The episode also shaped how O 'Quinn viewed his character , as he was unaware that Locke would be paralyzed until reading the script . To the actor , " Walkabout and the fifth season episode " The Life and Death of Jeremy Bentham " are the two installments which " sort of ( summarize ) [ Locke 's ] whole trip . " 
 = Credit Suisse = 
 Credit Suisse Group is a Swiss multinational financial services holding company , headquartered in Zürich , that operates the Credit Suisse Bank and other financial services investments . The company is organized as a stock corporation with four divisions : Investment Banking , Private Banking , Asset Management , and a Shared Services Group that provides marketing and support to the other three divisions . 
 Credit Suisse 's stock unsurprisingly hit a new 52 @-@ week low of $ 10 @.@ 01 during trading on July 6 , 2016 while somewhat recent reports have suggested it is yet again being investigated by the U. S. Department of Justice in relation to tax evasion . Credit Suisse is also contending with a valid federal lawsuit filed against it at a New York City court and related litigation filed with the Administrative Review Board of the U.S. Department of Labor pertaining to the Sarbanes @-@ Oxley Act 's whistleblower protections . On July 15 , 2016 , the latest legal brief was filed in that Sarbanes case with the Administrative Review Board at the expense of Credit Suisse , NTT Data , Inc . , and the U.S. Department of Labor . 
 Credit Suisse was founded by Alfred Escher in 1856 under the name Schweizerische Kreditanstalt ( SKA , English : Swiss Credit Institution ) in order to fund the development of Switzerland 's rail system . It issued loans that helped create Switzerland 's electrical grid and the European rail system . It also helped develop the country 's currency system and funded entrepreneurship . In the 1900s Credit Suisse began shifting to retail banking in response to the elevation of the middle @-@ class and the growing popularity of savings accounts . Credit Suisse partnered with First Boston in 1978 . After a large failed loan put First Boston under financial stress , Credit Suisse bought a controlling share of the bank in 1988 . In the 1990s , Credit Suisse acquired the Winterthur Group , Swiss Volksbank , Swiss American Securities Inc . ( SASI ) and Bank Leu among others . In the year 2000 , it added the U.S. investment firm Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette . 
 The company restructured itself in 2002 , 2004 and 2006 . It was one of the least affected banks during the global financial crisis , but afterwards began shrinking its investment business , executing layoffs and cutting costs . During the period between 2008 and 2012 , Germany , Brazil , and the United States began a series of investigations into the use of Credit Suisse accounts for tax evasion . In May 2014 , the company pleaded guilty to decades of conspiring to help US citizens avoid taxes , and agreed to pay $ 2 @.@ 6 billion in fines . 
 In 2014 , Credit Suisse had 888 @.@ 2 USD Bn of assets under management ( <unk> ) according to the Scorpio Partnership ( an increase of 9 @.@ 5 % on 2013 ) . 
 = = Corporate structure = = 
 Credit Suisse Group AG is organized as a joint @-@ stock company registered in Zürich that operates as a holding company . It owns the Credit Suisse bank and other interests in the financial services business . Credit Suisse is governed by a board of directors , its shareholders and independent auditors . The Board of Directors organize the Annual General Meeting of Shareholders while investors with large stakes in the company determine the agenda . Shareholders elect auditors for one @-@ year terms , approve the annual report and other financial statements , and have other powers granted by law . Shareholders elect members of the board of directors to serve a three @-@ year term based on candidates nominated by the Chairman 's and Governance committee and the Board of Directors meet six times a year to vote on company resolutions . The Board sets Credit Suisse 's business strategies and approves its compensation principles based on guidance from the compensation committee . It also has the authority to create committees that delegate specific management functions . 
 Credit Suisse has two divisions , Private Banking & Wealth Management and Investment Banking . A Shared Services department provides support functions like risk management , legal , IT and marketing to all areas . Operations are divided into four regions : Switzerland , Europe , the Middle East and Africa , the Americas and the Asian Pacific . Credit Suisse Private Banking has wealth management , corporate and institutional businesses . Credit Suisse Investment Banking handles securities , investment research , trading , prime brokerage and capital procurement . Credit Suisse Asset Management sells investment classes , alternative investments , real @-@ estate , equities , fixed income products and other financial products . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Credit Suisse 's founder , Alfred Escher , was called , " the spiritual father of the railway law of 1852 , " for his work defeating the idea of a state @-@ run railway system in Switzerland in favor of privatization . Escher founded Credit Suisse ( originally called the Swiss Credit Institution , i.e. , Schweizerische Kreditanstalt ) in 1856 primarily to provide domestic funding to railway projects , avoiding French banks that wanted to exert influence over the railway system . Escher aimed to start the company with three million shares and instead sold 218 million shares in three days . The bank was modeled after Crédit Mobilier , a bank funding railway projects in France that was founded two years prior , except Credit Suisse had a more conservative lending policy focused on short @-@ to @-@ medium term loans . In its first year of operation , 25 percent of the bank 's revenues was from the Swiss Northeastern Railway , which was being built by Escher 's company , <unk> . 
 Credit Suisse played a substantial role in the economic development of Switzerland , helping the country develop its currency system , funding entrepreneurs and investing in the Gotthard railway , which connected Switzerland to the European rail system in 1882 . Credit Suisse helped fund the creation of Switzerland 's electrical grid through its participation with <unk> ( now called <unk> ) , a coalition of organizations that co @-@ financed Switzerland 's electrical grid . According to The Handbook on the History of European Banks , " Switzerland 's young electricity industry came to assume the same importance as support for railway construction 40 years earlier . " The bank also helped fund the effort to disarm and imprison French troops that crossed into Swiss borders in the 1870 Franco @-@ Prussian War . By the end of the war , Credit Suisse had become the largest bank in Switzerland . 
 Throughout the late 1800s , Credit Suisse set up banking and insurance companies in Germany , Brussels , Geneva and others ( as SKA International ) with the bank as a shareholder of each company . It created insurance companies like Swiss RE , Swiss Life , <unk> and Schweiz . Credit Suisse had its first unprofitable year in 1886 , due to losses in agriculture , venture investments , commodities and international trade . The bank created its own sugar beet factory , bought 25 @,@ 000 shares in animal breeding ventures and supported an export business , Schweizerische <unk> , that experienced heavy losses for over @-@ speculative investing . 
 In the early 1900s Credit Suisse began catering to consumers and the middle @-@ class with deposit counters , currency exchanges and savings accounts . The first branch outside of Zürich was opened in 1905 in Basel . The bank helped companies affected by World War I restructuring , and extended loans for reconstruction efforts . During the 1920s depression , net profits and dividends were halved and employees took salary cuts . After World War II , a substantial portion of Credit Suisse 's business was in foreign reconstruction efforts . Holocaust survivors had problems trying to retrieve assets from relatives that died in concentration camps without death certificates . This led to a class action lawsuit in 1996 that settled in 2000 for $ 1 @.@ 25 billion . The Agreement on the Swiss Banks ' Code of Conduct with Regard to the Exercise of Due Diligence was created in the 1970s , after a Credit Suisse branch in Chiasso was exposed for illegally funneling $ 900 million in Italian deposits to speculative investments . 
 = = = Acquisitions , growth and First Boston = = = 
 In 1978 , White , Weld & Company dropped its partnership with Credit Suisse after it was bought by Merrill Lynch . To replace the partnership with White , Credit Suisse partnered with First Boston to create Credit Suisse First Boston in Europe and bought a 44 percent stake in First Boston 's US operations . 
 In 1987 , the Group acquired the blue chip London stockbrokers Buckmaster & Moore . Originally established by Irish aristocrat Charles Armytage @-@ Moore and sportsman Walter Buckmaster , who had met at Repton School . As stockbrokers they were very well connected , had developed a good private client business , which at one time included John Maynard Keynes . 
 Other Credit Suisse First Boston brands were later created in Switzerland , Asia , London , New York and Tokyo . According to an article in The New York Times , First Boston became " the superstar of the <unk> " by buying stakes in American companies that wanted to issue bonds . In 1988 First Boston loaned $ 487 million to Gibbons and Green for the purchase of the Ohio Mattress Company , which was purchased at twenty times its annual revenue . Gibbons had also borrowed $ 475 million in junk bonds . When the junk bonds market crashed the following year , Gibbons couldn 't repay First Boston . Credit Suisse injected $ 725 million to keep First Boston in business , which ultimately led to the company being taken over by Credit Suisse . This became known as the " burning bed " deal , because the Federal Reserve overlooked the Glass – Steagall Act that requires separation between commercial and investment banks in order to preserve the stability of the financial markets . 
 In the late 1990s Credit Suisse executed an aggressive acquisition strategy . The bank acquired Bank Leu , known as Switzerland 's oldest bank , in 1990 . In 1993 Credit Suisse outbid UBS for a controlling stake in Switzerland 's fifth largest bank , Swiss Volksbank in a $ 1 @.@ 1 billion deal . It also merged with Winterthur Group in 1997 for about $ 9 billion and acquired the asset management division of Warburg , Pincus & Co. in 1999 for $ 650 million . Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette was purchased for $ 11 @.@ 5 billion in 2000 . 
 In 1996 Credit Suisse restructured as the Credit Suisse Group with four divisions : Credit Suisse Volksbank ( later called Credit Suisse Bank ) for domestic banking , Credit Suisse Private Banking , Credit Suisse Asset Management and Credit Suisse First Boston for corporate and investment banking . The restructure was expected to cost the company $ 800 million and result in 7 @,@ 000 lost jobs , but save $ 560 million a year . While Credit Suisse First Boston had been struggling , Credit Suisse 's overall profits had grown 20 percent over the prior year , reaching $ 664 million . In 1999 Japan 's Financial Supervisory Agency temporarily suspended the financial @-@ products division 's license to operate in Japan for " window dressing , " the practice of selling derivatives that are often used by bank clients to hide losses . 
 In the 2000s Credit Suisse executed a series of restructures . In 2002 the bank was consolidated into two entities : Credit Suisse First Boston for investments and Credit Suisse Financial Services . A third unit was added in 2004 for insurance . Credit Suisse restructured again in 2004 under what it calls the " one bank " model . Under the restructuring , every board had a mix of executives from all three divisions . It also changed the compensation and commission models to encourage cross @-@ division referrals and created a " solution partners " group that functions between the investment and private banking divisions . Following the restructure Credit Suisse 's private banking division grew 19 percent per year despite the economic crisis . The firm bumped long @-@ time rival UBS off the number one position in Euromoney 's private banking poll . In 2006 , Credit Suisse acknowledged misconduct for helping Iran and other countries hide transactions from US authorities and paid a $ 536 million settlement . The same year it merged Bank Leu AG , Clariden Holding AG , Bank Hofmann AG and BGP Banca di <unk> <unk> into a new company called Clariden Leu . 
 The increasing importance of sustainability and the related commitments and liabilities of international standards such as the <unk> , of which the bank is a member , lead to an increasingly sophisticated and ambitious risk management over the years . Credit Suisse operates a process which since 2007 uses RepRisk , a Swiss provider of ESG Risk analytics and metrics , to screen and evaluate environmental and social risks of risky transactions and due diligence . 
 In 2009 Yellowstone Club founder Tim Blixseth sued Credit Suisse when the bank attempted to collect on $ 286 million in loan debt during Yellowstone 's bankruptcy proceedings . The debtor had borrowed more than $ 300 million for the business , but used a large portion of it for personal use before eventually filing for bankruptcy . Four lawsuits were filed from other resorts seeking $ 24 billion in damages alleging Credit Suisse created loans with the intention of taking over their properties upon default . 
 = = = Post financial crisis = = = 
 According to The Wall Street Journal , " Credit Suisse survived the credit crisis better than many competitors . " Credit Suisse had $ 902 million in <unk> for subprime holdings and the same amount for leveraged loans , but it did not have to borrow from the government . Along with other banks , Credit Suisse was investigated and sued by US authorities for bundling mortgage loans with securities , misrepresenting the risks of underlying mortgages during the housing boom . Following the crisis , Credit Suisse cut more than one @-@ trillion in assets and made plans to cut its investment banking arm 37 percent by 2014 . It reduced emphasis on investment banking and focused on private banking and wealth management . In July 2011 , Credit Suisse cut 2 @,@ 000 jobs in response to a weaker than expected economic recovery and later merged its asset management with the private bank group to cut additional costs . 
 A series of international investigations took place in the early 2000s regarding the use of Credit Suisse accounts for tax evasion . The Brazilian government investigated 13 former and current Credit Suisse employees in 2008 . The investigation led to arrests that year and in 2009 as part of a larger crackdown in Brazil . Four Credit <unk> bankers were accused of fraud by the US Justice Department in 2011 for helping wealthy Americans avoid taxes . German authorities found that citizens were using insurance policies of a Bermuda @-@ based Credit Suisse subsidiary to earn tax @-@ free interest . In November 2012 , Credit Suisse 's asset management division was merged with the private banking arm . 
 In September 2012 , the Swiss government gave banks like Credit Suisse permission to provide information to the US Justice Department for tax evasion probes . In February 2014 it agreed to pay a fine of $ 197 million after one of its businesses served 8 @,@ 500 US clients without registering its activities , leading to suspicion as to whether it was helping Americans evade taxes . It was one of 14 Swiss banks under investigation . Separately , in 2013 , German authorities began to probe Credit Suisse , its private bank subsidiary Clariden Leu , and its regional subsidiary Neue <unk> Bank for helping German citizens evade taxes . The bank eventually entered into a € 150 million settlement with the government . 
 In March 2014 , Credit Suisse denied claims it had been drawn into a Swiss competition probe investigating potential collusion to manipulate foreign exchange rates by various Swiss and foreign banks . In May 2014 , Credit Suisse pleaded guilty to conspiring to aid tax evasion . It was the most prominent bank to plead guilty in the United States since Drexel Burnham Lambert in 1989 and the largest to do so since the Bankers Trust in 1999 . " Credit Suisse conspired to help U.S. citizens hide assets in offshore accounts in order to evade paying taxes . When a bank engages in misconduct this brazen , it should expect that the Justice Department will pursue criminal prosecution to the fullest extent possible , as has happened here , " Attorney General Eric H. Holder said at the time . Holder also said " This case shows that no financial institution , no matter its size or global reach , is above the law . " Credit Suisse shares rose 1 % on the day the $ 2 @.@ 6 billion penalty was announced . 
 On 10 March 2015 , it was announced that <unk> Thiam , the CEO of Prudential would leave to become the next CEO of Credit Suisse . 
 = = Financial products = = 
 Credit Suisse endorses a strategy called <unk> of trying to be a single company that offers every common financial services product . The investment bank is intended for companies and wealthy individuals with more than 50 @,@ 000 euro . 
 Credit Suisse developed the <unk> + model of risk assessment in loans , which is focused exclusively on the chance of default based on the exogenous Poisson method . As of 2002 about 20 percent of Credit Suisse 's revenue was from its insurance business it gained through the 1997 acquisition of Winterthur . The investment bank 's insurance products are primarily popular in the domestic market and include auto , fire , property , life , disability , pension and retirement products among others . Historically 20 – 40 percent of the bank 's revenue has been from private banking services , one of its higher profit @-@ margin divisions . 
 Credit Suisse produces one of the six hedge funds following European stock indices that are used to evaluate the performance of the markets . The investment bank also has a 30 percent ownership in hedge fund investment firm York Capital Management . York sells hedge funds independently to its own clients , while Credit Suisse also offers them to private banking clients . Credit Suisse manages the financial instruments of the Dow Jones Credit Suisse long / short equity index ( originally called Credit Suisse / Tremont Hedge Fund Indexes ) . 
 According to a 2011 article in <unk> , Credit Suisse 's investment managers favor financial , technology and energy sector stocks . The bank 's head of equity investments in Europe said the team focuses on " value with an emphasis on free cashflow . " She also has an interest in companies undergoing management changes that may influence the stock price . According to a story in the Wall Street Journal , the head of Credit Suisse 's International Focus Fund keeps a portfolio of only 40 – 50 stocks , instead of the industry @-@ norm of more than 100 . Credit Suisse publishes its investment advice in four publications : Compass , Viewpoints , Research and the Credit Suisse Investment Committee Report . 
 = = Reputation and rankings = = 
 People should judge for themselves how Credit Suisse should be regarded by taking into account the following statement that appears on the United States Department of Justice 's web site about Credit Suisse : 
 " As part of the plea agreement , Credit Suisse acknowledged that , for decades prior to and through 2009 , it operated an illegal cross @-@ border banking business that knowingly and willfully aided and assisted thousands of U.S. clients in opening and maintaining undeclared accounts and concealing their offshore assets and income from the IRS . " 
 Credit Suisse is a member of Wall Street 's bulge bracket , a list of less than a dozen of the largest and most profitable banks . The company has been identified as one of the world 's most important banks , upon which international financial stability depends . The bank is also one of Fortune Magazine 's most admired companies . 
 Credit Suisse has been recognized as the world 's best private bank by Euromoney 's Global Private Banking Survey and as the best European Equity Manager by Global Investors . In polls by Euromoney , it has been ranked as the top private bank and the best bank in Switzerland . As of 2004 , Credit Suisse was first in volume of high @-@ yield transactions , second for corporate high @-@ yield bond insurance and third for IPO underwriting . The Securities Data Company ranked Credit Suisse as the fourth best place for financial advice for mergers and acquisitions in the US in 1995 and sixth for domestic equity issues . Credit Suisse has been recognized by the Asset Triple A Awards . In 2005 Credit Suisse was ranked as the second best prime broker by Institutional Investor . 
 = = Work environment = = 
 Credit Suisse is more internationally minded than most European banks . According to <unk> 's Insider Guide , Credit Suisse offers more travel opportunities , greater levels of responsibility and more client interaction than new employees get at competing firms , but is known for long hours . Analysts report 60- to 110 @-@ hour work @-@ weeks . 
 Roles and responsibilities are less stringent and the environment is pleasant despite hours being " the most grueling on Wall Street . " Vault 's Insider 's Guide reached similar conclusions , noting above @-@ average training , executive access and openness matched with reports of <unk> to 100 @-@ hour work @-@ weeks . 
 = John Hines ( Australian soldier ) = 
 John " Barney " Hines ( 1873 – 1958 ) was a British @-@ born Australian soldier of World War I , known for his prowess at collecting " souvenirs " from German soldiers . Hines was the subject of a famous photo taken by Frank Hurley that depicted him surrounded by German military equipment and money he had looted during the Battle of Polygon Wood in September 1917 . This image is among the best @-@ known Australian photographs of the war . 
 Born in Liverpool , England , in 1873 , Hines served in the Royal Navy and King 's Liverpool Regiment , and worked in several occupations . He arrived in Australia shortly before World War I began and volunteered for the Australian Imperial Force in August 1915 . Although discharged due to poor health in early 1916 , he rejoined in August that year and served on the Western Front from March 1917 to mid @-@ 1918 , when he was discharged again for health reasons . During his period in France he proved to be an aggressive soldier , and gained fame for the collection of items that he amassed , but was undisciplined when not in combat and frequently punished . Following World War I , Hines lived in poverty on the outskirts of Sydney until his death in 1958 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hines was born in Liverpool in 1873 . When he was aged 14 he attempted to join the British Army , but was returned to his mother after she protested . At the age of 16 he successfully enlisted in the Royal Navy but was discharged the next year after contracting malaria . 
 During the following decades Hines drifted between jobs and countries , including spending three years in the King 's Liverpool Regiment and serving as a guide in the Second Boer War , before arriving in Australia in mid @-@ 1914 . He was a large man and much of his body was covered in tattoos . Hines may also have been illiterate , though he was capable of signing his name . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Hines first joined the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) on 24 August 1915 , falsely claiming to be 28 years of age . In the year before he joined the Army he had worked as a seaman , engineer and shearer . He was discharged from the AIF as medically unfit on 20 January 1916 . On 8 May Hines successfully rejoined the AIF , this time giving an age of 36 years and seven months . By this stage of the war medical requirements were less strict due to the need for reinforcements to make good the AIF 's casualties . Hines was assigned to the 45th Battalion and departed Sydney for Europe onboard HMAT <unk> Wiltshire on 22 August 1916 . 
 After completing training in England , Hines joined the 45th Battalion on the Western Front in March 1917 . In June that year he captured a force of 60 Germans during the Battle of Messines by throwing hand grenades into their pillbox , and was later wounded . He returned to his battalion in time for the Battle of Polygon Wood in September , where Frank Hurley photographed him on 27 September surrounded by the loot he had captured . Hines was an aggressive soldier and it has been claimed that he killed more Germans than any other member of the AIF . Though brave in battle and admired by his fellow soldiers , his behaviour was erratic at times . The wartime commander of the 45th Battalion , Arthur Samuel Allen , described Hines to a journalist in 1938 as " a tower of strength to the battalion ... while he was in the line " . 
 Hines ' enthusiasm for collecting German military equipment and German soldiers ' personal possessions became well known within and possibly outside of his battalion , and earned him the nickname of " Souvenir King " . Although he collected some items from battlefields at Ypres and the Somme region , most were stolen from German prisoners of war . He kept the items he collected for himself , and there are no records of any being handed over to the Australian War Records Section , the AIF unit responsible for collecting items for later display in Australia . Hines sold some of the items he collected to other soldiers , including for alcohol . The photograph of Hines at the Battle of Polygon Wood was published in late 1917 under the title Wild Eye , the souvenir king and became one of the best @-@ known Australian photographs of the war . Many soldiers identified with Hines and were amused by his collection of souvenirs . The photograph was used as propaganda , and a false story developed that the German Kaiser Wilhelm II had become enraged after seeing it . 
 Away from the front line , Hines developed a record of indiscipline . He was court martialled on nine occasions for drunkenness , impeding military police , forging entries in his pay book and being absent without leave . He also claimed to have been caught robbing the strongroom of a bank in Amiens , though this is not recorded in his Army service record . As a result of these convictions , Hines lost several promotions he had earned for his acts of bravery . He was also fined on several occasions , and the resulting need for money may have been one of the factors that motivated his looting . A member of the 3rd Battalion described Hines as " not normally a weak man but rather one ... uncontrolled " . An officer from the 45th Battalion stated after the war that Hines had been " two pains in the neck " . 
 In mid @-@ 1918 Hines was discharged from the AIF as being medically unfit due to hemorrhoid problems . He arrived back in Australia on 19 October 1918 . While his Army service file records that he was lightly wounded on two occasions , Hines later claimed to have been wounded five times . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Hines was traumatised by his experiences during World War I. For 40 years afterwards he lived in a <unk> made of cloth bags near Mount Druitt on the outskirts of Sydney , and never married . The <unk> was surrounded by a fence on which he hung helmets taken from German soldiers ; he became well known to locals , though school children were afraid of him . Hines was unable to find consistent work , and lived on his Army pension as well as income from odd jobs and selling his souvenirs . He gained renewed fame when the photo of him at Polygon Wood was displayed at the temporary Australian War Museum in Sydney ( the predecessor of the Australian War Memorial ) from 1933 , and several newspapers and magazines aimed at former servicemen published profiles of him . An article in the Returned Sailors and Soldiers Imperial League of Australia 's magazine Reveille in 1934 highlighted Hines ' desperate living conditions and stated that he had been unemployed for four years . Several former soldiers sent money to him in response to this article . Hines ' pension was also doubled , though this income made him ineligible for relief work during the Great Depression . Despite his poverty , Hines travelled to Concord Repatriation Hospital each week to donate a suitcase of vegetables from his garden to the former soldiers being treated there . 
 Hines told a journalist in June 1939 that he was seeking to join the Militia and hoped to fight in another war . He attempted to enlist in the military during World War II , despite being in his 60s , but was rejected . An article published in The Nepean Times during 1943 claimed that Hines had attempted to stow away on a troop ship in 1940 , but was found and sent ashore before the vessel sailed . 
 On 28 January 1958 , Hines died at Concord Repatriation Hospital aged 84 or 85 . He was buried in Rookwood Cemetery in a grave which was unmarked until 1971 , when the Mount Druitt sub @-@ branch of the Returned Services League of Australia paid for a headstone . The Blacktown City Council also renamed the street on which he lived in the suburb of <unk> to John Hines Avenue , and a monument commemorating him was built at the nearby Mount Druitt <unk> Remembrance Garden in 2002 . 
 A large version of the famous photograph of Hines was accorded a prominent position in the Australian War Memorial 's permanent building in Canberra after it opened in 1941 . The photo was also included in the 2014 redevelopment of the Memorial 's permanent World War I exhibition . In a short biography of Hines published in 2002 , historian Peter Stanley commented that " ' Wild Eye 's ' bravado conceals a deeper pathos " and he " was a man whose skills in fighting were needed and whose knack for souveniring was admired , but he had few gifts that a peaceful society valued " . 
 = Steven the Sword Fighter = 
 " Steven the Sword Fighter " is the sixteenth episode of the first season of the American animated television series Steven Universe . It is written by Joe Johnston and Jeff Liu . In the United States , the episode originally aired on Cartoon Network on April 9 , 2014 , the first new episode to air on the series ' new Wednesday time slot . Pianist Aivi Tran and sound designer Steven <unk> of the musical group Aivi & <unk> composed one of the episode 's soundtracks to resemble the " broken facsimile " nature of Holo @-@ Pearl . The episode was viewed by 1 @.@ 098 million viewers , becoming the thirty @-@ sixth most watched episode aired by the network for the week of April 7 to April 13 , 2014 . It is currently the lowest rated episode of the series . 
 The episode shows Pearl attempting to teach Steven the art of sword @-@ fighting using Holo Pearl , a holographic version of herself . However , during the lessons , Pearl gets injured and retreats into her gem to heal and make a new body to project . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While Steven ( Zach <unk> ) , Garnet ( Estelle ) , Amethyst ( Michaela Dietz ) and Pearl ( Deedee Magno ) are watching a fictional Japanese movie titled Lonely Blade , Pearl critiques the film 's sword fighting techniques and offers to take Steven to the Ancient Sky Arena to show him how it is really done . To give him a proper demonstration , Pearl summons " Holo @-@ Pearl " , a holographic version of herself to spar with . After Pearl wins a sparring match with Holo @-@ Pearl , she begins to show Steven the basics of sword @-@ fighting . However , Pearl 's lessons bore Steven , making him clamor for Pearl to teach him the signature move from the Lonely Blade movie , much to Pearl 's chagrin . While Pearl is distracted talking to Steven , Holo @-@ Pearl impales her sword through Pearl 's chest , which causes Pearl to lose her physical form , leaving nothing but her gemstone . Although Steven is distraught at first , Garnet and Amethyst assure him that Pearl has simply retreated into her gem and will return once she has healed . 
 Two weeks pass and Pearl is still inside her gem , healing . Steven decides to use Holo @-@ Pearl as a replacement for the real Pearl . However , Holo @-@ Pearl only knows how to sword fight , seeing everything as a potential opponent . Garnet and Amethyst urge Steven to stop using it and wait for the real Pearl to come back . After Holo @-@ Pearl cuts down the real Pearl 's favourite tree , Steven becomes infuriated and tries to drive Holo @-@ Pearl away . 
 Later that night , Holo @-@ Pearl continues to ask Steven to be challenged in combat , though he repeatedly refuses . Eventually , Steven hits his breaking point and fights back against Holo @-@ Pearl , accidentally activating her " advanced " mode . After an intense fight , Steven is able to destroy Holo @-@ Pearl permanently . Garnet and Amethyst hear the commotion and come to check on Steven , and while he is explaining what he has learned , Pearl finally regains her physical form , having a new outfit variation , and faces the mess left from the recent moment . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Joe Johnston and Jeff Liu . Ki @-@ Yong Bae , Seon @-@ Jae Lee and Seo Whan Kim provided animation direction , Elle Michalka served as art director , and Ian Jones @-@ Quartey provided supervising direction . A sneak peek of the episode was shared on io9 on April 7 , 2014 , with Johnston first announcing the episode on the series ' production blog the following day , shortly after the series ' new Wednesday time slot was promoted on April 2 . In addition , several promotional pieces were published by him , Rebecca Sugar and color stylist Tiffany Ford , encouraging followers to watch . A panel from the storyboard was also promoted , before various background art and animation props were released before and after its premiere ; the animation props indicate the episode was produced thirteenth in production order . 
 The episode features the songs " Dance of Swords " and " Holo Pearl " by pianist Aivi Tran and sound designer Steven <unk> of the musical group Aivi & <unk> . The latter track , an instrumental piece , was composed to resemble the " broken facsimile " nature of the Pearl clone who bears the song 's title . The group utilized a " glitchy " piano and " an erratic collection of sounds " for it . The tracks were released onto SoundCloud on April 12 and 13 , respectively . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Gergo Vas from Kotaku observed various video game references during Pearl 's lecture on sword fighting , including Pokémon , Final Fantasy , Gitaroo Man and Sonic the Hedgehog . In addition , he identified an homage to Revolutionary Girl Utena upon looking at GIFs of Pearl 's sword @-@ fighting scene with her hologram clone . Writing for Cartoon Brew , Kendra Beltran noted that Lonely Blade imitated the style of anime , stating that " while the Universe team didn 't overdo the animation on the anime , you could tell what they were going for without hearing the accents . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Steven the Sword Fighter " was the first episode to premiere outside of Monday , onto its new time slot of Wednesdays , on Cartoon Network . Upon its premiere on April 9 , 2014 , the episode was seen by 1 @.@ 098 million viewers . It received a Nielsen household rating of 0 @.@ 7 , and was ranked as the thirty @-@ sixth most watched episode aired by the network for the week of April 7 to April 13 , 2014 . It is currently the lowest rated episode of the series . 
 Beltran highlighted elements of horror in the episode , noting it to come " in small spurts toward the end " , while writing about the " eerie tone of the rainy night matched with the sword @-@ wielding psychopath hologram . " She found it " weird to see Steven trying to not replace her , " regarding her as the established mother figure in the series . She concluded her review stating that while " not much for characterization , " Amethyst and Garnet 's acts of " sitcom comedy " were " the source of laughter this time around " for the series . 
 Eric Thurm of The A.V. Club graded the episode an A − , calling it , " in many ways , a perfect distillation of what makes Steven Universe special . " He noted Steven 's attempts to learn sword @-@ fighting as a callback to the first episode , " Gem Glow " , which aired alongside " Steven the Sword Fighter " upon its premiere . Finally , he contrasted Steven 's childishness and refusal to completely learn lessons to Adventure Time and Regular Show , where the protagonists of each have taken steps toward maturity . 
 = La Bella Mafia = 
 La Bella Mafia is the third studio album by rapper Lil ' Kim , released March 4 , 2003 on Atlantic Records . It debuted at number five on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart , selling 166 @,@ 000 in its first week and reached number four on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . A commercial success , La Bella Mafia was certified platinum by the RIAA , selling over one million copies in the US and over 3 @.@ 5 million worldwide , becoming the highest selling female rap album of 2003 . 
 The album marked Kim 's return after a musical hiatus . La Bella Mafia received positive reviews from music critics upon its release , marking Kim 's lyrical ability as impressive and her presence as formidable . It produced two singles that attained Billboard chart success . The lead single " The Jump Off , " peaked at number 17 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and at 16 on the UK Singles Chart chart . The second single " Magic Stick " , featured 50 Cent , peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 . The singles " Magic Stick " and " Came Back for You " earned Kim a Grammy nomination for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group and Best Female Rap Solo Performance , respectively . 
 = = Background = = 
 In late 2001 , Lil ' Kim left Junior M.A.F.I.A. and severed ties with all members . She also ended her friendship and business relationship with longtime collaborator Sean " Diddy " Combs . 
 Recording sessions for La Bella Mafia began in the spring of 2002 . In April 2002 , Lil ' Kim stated in an interview that she had begun working with Dr. Dre in the recording studio . She told MTV , " I 've been talking to Dre a lot . And Dre and I are talking about possibly doing some collaborations . He 's a cool cat . I love Dre . Our chemistry in the studio was just like , cool . We 've been working , you know , trying to cook up some things " . Kim also stated that she wanted to work with Eminem , Timbaland , and The Neptunes . 
 The original title for the album was <unk> ( which was also set to be the name of her clothing line and to her skit ) , but it was changed to La Bella Mafia ( which in Italian means ' Beautiful Mafia ' ) after Lil ' Kim watched a film of the same name about a family of mob widows who seek revenge for the murders of their mobster husbands . She stated , " Any girl who 's strong and very dedicated to what they do and don 't take no mess , they can be a part of La Bella Mafia " . 
 Limited edition collectable cards were included in the first 500 @,@ 000 US CDs that allowed fans to unlock exclusive content , such as photos and video , from the Internet . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 La Bella Mafia received generally positive reviews , as Metacritic reviews scored it at 65 out of 100 . AllMusic critic Jason Birchmeier stated her previous album The Notorious <unk> was considered a " disappointment " as a follow @-@ up to her debut album Hard Core and La Bella Mafia reestablished her as an " industry icon " . Nick Catucci , a critic for Spin Magazine , who gave the album 3 stars claimed , " The King is dead - long live the Queen " . 
 Stylus magazine critic Brett Berliner gave the album a B + calling the album " one of the top hip @-@ hop albums of 2003 " and said , " Kim is now in a class of female MCs that includes only Rah <unk> and MC Lyte - and she 's more confident , funny , and sexy than any of them " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine gave the album 3 stars stating the album was her " most consistent effort to date , " and added the album " plays like one giant bravado about everything : fame , money , power , sex , clothes , rhymes " . 
 Critics were also impressed with her lyrical ability . Jon Caramanica of Rolling Stone gave the album 3 stars stating , " When she really gets her hands dirty , Kim sounds more forceful and engaged than she 's been in years " . However , some critics felt the album was too long and contained too many fillers . Birchmeier of Allmusic stated the album could use a little " trimming " . Brett Berliner of Stylus Magazine said , " I enjoy about eight songs on this album , but they 're tracks I only feel like listening to from time to time " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 La Bella Mafia debuted at number four on the U.S. ' s Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart , and at number @-@ five on the Billboard 200 , with a successful first week sales of 160 @,@ 000 copies , and ultimately spent a little over 29 weeks on that chart . The album sold over 3 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide , and received a platinum certification by the RIAA , for sales of over 1 @.@ 1 million copies . Outside the States , it debuted at number 81 on the Swiss Albums Chart , at number 105 on the French Albums Chart and at number 82 on the German Albums Chart . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Altogether La Bella Mafia spawned two international singles and a third US only single . The lead album 's first single , " The Jump Off " peaked in the top @-@ twenty on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart with a peak position of number 17 , becoming Kim 's biggest single since her 1997 's " Not Tonight ( Ladies Night Remix ) " . It also reached number 8 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , number 7 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart , and number 16 on the UK Singles Chart . The second single , " Magic Stick " , featured 50 Cent , peaked in the top @-@ ten on the Hot 100 chart reaching number 2 , without a music video , and it wasn 't even released as a single . It ended up spending 14 weeks on the chart , becoming Kim 's biggest and highest single on that chart . It also reached number 2 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , number 7 on the Pop chart and number 1 on the Hot Rap Songs chart . The song " Thug Luv " , featuring Twista , was serviced to U.S. radios only . It reached number 60 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and number 14 on the Hot Rap Songs . A CD single was also released in the US . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Sample credits = = = 
 " <unk> " contains a sample of The Notorious B.I.G. ' s " Juicy " . 
 " Hold It Now " contains samples of Beastie Boys ' " Paul Revere " and Kurtis Blow 's " Christmas Rappin ' " . 
 " Can 't Fuck with Queen Bee " contains an sample and interpolation from the hit <unk> Williams song " Free " 
 " Shake Ya Bum Bum " contains a sample of Saregama India Ltd 's " Hum " . 
 " The Jump Off " contains an interpolation from The Lost Boyz 's " Jeeps , Lex , Coups , <unk> , and Benz " . 
 " This Is a Warning " contains a sample and interpolation of R. Kelly 's " A Woman 's Threat " . 
 " Magic Stick " contains a sample of B.B. King 's " The Thrill Is Gone " . 
 " Get In Touch with Us " contains a sample of Saregama India Ltd 's " Zindagi Ban Gaye To Tum " . 
 " Heavenly Father " contains a sample of The O 'Jays 's " A Prayer " . 
 " Came Back for You " contains a sample of Irene Reid 's " Didn 't We " . 
 = = = Leftover tracks = = = 
 " Knock ' Em Out the Box " ( featuring Method Man ) 
 " Back Together Again " ( featuring The Notorious B.I.G. ) 
 " Flow So Sick " ( featuring Ice Drake ) 
 " What 's The Word ? " ( featured bonus track on the Japanese album release ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Executive Producers : Kimberly " Lil ' Kim " Jones & The Notorious B.I.G. 
 Associate Producers : Hillary Weston & Jean Nelson 
 Queen Bee A & R : Jean Nelson & Dre Weston 
 Atlantic A & R : Huston " <unk> " Miller 
 Atlantic A & R Administrator : Lanre Gaba 
 Atlantic A & R Coordinator : Chris Wade 
 Queen Bee Project Manager : Jamel " Mann " Jackson 
 Atlantic Project Manager : Joi Brown 
 Album Assistant Engineer : Greg " Gee " Stewart 
 Management : Hillary Weston 
 Legal Affairs : L. <unk> McMillan , P.C. 
 Business Affairs : David <unk> LLP & Co . 
 Album Sequencing : DJ 45 & Dan " The " Man 
 Cover Photo & Photos 1 , 2 : Vincent Soyez 
 Hair : Tre Major 
 Makeup : JJ 
 Styling : Derek Lee and Kimberly " Lil ' Kim " Jones 
 Prop Stylist : Linda Keil 
 Jewelry : <unk> So 
 Additional Jewelry : Prestige Diamonds 
 Photos 3 , 4 : David LaChapelle 
 Hair : <unk> Lima 
 Makeup : Scott Barnes 
 Styling : Andrea Leiberman 
 Jewelry : Diamond Quasar 
 Art Direction : Lynn Kowalewski 
 Design : Kevin <unk> 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Hurricane Edith ( 1971 ) = 
 Hurricane Edith was the strongest hurricane to form during the 1971 Atlantic hurricane season . It developed from a tropical wave on September 5 and quickly strengthened into a hurricane in the Caribbean Sea . Edith rapidly intensified on September 9 and made landfall on Cape Gracias a Dios as a Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . It quickly lost intensity over Central America and after briefly entering the Gulf of Honduras it crossed the Yucatán Peninsula in Mexico . After moving across the Gulf of Mexico a trough turned the storm to the northeast and Edith , after having restrengthened while accelerating towards the coast , made landfall on Louisiana with winds of 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) on September 16 . Edith steadily weakened over land and dissipated over Georgia on September 18 . 
 The hurricane killed two people when it passed near Aruba . Striking northeastern Central America as a Category 5 hurricane , Edith destroyed hundreds of homes and killed at least 35 people . In Texas high tides caused coastal flooding but little damage . Edith caused moderate to heavy damage in portions of Louisiana due to flooding and a tornado outbreak from the storm . One tornado , rated F3 on the Fujita Scale , damaged several homes and injured multiple people in Baton Rouge . The tornado outbreak extended eastward into Florida , of which a few destroyed entire buildings . Damage in the United States totaled US $ 25 million ( 1971 dollars , $ 146 million in 2016 dollars ) . Hurricane Edith , along with hurricanes Cleo ( 1958 ) , Ethel ( 1960 ) , and Emily ( 2005 ) are the only Category 5 storms not to have their names retired . 
