 = = Other cover versions = = 
 In 1984 , parodist " Weird Al " Yankovic released his parody song " Eat It " . Yankovic recorded the song with Jackson 's permission . The song 's music video mocked the " Beat It " short film scene @-@ for @-@ scene , with Yankovic mimicking Jackson 's dance moves in a clumsy fashion . Jackson received royalties from Yankovic due to the strong similarities . 
 = Myotis alcathoe = 
 Myotis alcathoe is a European bat in the genus Myotis . Known only from Greece and Hungary when it was first described in 2001 , its known distribution has since expanded to Spain , England , Sweden , and Azerbaijan , among other countries . It is similar to the whiskered bat ( Myotis mystacinus ) and other species and is difficult to distinguish from them . However , its brown fur is distinctive and it is clearly different in characters of its karyotype and DNA sequences . Although some genetic data suggest that it is related to Geoffroy 's bat ( Myotis emarginatus ) , other analyses do not support a close relationship between M. alcathoe and any other species . 
 With a forearm length of 30 @.@ 8 to 34 @.@ 6 mm ( 1 @.@ 21 to 1 @.@ 36 in ) and body mass of 3 @.@ 5 to 5 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 12 to 0 @.@ 19 oz ) , Myotis alcathoe is a small bat . The fur is usually reddish @-@ brown on the upperparts and brown below , but more grayish in juveniles . The tragus ( a projection on the inner side of the ear ) is short , as is the ear itself , and the inner side of the ear is pale at the base . The wings are brown and the baculum ( penis bone ) is short and broad . M. alcathoe has a very high @-@ pitched echolocation call , with a frequency that falls from 120 kHz at the beginning of the call to about 43 kHz at the end . 
 Usually found in old @-@ growth deciduous forest near water , Myotis alcathoe forages high in the canopy and above water and mostly eats flies . The animal roosts in cavities high in trees . Although there are some winter records from caves , it may also spend the winter in tree cavities . Several parasites have been recorded on M. alcathoe . The IUCN Red List assesses Myotis alcathoe as " Data Deficient " , but it is considered threatened in several areas because of its rarity and vulnerability to habitat loss . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The whiskered bat ( Myotis mystacinus ) and similar species in Eurasia ( collectively known as " whiskered bats " ) are difficult to distinguish from each other ; for example , the distantly related Brandt 's bat ( Myotis brandtii ) was not recognized as distinct from M. mystacinus until the 1970s . Small , unusual M. mystacinus @-@ like bats were first recorded in Greece in the 1970s , but it was not until the advent of genetic studies that these bats could be confirmed as representing a distinct species , named Myotis alcathoe . In 2001 , the species was described by German zoologists Otto von Helversen and Klaus @-@ Gerhard Heller on the basis of specimens from Greece and Hungary . Although it also differs from other whiskered bats by morphological characters , Myotis alcathoe is most clearly distinct in its genetics , including DNA sequences and the location of the nucleolus organizer regions . Two studies used microsatellites markers on european whiskered bats : the first one used West @-@ <unk> <unk> and recovered three well @-@ defined species clusters for M. alcathoe , M. brandtii and M. mystacinus , the other one , conducted in Poland , suggesting a high level of hybridization with other whiskered bats that would further complicates attempts to identify M. alcathoe morphologically . 
 Von Helversen and Heller argued that none of the old names now considered synonyms of M. mystacinus could apply to M. alcathoe , because these names all have their type localities in western or central Europe . However , the more recent discovery of M. alcathoe further to the west renders it possible that an older name may be discovered . In addition , Russian researcher Suren <unk> has suggested that the name caucasicus <unk> , 2000 ( originally proposed for a subspecies of M. mystacinus from the Caucasus ) may prove to be applicable to M. alcathoe ; in that case , the species would be renamed Myotis caucasicus . The species may have remained undetected in Germany for so long because bat researchers did not sample its preferred habitats and would dismiss unusual @-@ looking whiskered bats as being abnormal M. mystacinus or M. brandtii . 
 On the basis of mitochondrial DNA sequence analysis , Myotis alcathoe first appeared close to Geoffroy 's bat ( Myotis emarginatus ) of southern Europe , North Africa , and southwestern Asia . However , a study of the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene incorporating many Myotis species did not support this relationship , and could not place M. alcathoe securely at a specific position among Eurasian Myotis . Two groups with slightly divergent mitochondrial DNA sequences ( separated by 1 @.@ 3 to 1 @.@ 4 % sequence divergence ) are distinguishable within the species , which probably correspond to different glacial refugia where M. alcathoe populations survived the last glacial period . One , known as the " Hungarian " group , has been recorded from Spain , France , Austria , Hungary , and Slovakia , and probably corresponds to a refugium in Iberia ; the other , the " Greek " group , is known only from Greece and Slovakia . 
 The specific name , alcathoe , refers to Alcathoe , a figure from Greek mythology who was turned into a bat when she refused the advances of the god Dionysus . She was associated with gorges and small streams , the preferred habitat of Myotis alcathoe in Greece . In their original description , von Helversen and colleagues described her as a nymph , and the common name " nymph bat " has therefore been used for this species . However , none of the classical sources speak of Alcathoe as a nymph ; instead , she was a princess , the daughter of King <unk> of Orchomenos . Therefore , Petr Benda recommended in 2008 that the common name " Alcathoe bat " or " Alcathoe myotis " be used instead . Other common names include " Alcathoe 's bat " and " Alcathoe whiskered bat " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Myotis alcathoe is the smallest European Myotis species . The fur is brownish on the upperparts , with a reddish tone in old specimens , and a slightly paler gray @-@ brown below . Younger animals may be completely gray @-@ brown . The brown fur distinguishes adult M. alcathoe from other whiskered bats , but juveniles cannot be unambiguously identified on the basis of morphology . M. alcathoe is similar to Daubenton 's bat ( Myotis <unk> ) and M. emarginatus in color . On the upper side of the body , the hairs are 6 to 8 mm long and have dark bases and brown tips . The hairs on the lower side of the body are only slightly paler at the tip than at the base . 
 The face and the upper lips are reddish to pink , not dark brown to black as in M. mystacinus . Although most of the face is hairy , the area around the eyes is bare . The nostrils are heart @-@ shaped , and their back end is broad , as in M. brandtii , not narrow as in M. mystacinus . Several glands are present on the muzzle , most prominently in reproductively active males . The ears are brown and are lighter on the inside than the outside . There is a notch at the edge of the ear , and the pointed tragus ( a projection inside the ear that is present in some bats ) extends up to this notch ; the tragus is longer , extending beyond the notch , in both M. brandtii and M. mystacinus . The base of the inner side of the ear is white ; it is much darker in M. mystacinus . The feet and the thumbs are very small . The small size of the ear , tragus , feet , and thumb distinguishes M. alcathoe from the slightly larger M. mystacinus and M. brandtii , but the feet are relatively larger than in M. mystacinus . 
 The wings are brown , but lighter than those of M. mystacinus . The <unk> ( the portion of the wing between the last digit and the hindlegs ) is attached to the fifth toe . The tail extends only about 1 mm beyond the back margin of the uropatagium ( the portion of the wing membrane between the hindlegs ) . The calcar , a cartilaginous spur supporting the uropatagium , is slender . With a width around 1 @.@ 3 mm , the penis is narrow , and it lacks a broadened tip ( except in one Croatian specimen ) . The baculum ( penis bone ) is about 0 @.@ 5 mm long . The short and broad shape of this bone distinguishes M. alcathoe from M. brandtii as well as M. <unk> . 
 The skull is similar in shape to that of M. mystacinus and M. brandtii , but the front part of the braincase is higher . The second and third upper premolars ( P2 and P3 ) are tiny and pressed against the upper canine ( C1 ) and fourth premolar ( P4 ) . The canine is less well @-@ developed than in M. mystacinus . There is a clear cusp present on the side of the P4 . The accessory cusp known as the <unk> is present on each of the upper molars when they are unworn . M. mystacinus lacks the P4 cusp and the protoconules on the molars , but M. brandtii has an even larger cusp on P4 . 
 As usual in Myotis species , Myotis alcathoe has a karyotype consisting of 44 chromosomes , with the fundamental number of chromosomal arms equal to 52 . However , a 1987 study already found that M. alcathoe ( then called " Myotis sp . B " ) differs from both M. mystacinus and M. brandtii in the pattern of active nucleolus organizer regions on the chromosomes . M. alcathoe also differs from other Myotis species in the sequences of the mitochondrial genes 12S rRNA and NADH dehydrogenase subunit 1 by at least 5 % and 13 % , respectively . 
 Myotis alcathoe has the highest @-@ frequency echolocation call of any European Myotis . In open terrain , the call has an average duration of 2 @.@ 5 ms , but it may be up to 4 ms long . At the beginning , its frequency is around 120 kHz , but it then falls fast , subsequently falls slightly slower , and at the end falls faster again . The call reaches its highest amplitude at around 53 kHz . It terminates at around 43 to 46 kHz ; this characteristic is especially distinctive . In different experiments , the time between calls was found to be around 85 and 66 ms , respectively . The high @-@ pitched call may be an adaptation to the animal 's occurrence in dense vegetation . 
 Head and body length is about 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) and wingspan is around 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) . Forearm length is 30 @.@ 8 to 34 @.@ 6 mm ( 1 @.@ 21 to 1 @.@ 36 in ) , tibia length is 13 @.@ 5 to 15 @.@ 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 53 to 0 @.@ 63 in ) , hindfoot length is 5 @.@ 1 to 5 @.@ 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 20 to 0 @.@ 23 in ) , and body mass is 3 @.@ 5 to 5 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 12 to 0 @.@ 19 oz ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Although Myotis alcathoe was initially known only from Greece and Hungary and was thought to be restricted to southeastern Europe , records since then have greatly expanded its range , and it is now known from Spain and England to Sweden and European Turkey . In several European countries , focused searches were conducted to detect its occurrence . Its habitat generally consists of moist , deciduous , mature forest near streams , for example in ravines or in alluvial forest ( forest near a river ) , where there are many decaying trees that the bat can use as roosting sites . In Germany , its preferred habitat consists of mixed deciduous forest . In the south of the continent , it usually occurs in mountain ranges , but the factors affecting its distribution in the north are less well known . Its range appears to be similar in shape to those of the greater and lesser horseshoe bats ( Rhinolophus ferrumequinum and R. hipposideros ) and Myotis emarginatus . It may yet be found in other European countries , such as the Benelux countries , Ireland , and Moldova . Although there are abundant records from some areas , such as France and Hungary , the species appears to be rare in most of its range . 
 Known records are as follows : 
 Albania 
 A single specimen was caught in 2006 in a forest of planes ( Platanus orientalis ) and poplars ( Populus spp . ) next to a small stream . M. mystacinus was recorded at the same place . 
 Austria 
 Three specimens of Myotis alcathoe were recorded in Burgenland , southeastern Austria , in 2006 . They were caught near fishponds in a region dominated by oak ( Quercus petraea ) and hornbeam ( Carpinus betulus ) . 
 Azerbaijan 
 The species was recorded around 2009 . 
 Belgium 
 The species is known from the 31 of July 2011 in two places around the city of Rochefort . 
 Bulgaria 
 The species is known from six localities in the south and west of the country ; the first record dates from 2003 . Habitats include river and mountain forests . 
 Caucasus 
 Bats collected in the Russian part of the Caucasus and in Abkhazia ( a breakaway part of Georgia ) from 2003 to 2009 may represent Myotis alcathoe . They are small and <unk> distinct from other local Myotis mystacinus @-@ like bats . The affinity of these bats to M. alcathoe has recently been confirmed by the genetic and morphological analyses . 
 Croatia 
 In 2003 , Myotis alcathoe was recorded here on the basis of two specimens ; three additional specimens were found in 2004 . 
 Czech Republic 
 Here , the species was recorded at nine sites clustered in three regions , with the first record dating from 2001 , in addition to records from <unk> specimens at three further sites . The typical habitat was mature oak @-@ hornbeam forest near water with dead , decaying trees , at altitudes ranging from 170 to 390 m ( 560 to 1 @,@ 280 ft ) . Both M. mystacinus and M. brandtii occur in some of the same places in this country . M. alcathoe has a limited , patchy distribution within the country , but reaches a high abundance in suitable habitat . 
 France 
 Myotis alcathoe was informally recognized in France in 2000 as a small Myotis similar to Myotis mystacinus , the " Murin <unk> " ; in 2002 , it was realized that this bat represents Myotis alcathoe . A large number of sites are known , mostly in the north of the country . The species reaches altitudes of up to 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) . It is usually found close to water , but it has been found in a variety of habitats , including farmlands , swamps , forests , and wooden grounds . In late summer and autumn , it occurs in caves . 
 Germany 
 The species is known from two different areas in the country . In 2005 and 2006 , specimens were caught in an old moist forest near the Rhine in western Baden @-@ Württemberg . Two other bats were found in highway tunnels close to this site . The species is also known from the <unk> hill range of Thuringia in central Germany , an island of relatively warm habitat with some unusual wildlife . There , bats were caught near a spring in a karst landscape amid oak @-@ dominated deciduous forest . The species was also recorded in deciduous forest at a former Soviet military training site in eastern Thuringia . Myotis alcathoe has also been recorded in the nearby states of Saxony @-@ Anhalt and Saxony , where it occurs in mixed deciduous forest . Many Saxony @-@ Anhalt records are from near water . However , the species was also recorded in the center of the city of Chemnitz in Saxony . 
 Greece 
 The species has been recorded in the Pindus and <unk> Mountains of central and northern Greece . Here , Myotis alcathoe is usually found in stands of plane or alder trees next to small streams in ravines . The bat hunts close to the trees , within the stand . It is often found together with the lesser horseshoe bat and with M. mystacinus . 
 Hungary 
 Myotis alcathoe is not uncommon in the mountain forests of northeastern Hungary . It has been found at brooks and lakes in oak , beech , alder , and hornbeam ( <unk> ) forests at 230 to 670 m ( 750 to 2 @,@ 200 ft ) altitude . Both M. brandtii and M. mystacinus occur together with M. alcathoe there . 
 Italy 
 Myotis alcathoe has been recorded in beech forest in Majella National Park in the region of Abruzzo . Additional specimens of Myotis alcathoe have been identified in Italy using molecular methods . In December 2013 its presence has been confirmed in the protected area of <unk> Lucano National Park ( Basilicata ) . 
 Latvia 
 A small Myotis was captured at a cave in Latvia between 2007 and 2010 ; pending genetic testing , it is suspected to be M. alcathoe . However , this record had not been confirmed in the subsequent national report to <unk> in 2014 . 
 Luxembourg 
 A single male was caught in 2011 and confirmed as M. alcathoe on the basis of genetic data . Elsewhere in the country it has been recorded on the basis of acoustic data . 
 Poland 
 The species was recorded in four caves in southern Poland in 2005 and 2006 , and later at several other sites in the south of the country . It is known from 182 to 1 @,@ 294 m ( 597 to 4 @,@ 245 ft ) above sea level , most often in beech forest ( Fagus sylvatica ) , but also in several other forest types . 
 Romania 
 A single Myotis alcathoe was captured in 2007 in a nature reserve in the eastern Carpathians ; the reserve contains riverine and conifer forest . The species was additionally recorded in a forested valley containing a small stream in Alba County . 
 Serbia 
 The species was reported on the basis of three specimens shortly before 2009 , but is probably rare . 
 Slovakia 
 Here , Myotis alcathoe is known from a single site , a cave in old deciduous forest at 525 m ( 1 @,@ 722 ft ) altitude . 
 Slovenia 
 A single specimen was recorded in Slovenia in 2007 . 
 Spain 
 In Catalonia , the species is known from six sites , ranging from sea level to 1 @,@ 200 m ( 3 @,@ 900 ft ) altitude . It is known in beech and riverine forest and was first recorded in 2006 . The species is known from three sites in La Rioja , where it was recorded in 2004 , and occurs amidst beech and riverine forest at 790 to 1 @,@ 390 m ( 2 @,@ 590 to 4 @,@ 560 ft ) altitude . It has also been found at seven localities in Navarre , with the first record dating from 2004 . There , it occurs in beech and oak forest at altitudes from 140 to 980 m ( 460 to 3 @,@ 220 ft ) . In Galicia , it is known from three localities at 300 to 680 m ( 980 to 2 @,@ 230 ft ) above sea level . 
 Sweden 
 The species was recorded at five sites in the south of the country , starting in 2008 , on the basis of echolocation calls . 
 Switzerland 
 Myotis alcathoe has been recorded from the Col du <unk> in the Jura Mountains ( canton of Vaud ) . The species is acoustically detected in 2003 in the canton of Geneva , and subsequent captures led to the discovery of the first breeding sites for the country . 
 Turkey 
 Eight individuals have been caught at three sites in close vicinity in the European part of the country in 2006 . 
 Ukraine 
 In 2009 , the possible occurrence of Myotis alcathoe in Ukraine was recorded . In 2011 , the species was definitively recorded there on the basis of two bats caught in the far southwest of the country in 2009 . 
 United Kingdom 
 Myotis alcathoe has been recorded in England since 2003 , and is known from two swarming sites in the south and a third site in the north of the country . The northern England site , in Ryedale , is in a protected area with many old trees , and the southern sites ( in Sussex ) are in woodland . 
 The species is also known from Montenegro and possibly from Bosnia and Herzegovina . Early records of Myotis <unk> — now known to be an eastern Asian species — from Ukraine , Bulgaria , and Romania may also pertain to this species . Because whiskered bats in many cases cannot easily be distinguished from each other without the use of genetic methods , some listings do not differentiate between them ; records of Myotis alcathoe and / or M. mystacinus and / or ( in some cases ) M. brandtii have been reported from Bulgaria , Belgium , and Montenegro . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 Myotis alcathoe is a rare species with narrow ecological requirements . According to a study in the Czech Republic , the diet of Myotis alcathoe mostly consists of <unk> flies , but caddisflies , spiders , small lepidopterans , and neuropterans are also taken . The presence of spiders in the diet suggests that the species gleans prey from foliage . It forages mainly high in the canopy and over water , and is often found in dense vegetation . The parasitic mite <unk> <unk> has been found on M. alcathoe , and the mites on M. alcathoe , M. brandtii , and M. mystacinus are genetically closely related . The bat fly <unk> <unk> <unk> has been recorded on M. alcathoe in Thuringia and the tick Ixodes <unk> in Romania . When caught , individuals of Myotis alcathoe are much calmer than M. mystacinus or M. brandtii . 
 Myotis alcathoe lives in small groups . In Greece , a maternity colony , containing three females and two juveniles , has been found in a plane tree . Additional roosts were found high in oak trees in Baden @-@ Württemberg and Saxony @-@ Anhalt . Twenty @-@ seven roosting sites have been found in the Czech Republic , all but one in trees ( the last was in a concrete pole ) . Most of the tree roosts were in oaks ( Quercus robur ) ; others were in limes ( Tilia cordata ) , birches ( Betula pendula ) , and various other species . Its strong preference for roosting sites in trees is unusual among European bats . <unk> tend to be located high in the canopy , and are often in old trees . In summer , roosts may contain large groups of up to 80 individuals , but autumn roosts in the Czech Republic are occupied by smaller groups . M. alcathoe swarms from late July to mid @-@ September in southern Poland . 
 In Saxony @-@ Anhalt , the species forages deep in valleys when temperatures are above 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) , but on warmer slopes or rocky areas when it is colder . There , Myotis alcathoe is relatively easy to capture in August , because M. brandtii and M. mystacinus already start swarming in late July . Although there are some records of Myotis alcathoe in caves during the winter , it is also possible that animals spend the winter in tree cavities , and whether swarming behavior occurs in Myotis alcathoe is unclear . An animal found in a cave in Saxony @-@ Anhalt in January was not sleeping deeply . Reproduction may also take place in caves , but pregnant females have been found as late as June . Relatively many juveniles are caught between July and September . In England , one individual of M. alcathoe was captured in 2003 ( and identified at the time as M. brandtii ) and again in 2009 . Three individuals that were <unk> tracked ( in eastern France , Thuringia , and Baden @-@ Württemberg , respectively ) moved only 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) , 935 m ( 3 @,@ 068 ft ) , and 1 @,@ 440 m ( 4 @,@ 720 ft ) from their night quarters ; M. brandtii and M. mystacinus tend to move over longer distances . A study in Poland suggested frequent hybridization among M. alcathoe , M. brandtii , and M. mystacinus sharing the same swarming sites , probably attributable to male @-@ biased sex ratios ( 1 @.@ 7 : 1 in M. alcathoe ) , a polygynous mating system , and the high number of bats at swarming sites . M. alcathoe showed a particularly high proportion of hybrids , perhaps because it occurs at lower densities than the other two species . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Because Myotis alcathoe remains poorly known , it is assessed as " Data Deficient " on the IUCN Red List . However , it may be endangered because of its narrow ecological preferences . Reservoir construction may threaten the species ' habitat in some places ; two Greek sites where it has been recorded have already been destroyed . Forest loss is another possible threat , and the species may be restricted to undisturbed habitats . Because of its patchy distribution and likely small population , it probably does not easily colonize new habitats . The species is protected by national and international measures , but the IUCN Red List recommends further research on various aspects of the species as well as efforts to increase public awareness of the animal . In addition , old forests need to be conserved and the species ' cave roosts need to be protected . 
 In Catalonia , the species is listed as " Endangered " in view of its apparent rarity there . The Red List of Germany 's Endangered Vertebrates lists Myotis alcathoe as " Critically Endangered " as of 2009 . In the Genevan region , the species is also listed as " Critically Endangered " as of 2015 . In Hungary , where the species is probably not uncommon in suitable habitat , it has been protected since 2005 . However , the species is declining there and is threatened by habitat loss and disturbance of caves . 
 = Fire Emblem = 
 Fire Emblem ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a tactical role @-@ playing video game franchise developed by Intelligent Systems and published by Nintendo . First produced and published for the Family Computer ( Famicom ) , the series currently consists of fifteen games , including remakes , across multiple game systems . Described by its creators as an " RPG simulation " , the gameplay revolves around tactical movement of characters across grid @-@ based environments , while incorporating a story and characters similar to those in a more traditional role @-@ playing video game . A noted aspect of gameplay is the permanent death of characters in battle , removing them from the rest of the game should they be defeated . The series title refers to the titular object , the Fire Emblem , usually portrayed as a royally treasured weapon or shield , representing the power of war and dragons , a recurring element in the series . Development of the first game began as a dōjin project by <unk> Kaga and three other developers . Its success prompted the development of further titles in the series . Kaga headed development of each entry until the release of Thracia 776 , when he left the company and founded his own game studio to develop Tear Ring Saga . 
 No games in the series were released outside of Japan until two characters , Marth and Roy , were included as playable characters in the 2001 fighting game Super Smash Bros. Melee . Their popularity eventually convinced Nintendo to release the next game , The Blazing Sword , in western regions under the title Fire Emblem in 2003 . Many games in the series have sold well , despite a decline during the 2000s which resulted in the series ' near @-@ cancellation . Individual entries have generally been praised , and the series as a whole has been praised for its gameplay , and it is cited as the origin of the tactical role @-@ playing genre . Characters from multiple games have also been included in crossovers with other franchises . On April 27 , 2016 , Nintendo showed off plans for a new mobile game based on the series that is set for release in Fall 2016 . Nintendo also announced that Fire Emblem is now considered as a " Major IP " for the company . 
 = = Titles = = 
 = = = Games = = = 
 According to a developer interview with the developers of Fire Emblem Fates , there are currently fifteen games in the Fire Emblem series , including remakes of earlier titles . The official Fire Emblem World portal lists thirteen games , excluding Fates . Counting only original titles , there have been twelve games in the series including Fates . A game was initially in development for the Nintendo 64 and its peripheral 64DD . Originally codenamed Fire Emblem 64 , it was first revealed by Shigeru Miyamoto in 1997 . Ultimately , due to poor sales for the 64DD and internal structural changes at Intelligent Systems , Fire Emblem 64 was cancelled in 2000 and development shifted to what would become Fire Emblem : The Binding Blade . It was speculated , and later confirmed by staff , that the work done for Fire Emblem 64 was incorporated into Binding Blade . A different title for the Wii was planned , but after some trial and error , in addition to an unfocused development schedule , the project was cancelled . No original Fire Emblem title is currently planned for the Wii U , and Nintendo producer Hitoshi Yamagami said such a game would need to sell 700 @,@ 000 copies to be profitable . 
 = = = = Main series = = = = 
 The first entry in the series , Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light , was released in 1990 for the Japanese Family Computer , introducing the basic series mechanics . A second title for the Famicom set during the events of the first game , Fire Emblem Gaiden , released in 1992 . In 1994 , Mystery of the Emblem was released for the Super Famicom , containing both a remake of Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light and a sequel continuing the story of the first game . Two more games were released for the Super Famicom in 1996 and 1999 respectively : Genealogy of the Holy War and Thracia 776 . 
 The next entry released was Binding Blade in 2002 for the Game Boy Advance , originally announced as Maiden of the Dark . A prequel to Binding Blade , The Sword of Flame , was released for the Game Boy Advance the following year . This entry was released overseas under the title Fire Emblem . It was released in 2003 in North America and 2004 in Europe . The final entry for the Game Boy Advance , The Sacred Stones , was released in 2004 in Japan , and 2005 in North America and Europe . 
 The next entry in the series , Path of Radiance , was released on the GameCube worldwide in 2005 . It was the first Fire Emblem to feature 3D graphics , voice acting , and full @-@ motion animated cutscenes . A direct sequel to Path of Radiance , Radiant Dawn was released for the Wii in 2007 in Japan and North America , and 2008 in Europe . The next entry in the series , Awakening for the Nintendo 3DS , was released in 2012 in Japan and 2013 in North America and Europe . The second entry for the 3DS , Fates , was released in June 2015 in Japan , February 2016 in North America and in May 2016 for Europe and Australia . It comes in multiple versions : two physical versions titled Birthright and Conquest , and a third route titled Revelation released as downloadable content . 
 = = = = Remakes and spin @-@ offs = = = = 
 An expanded remake of the first game , titled Fire Emblem : Shadow Dragon , was released for the Nintendo DS in 2008 in Japan and Europe , and 2009 in North America . Restoring content cut from the first game when it was remade in Mystery of the Emblem , the game makes use of the DS ' gameplay functions and includes additional story elements . A second remake for the DS was released in 2010 . Titled New Mystery of the Emblem , it was an expanded remake similar to Shadow Dragon , and did not receive a western release . 
 In 1997 , an episodic prequel to Mystery of the Emblem titled BS Fire Emblem were released through Satellaview . The events of Archanea Senki were included in the remake of Mystery of the Emblem . Characters from the Fire Emblem series have been included in multiple entries in the Super Smash Bros. series , beginning with main protagonists Marth and Roy in Super Smash Bros. Melee . Characters from Awakening also appeared in Intelligent System 's strategy game Code Name : S.T.E.A.M. as optional characters . A crossover with the Shin Megami Tensei series , titled Tokyo Mirage Sessions ♯ FE , was released in December 2015 in Japan and worldwide in June 2016 . 
 = = = Related media = = = 
 A short original video animation series based on Mystery of the Emblem was created in 1997 . These anime episodes were released in North America , six years before The Sword of Flame was localized . Amiibo figures based on Fire Emblem characters were produced , which are compatible with Fates , Code Name : S.T.E.A.M. and Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U. Manga based on the games have also been produced , including Binding Blade and Awakening . A trading card game based on the series is also available in Japan , featuring character artwork by old and new artists . 
 = = Common elements = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The Fire Emblem games takes place across multiple unrelated settings within a Medieval or Renaissance @-@ themed time period , with the story general focused on the main protagonist , usually a member of royalty , caught in the conflict of two or more countries across a continent and fighting for their cause before having to defeat the game 's final boss , who is either an evil dragon , tyrant or dark god hell @-@ bent on destroying the main character 's homeland if not the world and humanity itself . The continents of Archanea and Valentia are the settings of Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light , Gaiden , Mystery of the Emblem and Awakening , with Awakening taking place several millennia after the other games . It was also the planned setting for Fire Emblem 64 . Genealogy of the Holy War and Thracia 776 are set in the land of <unk> , while Fire Emblem and Binding Blade take place in <unk> . The Sacred Stones is set in the land of <unk> . Path of Radiance and Radiant Dawn are set on the continent of Tellius . 
 A recurring element in the series is the titular Fire Emblem , an object with magical powers . In Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light , it is a shield inset with five magical gems . Its name derives from its connection to dragons and weapons of war , being the " emblem of flame " . It also appears as a family crest in the continuity of Genealogy of the Holy War , a family seal in The Binding Blade storyline , a magical gemstone in The Sacred Stones , and and in the Path of Radiance world it takes the form of a bronze medallion holding a goddess of chaos . Other magical elements , including feuding gods and conflict with mystical species such as dragons and shape @-@ shifters are also recurring elements in the series . 
 = = = Gameplay = = = 
 The Fire Emblem series has been described by its developers as an " RPG simulation " , combining tactical simulation gameplay with the plot and character development of a role @-@ playing game , creating a sense of connection with characters in the field not present in previous tactical games . Battles in the Fire Emblem series play out on a grid @-@ based map , with the player controlling a set number of characters across maps tied to both the game 's story and optional side stories . Each character has a specific character class , giving them set abilities and affecting how far they can move across the field . Some character classes have innate skills unique to them , and each character has its own class and stats . Depending on the series entry , a character 's class can be changed or upgraded with or without special items . During battle , each character gains experience points by performing actions , such as attacking an enemy , healing an ally , and slaying a foe ( which typically offers the most experience points ) . When a certain level is reached , the character levels up , and new skill points are awarded randomly to a character 's attributes , be they the character 's maximum health , agility or strength . The more a character is used in battle , the more experience that character gains . 
 A key element in combat since Genealogy of the Holy War is the Weapon Triangle , a system governing the strengths and weaknesses certain weapons and types of magic have against each other in a Scissors , Paper , Rock fashion . For weapons , lances are stronger than swords , swords are stronger than axes , and axes are stronger than lances . In magic , fire is stronger than wind , wind is stronger than thunder , and thunder is stronger than fire . For Fates , the Weapon Triangle relationships add other weapons in the following way : swords and tomes are stronger than axes and bows , axes and bows were stronger than lances and shuriken , lances and shuriken are stronger than swords and tomes , and so on . Several games use a Weapon <unk> system : after being used a certain number of times , a character 's weapon will break . Different entries have various systems related to character weapons : in Genealogy of the Holy War , weapons can be repaired at special shops ; in Path of Radiance and future games , weapons can be bought and upgraded , while the durability system is replaced in Fates with a system where more powerful weapons weaken some of a wielder 's stats . 
 Both inside and outside battle , characters ' relationships can be developed through interactions on and off the battlefield . As the strength of their relationships grow , certain abilities in battle are also strengthened . A feature introduced in Genealogy of the Holy War and used in later titles was an aspect of relationships . A man and woman who fall in love will have a child , and that child will inherit certain skills and stats from them . One of the recurring features in the series is permanent death ( more frequently referred to as " permadeath " ) , a function where units defeated in battle are permanently removed from the rest of the game with a very few exceptions ( the main character , a character pivotal to the main story ) . Up until Fire Emblem : New Mystery of the Emblem : Heroes of Light and Shadow , there was no option to disable permanent death . In New Mystery of the Emblem , a new Casual Mode was added , where characters that died were revived at the end of a battle . Fates also added Phoenix Mode , where characters slain during one turn are revived on the player 's next turn . Another inclusion from Fates includes ' My Castle ' , a customisable castle that serves as the player 's base of operations throughout the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 The first Fire Emblem title , Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light , was originally never intended as a commercial game , defined by creator <unk> Kaga as a dōjin project with three other job @-@ holding students . As it turned out , the game was successful , prompting the development of more games in the series . The game was developed at Intelligent Systems , whose previous notable game was the strategy game Famicom Wars . Kaga would work on the Fire Emblem series until Thracia 776 , when he left Nintendo and began development on Tear Ring Saga for the PlayStation . After Thracia 776 , the Fire Emblem series had several releases on portable devices . At this time , Marth and Roy from Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light and Sword of Seals appeared as playable characters in Super Smash Bros. Melee , prompting western interest in the Fire Emblem series . The positive reception of the characters made Nintendo decide to localize The Sword of Flame under the title Fire Emblem . Due to its overseas success , it was decided to return the series to home consoles for Path of Radiance for the GameCube . Despite it arriving late in the GameCube 's life cycle , it provided a late boost to sales , reaffirming Nintendo 's faith in the series . By 2010 , the series was suffering from declining sales and Nintendo told Intelligent Systems that if their next Fire Emblem failed to sell above 250 @,@ 000 units , the series would be cancelled . This prompted Intelligent Systems to include lots of features new to the series , intending to make it the culmination of the series . The game 's reception and sales ended up saving the series from cancellation , convincing Nintendo to continue production . 
 The series ' original music was composed by Yuka Tsujiyoko . As the only music composer at Intelligent Systems when Shadow Dragon and the Blade of Light was in production , she acted as both composer and sound director , up until Thracia 776 , when she left the company to freelance after completing the score for Paper Mario . She has worked on later Fire Emblem games , alongside other composers including Saki Kasuga , Hiroki Morishita , and Rei Kondoh . The series includes several other notable staff members : Tohru Narihiro , who was involved in every Fire Emblem since the original ; Masahiro Higuchi , who began as a graphics designer for Genealogy of the Holy War ; and Kouhei Maeda , who wrote the scenarios for every game since The Sword of Flame and became a director for Awakening . Multiple artists are associated with the series . The characters for the first game and the remake of Mystery of the Emblem were designed by Daisuke <unk> . The characters of Mystery of the Emblem and Genealogy of the Holy War were designed by Katsuyoshi Koya , who later worked on designs for the Fire Emblem Trading Card Game . Katsuyoshi , who was unsatisfied with his work on the series , stepped down for Thracia 776 . The designer for Thracia 776 was Mayumi <unk> , whose brief tenure with the series ended when he left Intelligent Systems with Kaga after the game 's completion . Nevertheless , his art for the series was described by Kaga as his favorite up to that point . Other artists involved in later games are Eiji Kaneda ( Binding Blade ) , Sachiko Wada ( The Sacred Stones ) and Senri Kita ( Path of Radiance , Radiant Dawn ) . For Shadow Dragon , the character artwork was redone by Ghost in the Shell artist Masamune Shirow . Awakening 's character designers were Toshiyuki Kusakihara and Yūsuke Kozaki , who were brought on to give a new look to the series . Kozaki returned as character designer for Fates . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The first five Fire Emblem games were highly successful in Japan , selling 329 @,@ 087 , 324 @,@ 699 , 776 @,@ 338 , 498 @,@ 216 and 106 @,@ 108 copies respectively . As of 2002 , total sales had reached over two million copies . Sales of the series went into a decline beginning with Radiant Dawn , but Awakening topped the total sales of both Radiant Dawn and the Mystery of the Emblem remake in its first week . It went on to sell 1 @.@ 79 million copies worldwide and become the best @-@ selling Fire Emblem title in western territories . 
 The Fire Emblem series is highly popular in Japan . In 2007 , a Japanese public poll named Mystery of the Emblem as one of the country 's All Time Top 100 video games . Speaking to USGamer , Massive Chalice creator Brad Muir commented on how Fire Emblem had influenced the game , referring to it as " [ a ] venerable strategy series " , making positive reference to its gameplay and character relationships . In her review of Awakening , IGN 's Audrey Drake said that " Far too few people have played the Fire Emblem series " , calling it " [ a ] darling of the hardcore strategy RPG crowd - and one of the shining gems of the genre " . 
 Several journalistic sites have cited its low notoriety in the west as an effect of Nintendo 's sporadic localization efforts , along with its place in a niche game genre . At the same time , they have praised the series ' gameplay , regularly noting its high difficulty and relationship mechanics . Game Informer and Gamasutra both cited the series as an inspiration for later popular tactical role @-@ playing games , with Gamasutra naming Tactics Ogre : Let Us Cling Together , Final Fantasy Tactics and the Disgaea series as being influenced by its design . Destructoid writer Chris Carter , writing in 2014 , praised the series ' mechanics , at the same time listing the five best games in the series : among those he chose were Mystery of the Emblem , Radiant Dawn , and Awakening . Awakening is generally cited as having brought the series more publicity and player attention . 
 = = = Tear Ring Saga lawsuit = = = 
 After Kaga left Nintendo , he founded a studio called Tirnanog and began development on a game titled Emblem Saga , a strategy role @-@ playing game for the PlayStation . The game bore multiple similarities to the Fire Emblem series , and Nintendo filed a lawsuit against Tirnanog for copyright infringement . The first suit failed , but the court ruled in Tirnanog 's favor . Nintendo filed a second lawsuit , and this time was awarded a cash settlement of ¥ 76 million . Nevertheless , Tirnanog and publisher Enterbrain were still allowed to publish the title , though they changed its name to Tear Ring Saga , and eventually developed a sequel . Nintendo attempted taking a third lawsuit to the Japanese Supreme Court in 2005 , but the second ruling was upheld . 
 = Battle of Winterthur ( 1799 ) = 
 The Battle of Winterthur ( 27 May 1799 ) was an important action between elements of the Army of the Danube and elements of the Habsburg army , commanded by Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze , during the War of the Second Coalition , part of the French Revolutionary Wars . The small town of Winterthur lies 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) northeast of Zürich , in Switzerland . Because of its position at the junction of seven cross @-@ roads , the army that held the town controlled access to most of Switzerland and points crossing the Rhine into southern Germany . Although the forces involved were small , the ability of the Austrians to sustain their 11 @-@ hour assault on the French line resulted in the consolidation of three Austrian forces on the plateau north of Zürich , leading to the French defeat a few days later . 
 By mid @-@ May 1799 , the Austrians had wrested control of parts of Switzerland from the French as forces under the command of Hotze and Count Heinrich von Bellegarde pushed them out of the Grisons . After defeating Jean @-@ Baptiste Jourdan 's 25 @,@ 000 @-@ man Army of the Danube at the battles of Ostrach and Stockach , the main Austrian army , under command of Archduke Charles , crossed the Rhine at the Swiss town of Schaffhausen and prepared to unite with the armies of Hotze and Friedrich Joseph , Count of Nauendorf , on the plains surrounding Zürich . 
 The French Army of Switzerland and the Army of the Danube , now both under the command of André Masséna , sought to prevent this merger . Masséna sent Michel Ney and a small mixed cavalry and infantry force from Zürich to stop Hotze 's force at Winterthur . Despite a sharp contest , the Austrians succeeded in pushing the French out of the Winterthur highlands , although both sides took high casualties . Once the union of the Habsburg armies took place in early June , Archduke Charles attacked French positions at Zürich and forced the French to withdraw beyond the Limmat . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Political and diplomatic situation = = = 
 Initially , the rulers of Europe viewed the revolution in France as an event between the French king and his subjects , and not something in which they should interfere . As revolutionary rhetoric grew more strident , they declared the interest of the monarchs of Europe as one with the interests of Louis and his family ; this Declaration of Pilnitz threatened ambiguous , but quite serious , consequences if anything should happen to the royal family . The French position became increasingly difficult . Compounding problems in international relations , French émigrés continued to agitate for support of a counter @-@ revolution . On 20 April 1792 , the French National Convention declared war on Austria . In this War of the First Coalition ( 1792 – 1798 ) , France ranged itself against most of the European states sharing land or water borders with her , plus Portugal and the Ottoman Empire . Although the Coalition forces achieved several victories at Verdun , Kaiserslautern , Neerwinden , Mainz , Amberg and Würzburg , the efforts of Napoleon Bonaparte in northern Italy pushed Austrian forces back and resulted in the negotiation of the Peace of Leoben ( 17 April 1797 ) and the subsequent Treaty of Campo Formio ( 17 October 1797 ) . 
 The treaty called for meetings between the involved parties to work out the exact territorial and remunerative details . <unk> at a small town in the mid @-@ Rhineland , Rastatt , the Congress quickly derailed in a mire of intrigue and diplomatic posturing . The French demanded more territory . The Austrians were reluctant to cede the designated territories . Compounding the Congress 's problems , tensions grew between France and most of the First Coalition allies . Ferdinand of Naples refused to pay agreed @-@ upon tribute to France , and his subjects followed this refusal with a rebellion . The French invaded Naples and established the Parthenopaean Republic . Encouraged by the French Republic , a republican uprising in the Swiss cantons led to the overthrow of the Swiss Confederation and the establishment of the Helvetic Republic . The French Directory was convinced that the Austrians were planning to start another war . Indeed , the weaker France seemed , the more seriously the Austrians , the Neapolitans , the Russians , and the English discussed this possibility . In mid @-@ spring , the Austrians reached an agreement with Tsar Paul of Russia by which the legendary Alexander Suvorov would come out of retirement to assist Austria in Italy with another 60 @,@ 000 troops . 
 = = = Outbreak of war in 1799 = = = 
 The French Directory 's military strategy in 1799 called for offensive campaigns on all fronts : central Italy , northern Italy , the Swiss cantons , the upper Rhineland , and Holland . Theoretically , the French had a combined force of 250 @,@ 000 troops , but this was on paper , not in the field . As winter broke in 1799 , General Jean Baptiste Jourdan and the Army of the Danube , at a paper strength of 50 @,@ 000 and an actual strength of 25 @,@ 000 , crossed the Rhine between Basel and Kehl on 1 March . This crossing officially violated the Treaty of Campo Formio . The Army of the Danube advanced through the Black Forest and , by mid @-@ March , established an offensive position at the western and northern edge of the Swiss Plateau by the village of Ostrach . André Masséna had already pushed into Switzerland with his force of 30 @,@ 000 , and successfully passed into the <unk> Alps , Chur , and <unk> on the Inn . Theoretically , his left flank was to link with Jourdan 's right flank , commanded by Pierre Marie Barthélemy Ferino , at the far eastern shore of Lake Constance . 
 The Austrians had arrayed their own army in a line from the Tyrol to the Danube . A force of 46 @,@ 000 under command of Count Heinrich von Bellegarde formed the defence of the Tyrol . Another small Austrian force of 26 @,@ 000 commanded by Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze guarded the Vorarlberg . The main Austrian Army — close to 80 @,@ 000 troops under the command of Archduke Charles — had wintered in the Bavarian , Austrian , and Salzburg territories on the eastern side of the Lech . At the battles of Ostrach ( 21 March ) and Stockach ( 25 March ) , the main Austrian force pushed the Army of the Danube back into the Black Forest . Charles made plans to cross the upper Rhine at the Swiss town of Schaffhausen . Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze brought a portion ( approximately 8 @,@ 000 ) of his force west , leaving the rest to defend the Vorarlberg . At the same time , Friedrich Joseph , Count of Nauendorf , brought the left wing of the main Austrian force across the Rhine by <unk> . They planned to unite with the main Austrian army , controlling the northern access points of Zürich and forcing an engagement with Masséna . 
 By mid @-@ May , French morale was low . They had suffered terrible losses at Ostrach and Stockach , although these had been made up by reinforcements . Two senior officers of the Army of the Danube , Charles Mathieu Isidore Decaen and Jean @-@ Joseph Ange d 'Hautpoul , were facing courts @-@ martial on charges of misconduct , professed by their senior officer , Jourdan . Jean @-@ Baptiste Bernadotte and Laurent de Gouvion Saint @-@ Cyr were sick , or claimed they were , and had left the army 's encampments to recover their health . Masséna 's force had been repelled by Hotze 's army at Feldkirch , and forced to fall back , and <unk> 's failure to push through against Bellegarde 's Austrian force in the Tyrol , meant Masséna had to pull his southern wing back as well as his center and northern wing , to maintain communication with the retreating armies on his flanks . At this point , also , the Swiss revolted again , this time against the French , and Zürich became the last defensible position Masséna could take . 
 = = = Locale = = = 
 Winterthur ( / <unk> / ; German pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) lies in a basin south and east of the Töss approximately 31 kilometres ( 19 mi ) northeast of Zürich . To the north and east of the town lies a ring of hills approximately 687 metres ( 0 @.@ 427 mi ) high . To the west , the Töss runs on its 59 @.@ 7 @-@ kilometre ( 37 @.@ 1 mi ) course north toward the Rhine . The locale of a Roman settlement from 200 to 400 , and the site of a medieval battle in 919 , its location at seven crossroads gave it strategic importance in the effort to control north – south and east – west communication in the early days of the War of the Second Coalition . 
 = = = Leadership = = = 
 After the defeats at the battles at Ostrach and Stockach , and the Army of the Danube 's retreat into the Black Forest , the French Directory had sacked Jean Baptiste Jourdan in April 1799 and given command of both the Army of Switzerland and the Army of the Danube to André Masséna . Protecting the northern access to Zürich , Masséna gathered some of the best commanders he had available ; eventually , three of them would become Marshals of France , and Tharreau , a dependable General of Division . 
 The situation for the French was dire . Not only had they been trounced in southwestern Germany , the legendary Alexander Suvorov was on his way to northern Italy with 60 @,@ 000 Russians , to take command of Coalition forces there . Count Heinrich Bellegarde , positioned with 20 @,@ 000 men in the Grisons , effectively isolated Masséna 's force from any assistance out of Italy . Most threatening , Archduke Charles ' main army lay less than a day away ; in size alone , it could overwhelm him , or , if he withdrew to the west , its position cut off his avenue of withdrawal toward France . If Charles ' left wing , commanded by Nauendorf , united with Hotze 's force , approaching from the east , Masséna knew Charles would attack and very likely push him out of Zürich . 
 To prevent this merger of the Austrian forces , Masséna established a forward line centred at Winterthur , and under overall command of the experienced Jean Victor Tharreau . The French forces were arrayed in an uneven semicircle , in which Winterthur formed the central part . The command of the Winterthur brigades was the most important . If the center could not hold its position , the flanks would be isolated and crushed . Masséna sent newly promoted General of Division Michel Ney to Winterthur on 27 May 1799 to take command of the center . Masséna recalled him from his assignment commanding an outpost of Claude Lecourbe 's force in central Switzerland , and gave him a command more fitting with his new rank . Ney arrived with the reputation for boldness considered typical of cavalry officers , but with minimal experience in commanding mixed forces . Anxious to prove himself but aware of protocols , he had hurried to Tharreau 's headquarters , but had to wait for his letters of service before he could take command . These arrived on 25 May . The troops at Winterthur included a brigade of four battalions commanded by Dominique <unk> Roget , a weak brigade commanded by Théodore Maxime Gazan , and a cavalry brigade commanded by Frédéric Henri Walther . 
 Like Ney , Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze , the Austrian commander , was also a cavalry officer . Unlike Ney , he had broad field experience . The Swiss @-@ born Hotze had entered the military service of the Duke of Württemberg in 1758 and had been promoted to Rittmeister , or captain of cavalry ; he had campaigned briefly in the Seven Years ' War , but saw no combat . Later , he served in the Russian army in the Russo @-@ Turkish War ( 1768 – 74 ) . With an Austrian commission , he joined the Habsburg imperial army , and served in the brief War of the Bavarian Succession ( 1778 – 79 ) . His campaigning in the War of the First Coalition , particularly at the Battle of Würzburg , had earned him the confidence of Archduke Charles and elevation to the ranks of nobility by Charles ' brother , Francis II , Holy Roman Emperor . 
 = = Action = = 
 = = = Preliminaries = = = 
 On 22 May 1799 , Friedrich Joseph , Count of Nauendorf , led a large column across the Rhine at Constance , Stein and <unk> . Hotze 's force had already crossed the Rhine further east , where it was still a mountain stream , and passed through the Grisons , into Toggenburg , and moved toward Zürich . 
 To prevent these two forces from joining with Archduke Charles ' 100 @,@ 000 men , on 22 May , Masséna and 23 @,@ 000 troops of the Army of the Danube marched from Zürich in the direction of Winterthur . Once past Winterthur , they made their way another 14 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) northeast and , on 25 May , the two armies clashed at Frauenfeld . Out @-@ numbered almost four to one , Hotze 's force was badly mauled by the French ; 750 of Hotze 's men were killed or wounded , and 1 @,@ 450 captured ; in addition , Hotze lost two guns , and one color . His second @-@ in @-@ command , Major General Christoph Karl von <unk> , was wounded in action and died later of his wounds . Despite the superiority of the French numbers , though , Hotze extricated his force from the engagement , manoeuvred around the French position , and escaped in the direction of Winterthur . 
 Meanwhile , by 26 May Nauendorf established camp near <unk> and reacquired contact with the main Austrian force . Having united with Nauendorf , Archduke Charles awaited Hotze 's force , coming from the east , before he would attack the French at Zürich . That same night , Hotze camped between Frauenfeld and <unk> , about 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) southeast of Nauendorf 's position , and sent his advance posts as far ahead as Islikon and <unk> , only 9 kilometres ( 6 mi ) east of Winterthur . 
 = = = Clash = = = 
 On the morning of 27 May , Hotze assembled his force into three columns and marched toward Winterthur . Opposite him , Michel Ney , newly in command of his division of approximately 3 @,@ 000 men , deployed his force around the heights , the so @-@ called Ober @-@ Winterthur , a ring of low @-@ lying hills some 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) north of the city . 
 Given the size of the Austrian force approaching him , Ney planned to withdraw to Winterthur . Before he could implement this action , the over @-@ all commander of the forward line , Jean Victor Tharreau , had galloped to his position and said he would support Ney by sending Jean @-@ de @-@ Dieu Soult 's division ; Ney understood this to mean he was to make a stand along the entire outpost line , and that he would not be isolated . His small force would receive reinforcements from Soult 's division . Consequently , Ney directed the weakest brigade , under the command of Gazan , to move up a long valley toward Frauenfeld , and another brigade , under the command of Roget , to take the right , preventing any Austrian flanking manoeuvre . 
 By mid @-@ morning , Hotze 's advanced guard had encountered moderate French resistance first from Roget 's brigade , and then , almost immediately , from Gazan 's . The Austrian advance troops quickly overran Gazan 's weak brigade and took possession of the woods surrounding the village of Islikon . After securing the villages of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , further west of Islikon , Hotze deployed two of his columns facing the French front , while a third angled to the French right , as Ney had expected he would . 
 By mid @-@ morning , Ney had moved toward the front with Gazan 's brigade and he could see the enemy advancing toward him ; still expecting Soult 's reinforcements on his flanks , he anticipated an easy victory , like the one three days earlier in which Masséna 's force had pounded Hotze 's column at Frauenfeld . He did not realise , at least not yet , that Hotze had 8 @,@ 000 men with which to secure the crossroads north of Winterthur . Ney brought more of his men to the front , and moved against the Austrian left . In an Austrian volley , he and his horse went down ; the horse was killed and Ney received a knee injury . He had his wound bandaged , called for another horse , and reentered the fight . 
 Ney now had two problems : he expected support columns from Soult 's division on both flanks to arrive momentarily and he did not know that the Austrians had arrived in force , directly in front of his center . Although Roget 's brigade was strong enough to prevent the Austrians from flanking the position , Gazan 's brigade was too weak to resist the superior Austrian force , which was growing visibly stronger as Hotze 's troops continued to arrive at the forward line and throw themselves into the fray . 
 Finally accepting that Soult would not arrive , Ney could not hope to hold his position , much less push the Austrians back . He concluded that he must fall back to Winterthur . To cover the retreat , he instructed Walther and his cavalry to establish a position on the Töss , above the bridge at Stieg . From there , the cavalry could protect an orderly retreat . Amidst a muddy rivulet feeding the Töss , Ney positioned a second detachment guarding the village of Töss and the road leading to a ridge of the hills , where he placed a couple of cannons . From the ridge , his rear guard could fire its artillery on the Austrian advance . 
 For Walther , at the bridge , the position appeared defensible for as long as it would take to remove Ney 's force through Winterthur , yet the shock of the Austrian force , as it hit his defences , was sufficient to break his line after 90 minutes of brisk fighting . But there the Austrian forward momentum stalled . Although Hotze 's men forced Walther 's from the bridge , they themselves could not cross it . From the ridge , Ney 's rear guard maintained a steady stream of cannon fire on any of the Austrians who crossed the bridge and attempted to advance up the hill . Hotze recognised the futility of throwing his men into direct cannon fire and ordered instead a steady musketry barrage . This proved effective , for Ney was again injured , this time in his left hand , and his second horse was killed ; he relinquished command to Gazan , who organised the continued withdrawal from the position . 
 When the Archduke heard of Hotze 's success in taking Winterthur crossroads , he directed his troops to augment Nauendorf 's , and to take the village and the environs of Neftenbach , 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) west @-@ northwest of Winterthur . Nicolas Oudinot , whose men had secured Neftenbach as part of the French forward line , held out for most of the day , but was forced to retreat 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) to <unk> in the late afternoon ; his position there was not defensible and he was pushed further back to the outskirts of Zürich . By taking Neftenbach , Charles placed a formidable group of troops between Ney 's force and Hotze 's flank and forced an uneven French withdrawal toward Zürich . Tharreau manoeuvred around the Töss , attempting to re @-@ establish his forward line , but Masséna did not want a general engagement between Zürich and Neftenbach , not there and not then . The Armies of Switzerland and the Danube were not ready to take on Charles ; Masséna 's forces were not prepared for a battle on the scale required in facing Charles ' entire army , and he needed the defences offered by Zürich to mount a proper line against the impending Austrian attack . Eventually , Tharreau withdrew the entire forward line to Zürich . The clash took 11 hours . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Hotze 's force took relatively high casualties — 1 @,@ 000 men killed , wounded or missing ( 12 @.@ 5 percent ) of his entire force of 8 @,@ 000 — although his losses were comparable to Ney 's 800 killed wounded or missing , from his 7 @,@ 000 @-@ man force ( 11 @.@ 5 percent ) . More importantly , though , Hotze succeeded not only in pushing the French back from Winterthur , but also in uniting his force with Nauendorf 's and Charles ' . The unified Austrian force completed the semicircle around Masséna 's positions at Zürich . 
 For the French , despite their success earlier at Frauenfeld , the action was considerably less successful . In the clash , Ney was sufficiently wounded that he took immediate leave , and remained out of action and command until 22 July . The conduct of the battle also demonstrated the weakness of the French command system in which personal animosity and competition between high @-@ ranking officers , in this case , Soult and Tharreau , undermined French military objectives . Tharreau eventually charged Soult with insubordination ; Soult had outright refused to go to Ney 's assistance , despite specific , and direct , orders to move his division to Ney 's flanks . 
 Furthermore , the French dangerously underestimated Austrian tenacity and military skill . The white coats , as the French called the Austrians , were far better soldiers than the French assumed , and despite such demonstrations as that at Ostrach , Stockach and Winterthur , the French continued to hold this prejudice . This did not change until 1809 when the Battle of Aspern @-@ Essling and the Battle of Wagram a few weeks later caused Napoleon to revise his opinion of the Austrian military . 
 Finally , the battle at Winterthur made possible the victory at Zürich . Once the Austrian armies united west , north and east of Zürich , Charles decided he had a sufficiently superior force to attack Masséna 's positions in Zürich . His strategy , to develop a converging attack , was not entirely possible without another Austria corps , which was commanded by Suvorov , and positioned in the mountains in Italy ; this would have made possible the near encirclement of Masséna 's command at Zürich , making the French position untenable . Even so , at the First Battle of Zürich ( 4 – 7 June 1799 ) , the Austrian army forced the French to abandon Zürich ; Masséna withdrew across the Limmat , where he set up a defensive position on the low @-@ lying hills overlooking the city and awaited his opportunity to reacquire the city . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 = = = Austrian = = = 
 Lt. Field Marshal Friedrich Freiherr von Hotze 
 12 . Infantry Regiment Manfredini ( 3 battalions ) 
 21 . Infantry Regiment <unk> ( 2 companies ) 
 41 . Infantry Regiment Bender ( 3 battalions ) 
 1 . Light Infantry Regiment Strozzi ( 1 battalion ) 
 7 . Dragoon Regiment Waldeck ( 6 squadrons ) 
 First Battalion , Hungarian @-@ Banat Border Regiment 
 Total : ~ 8000 men 
 = = = French = = = 
 General of Division Michel Ney 
 Honoré Théodore Maxime Gazan de la Peyrière 's column ( 4 battalions ) 
 Dominique <unk> Roget 's column ( 2 battalions ) 
 Frédéric Henri Walther 's cavalry ( 3 squadrons ) 
 Total : 7 @,@ 000 men 
 = Herdwick = 
 The Herdwick is a breed of domestic sheep native to the Lake District of Cumbria in North West England . The name " Herdwick " is derived from the Old Norse <unk> , meaning sheep pasture . Though low in lambing capacity and perceived wool quality when compared to more common commercial breeds such as Merino sheep , Herdwicks are prized for their robust health , their ability to live solely on forage , and their tendency to be territorial and not to stray over the difficult upland terrain of the Lake District . It is considered that up to 99 % of all Herdwick sheep are commercially farmed in the central and western Lake District . 
 The wool quality of a Herdwick has unique qualities relating to durability . Thick bristle type fibres will often protrude from garments forming a protective barrier layer in blizzards — most likely the same qualities that protect the sheep in similar conditions . They have been known to survive under a blanket of snow for three days while eating their own wool . 
 Severely threatened by the 2001 outbreak of foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease in England and Wales , the breed has survived due to the intent to preserve this unique animal as a crucial part of traditional Lakeland agriculture . Still far less in number than most commercial breeds , Herdwicks survive largely due to farming subsidies and the aid of the British National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The root word of the breed 's name , <unk> , " sheep pasture " , is recorded in documents dating back to the 12th century . The origin of the breed itself is unknown , but the most common theory is that the ancestors of Herdwick sheep were introduced by early Norse settlers . According to this , it was brought to the region somewhere between the 10th and 11th centuries during the Viking invasions of western England . Alternatively , a piece of local folklore once suggested that it came from a wrecked Spanish Armada ship . In any case , the Herdwick was an important breed in the Lake District by the end of the 12th century . 
 For centuries , the husbandry of Herdwick sheep has been a large factor in shaping the culture and terrain of the Lake District . Topographically , grazing by sheep continues to keep the hillsides of fells largely treeless , and the ubiquitous dry stone walls of the valleys were built to protect grazing land and to confine livestock . Linguistically , many words of Lakeland speech relate to sheep husbandry . The ancient Yan Tan <unk> counting system for sheep is a survival of Brittonic counting systems . 
 = = = = Beatrix Potter = = = = 
 In the latter half of her life , the children 's author Beatrix Potter was involved with keeping and breeding Herdwicks , even acting as president of the breed association for a time . Between 1930 and 1938 she won a number of prizes for Herdwick ewes at shows across Cumbria . Upon her death in 1943 , she bequeathed fifteen farms – approximately a total sum of 4 @,@ 000 acres ( 16 km ² ) - to the National Trust , and per her instructions all continue to graze Herdwick flocks . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 In the modern era , the main industry of the Lake District has shifted from agriculture to tourism . The subsequent influx of tourists to the District has at times conflicted with traditional life , including the raising of Herdwicks . One Lake District farmer summed the problem up as , " We get 100 @,@ 000 visitors across our land every year ... If just one in a thousand forgets to shut a gate or can 't be bothered , that 's a hundred times we have to go out and round up our sheep . " 
 In the late 20th century , the keeping of Herdwicks became economically <unk> without outside support ; open market prices for Herdwick fleeces sometimes drop as low as a penny a kilogram ( which is about the weight of wool from a single sheep ) . Without direct monetary guarantees for wool prices from the National Trust , it actually costs farmers a considerably larger amount of money to shear their Herdwicks than they would receive in compensation ; the majority of farmers once burned their fleeces as waste products . The Trust now acts as a wool merchant itself , thus being able to bargain for better prices directly with the British Wool Marketing Board and operate a Herdwick wool trademark . Most farmers survive through the sale of lambs , as well as both National Trust and European Union farm subsidies . Lake District farmers in particular receive subsidies for operating in a designated Less Favored Area from the England Rural Development Programme . Those who agree to maintain their land in accordance with sustainable farming practices also receive additional subsidies . 
 95 % of all 50 @,@ 000 or so Herdwicks live within 14 miles of Coniston , Cumbria , and this makes them particularly vulnerable to outbreaks of disease . The outbreak of foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease in 2001 led to the destruction of many flocks , and to fears for the survival both of the breed and of the typical Lakeland sheep farming industry . Of the estimated 100 @,@ 000 Herdwick sheep present before the outbreak , a full 25 % were lost . They were not easily replaceable because long @-@ standing herds are <unk> so the introduction of new stock to the fells would have required extensive fencing . The call for vaccination rather than culling to preserve what is considered a part of the traditional identity of the fells and moors was led by parties – such as the Duke of Westminster , Earl Peel , Lord Barnard and Lord Lonsdale – who wished to save the hill sheep on their lands . Many Lake District residents saw the breed as an indispensable icon of the region . Longtime resident and writer for The Guardian A. Harry Griffin expressed this feeling : 
 There are other mountain sheep on the Lakeland fells , notably <unk> and Rough @-@ Fells , but the hardy Herdwick is the sheep most likely to be seen in and around the Duddon valley , the Coniston fells , the <unk> fells and , through Borrowdale or <unk> , up to the highest land in England , the <unk> . More than the old drystone walls that quarter the fells , the packhorse bridges or the whitewashed farmsteads , the little grey Herdwick sheep typify the Lakeland . 
 If they and their shepherds go , that is the end of the Lakeland where I have climbed , walked , skied and skated for nearly 80 years ; of the Lakeland I have written about nearly all my life . 
 The destruction of entire flocks meant that the shepherds were forced to undergo the process of again <unk> ( the local term for <unk> ) their new sheep to the hills . Normally , ewes teach this behaviour to their lambs , but with no more ewes left acquainted with a particular <unk> the behavior had to be taught all over again to new ewes , inevitably involving much rounding up of flocks that had strayed over the often inaccessible fells . <unk> sheep might also cause overgrazing by wandering if they replaced the original Herdwicks . The Cumbria Hill Sheep Initiative was set up to " reassess the position and circumstances " in the aftermath of the disease ; tough government restrictions in order to prevent another outbreak are still in place . 
 In 2008 , an Oregon sheep farmer began importing semen from Herdwick rams in to the United States to begin a breeding program using artificial insemination and designed to bring the breed to the country for the first time . In 2013 , Lakeland Herdwick meat received a Protected Designation of Origin from the European Union . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Herdwicks are a dual @-@ purpose breed , producing strongly flavoured lamb and mutton and a coarse , grey wool . This slowly maturing breed is one of the most hardy of all the British hill sheep breeds , withstanding the cold and relentless rain of the Lake District at heights upwards of 3 @,@ 000 feet ( about 1 @,@ 000 metres ) . Most Herdwicks spend winter on the fells , from approximately December to April . They are normally left to graze freely on the hillsides ( without any additional feed ) , but each ewe tends to stay in her <unk> ( the local term for heft ) , the same small area of fell . Due to the rough conditions on fells , lambing losses can be as high as 25 % . This ability to thrive unassisted is part of the reason fell farmers so highly value Herdwicks over much higher @-@ producing lowland breeds . 
 A Herdwick 's grey fleece is not easily dyed , and is coarse , and so is best suited to use as carpet wool . The wool is also an excellent natural insulator ; it is possible to buy sheets of fireproofed wool to fit as loft insulation . Herdwick lamb and mutton has a very distinct taste , and was even eaten at Queen Elizabeth II 's 1953 coronation banquet . Herdwick ewes also commonly produce desirable market lambs and mules by cross @-@ breeding with Suffolk , Cheviot , Charollais and Texel sheep . 
 Herdwick lambs are born black , and after a year they lighten to a dark brown colour ( the sheep are called <unk> or hoggets at this stage ) . After the first shearing , their fleece lightens further to grey . Rams are horned , and ewes polled . For shows and auctions , Herdwicks traditionally have their wool <unk> up ( the local term for <unk> ) with dye . Rams are also <unk> when put out with the ewes to show which have been mated , and the dye is also one method ( called a <unk> ) of marking sheep for ownership . Before chemical dyes became available , this dye was made from either iron ore or graphite mixed with grease . For many years the legal method of identifying a particular shepherd 's sheep were notches cut out of a sheep 's ear , called lug marks – now replaced by ear tags . 
 = Project 86 = 
 Project 86 is an American Christian rock band from Orange County , California , formed in 1996 . The band has released eight albums , which have collectively sold nearly 500 @,@ 000 units worldwide , two EPs , two DVDs , and one live album . Their music is characterized by a rock / post @-@ hardcore / alternative style . Frontman Andrew Schwab 's poetic and introspective lyrics have addressed a wide variety of topics such as conformity and emptiness . 
 The band was started by Schwab as a way to inspire people to live their lives with hope . In 1998 , BEC Recordings released a self @-@ titled debut album that was well received by critics and consumers . Their second release , Drawing Black Lines , garnered attention from mainstream record labels ; Atlantic licensed the album from Tooth & Nail Records , the parent company of BEC . The band 's third release , Truthless Heroes , was released exclusively by Atlantic , after the band was bought @-@ out of their original deal with Tooth & Nail . The band parted ways with Atlantic shortly after their third release , upon which they had a short stint as an independent . The band then negotiated a new contract with Tooth & Nail , and subsequently released three more albums , the last one being Picket Fence Cartel in summer 2009 . After fulfilling their last agreement with T & N , in December 2011 the band announced a Kickstarter campaign via their official website and Facebook page , stating that " the fans are now our record label . " Their eighth studio release , Wait for the Siren , was released on August 21 , 2012 . Their ninth album , Knives to the Future , was independently released by Team Black Recordings on November 11 , 2014 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1996 – 1999 : Formation and self @-@ titled debut = = = 
 According to the official Project 86 documentary " XV , " Project 86 was formed in mid 1996 by vocalist Andrew Schwab in Orange County , California . Guitarist Randy Torres , who was a sophomore in high school , was the first member recruited . The original lineup included Schwab , Torres , Ethan Luck ( Demon Hunter , Relient K ) , and bassist Matt Hernandez ( Unashamed , The <unk> ) . Drummer Alex Albert was added when Hernandez left the band after a few rehearsals , then Luck moved to bass from drums . Luck left the band to join The <unk> in Summer 1997 , after which high school senior Steven Dail joined in late 1997 . 
 Schwab comments in a 2004 interview regarding the number 86 in the band name : " The generation before us used that phrase to describe when they would reject or remove something ... Project 86 is like the whole idea of being rejected , or separate , or not going along with the current . " The group did not travel much initially ; they decided to hone their sound and live performances before embarking on tours . In 1997 , Project 86 was voted one of the top independent acts of the year by HM magazine readers . At <unk> the same year , their performance was a big hit and Tooth & Nail Records , became interested and subsequently signed them . 
 Bryan <unk> produced their self @-@ titled debut . He had engineered albums by multi @-@ platinum outfits The Offspring and Alice in Chains as well as producing labelmates <unk> . Schwab drew upon personal struggles he was experiencing at the time to write meaningful lyrics . Sonny Sandoval , lead singer of nu metal group P.O.D. , appeared as a guest performer . The album was released in June 1998 and was well received . It sold over 50 @,@ 000 copies to date and gained mainstream exposure on MTV shows Road Rules and The Real World . Project 86 was observed by Allmusic to be the " most daring album at the time for its genre " . The success of their debut made Project 86 a top seller for BEC / Tooth and Nail . The band embarked on a pioneering tour called " The Warriors Come Out and Play Tour " in May 1999 with friends P.O.D. and Blindside as the middle slot , which drew crowds of 600 @-@ 1000 across the nation . 
 = = = 2000 – 2003 : Drawing Black Lines and Truthless Heroes = = = 
 The group worked on their sophomore record with producer Garth " <unk> " <unk> in Vancouver , BC . Schwab wrote lyrics about a wider variety of issues , rather than just focusing on personal expression with their sophomore release : " The new album deals a lot less with me , and more with the world around us ; Issues in people , society , culture " . The sound was heavier and more progressive , with more hints of melody as well . As soon as the album was finished it garnered interest from several major labels , and Atlantic records licensed the album for co @-@ release with Tooth and Nail / BEC in March 2000 . Drawing Black Lines peaked at No. 37 on Heatseekers , and was well received by critics . By this time , listeners in the band had begun to amass a sizable fanbase . Despite heavy reliance on tour dates and word of mouth to inform people of its release , the album experienced some commercial success when it eventually sold nearly 120 @,@ 000 copies . The band added Cory Edelmann , previously of No Innocent Victim , after the album was finished . Project 86 traveled nationwide with P.O.D. , Hed PE , and Linkin Park on the " Kings of the Game " tour in October 2000 . They also played a string of shows with Queensrÿche . 
 In 2002 , Project 86 teamed with Slayer producer Matt Hyde to record their next album . The record was envisioned as a critique of post @-@ 9 / 11 America and the music industry . <unk> as a concept album , it told the story of a character attempting to find fulfillment in modern culture . " Songs were written and assembled with a certain ebb and flow in mind , " said Schwab , " I approached the album like writing chapters in a book . " The group spent over 14 months recording demos for Atlantic , which invested nearly $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in the project when it was all said and done . . Because of the pressure to produce radio singles , the sound of the album was quite different from its previous releases , as was Schwab 's cryptic lyrics , which represented the frustrations of being stifled creatively and feeling powerless in the process . 
 Truthless Heroes was released in September 2002 and peaked at No. 146 on the Billboard 200 . Their first and only single , " Hollow Again " , peaked at No. 35 on Mainstream Rock Tracks . Atlantic refused to release the second single because they claimed the lyrics conflicted with the Iraq War effort . While lauded by critics for its pounding criticism of the media and entertainment industry , the album proved to be controversial , particularly the promotional website . Additionally , many Christians felt alienated by its dark material ; one young fan deemed the album " too depressing " . Fans also complained that the record was " overproduced " and lacked the raw energy present in Drawing Black Lines . In a later interview , Schwab expressed disappointment about the record , stating he had " different aspirations for [ it ] than what came out . " The group performed with Taproot on their self @-@ titled tour in fall 2002 . In addition , they played shows with Thirty Seconds to Mars , <unk> , Blindside , Trust Company , Sevendust , and Finger Eleven . 
 During this time , Project 86 distanced themselves from the Christian market to a certain extent , due to having more general market opportunities for touring , as well as a natural shift in marketing emphasis from the label . According to Andree Farias of Christianity Today , " Their commitment with Atlantic required them to give precedence to their newfound mainstream audience . " While their first single , " Hollow Again , " gained respectable traction at rock radio , Atlantic did not release their second single , " Your Heroes are Dead " to alternative radio due to concerns about the lyrics in light of 9 / 11 . After moderate sales of nearly 75 @,@ 000 copies , the band parted ways with Atlantic in early 2003 . 
 = = = 2003 – 2006 : Songs to Burn Your Bridges By and ... And the Rest Will Follow = = = 
 The departure from Atlantic was a big disappointment for the band . " All of the hype about our future successes turned out to be just that – hype , " said Schwab in an interview , " We did not go platinum [ ... ] the record fell short of expectations and did not come close to the impact of our previous effort . " The band parted with their management company and did not tour for several months . Project 86 then started an independent label called " Team Black Recordings " . Work began on a new album after Hyde was convinced to produce again . Their fourth album , Songs to Burn Your Bridges By , was made available exclusively on their website in Fall 2003 . 
 The following year , Project 86 re @-@ signed with their previous label , Tooth and Nail . Songs to Burn Your Bridges By was re @-@ released in June 2004 . The new version included 3 new tracks produced by Aaron Sprinkle and mixed by J.R. McNeely , several new mixes , and featured new artwork . The release peaked at No. 36 on Heatseekers , and was met with positive reviews by critics . According to Schwab , the album was a return to the bands heavier roots , and a means to express the frustrations the band went through during Truthless Heroes . The group performed at Purple Door , a Christian music festival , later that year . When Project 86 played their set , <unk> threw mud everywhere and covered the stage and musical equipment . Thousands of dollars worth of musical equipment was damaged . 
 In Spring 2005 , Project 86 reunited with Drawing Black Lines producer Garth Richardson to record their fifth album , ... And the Rest Will Follow . After spending several days recording demos , the band flew to Vancouver , British Columbia , to record at The Farm Studios Compound . The band filmed the entire production and later released a DVD documentary entitled Subject to Change : The Making of ... And the Rest Will Follow . The album marked a spiritual change for the group who felt humbled by their past experiences . " The record is about growing up and becoming a man ( or woman ) and taking responsibility for your past mistakes , " stated Schwab , " [ We are ] refocusing our goals back to what they were when we started , reaching kids and inspiring them to live lives with hope and purpose . " 
 To promote the album , Project 86 released a new song on PureVolume every Monday until the release date . ... And the Rest Will Follow was released in September 2005 and debuted at No. 131 on the Billboard 200 . Critics were positive about the release . The band began a fall release tour and traveled with Spoken , Number One Gun , The Fold , and Mourning September . In January 2006 , a live performance of the single " My Will Be A Dead Man " was broadcast on Attack of the Show ! . A collaboration with synthpop group The Echoing Green resulted in a remix of the song " Something We Can 't Be " . The song appeared on MySpace alongside a remix of " From December " later that year . 
 = = = 2007 – 2008 : Rival Factions , The Kane Mutiny EP , and This Time of Year EP = = = 
 In March 2007 , Project 86 announced that Alex Albert had parted with the band on friendly terms to pursue other interests . Instead of searching for a full @-@ time replacement , the band recruited Jason Gerken , formerly of Shiner , to play drums on tour . Production of their sixth album , entitled Rival Factions , followed suit with Deftones producer Ulrich Wild . The album proved to be a large departure from their edgier material by sporting a distinct 1980s sound influenced by goth rock . 
 The majority of writing took place while the band took a break ; Dail got married in the Netherlands , while Schwab and Torres worked in Southern California and Seattle respectively . The men collaborated by emailing MP3s they recorded . In the end , 40 songs were amassed for the new record , but only ten were used . According to Schwab , the album 's title was chosen to represent " the tension that exists in everybody [ ... ] the flesh and the spirit . " It was also representative of their new musical direction , an attempt to polarize themselves from other heavy rock acts . Similarly to their last record , a documentary was filmed that detailed the recording process , entitled I Want Something You Have : Rival Factions The DVD . 
 Rival Factions was released in June 2007 and peaked at No. 124 on the Billboard 200 , the band 's highest debut to date . The record sold 6 @,@ 000 copies in the first week and was well received by critics , who made favorable comparisons to Duran Duran , Billy Idol , and the Killers . The band proceeded to tour with labelmates <unk> , Showbread , and Sullivan on the summer Tooth & Nail Tour . A performance also took place at the annual Christmas Rock Night event in <unk> , Germany that December . 
 Several tracks were recorded and mixed that were not included on Rival Factions . These songs were compiled with their previous remixes to form an EP . A cover of " Lucretia , My Reflection " by the Sisters of Mercy was also included . The Kane Mutiny EP was released exclusively on iTunes in November 2007 . Shortly after its release , the band uploaded a cover of " This Time of the Year " by Brenda Lee on iTunes . " Our version was a little bit more like A Nightmare Before Christmas [ sic ] , " declared Schwab . The single was well received and led Project 86 to build an entire album around the Christmas concept . This Time of Year EP was released in November 2008 . Unlike the previous EP , This Time of Year was made available in digital and physical formats . Jason Martin of indie rock outfit <unk> 59 helped produce both albums . 
 = = = 2009 – 2012 : Picket Fence Cartel and XV Live = = = 
 In early 2009 , the band returned to the studio with Martin and Ulrich Wild to record their seventh album , Picket Fence Cartel . Time was spent leisurely crafting the album ; previous endeavors had been limited by deadlines . " This time around , we said , ' Look , let 's not just put out another record , ' " said Schwab , " ' Let 's make sure we get the record to a place that we 're happy with it . ' " The band focused on a heavy metal sound . However , they did not entirely jettison their 1980s influences as synthesizers percolated several songs . Schwab 's lyrics focused on his belief that power and corruption often " run hand @-@ in @-@ hand when it comes to human souls . " " The world is teaching us that fame is to be sought after ; that recognition will equal success , fortune and , ultimately , peace , " he said , " But the search for and attainment of fame and wealth usually destroy us in the end . " 
 The record was released in July 2009 and peaked at No. 137 on the Billboard 200 . Critics praised the title for its barrage of heavy rock and spiritually minded lyrics . Later that summer , Project 86 traveled nationwide on the Scream the Prayer Tour with metalcore outfits The Chariot , Haste the Day , and Gwen Stacy . Coming mid @-@ October , Project 86 started the Picket Fence Cartel Tour with Children 18 : 3 , Showbread , The Wedding , and Yearling , and added a second part in spring 2010 with Flatfoot 56 and <unk> . The band released their first live album , entitled XV Live , in December 2010 to commemorate their 15th anniversary . The album 's songs spanned every studio album with the exception of the first . In February 2011 , Project 86 went on tour with Disciple . In June 2011 , Project 86 headlined the XV Tour with support from Children 18 : 3 and Write This Down . 
 Randy Torres , who had been gradually becoming less involved in the band over the previous several albums , decided to officially leave the band in late 2010 to work for Tooth and Nail records , and later , Microsoft . Steven Dail followed suit approximately one year later , citing the need to stop touring and be home with his family . Gerken left in early 2012 . 
 = = = 2012 – 2013 : Wait for the Siren = = = 
 Project 86 launched a Kickstarter campaign in December 2011 in an effort to " Make the fans the record label " after fulfilling their most recent contract with Tooth and Nail Records . Their eighth studio album titled Wait for the Siren was recorded in January and February 2012 . 
 Featuring all star guest appearances by : Bruce Fitzhugh ( Living Sacrifice ) , Rocky Gray ( Living Sacrifice ) , Brian " Head " Welch ( Korn , Love and Death ) , Andrew Welch ( Disciple ) , Blake Martin ( A Plea for Purging ) and The Wedding . The new album was produced by Steve Wilson and Andrew Schwab and engineered / mixed by Steve Blackmon . 
 Described as Andrew Schwab 's opus the record promises to be a fresh take on the P86 sound . Schwab said , " On this record I was really able to take the reins of the creative process in a direction I was passionate about . I was able to write songs that pushed me to grow as an artist . It was also insanely fun to have so many of my friends involved in the process and at this point in the game that is what its about . I am really looking forward to people hearing this album . " With concert goers noting the new energy of the songs and new band members Scott Davis on drums , <unk> Lowry on guitar and <unk> " Norman " Williams on bass it seems P86 has benefited from a back to basics reinvention . 
 Wait for the Siren was recorded and produced independently through fan support via the band 's 2011 @-@ 2012 Kickstarter campaign . On May 24 , 2012 , Project 86 released four preview tracks for the tracks " Fall , Goliath Fall " , " <unk> " , " Off the Grid " , and " Take the Hill " . 
 The album was officially released on August 20 , 2012 . 
 = = = 2014 – present : Knives to the Future = = = 
 In late 2013 , Project 86 announced that they were about to work on their ninth album which will also be released independently . He also stated that they will also do an acoustic EP plus Andrew Schwab will also release a solo album which will also be produced independently . They started an Indiegogo funding campaign on Feb 11 and closed on April 12 , 2014 ( 11 : 59 pm PT ) . They successfully got US $ 89 @,@ 816 raised of a goal of $ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 Schwab announced that pre @-@ production for a new album began on June 6 followed by a month @-@ long recording session in Steelman Studios in Van Nuys , CA . Matt McClellan and the band collaborated on production and Steve <unk> mixed the album . Dan Mumford is scheduled to do the artwork . The band has spent the middle of the year in Los Angeles recording 18 new tracks including an acoustic EP . With a career spanning nearly 20 years and selling over half a million records Andrew Schwab feels this album is a special landmark for P86 . He says , " We have loved pushing the envelope of evolution on every Project 86 release and this record is no exception . The inspiration behind this record is completely different and it 's been incredible to write and record with such a talented group of guys . " . Joining Schwab in the studio is Darren King ( The Overseer ) on guitar , Cody <unk> ( The Wedding ) on bass , and Ryan Wood ( 7 Horns 7 Eyes ) on drums . 
 Project 86 indicated that the name of their new record will be Knives to the Future and will release on November 11 , 2014 . " Spirit of Shiloh " , the first song from the album , debuted on SoundCloud . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Project 86 's music is characterized by heavy rock and Schwab 's " loud , eerie , and atmospheric " vocal style . Their sound has been likened to rock groups Helmet , Rage Against the Machine , and Tool . The moniker " intense " has frequently been used as a description . Rick Anderson of Allmusic called the music " dense and crunchy " , while Albuquerque Journal writer Ron Gonzales declared it a " blisteringly heavy sound . " Commenting on their musical style , Schwab stated " Our goal as a band has been to never make the same record twice . The only rule is that there are no rules . If there is a rule , it 's that we try not to over @-@ think things , that the music that comes out is honest and real , spontaneous and from our heart . " 
 When Project 86 released their self @-@ titled record , they were generally acknowledged to be a <unk> band . Schwab has maintained it was never intentional , " I think we got lumped in with that music because we [ had ] toured with P.O.D. and Linkin Park . " According to writer Mark Allan Powell , the music featured " cryptic , down @-@ tuned guitars " and " half @-@ spoken , half @-@ rapped " vocals . Drawing Black Lines saw their style adopt elements of traditional metal , groove metal , and hard rock . The band used their song " Pipedream " as a blueprint to build the album : " We knew that was one of the brightest spots on the album , " said Schwab , " I just wanted to take what we did in ' Pipedream ' and go further with it " . Experimentation with noise occurred in track " Twenty @-@ Three " , and would be revisited on their fourth album with " <unk> " . 
 Truthless Heroes and Songs To Burn Your Bridges By generally focused on a " dark and intense musical direction " . The group strayed from the style for their fifth album ... And The Rest Will Follow , opting to flirt with melodies and harmonies . Rival Factions marked a great departure when they embraced 1980s music and utilized keyboards . The band was inspired to write experimental songs after Dail penned " Evil ( A Chorus of Resistance ) " . " [ It ] was way different than anything we 'd done before , " stated Torres , " everything after that [ had ] to be as different as possible from things we 'd done prior . " Their signature hardcore sound was reinstated for Picket Fence Cartel . " We have had a great time adding more melody along the way , " insisted Schwab , " but in our hearts , we still really enjoy playing aggressive songs " . Even so , some songs retained synthesizers while others boasted folk influences . 
 Project 86 is considered a Christian band and every member professes Christianity . However , they have remained uncomfortable with the assertion . " We 're not going to go in there and say ' Hey we 're the Christian band . ' " stated Schwab in a 2004 interview . " We 're going to carry ourselves like a normal band . Hopefully people will like our music and investigate into the band [ ... ] and they will learn our beliefs . " In a 2007 interview , he further opined " We always tell people that the goal has been to just write music that we love , and write music hopefully that is challenging and inspiring to people and doesn 't sound like everything else out there . " 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Rock bands have largely influenced the band like the Deftones , Sepultura , Sick of It All , and <unk> . Torres expressed a particular affinity for The Beatles and Led Zeppelin : " I just love to listen to their albums over and over and pick apart stuff here and there that is amazing , " he said , " It is a huge influence on me musically . " Dail has revealed The Clash , Fugazi , and Rocket from the Crypt to be personally influential . At an early age , Schwab listened to Slayer , S.O.D. , and Metallica . He later discovered East Coast hip hop . During the recording of Rival Factions , the band took heavy influence from post @-@ punk groups like Depeche Mode , Joy Division , Psychedelic Furs , and The Sisters of Mercy . Some of their favorite bands are The Cure , Portishead , Quicksand , Shiner , and Sunny Day Real Estate . 
 Some musicians have cited Project 86 as an influence . Jessy <unk> , lead singer and songwriter for alternative rock band Falling Up , has been affected by Schwab 's writings . " Andrew 's lyrics have always been a source of inspiration to me , " he told CCM Magazine . " I 've tried to use more imaginative metaphors and things that are more symbolic , so that the songs can mean more things and have a bigger impact . " 38th Parallel , a short lived Christian rap rock group , also acknowledged the band 's influence . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Vocalist Andrew Schwab has remained the band 's lead lyricist . Schwab has stated most lyrics are based on his emotions . He also tries to incorporate social commentary from literature . Prominent influences include comic book artist Chris Ware and writers Chris Bachelder , Don DeLillo , Aldous Huxley , George Orwell , and T. S. Eliot . He has written lyrics around a variety of topics that include alcohol abuse ( " One @-@ Armed Man " ) , conformity ( " <unk> " ) , emptiness ( " Evil ( A Chorus of Resistance ) " ) , greed ( " Cold and Calculated " ) , nightlife ( " Molotov " ) , and spirituality ( " Chapter 2 " ) . Controversial issues like pornography ( " P.S. " ) and child molestation ( " Sioux Lane Spirits " ) have also been addressed . 
 According to John DiBiase , president of Jesus Freak Hideout , early lyrics reflected " anger , frustration , and often hopelessness . " Some journalists interpreted it as cynicism ; Sean Richardson writing for The Phoenix called it " overbearing " and hoped " positive vibes " from P.O.D. and Blindside would rub off , while Losey believed it to be a longtime " burden " being carried . " It is easy to give in to these types of [ cynical ] feelings when you have been wronged , " Schwab told CCM Magazine , " It 's a very selfish mentality that chokes you off from being proactive in your gifts and purpose . " Critics have noted that Schwab 's later material contains more optimistic perspectives . 
 Honesty is highly regarded by Schwab ; he has stated " I don 't want to be known or remembered as a positive band , but as a band that was sort of honest and had a quiet sense of hope . " He has sometimes used humor to convey his feelings . " Salem 's Suburbs " and " Your Heroes Are Dead " examine how society blindly accepts opinions found on television and the internet . " Caveman Jams " was directed at critics who claimed their music was too aggressive . The song tells how a fan was inspired to leave a life of self @-@ destruction . " That song was written to be funny , " stated Schwab , " [ It ] was definitely written as a response to some experiences we 've had as a band over the years , but in such a way that we 're having fun with it . I tried to approach it comically . " 
 = = Members = = 
 Timeline 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Notes 
 A ^ Wait for the Siren also charted at number 7 on the Hard Rock Albums Chart , number 18 on the Independent Albums Chart , and number 38 on the Top Rock Albums Chart 
 Live albums 
 2010 : 15 . Live . 
 EPs 
 2007 : The Kane Mutiny EP ( digital only ) 
 2008 : This Time of Year EP ( Christmas ) 
 2012 : The Midnight Clear Single ( Christmas ) 
 Singles 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Sam Simon = 
 Samuel Michael " Sam " Simon ( June 6 , 1955 – March 8 , 2015 ) was an American director , producer , writer , animal rights activist , boxing manager , tournament poker player , and philanthropist , most noted as co @-@ creator of the television series The Simpsons . 
 While at Stanford University , Simon worked as a newspaper cartoonist and after graduating became a storyboard artist at Filmation Studios . Simon submitted a spec script for the sitcom Taxi , which was produced , and he later became the series ' showrunner . Over the next few years , Simon wrote and produced for Cheers , It 's Garry Shandling 's Show and other programs , as well as writing the 1991 film The Super . 
 In 1989 , Simon developed the animated sitcom The Simpsons with Matt Groening and James L. Brooks . Simon assembled the show 's first writing team , co @-@ wrote eight episodes and has been credited with " developing [ the show 's ] sensibility " . Simon 's relationship with Groening was strained and he left the show in 1993 , negotiating a pay @-@ off which saw him receive tens of millions of dollars from the show 's revenue each year . The following year Simon co @-@ created The George Carlin Show , before later working as a director on shows such as The Drew Carey Show . Simon won nine Primetime Emmy Awards for his television work . 
 Simon turned to fields outside television in his later years . Simon regularly appeared on Howard Stern 's radio shows , managed boxer Lamon Brewster and helped guide Lamon to the World Boxing Organization Heavyweight Championship in 2004 and was a regular poker player and six @-@ time in the money finisher at the World Series of Poker . Simon founded the The Sam Simon Foundation , which consists of a mobile veterinary clinic that goes into low @-@ income neighborhoods offering free surgeries for cats and dogs several days per week , as well as a program that rescues and trains shelter dogs . He also funded the self @-@ christened Sea Shepherd Conservation Society vessel the MY Sam Simon . Simon was engaged at the time of his death , having been previously twice married , including to the actress Jennifer Tilly . Following a profile of Simon on 60 Minutes in 2007 , CBS writer Daniel Schorn wrote in an online article that Simon was " perhaps the Renaissance man of the baffling , uncertain age we live in . " 
 Simon was diagnosed with terminal colorectal cancer in 2012 and given only three to six months to live . Simon died on March 8 , 2015 . He bequeathed his $ 100M estate to various charities which he actively supported during his lifetime . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Simon was born Samuel Michael Simon on June 6 , 1955 in Los Angeles , California , United States . He grew up in Beverly Hills and Malibu . Simon 's family lived opposite Groucho Marx . Simon 's father was a cheap clothing manufacturer and was of Estonian Jewish heritage . Simon had a childhood which has been described as " comfortable " and " privileged " . Although his parents wanted Simon to become a lawyer , Simon was interested in art from a young age , appearing on televised local art programs at the age of five . He once was told by Walt Disney that he would one day work at his studio . 
 Simon attended Beverly Hills High School , where he was on the football team and served as a cartoonist for the school newspaper . He was awarded " Most Humorous " and " Most Talented " in his senior yearbook . He later attended Stanford University , graduating in 1977 . Simon had not wished to attend college , but Stanford persuaded him to apply due to his sufficient grades and proficiency at football ; Simon quit the football team after one day . Simon drew comics for the college newspaper , but was denied admission to a drawing class for not being talented enough . As he recalled to the Stanford alumni magazine , he was told , “ You ’ d be taking the space of a student who has talent . ” Simon majored in psychology , but did not focus on his academics . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 While still at Stanford , Simon 's first job was a newspaper sports cartoonist for The San Francisco Chronicle and The San Francisco Examiner . After graduating , he worked as a television storyboard artist , and later a writer , at Filmation Studios . There he worked on several animated shows , including The New Adventures of Mighty Mouse and Heckle & Jeckle and Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids ( 1979 ) . Simon recalls Filmation approving of his work because he was " self @-@ taught and unschooled , " but Simon felt the majority of what the studio produced was " awful " . On the suggestion of Filmation producer Lou Scheimer who was impressed by Simon 's writing ability , Simon submitted a spec script for the series Taxi which was produced and aired in 1981 during its third season . Simon was hired as a writer , quickly becoming showrunner for its fifth and final season in 1983 . Simon next worked as a writer and producer on Cheers from seasons one to three ( 1982 – 1985 ) , writing five episodes : " Endless <unk> " , " Battle of the Ex 's " , " Fairytales Can Come True " , " Cheerio Cheers " and " The Bartender 's Tale " . Simon created , wrote and produced the short @-@ lived sitcom Shaping Up in 1984 , alongside Ken Estin ; the show starred Leslie Nielsen as a gym owner and ran for five episodes on ABC . Simon also wrote and produced for Best of the West ( 1981 ) , Barney Miller ( 1982 ) and It 's Garry Shandling 's Show ( 1987 – 1988 ) , and wrote the 1991 film The Super . 
 = = = The Simpsons = = = 
 Simon co @-@ developed the animated series The Simpsons , which premiered on the Fox network in 1989 and has remained on air ever since . The show is regarded as one of the greatest television shows of all time , with Time magazine naming it the 20th century 's best series . The premise for the series originated as a series of short cartoons airing in 1987 as part of The Tracey Ullman Show , on which Simon was a writer and executive producer alongside James L. Brooks , with whom Simon had worked on Taxi . The cartoons were developed into a full series two years later . For The Simpsons , Simon served alongside Matt Groening ( who conceived the show and the five main characters ) and Brooks as executive producer and showrunner for the show 's first ( 1989 – 1990 ) and second ( 1990 – 1991 ) seasons , and was creative supervisor for the first four seasons . He assembled and led the initial team of writers , consisting of John Swartzwelder , Jon Vitti , George Meyer , Jeff Martin , Al Jean , Mike Reiss , Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky . 
 Simon has been credited with " developing [ the show 's ] sensibility " . Former Simpsons director Brad Bird has described him as " the unsung hero " of the show , while Vitti has stated to " leave out Sam Simon " is to tell " the managed version " of The Simpsons ' history , because " he was the guy we wrote for . " Writer Ken Levine called Simon " the real creative force behind The Simpsons ... The tone , the storytelling , the level of humor – that was all developed on Sam 's watch . " Levine says that Simon " brought a level of honesty to the characters " and made them " three @-@ dimensional " , adding that his " comedy is all about character , not just a string of gags . In The Simpsons , the characters are motivated by their emotions and their foibles . ' What are they thinking ? ' — that is Sam 's contribution . The stories come from the characters . " Simon crafted much of the world of Springfield and designed the models for many of the show 's recurring characters , including Mr. Burns , Dr. Hibbert , Chief Wiggum and Eddie and Lou , as well as many of the one @-@ time and guest star roles , such as Bleeding Gums Murphy . One of his contributions to the show 's character development was his proposal that Waylon Smithers should be gay , but that this should never have too much attention drawn to it ; Smithers ' sexuality became one of the show 's longest @-@ running gags . Simon saw The Simpsons as a chance to solve " what [ he ] didn 't like about the Saturday @-@ morning cartoon shows [ he had ] worked on ... [ he ] wanted all the actors in a room together , not reading their lines separated from each other . The Simpsons would have been a great radio show . If you just listen to the sound track , it works . " 
 The Simpsons utilized a process of collaborative script re @-@ writing by the show 's whole writing staff ; this meant the credited writer may not have been responsible for the majority of an episode 's content . Nevertheless , Simon was credited with co @-@ writing the season one episodes " The Telltale Head " , " The Crepes of Wrath " and the season finale " Some Enchanted Evening " . " Some Enchanted Evening " was intended to be the show 's premiere but was delayed due to poor animation . Simon adapted Edgar Allan Poe 's The Raven for the third segment of the season two episode " Treehouse of Horror " . Groening was nervous about " The Raven " because it did not have many gags , and felt it would be " the worst , most pretentious thing [ they had ] ever done " on the show . Nevertheless , the segment has often been praised as one of the best Treehouse of Horror stories in the show 's history . Ryan J. Budke of TV Squad described the segment as " one of the most refined Simpsons pop references ever " and knows " people that consider this the point that they realized The Simpsons could be both highly hilarious and highly intelligent . " Simon co @-@ wrote the episode " Two Cars in Every Garage and Three Eyes on Every Fish " with Swartzwelder , an episode which Tom Shales of the Washington Post has described as " a bull 's @-@ eye political satire " . The final episode he co @-@ wrote for season two was " The Way We Was " , alongside Jean and Reiss . While Reiss and Jean took over as showrunners , Simon remained on the writing staff for seasons three ( 1991 – 1992 ) and four ( 1992 – 1993 ) . For the third season he co @-@ wrote " Treehouse of Horror II " , and conceived the story for the Sideshow Bob episode " Black Widower " , together with mystery author Thomas Chastain , hoping to construct a full mystery story ; Vitti wrote the episode 's teleplay . Simon also substantially contributed to the episode " Stark Raving Dad " , pitched the episode " Homer at the Bat " , and proposed the " Land of Chocolate " sequence from " Burns Verkaufen der Kraftwerk " . Simon 's final writing credit was for the " Dial ' Z ' For Zombies " segment of " Treehouse of Horror III " . 
 Although they initially worked well together , Simon and Groening 's relationship became " very contentious " according to Groening . Simon never expected the show to be a success , often proclaiming to fellow staff members " We 're thirteen and out " — meaning that the show would be canceled after the thirteen episodes of the first season . Therefore , he also told the staff that they had creative freedom to do whatever they wanted to make The Simpsons as good a show as possible , regardless of network or public opinion , because he thought it inevitably would not be renewed ; he elaborated in 2009 that " really I was saying that to take the pressure off of everyone . I was just saying let 's just go out and make 13 episodes that are really good and really funny . " However , Groening interpreted it as meaning Simon was uncommitted and did not care whether the show was a success or not , as Simon 's career would survive , whereas his own would not . In 2001 , Groening described Simon as " brilliantly funny and one of the smartest writers I 've ever worked with , although unpleasant and mentally unbalanced . " According to John Ortved 's book The Simpsons : An Uncensored , Unauthorized History , when the show became successful Simon resented the media attention Groening received , particularly the praise for the show 's writing ; Simon felt that Groening 's involvement was limited , and that he should have been the one receiving credit for the show . Simon later spoke well of Groening 's influence , particularly on the show 's positive tone . 
 As well as Groening , Simon was often at odds with Brooks and production company Gracie Films . While working on The Simpsons , he and Brooks had co @-@ created the series Sibs ( 1991 ) and Phenom ( 1993 ) as part of a multi @-@ series deal for ABC . Simon did not want to work on either series , both of which were poorly received and swiftly canceled , which put a strain on the pair 's relationship . 
 Simon left Gracie Films and The Simpsons in 1993 . Simon commented that he " wasn 't enjoying it anymore , " wished to pursue other projects , and " that any show I 've ever worked on , it turns me into a monster . I go crazy . I hate myself . " Before leaving , he negotiated a deal that saw him receive a share of the show 's profits every year , particularly from home media , and an executive producer credit despite not having worked on the show since 1993 . The deal means he made over $ 10 million a year from The Simpsons ; he later told Stanford Magazine that " tens of millions " was a closer figure . Simon commented : " When I was there I thought I was underpaid . I thought I wasn 't getting enough credit for it . Now , I think it 's completely the opposite . I get too much credit for it . And the money is ridiculous . " 
 = = = Subsequent media work = = = 
 In January 1994 , Simon co @-@ created with comedian George Carlin the sitcom The George Carlin Show for Fox . It aired for 27 episodes before being canceled in December 1995 . Simon served as showrunner throughout its run and directed several episodes . Simon persuaded Carlin to do the show after writing it as something which would not be " typically <unk> . " He conceived the show as what Carlin 's life would have been like had he never become a comedian ; Carlin played a heavy drinking New York taxi driver . Simon commented : " When I was doing The Simpsons , people couldn 't see how smart it was because of the low moments . There 's something about this show . People who like it say it 's classy . They don 't see how vulgar it is . " Carlin wrote negatively of his relationship with Simon . On his own website , Carlin wrote of the show : " always check mental health of creative partner beforehand . Loved the actors , loved the crew . Had a great time . Couldn 't wait to get the fuck out of there . " In his final book , the posthumously published Last Words ( 2009 ) , Carlin elaborated : " I had a great time . I never laughed so much , so often , so hard as I did with cast members Alex Rocco , Chris Rich , Tony Starke . There was a very strange , very good sense of humor on that stage ... The biggest problem , though , was that Sam Simon was a fucking horrible person to be around . Very , very funny , extremely bright and brilliant , but an unhappy person who treated other people poorly . " Simon described himself as " combative " and said that most people see him as having a " bad attitude " . 
 In the late 1990s , Simon primarily worked as a director . He directed on the American adaptation of the sitcom Men Behaving Badly in 1996 , the Friends season three episode " The One Without the Ski Trip " in 1997 , and several episodes of The Norm Show ( 1999 ) and The Michael Richards Show ( 2000 ) . From 1998 to 2003 , he served as a consulting producer and director for The Drew Carey Show , and directed the show 's series finale . He was also a creative consultant on Bless This House in 1996 . 
 After leaving The Simpsons and The George Carlin Show , Simon sought to find a " life outside television , " as working in the industry " made [ him ] crazy . " On working in television , Simon concluded : " In some ways , it 's the greatest job in the world . You make a product that 's given away , and all it does is make people smile . Nobody gets hurt , there 's no damage , and you can get crazy rich . " Simon retired from full @-@ time television work , although still worked in the media , frequently contributing , as a writer and a participant , to Howard Stern 's radio shows . He wrote and directed the one @-@ off radio sitcom " The Bitter Half " for Stern 's Howard 101 in 2006 . Simon had his own show on <unk> . Simon returned to television production work in 2012 , serving as a consultant and director on the series Anger Management for half a day a week . 
 = = = Other ventures = = = 
 Simon was a staunch advocate for animal rights . Starting in 2002 , Simon self @-@ funded , at an annual cost of several million dollars , The Sam Simon Foundation , which has a mobile clinic that provides free surgeries for cats and dogs , as well as rescuing and retraining shelter dogs who might otherwise be euthanized . An episode of 60 Minutes broadcast in March 2007 described it as " the grandest dog shelter in the country , a five star , [ 6 acres ( 0 @.@ 024 km2 ; 0 @.@ 0094 sq mi ) ] spread in Malibu , perhaps the most desirable real estate on the planet . Here , among the waterfalls and the manicured grounds , The Sam Simon Foundation gives stray and abandoned dogs a new lease on life , literally . " 
 As Simon explained , the foundation aims to " rescue dogs " and " train them to be service dogs , [ to help ] people with disabilities , " primarily the deaf . It also provides free veterinary surgeries to pets belonging to low @-@ income families , and trains dogs to help soldiers returning from combat in Iraq and Afghanistan deal with post @-@ traumatic stress disorder . Simon said the money he used was " well spent just for the pleasure it gives me . " The training program has a 20 % success rate , because many of the rescued dogs " have physical and psychological problems " but the dogs who cannot be trained are put up for adoption . The foundation is non @-@ profit , does not accept public donations , but does receive some federal government funding due to a bill written and passed by Senator Al Franken . In 2011 , Simon established and self @-@ funded the Sam Simon Foundation Feeding Families program , a food truck which delivers vegan food to low @-@ income families ; the program helps feed some 200 families per week . He donated an undisclosed sum to the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society in 2012 for the purpose of purchasing another vessel for their fleet , the MY Sam Simon , which was unveiled in December 2012 . Simon was also a board member for Save the Children , and hosted the largest annual fundraiser for PETA , who named him an Honorary Director and their Norfolk , Virginia headquarters building after him . Simon has stated that animal rights charities have been his main target for donations , over other causes like human disease and environmental damage , because " your money can bring success " with visible results . Simon stated in 2011 that there is " nothing [ which gives him ] more pleasure than " helping others via his charities , and gave away most of his fortune . 
 Simon was a long time fan of boxing , attending fights with his grandfather , but his interest increased particularly after seeing the 1990 heavyweight championship fight between Evander Holyfield and James " Buster " Douglas which he described as " the most electrifying feeling I 'd had in my life . " He began training and won six out of nine amateur fights ; he was also a reserve contestant on the Fox series Celebrity Boxing . Simon was for eight years the manager of heavyweight boxer Lamon Brewster , the now @-@ retired former World Boxing Organization heavyweight champion . He met Brewster in 1997 and began managing him , helping him rise to the top of the WBO rankings . He considers guiding Brewster to his April 2004 victory over Wladimir Klitschko to win the vacant WBO Heavyweight Championship , with Klitschko the heavy favorite , to be amongst the greatest moments of his life ; it " eclipsed everything he had achieved in a glittering 26 @-@ year showbiz career . " Before the Klitschko fight , Simon calculated he had spent several hundred thousand dollars funding Brewster , paying him a large salary on top of match fees as well as letting him stay rent @-@ free at one of his houses , and taking only a 10 % cut of the match fees ; however , he never intended boxing to be a substantial " source of revenue " . Simon retired from boxing management soon after Brewster became WBO Heavyweight Champion . 
 Simon was a regular poker player , and Texas hold ' em in particular . He was introduced to the game as a child through weekly family poker games and casino trips with his grandfather . Simon did not consider himself a serious player until a game at writer David Steinberg 's house with several " scholarly " players , which encouraged him to study the game and enter numerous tournaments , although he decided not to become professional . He competed at the World Series of Poker ( WSOP ) each year between 2007 and 2011 , finishing in the money in six events . In 2007 , at the 6 @,@ 358 @-@ player $ 10 @,@ 000 No @-@ Limit Texas Hold 'em Main Event , he finished 329th with $ 39 @,@ 445 . He also finished 16th winning $ 35 @,@ 493 at the $ 1 @,@ 000 1 @,@ 048 @-@ player No @-@ Limit Hold 'em w / Re @-@ Buys in 2007 , 41st winning $ 10 @,@ 708 at the $ 1 @,@ 000 706 @-@ player No @-@ Limit Hold 'em w / <unk> in 2008 , 53rd winning $ 10 @,@ 692 at the $ 1 @,@ 000 879 @-@ player No @-@ Limit Hold 'em w / <unk> in 2008 , 20th winning $ 24 @,@ 066 at the $ 10 @,@ 000 275 @-@ player World Championship Pot @-@ Limit Hold 'em in 2009 , and 500th winning $ 23 @,@ 876 at the $ 10 @,@ 000 6 @,@ 865 @-@ player No @-@ Limit Hold 'em Championship in 2011 . He also won the $ 300 438 @-@ player No @-@ Limit Hold 'em Bounty $ 100 @,@ 000 Guarantee at the 2009 L.A. Poker Open , winning $ 22 @,@ 228 . His biggest win in terms of both field size and prize money was the $ 200 1 @,@ 082 @-@ player No @-@ Limit Hold 'em $ 150 @,@ 000 Guarantee at the 2010 <unk> O ' The Green , where he won $ 57 @,@ 308 . Simon 's private poker games between him and his celebrity friends have been described as " raucous and very entertaining " . Their reputation led Playboy TV to produce the show Sam 's Game , a televised version featuring Simon as host and master of ceremonies of a Las Vegas celebrity Texas Hold ' em match ; he produced the show . He had previously appeared on a 2009 episode of High Stakes Poker . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Simon won nine Primetime Emmy Awards and received ten further nominations for his work . For The Tracey Ullman Show he won the Emmys for Outstanding Variety , Music Or Comedy Series in 1989 and Outstanding Writing In A Variety Or Music Program in 1990 . In the former he was nominated again in 1990 , for the latter he was also nominated in 1987 , 1988 and 1989 . He received the Emmy for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) for The Simpsons in 1990 , 1991 , 1995 , 1997 , 1998 , 2000 and 2001 with further nominations in 1990 ( for " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " which was counted as a separate special ) , 1992 , 1996 , 1999 and 2002 . He was nominated for Outstanding Comedy Series for Taxi in 1983 and Cheers in 1985 , Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series for It 's Garry Shandling 's Show in 1988 and Outstanding Variety , Music Or Comedy Special for The Best of Tracey Ullman Show in 1990 . He also won a Peabody Award for The Simpsons in 1996 . In 2013 , Simon was awarded the Writers Guild of America Award Animation Writers Caucus lifetime achievement award for his work in animation ; the following year the WGA awarded him the Valentine Davies Award for his humanitarian and philanthropic efforts . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Simon was married to actress Jennifer Tilly from 1984 to 1991 and remained friends with her . He married Playboy Playmate Jami Ferrell in 2000 , and the marriage lasted three weeks . Simon was engaged to chef and caterer Jenna Stewart around 2011 . He was dating Kate Porter , a make @-@ up artist , from 2012 until his death . Simon had three dogs , supported the Democratic Party , and was vegan . 
 He lived in Pacific Palisades , Los Angeles , in the restored Bailey House , designed by Richard Neutra . After his home was destroyed by a fire in 2007 , Simon redesigned it to be environmentally friendly ; much of the interior is constructed from recycled materials while solar panels provide virtually its entire power needs . The building has a Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Gold certificate . He had an extensive art collection ; he owned paintings by Thomas Hart Benton , John Singer Sargent and one of the original casts of Auguste Rodin 's The Thinker . He also had a sculpture by Robert Graham and works by Alberto Vargas , Gil <unk> , Ed <unk> and Richard Estes . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 In late 2012 , Simon was diagnosed with terminal colorectal cancer which later metastasized to his other organs , including his liver and kidneys . He had been feeling ill for some time and had earlier been misdiagnosed . He was given between three and six months to live ; chemotherapy treatment reduced the size of his tumors over the following six months . He arranged for his fortune to be left to various charitable causes , stating " The truth is , I have more money than I 'm interested in spending . Everyone in my family is taken care of . And I enjoy this . " Simon died in his Los Angeles home from complications from the disease on March 8 , 2015 , aged 59 . His remains were interred at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery in Los Angeles . 
 Controversy surrounds the management of his trust , and the lack of donations to groups which he generously supported in his lifetime . 
 = = Credits = = 
 = Russian frigate General Admiral = 
 General Admiral ( Russian : Генерал @-@ <unk> ) was a screw frigate ordered by the Imperial Russian Navy from the United States before the American Civil War . She spent the bulk of her career in the Mediterranean Sea where she evacuated insurgents and their families from Crete in 1868 during the Cretan Revolt . She was struck from the Navy List the following year and broken up in 1870 . 
 = = Description = = 
 General Admiral was a very large screw frigate designed by Captain 1st Rank Ivan Shestakov and named after General Admiral Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolayevich of Russia , commander of the Russian Navy . She was built of live oak , but was reinforced with diagonal and longitudinal iron braces . General Admiral displaced 5 @,@ 669 long tons ( 5 @,@ 760 t ) . She was 305 feet ( 93 @.@ 0 m ) long between perpendiculars , had a beam of 54 feet 8 inches ( 16 @.@ 7 m ) and a deep draft of 23 ft 6 in ( 7 @.@ 2 m ) . She was sheathed in copper to reduce biofouling . A novel system of zinc pipes that penetrated sheathing and connected with the ventilation fan was installed in the hold to prevent the decay of her hull . Its efficacy is unknown although General Admiral 's short life suggests that it was not effective . 
 Two steam engines , rated at a total of 2 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 500 kW ) , and six fire @-@ tube boilers powered the single propeller when the ship was under steam . Using her engines , she had a maximum speed of 12 @.@ 25 knots ( 22 @.@ 69 km / h ; 14 @.@ 10 mph ) . General Admiral 's propeller could be hoisted out of the water and her funnel retracted to improve her sailing qualities . She was considered to be an excellent sailer and could reach 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) under sail alone . She carried 750 long tons ( 760 t ) of coal which gave her a range of 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) , but it was her 75 days of provisions that were the practical limit of her endurance . 
 General Admiral 's armament was made and installed in Russia . Her battery deck carried thirty @-@ six 60 @-@ pounder muzzle @-@ loading guns and four long 36 @-@ pounder chase guns . The upper deck had twenty @-@ four 60 @-@ pounder guns and two long 36 @-@ pounder chase guns . Two 3 @-@ pood shell guns were mounted fore and aft on revolving platforms . In 1862 her armament was revised and two 60 @-@ pounder and the two long 36 @-@ pounder guns on her upper deck were removed . Four years later , it was rearranged with two 60 @-@ pounders moved from her upper deck to the lower deck and two long 36 @-@ pounders moved from the lower deck to the upper deck . 
 = = Career = = 
 General Admiral was laid down on 21 September 1857 at the William H. Webb Shipyard in New York City . She was launched on 3 September 1858 and was delivered to Kronstadt on 15 March 1859 by an American crew , commanded by an American captain , although Captain Shestakov accompanied her back to Russia . Her total cost , including delivery , was 1 @,@ 419 @,@ 629 @.@ 51 silver rubles . En route she only took 11 days to reach Cherbourg from New York City under steam , a record time for a warship at that time . She sailed for the Mediterranean the following year under the command of Captain Shestakov , stopping at Kiel in July 1860 . While in the Mediterranean she made port visits at Beirut , Piraeus and Nice . General Admiral departed Nice on 16 April 1863 for the Baltic Sea . She met the newly completed coast @-@ defence ship Pervenets en route and escorted her from England to the Baltic . 
 Three years later , on 8 June 1866 , General Admiral departed Kronstadt for the Mediterranean , making a port visit at Copenhagen on 22 June en route . In June 1867 she made another port visit at Piraeus before leaving Cadiz on 26 July bound for the Baltic . She returned to the Mediterranean the next year and evacuated Cretan insurgents and their families in 1868 during the Cretan Revolt against the Ottoman Empire . Having returned to Russia by 1869 , she was struck from the Navy List on 26 June 1869 and broken up the following year . 
 = SR N15X class = 
 The SR N15X class or Remembrance class were a design of British 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 steam locomotives converted in 1934 by Richard Maunsell of the Southern Railway from the large LB & SCR L class 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 tank locomotives that had become redundant on the London – Brighton line following electrification . It was hoped that further service could be obtained from these locomotives on the Southern 's Western Section , sharing the duties of the N15 class locomotives . The locomotives were named after famous Victorian engineers except for Remembrance , which was the LBSCR 's memorial locomotive for staff members who died in the First World War . 
 In their new form the locomotives were similar in outline to the N15 class , though suffered from the expectation amongst crews that they were an improved version of this type . Despite this , their ability to accelerate well was put to good use on cross @-@ country trains between main lines . The class saw service into nationalisation in 1948 . All had been withdrawn by 1957 , with none preserved . 
 = = Background = = 
 With the impending electrification of the Southern Railway 's Central Section ( the former LB & SCR lines ) , the question arose as to what to do with the relatively new and powerful LB & SCR designs . Maunsell looked at the possibility of converting the LBSCR “ Remembrance ” or LB & SCR L Class 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 tanks built by L. B. Billinton between 1914 and 1922 . These Baltics had proved to be capable machines on the Brighton line , although their relatively low boiler pressure ( 170 psi or 1 @.@ 17 MPa ) , the excessive difference between " first valve " and " second valve " on the regulator , and more particularly their small ( 8 in or 203 mm ) piston valves in relation to their large ( 21 in or 533 mm ) cylinders were a significant limitation , precluding their use on any other part of the Southern system . The decision was taken to rebuild them into more conventional 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 tender locomotives . 
 = = Conversion = = 
 All seven of the Billinton L Class locomotives entered Eastleigh works in 1934 for rebuilding , each leaving the works the same year . Conversion into the 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 tender type , entailed removing the trailing bogie , water tanks , and bunker , shortening the mainframes and fitting new cabs ; these were of the side @-@ window variety already used on the Lord Nelson class . At the same time there was a revision of the locomotives ' front end arrangement incorporating a " King Arthur " N15 type of blast pipe and chimney ; boiler pressure was increased to 180 psi ( 1 @.@ 24 MPa ) , whilst the piston diameter was marginally decreased from 22 in ( 559 mm ) to 21 inches ( 533 mm ) . 
 The class received 5 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 23 @,@ 000 l ; 6 @,@ 000 US gal ) bogie tenders from Robert Urie 's S15 class and Southern @-@ type smoke deflectors on either side of the smokebox . The result was classified N15X , the suffix corresponding to the old LBSCR designation for a rebuilt / modified locomotive . The conversion process created a locomotive that was similar in appearance to the N15 " King Arthur " class as modified by Maunsell in the 1920s . 
 = = = Naming the locomotives = = = 
 Two of the locomotives retained their original names : number 2333 Remembrance and 2329 Stephenson , whilst the other members of the L class , were newly new named after famous railway engineers . The new locomotive names were suggested by Maunsell 's assistant , Harry Holcroft , and were distributed as thus : 
 2327 Trevithick , <unk> Hackworth , 2329 Stephenson , 2330 Cudworth , <unk> Beattie , 2332 Stroudley , 2333 Remembrance 
 2333 Remembrance retained its name as it had been the LBSCR 's designated memorial to employees lost in the First World War . However the original LBSCR nameplates were straight for water tank mounting , necessitating new rounded plates to fit over the central wheel splashers ( see colour plate in infobox above ) . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 The rebuilding caused a certain amount of controversy among footplate crews , with some maintaining that one could not make so many changes and have a reliable locomotive at the end of the process . The class suffered on the South Western section from the expectation that they were an improved version of the N15 " King Arthur " class . Once this misconception was overcome , the class came into their own on the Basingstoke services , where their ability to accelerate well was put to good use . However , the rebuilds gained a reputation for rough – riding and relatively poor efficiency when compared to the N15s , and were dissimilar in performance to the original L class locomotives , making them unpopular with crews . Because of this , the class was used on secondary duties , cross – country and inter – regional trains around Basingstoke rather than the heavy London to Exeter expresses for which they were intended . 
 Several of the class were loaned to the Great Western Railway between 1942 and 1944 to assist in bolstering freight power , of which there was an acute shortage on that railway during the Second World War . The class saw use after nationalisation in 1948 , though with increasing numbers of Bulleid Pacifics able to take over their duties , the Remembrance class began to be withdrawn from service during the mid @-@ 1950s , starting with Hackworth in 1955 , and finally Beattie in 1957 . The early withdrawal of the class ensured that none were preserved . 
 No. 2332 Stroudley featured in the opening shots of the 1945 film Waterloo Road . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On 23 December 1955 , locomotive No. <unk> Trevithick was hauling a passenger train that ran into the rear of another at Woking , Surrey . The locomotive was deemed beyond economic repair and was scrapped at Eastleigh Works , Hampshire . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 = = = Southern = = = 
 Under Southern ownership , the " Remembrances " were originally painted in Maunsell 's Olive Green livery as seen above , with " Southern " and the locomotive 's number on the tender tank . Wartime service under the Southern saw the locomotives painted in black livery with " Sunshine Yellow " lettering . Numbers allocated to the locomotives were 2327 to 2333 . After the war , the locomotives were turned out in Bulleid 's Southern Railway Malachite Green livery with " Sunshine Yellow " lettering . 
 = = = British Railways = = = 
 After nationalisation in 1948 , the locomotives ' initial livery was a slightly modified Southern Malachite Green livery , where " British Railways " replaced " Southern " in " Sunshine Yellow " lettering on the tender sides . From 1949 , the class was turned out in British Railways mixed @-@ traffic black livery with red and cream lining . The British Railways crest was placed on the tender water tank sides . Numbering was in the <unk> series , as numbers <unk> to <unk> . 
 = Gabriel Slaughter = 
 Gabriel Slaughter ( December 12 , 1767 – September 19 , 1830 ) was the seventh Governor of Kentucky and was the first person to ascend to that office upon the death of the sitting governor . His family moved to Kentucky from Virginia when he was very young . He became a member of the Kentucky militia , serving throughout his political career . He received a citation from the state legislature in recognition of his service at the Battle of New Orleans . 
 After spending a decade in the state legislature , Slaughter was elected the fourth Lieutenant Governor , serving under Charles Scott . With the War of 1812 looming at the end of his tenure , Slaughter ran for governor against Isaac Shelby , the state 's first governor and a noted military leader . Shelby beat Slaughter soundly . Four years later , Slaughter was again elected as lieutenant governor , serving under George Madison . 
 Madison died a short time into his term , whereupon Slaughter became acting governor . He sought to be sworn in as governor , but public sentiment turned against him when he replaced Shelby 's son @-@ in @-@ law with John Pope as Secretary of State . Pope was an unpopular figure in Kentucky and , after his appointment , some in the General Assembly began to call for a special election to replace Slaughter . The measure did not pass , but Slaughter was never able to shed the title of " acting governor . " Following his term as governor , Slaughter became a Baptist lay minister and served on the first board of trustees of Georgetown College . He died September 19 , 1830 and was buried in his family 's cemetery . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gabriel Slaughter was born in Culpeper County , Virginia on December 12 , 1767 , the son of Robert and Susannah ( Harrison ) Slaughter . He was educated in the county 's public schools and worked as a farmer . In 1786 , Slaughter married a cousin , Sarah Slaughter , and the couple had two daughters – Mary Buckner Slaughter and Susan Harrison Slaughter . 
 Slaughter 's father visited Kentucky as early as 1776 , and moved to Mercer County permanently in 1789 . In September 1791 , Gabriel Slaughter sold his land in Virginia , and he and his family followed his father to Kentucky . He became known for his generosity , and his large mansion on the turnpike to Lexington was nicknamed " Wayfarer 's Rest " because of the vast number of travelers that he allowed to stay there . Among his guests was future lieutenant governor Robert B. McAfee . Soon after his arrival in Kentucky , however , his wife Sarah died , leaving Slaughter to care for his two daughters alone . 
 In 1795 , Slaughter was appointed justice of the peace in Mercer County by Governor Isaac Shelby . The same year , he was also named a tax commissioner for a district of Mercer County . On a return trip to Virginia in 1797 , Slaughter married his second wife , Sara Hord . The couple returned to Slaughter 's home in Mercer County , where they had three children : John Hord Slaughter , Frances Ann Hord Slaughter , and Felix Grundy Slaughter . 
 = = Service in the Kentucky General Assembly = = 
 Slaughter 's political career began in earnest with his 1797 election to the Kentucky House of Representatives representing Mercer County . He was named to the Committee on Enrollments , and probably served as chair , since he delivered the committee 's reports to the Assembly . It is unclear whether he did not seek re @-@ election in 1798 , or whether he was defeated in that year 's canvass . Whatever the case , he filled the space of his legislative hiatus by serving as trustee of the newly incorporated Harrodsburg Academy . He was re @-@ elected to the state House in 1799 . In addition to the Committee on Enrollments , he served on the Committee on Privileges and Elections and a joint committee that reported on the state of the Auditor 's , Treasurer 's , and Registrar 's offices . Records show that he also served as chairman when the House sat as a committee of the whole on November 25 , 1799 . 
 Slaughter was re @-@ elected to the state House in 1800 , and from 1801 to 1808 he served in the Kentucky Senate . In 1801 , he was chosen as one of three commissioners from Mercer County charged with selling stock shares in the Kentucky River Company , which was chartered to clear obstructions in the Kentucky River from its mouth to the mouth of its south fork . In 1804 , he was a candidate for President Pro Tempore of the Kentucky Senate following the death of the Senate 's presiding officer , Lieutenant Governor John Caldwell . Ultimately , however , Thomas Posey proved the more popular choice . From 1807 to 1808 , he served as chair of the Senate Committee of Propositions and Grievances . 
 Slaughter was elected lieutenant governor in 1808 . In a four @-@ man race , he received more than three times the number of votes as his nearest opponent . His four @-@ year term under Governor Charles Scott was largely undistinguished . Although the exact date is unknown , it is likely that the death of Slaughter 's second wife preceded his election as lieutenant governor . On October 3 , 1811 , he married his third wife , Elizabeth ( Thompson ) Rodes , a widow from Scott County . 
 Prohibited by the Kentucky Constitution from succeeding himself as lieutenant governor , Slaughter ran for governor of Kentucky in 1812 . The impending war with England , however , drew military hero and former governor Isaac Shelby into the race . Despite Shelby 's immense popularity , Slaughter refused to withdraw from the race and was soundly beaten by more than a two @-@ to @-@ one margin . Following his defeat , Slaughter took a two @-@ year hiatus from public life , and engaged in farming at his estate in Mercer County . 
 = = Service in the state militia = = 
 Slaughter had been commissioned as a lieutenant colonel in the Fifth Regiment of the Kentucky militia on December 24 , 1803 . He was promoted to the rank of major in 1802 and colonel in 1803 . In 1814 , he answered Governor Shelby 's call for volunteers to serve in the army of the Southwest under General Andrew Jackson . 
 When the Quartermaster general did not deliver promised supplies to Slaughter 's regiment , private funds had to be used to purchase boats for their travel down the Mississippi River . They also ran short of weapons . Upon their arrival at New Orleans on January 4 , 1815 , General Jackson noted in his official report that " Not one man in ten was well armed , and only one man in three had any arms at all . " The citizens of New Orleans provided enough firearms to equip the rest of Slaughter 's men and another Kentucky battalion . Despite being vastly outnumbered , Jackson 's forces were victorious . Units from Kentucky and Tennessee , including Slaughter 's regiment , bore the brunt of the British attack . Slaughter was later recognized by the state legislature for his service . 
 Following their service together , Jackson asked Slaughter to preside over a court martial . When the verdict was not satisfactory to Jackson , he ordered Slaughter to reconsider and reverse the decision . Slaughter declined , replying " I know my duty , and have performed it . " This decision was respected by Jackson , and apparently did no harm to the mutual respect between him and Slaughter . 
 = = Ascension to the governorship = = 
 In 1816 , Slaughter was again elected to the post of lieutenant governor over Richard Hickman and James Garrard . George Madison was elected governor without opposition . Madison died October 14 , 1816 , and Slaughter ascended to the governorship . This was the first time a sitting governor had died in office in Kentucky , and some questioned the legality of Slaughter 's status in the position . 
 Following Governor Madison 's death , Secretary of State Charles Stewart Todd offered to step down if Slaughter preferred to appoint someone else to the post . The letter was not an explicit resignation , as Todd emphatically declared his intention to work with Slaughter should the governor choose to retain him . Slaughter did replace Todd with former Senator John Pope , however , apparently as a political favor . This move proved disastrous for Slaughter 's political career . Todd was very popular by virtue of being the son @-@ in @-@ law of twice @-@ governor Shelby . By contrast , Pope was extremely unpopular for his vote in the U.S. Senate against declaring war in the War of 1812 . 
 The move was panned in the state 's newspapers , and by prominent citizens such as future governor James Turner Morehead . Yet Slaughter followed up with another unpopular decision , appointing Martin D. Hardin , a member of the hated Federalist Party , to fill the Senate seat of William T. Barry . Despite this , the General Assembly made the appointment permanent when it convened in December 1816 . However , the administration candidate for a full senatorial term , John Adair was defeated in the General Assembly , which opted for John J. Crittenden . 
 On January 27 , 1817 , a faction in the Kentucky House of Representatives led by Joseph Cabell Breckinridge proposed a bill calling for the election of " a governor to fill the vacancy occasioned by the death of " Governor Madison . The measure failed , but the legislative elections of 1817 showed a popular mandate for a special gubernatorial election . The Kentucky House passed a bill calling for such elections by a vote of 56 – 30 , but the measure died in the state senate . Nevertheless , Slaughter was never officially given the title of governor and was referred to as " lieutenant governor " or " acting governor " throughout his administration . The General Assembly censured both Slaughter and Pope for failing to require the proper security and oath of office for the state treasurer . 
 Slaughter 's unpopularity led to the demise of many of his proposals , regardless of their merits . He suggested a comprehensive system of public schools and , though the idea had been proposed by previous governors , Slaughter devised a means of funding it . The hostile legislature refused the plan and overrode Slaughter 's vetoes of bills that allowed individual schools to be supported by lotteries . Slaughter further proposed a reform of the penal system and recommended internal improvements , including the creation of a state library . These measures were also rejected . 
 Slaughter 's governorship was further complicated by the financial panic of 1819 , and he spent the majority of his term working to stabilize that state 's economy . Politicians of the day generally divided into those who favored measures favorable to debtors – called the " relief " position or party – and those who insisted that creditors be paid in a timely manner – called the " anti @-@ relief " position or party . On December 16 , 1819 , the General Assembly passed a law requiring a six @-@ month moratorium on the collection of debts . Slaughter , an anti @-@ relief partisan , vetoed the bill , but relief party legislators held a large majority in the General Assembly thanks to the previous fall 's elections , and overrode the veto . The following February , the General Assembly passed an even more liberal stay law , preventing the collection of debts for one year if the creditor would accept payments in the devalued notes of the Bank of Kentucky and two years if they demanded payment in specie or specie @-@ backed notes . These actions were a precursor to the Old Court @-@ New Court controversy . While Slaughter clashed with the General Assembly over potential solutions to the crisis at the state level , he adopted a strong states ' rights policy at the national level . He challenged the constitutionality of the Bank of the United States and the Supreme Court 's ruling that individual states could not tax branches of the Bank . 
 = = Religious leadership and later life = = 
 Following his term as governor , Slaughter failed in a bid to return to the state senate in 1821 , but was re @-@ elected to the state House of Representatives in 1823 , serving a single term . During this term , he continued to support measures to improve education . He voted to ask Congress for aid for the Deaf and Dumb School in the state , and opposed redirecting fines and forfeitures earmarked for the state 's " Seminaries of Learning " into the state treasury . He was also named to a joint committee to investigate the use of state appropriations to Transylvania University . 
 Concurrent with his political career , Slaughter took a leading role in the affairs of his church . He was born into the tradition of the Church of England , but soon became associated with the Baptist congregation at Shawnee Run . He served as a messenger from this congregation to the various associations with which it was connected for over thirty years . One such association was the South District Association ; Slaughter served as clerk at that body 's annual meeting in 1808 and 1809 , and later served as its moderator for nine years . In 1813 , he helped found the Kentucky Bible Society . 
 Following his term in the state House , Slaughter retired from politics and became an active lay minister of the Baptist faith . In 1829 , he was appointed to the first board of trustees of Georgetown College , a Baptist college in Georgetown , Kentucky . He died on September 19 , 1830 , and was interred in his family 's cemetery in Mercer County . 
 = Northrop YF @-@ 23 = 
 The Northrop / McDonnell Douglas YF @-@ 23 was an American single @-@ seat , twin @-@ engine stealth fighter aircraft technology demonstrator designed for the United States Air Force ( USAF ) . The design was a finalist in the USAF 's Advanced Tactical Fighter ( ATF ) competition , battling the Lockheed YF @-@ 22 for a production contract . Two YF @-@ 23 prototypes were built with the nicknames " Black Widow II " and " Gray Ghost " . 
 In the 1980s , the USAF began looking for a replacement for its fighter aircraft , especially to counter the USSR 's advanced Sukhoi Su @-@ 27 and Mikoyan MiG @-@ 29 . Several companies submitted design proposals ; the USAF selected proposals from Northrop and Lockheed . Northrop teamed with McDonnell Douglas to develop the YF @-@ 23 , while Lockheed , Boeing and General Dynamics developed the YF @-@ 22 . 
 The YF @-@ 23 was stealthier and faster , but less agile than its competitor . After a four @-@ year development and evaluation process , the YF @-@ 22 was announced the winner in 1991 and entered production as the Lockheed Martin F @-@ 22 Raptor . The U.S. Navy considered using the production version of the ATF as the basis for a replacement to the F @-@ 14 , but these plans were later canceled . The two YF @-@ 23 prototypes were museum exhibits as of 2010 . 
 = = Development = = 
 American reconnaissance satellites first spotted the advanced Soviet Su @-@ 27 and MiG @-@ 29 fighter prototypes in 1978 , which caused concern in the U.S. Both Soviet models were expected to reduce the maneuverability advantage of contemporary US fighter aircraft . In 1981 , the USAF requested information from several aerospace companies on possible features for an Advanced Tactical Fighter ( ATF ) to replace the F @-@ 15 Eagle . After discussions with aerospace companies , the USAF made air @-@ to @-@ air combat the primary role for the ATF . The ATF was to take advantage of emerging technologies , including composite materials , lightweight alloys , advanced flight @-@ control systems , more powerful propulsion systems , and stealth technology . In October 1985 , the USAF issued a request for proposal ( RFP ) to several aircraft manufacturers . The RFP was modified in May 1986 to include evaluation of prototype air vehicles from the two finalists . At the same time , the U.S. Navy , under the Navalized Advanced Tactical Fighter ( NATF ) program , announced that it would use a derivative of the ATF winner to replace its F @-@ 14 Tomcat . The NATF program called for procurement of 546 aircraft along with the USAF 's planned procurement of 750 aircraft . 
 In July 1986 , proposals were submitted by Lockheed , Boeing , General Dynamics , McDonnell Douglas , Northrop , Grumman and Rockwell . The latter two dropped out of competition shortly thereafter . Following proposal submissions , Lockheed , Boeing , and General Dynamics formed a team to develop whichever of their proposed designs was selected , if any . Northrop and McDonnell Douglas formed a team with a similar agreement . The Lockheed and Northrop proposals were selected as finalists on 31 October 1986 . Both teams were given 50 months to build and flight @-@ test their prototypes , and they were successful , producing the Lockheed YF @-@ 22 and the Northrop YF @-@ 23 . 
 The YF @-@ 23 was designed to meet USAF requirements for survivability , supercruise , stealth , and ease of maintenance . Supercruise requirements called for prolonged supersonic flight without the use of afterburners . Northrop drew on its experience with the B @-@ 2 Spirit and F / A @-@ 18 Hornet to reduce the model 's susceptibility to radar and infrared detection . The USAF initially required the aircraft to land and stop within 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) , which meant the use of thrust reversers on their engines . In 1987 , the USAF changed the runway length requirement to 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 914 m ) , so thrust reversers were no longer needed . This allowed the aircraft to have smaller engine nacelle housings . The nacelles were not downsized on the prototypes . 
 The first YF @-@ 23 ( serial number 87 @-@ 0800 ) , Prototype Air Vehicle 1 ( PAV @-@ 1 ) , was rolled out on 22 June 1990 ; PAV @-@ 1 took its 50 @-@ minute maiden flight on 27 August with Alfred " Paul " Metz at the controls . The second YF @-@ 23 ( serial number 87 @-@ 0801 , PAV @-@ 2 ) made its first flight on 26 October , piloted by Jim Sandberg . The first YF @-@ 23 was painted charcoal gray and was nicknamed " Spider " and " Black Widow II " , the latter after the Northrop P @-@ 61 Black Widow of World War II . It briefly had a red hourglass marking resembling the marking on the underside of the black widow spider before Northrop management had it removed . The second prototype was painted in two shades of gray and nicknamed " Gray Ghost " . 
 = = Design = = 
 The YF @-@ 23 was an unconventional @-@ looking aircraft , with diamond @-@ shaped wings , a profile with substantial area @-@ ruling to reduce aerodynamic drag at transonic speeds , and an all @-@ moving V @-@ tail . The cockpit was placed high , near the nose of the aircraft for good visibility for the pilot . The aircraft featured a tricycle landing gear configuration with a nose landing gear leg and two main landing gear legs . The weapons bay was placed on the underside of the fuselage between the nose and main landing gear . The cockpit has a center stick and side throttle . 
 It was powered by two turbofan engines with each in a separate engine nacelle with S @-@ ducts , to shield engine axial compressors from radar waves , on either side of the aircraft 's spine . Of the two aircraft built , the first YF @-@ 23 ( PAV @-@ 1 ) was fitted with Pratt & Whitney YF119 engines , while the second ( PAV @-@ 2 ) was powered by General Electric YF120 engines . The aircraft featured fixed engine nozzles , instead of thrust vectoring nozzles as on the YF @-@ 22 . As on the B @-@ 2 , the exhaust from the YF @-@ 23 's engines flowed through troughs lined with heat @-@ <unk> tiles to dissipate heat and shield the engines from infrared homing ( IR ) missile detection from below . 
 The flight control surfaces were controlled by a central management computer system . Raising the wing flaps and ailerons on one side and lowering them on the other provided roll . The V @-@ tail fins were angled 50 degrees from the vertical . Pitch was mainly provided by rotating these V @-@ tail fins in opposite directions so their front edges moved together or apart . Yaw was primarily supplied by rotating the tail fins in the same direction . Test pilot Paul Metz stated that the YF @-@ 23 had superior high angle of attack ( AoA ) performance compared to legacy aircraft . <unk> the wing flaps down and ailerons up on both sides simultaneously provided for aerodynamic braking . To keep costs low despite the novel design , a number of " commercial off @-@ the @-@ shelf " components were used , including an F @-@ 15 nose wheel , F / A @-@ 18 main landing gear parts , and the forward cockpit components of the F @-@ 15E Strike Eagle . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Evaluation = = = 
 The first YF @-@ 23 , with Pratt & Whitney engines , <unk> at Mach 1 @.@ 43 on 18 September 1990 , while the second , with General Electric engines , reached Mach 1 @.@ 6 on 29 November 1990 . By comparison , the YF @-@ 22 achieved Mach 1 @.@ 58 in supercruise . The YF @-@ 23 was tested to a top speed of Mach 1 @.@ 8 with afterburners and achieved a maximum angle @-@ of @-@ attack of 25 ° . The maximum speed is classified , though sources state a maximum speed greater than Mach 2 at altitude and a supercruise speed greater than Mach 1 @.@ 6 . The aircraft 's weapons bay was configured for weapons launch , and used for testing weapons bay acoustics , but no missiles were fired ; Lockheed fired AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder and AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM missiles successfully from its YF @-@ 22 demonstration aircraft . PAV @-@ 1 performed a fast @-@ paced combat demonstration with six flights over a 10 @-@ hour period on 30 November 1990 . Flight testing continued into December . The two YF @-@ 23s flew 50 times for a total of 65 @.@ 2 hours . The tests demonstrated Northrop 's predicted performance values for the YF @-@ 23 . The YF @-@ 23 was stealthier and faster , but the YF @-@ 22 was more agile . 
 The two contractor teams submitted evaluation results with their proposals in December 1990 , and on 23 April 1991 , Secretary of the Air Force Donald Rice announced that the YF @-@ 22 was the winner . The Air Force selected the YF119 engine to power the F @-@ 22 production version . The Lockheed and Pratt & Whitney designs were rated higher on technical aspects , were considered lower risks , and were considered to have more effective program management . It has been speculated in the aviation press that the YF @-@ 22 was also seen as more adaptable to the Navy 's NATF , but by 1992 the U.S. Navy had abandoned NATF . 
 Following the competition , both YF @-@ 23s were transferred to NASA 's Dryden Flight Research Center at Edwards AFB , California , without their engines . NASA planned to use one of the aircraft to study techniques for the calibration of predicted loads to measured flight results , but this did not take place . 
 = = = Possible revival = = = 
 In 2004 , Northrop Grumman proposed a YF @-@ 23 @-@ based bomber to meet a USAF need for an interim bomber , for which the FB @-@ 22 and B @-@ 1R were also competing . Northrop modified aircraft PAV @-@ 2 to serve as a display model for its proposed interim bomber . The possibility of a YF @-@ 23 @-@ based interim bomber ended with the 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review , which favored a long @-@ range bomber with much greater range . The USAF has since begun the Next @-@ Generation Bomber program . 
 = = Aircraft on display = = 
 Both YF @-@ 23 airframes remained in storage until mid @-@ 1996 , when the aircraft were transferred to museums . 
 YF @-@ 23A PAV @-@ 1 , Air Force serial number 87 @-@ 0800 , registration number <unk> , was on display as of 2015 in the Research and Development hangar of the National Museum of the United States Air Force near Dayton , Ohio . 
 YF @-@ 23A PAV @-@ 2 , AF <unk> no . 87 @-@ 0801 , registration number <unk> , was on exhibit at the Western Museum of Flight until 2004 , when it was reclaimed by Northrop Grumman and used as a display model for a YF @-@ 23 @-@ based bomber . PAV @-@ 2 was returned to the Western Museum of Flight and was on display as of 2010 at the museum 's new location at Torrance Airport , Torrance , California . 
 = = Specifications ( YF @-@ 23 ) = = 
 Data from Pace , Sweetman , Winchester , Aronstein , 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 ( pilot ) 
 Length : 67 ft 5 in ( 20 @.@ 60 m ) 
 Wingspan : 43 ft 7 in ( 13 @.@ 30 m ) 
 Height : 13 ft 11 in ( 4 @.@ 30 m ) 
 Wing area : 900 ft2 ( 88 m2 ) 
 Empty weight : 29 @,@ 000 lb ( 13 @,@ 100 kg ) 
 Loaded weight : 51 @,@ 320 lb ( 23 @,@ 327 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 62 @,@ 000 lb ( 29 @,@ 000 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Pratt & Whitney YF119 or General Electric YF120 afterburning turbofan , 35 @,@ 000 lbf ( 156 kN ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : At altitude : Mach 2 @.@ 2 + ( 1 @,@ 450 + mph , 2 @,@ 335 + km / h ) 
 Supercruise : Mach 1 @.@ 6 + ( 1 @,@ 060 + mph , 1 @,@ 706 + km / h ) 
 Range : over 2 @,@ 790 mi ( over 4 @,@ 500 km ) 
 Combat radius : 750 – 800 nmi ( 865 – 920 mi , 1 @,@ 380 – 1480 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 65 @,@ 000 ft ( 19 @,@ 800 m ) 
 Wing loading : 54 lb / ft2 ( 265 kg / m2 ) 
 Thrust / weight : 1 @.@ 36 
 Armament 
 None as tested but provisions made for : 
 1 × 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) M61 Vulcan cannon 
 4 × AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM or AIM @-@ 7 Sparrow medium @-@ range air @-@ to @-@ air missiles 
 2 × AIM @-@ 9 Sidewinder short @-@ range air @-@ to @-@ air missiles 
 = Techno Cumbia = 
 " Techno Cumbia " is a song recorded by American recording artist Selena for her fourth studio album , Amor Prohibido ( 1994 ) . It was posthumously released as the b @-@ side track to " Dreaming of You " through EMI Latin on August 14 , 1995 . " Techno Cumbia " was written by Pete Astudillo and co @-@ written and produced by Selena 's brother @-@ producer A.B. Quintanilla . The song is a techno @-@ pop cumbia recording with influences of dancehall , rap , Latin dance , and club music . Lyrically , Selena calls on people to dance her new style the " techno cumbia " and calls out those who can 't dance . 
 " Techno Cumbia " garnered acclaim from music critics , who believed it to be one of the better recordings found on Amor Prohibido . Musicologists believed " Techno Cumbia " predated the Latin urban music market and found that Selena spearheaded a new style of music . The song posthumously peaked at number four on the United States Billboard Hot Latin Songs and Regional Mexican Airplay charts . The recording received the Tejano Music Award for Tejano Crossover Song of the Year in 1995 and received nominations for Single of the Year at the Broadcast Music Inc . ' s pop awards and Music Video of the Year at the 1996 Tejano Music Awards . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Techno Cumbia " was written by Selena y Los Dinos backup dancer and vocalist Pete Astudillo . The song was co @-@ written by Selena 's brother @-@ producer A.B. Quintanilla who arranged the piece and served as producer . In 2002 , A.B. spoke on how Amor Prohibido ( 1994 ) was experimental music @-@ heavy and commented on how " Techno Cumbia " was an example of his ideas of keeping the band 's image modern . During the recording sessions , Selena added rap verses to the song ; A.B. believed it to be first of its kind for the genre . Selena was shot and killed by Yolanda Saldívar , her friend and former manager of the singer 's Selena Etc. clothing boutiques , on March 31 , 1995 . The song was included on the track listing of the posthumously released album Dreaming of You ( 1995 ) . A.B. flew to Manhattan to meet up with R & B group Full Force who remixed " Techno Cumbia " along with updating their remix version of Selena 's 1992 song " Missing My Baby " . San Antonio Express @-@ News writer and Billboard Latin music correspondent , Ramiro Burr believed the addition of " Techno Cumbia " were " remastered , injecting extra percussions to spice them up . " The album 's remix version and radio edit of " Techno Cumbia " was released as the b @-@ side track to the lead single " Dreaming of You " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Techno Cumbia " is a Spanish @-@ language uptempo techno @-@ pop cumbia song . It draws influences from Latin dance , dancehall , rap , and club music . Musicologists Ilan Stavans and Harold Augenbraum called it a hip @-@ hop fusion song . Billboard magazine Latin music correspondent , John Lannert wrote the liner notes of Dreaming of You and called " Techno Cumbia " a " dancehall thumper " . Musicologist James Perone found the recording to be the " richest track " off of Amor Prohibido because of its " rhythmic and textural contrast " . Perone compared it to the ' 90s American dance music scene and commented on how the " techno aspect of the piece is muted ; however , Selena 's voice is electronically processed for part of the recording . " " Techno Cumbia " incorporates " rhythmic shifts from accentuation on off @-@ beats to accentuation on the beat " . The " hey , ho " is a reference to American soul singer Ray Charles ' call and response 1950s single " What 'd I Say " , used under a " Latin @-@ style drumbeat " . 
 Texas Monthly editor , Joe Nick Patoski believed " Techno Cumbia " contained the " most popular rhythm [ at the time ] coursing through the Latin music world " . Patoski further wrote that the track " honored " it by " updating it with vocal samples , second line drumming from New Orleans , and horn charts inspired by soca from the Caribbean . " This was echoed by word for word from author Deborah Paredez on her book on Selena 's fandom . Patoski further wrote that the remix version " may have been laced with such exotica as a reggae toastmaster talking over a teeth @-@ rattling bass line " , and called it a " electronic mishmash " , and a " pan @-@ Caribbean attack that included soca and Hi Life from the Trinidad " . Written in the key of G minor , the beat is set in common time and moves at a moderate 91 beats per minute . The remix version on Dreaming of You has a key signature set in C minor and moves at a moderate 90 bpms . The remix employs a piano , <unk> , tambourine , French horn and drums . Lyrically , Selena calls on people to dance her new style the " techno cumbia " dance and " humorously " calls out people who can 't dance cumbia . Italian essayists Gaetano Prampolini and Annamaria Pinazzi described the lyrics of " Techno Cumbia " that " summons everyone to the dance floor " . Patoski found it to resemble the " nonsensical novelty " song by Shirley Ellis ' 1964 single " The Name Game " . 
 = = Critical reception and chart performance = = 
 Because of its mixture of different cultural music genres , " Techno Cumbia " reminded authors Sara <unk> and Walter Clark of Chicano performance artist Guillermo Gómez @-@ Peña 's suggestion that " cultures are being superimposed " . According to Ed Morales who wrote in his book The Latin Beat , " Techno Cumbia " is easily " forgettable throwaways " among the average listener , but found the recording " catchy " and " sticks in your gut " . Author Michael Corcoran wrote in his music guide on Texan music that " Techno Cumbia " has " Michael Jackson @-@ like trills " . Patoski believed " Techno Cumbia " was aimed towards the Spanish international market , calling it " the most compelling tune " . Author Norma Elia Cantú called " Techno Cumbia " , " La <unk> " ( 1990 ) , and " La Carcacha " ( 1992 ) the " auditory of Tejano music " . Morales believed the song " may have been an indirect influence on the fin de siècle collective of disc jockeys from the borderlands around Tijuana called <unk> " . Stavans and Augenbraum called " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , " No Me Queda Más " , and " Techno Cumbia " to have been the " key hits of [ Amor Prohibido ] " . Lannert wrote in the Dreaming of You liner notes that Selena " amazingly and quickly reverses field [ from the previous track " Tú Sólo Tú " ] to reveal a playful cooing growl " . 
 " Techno Cumbia " debuted at number 13 on the United States Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart on October 7 , 1995 . In its second week the song rose to number nine , receiving airplay honors that week . On October 21 , 1995 , " Techno Cumbia " jumped to number five and subsequently debuted at number seven on the U.S. Regional Mexican Airplay chart . The following week the recording gained more airplay spins at radios , however it remained at number five on the Hot Latin Tracks chart while the song moved to number six on the Regional Mexican Airplay chart . On November 4 , 1995 , " Techno Cumbia " reached its peak at number four on the Hot Latin Tracks chart . In the issue dated November 11 , 1995 , " Techno Cumbia " received increased airplay spins from the previous tracking week and peaked at number four on the Regional Mexican Airplay chart . 
 = = Cultural impact and legacy = = 
 " Techno Cumbia " is believed by musicologist to have predated the Latin urban music genre — which became one of the most popular subgenres of Latin music in the 2000s decade — and to have spearheaded a new style of music . During a 2002 interview , Astudillo spoke on how the success of " Techno Cumbia " and its cultural impact on Latin music " has set a new trend " . He further said that at the time of recording the song , he didn 't envision the track to be as successful or impactful as it has been . Following Selena 's death , A.B. formed his own group the Kumbia Kings and released " Boom Boom " from his album <unk> ! ( 2001 ) ; believed by Billboard to be the direct " descendants of Techno Cumbia " . Author Charles Tatum , found " Techno Cumbia " along with Selena 's 1992 single " La <unk> " and " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " to have revolutionized the Tejano cumbia music scene . Music analyst Guadalupe San Miguel wrote that " Techno Cumbia " , " Como la Flor " ( 1992 ) , and " La Carcacha " were Selena 's " biggest cumbia hits " . Selena popularized the <unk> genre during her career . Vibe magazine reported that Full Force was awarded gold and platinum discs for Selena 's 1992 song " Missing My Baby " and " Techno Cumbia " . 
 The music video of " Techno Cumbia " was released posthumously and used the remix version found on Dreaming of You . The video was choreographed by Kenny Ortega , who later choreographed the music video of Selena 's posthumously released " A Boy Like That " single in 1996 . The music video featured live performances of Selena singing the song at the Houston Astrodome concert on February 26 , 1995 , outtakes from her music video for " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , and performances of the singer during her tour for Amor Prohibido ( 1994 – 95 ) . Cecilia <unk> served as the director of the video and found the project to be rather challenging to do . " Techno Cumbia " was awarded the Tejano Music Award for Tejano Crossover Song of the Year in 1995 . During the awards ceremony , presenter Raul <unk> mistakenly read the Tejano Crossover Song of the Year award as being Shelly Lares . The mistake was corrected during the awards " lengthy break " and Lares gave the award to Selena who was seen in tears and refused to accept the award from Lares , despite Jose Behar ( president of EMI Latin ) urging the singer to do so . The song was nominated for Music Video of the Year at the 1996 Tejano Music Awards , and Song of the Year at the 1997 Broadcast Music Inc . ' s pop awards . Mexican group Liberación recorded the song for the tribute album Mexico Recuerda a Selena ( 2005 ) . AllMusic 's Alex Henderson commented on how Liberación gave " Techno Cumbia " a " <unk> treatment " . Mexican group Banda El Recodo performed and recorded the track for the live televised tribute concert Selena ¡ VIVE ! in April 2005 . " 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Dreaming of You liner notes . 
 = Jaki Byard = 
 John Arthur " Jaki " Byard ( June 15 , 1922 – February 11 , 1999 ) was an American jazz pianist , composer and arranger who also played tenor and alto saxophones , among several other instruments . He was known for his eclectic style , incorporating everything from ragtime and stride to free jazz . 
 Byard played with Maynard Ferguson in the late 1950s and early 1960s , and was a member of bands led by Charles Mingus for several years , including on several studio and concert recordings . The first of his recordings as a leader was in 1960 , but , despite being praised by critics , his albums and performances did not gain him much wider attention . In his 60 @-@ year career , Byard recorded at least 35 albums as leader , and more than 50 as a sideman . Byard 's influence on the music comes from his combining of musical styles during performance , and his parallel career in teaching . 
 From 1969 Byard was heavily involved in jazz education : he began teaching at the New England Conservatory and went on to work at several other music institutions , as well as having private students . He continued performing and recording , mainly in solo and small group settings , but he also led two big bands – one made up of some of his students , and the other of professional musicians . His death , from a single gunshot while in his home , remains an unsolved mystery . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Byard was born in Worcester , Massachusetts . At that time , his parents – John Sr and Geraldine Garr – were living at 47 Clayton Street . Both of his parents played musical instruments ; his mother played the piano , as did his uncles and grandmother , the last playing in cinemas during the silent film era . He began piano lessons at the age of six , but they ended when his family was affected by the Great Depression . He was also given a trumpet that belonged to his father , and attempted to copy the popular players of the time , Roy Eldridge and Walter Fuller . As a boy he often walked to Lake <unk> to listen to bands performing there . He heard Benny Goodman , Lucky <unk> , Fats Waller , and Chick Webb , and listened to other bands of the era on the radio . " Those were the things that inspired me – I guess it stuck with me " , he commented decades later . 
 Byard began playing professionally on piano at the age of 16 , in bands led by Doc <unk> and Freddy Bates . His early lessons had involved mostly playing by rote , so his development of knowledge of theory and further piano technique occurred from the late 1930s until 1941 , including studying harmony at Commerce High School . In that year he was drafted into the army , where he continued with piano lessons and was influenced by pianist Ernie Washington , with whom he was barracked , although Byard also took up trombone at this time . He also studied Stravinsky and Chopin , and continued studying classical composers into the 1960s . Part of his military service was in Florida , where he was a mentor to the young saxophonist Cannonball Adderley and his brother , Nat . After leaving the army in 1946 , Byard 's musical education continued , through discussions with others , and using library materials combined with music school syllabuses . 
 = = Career as musician = = 
 Byard played with bands from the Boston area , including for two years with violinist Ray Perry , who encouraged Byard to add tenor saxophone to his array of instruments . He then joined Earl Bostic 's band as pianist in 1947 and they toured for around a year . Byard then formed a bebop band with Joe Gordon and Sam Rivers in Boston , before touring for a year with a stage show band . Back once more in Boston , he had a regular job for three years with Charlie Mariano in a club in nearby Lynn . They recorded together in 1953 . Byard was a member of Herb Pomeroy 's band as a tenor saxophonist from 1952 to 1955 , and recorded with him in 1957 . Byard also played solo piano in Boston in the early to mid @-@ 1950s and freelanced in that area later in the same decade . He joined Maynard Ferguson in 1959 , and stayed until 1962 . As one of Ferguson 's players and arrangers , Byard found that his own preference for experimentation in time signatures , harmony and freer improvisation was restricted by the preferences of other band members . 
 Byard moved to New York in the early 1960s . His first recording as a leader , the solo piano Blues for Smoke , was recorded there on December 16 , 1960 ( but not released in the United States until 1988 ) Also in 1960 , Byard first played with the bassist Charles Mingus . He recorded extensively with Mingus in the period 1962 – 64 ( including on the important albums on Impulse ! Records – Mingus Mingus Mingus Mingus Mingus and The Black Saint and the Sinner Lady ) , and toured Europe with him in 1964 . Byard also made recordings as a sideman between 1960 and 1966 with Eric Dolphy , Booker Ervin , Roland Kirk , and Rivers . His performance on Dolphy 's Outward Bound put Byard at the forefront of modern jazz . 
 As a leader , Byard recorded a string of albums for the Prestige label during the 1960s . Some of these albums included Richard Davis on bass and Alan Dawson on drums , a trio combination described by critic Gary Giddins as " the most commanding rhythm section of the ' 60s , excepting the Hancock @-@ Carter @-@ Williams trio in Miles Davis 's band " , although it existed only for recordings . One such album was Jaki Byard with Strings ! , a sextet recording that featured Byard 's composing and arranging : on " Cat 's Cradle Conference Rag " , each of five musicians " play five standards based on similar harmonies simultaneously " . A further example of Byard 's sometimes unusual approach to composition is the title track from Out Front ! , which he created by thinking of fellow pianist Herbie Nichols ' touch at the keyboard . Popularity with jazz critics did not translate into wider success : a Washington Post review of his final Prestige album , Solo Piano from 1969 , remarked that it was by " a man who has been largely ignored outside the inner circles " . Giddins also commented in the 1970s on the lack of attention that Byard had received , and stated that the pianist 's recordings from 1960 to 1972 " are dazzling in scope , and for his ability to make the most of limited situations " . 
 Byard also continued to play and record with other leaders . While in Europe in 1965 , he joined Art Blakey 's band for a series of concerts there . In 1967 Byard played in a small group with drummer Elvin Jones . Between 1966 and 1969 Byard recorded three albums with the saxophonist Eric Kloss , then , in 1970 , returned to Mingus ' band , including for performances in Europe . Byard occasionally substituted on piano in Duke Ellington 's orchestra in 1974 when the leader was unwell . In 1974 – 75 Byard had a residency at Bradley ’ s in New York . He also fronted a big band , the Apollo Stompers , which was formed in the late 1970s . There were two versions of the band : one made up of musicians in New York , and the other using students from the New England Conservatory , where Byard had taught from 1969 . 
 In 1980 Byard was the subject of a short documentary film , Anything for Jazz , which featured him playing , teaching and with his family . By the 1980s his main instrument remained the piano , and he still played both alto and tenor saxophones , but he had stopped playing the other instruments that he used to use professionally – bass , drums , guitar , trombone , and trumpet , although he still taught all of them . In the same period , he was often heard in New York playing solo , in duos , or in trios . In 1988 he played with a band founded by Mingus ' widow to perform the bassist 's compositions – the Mingus Big Band . Byard played and recorded with a former student of his , Ricky Ford , from 1989 to 1991 , and continued to play and teach during the 1990s . 
 = = Career as teacher = = 
 Byard was a charter faculty member at the New England Conservatory , helping to establish its jazz studies program , initially named ' Afro @-@ American Music ' ; he stayed for more than 15 years . He also taught at the Hartt School of Music from 1975 , the Manhattan School of Music from 1989 to 1999 , the New School for Jazz and Contemporary Music , and lectured for three years at Harvard University . 
 As teacher and player , Byard was renowned for his knowledge of the history of jazz piano . This meant that some aspiring young musicians sought him out as a teacher . One of these was pianist Jason Moran , who described their first meeting , at a performance by the Apollo Stompers : 
 Jaki had all these toys and whistles and bells and things that he was playing from the piano , and also screaming and yelling from the piano in joy . I remember thinking , ' This guy 's out of his mind . ' After the set , I went up to him , introduced myself , and said that I would be studying with him . He said something to the effect of , ' get ready ' . 
 Moran studied with Byard for four years , and credits the older man with developing his skills , building his awareness of jazz history , and creating his willingness to experiment with different styles . Another student , Fred Hersch , reported that Byard was both organized and chaotic as a teacher : giving his students <unk> and having them study early stride piano , but also behaving eccentrically and missing lessons . 
 Jazz flautist Jamie Baum also studied with Byard , and after his death organized a tribute band consisting mainly of his students : Baum , Adam Kolker , Jerome Harris , George Schuller and <unk> <unk> , called Yard Byard or The Jaki Byard Project , using compositions Byard had left with Baum but never performed . 
 = = Death = = 
 Byard died in his home in Hollis , Queens , New York City , of a gunshot wound on February 11 , 1999 . He was shot once in the head . The police reported that Byard 's family , with whom he shared the house , last saw him at 6 pm , that he was killed around 10 pm , that there " were no signs of robbery , forced entry or a struggle " , and that no weapon was found . The death was soon declared to be a homicide , but the circumstances surrounding it have not been determined , and the case remains unsolved . 
 Byard was survived by two daughters , a son , four grandchildren , and six <unk> . His wife of four decades had died five years earlier . 
 = = Playing style and influence = = 
 Giddins described the nature of Byard 's piano playing : " His tone [ ... ] is unfailingly bright . His middle @-@ register improvisations are evenly articulated with a strong touch and rhythmic elan [ ... he ] likes ringing tremolos and portentous fifths [ ... and ] barely articulated keyboard washes that float beyond the harmonic bounds but are ultimately anchored by the blues " . Byard played in a variety of styles , often mixed together in one performance : John S. Wilson commented that Byard " progresses from a basic melodic statement to nimble Art Tatum fingering to Fats Waller stride , to prickly Thelonious Monk phrases , to Cecil Taylor dissonances " . This could have deliberately comic , surrealistic effects . 
 Byard pointed out that the use of humor did not mean that his music was not serious : " I might do it with humor , but it 's still serious because I mean what I 'm doing " . He stated that his choice to play in a variety of styles was not <unk> or superficial : " I can 't play one way all night ; I wouldn 't want to and I wouldn 't want the public to hear me that way " . One obituary writer noted that , " Nobody thinks it odd if a pianist underpins melody with stride patterns or a boogie bass . When Byard did that 30 years ago , distinctions were drawn more tightly " . Music writer Dan Lander also stated that Byard 's playing was ahead of its time , and added that it has influenced 21st @-@ century pianists : 
 Byard 's grasp and integration of historical forms , his ability to embrace tradition and risk taking , was visionary , impacting on a new generation of jazz musicians who understood the history of jazz as a material to build on and work with , at the service of creating something new , rather than as an unmovable weight , fixing them to the past . 
 A 1968 review of a Byard concert reported that his alto saxophone playing was " in a manner rooted in the bop era " , and that he occasionally accompanied himself , " saxophone with his left hand , piano with his right " . His playing on tenor saxophone was influenced by Lester Young ; Byard himself cited Ben Webster as an influence on his tenor ballad playing . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = As leader / co @-@ leader = = = 
 Byard plays only piano , unless otherwise noted . 
 = = = As sideman = = = 
 An asterisk ( * ) indicates that the year is that of release . 
 Sources : 
 = Guinea pig = 
 The guinea pig ( Cavia porcellus ) , also called the cavy or domestic guinea pig , is a species of rodent belonging to the family Caviidae and the genus Cavia . Despite their common name , these animals are not in the <unk> , or pig family , nor do they originate from Guinea . They originated in the Andes , and earlier studies based on biochemistry and hybridization suggest they are domesticated descendants of a closely related species of cavy such as Cavia <unk> , C. <unk> , or C. tschudii and , therefore , do not exist naturally in the wild . Recent studies applying molecular markers , in addition to studying the skull and skeletal morphology of current and mummified animals , revealed that the ancestor is most likely Cavia tschudii . 
 The domestic guinea pig plays an important role in the folk culture of many Indigenous South American groups , especially as a food source , but also in folk medicine and in community religious ceremonies . Since the 1960s , efforts have been made to increase consumption of the animal outside South America . 
 In Western societies , the domestic guinea pig has enjoyed widespread popularity as a household pet since its introduction by European traders in the 16th century . Their docile nature ; friendly , even affectionate responsiveness to handling and feeding ; and the relative ease of caring for them , continue to make guinea pigs a popular pet . Organizations devoted to competitive breeding of guinea pigs have been formed worldwide , and many specialized breeds of guinea pig , with varying coat colors and compositions , are cultivated by breeders . 
 Biological experimentation on guinea pigs has been carried out since the 17th century . The animals were frequently used as model organisms in the 19th and 20th centuries , resulting in the epithet " guinea pig " for a test subject , but have since been largely replaced by other rodents such as mice and rats . They are still used in research , primarily as models for human medical conditions such as juvenile diabetes , tuberculosis , scurvy , and pregnancy complications . 
 = = History = = 
 The guinea pig was first domesticated as early as 5000 BC for food by tribes in the Andean region of South America ( the present @-@ day southern part of Colombia , Ecuador , Peru , and Bolivia ) , some thousands of years after the domestication of the South American camelids . Statues dating from circa 500 BC to 500 AD that depict guinea pigs have been unearthed in archaeological digs in Peru and Ecuador . The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped animals and often depicted the guinea pig in their art . From about 1200 AD to the Spanish conquest in 1532 , selective breeding resulted in many varieties of domestic guinea pigs , which form the basis for some of the modern domestic breeds . They continue to be a food source in the region ; many households in the Andean highlands raise the animal , which subsists on the family 's vegetable scraps . Folklore traditions involving guinea pigs are numerous ; they are exchanged as gifts , used in customary social and religious ceremonies , and frequently referenced in spoken metaphors . They also play a role in traditional healing rituals by folk doctors , or curanderos , who use the animals to diagnose diseases such as jaundice , rheumatism , arthritis , and typhus . They are rubbed against the bodies of the sick , and are seen as a supernatural medium . Black guinea pigs are considered especially useful for diagnoses . The animal also may be cut open and its entrails examined to determine whether the cure was effective . These methods are widely accepted in many parts of the Andes , where Western medicine is either unavailable or distrusted . 
 Spanish , Dutch , and English traders brought guinea pigs to Europe , where they quickly became popular as exotic pets among the upper classes and royalty , including Queen Elizabeth I. The earliest known written account of the guinea pig dates from 1547 , in a description of the animal from Santo Domingo ; because cavies are not native to Hispaniola , the animal was earlier believed to have been introduced there by Spanish travelers . However , based on more recent excavations on West Indian islands , the animal must have been introduced by ceramic @-@ making horticulturalists from South America to the Caribbean around 500 BC , and it was present in the <unk> period , for example , on Puerto Rico , long before the advent of the Spaniards . The guinea pig was first described in the West in 1554 by the Swiss naturalist Conrad Gessner . Its binomial scientific name was first used by Erxleben in 1777 ; it is an amalgam of Pallas ' generic designation ( 1766 ) and Linnaeus ' specific conferral ( 1758 ) . The earliest known illustration of a domestic guinea pig is a painting ( artist unknown ) in the collection of the National Portrait Gallery in London , dated to 1580 , which shows a girl in typical Elizabethan dress holding a tortoise @-@ shell guinea pig in her hands ; she is flanked by her two brothers , one of whom holds a pet bird . The picture dates from the same period as the oldest recorded guinea pig remains in England , which are a partial cavy skeleton found at Hill Hall ( Essex ) , an Elizabethan manor house , and dated to around 1575 . 
 = = Name = = 
 The scientific name of the common species is Cavia porcellus , with porcellus being Latin for " little pig " . Cavia is New Latin ; it is derived from <unk> , the animal 's name in the language of the <unk> tribes once native to French Guiana . <unk> may be an adaptation of the Portuguese <unk> ( now <unk> ) , which is itself derived from the Tupi word <unk> , meaning rat . Guinea pigs are called <unk> or jaca in Quechua and cuy or <unk> ( plural <unk> , <unk> ) in the Spanish of Ecuador , Peru , and Bolivia . Ironically , breeders tend to use the more formal " cavy " to describe the animal , while in scientific and laboratory contexts , it is far more commonly referred to by the more colloquial " guinea pig " . 
 How the animals came to be called " pigs " is not clear . They are built somewhat like pigs , with large heads relative to their bodies , stout necks , and rounded rumps with no tail of any consequence ; some of the sounds they emit are very similar to those made by pigs , and they also spend a large amount of time eating . They can survive for long periods in small quarters , like a ' pig pen ' , and were thus easily transported on ships to Europe . 
 The animal 's name alludes to pigs in many European languages . The German word for them is <unk> , literally " little sea pig " , which has been translated into Polish as <unk> <unk> , into Hungarian as <unk> , and into Russian as <unk> <unk> . This derives from the Middle High German name <unk> . This originally meant " dolphin " and was used because of the animals ' grunting sounds ( which were thought to be similar ) . Many other , possibly less scientifically based explanations of the German name exist . For example , sailing ships stopping to reprovision in the New World would pick up stores of guinea pigs , which provided an easily transportable source of fresh meat . The French term is <unk> d <unk> ( Indian pig ) or <unk> ; the Dutch call it <unk> <unk> ( Guinean piglet ) or <unk> ( while in some Dutch dialects it is called <unk> rat ) ; and in Portuguese , the guinea pig is variously referred to as <unk> , from the Tupi word via its Latinization , or as <unk> da Índia ( little Indian pig ) . This is not universal ; for example , the common word in Spanish is <unk> de Indias ( little rabbit of the Indies ) . The Chinese refer to them as <unk> ( <unk> , ' pig mouse ' ) , and sometimes as Netherlands pig ( <unk> , <unk> ) or Indian mouse ( <unk> , <unk> ) . The Japanese word for guinea pig is " <unk> " ( <unk> ) , which derives from the name of another mountain @-@ dwelling rodent , the marmot ; this is what guinea pigs were called by the Dutch traders who first brought them to Nagasaki in 1843 . 
 The origin of " guinea " in " guinea pig " is harder to explain . One proposed explanation is that the animals were brought to Europe by way of Guinea , leading people to think they had originated there . " Guinea " was also frequently used in English to refer generally to any far @-@ off , unknown country , so the name may simply be a colorful reference to the animal 's exotic appeal . Another hypothesis suggests the " guinea " in the name is a corruption of " Guiana " , an area in South America , though the animals are not native to that region . A common misconception is that they were so named because they were sold for the price of a guinea coin ; this hypothesis is untenable , because the guinea was first struck in England in 1663 , and William Harvey used the term " Ginny @-@ pig " as early as 1653 . Others believe " guinea " may be an alteration of the word coney ( rabbit ) ; guinea pigs were referred to as " pig coneys " in Edward Topsell 's 1607 treatise on quadrupeds . 
 = = Traits and environment = = 
 Guinea pigs are large for rodents , weighing between 700 and 1 @,@ 200 g ( 1 @.@ 5 and 2 @.@ 6 lb ) , and measuring between 20 and 25 cm ( 8 and 10 in ) in length . They typically live an average of four to five years , but may live as long as eight years . According to the 2006 Guinness World Records , the longest living guinea pig survived 14 years , 10 @.@ 5 months . 
 In the 1990s , a minority scientific opinion emerged proposing that <unk> , such as guinea pigs , chinchillas , and degus , are not rodents and should be reclassified as a separate order of mammals ( similar to lagomorphs ) . Subsequent research using wider sampling has restored consensus among mammalian biologists that the current classification of rodents as monophyletic is justified . 
 = = = Natural habitat = = = 
 C. porcellus is not found naturally in the wild ; it is likely descended from some closely related species of cavies , such as C. <unk> , C. <unk> , and C. tschudii , which are still commonly found in various regions of South America . Some species of cavy identified in the 20th century , such as C. <unk> and C. <unk> , may be domestic guinea pigs that have become feral by reintroduction into the wild . Wild cavies are found on grassy plains and occupy an ecological niche similar to that of cattle . They are social , living in the wild in small groups which consist of several females ( sows ) , a male ( boar ) , and the young ( which in a break with the preceding porcine nomenclature are called pups ) . They move together in groups ( herds ) eating grass or other vegetation , and do not store food . While they do not burrow or build nests , they frequently seek shelter in the burrows of other animals , as well as in crevices and tunnels formed by vegetation . They tend to be most active during dawn and dusk , when it is harder for predators to spot them . 
 = = = Domestic habitat = = = 
 Domesticated guinea pigs thrive in groups of two or more ; groups of sows , or groups of one or more sows and a neutered boar are common combinations . Guinea pigs learn to recognize and bond with other individual guinea pigs , and testing of boars shows their neuroendocrine stress response is significantly lowered in the presence of a bonded female when compared to the presence of unfamiliar females . Groups of boars may also get along , provided their cage has enough space , they are introduced at an early age , and no females are present . Domestic guinea pigs have developed a different biological rhythm from their wild counterparts , and have longer periods of activity followed by short periods of sleep in between . Activity is scattered randomly over the day ; aside from avoidance of intense light , no regular circadian patterns are apparent . 
 Domestic guinea pigs generally live in cages , although some owners of large numbers of guinea pigs dedicate entire rooms to their pets . Cages with solid or wire mesh floors are used , although wire mesh floors can cause injury and may be associated with an infection commonly known as <unk> ( ulcerative <unk> ) . " Cubes and <unk> " ( or C & C ) style cages are now a common choice . Cages are often lined with wood shavings or a similar material . Bedding made from red cedar ( Eastern or Western ) and pine , both softwoods , were commonly used in the past , but these materials are now believed to contain harmful phenols ( aromatic hydrocarbons ) and oils . Safer <unk> made from hardwoods ( such as aspen ) , paper products , and corn cob materials are other alternatives . Guinea pigs tend to be messy within their cages ; they often jump into their food bowls or kick bedding and feces into them , and their urine sometimes crystallizes on cage surfaces , making it difficult to remove . After its cage has been cleaned , a guinea pig typically urinates and drags its lower body across the floor of the cage to mark its territory . Male guinea pigs may also mark their territory in this way when they are taken out of their cages . 
 Guinea pigs do not generally thrive when housed with other species . Housing of guinea pigs with other rodents such as gerbils and hamsters may increase instances of respiratory and other infections , and such rodents may act aggressively toward the guinea pig . Larger animals may regard guinea pigs as prey , though some ( such as dogs ) can be trained to accept them . Opinion is divided over the <unk> of guinea pigs and domestic rabbits . Some published sources say that guinea pigs and rabbits complement each other well when sharing a cage . However , as lagomorphs , rabbits have different nutritional requirements , so the two species cannot be fed the same food . Rabbits may also harbor diseases ( such as respiratory infections from <unk> and Pasteurella ) , to which guinea pigs are susceptible . Even the dwarf rabbit is much stronger than the guinea pig and may cause intentional or inadvertent injury . 
 = = = Behavior = = = 
 Guinea pigs can learn complex paths to food , and can accurately remember a learned path for months . Their strongest problem @-@ solving strategy is motion . While guinea pigs can jump small obstacles , they are poor climbers , and are not particularly agile . They startle extremely easily , and either freeze in place for long periods or run for cover with rapid , darting motions when they sense danger . Larger groups of startled guinea pigs " stampede " , running in haphazard directions as a means of confusing predators . When excited , guinea pigs may repeatedly perform little hops in the air ( known as " <unk> " ) , a movement analogous to the ferret 's war dance . They are also very good swimmers . 
 Like many rodents , guinea pigs sometimes participate in social grooming , and they regularly self @-@ groom . A milky @-@ white substance is secreted from their eyes and rubbed into the hair during the grooming process . Groups of boars often chew each other 's hair , but this is a method of establishing hierarchy within a group , rather than a social gesture . Dominance is also established through biting ( especially of the ears ) , piloerection , aggressive noises , head thrusts , and leaping attacks . Non @-@ sexual simulated mounting for dominance is also common among same @-@ sex groups . 
 Guinea pig sight is not as good as that of a human , but they have a wider angle of vision ( about 340 ° ) and see in partial color ( <unk> ) . They have well @-@ developed senses of hearing , smell , and touch . Vocalization is the primary means of communication between members of the species . These are the most common sounds made by the guinea pig : 
 A " wheek " is a loud noise , the name of which is onomatopoeic , also known as a whistle . An expression of general excitement , it may occur in response to the presence of its owner or to feeding . It is sometimes used to find other guinea pigs if they are running . If a guinea pig is lost , it may wheek for <unk> listen 
 A bubbling or purring sound is made when the guinea pig is enjoying itself , such as when being petted or held . It may also make this sound when grooming , crawling around to investigate a new place , or when given <unk> listen 
 A rumbling sound is normally related to dominance within a group , though it can also come as a response to being scared or angry . In these cases , the rumble often sounds higher and the body vibrates shortly . While courting , a male usually purrs deeply , swaying and circling the female in a behavior called " <unk> " . A low rumble while walking away reluctantly shows passive <unk> listen 
 <unk> and whining are sounds made in pursuit situations , by the pursuer and <unk> , <unk> listen 
 A chattering sound is made by rapidly gnashing the teeth , and is generally a sign of warning . Guinea pigs tend to raise their heads when making this sound . 
 <unk> or shrieking is a high @-@ pitched sound of discontent , in response to pain or <unk> listen 
 Chirping , a less @-@ common sound , likened to bird song , seems to be related to stress , or when a baby guinea pig wants to be fed . Very rarely , the chirping will last for several <unk> listen 
 = = Breeding = = 
 The guinea pig is able to breed year @-@ round , with birth peaks usually coming in the spring ; as many as five litters can be produced per year . The gestation period lasts from 59 – 72 days , with an average of 63 – 68 days . Because of the long gestation period and the large size of the pups , pregnant females may become large and eggplant @-@ shaped , although the change in size and shape varies . Unlike the offspring of most other rodents , which are altricial at birth , newborn pups are well @-@ developed with hair , teeth , claws , and partial eyesight ; they are immediately mobile , and begin eating solid food immediately , though they continue to suckle . Litters yield one to six pups , with an average of three ; the largest recorded litter size is 17 . 
 In smaller litters , difficulties may occur during labour due to oversized pups . Large litters result in higher incidences of stillbirth , but because the pups are delivered at an advanced stage of development , lack of access to the mother 's milk has little effect on the mortality rate of newborns . <unk> females assist in mothering duties if lactating . 
 Guinea pigs also practice alloparental care , in which a female may adopt the pup or pups of another . This might take place if the original parents die or are for some reason separated from them . This behavior is common , and is seen in many other animal species such as the elephant . 
 Male and female guinea pigs do not differ in external appearance apart from general size . The position of the anus is very close to the genitals in both sexes . Female genitals are distinguished by a Y @-@ shaped configuration formed from a <unk> flap , while the male genitals may look similar , with the penis and anus forming a like shape , the penis will protrude if pressure is applied to the surrounding hair . The male 's testes may also be visible externally from scrotal swelling . 
 Males reach sexual maturity at 3 – 5 weeks ; females can be fertile as early as four weeks and can carry litters before they are adults . Females that have never given birth may develop irreversible fusing of the pubic symphysis , a joint in the pelvis , due to calcification which may occur between six and 10 months of age . If they become pregnant after this has happened , the birth canal will not widen sufficiently ; this may lead to dystocia and death as they attempt to give birth . <unk> of the female 's pubic symphysis ( if not bred ) is a common myth . The reason for potential calcification is a metabolic disease , like <unk> . A healthy , normal female guinea pig 's pubic symphysis does not <unk> . Females can become pregnant 6 – 48 hours after giving birth , but it is not healthy for a female to be thus constantly pregnant . 
 <unk> of pregnancy is common and kills many pregnant females . Signs of toxemia include anorexia , lack of energy , excessive salivation , a sweet or fruity breath odor due to ketones , and seizures in advanced cases . Pregnancy toxemia appears to be most common in hot climates . Other serious complications of pregnancy can include a prolapsed uterus , hypocalcaemia , and mastitis . 
 = = Diet = = 
 Grass is the guinea pig 's natural diet . Their molars are particularly suited for grinding plant matter , and grow continuously throughout the animal 's life . Most grass @-@ eating mammals are quite large and have a long digestive tract ; while guinea pigs have much longer colons than most rodents , they must also supplement their diet by coprophagy , the eating of their own feces . However , they do not consume all their feces indiscriminately , but produce special soft pellets , called cecotropes , which recycle B vitamins , fiber , and bacteria required for proper digestion . The cecotropes ( or <unk> pellets ) are eaten directly from the anus , unless the guinea pig is pregnant or obese . They share this behaviour with rabbits . In geriatric boars or sows ( the condition is rarer in young ones ) , the muscles which allow the softer pellets to be expelled from the anus for consumption can become weak . This creates a condition known as anal impaction , which prevents the boar from <unk> cecotropes , though harder pellets may pass through the impacted mass . The condition may be temporarily alleviated by carefully expelling the impacted feces . 
 Guinea pigs benefit from feeding on fresh grass hay , such as timothy hay , in addition to food pellets which are often based from timothy . Alfalfa is also a popular food choice ; most guinea pigs will eat large amounts of alfalfa when offered it , though some controversy exists over the feeding of alfalfa to adult guinea pigs . Some pet owners and veterinary organizations have advised that , as a legume rather than a grass hay , alfalfa consumed in large amounts may lead to obesity , as well as bladder stones due to excess calcium , in any but pregnant and very young guinea pigs . However , published scientific sources mention alfalfa as a source for replenishment of protein , amino acids , and fiber . 
 Like humans , but unlike most other mammals , guinea pigs cannot synthesize their own vitamin C and must obtain this vital nutrient from food . If guinea pigs do not ingest enough vitamin C , they can suffer from potentially fatal scurvy . Guinea pigs require about 10 mg of vitamin C daily ( 20 mg if pregnant ) , which can be obtained through fresh , raw fruits and vegetables ( such as broccoli , apple , cabbage , carrot , celery , and spinach ) or through dietary supplements . Healthy diets for guinea pigs require a complex balance of calcium , magnesium , phosphorus , potassium , and hydrogen ions ; adequate amounts of vitamins E , A , and D are also necessary . <unk> diets have been associated with muscular dystrophy , metastatic calcification , difficulties with pregnancy , vitamin deficiencies , and teeth problems . Guinea pigs tend to be fickle eaters when it comes to fresh fruits and vegetables , having learned early in life what is and is not appropriate to consume , and their habits are difficult to change after maturity . They do not respond well to sudden changes in diet ; they may stop eating and starve rather than accept new food types . A constant supply of hay or other food is generally recommended , as guinea pigs feed continuously and may develop habits such as chewing on their own hair if food is not present . Because guinea pigs ' teeth grow constantly , they routinely gnaw , lest their teeth become too large for their mouths , a common problem in rodents . Guinea pigs also chew on cloth , paper , plastic , and rubber . 
 A number of plants are poisonous to guinea pigs , including bracken , <unk> , buttercup , <unk> , deadly nightshade , foxglove , hellebore , hemlock , lily of the valley , <unk> , monkshood , privet , ragwort , rhubarb , speedwell , toadflax ( both Linaria vulgaris and Linaria <unk> ) , and wild celery . Additionally , any plant which grows from a bulb ( e.g. , tulip or onion ) is normally considered poisonous , as well as ivy and oak tree leaves . 
 = = Health = = 
 Common ailments in domestic guinea pigs include respiratory tract infections , diarrhea , scurvy ( vitamin C deficiency , typically characterized by sluggishness ) , abscesses due to infection ( often in the neck , due to hay embedded in the throat , or from external scratches ) , and infections by lice , mites , or fungus . 
 Mange mites ( <unk> <unk> ) are a common cause of hair loss , and other symptoms may also include excessive scratching , unusually aggressive behavior when touched ( due to pain ) , and , in some instances , seizures . Guinea pigs may also suffer from " running lice " ( <unk> <unk> ) , a small , white insect which can be seen moving through the hair ; their eggs , which appear as black or white specks attached to the hair , are sometimes referred to as " static lice " . Other causes of hair loss can be due to hormonal upsets caused by underlying medical conditions such as ovarian cysts . 
 Foreign bodies , especially small pieces of hay or straw , can become lodged in the eyes of guinea pigs , resulting in excessive blinking , tearing , and in some cases an opaque film over the eye due to corneal ulcer . Hay or straw dust can also cause sneezing . While it is normal for guinea pigs to sneeze periodically , frequent sneezing may be a symptom of pneumonia , especially in response to atmospheric changes . Pneumonia may also be accompanied by <unk> and can be fatal . 
 Because the guinea pig has a stout , compact body , it more easily tolerates excessive cold than excessive heat . Its normal body temperature is 101 – 104 ° F ( 38 – 40 ° C ) , so its ideal ambient air temperature range is similar to a human 's , about 65 – 75 ° F ( 18 – 24 ° C ) . Consistent ambient temperatures in excess of 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) have been linked to hyperthermia and death , especially among pregnant sows . Guinea pigs are not well suited to environments that feature wind or frequent drafts , and respond poorly to extremes of humidity outside of the range of 30 – 70 % . 
 Guinea pigs are prey animals whose survival instinct is to mask pain and signs of illness , and many times health problems may not be apparent until a condition is severe or in its advanced stages . Treatment of disease is made more difficult by the extreme sensitivity guinea pigs have to most antibiotics , including penicillin , which kill off the intestinal flora and quickly bring on episodes of diarrhea and in some cases , death . 
 Similar to the inherited genetic diseases of other breeds of animal ( such as hip dysplasia in canines ) , a number of genetic abnormalities of guinea pigs have been reported . Most commonly , the roan coloration of Abyssinian guinea pigs is associated with congenital eye disorders and problems with the digestive system . Other genetic disorders include " waltzing disease " ( deafness coupled with a tendency to run in circles ) , palsy , and tremor conditions . 
 = = Pets = = 
 = = = Handling , temperament and socialization = = = 
 If handled correctly early in life , guinea pigs become amenable to being picked up and carried , and seldom bite or scratch . They are timid explorers and often hesitate to attempt an escape from their cage even when an opportunity presents itself . Still , they show considerable curiosity when allowed to walk freely , especially in familiar and safe terrain . Guinea pigs that become familiar with their owner will whistle on the owner 's approach ; they will also learn to whistle in response to the rustling of plastic bags or the opening of refrigerator doors , where their food is most commonly stored . In Switzerland , owning a single guinea pig is considered harmful to its well @-@ being and forbidden by law . 
 = = = Appearance , coat and grooming = = = 
 Domesticated guinea pigs occur in many breeds , which have been developed since their introduction to Europe and North America . These varieties vary in hair and color composition . The most common varieties found in pet stores are the English <unk> ( also known as the American ) , which have a short , smooth coat , and the Abyssinian , whose coat is ruffled with <unk> , or rosettes . Also popular among breeders are the Peruvian and the <unk> ( or Silkie ) , both straight longhair breeds , and the Texel , a curly longhair . Grooming of guinea pigs is primarily accomplished using combs or brushes . <unk> breeds are typically brushed weekly , while longhair breeds may require daily grooming . 
 = = = Clubs and associations = = = 
 Cavy clubs and associations dedicated to the showing and breeding of guinea pigs have been established worldwide . The American Cavy Breeders Association , an adjunct to the American Rabbit Breeders ' Association , is the governing body in the United States and Canada . The British Cavy Council governs cavy clubs in the United Kingdom . Similar organizations exist in Australia ( Australian National Cavy Council ) and New Zealand ( New Zealand Cavy Council ) . Each club publishes its own standard of perfection and determines which breeds are eligible for showing . 
 = = = Allergies to pet guinea pigs = = = 
 Allergic symptoms , including rhinitis , conjunctivitis , and asthma , have been documented in laboratory animal workers who come into contact with guinea pigs . Allergic reactions following direct exposure to guinea pigs in domestic settings have also been reported . Two major guinea pig allergens , Cav p I and Cav p II , have been identified in guinea pig fluids ( urine and saliva ) and guinea pig dander . People who are allergic to guinea pigs are usually allergic to hamsters and gerbils , as well . Allergy shots can successfully treat an allergy to guinea pigs , although treatment can take up to 18 months . 
 = = Cultural and media influence = = 
 As a result of their widespread popularity , especially in households with children , guinea pigs have shown a presence in culture and media . Some noted appearances of the animal in literature include the short story " Pigs Is Pigs " by Ellis Parker Butler , which is a tale of bureaucratic incompetence . Two guinea pigs held at a railway station breed unchecked while humans argue as to whether they are " pigs " or " pets " for the purpose of determining freight charges . Butler 's story , in turn , inspired the Star Trek : The Original Series episode " The Trouble With Tribbles " , written by David Gerrold . In the Golden Hamster Saga books , two guinea pigs named Enrico and Caruso are modern @-@ day thespians ( named after Enrico Caruso ) who serve as secondary characters , and often irritate the main character , Freddy <unk> , who strongly dislikes their acting antics . 
 = = = In children 's literature = = = 
 The Fairy Caravan , a novel by Beatrix Potter , and Michael Bond 's Olga da <unk> series for children , both feature guinea pigs as the protagonist . Another appearance is in The Magician 's Nephew by C. S. Lewis : in the first ( chronologically ) of his The Chronicles of Narnia series , a guinea pig is the first creature to travel to the Wood between the Worlds . In Ursula <unk> 's Maisie and the <unk> Gig , a little girl has a recurrent dream about a giant guinea pig , while guinea pigs feature significantly in several of <unk> 's other books , including the young adult novel The White Guinea Pig and The Game of the Goose . 
 = = = In film and television = = = 
 Guinea pigs have also been featured in film and television . In the TV movie <unk> Rules , the main character and the main character 's crush both have guinea pigs which play a minor part in the plot . A guinea pig named Rodney , voiced by Chris Rock , was a prominent character in the 1998 film Dr. Dolittle , and <unk> the Guinea pig is a co @-@ star on Nick Jr . ' s Wonder Pets . Guinea pigs were used in some major advertising campaigns in the 1990s and 2000s , notably for Egg Banking plc , Snapple , and Blockbuster Video . The Blockbuster campaign is considered by some guinea pig advocates to have been a factor in the rise of caging guinea pigs and rabbits together . In the South Park season 12 episode " Pandemic 2 : The Startling " , giant guinea pigs dressed in costumes rampage over the Earth . The 2009 Walt Disney Pictures movie G @-@ Force features a group of highly intelligent guinea pigs trained as operatives of the U.S. government . A video game based on the movie was also released . A guinea pig named Bugsy appears in the 2008 film Bedtime Stories . A guinea pig named <unk> features prominently in the second season of the U.S. adaptation of House of Cards . 
 = = Scientific research = = 
 The use of guinea pigs in scientific experimentation dates back at least to the 17th century , when the Italian biologists Marcello Malpighi and Carlo <unk> conducted vivisections of guinea pigs in their examinations of anatomic structures . In 1780 , Antoine Lavoisier used a guinea pig in his experiments with the calorimeter , a device used to measure heat production . The heat from the guinea pig 's respiration melted snow surrounding the calorimeter , showing that respiratory gas exchange is a combustion , similar to a candle burning . Guinea pigs played a major role in the establishment of germ theory in the late 19th century , through the experiments of Louis Pasteur , Émile Roux , and Robert Koch . Guinea pigs have been launched into orbital space flight several times , first by the USSR on the Sputnik 9 biosatellite of March 9 , 1961 – with a successful recovery . China also launched and recovered a biosatellite in 1990 which included guinea pigs as passengers . 
 In English , the term ' guinea pig ' is commonly used as a metaphor for a subject of scientific experimentation , or any experiment or test in modern times . This dates back to the early 20th century ; the Oxford English Dictionary notes its first usage in this capacity in 1913 . In 1933 , Consumers Research founders F. J. <unk> and Arthur <unk> wrote a book entitled 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Guinea Pigs , extending the metaphor to consumer society . The book became a national bestseller in the United States , thus further popularizing the term , and spurred the growth of the consumer protection movement . The negative connotation of the term was later employed in the novel The Guinea Pigs by Czech author Ludvík Vaculík as an allegory for Soviet totalitarianism . Guinea pigs were popular laboratory animals until the later 20th century ; about 2 @.@ 5 million guinea pigs were used annually in the U.S. for research in the 1960s , but that total decreased to about 375 @,@ 000 by the mid @-@ 1990s . As of 2007 , they constitute about 2 % of the current total of laboratory animals . In the past , they were widely used to standardize vaccines and antiviral agents ; they were also often employed in studies on the production of antibodies in response to extreme allergic reactions , or anaphylaxis . Less common uses included research in pharmacology and irradiation . Since the middle 20th century , they have been replaced in laboratory contexts primarily by mice and rats . This is in part because research into the genetics of guinea pigs has lagged behind that of other rodents , although geneticists W. E. Castle and Sewall Wright made a number of contributions to this area of study , especially regarding coat color . In 2004 , the U.S. ' s National Human Genome Research Institute announced plans to sequence the genome of the domestic guinea pig . 
 The guinea pig was most extensively implemented in research and diagnosis of infectious diseases . Common uses included identification of brucellosis , Chagas disease , cholera , diphtheria , foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease , glanders , Q fever , Rocky Mountain spotted fever , and various strains of typhus . They are still frequently used to diagnose tuberculosis , since they are easily infected by human tuberculosis bacteria . Because guinea pigs are one of the few animals which , like humans and other primates , cannot synthesize vitamin C , but must obtain it from their diet , they are ideal for researching scurvy . From the accidental discovery in 1907 that scurvy could be induced in guinea pigs , to their use to prove the chemical structure of the " <unk> factor " in 1932 , the guinea pig model proved a crucial part of vitamin C research . 
 Complement , an important component for serology , was first isolated from the blood of the guinea pig . Guinea pigs have an unusual insulin mutation , and are a suitable species for the generation of anti @-@ insulin antibodies . Present at a level 10 times that found in other mammals , the insulin in guinea pigs may be important in growth regulation , a role usually played by growth hormone . Additionally , guinea pigs have been identified as model organisms for the study of juvenile diabetes and , because of the frequency of pregnancy toxemia , of pre @-@ eclampsia in human females . Their placental structure is similar to that of humans , and their gestation period can be divided into trimesters that resemble the stages of fetal development in humans . 
 Guinea pig strains used in scientific research are primarily <unk> strains . Aside from the common American or English stock , the two main <unk> strains in laboratory use are the Hartley and Dunkin @-@ Hartley ; these English strains are albino , although pigmented strains are also available . <unk> strains are less common and are usually used for very specific research , such as immune system molecular biology . Of the inbred strains that have been created , the two still used with any frequency are , following Sewall Wright 's designations , " Strain 2 " and " Strain 13 " . 
 Hairless breeds of guinea pigs have been used in scientific research since the 1980s , particularly for dermatological studies . A hairless and immunodeficient breed was the result of a spontaneous genetic mutation in inbred laboratory strains from the Hartley stock at the Eastman Kodak Company in 1979 . An <unk> hairless breed was also identified by the Institute Armand <unk> in 1978 , and Charles River Laboratories has reproduced this breed for research since 1982 . Cavy fanciers then began acquiring hairless breeds , and the pet hairless varieties are referred to as " skinny pigs " . 
 = = As food = = 
 = = = South America = = = 
 Guinea pigs ( called cuy , <unk> , or <unk> ) were originally domesticated for their meat in the Andes . Traditionally , the animal was reserved for ceremonial meals by indigenous people in the Andean highlands , but since the 1960s , it has become more socially acceptable for consumption by all people . It continues to be a major part of the diet in Peru and Bolivia , particularly in the Andes Mountains highlands ; it is also eaten in some areas of Ecuador ( mainly in the Sierra ) and Colombia . Because guinea pigs require much less room than traditional livestock and reproduce extremely quickly , they are a more profitable source of food and income than many traditional stock animals , such as pigs and cattle ; moreover , they can be raised in an urban environment . Both rural and urban families raise guinea pigs for supplementary income , and the animals are commonly bought and sold at local markets and large @-@ scale municipal fairs . Guinea pig meat is high in protein and low in fat and cholesterol , and is described as being similar to rabbit and the dark meat of chicken . The animal may be served fried ( <unk> or <unk> ) , broiled ( <unk> ) , or roasted ( al <unk> ) , and in urban restaurants may also be served in a casserole or a <unk> . <unk> commonly consume <unk> or <unk> de cuy , a soup dish . <unk> or <unk> , a process similar to <unk> , is also popular , and is usually served with corn beer ( <unk> ) in traditional settings . 
 Peruvians consume an estimated 65 million guinea pigs each year , and the animal is so entrenched in the culture that one famous painting of the Last Supper in the main cathedral in Cusco shows Christ and the 12 disciples dining on guinea pig . The animal remains an important aspect of certain religious events in both rural and urban areas of Peru . A religious celebration known as jaca <unk> ( " collecting the <unk> " ) is a major festival in many villages in the Antonio Raimondi province of eastern Peru , and is celebrated in smaller ceremonies in Lima . It is a syncretistic event , combining elements of Catholicism and pre @-@ Columbian religious practices , and revolves around the celebration of local patron saints . The exact form the jaca <unk> takes differs from town to town ; in some localities , a <unk> ( servant ) is appointed to go from door to door , collecting donations of guinea pigs , while in others , guinea pigs may be brought to a communal area to be released in a mock bullfight . Meals such as cuy <unk> are always served as part of these festivities , and the killing and serving of the animal is framed by some communities as a symbolic satire of local politicians or important figures . In the Tungurahua and Cotopaxi provinces of central Ecuador , guinea pigs are employed in the celebrations surrounding the feast of Corpus Christi as part of the <unk> , which is a community meal , and the Octava , where <unk> ( greased poles ) are erected with prizes tied to the crossbars , from which several guinea pigs may be hung . The Peruvian town of <unk> has an annual festival which involves dressing guinea pigs in elaborate costumes for a competition . 
 Andean immigrants in New York City raise and sell guinea pigs for meat , and some ethnic restaurants in major United States cities serve cuy as a delicacy . Peruvian research universities , especially La Molina National Agrarian University , began experimental programs in the 1960s with the intention of breeding larger @-@ sized guinea pigs . Subsequent university efforts have sought to change breeding and husbandry procedures in South America , to make the raising of guinea pigs as livestock more economically sustainable . In the 1990s and 2000s , the university began exporting the larger breed guinea pigs to Europe , Japan , and the United States in the hope of increasing human consumption outside of these countries in northern South America . 
 = = = Sub @-@ Saharan Africa = = = 
 Many efforts have also been made to promote guinea pig husbandry in developing countries of West Africa , where they occur more widely than generally known because they are usually not covered by livestock statistics . However , it has not been known when and where the animals have been introduced to Africa . In Cameroon , they are widely distributed . In the Democratic Republic of the Congo , they can be found both in peri @-@ urban environments as well as in rural regions , for example , in South Kivu . They are also frequently held in rural households in <unk> Region of southwestern Tanzania . 
 = = = Western culture = = = 
 Nevertheless , as a food source , guinea pigs are generally considered taboo in other countries in America and Europe . In reality television , guinea pig meat has been consumed as an exotic dish by such Western celebrity chefs as Andrew Zimmern ( for his show Bizarre Foods ) , Anthony Bourdain in No Reservations , and Jeff Corwin in his show Extreme Cuisine . 
 = Jimmy Speirs = 
 James Hamilton Speirs ( 22 March 1886 – 20 August 1917 ) , commonly known as Jimmy Speirs , was a Scottish footballer who represented his country on one occasion , scored the winning goal in the 1911 FA Cup Final , and received the Military Medal during the First World War . 
 Born in Glasgow , he was one of six children , and worked as a clerk while playing youth football for Annandale . He started his adult football career with local junior team Maryhill , where he played for less than a season , before he moved to Rangers in 1905 . He spent three years with the club , but won only the Glasgow Merchants ' Charity Cup , before he joined a third Glasgow side Clyde . After one season , he left Clyde and Scotland , and joined Bradford City for their second season in the First Division . His greatest success came in his second season with Bradford , when he was the club 's captain and goalscorer in their FA Cup Final victory of 1911 , in a team featuring eight Scottish @-@ born players . 
 He spent another two seasons with Bradford City , before he joined Leeds City , but after two seasons , the First World War broke out . League football continued for one more season , at the end of which Speirs returned to Glasgow . Married with two young children , Speirs would have been exempt from conscription , but he volunteered to join the Queen 's Own Cameron Highlanders in 1915 . He was promoted to lance corporal , corporal and sergeant , and won the Military Medal for bravery in the field , but was killed during the Battle of Passchendaele in August 1917 , at the age of 31 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jimmy Speirs was born on 22 March 1886 in the Govan area of Glasgow , Scotland , to James Hamilton Speirs senior and Janet Shields Speirs ( née McLean ) . He was the fifth of six children , following the births of siblings Maggie , Archibald , Annie and John . The youngest of the family was Robert , born in 1888 . By 1901 , the family had moved to nearby Govanhill , and Jimmy worked as a clerk . It was in Govanhill that Speirs ' football ability was first shown , when he played in the junior football circuit on the black ash pitches of Glasgow , for Annandale , during summer tournaments . 
 = = Football career = = 
 = = = Scotland = = = 
 An inside forward , Speirs moved to Maryhill in the Glasgow Junior League in 1905 . Maryhill , whose <unk> Park ground was five miles north of Speirs ' home , were among the top sides in the junior leagues , and lifted 13 trophies in eight seasons at the turn of the 20th century . The 1904 – 05 team contained six junior internationals , and the side won three titles that season . Speirs ' first recorded scoring appearance was on 29 April 1905 , when his two goals helped Maryhill beat Parkhead 2 – 0 . Speirs scored again in a 3 – 3 draw against Ashfield in the Glasgow Junior Cup final , and scored the only goal of the replay to help Maryhill win the competition . Maryhill also won the Glasgow Merchants ' Charity Cup and the league title although it is unknown if Speirs played in the cup final or picked up a league winners medal . 
 At the end of the season , Speirs and junior international John <unk> both moved across Glasgow to First Division side Rangers , who had finished second to city rivals Celtic after losing out in a title play @-@ off . Speirs did not make his full debut until 25 September 1905 , when Rangers lost 5 – 0 to Heart of Midlothian at Ibrox . Speirs scored his first Rangers goal two weeks later during the next league game in a 4 – 1 win away to Port Glasgow . In his first season , Speirs scored a hat @-@ trick in a 7 – 1 Scottish Cup first round victory over Second Division Arthurlie , and won the Glasgow Merchants ' Charity Cup , during which he scored twice in both the semi @-@ final and final . However , Rangers could only finish fourth in the league , with Celtic retaining the title . Rangers improved to third place the following season as Speirs finished joint top scorer with 13 goals , but Celtic again were league winners . Celtic also defeated Rangers 3 – 0 in the Scottish Cup in front of 60 @,@ 000 fans . Rangers ' only trophy that season was the successful defence of the Merchants ' Charity Cup , but Speirs did not play . In 1907 – 08 , Celtic once again finished top , with Rangers in third , and knocked their rivals out of the Scottish Cup . The two teams also met in the final of the Glasgow Cup , with Celtic winning in the second replay . Speirs was limited to 13 games , none of which Rangers lost , and he left after playing 62 matches , from which he scored 29 goals . During his final days with Rangers , he also won his only cap for Scotland , in a 2 – 1 win over Wales on 7 March 1908 . Speirs won a representative cap 11 days later , when he played and scored for Glasgow during an inter @-@ city fixture with Sheffield . The game finished 2 – 2 . 
 In the summer of 1908 , after three years with Rangers , Speirs moved to another Glasgow @-@ based club , Clyde , which also played in the First Division . Clyde 's Shawfield Park ground was three miles from Speirs ' home in Govanhill , in the Rutherglen area of the city , where Speirs ' grandparents and father lived . Clyde had finished 17th in 1907 – 08 , one point ahead of bottom side Port Glasgow . Speirs played only 14 league games for Clyde but helped them to their highest league position of third , three points behind winners Celtic . Clyde also lost to Celtic in the Scottish Cup semi @-@ final , following a replay . It was Speirs ' only season with Clyde , during which he scored a total of 10 goals from 20 appearances . 
 = = = Bradford City = = = 
 Speirs left his native Scotland during the summer of 1909 , to head for Yorkshire and sign for Bradford City , under the management of his countryman Peter O 'Rourke . It would be City 's second season in the First Division following their promotion in 1907 – 08 , and O 'Rourke wanted to strengthen his side after they narrowly avoided relegation in their first season in the top flight . He assembled a team which contained several Scottish players , and also brought in England international outside right Dicky Bond . Speirs made his debut on the opening day of the 1909 – 10 season , as City lost 1 – 0 to Manchester United . His first goal came three months later , in a 3 – 1 victory over Sunderland , during the middle of a ten @-@ game undefeated spell . Speirs played in all 38 games during his first season , scoring six times , as City finished seventh . He also played in both the club 's FA Cup games that season , scoring in a 4 – 2 victory over Notts County in the first round . 
 It was the following season when Speirs wrote his name in the club 's record books , with his performance in the same competition . He played 25 league games , scoring seven goals , to help City to fifth place , a position which the club has not yet bettered . The club also reached the FA Cup Final in the same season , with Speirs playing in all but one of the games along the way , scoring in a 2 – 1 second round victory over Norwich City . Speirs , along with Frank Thompson and George Robinson , was censured by the Football Association following a scramble for the match ball at the end of the semi @-@ final victory against Blackburn Rovers . Speirs was captain of the side and in the days up to the final he wrote to his opposite number , Colin Veitch . The contents of his letter are not known , but in his reply , Veitch said Speirs had " expressed in sound terms the true spirit of comradeship , and the proper sentiments one would expect to see associated with the sportsman , and the sport " . Speirs led out a team which contained eight Scots for the final at the Crystal Palace on 22 April 1911 against Newcastle United . The game ended in a 0 – 0 draw , in what was described as a " decidedly dull and uneventful game " . The final replay was played four days later at Old Trafford , Manchester , with City making one change to the team , bringing in Bob Torrance for fellow Scottish defender Willie Gildea . After 15 minutes , Speirs scored what turned out to be the only goal of the game to win the cup . Robinson shot at goal , but the wind caught the ball , which was headed on by Frank Thompson . Speirs himself headed the ball at goal , and Newcastle 's goalkeeper Jimmy Lawrence was distracted by City striker Frank O 'Rourke and the ball rolled into the net . Speirs lifted the newly @-@ cast trophy , which had been made by Bradford jewellers <unk> , and displayed it on the club 's victory parade later that evening in Bradford . The following day , Speirs was pictured on the front page of the Daily Mirror newspaper , holding the cup . 
 The club 's attempt to defend the victory came to an end after six consecutive clean sheets , when they were defeated 3 – 2 by Barnsley with Speirs scoring one of the goals . However , he was limited to ten league games , not playing from September until March , and finished the season with seven goals . They included his second senior hat @-@ trick during a 5 – 1 victory over Sheffield Wednesday on 30 March 1912 . Speirs started the following season , but after playing 13 of the first 15 games , he left . He had played 96 games in total , scoring 33 goals . 
 = = = Leeds City = = = 
 Speirs joined neighbours Leeds City , which played in the Second Division , for a fee of £ 1 @,@ 400 in December 1912 , becoming one of Herbert Chapman 's first signings . Speirs ' debut came on 28 December in a 3 – 2 defeat to Fulham , and although his first goal did not come until his fifth game against Bradford ( Park Avenue ) , Speirs finished second highest scorer with 10 goals , behind Billy McLeod . Their goals helped Leeds finish in sixth position , 10 points off the promotion places . The following season , Leeds came closer to promotion , but despite Speirs , as captain , scoring 12 goals and McLeod netting 27 , they came fourth , two points behind Park Avenue in the second promotion spot . Despite the outbreak of the First World War in June 1914 , league football continued , but Leeds lost their first four games of the season and were unable to recover , finishing a lowly 15th . Speirs scored the only goal of the West Riding Cup final against Hull City on 11 November 1914 to give what was Leeds City 's only ever trophy before the club was expelled from the league in 1919 and subsequently dissolved . League football was suspended at the end of the season , and the last game of Speirs ' career was a 2 – 0 defeat to Barnsley on 24 April 1915 . He played 73 league games for Leeds , scoring 32 goals . 
 In total , Speirs had played 226 league games , a further 30 Scottish and English FA Cup games , and several other appearances in other cup competitions . During his career , he scored 92 league goals , and 12 senior cup goals . 
 = = First World War = = 
 At the end of the 1914 – 15 season , Speirs returned to his native Glasgow and enlisted in the Queen 's Own Cameron Highlanders on 17 May 1915 . Conscription was a year away , from which Speirs would have been exempt because he was married with two young children . Private S / <unk> Speirs was posted to the regiment 's headquarters in Inverness where he joined the 3rd Battalion , a reserve battalion , for training . He was appointed to the position of Lance Corporal while on training , and after the British troops suffered heavy casualties , Speirs was posted overseas on 29 May 1916 . The following month , he was promoted to the position of Corporal . Later the same year , he wounded his elbow , from either a gunshot or shrapnel injury . In April 1917 , Speirs took part in the Second Battle of Arras , for which he was awarded the Military Medal for bravery in May 1917 , before he was promoted to Sergeant in June . The following month , he returned home to Scotland on leave , but he soon returned to France and was killed during the Battle of Passchendaele on or about 20 August 1917 , aged 31 . He is buried at <unk> Farm New British Cemetery , near Ypres in Belgium . 
 = = Personal life and legacy = = 
 Speirs married Elizabeth Lennox Maben , known as Bessie , on 24 October 1906 in Maben 's father 's home in Glasgow . On 11 December 1907 , the couple 's first child , James Hamilton Speirs , was born . Speirs , who had still been recorded as a clerk at the time of the wedding , was now listed as a spirit dealer 's <unk> . Their second child , Elizabeth Maben Speirs , known as Betty , was born on 6 August 1912 . 
 Speirs was also a freemason . He was initiated into The Lodge Saint Vincent <unk> No 553 , based in Glasgow , on 11 March 1908 , just four days after he had made his only Scottish appearance . When his football career took him away from Glasgow , Speirs maintained links with the lodge . He became a Master Mason , then a life member on 12 February 1913 . 
 Following Speirs ' death , Bessie remarried during the 1920s and moved to the south of England with Betty and her new husband . His son remained in Scotland but later emigrated to Canada . In 2003 , his family auctioned Speirs ' 1911 FA Cup winning medal with his Military Medal and service medal . The FA Cup medal was sold for £ 26 @,@ 210 , a record for a cup medal . His daughter 's family 's descendants now live in Kent . 
 Bradford City fan Mark Lawn bought Speirs ' FA Cup winning medal . Lawn later became chairman of the football club and allowed the medal to be shown , alongside that of Frank Thompson , in the club 's museum . Speirs ' medals formed part of an exhibition to celebrate Bradford City 's centenary in 2003 at Bradford Industrial Museum and have also been on show at Imperial War Museum North , in Greater Manchester , as part of an exhibition linking sport and war . 
 = = Playing honours = = 
 Annandale 
 Glasgow Junior Cup : 1905 
 Rangers 
 Glasgow Merchants ' Charity Cup : 1906 
 Bradford City 
 FA Cup : 1911 
 Leeds City 
 West Riding Cup : 1914 
 = = Playing statistics = = 
 Senior competitions only . 
 League refers to either Scottish Football League or The Football League appearances . Cup refers to either Scottish Cup or FA Cup appearances . 
 = Super Metroid = 
 Super Metroid is an action @-@ adventure video game published by Nintendo , developed by its Research & Development 1 ( R & D1 ) division , and programmed by Intelligent Systems for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . It was released in Japan on March 19 , 1994 , in North America on April 18 , and in Europe and Australia on July 28 . The game was directed and written by Yoshio Sakamoto , and produced by Makoto Kano , with Gunpei Yokoi serving as general manager . It is the third game in the Metroid series . 
 Super Metroid is a direct sequel to Metroid II : Return of Samus ( 1991 ) . The player controls bounty hunter Samus Aran as she attempts to retrieve a Metroid larva stolen by the Space Pirate leader Ridley . The gameplay focuses on exploration , with the player searching for power @-@ ups that are used to reach previously inaccessible areas . It introduces new concepts to the series , such as the inventory screen , an <unk> facility , and the ability to fire in all directions . 
 Super Metroid received critical acclaim , and is widely considered by many critics and gamers to be one of the greatest video games of all time , owing to its use of atmosphere , gameplay , audio , cinematic elements and graphics . While the game sold poorly in Japan , it fared better in North America and Europe . Super Metroid became popular among players for speedrunning , and its gameplay and design influenced other games , including Shadow Complex and Axiom Verge . The game was followed by the 2002 release of Metroid Fusion and Metroid Prime , ending the series ' eight @-@ year hiatus . Since 2007 , Super Metroid has been released for the Virtual Console service on the Wii , the Wii U , and the New Nintendo 3DS . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Super Metroid is an 2D , side @-@ scrolling action @-@ adventure game , which primarily takes place on the fictional planet Zebes — a large , open @-@ ended world with areas connected by doors and elevators . The player controls Samus Aran as she searches the planet for a Metroid that was stolen by Ridley , the leader of the Space Pirates . Samus can run , jump , crouch , and fire a weapon in eight directions ; she can also perform other actions , such as wall jumping — jumping from one wall to another in rapid succession to reach higher areas . The " Moon Walk " ability , named after the popular dance move of the same name , allows Samus to walk backwards while firing or charging her weapon . The heads @-@ up display shows Samus ' health , the supply mode for reserve tanks , icons that represent weapons , and an automap that shows her location and its surroundings . 
 Throughout the course of the game , the player collects power @-@ ups that enhance Samus ' armor and weaponry , as well as grant her special abilities , allowing Samus to access areas that were previously inaccessible . The Morph Ball allows Samus to curl into a ball , roll into tight places and plant bombs ; the Spring Ball adds an ability to jump while in Morph Ball form . The Speed Booster can be used to run at high speeds , and can crash onto barriers and enemies . The Space Jump allows Samus to jump infinite times to cover great distances , and the Hi @-@ Jump Boots allow for a higher jump . The Grapple Beam can be used to swing across open areas . The X @-@ ray Scope is used to see items and passages through walls and other surfaces . 
 Super Metroid features an inventory screen , in which the player can enable and disable weapons and abilities , combine Samus ' weapon beams , or replenish her health by using acquired reserve tanks ; when the supply mode is set to " auto " , the reserve tanks are automatically used if Samus ' health is depleted . The save system from Metroid II : Return of Samus returns in Super Metroid , which allows the player to save and resume the game at any of the save points scattered around the planet . The player can also save the game at Samus ' gunship , which fully recharges her health and ammunition as well . Super Metroid has three endings based on the time taken to complete the game , which determine whether Samus poses with or without her suit . The best ending is achieved when the game is completed under three hours . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Super Metroid opens with a narrative by bounty hunter Samus Aran . Samus describes how a Metroid larva hatched from an egg and immediately imprinted upon her , believing her to be its mother . She brought the larva to Ceres Space Colony , where scientists believed that they could harness its power . Just after she left the colony , she received a distress call and returned to find the scientists dead and the larva stolen by Ridley — the leader of the Space Pirates . Samus escapes from the space colony when its self @-@ destruct sequence is activated , and follows Ridley to the planet Zebes . There , she searches for the stolen larva in a network of caves , and finds that the Space Pirates rebuilt and expanded their base on Zebes . 
 Along the way , Samus defeats four of the Space Pirate bosses , including Kraid and Ridley , and arrives in <unk> — the heart of the Space Pirate base . There , she encounters the Metroid larva , which has now grown to an enormous size . It attacks Samus and nearly drains all of her energy before it realizes who she is , and then departs . Samus recharges her energy and confronts Mother Brain , the biomechanical creature that controls the base 's systems and all the enemy forces on Zebes . Mother Brain nearly kills Samus , but is then attacked by the Metroid larva , which drains it of its energy and transfers it back to Samus . Mother Brain recovers and destroys the Metroid in retaliation , but is in turn defeated by Samus with the Hyper Beam — an extremely powerful weapon created from the energy given to her by the Metroid . Afterward , a planetary self @-@ destruct sequence begins , which Samus narrowly escapes . If the player rescues the <unk> and the Etecoons — the creatures Samus encountered earlier in the game — during the escape , they are shown leaving the planet in the distance . 
 = = Development = = 
 Super Metroid was developed by Nintendo R & D1 with a staff of 15 people managed by Gunpei Yokoi . The game was directed and written by Yoshio Sakamoto , and produced by Makoto Kano . Intelligent Systems , who co @-@ developed the original Metroid with R & D1 , handled the programming for Super Metroid . The game , which was released almost a decade after the original Metroid game , took half a year to gain approval for the initial idea , and actual development of the game took two more years to complete . When asked why the game took so long to make , Sakamoto responded , " We wanted to wait until a true action game was needed . [ ... ] And also to set the stage for the reappearance of Samus Aran . " Previously visited areas were added to Super Metroid to add a sense of familiarity that would satisfy players of previous Metroid games . 
 The developers ' primary goal was to make the game a " good action game " . They wanted the game to have a large map , but found it difficult to organize the amount of graphic data involved . Coming up with several ideas , the developers decided to break the game up into many mini @-@ adventures . New weapons are introduced to the Metroid series in Super Metroid , including the Grapple Beam , used to latch a laser beam onto the ceiling . The game is the first in the series to let Samus fire in all directions while moving , and it is among the first open world games to offer the player a mapping facility . The feature shows the outlines of rooms , locations of important rooms , and dots for special items . Shortly before the game 's release , the Entertainment Software Rating Board , a self @-@ regulating organization , was formed in response to the increasing violence found in games such as 1992 's Mortal Kombat . When asked whether he thought that recent game violence controversy would cause any negative backlash for Super Metroid , Sakamoto stated , " We don 't think there 's too much violence in the game . " Using Samus as an example , he explained that her purpose is to maintain peace in the galaxy , claiming , " It 's not violence for the sake of violence . " The game was demonstrated at the Winter 1994 Consumer Electronics Show , and was named the best SNES game at the show by GamePro . Super Metroid was distributed on a 24 @-@ megabit cartridge , making it the largest SNES game at the time of its release . The game 's opening dialogue was voiced by Dan Owsen . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for Super Metroid was composed by Kenji Yamamoto and Minako Hamano , and uses 16 @-@ bit versions of music from previous games . According to Yamamoto , he came up with the game 's theme by humming it to himself while riding his motorcycle from work . In addition to composing music , Yamamoto served as a sound programmer and created sound effects for the game . These simultaneous roles allowed him " to produce distinct Metroid music with a sound programmer ’ s ear , with a sound effect creator ’ s ear , and with the approach methodology and theory of a composer . " The arrangements and remixes of the game 's themes were used in Metroid Prime and its sequels , because Yamamoto wanted " to satisfy old Metroid fans . It 's like a present for them . " 
 Most of the tracks from Super Metroid were released in an album , Super Metroid : Sound in Action , on June 22 , 1994 . Published by Sony Records under the catalog number <unk> @-@ <unk> , it contained 38 tracks and covers a duration of 58 : 49 . The album also include the original Metroid tracks composed by Hirokazu Tanaka , and additional tracks arranged by Yoshiyuki Ito and Masumi Ito . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Super Metroid was released by Nintendo in Japan on March 19 , 1994 ; in North America on April 18 , 1994 ; and in Europe on July 28 , 1994 . It was re @-@ released in Japan on September 30 , 1997 , as a downloadable game for the Nintendo Power flash memory cartridge . It became available as a Wii Virtual Console title in North America on August 20 , 2007 , in Japan on September 20 , 2007 , and in Europe on October 12 , 2007 . In Super Smash Bros. Brawl , Super Metroid is also one of the trial games available in the " Masterpieces " section , which uses Virtual Console technology to emulate older hardware and have time constraints . Super Metroid was released for the Wii U Virtual Console on May 15 , 2013 ; it was initially available during the trial campaign for a cheaper price , and it was reverted to its regular price on June 13 , 2013 . Users who own the Wii Virtual Console version of the game will be able to get the Wii U Virtual Console version for a reduced price . The New Nintendo 3DS Virtual Console version was released on April 14 , 2016 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Super Metroid was met with widespread critical acclaim . Chris Slate of the Game Players video game magazine thoroughly enjoyed Super Metroid , claiming that it " easily lives up to everyone 's high expectations " . He was satisfied with how Nintendo mixed complex gameplay with " state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art " graphics and sound . Slate found the newly added auto @-@ mapping feature something that players really needed , saying that it was the only feature in Super Metroid that the original Metroid should have had . Concluding his review , Slate stated , " Action fans can 't afford to miss Super Metroid . [ ... ] You 'll want to play through again and again even after you 've beaten it . " Nintendo Power mentioned that the game " may well be the best action adventure game ever " , calling it the " wave of the future " . They praised the game 's graphics , sound , and controls , while their only negative comment was , " Even 100 megabits of Metroid wouldn 't be enough . " Electronic Gaming Monthly gave Super Metroid their " Game of the Month " award , comparing it favorably to the original Metroid and applauding the graphics , the many weapons and items available , and the music . Each of the four reviewers gave it scores of nine out of ten . GamePro criticized that the controls are often awkward or difficult and that many of the power @-@ ups are either lifted from other SNES games or simple upgrades of other power @-@ ups in the game , but praised the game 's massive size along with the auto @-@ mapping feature , saying it " makes a potentially frustrating game accessible to a far wider audience . " GamesRadar was pleased with the game 's " phenomenal " soundtrack , complimenting it as " one of the best videogame scores of all time " . 
 The former British video game publication Super Play , which had three editors review the game , also enjoyed it . The magazine 's Zy Nicholson noted that the game was better than his favorite game , Mega Man X , describing Super Metroid as " more of an experience than a game " . Comparing the game to the 1986 film Aliens , Nicholson felt that the game was best experienced when played in the dark with the volume turned up . He found the game so compulsive that he was tempted to play " without eating or sleeping " . The publication 's Tony Mott named the game 's atmosphere its best aspect , calling the game a mix of Turrican ( 1990 ) , Aliens , Exile ( 1989 ) , and Nodes of <unk> ( 1985 ) . Appreciating the game 's controls , Mott applauded Nintendo 's ability to create a refined gameplay . He concluded his review by calling Super Metroid " undoubtedly the best game I 've played this year so far " , predicting that anyone who plays the game would be " playing a game destined for classic status " . The third reviewer , James Leach , agreed with Nicholson and Mott that Super Metroid was what Mega Man X should have been . Concluding his review , Leach wrote that Super Metroid contained everything he looked for in a video game : " playability , hidden tricks , powerful weapons and <unk> evil baddies " . After summarizing the reviews , the magazine 's verdict was , " We all love this game . Super Metroid is absolutely marvelous and you should own it . " 
 IGN called Super Metroid 's Virtual Console version a " must @-@ own " , commenting that although the game was released nine months after the Wii launched , they felt that it was worth the wait . For players who have never played Super Metroid , IGN claims that they owe themselves as gamers to " finally find out about what you 've been missing all these years " . In his review for GameSpot , Frank Provo found it " absolutely astonishing that Nintendo let 13 years go by before making Super Metroid readily available again " , but considered the most important thing was that players " can now play this masterpiece without having to track down the original Super Nintendo Entertainment System cartridge or fumble with legally questionable emulators " . Despite admitting that the Virtual Console version was essentially " nothing more than a no @-@ frills , emulated version of a 13 @-@ year @-@ old SNES game " that was no longer cutting @-@ edge , he was still pleased with it and reiterated his belief that Super Metroid is " one of the best 2D action adventure games ever produced " . 
 When Super Metroid launched in Japan , GamesRadar 's Andy Robinson noted that it was released " at the wrong place , at the wrong time " . Struggling against more commercially popular games , such as Donkey Kong Country in 1994 , along with the launch of the PlayStation and Sega Saturn video game consoles , Super Metroid sold poorly in Japan . With the help of strong marketing from Nintendo , Super Metroid sold better in North America and Europe , and a year after its release , Nintendo placed it on their Player 's Choice marketing label . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 Super Metroid received several awards and honors . Electronic Gaming Monthly named it Game of the Month for May 1994 , gave it an Editors ' Choice award , awarded it as the Best Action Game of 1994 , and named it the Best Game of All Time in 2003 . In IGN 's yearly Top 100 Games of All Time lists , Super Metroid was ranked 3rd ( 2003 ) , 10th ( 2005 ) , 4th ( 2006 ) , and 7th ( 2007 ) . GamePro listed Super Metroid as one of the 15 Retro Games for the Wii You Must Play . Super Metroid was placed 1st on GamesRadar 's list of the Best Super Nintendo Games of All Time , beating out Chrono Trigger ( 2nd ) and The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past ( 3rd ) . Super Metroid was also named the best Super NES game of all time by ScrewAttack , beating out The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past ( 2nd ) and Final Fantasy VI ( 3rd ) . Classic Game Room 's <unk> Undertow series named Super Metroid the best Super NES game of all time as well , beating out The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past ( 2nd ) and Super Mario World ( 3rd ) . Nintendo Power named Super Metroid the best game in the Metroid series , beating out Metroid Prime ( 2nd ) and Metroid : Zero Mission ( 3rd ) . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After Super Metroid 's release , there would not be another sequel for eight years , as none of the games in the Metroid series up to this point had enjoyed the level of success that the Mario and The Legend of Zelda franchises had . Yokoi , who had involved in producing the first two Metroid games , left Nintendo after the commercial failure of the Virtual Boy , and died in 1997 in a car accident . During the series ' hiatus , fans eagerly awaited a Metroid title for the Nintendo 64 . Sakamoto considered creating an N64 title , but was not interested in being part of its development , mainly because of the console 's controller . Nintendo approached another company to make an N64 Metroid , but the offer was declined because the developers thought they could not make a game that could equal Super Metroid 's standards . Mario and The Legend of Zelda series creator Shigeru Miyamoto said that Nintendo " couldn 't come up with any concrete ideas " on the N64 game . Super Metroid 's co @-@ developer Intelligent Systems considered continuing the series on the Game Boy Color , but the idea was dropped due to the handheld 's technical limitations . 
 In 2002 , two new Metroid games were released by Nintendo , marking the return of the series after an eight @-@ year hiatus . The games were Metroid Fusion , a 2D side @-@ scroller developed for the Game Boy Advance by Nintendo R & D1 , the same team that developed Super Metroid ; and Metroid Prime , a first @-@ person action @-@ adventure game developed for the GameCube by Retro Studios — Nintendo 's first @-@ party developer based in Austin , Texas , and the first Metroid game to feature 3D computer graphics . Both Fusion and Prime garnered critical acclaim , with the latter winning several Game of the Year awards . After Metroid Prime , three more games in the first @-@ person perspective and a pinball spin @-@ off were released , including its sequel , Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes . 
 As Super Metroid gave players awards based on how long it took them to complete the game , it has become a popular choice for speedruns , a style of play in which the player intends to complete the game as quickly as possible for the purpose of competition . With the releases of Super Metroid and Konami 's 1997 game Castlevania : Symphony of the Night , the formula on exploration and weapon upgrading elements these games presented would form the foundations of the " Metroidvania " genre . The gameplay and design of Super Metroid influenced other games , such as Chair Entertainment 's Shadow Complex , and Tom Happ 's Axiom Verge . Marty Sliva of IGN writes that The <unk> , a puzzle @-@ platform game developed by <unk> Games , is " just might be the closest thing to Super Metroid 's atmosphere that I ’ ve ever played . " 
 Several ROM hacks of Super Metroid have been released by fans , which added new features that are not included in the original game . Super Metroid : Redesign , created by " <unk> " in 2006 , features new items , expanded areas and modified physics . In 2011 , a Japanese hacker " SB " released a ROM hack titled Metroid : Super Zero Mission , which intends to combine elements from Super Metroid and the later @-@ released Metroid : Zero Mission . 
 = Al @-@ Talaba SC = 
 Al @-@ Talaba Sport Club ( Students Sport Club , Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is an Iraqi sports club based in Al @-@ <unk> , Baghdad . Its football team competes in the Iraqi Premier League , the top flight of Iraqi football . Founded as Al @-@ Jameaa Football Club in 1969 , the club changed its name to Al @-@ Talaba in 1977 . The club 's home stadium is Al @-@ Talaba Stadium . 
 Al @-@ Talaba have won five league titles , with the most recent being in the 2001 – 02 season . They also achieved two FA Cups and three Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cups , one of the four clubs that won it the most of any Iraqi club . The club also became the runners @-@ up of the 1995 Asian Cup Winners ' Cup . Al @-@ Talaba have won two international club competitions : the 1984 Bangalore Championship and the 2005 Damascus International Championship . 
 Since it was first established , Al @-@ Talaba was owned by the University of Baghdad . From 1975 to 1993 , Al @-@ Talaba became owned by the National Union of Iraqi Students . Since 1993 , the club is owned by the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research and the minister is the honorary president of the club . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1964 – 1980 ) = = = 
 In 1964 , the University of Baghdad formed a football club made of the best football @-@ playing students in the university , under the name of <unk> <unk> Baghdad , to compete in the Universities of Iraq League . The first president of the club was Hassan <unk> and the first technical staff consisted of the manager , Ghani Askar , and his two assistants , <unk> Al @-@ Badri and Sami Al @-@ Saffar . The first competition that the team played in was the 1964 Republic Championship . 
 The sports club was founded on 17 December 1969 under the name of Al @-@ Jameaa , which translates to The University , to represent the University of Baghdad in official Iraqi competitions . By a special resolution from the Iraq Football Association , the team 's first participation was in Iraq Division One ( second level ) without needing to compete in either the second or third divisions . In their first season , 1970 – 71 , the team under the management of <unk> Muhsin finished top of Division One and were promoted to the League of the Institutes . However , in the 1971 – 72 League of the Institutes season , they finished in last place and were relegated back to Division One . 
 After three seasons , Muhsin left the club and Jamal Salih became the new manager , leading the team to promotion in the 1974 – 75 season . He introduced some players from <unk> <unk> Baghdad , who won the 1975 Universities League , to strengthen the team . After finishing eighth in 1976 , Al @-@ Talaba were the runners @-@ up in the 1976 – 77 season , five points behind the league leaders , Al @-@ Zawra 'a . Halfway through the 1977 – 78 season , on 27 December 1977 , the club changed its name from Al @-@ Jameaa to Al @-@ Talaba , which translates to The Students . They finished eighth in that season . 
 In 1978 , Jamal Salih was sacked by the board and was replaced with Abdul Wahab Abdul Qadir , who led the team through the 1978 – 79 season , their first as Al @-@ Talaba , in which they finished third in the league behind Al @-@ Shorta and Al @-@ Zawra 'a . For the first time , an Al @-@ Talaba player was among the league 's top three goalscorers with Hussein Saeed scoring six goals and Haris Mohammed scoring five . In 1979 , Al @-@ Talaba participated in the University Games , but failed to win the competition . 
 In the 1979 – 80 Iraqi National League , under the management of Khalaf Hassan , Al @-@ Talaba finished in third place again with 27 points . Two of their most significant wins that season were beating the eventual league champions , Al @-@ Shorta , 2 – 0 in the second round of matches on 26 September 1979 and beating Al @-@ Tayaran 1 – 0 in the 20th round on 24 April 1980 . In the 1979 – 80 Iraq FA Cup , Al @-@ Talaba reached the final for the first time but they were defeated on 8 February 1980 by Al @-@ Jaish 4 – 2 on penalties after drawing 1 – 1 . 
 = = = Golden years ( 1980 – 1986 ) = = = 
 Under the management of Ammo Baba , known as the " Sheikh of Coaches " , Al @-@ Talaba won their first Premier League title in the 1980 – 81 season ( while it was known as the National League ) . They finished the season as the league leaders with 17 points and had the goal difference of + 14 , the same amount of points and goal difference as Al @-@ Shorta , but Al @-@ Talaba were awarded the title on number of wins as they eight wins and Al @-@ Shorta had six . Hussein Saeed was the top goalscorer of the league with eleven goals . 
 Before the last round of matches , Al @-@ Talaba had 17 points and Al @-@ Shorta had 15 . Al @-@ Talaba winning in the last round and Al @-@ Shorta losing or drawing would secure the title for Al @-@ Talaba but , in the last match , they lost 1 – 2 against Al @-@ Tayaran and Al @-@ Shorta won 3 – 0 against Al @-@ Zawra 'a to create a tie on points and goal difference , Al @-@ Shorta had scored more goals than Al @-@ Talaba and therefore were expected to be crowned champions , but the Iraq FA ruled that the greater number of wins should take precedence and declared Al @-@ Talaba as champions . This was a controversial decision at the time as it was the first time such a phenomenon had happened in Iraqi football . 
 After achieving their first league title , Al @-@ Talaba succeeded in winning it again in the 1981 – 82 season under Jamal Salih in his second term as team manager . They finished the season as the league leaders with 34 points , two points ahead of second @-@ placed Al @-@ Tayaran . Hussein Saeed was the second top goalscorer with eleven goals behind Al @-@ Zawra <unk> <unk> Yousif , who scored fourteen . 
 In the 1982 – 83 season , Akram Salman was appointed as the team 's new manager . Al @-@ Talaba started the season with confidence having won the league in the last two seasons , but finished in second place , only one point behind the league leaders , Salahaddin . Salahaddin were undefeated in the league while Al @-@ Talaba had a single loss , by 2 – 0 loss to Al @-@ <unk> in the second round of matches . The championship was decided in the last match of the season when Al @-@ Talaba met Salahaddin with only one point between them , so Salahaddin needed a win or a draw to secure the title . Al @-@ Talaba scored first and dominated the match until , in the last thirty minutes , Salahaddin managed to equalise . The score remained 1 – 1 , which won Salahaddin the championship for the first time in their history . Hussein Saeed was the top goalscorer with 17 goals , eight goals ahead of another Al @-@ Talaba player , Rahim Hameed . 
 Al @-@ Talaba again finished second in the 1983 – 84 , with 36 points , three behind league leaders , Al @-@ Jaish . In 1984 , Al @-@ Talaba won its first international club competition , the 1984 Bangalore Championship , winning four games and drawing one out of the five games they played in the tournament , which was hosted in Bangalore , India . 
 The 1984 – 85 Iraqi National League was abandoned halfway through due to a perceived decline in public interest , described as becoming " non @-@ existent " , after the performances of the Iraq national football team in the 1986 FIFA World Cup qualification ( AFC ) and winning the 1985 Arab Nations Cup and the 1985 Pan Arab Games . Al @-@ Talaba were in third place with 21 points before the stoppage . They then participated in the Al @-@ Rasheed Cup which was set up by Al @-@ Rasheed after the abandonment of the league . The Al @-@ Rasheed Cup contained twelve of the fourteen top division clubs as well as four lower division clubs . Al @-@ Talaba reached the quarterfinals of the tournament but were knocked out by the eventual winners Al @-@ Rasheed . 
 After Al @-@ Rasheed was promoted to the top division , most of Iraq 's national team players signed for them , which made it difficult for the other teams to compete . Even so , in the 1985 – 86 Iraqi National League and under the management of Yahya Alwan , Al @-@ Talaba won their third league title against all expectations . They finished the season with 25 points , two points ahead of the favourites Al @-@ Rasheed . On 27 December 1985 , one of the most important matches of the season , which could have decided the championship , was played between Al @-@ Talaba and Al @-@ Rasheed in front of 50 @,@ 000 spectators at the Al @-@ Shaab Stadium . The match ended in a 1 – 0 win for Al @-@ Talaba with the goal being from a penalty taken by Hussein Saeed in the 63rd minute . Saeed was the season 's joint top goalscorer along with Ahmed Radhi and Rahim Hameed . Al @-@ Talaba participated in the 1986 Asian Club Championship after 14 years of stoppage , where they reached the final round but finished last in the table with a single point . Al @-@ Talaba also participated in the Saddam International Tournament in 1986 , hosted in Baghdad , but finished third in their group and failed to reach the semi @-@ finals . By winning the league , Al @-@ Talaba qualified for the 1986 Al @-@ Muthabara Cup but were defeated 2 – 1 by Al @-@ Rasheed . 
 = = = Ups and downs ( 1986 – 1992 ) = = = 
 Due to managerial changes and instability , the 1986 – 87 Iraqi National League ended with Al @-@ Talaba in sixth place , having totaled 49 points , under the consecutive management of Ahmed Subhi , Yahya Alwan and Jamal Salih . The season after , Al @-@ Talaba under the management of Yousif Abdul @-@ Ameer finished in eighth place with only 30 points . This was their worst National League performance since 1975 – 76 . 
 Al @-@ Talaba returned to winning ways under the management of Jamal Ali in the 1988 – 89 season , which was played in a different format to previous seasons . They finished fourth in the Baghdad Group , just ahead of Al @-@ Shorta , to qualify for the final tournament , where they finished second in Group 1 , behind Al @-@ <unk> , to qualify for the semi @-@ finals . In the semi @-@ finals , Al @-@ Talaba defeated Al @-@ Tayaran 6 – 5 on penalties after a 1 – 1 draw . In the final , Al @-@ Talaba faced their rivals , Al @-@ Rasheed , at the Al @-@ Shaab Stadium . The match ended 1 – 1 at full time with their goal scored by Ali Hussein . It went to penalties where Hussein Saeed missed his penalty and enabled Al @-@ Rasheed to win 5 – 4 . That season , Al @-@ Talaba also finished as runners @-@ up in the Al @-@ <unk> Cup , behind Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya . 
 In the 1989 – 90 Iraqi National League , which returned to the normal league format , Al @-@ Talaba finished in sixth place with 31 points , having won twelve matches , drawn seven and lost seven . In the cup , they reached the fifth round when they won at home to Al @-@ <unk> 1 – 0 and lost 3 – 1 away . This was Hussein Saeed 's final season with Al @-@ Talaba before he retired . In the next season , under the management of the club 's first and only foreign coach , Eddie <unk> , and Yahya Alwan , they finished second with 41 points . 
 In the 1991 – 92 season , Al @-@ Talaba finished in fourth place with 55 points . The vice @-@ president of Al @-@ Talaba , Salim Rasheed , organised a competition called the Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup in which only the top six teams in the league could participate with all the matches being played at the Al @-@ Shaab Stadium . Al @-@ Talaba won their first match against Al @-@ Shorta 1 – 0 and lost their second match against Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya 1 – 0 , qualifying them for the semi @-@ finals where they lost to Al @-@ Zawra 'a 1 – 0 after an early goal by Mohammed Jassim Mahdi . In the third @-@ place match , Al @-@ Talaba faced Al @-@ Karkh whom they defeated 4 – 3 on penalties after a 2 – 2 draw . The 1991 Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup ended with Al @-@ Zawra 'a as winners . 
 = = = Stability and Asian prominence ( 1992 – 2001 ) = = = 
 During the longest season in Iraqi football , the 1992 – 93 season , when every club played 69 matches , Al @-@ Talaba had Yahya Alwan as their manager in the first stage of the league , in which they won 14 matches , drawn seven and lost two , 1 – 0 against Kirkuk and the same score against Samarra . They completed the stage in third place with 35 points . Before the start of the second stage , Al @-@ Talaba signed Ayoub Odisho as their new manager , and he led them through the second stage to have exactly the same statistics as the first one , finishing with 70 points and in second place . In the third stage , the team won 18 matches , drew four and lost only once against Al @-@ <unk> . After 69 matches , Al @-@ Talaba finished top of the league with 110 points , having scored 130 goals and conceded 34 . In the 1992 Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup which was organised by the Iraq FA , Al @-@ Talaba finished the group stage as the Group Two leaders with four points . In the semi @-@ finals , they had to face Al @-@ Zawra 'a in a match which was considered a replay of the 1991 semi @-@ final which Al @-@ Zawra 'a won 1 – 0 . In this match , Al @-@ Talaba won 3 – 2 with a golden goal in the 100th minute during extra time . In the final against Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya , the match ended in a 0 – 0 draw which led to extra time when Alaa Kadhim scored the winning goal in the 104th minute . In the 1992 – 93 Iraq FA Cup , Al @-@ Talaba reached the final after defeating Haifa , Salahaddin , Salam and Samarra . In the final , they lost to Al @-@ Zawra 'a 2 – 1 . 
 After almost achieving a treble in the 1992 – 93 season , Al @-@ Talaba were managed by Hussein Saeed in the first half of the 1993 – 94 season and Ayoub Odisho in the second ; they finished in third place with 75 points . In the 1993 Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup , they came second in the Group One table behind Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya . In the semi @-@ finals , Al @-@ Talaba met Al @-@ Zawra 'a for the third time in a row and won 3 – 1 . In the final , they faced Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya for the second time and defeated them 2 – 1 at the Al @-@ Shaab Stadium , winning their second successive Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup under the management of Saeed . In the 1993 – 94 Iraq FA Cup , Al @-@ Talaba again faced Al @-@ Zawra 'a in the final but lost by the same score as in the previous season , 2 – 1 . In the 1994 – 95 Iraqi National League , Al @-@ Talaba finished fourth with 105 points , two points behind Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya in second place and Najaf in third . In the last round , Al @-@ Talaba faced Al @-@ Zawra 'a needing a win to finish second , but they lost 2 – 1 . In the fourth edition of the Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup , Al @-@ Talaba reached the final against Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya but lost 4 – 3 on penalties after a 0 – 0 draw . 
 In the 1995 – 96 season , Al @-@ Talaba finished in sixth place with 31 points , having won eight matches , drawn seven and lost seven . They reached the final of the 1995 Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup , coming up against Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya for the fourth time in a row in this competition , and Al @-@ Talaba won with a single goal scored by Abdul @-@ Wahab Abu Al @-@ Hail , achieving their third Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup success . After Al @-@ Zawra 'a achieved a double in the 1993 – 94 season , the Iraq FA chose the FA Cup runners @-@ up , Al @-@ Talaba , as Iraq 's representative in the 1995 Asian Cup Winners ' Cup . Under the management of Ayoub Odisho , they defeated Al @-@ Gharafa in the first leg in Doha 5 – 3 and lost in the second leg 1 – 0 at the Al @-@ Shaab Stadium . In the second round , they came up against <unk> and lost 2 – 1 in Tashkent before they turned it around to win 2 – 0 in Baghdad with goals from <unk> Mohammed and <unk> <unk> . In the quarter @-@ finals , Al @-@ Talaba won their first leg against Bahman in Tehran 1 – 0 with a goal by Sabah <unk> . At the Al @-@ Shaab Stadium , Bahman won 1 – 0 for a 1 – 1 draw on aggregate . The match went to a golden goal decider which was scored by <unk> . Al @-@ Talaba had now qualified for the semi @-@ finals where they were drawn to meet Kazma SC of Kuwait but Kazma withdrew from the tournament , refusing to play against Al @-@ Talaba because of political tensions between Iraq and other Persian Gulf countries , including Saudi Arabia and Kuwait , in the aftermath of the 1991 Gulf War . The AFC directed Al @-@ Talaba to play against Al @-@ Riyadh of Saudi @-@ Arabia but they too withdrew for the same reason , and that meant Al @-@ Talaba had a walkover through the semi @-@ finals . In the final , Al @-@ Talaba faced <unk> Hiratsuka in Kanagawa where they were beaten 2 – 1 after the winning goal was scored in the 81st minute by Hidetoshi Nakata . 
 In 1996 , the league was renamed to the Iraqi Premier League , and Al @-@ Talaba finished third in the 1996 – 97 Iraqi Premier League , winning 17 matches , drawing nine and losing four . They reached the round of 16 in the 1996 – 97 Iraq FA Cup and didn 't get past the group stage in the 1996 Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup . Under the management of Ayoub Odisho , in the 1997 – 98 season , Al @-@ Talaba finished in fifth place with 61 points , one point behind fourth placed Najaf FC . In the 1997 Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup , they reached the semi @-@ finals but were defeated by Najaf 3 – 1 on penalties . In the third place match against Al @-@ Zawra 'a , Al @-@ Talaba were beaten 7 – 0 which is the most goals ever conceded in a match by Al @-@ Talaba . 
 In the 1998 – 99 season , now under the management of Akram Salman , Al @-@ Talaba finished in second place , only one point behind the league leaders , Al @-@ Zawra 'a , with 75 points . In the 1998 – 99 Iraq FA Cup , they reached the final after beating Al @-@ Shorta in the semi @-@ finals . They were defeated by Al @-@ Zawra 'a in the final 1 – 0 . Because of Al @-@ Zawra 'a achieving the double , the 1999 Al @-@ Muthabara Cup was played between Al @-@ Zawra 'a and the league and cup runners @-@ up , Al @-@ Talaba , where they were defeated for the third time that season by Al @-@ Zawra 'a , who won 5 – 4 on penalties after a 2 – 2 draw . In the 1998 Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup , Al @-@ Talaba reached the semi @-@ finals where they were beaten by Al @-@ Naft . In the third @-@ place match , Al @-@ Talaba defeated Al @-@ Mina 'a 3 – 1 . In the 1998 – 99 Asian Cup Winners ' Cup , they managed to reach the semi @-@ finals where they lost to Al @-@ Ittihad and they then lost the third @-@ place play @-@ off to Kashima Antlers . Al @-@ Talaba finished fourth in the 1999 – 2000 season with 100 points . They also finished in the same position in the 2000 – 01 season with 60 points . They finished in fourth place in the 1999 Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup after a 3 – 0 loss against Al @-@ Karkh in the third @-@ place play @-@ off . They qualified for the 2000 – 01 Asian Cup Winners ' Cup but were knocked out in the first round by Al @-@ <unk> on away goals . In addition , they reached the final of the 2000 Al @-@ Quds International Championship , but lost to Al @-@ Zawra 'a by 4 – 3 on penalties after a 1 – 1 draw . 
 = = = <unk> Ahmed era ( 2001 – 2007 ) = = = 
 Al @-@ Talaba participated in the 2001 Al @-@ <unk> Arabian Championship before the start of the 2001 – 02 season ; they played four games , winning one , drawing two and losing one , finishing third in the tournament . After eight years without winning the league and six years without any trophy , <unk> Ahmed led Al @-@ Talaba to the 2001 – 02 championship with 91 points from 29 wins , four draws and five losses . They started the season by defeating Kirkuk FC 8 – 0 at Al Karkh Stadium , which is one of the biggest wins by Al @-@ Talaba , and ended it with a 6 – 0 win over Duhok at Al @-@ Shaab Stadium . They reached the final of the 2001 – 02 Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup , after defeating Al @-@ Karkh 1 – 0 in the semi @-@ finals , against Al @-@ Shorta where they lost with a single goal after extra time . Younis Mahmoud was the top goalscorer of the tournament . Al @-@ Talaba also won their first @-@ ever Iraq FA Cup that season , after meeting Al @-@ Shorta again in the final and defeating them with <unk> Hashim 's late 85th @-@ minute goal . Al @-@ Talaba also won the 2001 Baghdad Cup by defeating Al @-@ Zawra 'a 2 – 1 and won the 2002 Al @-@ Muthabara Cup against the league runners @-@ up , Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya , 2 – 1 after extra time . 
 Al @-@ Talaba finished as runners @-@ up in the 2002 – 03 season , finishing two points behind champions Al @-@ Shorta . In the 2002 – 03 Umm Al @-@ Ma 'arik Cup , they reached the final but were defeated 1 – 0 by Al @-@ Shorta . Al @-@ Talaba 's Ahmad Salah was named the best player of the tournament . They retained the Iraq FA Cup by defeating Al @-@ Mina 'a 1 – 0 with Alaa Kadhim 's goal in the closing minutes and then defeating Al @-@ Shorta in the final 1 – 0 at the <unk> Hariri Stadium with Ahmad Salah 's goal in the 26th minute . 
 In the wake of the 2003 invasion of Iraq , all of Al @-@ Talaba 's matches in the 2003 – 04 season were postponed and then cancelled , except two games which they won against Al @-@ <unk> before the league was abandoned for the season . Al @-@ Talaba were the runners @-@ up of the 2003 Baghdad Championship , defeating Al @-@ Shorta 2 – 1 in the semi @-@ finals and losing to Al @-@ Zawra 'a 5 – 4 on penalties after a 2 – 2 draw in the final , a match that saw three red cards in total . In the 2002 – 03 AFC Champions League , Al @-@ Talaba finished third in Group D with three points from three games after one win and two losses . 
 Al @-@ Talaba participated in the 2003 – 04 Arab Champions League , reaching the proper group stage where they finished in third place with three points . Before the start of the 2004 – 05 season , Al @-@ Talaba participated in the 2004 Damascus International Championship . They played three games in the tournament , winning two and losing one , being knocked out in the group stage . They also participated in the 2004 Tishreen Cup , one week after they were knocked out of the Damascus International Championship . In the Tishreen Cup , they finished top of their group to qualify for the semi @-@ finals . They defeated Tishreen SC 1 – 0 to reach the final , which they lost by 3 – 2 to fellow Iraqi club Al @-@ Zawra 'a . In the 2004 – 05 Iraqi Premier League , Al @-@ Talaba finished the first phase as leaders of Group Three with 28 points , having won eight matches , drawn four and lost four . They also became leaders of Group Two in the second phase with eight points , ahead of Al @-@ Naft who had seven points , after winning two matches and drawing two . In the semi @-@ finals , Al @-@ Talaba came up against Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya ; they were beaten in the first leg 1 – 0 and drew the second leg 2 – 2 . Al @-@ Talaba won the third @-@ place play @-@ off against Al @-@ Zawra 'a 4 – 2 on penalties after a 1 – 1 draw . 
 Al @-@ Talaba maintained their performance in the 2005 – 06 Iraqi Premier League by finishing the first phase as the leaders of Group Four with 24 points from seven wins , three draws and two losses . In the second phase , they finished in second place with seven points behind Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya , who had the same number of points but a better goal difference of + 4 against Al @-@ Talaba 's + 1 . In the last match of the second phase , Al @-@ Talaba faced Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya with a chance to retain the league leadership , but they lost 3 – 1 . From 2 – 9 September 2005 , Al @-@ Talaba participated in the 2005 Damascus International Championship , reaching the final against fellow Iraqi club Al @-@ Zawra 'a . Al @-@ Talaba won 5 – 4 on penalties . In the 2005 – 06 Arab Champions League , Al @-@ Talaba won their first round tie against Al @-@ Shabab by 3 – 1 in the first leg and 4 – 1 in the second leg . They faced Al @-@ Qadisiyah in the second round and were defeated 1 – 0 in the first leg and 2 – 1 in the second leg to be eliminated the competition . 
 On 30 November 2006 , the club 's president , <unk> <unk> , was kidnapped by an unknown terrorist group in Baghdad and , after three days , his body was found in the morgue . The administrative board elected the team 's striker at the time , Alaa Kadhim , as the new interim president until the club 's elections in which he won with 93 votes out of 97 existing on 15 March 2007 . Alaa Khadim was the club 's player @-@ president through 2006 – 07 . Aged 35 at the end of the season , he retired from playing in order to focus on administrating the club . 
 Before the start of the 2006 – 07 season , Al @-@ Talaba participated in the 2006 Shabab Al @-@ Ordon Arab Championship , a tournament organised by Shabab Al @-@ Ordon Club . Al @-@ Talaba played three matches in the tournament and drew all three of them , being knocked out in the group stage . In the 2006 – 07 Iraqi Premier League , Al @-@ Talaba finished the first phase in second place with 13 points , behind Al @-@ Zawra 'a with 14 points , with three wins , four draws , and one loss . Al @-@ Talaba managed to finish second in the elite stage with eight points from two wins , two draws and one loss , just ahead of <unk> with seven points . In the semi @-@ finals , Al @-@ Talaba lost to Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya 2 – 0 and then lost 2 – 1 to Najaf FC in the third @-@ place play @-@ off . 
 = = = Instability and crisis ( 2007 – 2013 ) = = = 
 Before the start of the 2007 – 08 season , Al @-@ Talaba participated in the 2007 Press Club Championship , hosted in Syria . Al @-@ Talaba drew both of their group stage matches , finishing second in their group to qualify for the semi @-@ finals . In the semi @-@ final , they lost 3 – 1 against <unk> SC and were knocked out . Al @-@ Talaba considered withdrawing from the 2007 – 08 Iraqi Premier League due to a financial crisis that led to their players not being paid all their salaries on time , but eventually decided not to withdraw . Under the management of Karim Saddam , Nabil Zaki and Karim Salman , Al @-@ Talaba finished in fifth place in the first phase of the league with 36 points , having won nine matches , drew nine , and lost four . They played poorly in the second phase , ending the phase in third place in their group with seven points with only one win , four draws , and three losses . They were knocked out in the round of 32 in the 2007 – 08 Arab Champions League , losing 4 – 0 on aggregate to USM Alger . In the 2008 – 09 Iraqi Premier League , with Abdul Ghani <unk> as Al @-@ Talaba 's manager , they finished in third place in their group with 47 points , only three points behind Najaf FC , with 14 wins , five draws , and five losses . 
 In the 2009 – 10 Iraqi Premier League , under the management of Radhi <unk> , Al @-@ Talaba finished as the leaders of Group B in the first stage with 68 points , having won 19 matches , drew 11 , and lost four . They withdrew in the twelfth round due to a ruling from the Iraqi Olympic Committee where they were set to face Baghdad that awarded the win . In the elite stage , Al @-@ Talaba ended up in second place of Group One as the best runners @-@ up of the three groups where they had ten points , the same amount of points as the first place , Al @-@ Zawra 'a , but they had the goals difference of + 2 and Al @-@ Talaba the goals difference of + 1 . If either Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya had beaten Naft Al @-@ <unk> or Al @-@ Shorta had beaten Najaf FC , Al @-@ Talaba would not have qualified for the semi @-@ finals , but Jawiya drew 0 – 0 and Al @-@ Shorta drew 2 – 2 . In the semi @-@ finals , Al @-@ Talaba won 1 – 0 to Erbil in the first leg and drew with no goals in the second leg . They lost in the final to Duhok SC with a late goal in the 82nd minute . 
 With Yahya Alwan as their manager , Al @-@ Talaba had one of the worst seasons in their history in the 2010 – 11 Iraqi Premier League , finishing the season in eighth place of the Southern group with 38 points , only one point away from relegation , with nine wins , eleven draws , and six losses . In the 2011 AFC Cup , Al @-@ Talaba finished in third place in their group with five points , having won one match , drew two , and lost three , therefore they were knocked out at the group stage . In the 2011 – 12 Iraqi Premier League , Al @-@ Talaba with Jamal Ali , Khalaf Hassan , and Karim Salman as their consecutive managers , finished the season in fourth place with 68 points , winning in 19 matches , drawing in 11 , and losing in eight . 
 In the 2012 – 13 Iraqi Premier League , under the management of Nazar Ashraf , Al @-@ Talaba returned to their poor performance of the 2010 – 11 season , finishing in the 14th place with 35 points , only one point away from relegation , with only nine wins , eight draws , and 17 losses . They saved the club from being relegated in the 33rd round against Al @-@ Naft where they won 2 – 1 and also because of Al @-@ <unk> 's loss to Zakho in the last round . Al @-@ Talaba passed the round of 32 of the 2012 – 13 Iraq FA Cup where they were up against Al @-@ Zawra 'a , drawing 0 – 0 in the first leg and winning 3 – 1 in the second leg before it was abandoned . 
 = = = Recent history ( 2013 – ) = = = 
 Al @-@ Talaba finished the 2013 – 14 Iraqi Premier League , under the management of Abdul @-@ Wahab Abu Al @-@ Hail , in eighth place with 31 points from 22 matches . The season after , Al @-@ Talaba finished in fifth place of Group Two with four wins , five draws , and seven losses before Abu Al @-@ Hail was sacked . In that season , they also participated in a friendly cup , the 2015 Baghdad Cup , which was played between the big four clubs of Baghdad . The mini @-@ tournament started at the semi @-@ final stage and each match was only 30 minutes long . Al @-@ Talaba were knocked out in the semi @-@ final by Al @-@ Zawra 'a , 4 – 2 on penalties after a 0 – 0 draw . 
 In June 2015 , the board signed Ayoub Odisho as the team 's new manager , 18 years after he first held the post in 1998 . The team also signed Younis Mahmoud , an Al @-@ Talaba Hall of Famer and the captain of the Iraq national team , twelve years after he left the club in 2004 , with a free contract to get ready for the 2015 – 16 season . The team finished the group stage in fourth place of Group One with 27 points with seven wins , six draws and four losses , getting qualified to the final stage , where they finished in third place with three wins , three draws and a loss . 
 = = Stadiums = = 
 In the 1980s , a stadium to hold 8 @,@ 000 spectators was built at Hai Al @-@ Qahira in Baghdad to host Al @-@ Talaba 's home matches . Al @-@ Talaba currently hold their training sessions at the University of Baghdad Stadium in <unk> , Baghdad , 15 km away from their main stadium . 
 In early 2014 , the owner of the club , the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research gave the project of building a new sports city to the Spanish company <unk> . They are constructing a main football stadium with a capacity of 16 @,@ 000 spectators and an area of 71 @,@ 150 m ² . The project also includes two tennis courts , a basketball court , a volleyball court , a <unk> pitch , a handball court , a hotel , restaurants , and a covered swimming pool . Al @-@ Talaba is defined as a sports club , not just a football one , and it has supported other sports at minor level only in the past . The foundation stone was laid by the former minister of higher education and scientific research , Ali al @-@ <unk> , in February 2014 . The cost of the project is estimated to be $ 84 million and the duration of construction was expected to be 30 months , meaning that by 2017 the Al @-@ Talaba Sports City should be open . Due to the financial crisis in Iraq , the the project was scratched after spending $ 4 million on designs . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 Al @-@ Talaba is one of the four " Popular Teams " in Baghdad , the others being Al @-@ Zawra 'a , Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya and Al @-@ Shorta . All the four Popular Teams have rivalries with each other . Al @-@ Talaba 's arch rivals are Al @-@ Zawra 'a and Al @-@ Quwa Al @-@ Jawiya because of their constant battles to win the Iraqi Premier League over the years . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Recent seasons = = = 
 The season @-@ by @-@ season performance of the club over the recent years : 
 As of 21 May 2016 . Rank 
 = Rank in the league ; P = 
 Played ; W 
 = Win ; D = 
 Draw ; L 
 = Loss ; F = 
 Goals for ; A 
