 = Goals against ; GD = 
 Goal difference ; Pts 
 = Points ; Cup = 
 Iraq FA <unk> 
 = Still in competition ; — = 
 Not attended ; 1R 
 = 1st round ; 2R = 
 2nd round ; 3R 
 = 3rd round ; R16 = 
 Round of sixteen ; QF 
 = Quarterfinals ; SF = 
 Semifinals . 
 = Homer 's Phobia = 
 " Homer 's Phobia " is the fifteenth episode of the eighth season of the American animated television series The Simpsons . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 16 , 1997 . In the episode , Homer dissociates himself from new family friend John after discovering that John is gay . Homer fears that John will have a negative influence on his son Bart and decides to ensure Bart 's heterosexuality by taking him hunting . 
 It was the first episode written by Ron Hauge and was directed by Mike B. Anderson . George Meyer pitched " Bart the homo " as an initial idea for an episode while show runners Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein were planning an episode involving Lisa " discovering the joys of campy things " . Oakley and Weinstein combined the two ideas and they eventually became " Homer 's Phobia " . Fox censors originally found the episode unsuitable for broadcast because of its controversial subject matter , but this decision was reversed after a turnover in the Fox staff . Filmmaker John Waters guest @-@ starred , providing the voice of the new character , John . 
 " Homer 's Phobia " was the show 's first episode to revolve entirely around gay themes and received a positive critical response both for its humor and anti @-@ homophobia message . It won four awards , including an Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming One Hour or Less ) and a GLAAD Media Award for " Outstanding TV – Individual Episode " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Needing money to pay for a repair after Bart damages the gas line , the Simpson family visits " <unk> 's " , an offbeat collectibles shop , hoping that it will purchase one of the family 's heirlooms ( an " authentic " civil war doll which turns out to be a decorative liquor bottle ) . Homer meets John , the antiques dealer , who explains that much of the merchandise is there because of its camp value . Bart and Lisa take an instant liking to John , and Homer invites him to the Simpsons ' house to see the campy items that the family owns . The next morning , Homer tells Marge that he likes John and suggests they invite him and " his wife " over for a drink some time . Marge tries to hint repeatedly to an oblivious Homer that John is gay , and when she eventually can 't she tells him face to face and Homer is horrified . Homer 's attitude towards John changes completely , and he turns against him , refusing to join his tour of Springfield . The rest of the family joins John and has a good time , but Homer is upset with the family upon their return . The rest of the Simpson family continue to enjoy John 's company , especially Bart , who starts wearing Hawaiian shirts and dancing in a woman 's wig . This makes Homer uneasy , and he begins to fear Bart is gay . 
 Homer endeavors to make Bart more masculine by forcing him to look at a cigarette billboard featuring scantily clad women in hopes Bart will be attracted to girls , but instead Bart gets the urge to smoke " anything slim . " Homer then escorts him to see a steel mill to show Bart a manly environment ; however , much to his surprise and dismay , the entire workforce is gay , and during their breaks they turn the mill into " The Anvil " , a gay disco . A desperate Homer insists on taking Bart deer hunting with Moe and Barney . When they cannot find any deer , they decide instead to go to " Santa 's Village " and shoot the reindeer in the corral , despite a tearful Bart being reluctant to do so . This backfires when the reindeer attack them . John , with the help of Lisa and Marge , uses a Japanese Santa Claus robot to scare off the reindeer and save the hunting party . Homer accepts John , more or less , and tells Bart , who is still unaware of his father 's concerns , that any way he lives his life is fine with him . After Lisa informs Bart that Homer thinks he is gay , Bart is stunned . The episode ends with everyone driving off in John 's car . 
 Just before the end credits a dedication to the steelworkers of America is shown , reading " Keep reaching for that rainbow ! " 
 = = Production = = 
 The original concept for the episode came from a few lines of show ideas written by George Meyer . One of them read " Bart the homo " , and Ron Hauge was selected to write the episode , with the story stemming from that line . The idea of using filmmaker John Waters as a guest star had been around for a while . Many of the staff were fans of his work , and showrunners Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein had planned to use him in an episode called " Lisa and Camp " , which revolved around Lisa " discovering the joys of campy things " . Their idea was combined with Meyer 's and it became this episode . The episode was originally titled " Bart Goes to Camp " , but was renamed because the joke was too oblique . Mike B. Anderson directed the episode , telling The Gold Coast Bulletin : " When I read the script I was enthralled , not only because of the visual possibilities , but also because the story felt very solid . It was engaging and surprising and I really put heart into that episode . " 
 Waters accepted his invitation to be a guest star instantly , stating that if it was good enough for the actress Elizabeth Taylor , who appeared in the season four episodes " Lisa 's First Word " and " Krusty Gets Kancelled " , it was good enough for him . He joked , however , about a negative reaction if his character would be made to look like fitness personality Richard Simmons . John 's design was based largely on Waters ' own appearance ; for animation reasons , Waters moustache was changed from straight to curvy , so that it did not look like a mistake . As thanks for his performance , the show 's staff sent Waters an animation cel from the episode , which he now has hanging in his office . 
 According to Oakley , the Fox censor objected to " Homer 's Phobia " being aired . The normal procedure is for an episode 's script to be sent to the censor and then faxed back with a list of lines and words that should be substituted . However this episode came back with two pages of notes about almost every single line in the show . The censors stated that they did not like the use of the word " gay " , or the discussion of homosexuality at all , and closed with a paragraph which stated that " the topic and substance of this episode are unacceptable for broadcast " . Usually the censor notes are ignored as the offending lines and problems are dealt with after the episode has been animated . In this case the entire episode was deemed a problem , so it could not be solved in this way . The staff asked Waters if he thought the gay community would find the episode offensive . Homer 's use of the word " fag " to insult John was his only problem , so the writers changed it to " queer " . The censor problems ultimately came to nothing as when the episode came back from animation in South Korea , the then @-@ Fox president had just been fired and replaced , with the censors being replaced as well . The new censors sent back merely one line : " acceptable for broadcast " . 
 The " gay steel mill " scene was written by Steve Tompkins . He first pitched that Homer and Bart would encounter longshoremen , but it was too much work to animate the lading of ships , so a steel mill was used instead . Tompkins also wrote a different third act for the episode , which was never produced . Instead of Homer , Bart , Barney and Moe going deer hunting and ending up at " Santa 's Village " they would go back to the steel mill . There , Homer would attempt to prove his heterosexuality by having a human tractor pulling contest with some of the steel mill workers . It was decided that it " didn 't really service the story " and was dropped . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode features numerous cultural references . The song " Gonna Make You Sweat ( Everybody Dance Now ) " by C + C Music Factory is played twice during the episode : first as the steel mill transforms into a disco , and second over the closing credits . Homer 's record collection includes music by The New Christy Minstrels and The Wedding of Lynda Bird Johnson , the albums Loony <unk> and Ballad of the Green Berets by Staff Sgt. Barry Sadler . The song that John picks out and he and Homer dance to is " I Love the Nightlife " by Alicia Bridges , and the song that Bart dances to is " The Shoop Shoop Song ( It 's in His Kiss ) " by Betty Everett . When John is introduced there is a plastic pink flamingo lying in the background , a reference to John Waters 's film Pink Flamingos . Items in John 's store include several buttons endorsing political campaigns of Richard Nixon , Dan Quayle and Bob Dole as well as an issue of TV Guide owned by Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis which features the title characters from the sitcom Laverne & Shirley on the cover . When John takes the Simpson family on a driving tour of Springfield 's shopping district , he points out a store where he claims that the Mexican film actress Lupe Vélez bought the toilet she drowned in . This is a reference to the urban legend that Velez was found dead with her head in the toilet the night of her suicide in 1944 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings and awards = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Homer 's Phobia " finished tied for 47th place in the weekly ratings for the week of February 10 – 16 , 1997 with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 7 . It was the fourth @-@ highest @-@ rated show on the Fox Network that week . The episode won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( For Programming One Hour or Less ) in 1997 . Mike Anderson won the Annie Award for Best Individual Achievement : Directing in a TV Production , and the WAC Award for Best Director for Primetime Series at the 1998 World Animation Celebration . Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation called it " a shining example of how to bring intelligent , fair and funny representations of our community onto television " and awarded it the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding TV – Individual Episode . Several of the episode 's animation cels were selected for display at the Silver K Gallery in Melbourne , Australia in 2001 . 
 = = = Critical reviews and analysis = = = 
 " Homer 's Phobia " has been cited as a significant part of The Simpsons ' exploration of lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( LGBT ) themes . The series made several references to homosexuality before the episode aired . In the 1990 episode " Simpson and Delilah " , the character Karl ( voiced by Harvey Fierstein ) kisses Homer , while the recurring character Waylon Smithers is often shown to be in love with his boss , Montgomery Burns , initially suggestively and since then more overtly . However , " Homer 's Phobia " was the first episode to revolve entirely around homosexual themes . Two later episodes that explored LGBT issues were " Three Gays of the Condo " and " There 's Something About Marrying " . 
 When the episode aired , the production team received " very few " complaints about its content , with most of the response being positive . Alan <unk> gave the episode a positive write @-@ up in the LGBT @-@ interest magazine The Advocate , calling it " vintage Simpsons . " Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood stated in their book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , that : " Only The Simpsons could do this so tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek that nobody could get in a tizzy about it . Very good indeed . " In the book Leaving Springfield , Matthew Henry praised the episode 's critiquing of " the most common misconception about homosexuality : namely that gayness is somehow contagious " , as well as its other themes . Catharine Lumby of the University of Sydney cited the episode as an example of good satire as it " managed to explore a lot of [ homosexual ] issues in quite a deep way [ ... ] without being overtly political " , which she claimed , along with the episode 's humor , made its anti @-@ homophobia message more successful than that of other gay @-@ themed shows like Queer as Folk . In his review of The Simpsons – The Complete Eighth Season DVD , Todd Gilchrist said that " Homer 's Phobia " " certainly qualifies as one of the all @-@ time greatest episodes . " 
 It was placed fifth on Entertainment Weekly 's top 25 The Simpsons episode list . In 2003 , USA Today published a top 10 chosen by the webmaster of The Simpsons Archive , which had this episode listed in tenth place , and it was again placed tenth on AskMen.com 's " Top 10 : Simpsons Episodes " list . IGN.com ranked John Waters 's performance as the ninth @-@ best guest appearance in the show 's history , with TV Guide naming him the third @-@ best film related guest star . In a 2008 article , Entertainment Weekly named Waters as one of the 16 best Simpsons guest stars . John Patterson of The Guardian wrote that Waters ' appearance " felt to me like a summit meeting between the most influential pop @-@ culture figures of the last 25 years . " 
 In 2002 , Off the Telly writers Steve Williams and Ian Jones named " Homer 's Phobia " one of the five worst episodes of The Simpsons , stating that it " leaves such a nasty taste in the mouth " , as Homer is " quite simply a bastard " throughout the course of the episode . The pair concluded by saying " this is a side of the show we 'd not seen before , nor particularly wanted to see . " In June 2003 , Igor <unk> sued the Russian television channel REN TV on claims that The Simpsons , along with Family Guy , were " morally degenerate and promoted drugs , violence and homosexuality . " As evidence , " Homer 's Phobia " was shown to the judge to prove that The Simpsons promoted homosexuality , and thus should not be aired again on the channel . The case was thrown out after one day . 
 = April 23 , 1998 Albanian – Yugoslav border ambush = 
 On the morning of April 23 , 1998 a band of Kosovo Liberation Army ( KLA ) fighters was ambushed by a much smaller group of Yugoslav Army ( VJ ) border guards near the Košare outpost , just west of Dečani . The fighters had been trying to smuggle weapons and supplies into Kosovo via northern Albania . Nineteen were killed in the ensuing attack , and a further two were captured . The VJ did not sustain any casualties . Some of the militants retreated back to Albania , while others managed to break through the ambush and make it past the Yugoslav border , into Kosovo . Following the clash , the VJ confiscated a large quantity of arms that the militants had been transporting . 
 Villagers in northern Albania and western Kosovo reported hearing explosions in the vicinity of the ambush and seeing helicopters flying overhead for much of the following day . Albanian officials later alleged that two of these helicopters had violated the country 's airspace , and Albania moved elite army units to the Yugoslav border in response . Yugoslav authorities accused Albania of backing the KLA . In response to the ambush , U.S. officials indicated that they would push for sanctions to be re @-@ implemented against Yugoslavia , and said they would look to freeze the country 's assets overseas . Some Albanian sources alleged that the men had not been ambushed , rather they were abducted and killed by Yugoslav security forces . Such claims could not be verified by Western journalists , and later that year , Amnesty International affirmed that the men were killed in an ambush while smuggling weapons across the border . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following World War II , Kosovo was given the status of an autonomous province within the Socialist Republic of Serbia , one of six constitutional republics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . After the death of Yugoslavia 's long @-@ time leader Josip Broz Tito in 1980 , Yugoslavia 's political system began to unravel . In 1989 , Belgrade revoked Kosovo 's autonomy . Kosovo , a province inhabited predominantly by ethnic Albanians , was of great historical and cultural significance to Serbs , who had formed a majority there before the mid @-@ 19th century , but by 1990 represented only about 10 percent of the population . Alarmed by their dwindling numbers , the province 's Serbs began to fear that they were being " squeezed out " by the Albanians , and ethnic tensions worsened . As soon as Kosovo 's autonomy was abolished , a minority government run by Serbs and Montenegrins was appointed by Serbian President Slobodan Milošević to oversee the province , enforced by thousands of heavily armed paramilitaries from Serbia @-@ proper . Albanian culture was systematically repressed and hundreds of thousands of Albanians working in state @-@ owned companies lost their jobs . 
 In 1996 , a ragtag group of Albanian nationalists calling themselves the Kosovo Liberation Army ( KLA ) began attacking the Yugoslav Army ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Vojska Jugoslavije ; VJ ) and the Serbian Ministry of Internal Affairs ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Ministarstvo unutrašnjih poslova ; MUP ) in Kosovo . Their goal was to separate the province from the rest of Yugoslavia , which following the secession of Slovenia , Croatia , Macedonia and Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina in 1991 – 92 , was just a rump federation consisting of Serbia and Montenegro . At first , the KLA carried out hit @-@ and @-@ run attacks ( 31 in 1996 , 55 in 1997 , and 66 in January and February 1998 alone ) . It quickly gained popularity among young Kosovo Albanians , many of whom rejected the non @-@ violent resistance to Yugoslav authorities advocated by the politician Ibrahim Rugova and favoured a more aggressive approach . The organization received a significant boost in 1997 , when an armed uprising in neighbouring Albania led to thousands of weapons from the Albanian Army 's depots being looted . Many of these weapons ended up in the hands of the KLA , which already had substantial resources due its involvement in the trafficking of drugs , weapons and people , as well as through donations from the Albanian diaspora . Cross @-@ border arms smuggling flourished ; the unit charged with securing the Yugoslav border was the 549th Motorized Brigade , under the command of General Božidar Delić . 
 The KLA 's popularity skyrocketed after the VJ and MUP attacked the compound of KLA leader Adem Jashari in March 1998 , killing him , his closest associates and most of his family . The attack motivated thousands of young Kosovo Albanians to join the ranks of the KLA , fueling the Kosovar uprising that eventually erupted in the spring of 1998 . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = Clash = = = 
 According to Delić , at 05 : 45 on the morning of April 23 , soldiers of the 53rd Border Battalion of the 549th Motorized Brigade encountered a group of 150 – 200 militants near the Košare outpost attempting to illegally enter Kosovo via northern Albania , just west of Dečani . Rebels had been massing at the Albanian – Yugoslav border for some time in anticipation of a renewed VJ offensive . Yugoslav authorities stated that the militants were " armed infiltrators " who had been undergoing training in military camps in Albania , and were attempting to smuggle weapons into Kosovo . According to Delić , the border patrol was greatly outnumbered by the militants . Armed with howitzers and rocket launchers , the patrol ambushed the armed group , sparking an intense exchange of fire . Clashes reportedly lasted all night , and the Kosovo Albanian residents of the border village of <unk> reported artillery fire and helicopters flying overhead the following day . 
 The VJ reported suffering no casualties in the clash . Nineteen militants were killed , one was wounded and a further two were captured . It was the single deadliest war @-@ related incident in Kosovo since the attack against Jashari 's compound the previous month . Initial reports suggested that anywhere between 16 and 23 militants had been killed . Nine of the fallen militants were from the village of Erec , near Dečani , about 9 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 0 mi ) from the Albanian border . Delić identified the captured militants as <unk> <unk> ( an English professor from Erec ; b . 1970 ) and <unk> <unk> ( an agricultural technician from Erec ; b . 1961 ) . The remaining militants either managed to break through the ambush and reach Kosovo , or fled back to Albania , according to Delić . Footage taken by the military , and later broadcast on Yugoslav television , showed a field strewn with guns , ammunition and the bodies of three militants . The VJ reported seizing 4 tonnes ( 3 @.@ 9 long tons ; 4 @.@ 4 short tons ) of weapons and ammunition , including 120 cases of landmines . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 During Milošević 's trial at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , Delić testified that an investigative judge from Niš visited the Košare outpost shortly after fighting had ceased , and conducted an on @-@ site investigation . Journalists were not allowed to visit the site due to " security concerns " . On April 24 , Western reporters saw VJ personnel digging mortar positions south of Dečani , about 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) from the Albanian border . The troops said they had been exchanging gunfire with the rebels over the previous two days . 
 The U.S. State Department acknowledged that it had received reports of " myriad deaths " along the Albanian border . State Department spokesman James Rubin called the situation in Kosovo " quite troubling , extremely dangerous . " U.S. officials said they would push for a freeze on Yugoslavia 's overseas assets and an international ban on foreign trade with the country in response to the violence . In turn , the Yugoslav military issued a statement requesting that the West put pressure on Kosovo Albanian leaders " to give up and denounce terrorism if they truly wanted a peaceful and political solution to Kosovo 's problems . " The statement also accused Albania of " training , infiltrating and illegally arming the terrorists , " and demanded that the West pressure the country to desist from such activities . Albania denied supporting the KLA insurgency , and alleged that two Yugoslav helicopters had violated its airspace . Yugoslavia denied that there had been any violations . Consequently , the Albanian Army and police were placed on high alert , and the country stationed elite troops along its border . 
 On April 27 , nine of the fallen militants were buried in Erec . Some 400 ethnic Albanians attended their funerals . The dead ranged in age from seventeen to forty @-@ five years old . Villagers claimed that some of the dead had been arrested days before their deaths and thus could not have been ambushed , as the Yugoslav authorities claimed . Such claims could not be independently verified by Western reporters . In a 1998 report , Amnesty International affirmed that the 19 men had been killed in an ambush while trying to smuggle weapons into Kosovo . 
 = Ryan Gosling = 
 Ryan Thomas Gosling ( born November 12 , 1980 ) is a Canadian actor , musician , and producer . He began his career as a child star on the Disney Channel 's Mickey Mouse Club ( 1993 – 95 ) and went on to appear in other family entertainment programs including Are You Afraid of the Dark ? ( 1995 ) and Goosebumps ( 1996 ) . He starred in the television series Breaker High ( 1997 – 98 ) as Sean Hanlon and Young Hercules ( 1998 – 99 ) as the title role . His first starring role was as a Jewish neo @-@ Nazi in The Believer ( 2001 ) , and he then built a reputation for starring in independent films such as Murder by Numbers ( 2002 ) , The Slaughter Rule ( 2002 ) , and The United States of Leland ( 2003 ) . 
 Gosling came to the attention of a wider audience in 2004 with a leading role in the romantic drama The Notebook , for which he won four Teen Choice Awards and an MTV Movie Award . His performance as a drug @-@ addicted teacher in Half Nelson ( 2006 ) was nominated for an Academy Award and his performance as a socially inept loner in Lars and the Real Girl ( 2007 ) was nominated for a Golden Globe Award . Also in 2007 , he starred in the courtroom thriller Fracture . After a three @-@ year acting hiatus , Gosling starred in Blue Valentine , earning him a second Golden Globe nomination . 2011 proved to be a landmark year for Gosling as he co @-@ starred in three mainstream films – the romantic comedy @-@ drama Crazy , Stupid , Love , the political drama The Ides of March and the action thriller Drive – and received two Golden Globe nominations . In 2013 , he starred in the crime thriller Gangster Squad , the generational drama The Place Beyond the Pines , and the violent revenge film Only God Forgives . His directorial debut Lost River was released in 2014 . In 2015 , he joined an ensemble cast for the financial drama The Big Short . 
 Gosling 's band , Dead Man 's Bones , released their self @-@ titled debut album and toured North America in 2009 . He is a co @-@ owner of <unk> , a Moroccan restaurant in Beverly Hills , California . He is a supporter of PETA , Invisible Children and the Enough Project and has travelled to Chad , Uganda and eastern Congo to raise awareness about conflicts in the regions . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ryan Thomas Gosling was born in London , Ontario , to Thomas Ray Gosling , a travelling salesman for a paper mill , and Donna , a secretary who qualified as a high school teacher in 2011 . His father is of English , Scottish , and French Canadian descent ; Ryan 's great @-@ great grandfather , George Edward Gosling , was born in Paddington , London , England . Gosling 's parents were Mormons , and Gosling has said that the religion influenced every aspect of their lives . Because of his father 's work , they " moved around a lot " and Gosling lived in both Cornwall , Ontario , and Burlington , Ontario . His parents divorced when he was 13 , and he and his older sister Mandi lived with their mother , an experience Gosling has credited with programming him " to think like a girl " . 
 Gosling was educated at Gladstone Public School , Cornwall Collegiate and Vocational School and Lester B. Pearson High School . As a child , he watched Dick Tracy and was inspired to become an actor . He " hated " being a child , was bullied in elementary school and had no friends until he was " 14 or 15 " . In the first grade , having been heavily influenced by the action film First Blood , he took steak knives to school and threw them at other children during recess . This incident led to a suspension . He was unable to read and was diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) , prescribed Ritalin , and placed in a class for special @-@ needs students . Consequently , his mother quit her job and homeschooled him for a year . Gosling has said that homeschooling gave him " a sense of autonomy that I 've never really lost " . Gosling performed from an early age . He showed interest in performing when his sister was a performer . He and his sister sang together at weddings ; he performed with Elvis Perry , his uncle 's Elvis Presley tribute act , and was involved with a local ballet company . Performing boosted his self @-@ confidence as it was the only thing he received praise for . He developed an idiosyncratic accent because , as a child , he thought having a Canadian accent did not sound " tough " . He began to model his accent on that of Marlon Brando . He dropped out of high school at the age of seventeen to focus on his acting career . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Child actor ( 1993 – 1999 ) = = = 
 In 1993 , at the age of 12 , Gosling attended an open audition in Montreal for a revival of Disney Channel 's Mickey Mouse Club . He was given a two @-@ year contract as a <unk> and moved to Orlando , Florida . He appeared on @-@ screen infrequently because other children were considered more talented . Nonetheless , he has described the job as the greatest two years of his life . Fellow cast members included Justin Timberlake , Britney Spears , and Christina Aguilera . Gosling has credited the experience with instilling in them " this great sense of focus . " He became particularly close friends with Timberlake and they lived together for six months during the second year of the show . Timberlake 's mother became Gosling 's legal guardian after his mother returned to Canada for work reasons . Gosling has said that , even though he and Timberlake are no longer in touch , they are still supportive of each other . Following the show 's cancellation in 1995 , Gosling returned to Canada and continued to appear in family entertainment television series including Are You Afraid of the Dark ? ( 1995 ) , Goosebumps ( 1996 ) and starred in Breaker High ( 1997 – 98 ) as Sean Hanlon . At the age of 18 , he moved to New Zealand to film the Fox Kids adventure series Young Hercules ( 1998 – 99 ) as the title character . In 2002 , he told the Vancouver Sun that he initially enjoyed working on the show , but began to care too much about the series , so it was no longer fun for him . He wanted to spend more time sitting with and devising a character as well as play a variety of roles , so he chose to enter film and not accept any more television work . 
 = = = Move to independent film ( 2000 – 2003 ) = = = 
 At the age of nineteen , Gosling decided to move into " serious acting " . He was dropped by his agent and initially found it difficult to secure work because of the " stigma " attached to children 's television . After a supporting role in the football drama Remember the Titans , Gosling secured a lead role as a young Jewish neo @-@ Nazi in 2001 's The Believer . Director Henry Bean said he cast Gosling because his Mormon upbringing helped him understand the isolation of Judaism . Kevin Thomas of the Los Angeles Times praised an " electrifying and terrifyingly convincing " performance while Todd McCarthy of Variety felt his " dynamite performance " could " scarcely have been better " . The film won the Grand Jury Prize at the Sundance Film Festival and Gosling has described it as " the film that kind of gift @-@ wrapped for me the career that I have now . " Because of the controversial nature of the film , it was difficult to secure financial backing for a full theatrical release and the film was instead broadcast on Showtime . The film was a commercial failure , grossing just $ 416 @,@ 925 worldwide from a production budget of $ 1 @.@ 5 million . 
 In 2002 , Gosling co @-@ starred in the psychological thriller Murder by Numbers with Sandra Bullock and Michael Pitt , where Gosling and Pitt portrayed a pair of high school seniors who believe they can commit the perfect murder . Bullock played the detective tasked with investigating the crime . Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly described him as " a phenomenal talent even in junk like this " while Todd McCarthy of Variety felt that the " strong and " charismatic " young actors were " let down by the screenplay " . The film was a minor commercial success , grossing $ 56 million worldwide from a production budget of $ 50 million . His second screen appearance of 2002 was in The Slaughter Rule with David Morse which explores the relationship between a high school football player and his troubled coach in rural Montana . Gosling has said that the opportunity to work with Morse made him " a better actor " . Stephen Holden of The New York Times described Gosling as " major star material " with a " rawness and an intensity that recall the young Matt Dillon " while Manohla Dargis of the Los Angeles Times was won over by his " raw talent " . The film was released in just three US theatres and grossed $ 13 @,@ 411 . In 2003 , Gosling starred in The United States of Leland as a teenager imprisoned for the murder of a disabled boy . He was drawn to the role because it was unusual to find a character that was " emotionally disconnected for the whole film . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times felt that the " gifted actor does everything that can be done with Leland , but the character comes from a writer 's conceits , not from life . " A.O. Scott of The New York Times noted that he " struggles to rescue Leland from the clutches of cliché " while David Rooney of Variety felt that his " one @-@ note , blankly disturbed act has none of the magnetic edge of his breakthrough work in The Believer " . The film grossed $ 343 @,@ 847 in the United States and was not released overseas . 
 = = = The Notebook and Half Nelson ( 2004 – 2009 ) = = = 
 Gosling came to the attention of a mainstream audience in 2004 after starring opposite fellow Canadian Rachel McAdams in the romantic drama film The Notebook , a film adaptation of Nicholas Sparks ' novel of the same name , directed by Nick Cassavetes . Gosling portrayed Noah Calhoun and commented on the role : " It gave me an opportunity to play a character over a period of time – from 1940 to 1946 – that was quite profound and formative . " Gosling sought to imbue his character with " quiet strength " and was inspired by the performance of Sam Shepard in Days of Heaven . Shepard co @-@ starred in The Notebook . Filming took place in Charleston , South Carolina , in late 2002 and early 2003 . Although Gosling and McAdams became romantically involved in 2005 , they had a combative relationship on the set . " We inspired the worst in each other , " Gosling has said . " It was a strange experience , making a love story and not getting along with your co @-@ star in any way . " At one point , Gosling asked Cassavetes to " bring somebody else in for my off @-@ camera shot " because he felt McAdams was uncooperative . The New York Times praised the " spontaneous and combustible " performances of the two leads and noted that , " against your better judgment , you root for the pair to beat the odds against them . " Desson Thomson of The Washington Post praised Gosling 's " beguiling <unk> " and noted that " it 's hard not to like these two or begrudge them a great love together " . The film grossed over $ 115 million worldwide and , with adjustments for inflation , it remains the most commercially successful film of Gosling 's career as of 2012 . Gosling won four Teen Choice Awards and an MTV Movie Award . Entertainment Weekly has said that the movie contains the All @-@ Time Best Movie Kiss while the Los Angeles Times has included a scene from the film in a list of the 50 Classic Movie Kisses . The Notebook has appeared on many Most Romantic Movies lists . 
 In 2005 , Gosling appeared as a disturbed young art student in Stay , a psychological thriller film co @-@ starring Naomi Watts and Ewan McGregor . In an uncomplimentary review of the film , Manohla Dargis of The New York Times said that Gosling " like his fans , deserves better . " Todd McCarthy of Variety felt that the " capable " McGregor and Gosling " deliver nothing new from what they 've shown before " . The film grossed $ 8 million worldwide . Gosling was unfazed by the negative reaction : " I had a kid come up to me on the street , 10 years old , and he says , ' Are you that guy from Stay ? What the f--- was that movie about ? ' I think that 's great . I 'm just as proud if someone says , ' Hey , you made me sick in that movie , ' as if they say I made them cry . ” Gosling next starred in 2006 's Half Nelson as a drug @-@ addicted junior high school teacher who forms a bond with a young student . To prepare for the role , Gosling moved to New York for one month before shooting began . He lived in a small apartment in Brooklyn and spent time shadowing an eighth grade teacher . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times described " a mesmerizing performance ... that shows the kind of deep understanding of character few actors manage . " Ruthe Stein of the San Francisco Chronicle drew comparisons with Marlon Brando and declared that " nobody who cares about great acting will want to miss his performance " . Roger Ebert felt the performance " proves he 's one of the finest actors working in contemporary movies . " He was nominated for an Academy Award . The film grossed $ 4 million at the worldwide box office . In 2007 , he was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences . 
 Gosling played an introvert who falls in love with a sex doll in the 2007 film Lars and the Real Girl . He drew inspiration from James Stewart 's performance in Harvey . Roger Ebert felt " a film about a life @-@ sized love doll " had been turned into " a life @-@ affirming statement of hope " because of " a performance by Ryan Gosling that says things that cannot be said " . Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post described his performance as " a small miracle ... because he changes and grows so imperceptibly before our eyes . " However , Manohla Dargis of The New York Times felt " the performance is a rare miscalculation in a mostly brilliant career . " He was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy . The film was a box office failure , failing to recoup its $ 12 million production budget . Gosling starred opposite Anthony Hopkins in the 2007 courtroom thriller Fracture . He originally turned down the role , but changed his mind when Hopkins signed on . Gosling noted that he was drawn to his character , Willie , because he had flaws and seemed like a real person . He spent time shadowing lawyers and observing courtroom proceedings in preparation for the role . Claudia Puig of USA Today declared that " watching a veteran like Hopkins verbally joust with one of the best young actors in Hollywood is worth the price of admission " . Manohla Dargis of The New York Times felt it was a treat to watch " the spectacle of that crafty scene stealer Anthony Hopkins mixing it up with that equally cunning screen <unk> Ryan Gosling ... Each actor is playing a pulp type rather than a fully formed individual , but both fill in the blanks with an alchemical mix of professional and personal charisma . " The film grossed over $ 91 million worldwide . 
 Gosling was scheduled to begin filming The Lovely Bones in 2007 . However , he left the production two days before filming began because of " creative differences " and was replaced by Mark Wahlberg . Gosling had been cast as the father of the murdered teenage girl and initially felt he was too young for the role . The director Peter Jackson and the producer Fran Walsh persuaded him that he could be aged with hair and make @-@ up changes . Before shooting began , Gosling gained 60 pounds in weight and grew a beard to appear older . Walsh then " began to feel he was not right . It was our blindness , the desire to make it work no matter what . " Gosling later said , " We didn 't talk very much during the preproduction process , which was the problem ... I just showed up on set , and I had gotten it wrong . Then I was fat and unemployed . " He has said the experience was " an important realisation for me : not to let your ego get involved . It 's OK to be too young for a role . " 
 = = = Widespread recognition ( 2010 – 2012 ) = = = 
 Following a three @-@ year absence from the big screen , Gosling starred in five movies in 2010 and 2011 . " I ’ ve never had more energy , ” Gosling has said . “ I ’ m more excited to make films than I used to be . I used to kind of dread it . It was so emotional and taxing . But I ’ ve found a way to have fun while doing it . And I think that translates into the films . ” He has also spoken of feeling depressed when not working . In 2010 , he co @-@ starred with Michelle Williams in Derek Cianfrance 's directorial debut , the marital drama Blue Valentine . The low @-@ budget film was mainly improvised and Gosling has said " you had to remind yourself you were making a film " . Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle felt he " brings a preternatural understanding of people to his performance " while A.O. Scott of The New York Times found him " convincing as the run @-@ down , desperate , older Dean , and maybe a bit less so as the younger version " . Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly noted that he " plays Dean as a snarky working @-@ class hipster , but when his anger is unleashed , the performance turns powerful . " However , Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe felt the performance was an example of " <unk> misdirected " . He was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama . The film was a box office success , grossing over $ 12 million worldwide from a production budget of $ 1 million . Gosling 's second on @-@ screen appearance of 2010 was in the mystery film All Good Things with Kirsten Dunst , based on a true story . He played the role of New York real @-@ estate heir Robert Durst , who was investigated for the disappearance of his wife ( played by Dunst ) . Gosling found the filming process to be a " dark experience " and did not undertake any promotional duties for the film . When asked if he was proud of the film , he replied , " I 'm proud of what Kirsten does in the movie . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone felt he " gets so deep into character you can feel his nerve endings . " Mick La Salle of the San Francisco Chronicle found the " chameleonic Gosling is completely convincing as this empty shell of a man " . Betsy Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times felt that the film belonged to Dunst , but noted that Gosling " is good too " . The film grossed $ 644 @,@ 535 worldwide . Also in 2010 , Gosling narrated and produced <unk> , a documentary that explores the cynicism in today ’ s youth towards social and political causes . 
 2011 saw Gosling expand his horizons by appearing in three diverse , high @-@ profile roles . He co @-@ starred in his first comedic role in the romantic comedy @-@ drama Crazy , Stupid , Love , with Steve Carell and Emma Stone . Gosling took cocktail @-@ making classes at a Los Angeles bar in preparation for his role as a smooth @-@ talking ladies ' man . Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post said his " seductive command presence suggests we may have found our next George Clooney " . Peter Travers declared him " a comic knockout " while Claudia Puig of USA Today felt he reveals a " surprising " " knack for comedy . " He was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy . The film was a box office success , grossing over $ 142 million worldwide . With adjustments for inflation , it is the second most successful of Gosling 's career . Gosling 's first action role was in Drive , based on a novel by James Sallis . Gosling portrayed a Hollywood stunt performer who moonlights as a getaway driver and he has described the film as a " violent John Hughes movie " : " I always thought if Pretty in Pink had head @-@ smashing it would be perfect " . Roger Ebert compared Gosling to Steve McQueen and stated that he " embodies presence and sincerity ... he has shown a gift for finding arresting , powerful characters [ and ] can achieve just about anything . Joe Morgenstern of the Wall Street Journal pondered " the ongoing mystery of how he manages to have so much impact with so little apparent effort . It 's irresistible to liken his economical style to that of Marlon Brando . " The film was a box office success , grossing $ 70 million worldwide from a production budget of $ 15 million . In his final appearance of 2011 , Gosling co @-@ starred with Philip Seymour Hoffman in the political drama The Ides of March directed by George Clooney , in which he played an ambitious press secretary . Gosling partly decided to do the film to become more politically aware : " I 'm Canadian and so American politics aren 't really in my wheelhouse . " Joe <unk> of the Wall Street Journal said that Gosling and Hoffman " are eminently well equipped to play variations on their characters ' main themes . Yet neither actor has great material to conjure with in the script . " In a generally tepid review , Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times asserted that it was " certainly involving to see the charismatic Gosling verbally spar with superb character actors like Hoffman and [ Paul ] Giamatti . " Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle felt there was " one aspect to the character that Gosling can 't quite nail down , that might simply be outside his sphere , which is idealism . " He was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama . The film grossed $ 66 million worldwide . 
 = = = Mixed critical notices and directorial debut ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 In 2013 's Gangster Squad , a crime thriller , Gosling portrayed Sgt. Jerry <unk> , a 1940s LAPD officer who attempts to outsmart mob boss Mickey Cohen ( played by Sean Penn ) . He was reunited with Emma Stone as his love interest , after their earlier pairing in Crazy , Stupid Love . Stone has said she hopes they will find more projects to work together on . A.O. Scott of The New York Times described the film as an excuse for the cast " to earn some money trying out funny voices and suppressing whatever sense of nuance they might possess . " Christy Lemire of the Boston Globe criticized Gosling 's " weird , whispery voice " and his " barely developed , one @-@ note " character . However , Betsy Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times felt that there was " a seductive power " in the scenes shared by Gosling and Stone : " But like too much else in the film , it 's a scenario that is only half played out . " In The Place Beyond the Pines , a generational drama directed by Blue Valentine 's Derek Cianfrance , Gosling portrayed Luke , a motorcycle stunt rider who robs banks to provide for his family . The shoot was described by Gosling as " the best experience I have ever had making a film . " A. O. Scott of the New York Times praised the performance : " Mr. Gosling ’ s cool self @-@ possession — the only thing he was allowed to display in “ Drive ” — is complicated , made interesting , by hints of childlike innocence and vulnerability . " Scott Foundas of The Village Voice was unimpressed : " Gosling 's character verges on parody ... Gosling uses a soft , wounded half @-@ whisper that tells us this is all some kind of put @-@ on ... It 's a close variation on the role Gosling played to stronger effect in Nicolas Winding Refn 's existential Hollywood thriller , Drive , where it was clear the character was meant to be an abstraction . " David Denby of The New Yorker remarked that he " reprises his inexorable @-@ loner routine " . The film has grossed $ 35 million worldwide from a production budget of $ 15 million . 
 Later that year , Gosling starred in the violent revenge drama Only God Forgives , directed by Drive 's Nicolas Winding Refn . Gosling undertook Muay Thai training in preparation for the role and has described the script as " the strangest thing I ’ ve ever read " . David Edelstein of New York Magazine stated : " Gosling looked like a major actor as a skinhead in The Believer and a star in Half Nelson . Then he stopped acting and started posing . His performance in Only God Forgives ( would God forgive that title ? ) is one long , moist stare " . Peter Debruge of Variety remarked that " the wallpaper emotes more than Ryan Gosling . " Stephen Holden of the New York Times criticized Gosling 's inability " to give his automaton any suggestion of an inner life " . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone commented that Gosling , while " meant to be a blank page for us to write on , often looks merely blank " . Betsy Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times was disappointed by Gosling 's performance : " Gosling moves through " Only God Forgives " like a mannequin waiting to be brought to life ... has never been less dimensional " . Sara Stewart of the New York Post was unimpressed : " Gosling reprises his man @-@ of @-@ few @-@ words persona ... Enough already . " 
 In early 2013 , Gosling announced that he was taking a break from acting , stating , “ I ’ ve lost perspective on what I ’ m doing . I think it ’ s good for me to take a break and reassess why I ’ m doing it and how I ’ m doing it . And I think this is probably a good way to learn about that . ” Gosling 's directorial debut Lost River competed in the Un Certain Regard section at the 2014 Cannes Film Festival . The " fantasy noir " , written by Gosling , stars Christina Hendricks , Ben Mendelsohn , and Matt Smith . The film received largely unfavorable reviews . Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian found it " insufferably conceited " and remarked that Gosling had lost " any sense of proportion or humility . " Robbie Collin of The Telegraph described Lost River as " mind @-@ bogglingly pleased with itself " while Variety 's Justin Chang dismissed the " derivative " film as a " train @-@ wreck . " 
 In 2015 , he played a bond salesman in the financial drama The Big Short , a Best Picture nominee at the 2016 Academy Awards . David Sims of The Atlantic felt he was " <unk> funny , somehow simultaneously magnetic and repulsive ; after years wandering the halls of mediocre art cinema , it ’ s wonderful to see him cut loose again . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone said : " Gosling , a virtuoso of verbal sleaze , talks directly to the camera , and he 's volcanically fierce and funny . " Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly felt he " oozes smarm and smartass charm . " However , Peter Keogh of the Boston Globe said he was merely " doing a fair imitation of Bradley Cooper . " 
 In 2016 , Gosling co @-@ starred in the dark detective comedy The Nice Guys , opposite Russell Crowe , and will star in the musical comedy La La Land , opposite Emma Stone . Gosling also filmed an appearance in the upcoming Terrence Malick film Weightless . The film 's co @-@ stars Christian Bale , Cate Blanchett , Rooney Mara , Haley Bennett , Val Kilmer and Michael Fassbender . When asked to provide details of the film or his role , Gosling replied , " I can 't comment . A ' Chatty Cathy ' that one . " Gosling had previously signed on to work with Malick in 2004 on the biographical film Che . However , Malick left the project to direct The New World and Gosling later dropped out with scheduling conflicts . It has been announced that Gosling will play an undisclosed role in the sequel to Blade Runner , which began filming in early July 2016 . 
 = = Music career = = 
 In 2007 , Gosling made a solo recording called " Put Me in the Car " available for download on the Internet . Also that year , Gosling and his friend Zach Shields formed the indie rock band Dead Man 's Bones . The two first met in 2005 when Gosling was dating Rachel McAdams and Shields was dating her sister , <unk> . They initially conceived of the project as a monster @-@ themed musical but settled on forming a band when they realized putting on a stage production would be too expensive . They recorded their self @-@ titled debut album with the Silverlake Conservatory 's Children 's Choir and learned to play all the instruments themselves . Gosling contributed vocals , piano , guitar , bass guitar and cello to the record . The album was released through ANTI- Records on October 6 , 2009 . Pitchfork Media was won over by the " unique , catchy and lovably weird record " while Prefix felt the album was " rarely kitschy and never inappropriate " . However , Spin felt the album " doesn 't reverse the rule that actors make dubious pop musicians " and Entertainment Weekly criticized its " cloying , gothic preciousness " . 
 In September 2009 , Gosling and Shields had a three @-@ night residency at LA 's Bob Baker Marionette Theater where they performed alongside dancing neon skeletons and glowing ghosts . They then conducted a thirteen @-@ date tour of North America in October 2009 , using a local children 's choir at every show . Instead of an opening act , a talent show was held each night . In September 2010 , they performed at Los Angeles ' FYF Festival . In 2011 , the actor spoke of his intentions to record a second Dead Man 's Bones album . No children 's choir will be featured on the follow @-@ up album because " it 's not very rock ' n ' roll " . 
 = = Charity work = = 
 Gosling is supportive of various social causes . He has worked with PETA on a campaign to encourage KFC and McDonald 's to use improved methods of chicken slaughter in their factories , and on a campaign encouraging dairy farmers to stop de @-@ <unk> cows . Gosling volunteered in Biloxi , Mississippi in 2005 , as part of the clean @-@ up effort following Hurricane Katrina . He is a supporter of Invisible Children Inc , a group that raises awareness about the LRA in Central Africa . In 2005 , Gosling travelled to Darfur refugee camps in Chad . He was a speaker at Campus Progress 's National Conference in 2008 where he discussed Darfur . As part of his work with the Enough Project , he visited Uganda in 2007 and eastern Congo in 2010 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gosling previously resided in New York City with his mixed @-@ breed dog , George . He co @-@ owns <unk> , a Moroccan restaurant in Beverly Hills , California . He bought the restaurant on an impulse ; he has said that he spent " all [ his ] money " on it , spent a year doing the renovation work himself , and now oversees the restaurant 's menus . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Gosling dated his Murder by Numbers co @-@ star Sandra Bullock for a year from 2002 to 2003 . He also dated his The Notebook co @-@ star Rachel McAdams from mid @-@ 2005 to mid @-@ 2007 , and they briefly reunited in mid @-@ 2008 . 
 In September 2011 , Gosling began dating his The Place Beyond the Pines co @-@ star Eva Mendes . He has two daughters with Mendes , born in September , 2014 and April , 2016 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 With Dead Man 's Bones 
 2009 : Dead Man 's Bones 
 Solo 
 2011 : " You Always Hurt the Ones You Love " – Blue Valentine : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Neville Page = 
 Neville Page is a British @-@ American film and television creature and concept designer . Born in England , he was raised in Manchester , and Chicago , Illinois . He was inspired by science fiction , including Star Wars , and makeup artist Rick Baker 's work in An American Werewolf in London . Page moved to Hollywood at the age of 17 , and gained roles as an actor . He graduated with honors in 1990 from the Art Center College of Design with a degree in industrial design , and went on to teach students in Switzerland . He focused his work on design consulting along with business partner Scott Robertson . 
 Page has worked as a concept designer on films , including Super 8 , Watchmen , Star Trek , TRON : Legacy , Cloverfield , and Avatar . In 2010 his works were featured in an exhibit titled " From Page to Screen : Character and Creature Design of Neville Page " at the Oceanside Museum of Art . He joined the panel of judges on the SyFy television series Face Off for its third season alongside Ve Neill and Glenn Hetrick . His works were again featured at the Oceanside Museum of Art in 2012 in an exhibit titled " The Beauty in the Beast : Crafting Creatures by Neville Page " , which highlighted his designs in films , including Green Lantern , Prometheus , and TRON : Legacy . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Neville was born in England , and grew up in Manchester , England . He was later raised in Chicago , Illinois . He grew up around artistic influences ; his parents worked as performers in the circus . From an early age he was motivated to pursue a career in science fiction due to his appreciation for Star Wars . Page was inspired by makeup artist Rick Baker and his film work , including An American Werewolf in London . 
 At the age of 17 , Page moved to Hollywood to further employment in acting . He gained minor roles on soap operas , including General Hospital . He took coursework at the Art Center College of Design , and in 1989 for a class on product @-@ design he created a machine apparatus similar to that used by the character portrayed by Sigourney Weaver in the film Aliens . He received his degree in industrial design from that institution with honors in 1990 . Following his graduation , Page instructed students at the Switzerland location of the Art Center College of Design . Along with his studio partner Scott Robertson , he began work in the field of design consulting . 
 = = Career = = 
 Neville instructs students at the Gnomon School of Visual Effects in Hollywood , in addition to the Art Center College of Design , in Pasadena , California . 
 He has worked as a concept designer on films , including Watchmen , Star Trek , TRON : Legacy , Cloverfield , and Avatar . Cloverfield director Matt Reeves noted they hired Page to design the " creature " that appears in the film , commenting , " We would go into his office and he would have what I affectionately referred to as his ' Wall of Terror . ' On the wall were all sorts of bits of color , and as you got closer suddenly your interest turned to revulsion because those pictures were like pictures of intestines and eyeballs and pieces of animals . What he was doing was having a biological , evolutionary basis for every aspect of the creature . " 
 From July through August 2010 , the Oceanside Museum of Art held an exhibition on Page . Titled : " From Page to Screen : Character and Creature Design of Neville Page " , featuring works by Page , including pencil drawings , three @-@ dimensional models , and digital creations . Page said he hoped the exhibit would educate the public about a different facet to filmmaking , " The general public tends to associate films with actors versus people who conceive and design and make the films . What is on display is one small facet of what it takes to make a movie , one of the many gears involved in the mechanism , neither more important nor less ... simply as important . " 
 Neville has served as a judge on the SyFy television series Face Off . He joined the judging panel on Face Off in season three , which launched in August 2012 . His fellow judges included Ve Neill and Glenn Hetrick . Page returned for the fourth season in 2013 . In October 2012 , Page returned to the Oceanside Museum of Art , with an exhibition titled , " The Beauty in the Beast : Crafting Creatures by Neville Page " . The exhibit which ran for ten weeks featured 45 works by Page from films , including Green Lantern , Prometheus , and TRON : Legacy . He was the creature designer for the 2013 American science fiction action film Star Trek Into Darkness . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In the 2011 book Star Wars vs. Star Trek : Could the Empire kick the Federation 's ass ? And other galaxy @-@ shaking enigmas , author Matt <unk> characterized Neville Page as a " creature guru " . Cloverfield director Matt Reeves spoke highly of his work with Page , " ... he is a genius . " Reeves characterized Page 's work on the " creature " in the film , " It developed in many different ways , and it came down to what Neville was doing , which was amazing . " 
 The North County Times referred to him observing , " Page is one of the most recognizable artists in the entertainment industry for his iconic designs . " Director of exhibitions and collections at the Oceanside Museum of Art , Teri Sowell , reflected of the exhibition featuring Page 's work to The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune , " These creatures are so embedded in our minds , we take them for granted . It 's really handcrafted art . " Film director J. J. Abrams commented on Page 's work on his film Super 8 , " the designer of the creature , Neville Page , did an amazing job and I think he gave us something that took a ton of iterations but he really nailed it " . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Joaquim José Inácio , Viscount of Inhaúma = 
 Joaquim José Inácio , Viscount of Inhaúma ( 1 August 1808 – 8 March 1869 ) was a naval officer , politician and monarchist of the Empire of Brazil . He was born in the Kingdom of Portugal , and his family moved to Brazil two years later . After Brazilian independence in 1822 , Inhaúma enlisted in the armada ( navy ) of Brazil . Early in his career during the latter half of the 1820s , he participated in the subduing of secessionist rebellions : first the Confederation of the Equator , and then the Cisplatine War , which precipitated a long international armed conflict with the United Provinces of the River Plate . 
 Throughout the chaos that characterized the years when Emperor Dom Pedro II was a minor , Inhaúma remained loyal to the government . He helped quell a military mutiny in 1831 and was involved in suppressing some of the other rebellions that erupted during that troubled period . He saw action in the Sabinada between 1837 and 1838 , followed by the Ragamuffin War from 1840 until 1844 . In 1849 , after spending two years in Great Britain , Inhaúma was given command of the fleet that was instrumental in subduing the Praieira revolt , the last rebellion in imperial Brazil . 
 During the 1850s , Inhaúma held a series of bureaucratic positions . He entered politics in 1861 as a member of the Conservative Party . He became a cabinet member and was given the position of navy minister . Inhaúma also became the first person to hold the Ministry of Agriculture portfolio , albeit briefly . The first professional firefighter corps in Brazil was formed during his tenure as agriculture minister . In late 1866 , Inhaúma was appointed commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the fleet engaged in the Paraguayan War . During the fighting , he achieved the rank of admiral , the highest in the Brazilian armada . He was also awarded a noble title , eventually being raised from baron to viscount . In 1868 , he was elected to the national legislature 's lower house , but never assumed office . 
 Although he successfully prosecuted his operations in the war against Paraguay , Inhaúma 's leadership was encumbered by his hesitating and procrastinating behavior . While in command in the war zone , he became mentally exhausted and contracted an unknown disease . Seriously ill , Inhaúma returned to the national capital in early 1869 and died shortly thereafter . Although historical works have not given much coverage to Inhaúma , some historians regard him among the greatest of the Brazilian navy officers . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Birth and education = = = 
 Joaquim José Inácio was born in Lisbon , Kingdom of Portugal . Although the date on his birth certificate was 30 July 1808 , his mother claimed that the correct birthdate was two days later , on 1 August . He personally affirmed that the later date was accurate , as did his younger brother , who was his biographer . Regardless , some biographers , including Joaquim Manuel de Macedo and Carlos Guilherme Haring , have persisted in citing the date mistakenly entered on the birth certificate . 
 Joaquim Inácio 's parents were José <unk> de Barros and Maria Isabel de Barros . In 1808 , the Portuguese Royal family moved to Brazil , then the largest and wealthiest colony of Portugal . Two years later , on 10 July 1810 , José de Barros arrived in the Brazilian capital , Rio de Janeiro . As a crew member of the frigate D. Carlota , he was charged with transporting what remained of the personal property of Prince Regent Dom João , later King Dom João VI to Brazil . José de Barros also brought his family on the voyage , including Joaquim Inácio , who was then one year and eight months old . Joaquim Inácio had an older sister named Maria and six younger siblings ( who were born after the arrival in Brazil ) , among them Bento José de Carvalho and Antônio José <unk> de Barros . 
 As was common at the time , Joaquim Inácio began his education at home and was later enrolled in Seminário de São José ( Saint Joseph School ) and after that , in Seminário São Joaquim ( Saint Joachim School ) , which became Pedro II School in 1837 . His teachers included <unk> da Cunha Barbosa , who later became one of the leading figures in the Brazilian independence movement . Joaquim Inácio chose to follow his father , a naval officer who achieved the rank of second lieutenant , in his choice of a career . On 20 November 1822 at age 14 , Joaquim Inácio was admitted as aspirante a guarda @-@ marinha ( aspiring midshipman or naval cadet ) at the Navy Academy . On 11 December 1823 , he graduated from the academy , majoring in mathematics , with the rank of guarda @-@ marinha ( midshipman ) . As he had in previous studies at other schools , Joaquim Inácio proved to be a brilliant student . Among his colleagues at the academy was Francisco Manuel Barroso da Silva ( later Baron of Amazonas ) whom he befriended . 
 = = = Rebellions in north and south = = = 
 When Prince Dom Pedro ( later Emperor Dom Pedro I ) , son and heir of King João VI , led the movement for the independence of Brazil , Joaquim Inácio was one of several Portuguese @-@ born residents who sided with the Brazilian cause and joined the armada ( as the Brazilian Navy was called in the imperial era ) . On 16 January 1824 , he began his service aboard the D. Pedro I , a ship of the line and flagship of First Admiral Thomas Cochrane , Marquis of Maranhão . Joaquim Inácio did not fight in any battles , as the Portuguese enemy forces had surrendered by that time . His baptism of fire came a few months later with the advent of the Confederation of the Equator , a secessionist rebellion in Brazil 's northeastern provinces . He was given the command of the cutter Independente and aided in the suppression of rebels in Rosário do <unk> , a village in the province of Maranhão . The rebellion was over by early 1825 , and on 25 February Joaquim Inácio was promoted to second lieutenant . 
 In June 1825 , Joaquim Inácio traveled to Brazil 's far south to quell a secessionist rebellion in the province of Cisplatina . The insurgents were aided by the United Provinces of the River Plate ( later Argentina ) , which led to the Cisplatine War . Joaquim Inácio served as first officer aboard the <unk> Pará , which was stationed in <unk> de Sacramento ( present @-@ day Colonia del Sacramento ) , the second most important town in Cisplatina . By late February 1826 , Sacramento was besieged by enemy forces . Joaquim Inácio was sent ashore and placed in charge of the Santa Rita battery , composed of sailors and cannons from the Brazilian ships . He took an active part in successfully repelling enemy attacks upon Sacramento on 7 February , 26 February and 14 March . 
 On the night of 10 March 1826 and in the midst of the siege of Sacramento , Joaquim Inácio boarded a small , unarmed boat accompanied by a single army officer and passed unnoticed through a line of nineteen enemy ships under cover of darkness . He reached the main Brazilian fleet on the morning of the next day and requested assistance from Vice @-@ Admiral Rodrigo José Ferreira Lobo , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the naval forces operating in the war . Joaquim Inácio returned to Sacramento two days later under heavy enemy fire along with three boats carrying supplies and arms . Although welcomed as a hero in the besieged town , he was passed over for a promotion . Disregard for this achievement was due to his lack of wealth and family connections , a burden which continued to thwart his career for years to come . 
 = = = Loss of Cisplatina = = = 
 In February 1827 , Joaquim Inácio was transferred to the crew of the corvette Duquesa de Goiás , in which he was to take part in the invasion of Carmen de Patagones , a village in the northeast of the United Provinces that served as a port for corsairs . The Duquesa de Goiás sank during the expedition , killing several crew members . Joaquim Inácio insisted on being the last officer to leave the vessel . He was next given the command of the schooner Constança . The invasion of Carmen was a complete failure , and the Brazilian land forces were defeated and taken prisoner . On 7 March , while Joaquim Inácio awaited news of the invasion , the Constança and another schooner were surrounded by enemy vessels . After a desperate battle , he was taken captive after refusing to surrender . 
 The Brazilian prisoners were placed together aboard a brig bound for Buenos Aires , capital of the United Provinces . They suffered severe hardship , starving and almost naked . Under the leadership of Joaquim Inácio , the Brazilians staged an uprising , took control of the ship and made prisoners of their captors . The ship successfully eluded two corvettes and one schooner @-@ brig that had pursued them , and sailed on to Montevideo , capital of Cisplatina , which they reached in safety on 29 August 1827 . Despite Joaquim Inácio 's daring rescue of Brazilian prisoners of war from both the invasion 's land @-@ based forces and from the two schooners , he was reprimanded by the commander @-@ in @-@ chief Vice @-@ Admiral Rodrigo Pinto Guedes , Baron of Rio da Prata ( who had replaced Rodrigo Lobo ) for the loss of the Constança . 
 Joaquim Inácio returned to Rio de Janeiro in October , his tour of duty having lasted three years . He was then sent back to Cisplatina aboard the frigate Niterói and in December he became the first officer of the barque Grenfell . On 17 February 1828 , he fought in the Battle of Quilmes . During the engagement , the Brazilian barque @-@ brig ( three @-@ masted barque ) <unk> e <unk> de agosto ran aground and was about to be boarded . Seeing this , Joaquim Inácio positioned the Grenfell near the threatened vessel and protected her until she could be freed by the rising tide . Both ships returned to the battle , which resulted in a Brazilian victory . Brazil 's efforts in the war were ultimately in vain , as it eventually relinquished Cisplatina , which became the independent nation of Uruguay . In July 1829 , Joaquim Inácio again returned to Rio de Janeiro , and on 17 October he was promoted to first lieutenant . 
 = = Rebellions = = 
 = = = Further uprisings = = = 
 On 17 March 1831 , Joaquim Inácio married Maria José de Mariz <unk> . Her father was an officer in the Portuguese navy whose own father and paternal grandfather had also been military officers . Joaquim Inácio and his wife had several children : Ana Elisa de Mariz e Barros , Joaquim José Inácio , Antônio Carlos de Mariz e Barros and Carlota Adelaide de Mariz e Barros . The couple also had a girl and a boy , named Constança and Manuel respectively , both of whom died in infancy . 
 A month and a half after Joaquim Inácio 's marriage , Emperor Pedro I abdicated and sailed to Europe . Since the former emperor 's son and heir Dom Pedro II was a minor , a regency was formed , and more than a decade of instability and turmoil ensued . On 6 October 1831 , navy artillerymen , held under suspicion of plotting a mutiny , escaped the presiganga ( prison ship ) in which they had been confined . Joaquim Inácio commanded the schooner <unk> which , along with other vessels , had been guarding the prison ship . Seeing that the artillerymen had set sail for Rio de Janeiro , Joaquim Inácio and a few men took a boat to warn the city . They encountered musket fire from the artillerymen , who then changed course for the nearby Ilha das Cobras ( Island of the Snakes ) in the face of strong opposition from the mainland . They were defeated the next day when three columns of men from the Volunteer Soldier @-@ Officers Battalion and Permanent Municipal Guard Corps invaded the island . 
 In January 1833 , strong winds forced the old and poorly built <unk> aground off Santa Marta beach in the southern province of Santa Catarina , where it sank . Joaquim Inácio was again the last to abandon ship . The entire crew was rescued , though he himself barely survived . Joaquim Inácio and his younger brother Bento José ( who was also a navy officer ) stayed afloat by holding onto a leather basket until reaching the shore . Afterward , Joaquim Inácio was court martialed and absolved of any wrongdoing . On 5 April 1833 , he was given command of the barque @-@ brig <unk> e <unk> de agosto ( the same ship he had saved in 1828 ) and sailed to the province of Maranhão . The last time he had been in the province was in 1825 . He remained stationed in the provincial capital ( São Luís ) as chief of the port until his return to Rio de Janeiro on 30 December 1836 . He was transferred to the steam barque <unk> in 1837 and later , on 19 July of the same year , to the brig Constança ( a different vessel than the schooner he lost in 1827 ) . 
 Joaquim Inácio departed Rio de Janeiro on 11 August 1837 for Salvador , capital of the province of Bahia . He had been charged with delivering the prisoner Bento Gonçalves ( leader of the rebellion known as the Ragamuffin War that had ravaged Rio Grande do Sul since 1835 ) to a military fortress . On 7 September 1837 , Joaquim Inácio was promoted to captain lieutenant . A couple of months later , the Sabinada rebellion erupted in Salvador . The rebels freed Bento Gonçalves , who escaped back to Rio Grande do Sul . Joaquim Inácio took part in the blockade of that city until the end of the rebellion in March 1838 . His lack of family connections and political influence again stymied his career in 1839 , when he was passed over for a well @-@ deserved promotion . 
 = = = Restoration of order = = = 
 On 23 July 1840 , Pedro II was declared of age and Joaquim Inácio was among the naval officers representing the armada in the delegation that greeted the young emperor . The rise of Pedro II to head the central government resulted in a slow , but steady , restoration of order in the country . On 17 December , Joaquim Inácio was named <unk> do arsenal de marinha ( inspector of the navy shipyard ) in Rio Grande , the second most important town in Rio Grande do Sul . The province was still troubled by the Ragamuffin rebellion . He led the sailors manning the trenches surrounding Rio Grande and fought the Ragamuffins when they attacked the town in July 1841 . 
 The Ragamuffin menace was halted when the government dispatched field marshal ( present @-@ day divisional general ) Luís Alves de Lima e Silva ( then Baron , later Duke of Caxias ) in 1842 . The Baron of Caxias had been the second in command of the Volunteer Soldier @-@ Officers Battalion when it put down the mutiny of navy artillerymen in 1831 . He and Joaquim Inácio established a close , lifelong friendship . Joaquim Inácio was promoted to frigate captain on 15 March 1844 . Soon afterward , Joaquim Inácio was relieved of command , at his own request , after becoming ever more at odds with his superior . On 2 April 1845 , he was assigned command of the frigate Constituição and in October returned to Rio Grande do Sul , which by that time had been pacified . He escorted the Emperor during his tour of the Brazilian southern provinces . Pedro II was favorably impressed with the character of the ship 's captain . Dark @-@ haired and of average height , Joaquim Inácio was joyful and pleasant . He was also hard @-@ working , intelligent and well @-@ learned . In addition to his native Portuguese , he could also speak and write in Latin , English and French . 
 In August 1846 , Joaquim Inácio sailed the Constituição to Devonport ( then @-@ known as Plymouth Dock ) in the United Kingdom , where the ship was to undergo repairs . He paid a visit there to the elderly Thomas Cochrane , Marquis of Maranhão , who queried him regarding Brazil 's state of affairs . Joaquim Inácio returned to Brazil in May 1847 and was assigned to bureaucratic tasks . In April 1848 , he was stationed , again at the helm of the Constituição , in Bahia province . Later that year , the Praieira revolt erupted in the nearby province of Pernambuco . In early November , Joaquim Inácio assumed the command of the fleet protecting Recife , capital of Pernambuco . He sent many of his sailors ashore to aid in the town 's defense . Recife was attacked by rebels on 2 February 1849 . The insurgent attackers were defeated , and soon afterward the last rebellion of Brazil 's imperial era came to an end . Joaquim Inácio , who fought in the streets with his men , later remarked : " It was not a battle , but a diabolical hunt from which I have escaped by miracle . " He was awarded with a promotion to captain of sea and war on 14 March . 
 = = Bureaucratic positions and politics = = 
 = = = Navy commissions = = = 
 On 26 May 1850 , Joaquim Inácio was appointed inspector of the naval shipyard at Rio de Janeiro . He played no role in the Platine War that pitted the Empire against the Argentine Confederation ( the successor state of the United Provinces of the River Plate ) , which lasted from late 1851 until early 1852 . He spent that period in the capital overseeing the construction and repair of several sailing vessels and steamships for the Brazilian armada . He was promoted to chief of division ( modern @-@ day rear admiral ) on 3 March 1852 . 
 Throughout the 1850s , Joaquim Inácio was assigned to a succession of mostly bureaucratic positions . After being removed from the office of inspector on 8 November 1854 , eleven days later he was named captain of the port of Rio de Janeiro ( for both the city and province ) . From 1854 until 1860 , he was appointed a member of various navy boards that dealt with matters ranging from promotions and equipment purchases to war spoils and standardization of naval uniforms . On 2 November 1855 , Joaquim Inácio was named adjutant ( equivalent to adjutant general ) to the navy minister . On 2 December 1856 , he was promoted to chief of fleet ( modern vice admiral ) and made a Fidalgo Cavaleiro da Casa Imperial ( Knight Nobleman of the Imperial Household ) , which raised him to a position ranking above the members of chivalry orders and below the titled nobles ( barons , counts , etc . ) . Joaquim Inácio also became a member and vice @-@ president of the naval council ( an advisory board ) on 24 July 1858 . 
 As had also been the case with his predecessors , the rank of adjutant was seen by Joaquim Inácio as an embarrassment . Inside the armada administration , it denoted the most important office , as it was filled by an officer who acted as the navy minister 's direct representative in the armada . Even so , the title of " adjutant " was itself perceived as demeaning . Joaquim Inácio later complained : " In what part of the world ... does the navy minister have a general officer as an adjutant ? What is an adjutant , other than a young officer who transmits orders , and even messages , he receives from his chief ? " He concluded : " Thus the title of adjutant cannot <unk> an officer who supervises the armada 's discipline and answers for it " . His request to have the designation for the position changed to a more appropriate title was ignored . He also felt slighted that many of his proposals to the navy boards regarding improvements were not acted on , and on 21 November 1860 , he asked to be removed from all positions . 
 = = = Conservative politician = = = 
 Freed from the demands of his former commissions , Joaquim Inácio spent his time translating Jean @-@ Félicité @-@ Théodore <unk> 's Et <unk> De La Mer ( The Diplomacy of the Sea ) from French into Portuguese . He was a cultured person whose penchants included poetry . He was also interested in plays and he was an elected member of the Dramatic Conservatory ( which sponsored the national theater ) from 8 June 1856 . Joaquim Inácio was very religious and he often mentioned God and Catholic saints in his letters . During the Paraguayan War in the late 1860s , upon learning that he was being mocked and criticized by the Paraguayans for his religious devotion , Joaquim Inácio merely replied : " Leave me my beliefs and let them call me whatever they want . " He was an enthusiastic member of the Santa Casa de Misericórdia ( Holy House of Mercy ) , a charitable organization in Rio de Janeiro . When the national capital was ravaged by yellow fever in 1854 , he went from door to door asking for donations to help the sick . 
 Despite his staunch Catholicism , Joaquim Inácio became a freemason , joining the Loja <unk> <unk> ( Freemasonry Integrity Lodge ) in 1828 . He eventually rose to the highest ranks of that lodge , becoming Deputy Grand Master in 1863 . He was also accorded membership in other Brazilian lodges , became an honorary member of Portuguese Freemasonry and was a representative of the Grand Orient de France in Brazil . Freemasonry opened new venues for Joaquim Inácio , providing him with connections and influence he had previously lacked and which were essential to advancing his political career . On 2 March 1861 , his friend Caxias , also a freemason and staunch Catholic , became prime minister . He invited Joaquim Inácio , who became a member of the Conservative Party , to assume the naval ministry 's portfolio . It was commonplace in Brazil for high @-@ ranking military officers to engage in politics . 
 He served as the first head of the newly created Ministry of Agriculture , Commerce and Public Works from 2 March 1861 until 21 April . Although created by a decree of 1856 ( following a suggestion made by Joaquim Inácio in 1851 ) , the first professional firefighter corps in Brazil was effectively formed under his tenure at the head of the Ministry of Agriculture . The cabinet resigned on 24 May 1862 after losing its majority in the Chamber of Deputies ( the national legislature 's lower house ) . Joaquim Inácio returned to his position on the naval council on 2 July and left that post when he became a member of the Supreme Military and Justice Council on 2 October 1864 . 
 = = Paraguayan War = = 
 = = = Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief = = = 
 In December 1864 , the dictator of Paraguay , Francisco Solano López , ordered an invasion of the Brazilian province of Mato Grosso ( currently the state of Mato Grosso do Sul ) , triggering the Paraguayan War . Four months later , Paraguayan troops invaded Argentine territory in preparation for an attack on Rio Grande do Sul . The invasions resulted in an alliance between Brazil , Argentina and Uruguay . Following the resignation of Caxias 's government in 1862 , successor cabinets were headed by the Progressive League , the rival of the Conservative Party . As a Conservative , Joaquim Inácio found himself largely sidelined . He humorously commented that the Progressives " have not lifted my excommunication by giving me a better ration of soup [ i.e. , any command of importance ] , thus I shall remain on a diet . " In October 1865 , Joaquim Inácio was sent to the north of Brazil , charged with recruiting volunteers , but soon resigned that commission and opted to devote his time to the Holy House of Mercy . 
 The allies invaded Paraguay in April 1866 , but their advance by land was blocked by fortifications at Humaitá and naval forces faced the obstacle of entrenched defenses along the Paraguay River . The Progressive cabinet decided to create a unified command over Brazilian land and naval forces operating in Paraguay . It entrusted the command to Caxias , who in turn requested that Joaquim Inácio head the Brazilian fleet in Paraguay . On 22 December , Joaquim Inácio replaced his close friend Vice @-@ Admiral Joaquim Marques Lisboa ( then @-@ Baron and later Marquis of Tamandaré ) as fleet commander . For the sake of appearances , the new position was nominally pro tempore , since Tamandaré had virtually been forced to resign . On 5 February 1867 , Joaquim Inácio was promoted to vice @-@ admiral ( equivalent to present @-@ day squadron vice @-@ admiral ) , and sixteen days later he was made permanent commander @-@ in @-@ chief . 
 The allied objective was to encircle Humaitá and force its capitulation by siege . On 15 August 1867 , under heavy fire , Brazilian warships forced the passage of Curupayty , an outer line of defense of Humaitá . Joaquim Inácio commanded from the bridge of the ironclad Brasil , which engaged in the operation . Joaquim Inácio was afterwards awarded the noble title of Barão de Inhaúma ( Baron of Inhaúma ) on 27 September . The name came from Inhaúma , a region ( now a neighborhood ) near the city of Rio de Janeiro . His wife had grown up there , and he himself owned a coffee farm in the area . Those landowners , including the Baron of Inhaúma , who produced coffee ( the most valuable Brazilian export commodity ) were the wealthiest and most influential people in Brazil 's southeast . They were owners of slaves , and many of them formed the core of the Conservative Party ( the ultraconservative wing called saquarema ) and were connected to each other through family and political ties . 
 = = = Operations on the Paraguay River = = = 
 After Inhaúma had punched through the defenses at Curupayty , he encountered three large chains stretched across the river at Humaitá that prevented further progress upriver beyond the fortress . He anchored his ships in a cove that became known as Porto Elisiário ( Elisiário Port ) . For six months , the Brazilian warships remained stationed between Curupayty and Humaitá , bombarding both strongholds without causing any serious damage . The encirclement of Humaitá could not be completed until the Allies gained full control of the river . The Allied commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Argentine president Bartolomé Mitre , had pressed Inhaúma for months to execute that goal . The Brazilian had , however , developed second thoughts about the enterprise and procrastinated . He believed — unfairly — that Mitre would welcome the destruction of Brazil 's warships , severely weakening the Empire militarily and geopolitically . 
 There were other factors that prompted Inhaúma to have second thoughts . The level of the river had fallen and as the encirclement on land had not been completed , even " if the Brazilian ships did manage to get past the batteries they could well become stranded , with little or no fuel and possibly no supporting Allied troops on the banks " . Inhaúma also argued that the ironclads were too large and had limited manoeuvrability in the narrow channel at Humaitá , being better suited to seagoing operations than on a river . He preferred to wait for the shallow @-@ draft monitors that were under construction in Rio de Janeiro . 
 After a year in Paraguay , Inhaúma had also become ill with a lingering disease ( not positively identified , although malaria is suspected ) and had fallen into depression , becoming what historian Francisco Doratioto themed " no more than a ghost of an admiral " . By January 1868 Humaitá had been completely cut off from land reinforcement and the shallow @-@ draft monitors had arrived . Both Inhaúma and his officers balked at putting the new vessels into action . It was Inhaúma 's son @-@ in @-@ law , Captain of Sea and War <unk> Carlos de Carvalho ( soon Baron of Passagem ) who volunteered to lead a squadron . On 19 February , the Brazilian ironclads successfully made a passage up the Paraguay River under heavy fire , gaining full control of the river and thus isolating Humaitá from resupply by water . 
 On 2 March 1868 , parties of Paraguayans in canoes camouflaged by foliage and brush boarded Brazilian ironclads anchored in <unk> . The imperiled vessels dispatched a boat to warn Inhaúma , who was aboard the flagship Brasil downriver at Elisiário Port . By the time he arrived , the Brazilians had locked themselves inside their ships and the Paraguayans had taken control of the decks . Inhaúma ordered the Brasil and two other vessels to open fire , decimating the Paraguayans and saving the ironclads . A day later he was raised from baron to viscount by Pedro II . On 25 July , the allies occupied Humaitá after the Paraguayans had abandoned it and retreated further upriver . 
 = = = Illness and death = = = 
 Unknown to Inhaúma and only a few days before the fall of Humaitá , the Progressive cabinet in Rio de Janeiro had resigned following a political crisis . The Emperor called the Conservatives , under the leadership of Joaquim Rodrigues Torres , Viscount of Itaboraí , back into power on 16 July 1868 . During the Progressive administration , Inhaúma had developed a trusting friendship with the able , young Navy Minister Afonso Celso de Assis Figueiredo ( later Viscount of Ouro Preto ) . The return of the Conservatives resulted in Inhaúma 's election to the Chamber of Deputies as a representative for the province of Amazonas , although he would never assume office . In the new political climate , Inhaúma was also considered a contender for a senatorial chair representing the province of Rio de Janeiro . 
 Meanwhile , Caxias had organized an assault on the new Paraguayan defenses which López had thrown up along the <unk> , south of Asunción ( Paraguay 's capital ) . This stream afforded a strong defensive position which was anchored by the Paraguay River and by the swampy jungle of the Chaco region . Caxias had a road cut through the supposedly impenetrable Chaco , located on the other side of the Paraguayan River where the Allied army was camped . The Brazilian ships carried the Allied troops across the river , where they moved over the road which had been finished in December . The Allied forces outflanked the Paraguayan lines and attacked from the rear . The combined allied forces annihilated the Paraguayan army and on 1 January 1869 Asunción was occupied . 
 Inhaúma reached the Paraguayan national capital on 3 January 1869 , increasingly sick and depressed . He lamented in his private journal that the conflict " cannot be called a war but a killing of people , extermination of the Paraguayan nation . " Inhaúma temporarily transferred his command to his son @-@ in @-@ law , the Baron of Passagem , on 16 January . On 28 January , Inhaúma was officially discharged from that post and promoted to admiral , the highest rank in the armada . Having received permission from the Conservative cabinet to depart , he left for Rio de Janeiro on 8 February , arriving ten days later . Although welcomed " with the greatest demonstrations of enthusiasm " , Inhaúma was so weak that he had to be carried from the docks to his carriage . Alfredo d 'Escragnolle Taunay , Viscount of Taunay in his memoirs said that Pedro II , upon learning of Inhaúma 's arrival , refused to pay a visit to him . It had become common for officers to claim sickness so that they could withdraw from the war . The Emperor soon realized that Inhaúma was indeed very ill and asked for daily updates on his condition . 
 Inhaúma 's health steadily deteriorated , and he died on 8 March at around 04 : 30 in the morning . According to historian Eugênio Vilhena de Morais , malaria was the cause of death . His coffin was placed in a carriage reserved for the funerals of members of the imperial family . It was escorted by three cavalry squadrons and followed by three hundred carriages , while onlookers crowded both sides of the streets along the procession 's route . Tamandaré and the future Viscount of Ouro Preto were among the pallbearers . He was buried in the São Francisco Xavier cemetery ( popularly known as <unk> Cemetery ) in Rio de Janeiro . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Soon after his death , the Viscount of Inhaúma was hailed as " one of the greatest figures of the Brazilian armada " in the Brazilian Senate . He was extremely popular in the armada and was fondly called " Uncle Joaquim " by his subordinates . The Brazilian navy 's slang phrase , " <unk> na <unk> " , which meant to behave correctly , was derived from his name . Since 1870 , no comprehensive biography of Inhaúma has been published , even though he , according to Francisco Eduardo Alves de <unk> , " is , and always will be , important to the navy of Brazil for his example as a modest and dedicated chief . " The Inhaúma @-@ class corvette , built in the 1980s and 1990s , was named after him . Despite the scant attention paid him in historical literature , there are some historians who share a highly positive view of Inhaúma . Américo <unk> Lacombe said that he was " one of the greatest names in our [ Brazilian ] military history " . Max Justo Guedes regarded him among the greatest imperial navy officers , and Adolfo <unk> considered him one of the greatest navy officers in Brazilian history . 
 = = Titles and honors = = 
 = = = Titles of nobility = = = 
 Fidalgo Cavaleiro da Casa Imperial ( Knight Nobleman of the Imperial Household ) on 2 December 1856 . 
 Baron of Inhaúma ( without Greatness ) on 27 September 1867 . 
 Viscount of Inhaúma ( Grandee ) on 3 March 1868 . 
 = = = Other titles = = = 
 Member of the Brazilian Historic and Geographic Institute . 
 Member of the Supreme Military and Justice Council . 
 <unk> <unk> ( interim steward ) of the Santa Casa de Misericórdia ( Holy House of Mercy ) in Rio de Janeiro city . 
 = = = Honors = = = 
 Grand Cross of the Brazilian Order of the Rose . 
 Grand Cross of the Brazilian Order of Saint Benedict of Aviz . 
 Commander of the Brazilian Order of Christ . 
 Grand Cross of the Portuguese Order of the Immaculate Conception of Vila Viçosa . 
 Grand Officer of the French Légion d 'honneur . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = So God Made a Farmer = 
 " So God Made a Farmer " was a speech given by radio broadcaster Paul Harvey at the 1978 Future Farmers of America convention . The speech was first published in 1986 in Harvey 's syndicated column . The speech borrowed a few phrases from a 1975 article written by Harvey in the Gadsden Times , which was itself inspired by parts of a 1940 definition of a dirt farmer published in The Farmer @-@ Stockman . The 1940 article was copied verbatim by Tex Smith in a letter to the editor in the Ellensburg Daily Record in 1949 . The speech was given as an extension of the Genesis creation narrative referring to God 's actions on the 8th day of creation . Harvey described the characteristics of a farmer in each phrase , ending them with the recurring " So God Made a Farmer " . 
 The speech was used in a commercial by Ram Trucks during the fourth quarter of Super Bowl XLVII . The ad featured photographs of rural America set to a narration of a portion of Harvey 's speech . In a collaboration with the FFA , Dodge agreed to donate $ 100 @,@ 000 for every 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 views that the YouTube video of the ad received up to $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . This goal was reached in less than five days . 
 = = The speech = = 
 Paul Harvey , a radio host who died in 2009 , delivered the speech at an FFA convention in 1978 . His speech began as a continuation of the Genesis creation narrative referring to the actions God took on the 8th day . In it , Harvey stated that God needed a caretaker for the land he created . The speech continues with God expressing the characteristics needed by the person he is creating : 
 " I need somebody with arms strong enough to wrestle a calf and yet gentle enough to deliver his own grandchild ; somebody to call hogs , tame cantankerous machinery , come home hungry , have to await lunch until his wife 's done feeding visiting ladies , then tell the ladies to be sure and come back real soon , and mean it . " 
 Multiple passages setting out characteristics of the sort end with the same refrain , by which the speech is now known : " So God made a farmer . " 
 Harvey 's " So God Made a Farmer " speech was characterized , according to The Atlantic , by its " folksy timbre " . The New York Times spoke further on elements of his speaking style in its 2009 obituary : " his style was stop @-@ and @-@ go , with superb pacing and silences that rivaled Jack Benny ’ s . He spoke directly to the listener , with punchy sentences , occasional exclamations of “ Good heavens ! ” or “ Oh , my goodness ! ” and pauses that squeezed out the last drop of suspense : the radio broadcaster ’ s equivalent of the raised eyebrow or the knowing grin . " Bob Greene described the opening phrase of the speech as " seemingly simple , and devastatingly direct " . 
 The speech also ran in Paul Harvey 's syndicated newspaper column in 1986 . Both the sound recording of the speech and the text of the article have been federally registered with the U.S. Copyright Office by <unk> , Inc . , Paul Harvey 's company that is now owned by his son . In an introduction , Harvey claimed , in a typical rhetorical flourish , that he had found the essay in his mailbag . : 
 " This next arrived unsigned in my mailbag . I 've tried but cannot trace its source . A farmer , perhaps ; more likely a farmer 's wife . I 've embellished the essay in places and cropped it in others but I hope the sense of it remains intact . " 
 = = = Prior versions = = = 
 Paul Harvey ran a similar article in the column " A Point of View " for the Gadsden Times on August 26 , 1975 . Entitled " What it is to be a farmer " , the article did not contain the concept of God creating the farmer seen in his 1978 speech , but he still described the characteristics of a farmer . Many of the same phrases made their way into his 1978 speech . The 1975 column was largely similar to a definition of a dirt farmer given by Boston B. Blackwood from Hartshorne , Oklahoma in a 1940 copy of The Farmer @-@ Stockman . This was copied verbatim in a September 10 , 1949 letter to the editor of the Ellensburg Daily Record written by Tex Smith from Ellensburg , Washington . Both the 1940 and 1975 columns share elements not included in the speech such as the statement that a farmer 's wife won 't let him starve . In the " So God Made a Farmer " speech and Harvey 's 1986 column , only two phrases and a few words remain from Blackwood 's 1940 piece including the phrase , " can shape an axe handle from a persimmon sprout " . 
 = = Super Bowl XLVII commercial = = 
 The speech was used in a two @-@ minute Ram Trucks Super Bowl commercial entitled " Farmer " in Super Bowl XLVII . The ad featured a voiceover of Harvey 's speech set to still photographs taken by ten photographers including William Albert Allard and Kurt Markus . Created by The Richards Group , the ad ran during the fourth quarter . It was noted for its religious imagery . The ad , like another Chrysler Super Bowl XLVII ad featuring Oprah Winfrey , advertised the brand without focusing on the vehicle . This was similar to ads run by Chrysler in Super Bowl XLVI and Super Bowl XLV . 
 The ad was made in collaboration with the National FFA Organization and the National FFA Foundation and with permission from Harvey 's company , <unk> , Inc . , and Ram agreed to donate up to $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to the foundation based on the views received by the YouTube video . The goal , which was based on $ 100 @,@ 000 for every 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 views , was reached in less than 5 days . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The ad received mostly positive reviews . Slate called it the " most striking Super Bowl ad " but also criticized it for being similar in concept to a 2011 YouTube video by <unk> While the Slate review was criticizing its originality , <unk> released a statement reflecting their approval of the ad . While <unk> the Super Bowl commercials for the Wall Street Journal , Cindy Gallop referred to it as the " Great American Super Bowl Commercial " . Dale Buss , of Forbes , wrote " Chrysler managed to insert just enough of its vehicles and brands in each spot so as to make their inclusion seem part of the fabric of the paean , not at all intrusive , thereby lending the kind of authenticity to Ram and Jeep that fuels long @-@ term brand success " . The ad ranked third in the USA Today Super Bowl Ad Meter . Critics noted that the ad focused on the family farm despite the industrialization of agriculture in America . A Latino nonprofit organization called <unk> uploaded a remake to its Facebook page that featured more Latinos . 
 Country music singer James Wesley 's 2013 single " Thank a Farmer " was inspired by the ad . 
 = Ohio State Route 228 = 
 State Route 228 ( SR 228 ) is a short north – south state highway in the U.S. state of Ohio . The southern terminus of the state route is at State Route 19 ( SR 19 ) nearly five and a half miles ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) north of Republic . Its northern terminus is at SR 101 approximately 5 @.@ 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) southwest of Clyde . 
 The state highway was established in 1924 . It serves as a connector between SR 19 and SR 101 east and northeast of where the two routes intersect . SR 19 jogs west from SR 228 's southern terminus , and SR 101 traverses in a southwest @-@ to @-@ northeast fashion , creating a tight angle between the two routes . SR 778 serves a similar purpose to SR 228 to the west and southwest of the junction of SR 19 and SR 101 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 228 is located entirely within Adams Township in Seneca County . It is not included in the National Highway System . SR 228 has a AADT of 320 . 
 The short connector route begins where SR 19 and County Road 32 ( CR 32 ) meet , an intersection in which SR 19 forms the southern and western legs and CR 32 approaches from the east . The route passes through mostly farmland . After that , SR 228 arrives at its endpoint at the intersection of SR 101 , where it crosses southwest @-@ to @-@ northeast , and Township Road 180 ( Rowe Road ) continues to the northwest after SR 228 terminates . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 228 came into being in 1924 along the routing that it occupies to this day . No significant changes have taken place to the route since its designation . The route was repaved in 1969 , 1983 , and 1995 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Adams Township , Seneca County . 
 = New Guinea Volunteer Rifles = 
 The New Guinea Volunteer Rifles ( NGVR ) was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army . It was initially raised as a unit of the Militia from white Australian and European expatriates in New Guinea upon the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 , before being activated for full @-@ time service following the Japanese landings in early 1942 . NGVR personnel then helped rescue survivors of Lark Force from Rabaul in February and March 1942 . Between March and May , the NGVR monitored the Japanese bases which had been established in the Huon Gulf region , being the only Allied force in the area until the arrival of Kanga Force at Wau in May . The battalion subsequently established observation posts overlooking the main approaches and reported on Japanese movements . 
 Later , it inflicted significant casualties on the Japanese in a series of raids , and led them to believe that they faced a much larger opposing force . On 29 June , the NGVR and the newly arrived 2 / 5th Independent Company carried out a highly successful attack on the Japanese garrison in Salamaua , killing at least 113 men . When the focus shifted to the Milne Bay and Kokoda Track battles of August and September , the NGVR continued to man its posts overlooking the Japanese base areas . The Japanese were subsequently defeated in the Battle of Wau in January and February 1943 , relieving the pressure on the NGVR . The battalion was disbanded in April 1943 due to attrition . 
 In the years immediately following the war the Australian Army considered re @-@ establishing a military presence in Papua New Guinea ( PNG ) , although there was some opposition among white settlers to the raising of native units . As an interim measure , the re @-@ establishment of the NGVR was approved in July 1949 . The unit reformed as the Papua New Guinea Volunteer Rifles ( PNGVR ) on 16 March 1951 , initially as a whites @-@ only reserve unit of the Citizen Military Forces ( CMF ) . In March 1951 a PNGVR detachment assisted in relief operations following the eruption of Mount Lamington , which killed 3 @,@ 466 people and left more than 5 @,@ 000 homeless . Between 1951 and 1953 PNGVR elements were established in all the main centres of Papua New Guinea . 
 Meanwhile , in addition to its other responsibilities the PNGVR fostered the raising of the regular Pacific Islands Regiment ( PIR ) and Headquarters Area Command Papua New Guinea . During the mid @-@ 1960s the enlistment of Papua New Guinean and Chinese personnel had finally been authorised , with the unit evolving into a multi @-@ racial battalion . By 1969 only one @-@ fifth of PNGVR members were Europeans . Yet amid concerns about the ability of the fledgling nation of PNG to finance a large military capability on its own , and with the need to maintain a CMF @-@ type unit in the army of an independent PNG being questionable , the PNGVR was ultimately disbanded in 1973 , shortly before independence , leaving the PIR as the only infantry unit in the new Papua New Guinea Defence Force . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 = = = = Formation = = = = 
 By 1939 the eastern half of the island of New Guinea was divided into the territories of Papua in the south , and the former German colony of New Guinea in the north , both of which were administered by Australia . Due to the provisions of the League of Nations mandate under which German New Guinea had been entrusted to Australia in 1920 following its capture during the First World War , little in the way of defensive preparations had been made in the mandated territory , even as global conflict became more likely . Following the outbreak of war in Europe the raising of a Militia battalion in New Guinea , known as the New Guinea Volunteer Rifles ( NGVR ) , was authorised on 4 September 1939 . Early arrangements for the raising of the unit were undertaken by Lieutenant Colonel John <unk> , with the unit 's initial establishment limited to just 21 officers and 400 other ranks . As Superintendent of Police , <unk> 's influence ensured a close link between the police and the NGVR , with the police stores organisation controlling the issue of arms and equipment and police guards manning the NGVR 's store and parade ground . 
 The men were all white Australian or European expatriates and were drawn from a wide range of civilian occupations , although the majority were longtime residents and included gold miners , planters , traders and government officials . Most had lived in the territory for years , and many were quite old , with men between the ages of 18 and 50 accepted . Yet they were familiar with the terrain and the local inhabitants , even if they were poorly armed and equipped . Due to the paternalistic concerns of the civilian administration regarding native welfare and unease about providing the indigenous population with arms and military training they were not recruited into the NGVR , although they did serve in the Papuan Infantry Battalion ( PIB ) from June 1940 . Enlistment was for a period of two years and was unpaid except for a one pound annual allowance , unless called up for active service . Uniforms consisted of khaki shirts and trousers made from material sent from Australia , while felt hats , bandoliers , leather belts , boots , <unk> and brass NGVR shoulder badges were also worn . Weapons included First World War @-@ era .303 rifles and some Vickers and Lewis machine @-@ guns . 
 = = = = Initial preparations = = = = 
 On 21 December 1939 , Major Ross Field , a former officer in the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) and Director of Public Works at Rabaul , took over command of the unit . A headquarters was subsequently established at Rabaul , while sub @-@ units were located at Wau , Salamaua , Lae and Madang . In the event of war the NGVR would be dispersed at strategic points on the mainland and the islands of the territory . If mobilised , the NGVR would come under the operational command of the 8th Military District which was in the process of being raised under the command of Major General Basil Morris . One of the unit 's first tasks was to provide an armed escort for enemy aliens , mostly Germans and Austrians , who were being deported to Australia by ship to be interned . Contingents departed on 29 September 1939 , 9 November 1939 and 31 May 1940 , with each escort party consisting of a non @-@ commissioned officer and six private soldiers . Meanwhile , on 12 December the compulsory evacuation of all European women and children in Papua and New Guinea was ordered . In June 1940 the NGVR 's establishment was increased to 23 officers and 482 other ranks , although this proved difficult to achieve due to the demands of recruitment for overseas service with the Second Australian Imperial Force , which resulted in a large turn @-@ over of men . At this time contingency plans for the defence of Papua and New Guinea envisioned the deployment of Australian forces to Rabaul and Port Moresby , while the defence of Lae and Salamaua would be left to the NGVR . 
 The atmosphere in the battalion in the early days was one of enthusiasm , with many of the older members taking a leading role . In April and June two regular instructors from the Australian Instructional Corps were sent to Rabaul in order to improve the standard of training in the unit . By July 1940 it was spread thin , with an authorized strength of 226 men based at Rabaul , 151 at Wau , 85 at Bulolo , 39 at Salamaua and 19 at Madang , for a total establishment of 520 . As the war with Germany and Italy continued in Europe , North Africa and the Middle East , Australian fears of Japanese intentions in Pacific grew . Yet with the bulk of Australian military and naval forces in the Middle East , defensive preparations remained limited . Two brigades from the 8th Division were subsequently dispatched to Singapore and then Malaya in February 1941 , while a Militia battalion would be stationed between Port Moresby and Thursday Island , an AIF battalion would garrison Rabaul on New Britain , and the 8th Division 's third brigade – less the battalion at Rabaul – would be dispersed piecemeal in Timor and Ambon . In July 1941 the 1st Independent Company was deployed to Kavieng on New Ireland in order to protect the airfield , while sections were sent to <unk> in central New Ireland , Vila in the New Hebrides , Tulagi on Guadalcanal , Buka Passage in Bougainville , and Lorengau on Manus Island to act as observers . In early 1941 volcanic activity in the Rabaul area forced the government to move its administration to Lae , and NGVR 's headquarters also moved at this time . 
 = = = = Rabaul = = = = 
 The 2 / 22nd Battalion subsequently began arriving in Rabaul in March and April 1941 , while additional units added to the force . Designated Lark Force , it was directed to garrison the town . Tasks included protecting the airfields at Lakunai and Vunakanau and the seaplane base in Simpson Harbour , as well as forming " an advanced observation line " to provide early warning of Japanese movements . Following its arrival the role of the NGVR in Rabaul became a secondary one , and as a consequence the 80 men stationed there were not mobilised and the detachment was largely subsumed by the AIF battalion instead . Occupying defensive positions around Simpson Harbour the Australians were widely dispersed , with companies at Praed Point , <unk> Bay , Lakunai airfield , and another inland at Vunakanau airfield , while other elements covered the coastal approaches , near Vulcan crater . Meanwhile , the NGVR spent the following months preparing defensive positions around Lakunai airfield . Lieutenant Colonel John Scanlan subsequently took over command of Lark Force in October . 
 Yet with the position increasingly viewed as untenable , the garrison was reinforced with four Lockheed Hudson bombers and ten obsolete CAC Wirraway reconnaissance aircraft from No. 24 Squadron RAAF , and by December had grown to 1 @,@ 400 men . Despite Lark Force being considered too weak to repel the expected Japanese attack , no plans were made for its withdrawal and instead the Japanese were to be made to fight for the island . In September the Administrator of the Mandated Territory , Sir Walter McNicoll , and his staff transferred to Lae . The Japanese began aerial reconnaissance over Rabaul soon after the attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December , while the compulsory evacuation of all remaining European women and children to relative safety in Australia was ordered on 12 December . Meanwhile , scattered across the islands to the north , the 270 men of the 1st Independent Company were all that lay between Rabaul and the large Japanese base at Truk in the Caroline Islands . 
 On the mainland the NGVR formed independent detachments at Wau , Salamaua , Bulolo and Lae . By mid @-@ 1941 it had lost many of its youngest and most dedicated members , many of whom had left to join the AIF instead . Those that remained found the difficulties of making the journey from their remote home locations to the training centres increasingly onerous , while many were disappointed by the lack of ammunition and equipment for training . In September NGVR 's headquarters was transferred to Bulolo on the mainland , while Field relinquished command and was replaced by Major ( later Colonel ) Bill Edwards . One of more enthusiastic of the early volunteers , Edwards revitalized the unit on the goldfields and many new recruits came in . By December , with war against Japan seemingly imminent the strength of the NGVR was 12 officers and 284 other ranks in total , with just 170 to 180 men on the mainland . On 8 December 1941 , the day after war began in the Pacific , Morris was authorised to place the battalion on full @-@ time duty , although only a small number were ultimately called up at this time . 
 Meanwhile , Australian defences in Papua remained limited and were centred on Port Moresby , consisting of approximately 1 @,@ 000 only partially trained Militia from the 49th Battalion , two six @-@ inch coastal guns , a 3 @.@ 7 @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft battery and a few Consolidated PBY Catalina flying boats , in addition to the locally recruited PIB which was still forming . However , with the Japanese soon expected to attempt to seize Rabaul and Port Moresby the remainder of the 30th Brigade was brought forward , with the 39th and 53rd Battalions arriving in Port Moresby on 3 January . Yet despite such measures , Australian unpreparedness and the speed of the coming Japanese advance meant that the NGVR was destined to provide the only armed resistance in New Guinea until the middle of 1942 . 
 The first air attacks on Rabaul began on 4 January 1942 . Within days the Japanese had succeeded in destroying the bulk of the defending aircraft , while further attacks targeted shipping in the harbour and shore installations . Scanlan considered he would need an entire brigade to defend Rabaul , yet with an invasion imminent all he could do was redeploy some of his limited force , while the remaining aircraft were withdrawn to Lae and the airfields cratered . The Japanese South Seas Force of approximately 5 @,@ 300 men under the command of Major General Tomitarō Horii landed at Rabaul in the early hours of 23 January 1942 . Attached to Lark Force , the NGVR detachment was positioned on the northern flank of the defensive line around Simpson Harbour with A Company , 2 / 22nd Battalion , manning medium machine @-@ gun and mortar positions at Vulcan Island . Defending a 1 @,@ 600 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 700 yd ) section of beach , one of the detachments subsequently engaged a Japanese force after dawn as they came ashore by barge , inflicting a number of casualties on them before being forced to withdraw . 
 Outnumbered , Lark Force was quickly overrun in the ensuing fighting , with the Japanese completing the capture of the town within 24 hours . Australian losses were heavy , with 28 men killed and most of the defenders captured . The survivors withdrew into the interior , moving south across New Britain to the Open Bay and Wide Bay areas , and west , for eventual evacuation . In total more than 400 servicemen and civilians escaped . Only 11 NGVR soldiers were among them . Many were less fortunate . 160 wounded and sick Australian soldiers , including a number of NGVR personnel , were captured and subsequently murdered by the Japanese at Tol Plantation in Wide Bay . Later , the Japanese naval prison ship Montevideo Maru was sunk off the west coast of Luzon in the South China Sea on 1 July 1942 after she was hit by three torpedoes fired by the submarine USS Sturgeon , resulting in the loss of 1 @,@ 035 lives , most of them Australian civilians and prisoners of war from Rabaul . Among those killed were 36 men from the NGVR . 
 = = = = Salamaua – Lae – Wau = = = = 
 The battalion was finally mobilised on 21 January 1942 . The same day 60 Japanese aircraft simultaneously attacked Lae , Salamaua and Bulolo . Realising the Japanese occupation of the north coast settlements of the Huon Gulf was imminent , McNicoll declared a state of emergency , handing over control to the NGVR second @-@ in @-@ command , Major Edmund Jenyns . With a Japanese landing at Lae expected and with the NGVR on full @-@ time duty , all civilians departed on 24 January . Four days later McNicoll returned to Australia , effectively ending civil administration in New Guinea . Only six RAAF signallers and five or six soldiers from the NGVR remained to report Japanese movements . Meanwhile , other NGVR groups defended strategic points in the area , and from mid @-@ February the NGVR detachment from Wau joined the Salamaua platoon , with the company concentrating at Mubo under Captain Douglas Umphelby . 
 Ill @-@ equipped and wearing an assortment of clothing and uniforms , their webbing was mostly of First World War vintage leather . Lacking helmets and entrenching tools , they carried packs and haversacks weighing in excess of 40 to 50 pounds ( 18 to 23 kg ) . With an average age of 35 years , most of the men had lived New Guinea for a considerable period of time . Highly individualistic and with limited military training , they lacked the coherence of a formed unit , while many brought their native labour lines with them to share the burden . The men readied themselves to fight a guerrilla war from the hinterland against the expected invasion , as well as preparing to destroy key infrastructure to deny it to the Japanese . Meanwhile , another company formed at Lae under Captain Hugh Lyon for the same purpose . Both companies were ordered to commence a demolition campaign in the event of a Japanese landing , although Wau airfield was to be left intact for the time being . NGVR personnel also helped rescue 217 survivors of Lark Force from Rabaul in February and March 1942 . 
 On 8 March 1942 approximately 3 @,@ 000 Japanese naval troops landed unopposed at Lae forcing the NGVR detachment to withdraw west towards Nadzab , while another battalion from the South Sea 's Force landed further south at Salamaua the same day . After observing the landings the NGVR detachment skirmished with the Japanese and attempted to demolish the airfield before withdrawing across the Francisco River , destroying the bridge across the river mouth as they went . The Japanese subsequently occupied Salamaua , and after leaving a section at the river the NGVR detachment moved south to Mubo . Although in the panic which followed Morris had initially ordered Edwards to prevent the Japanese from crossing the mountains , this failed to recognise the reality of the situation and subsequently proved unrealistic . Unable to be resupplied and lacking modern weapons and equipment , and with relatively few men and no prospect of reinforcement , the <unk> lacked the strength to block any Japanese movement inland . Although Morris was concerned about the possible loss of the Bulolo Valley , with Port Moresby threatened he was unable to reinforce the NGVR at Wau . Yet the Japanese chose to consolidate their position instead . Meanwhile , the NGVR was ordered to destroy the airfield at Wau and carry out a demolition campaign in the Bulolo Valley . Edwards rashly authorised the destruction of the two power stations in the valley and bridges at Bulolo and Wau , and despite there being no indication of a Japanese move towards Wau , the order was completed nonetheless . At Lae the primary concern of the Japanese was to get the airfield operational . 
 From its position at Mubo Umphelby 's company was subsequently ordered to maintain observation over the town and to block any Japanese movement towards Wau . A number of supply dumps and observation posts had been prepositioned in the hinterland and these were utilised for the task , while two Vickers machine @-@ guns were subsequently set up to cover the narrow approach up the <unk> River valley to Mubo . The company included a number of men who possessed an intimate knowledge of the difficult terrain in the area , and despite limited equipment and supply deficiencies , they were subsequently able to provide invaluable intelligence to the Australian high command . Meanwhile , after the fall of Lae Lyon 's company had been stationed in the Markham Valley to the west , and was tasked with observing Japanese movements from that direction . 
 Although the Japanese were slow to move inland , a party of 60 soldiers subsequently destroyed the NGVR stores dump at Komiatum on 18 March before returning to Salamaua . Around Lae the Japanese remained confined to the township over the following weeks , focusing on making the airfield operational and establishing workshops and supply dumps in the area . Between March and May , with a strength of just 500 men , the NGVR monitored the Japanese bases which had been established in the Huon Gulf region , being the only Allied force in the area until the arrival of Kanga Force at Wau in May 1942 . The battalion then established observation posts and camps overlooking the main approaches and reported on Japanese movements and shipping , and called in airstrikes , while planning their own offensive . Later , it inflicted significant casualties on the Japanese in a series of raids , and led them to believe that they faced a much larger opposing force . 
 Following the bombing of Port Moresby in early February the civil administration in Papua had also been replaced by military control , with the Australian New Guinea Administrative Unit ( ANGAU ) formed to administer both Papua and New Guinea in a unified military government , following their hurried amalgamation . Regardless , the NGVR remained the only Allied unit operating on the north coast and goldfields over this period . It subsequently assisted the evacuation of many European civilians from the war @-@ zone , with many being flown out , while others moved by ship or overland to Port Moresby . As the sole representative of government authority , the NGVR also assumed responsibility for several thousand indentured native labourers recruited from the outlying districts who had been left without support and were unable to return to their homes . The NGVR subsequently established camps and fed them , and they became the first of many carriers and labourers enlisted to support the Allies during the fighting that followed . Meanwhile , the Japanese took Finschhafen on 10 March and occupied Bougainville later that month . Yet Morris was now finally in a position to begin reinforcing the NGVR . A platoon of reinforcements intended for the 2 / 1st Independent Company subsequently reached Port Moresby in late March following the loss of New Britain and New Ireland and they were sent over the Bulldog Track to support the NGVR instead . 
 Edwards next sent an NGVR scout section to find out what the Japanese were doing in Salamaua in late March . Although they were subsequently detected the Japanese failed to find them ; however , with the local inhabitants facing reprisals for assisting the Australians , the NGVR withdrew to avoid further consequences for them . Similar posts were subsequently established along the Markham Valley and at Heath 's Plantation , closer to Lae to observe Japanese movements . Elsewhere , Lorengau on Manus Island was subsequently captured by the Japanese on 8 April . Meanwhile , minor skirmishing occurred in April and May in the Markham Valley as the Japanese attempted to challenge the NGVR presence in the area . The NGVR continued its role of observing the Japanese , with Port Moresby instructing that no operations were to be undertaken against Lae or <unk> without orders , and that reinforcements were soon be sent to the area . On 23 April a Japanese fighting patrol of approximately 65 men from Salamaua moved on Komiatum , challenging NGVR control of the area . The Japanese subsequently discovered the NGVR stores there and ejected a small group of Australians guarding the village . Although the fighting continued for most of the day and resulted in three Japanese killed and several others wounded , the village was subsequently destroyed along with the NGVR stores . The NGVR detachment was then forced to withdraw to Mubo , while the Japanese returned to Salamaua . Following the capture of Madang on 1 May by the Japanese , the inland towns of Wau and Bulolo in the Morobe District were the only major centres in New Guinea still in Allied hands . 
 The Battle of the Coral Sea between 4 and 8 May effectively removed the threat of a Japanese invasion of Port Moresby . Meanwhile , a force consisting of the 2 / 5th Independent Company under Major Paul Kneen and supporting units had been tasked with undertaking a limited guerrilla offensive to harass and destroy Japanese personnel and equipment in the Lae and Salamaua area and the Markham Valley . Designated Kanga Force under the command of Major Norman Fleay , the first elements flew into Wau from Port Moresby on 23 May to reinforce the NGVR . Kanga force consisted of two companies of the NGVR split between the Markham Valley and Mubo , a platoon from the 2 / 1st Independent Company , and the 2 / 5th Independent Company with the force subsequently in position nine days later . Kanga force 's main problem was one of logistics . Supplies for Kanga Force were either flown in , depending on aircraft availability , or shipped to the mouth of the Lakekamu River in small craft , transported up the river to Bulldog in canoes and then carried over the Bulldog Track by native porters . 
 By early June , Kanga Force was largely concentrated at Wau , although there were elements of the 2 / 1st and 2 / 5th spread out as far as Bulwa , and elements of the NGVR at <unk> . The NGVR was still watching the Salamaua sector from Mubo , whilst other elements were covering the inland routes from the Markham and Wampit Rivers . As Fleay attempted to juggle his forces and relieve the exhausted NGVR detachments , his orders were clarified and work began on planning a number of raids in the area . Fleay considered there were 2 @,@ 000 Japanese in Lae and 250 in Salamaua . In comparison , he had just 700 men , of whom only 450 were fit for operations , with the force too small to meet the many possible Japanese threats . The threat of an overland advance required him to defend the numerous tracks through the Bulolo Valley , while the threat of an air invasion required him to defend likely landing zones at Wau , Bulolo , Bulwa and <unk> , meaning that Fleay had even less resources to achieve his mission . He assessed that the only course of action available was to maintain a large force in the Bulolo Valley to defend the overland route to Papua , while conducting a number of raids in the area in order to inflict casualties on the Japanese and forestall any advance . These would be concentrated in three areas : on the Japanese force at Heath 's Plantation , where they formed an obstacle to any large @-@ scale movement against Lae ; on the Lae area to destroy the aircraft , dumps and installations located there , and to test the defences with a view to larger scale operations in the future ; and on the Salamaua area to destroy the wireless station , aerodrome and dumps . 
 Initial raids would subsequently be undertaken at Salamaua and Heath 's Plantation , led by Major Paul Kneen and Captain Norman Winning from the 2 / 5th Independent Company . Targeting the aerodrome and 300 @-@ strong Japanese garrison Winning planned the assault on Salamaua with Umphelby from the NGVR , following careful reconnaissance by NGVR scouts under Sergeant Jim McAdam . Early in the morning of 29 June 1942 , 71 members of the NGVR and the 2 / 5th Independent Company carried out a highly successful attack , killing at least 113 men and destroying a number of installations including the radio station and supply dumps for the loss of only three men slightly wounded . In addition , the Australians captured a small amount of enemy equipment and a number of documents , including marked maps , sketches , and Japanese orders . The simultaneous raid on Heath 's Plantation at Lae was carried out by 58 men , mainly from the 2 / 5th Independent Company . Although also successful , surprise was lost after watchdogs warned the Japanese of their approach , and Kneen was subsequently killed and two men were wounded , while Japanese losses included 42 killed . Following the raids , the Japanese sent patrols of up to 90 men into the foothills in the hinterland around Salamaua , destroying the camp at <unk> and reinforcements were moved from the garrison at Lae to Kela village . Meanwhile , reconnaissance reports indicated that the Japanese had been forced to draw on their garrison at Lae to reinforce their perimeter at Salamaua during early July in an attempt to prevent further raids . 
 In retaliation Japanese aircraft subsequently bombed Wau , Bulolo and <unk> on 2 July , killing a number of Australians , destroying some houses and buildings , and driving many native carriers into the bush . Meanwhile , the Japanese garrison at Salamaua continued to be reinforced , with NGVR scouts estimating that another 200 soldiers had arrived since the raid , with the force there growing to between 400 and 500 men . Strong patrols were subsequently observed searching the tracks around the town for the Australians . Although the morale of the NGVR remained high , the effect of continuous operations in the harsh terrain with only limited logistic and medical support took their toll , with many falling ill to fever and tropical disease . The number of fit men decreased steadily . On 5 July Fleay restricted Kanga force activities to patrolling and observation . Finally the Japanese moved on Mubo , defended by just 64 men from the NGVR and 2 / 5th Independent Company occupying the high ground overlooking the village and the airstrip , with a lightly equipped force of 136 Japanese marines from the Sasebo 5th Special Naval Landing Party crossing the Francisco River on the morning 21 July . Approaching Mubo around 17 : 00 the Japanese clashed with the Australians and were scattered . With the Japanese trapped in the river valley , the Australians opened fire with four Vickers machine @-@ guns , three Lewis guns and three Brens , inflicting between 50 and 60 casualties , including 12 killed , without loss . The Japanese were subsequently forced to withdraw towards Salamaua , carrying their dead and wounded . The same day the Japanese launched a simultaneous thrust up the Markham Valley against the 2 / 5th Independent Company . 
 With a seaborne movement blocked , the Japanese again attempted to move against Port Moresby overland in July . Following a landing near Gona , on the north coast of New Guinea , on the night of 21 / 22 July , Japanese forces attempted to advance south overland through the mountains of the Owen Stanley Range to seize Port Moresby as part of a strategy of isolating Australia from the United States , resulting in a series of battles during the Kokoda Track campaign . From that point the importance of Kanga Force 's operations around Salamaua and Wau declined , with the direct threat posed by the landings dictating that the limited forces and supplies available to the Australians be concentrated on Port Moresby . Lieutenant General Sydney Rowell took over command of New Guinea Force from Morris on 12 August at the height of the fighting . The 2 / 6th Independent Company had arrived in Port Moresby on 7 August and it had been planned to send them forward to Wau to reinforce Kanga Force . However , with the Japanese threat against Port Moresby growing increasingly serious they were held in reserve there instead , while Kanga Force would be required to continue to hold on with the limited resources available to them . Meanwhile , as food was not getting through to Kanga Force , the soldiers of the NGVR became increasingly dependent on local supplies . Japanese air raids against their supply dumps , intimidation of the local inhabitants , large scale desertions of native carriers , and the inherent difficulty of getting supplies forward to feed those carriers that remained combined to threaten to stop their operations altogether . 
 The Japanese subsequently staged a landing at Milne Bay on the eastern tip of New Guinea on the evening of 25 August 1942 to reduce the Allied airfields that had been established there , further straining the limited resources available to Rowell and preventing him from reinforcing Kanga Force . Yet despite some success the landing force was subsequently destroyed by the Australians with the survivors forced to evacuate by sea on 4 – 5 September . During this time Horii 's South Seas Detachment had continued to make strong progress along the Kokoda Track , although the outnumbered Australian opposition was becoming increasingly effective . By 16 September the Japanese had reached Ioribaiwa , in sight of Port Moresby itself . However , following a heavy defeat at Guadalcanal , <unk> was ordered onto the defensive . The Japanese subsequently began to withdraw from Kokoda on 24 September to establish a defensive position on the north coast , but were closely followed by the Australians who recaptured Kokoda on 2 November . Further fighting continued into November and December as Australian and United States forces assaulted the Japanese beachheads , in what later became known as the Battle of Buna – Gona . Gona was captured on 9 December 1942 and Buna on 3 January 1943 . The Japanese subsequently began to abandon Sanananda on 13 January following an unsuccessful Australian assault the day before . Mopping up operations were completed on 22 January . 
 Meanwhile , the privations of operating around Mubo and in the Markham Valley continued to take their toll on the Australians , and by early August the bulk of the men forward of <unk> and Wau were commandos . The NGVR had been exhausted by their exertions during the fighting and few now remained , with a small group from the 2 / 5th Independent Company relieving the NGVR scouts for their observation role . Indeed , by September 1942 the NGVR was no longer recognisable as a unit . As the first phase of irregular warfare in the Salamaua – Lae – Wau region came to a close by the end of August , the Japanese occupied Mubo from where they were positioned to seize Wau and the Bulolo Valley , but had not yet moved up the Markham Valley in strength . The Australians were subsequently forced to abandon Wau and the Bulolo Valley , and were preparing to hold a position at the head of the Bulldog Track . While the focus of the campaign in New Guinea shifted to the Milne Bay and Kokoda Track battles in August and September 1942 the NGVR continued to man its posts overlooking the Japanese base areas , patrolling extensively . The Allies remained concerned about the defence of the important air installation at Wau and were keen to secure the crest of the Owen Stanleys in that area . Consequently , the 2 / 7th Independent Company was flown into Wau in October 1942 to reinforce Wau . Anticipating an attack by the Japanese , General Thomas Blamey ordered the 17th Brigade from Milne Bay to reinforce Wau and relieve Kanga Force , and on 16 January 1943 the Japanese launched an offensive against Wau , known as the Battle of Wau . 
 = = = = Disbandment = = = = 
 The Japanese were subsequently defeated at Wau in January and February 1943 , relieving the pressure on the NGVR . Following this , as problems with supply and sickness reduced Fleay 's effectiveness , Kanga Force was broken up on 23 April 1943 with its individual units becoming part of the 3rd Division , which left Wau to begin the Salamaua @-@ Lae campaign to drive the Japanese from Salamaua . Meanwhile , ANGAU had expanded its activities on the goldfields , restoring military administration and the organisation of the supply and supervision of native carriers supporting Allied forces . By this time NGVR was believed to contain 300 men ; however , most were suffering ill health following months of guerrilla fighting , and many were experiencing ill affects due to their age . Having suffered heavy attrition , and with no further reinforcements available in New Guinea , the unit was finally disbanded in April 1943 . As a part @-@ time volunteer unit , the NGVR was unique in the history of PNG , yet due to their military training , their knowledge of New Guinea and its people , and their experiences in the early days of the war , many of its surviving members became part of ANGAU , while others remained as coastwatchers or in other capacities attached to AIF divisions and Z and M Special Units , continuing to serve until the end of hostilities in 1945 . As the Allies moved onto the offensive in New Guinea they planned to neutralise and bypass the Japanese base at Rabaul as part of their advance . During the Admiralty Islands campaign a small number of Australians from the NGVR and ANGAU were assigned to the US @-@ led Brewer Force during a reconnaissance @-@ in @-@ force on the Japanese @-@ held island of Los Negros between 29 February and 4 March 1944 . For their actions the unit was awarded a Distinguished Unit Citation by the United States . 
 Due to the nature of the early campaign in New Guinea the NGVR never fought as a formed unit , with it sub @-@ units scattered and forced to fight independently instead . Its men had come from many walks of life , and while some were too old to join the AIF , or were medically unfit or employed in restricted occupations , they acquitted themselves well in the harsh terrain , with only limited equipment and support , often developing their own tactics . The battalion played an important role in the period to late May 1942 by maintaining contact with the Japanese , as well as demonstrating to the native population in the Salamaua – Wau – Lae region that the Australians had not been forced out of the area . They provided early warning of Japanese troop and aircraft movements , and succeeded in preventing the Japanese from utilising the Bulldog Track as an avenue of approach to Port Moresby . The NGVR also aided the deployment of Kanga Force and later supported US forces on Manus . As part of Kanga Force they also denied the Japanese the vital airfields at Wau and Bulolo , which would have brought Port Moresby within the effective range of Japanese bombers . They also initiated the organisation of New Guinean labour which was to provide a vital contribution to the success of the Allied campaign in New Guinea . While records are incomplete , approximately 600 to 850 men are believed to have served with the unit . A roll of honour in the Shrine of Memories in ANZAC Square , Brisbane lists the names of 95 men who were killed or died serving with the unit during the war . 
 = = = Post war = = = 
 = = = = Re @-@ establishment = = = = 
 In the years immediately following the war the Australian Army considered re @-@ establishing a military presence in PNG , although there was some opposition among the colonial administration and white settlers to the raising of native units , echoing previous concerns . As an interim measure , the re @-@ establishment of the NGVR was approved in July 1949 , re @-@ forming as a whites @-@ only reserve unit of the Citizen Military Forces ( CMF ) . Volunteers were first called for in September 1950 , with initial arrangements for the new unit begun by Lieutenant Colonel <unk> McLeod . Later , two non @-@ commissioned officers arrived from Northern Command in October 1950 , forming part of a small regular cadre which would support the administration of the unit and assist with its training . In February 1951 a small group of Australian officers and non @-@ commissioned officers arrived to assist with raising the unit , and the re @-@ raising of the Pacific Islands Regiment ( PIR ) . The unit was subsequently raised as the Papua New Guinea Volunteer Rifles ( PNGVR ) on 16 March 1951 , with the enlistment of the first recruits beginning in Port Moresby soon after . 
 The PNGVR was intended to maintain sub @-@ units capable of providing advice on topography , native customs and personalities , provision of guides and interpreters , and assistance in the organisation and training of irregular native forces . The unit would also form the basis for the future expansion of forces in PNG if required , and be of limited assistance to civic action projects . It would also provide detachments to protect vulnerable points and counter small @-@ scale raids , and be capable of being used in border @-@ type or counter @-@ insurgency operations in support of regular forces following further training . The initial recruits were Australians , most of whom had served as officers or non @-@ commissioned officers during the war . The first resident commanding officer was Lieutenant Colonel E.F. Madden . Conditions of service were the same as for CMF units in Australia , while PNGVR members were paid the same as their Australian Regular Army ( ARA ) counterparts . Recruits were required to complete 12 days home training and a camp of 14 days each year , but could also undertake additional training periods if they wished . 
 = = = = Peace @-@ time service = = = = 
 In March 1951 a small PNGVR detachment assisted in relief operations following the eruption of Mount Lamington which killed 3 @,@ 466 people and left more than 5 @,@ 000 homeless . By the end of 1951 detachments had been raised at Port Moresby , Lae , Wau and Rabaul . Initially the battalion included a headquarters company and two under strength rifle companies , with A Company based in Lae and B Company in Rabaul . Meanwhile , the raising of a locally recruited regular battalion manned by indigenous personnel and trained and commanded by Australian officers and non @-@ commissioned officers had been authorised in November 1950 , and in March 1951 the PIR was reformed with an initial strength of one battalion . In addition to its other responsibilities the PNGVR fostered the raising of the PIR and HQ Area Command Papua New Guinea . The PNGVR would augment the PIR in wartime , and the two units would later regularly train together . However , due to the terms of the UN trusteeship under which the territory had been entrusted to Australia it was decided from the outset that neither unit would serve outside PNG . 
 Yet the PNGVR did not live up to initial expectations , and it remained significantly under strength . By May 1952 it numbered just eight officers and 140 other ranks , yet Rowell , by then the Chief of the General Staff , decided against disbanding the battalion " ... when there is the nucleus of a unit there " . In assessing the unit 's achievements , while only 0 @.@ 24 per cent of the population of Brisbane belonged to the CMF at the time , the PNGVR had succeeded in recruiting 2 @.@ 14 percent of the white population of the territories . The problem of raising a CMF unit in PNG was largely one of scale due to the small number of eligible men to recruit from , the absence of National Service intakes to swell its numbers , and the lack of suitable accommodation and training facilities . The role initially envisioned for the PNGVR proved overly ambitious , and it was subsequently redefined to being one of the provision of officers and non @-@ commissioned officers for an expanded PIR during wartime . 
 Between 1951 and 1953 PNGVR elements were established in all the main centres in PNG . A platoon was subsequently formed at Samarai in December 1953 , while further detachments were later established at Madang , Wewak , Goroka , Mount Hagen , <unk> , <unk> and Kavieng . A third rifle company was later raised , with C Company being formed at Goroka in 1957 . In May 1958 , for the first time since the Second World War soldiers of the unit participated in joint exercises with the PIR in the Goldie River – Kokoda Track area . Such exercises subsequently became a regular activity between the two units , while PNGVR detachments regularly marched with the PIR on Anzac Day and Queen 's Birthday celebrations . As part of the annual training program soldiers of the unit undertook two weeks in concentrated exercises and training every year , initially at Goldie River . Meanwhile , the arms and equipment issued to the unit progressively improved . Unlike the rest of the CMF , the PNGVR was not reorganised along pentropic lines in 1960 and remained relatively unchanged . 
 The unit expanded in the early 1960s with additional resources becoming available and increased recruitment , and by 1962 Administration Company and D Company had been added to the establishment , both of which were based in Port Moresby . Yet the small European population and the rapid turnover of staff in local industries continued to limit the manpower available , while the Army preferred to recruit permanent residents such as planters and traders , who represented an even smaller minority . In order to increase the number of personnel available arrangements were made to allow CMF members who started their training in Australia and then transferred their civilian employment to PNG to continue to serve with the PNGVR , while those who completed their time in PNG were similarly able to complete their training upon their return to Australia . 
 In 1962 the battle honours won by the NGVR during Second World War were awarded to the PNGVR so that the history of the former unit could be perpetuated . As the fighting in West New Guinea between Indonesia and the Dutch reached its height , concerns about the security of the border grew . By January 1963 the unit had grown to 550 men , all of them white . However , in 1964 the enlistment of Papua New Guinean and Chinese personnel had finally been authorised , with the unit evolving into a multi @-@ racial battalion . A large number of Papua New Guineans subsequently applied to join the unit . The strength of the unit increased rapidly as a result , and an additional platoon was subsequently raised at <unk> the same year . A camp was subsequently built at <unk> , near Mount Hagen , and the first integrated camp was held there in November 1964 . Yet the cost of flying men to <unk> proved prohibitive and from 1966 annual camps were held at Lae , initially at a wartime facility on the Bumbu River , and later at <unk> Barracks . Papua New Guinea Command was formed in 1965 , ending the link with Headquarters Northern Command in Brisbane . During this time CMF officers from Australia began visiting PNG to gain experience in operating in tropical conditions with the PNGVR and PIR , with the first group arriving in October 1965 . 
 The Cold War and growing Australian concern about Indonesian intentions during the Indonesia – Malaysia confrontation saw increasing defence resources allocated to PNG during the 1960s , including the raising of a second PIR battalion in 1965 . As part of this process in March 1966 it was announced that the PNGVR would be reorganised as a full battalion on the Tropical Warfare Establishment , with its strength expanded to 750 men of all ranks , while it would also receive a range of new weapons and equipment , including new heavy barrelled 7 @.@ 62 mm L1A1 Self @-@ Loading Rifles , M60 machine @-@ guns and 81 mm mortars . Support Company was subsequently raised in Port Moresby to replace the infantry company there , and included a mortar platoon , anti @-@ tank platoon , signals platoon and an assault pioneer platoon . Meanwhile , the Wewak detachment was redesignated D Company , and took over control of the Madang platoon . In 1968 the construction of the new <unk> Barracks was completed at Lae , and Headquarters PNGVR was subsequently moved there from Murray Barracks in Port Moresby . By 1969 only one @-@ fifth of PNGVR members were Europeans . On 17 May 1969 , PNGVR was presented with the Queen 's and Regimental Colours at <unk> Barracks in Lae by the Administrator , Sir David Osborne Hay . A platoon was later raised at the University of Papua New Guinea ( <unk> ) in April 1970 . In July 1971 Second Lieutenant Pascal <unk> of the <unk> detachment subsequently became the first Papua New Guinean to be commissioned into the PNGVR . 
 = = = = Disbandment = = = = 
 Yet as relations with Indonesia improved and the Vietnam War came to an end , the changing strategic circumstances in the Asia @-@ Pacific saw the unit establishment reduced to 440 all ranks during the early 1970s , while in the lead up to Papua New Guinean independence in 1975 consideration was given to disbanding the unit . Although unknown to the unit at the time , the PNGVR held its last annual training camp in August 1973 at Finschhafen , with 350 soldiers from detachments across the country participating . Amid concerns about the ability of the economy of the fledgling nation of Papua New Guinea to finance a large military capability on its own , and with the need to maintain a CMF @-@ type unit in the army of an independent PNG being questionable , the PNGVR was ultimately disbanded on 1 December 1973 , leaving the PIR as the only infantry unit in the new Papua New Guinea Defence Force . Although the decision to disband the unit was much debated within the Army at the time — and strongly resisted by the PNGVR Association — it had been felt that training a volunteer force without the considerable assistance of the ARA that had previously been available would be impossible after independence , while the possible destabilising effect a locally recruited unit might have was also a concern as the regional bases of the PNGVR might have provided a source of power in areas disaffected by the central government in Port Moresby . The PNGVR Queen 's and Regimental Colours were subsequently laid up at the Australian War Memorial on Anzac Day 1974 . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The NGVR was awarded the following battle honours : 
 Second World War : Rabaul , Wau , South West Pacific 1942 – 43 . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers commanded the NGVR : 
 Second World War 
 Lieutenant Colonel C.R. Field ( 1939 – 41 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel W.M. Edwards ( 1941 – 43 ) 
 Post War 
 Lieutenant Colonel <unk> McLeod ( 1950 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel E. F. Madden ( 1951 – 53 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel T.W. Young ( 1953 – 55 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel J.K. Lynch ( 1955 – 57 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel W.H. <unk> ( 1957 ) 
 Major <unk> Lloyd ( 1957 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel J.K. Murdoch ( 1958 – 60 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel R.T. Eldridge ( 1960 – 62 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel R.D. Newman ( 1962 – 65 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel M.A. Bishop ( 1965 – 68 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel K.E. <unk> ( 1968 – 71 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel W.A. Harrington ( 1971 – 72 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel P. Cole ( 1972 – 73 ) 
 = Tropical Storm Andrea ( 2013 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Andrea brought flooding to Cuba , the Yucatan Peninsula , and portions of the East Coast of the United States in June 2013 . The first tropical cyclone and named storm of the annual hurricane season , Andrea originated from an area of low pressure in the eastern Gulf of Mexico on June 5 . Despite strong wind shear and an abundance of dry air , the storm strengthened while initially heading north @-@ northeastward . Later on June 5 , it re @-@ curved northeastward and approached the Big Bend region of Florida . Andrea intensified and peaked as a strong tropical storm with winds at 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) on June 6 . A few hours later , the storm weakened slightly and made landfall near Steinhatchee , Florida later that day . It began losing tropical characteristics while tracking across Florida and Georgia . Andrea transitioned into an extratropical cyclone over South Carolina on June 7 , though the remnants continued to move along the East Coast of the United States , until being absorbed by another extratropical system offshore Maine on June 10 . 
 Prior to becoming a tropical cyclone , the precursor to Andrea dropped nearly 12 inches ( 300 mm ) of rainfall on the Yucatán Peninsula . In Cuba , the storm brought flooding , especially in Pinar del Río Province . Over 1 @,@ 000 people fled their homes , mainly along the Cuyaguateje River . A tornado was also spawned in the area , damaging three homes . In Florida , the storm brought heavy rainfall to some areas , causing localized flooding . There were nine tornadoes in Florida , the worst of which touched down in The Acreage and downed power lines and trees , causing significant roof damage to several houses ; there was also one injury . After Andrea transition into an extratropical storm , the remnants that also spawned one tornado in North Carolina , though damage was minor . Additionally , minor flooding was reported in some areas of the Northeastern United States . Three fatalities occurred due to weather @-@ related traffic accidents in Virginia and New Jersey . There was a direct death reported after a surfer in South Carolina went missing and was presumed to have drowned . The remnants of Andrea also brought gusty winds to Atlantic Canada , causing thousands of power outages in Nova Scotia and New Brunswick . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 At the end of May 2013 , a broad and diffuse cyclonic disturbance developed over eastern Mexico and northern Central America , incorporating the remnants of eastern Pacific Hurricane Barbara . As a tropical wave approached from the east , an inverted trough developed on the northern edge of the active region on June 2 , setting the stage for the formation of a weak surface low pressure system over the southern Gulf of Mexico the next day . The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began monitoring the system in their Tropical Weather Outlooks , bulletins issued every six hours regarding the probability of tropical cyclone formation within 48 hours . A nearby upper trough created unfavorable conditions for tropical cyclogenesis , subjecting the low to wind shear and abundant dry air that kept it indistinct and disorganized . On June 5 , the environment became less hostile , and the system began to improve in structure . 
 On June 5 , a Hurricane Hunters flight found a closed center and winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . In response , the NHC initiated advisories on Tropical Storm Andrea later that day , while centered about 310 miles ( 500 km ) southwest of St. Petersburg , Florida . Due to somewhat unfavorable conditions , significant strengthening was initially considered unlikely . Early on June 6 , deep convection was displaced well to the east and southeast of the center as a result of wind shear up to 29 mph ( 47 km / h ) . Despite this , Andrea intensified to attain peak winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) at 1200 UTC that day . Thereafter , unfavorable conditions , including dry air entrainment caused the storm to weaken slightly . At 2200 UTC on June 6 , Andrea made landfall in Dixie County , Florida about 10 miles ( 15 km ) south of Steinhatchee . Simultaneously , the storm attained its minimum barometric pressure of 992 mbar ( 29 @.@ 3 inHg ) . 
 After moving inland on June 6 , the NHC noted that extratropical transition was likely within 24 hours and that it " could occur sooner if the convective structure does not improve . " By later on June 7 , most of the convection became displaced to the northwest due to dry air . Around that time , the storm began accelerating northeastward at 26 mph ( 42 km / h ) due to an approaching mid @-@ latitude trough . Based on ground observations and Doppler radar , the system transitioned into an extratropical cyclone at 1800 UTC on June 7 , while located over northeastern South Carolina . The remaining thunderstorms around Andrea became indistinguishable from those associated with a frontal zone over North Carolina . Due to a policy created in response to Hurricane Sandy , the NHC continued to issue advisories on the remnants of Andrea as it remained a threat to the East Coast of the United States . On June 8 , it moved rapidly northeastward across the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England . Because gale @-@ force winds were located well to the southeast of the center , the NHC ceased advisories on the remnants of Andrea . Upon reaching the Gulf of Maine , the extratropical remnants of Andrea were absorbed by another extratropical low pressure area around 0000 UTC on June 9 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Multiple tropical cyclone warnings and watches were posted along both the Atlantic and Gulf coasts of the United States in association with Tropical Storm Andrea . At 2200 UTC on June 5 , a tropical storm warning was issued from Boca Grande to the mouth of the Ochlockonee River in Florida . Additionally , a tropical storm watch was put into effect for Flagler Beach , Florida to Surf City , North Carolina . At 0900 UTC on June 6 , the tropical storm warning was extended from the mouth of the Ochlockonee River to Indian Pass , Florida . Simultaneously , another tropical storm warning was issued from Flagler Beach , Florida to Cape Charles Light in Virginia . Early on June 7 , the tropical storm warning on the Gulf Coast of Florida was expanded to include Boca Grande to the Steinhatchee River in Florida , before being canceled a few hours later . At 0900 UTC on June 7 , the tropical storm warning from Flagler Beach to Surf City was modified to Altamaha River , Georgia to Cape Charles Light . Throughout that day , the tropical storm warning was progressively retracted northward , with the southern terminal being at the Savannah River in Georgia at 1200 UTC , the Santee River in South Carolina at 1500 UTC , the Little River Inlet in South Carolina at 1800 UTC , and finally Surf City at 2100 UTC . Early on June 8 , all tropical cyclone <unk> and watches were discontinued . 
 The United States Coast Guard urged marine interests and boaters in Florida , Georgia , and South Carolina to take precaution to protect their lives and vessels . In Florida , the Gulf Islands National Seashore closed their campground and a beach front road . Additionally , several states parks were closed and campers were evacuated . At Pensacola Beach , condominium associations asked residents to remove furniture from high balconies due to the anticipation of strong winds . A state of emergency was issued for Taylor County , where two shelters were opened . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Becoming a tropical storm on June 5 , Andrea marked the fourth consecutive season with a named storm in the month of June , following Hurricane Alex in 2010 , Tropical Storm Arlene in 2011 , and Hurricane Chris and Tropical Storm Debby in 2012 . This was over a month earlier than the 1966 – 2009 average date of the first named storm , July 9 . 
 The precursor disturbance to Andrea dropped nearly 12 inches ( 300 mm ) of rain on the Yucatán Peninsula in a 24 @-@ hour period . In Cuba , the Civil Defense issued a weather alarm for Pinar del Río Province from June 5 to June 6 . There was also a lower @-@ level " alert " in the adjacent provinces of <unk> and <unk> . Over 1 @,@ 000 people fled their homes due to flooding , especially along the Cuyaguateje River in Pinar del Río Province . The city of Las <unk> received more than 10 inches ( 250 mm ) of rainfall in 24 hours ; a few other locations reported over 8 inches ( 200 mm ) of rain . Of the 24 dams in Pinar del Río Province , six had already filled by June 5 . The disturbance spawned a tornado in that area , which damaged three homes . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 Along the Florida coast , storm surge produced by Andrea remained relatively minor , with surge heights ranging from 2 – 4 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 – 1 @.@ 22 m ) across the state 's Gulf coast . These measurements peaked in Cedar Key , where a station documented a storm surge height of 4 @.@ 08 ft ( 1 @.@ 24 m ) ; the same station recorded a storm tide height of 6 @.@ 26 ft ( 1 @.@ 91 m ) . The highest wind measurement was at a <unk> site in Davis Islands , which observed sustained winds of 47 mph ( 76 km / h ) . A total of 10 tornadoes were spawned in Florida . Near Myakka City , a tornado damaged the roofs of three single family homes , six pole barns , and four outbuildings . One horse and six chickens were killed , and another horse and two dogs were injured . Significant piles of debris and downed power lines covered State Road 70 in Myakka City . Damage was estimated at $ 50 @,@ 000 . Another twister spawned in Sun City Center downed trees and damaged <unk> , fascia and shingles . Damage reached approximately $ 36 @,@ 000 . 
 Andrea dropped locally heavy rainfall in some areas of West Central Florida , with a Community Collaborative Rain , Hail and Snow Network ( <unk> ) station observing 6 @.@ 17 inches ( 157 mm ) inches of precipitation near Chiefland . Minor street flooding was reported in several counties . Near the city of Coachman , the weight of saturated leaves on the roof of a dog kennel at the Pinellas County Humane Society caused a large section of the roof to collapse . In East Central Florida , the storm produced about 2 – 3 inches ( 51 – 76 mm ) of rain , with isolated totals of 5 – 6 inches ( 130 – 150 mm ) over a three @-@ day period in Orange , Osceola , and Volusia counties . In North Florida , the storm spawned a tornado at the Naval Station Mayport in Jacksonville . A number of " non @-@ critical " structures suffered minor impact , while other buildings experienced damaged roofs and broken windows . Strong winds were also observed in the area , with gusts up to 83 mph ( 134 km / h ) at the Jacksonville Beach Pier ; this was the strongest wind gust associated with the storm . Another tornado was spawned on Amelia Island in Fernandina Beach , though it caused minimal damage . 
 Of the ten tornadoes in Florida , three were spawned in the southern portions of the state . In The Acreage , an EF @-@ 1 tornado caused minor to moderate roof damage to several homes , mainly in the form of shingles and roof covering torn off . Numerous trees were uprooted or snapped near the trunk , along with several branches falling ; this resulted in broken windows in several homes . At one home , the garage door was damaged , causing the door to blow in , which in turn led to the roof being damaged above the garage . An 85 @-@ year @-@ old woman was injured after being struck by a falling branch of an oak tree , which broke through her bedroom window . A few vehicles were moved from their original locations , while a 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) boat was flipped on its side . Another tornado in Belle Glade damaged an awning and downed trees and several power lines . Further south , a tornado touched down in Broward County and entered Palm Beach County before lifting back up ; it resulted in no damage . 
 A convective band associated with Tropical Storm Andrea moved slowly across South Florida , prompting flash flood warnings for Broward and Miami @-@ Dade County Counties . Precipitation peaked at 14 @.@ 27 inches ( 362 mm ) in North Miami Beach , 13 @.@ 96 inches ( 355 mm ) of which fell in a 24 @-@ hour period . Roads became impassable in the Waterways community in Aventura , leaving over 50 vehicles disabled . In nearby Golden Beach , hundreds of people became stranded in their vehicles , according to city officials . At the Biscayne Bay Campus of Florida International University , 11 @.@ 71 inches ( 297 mm ) of rain was observed . A number of stalled vehicles and impassable roads were reported in North Miami , while 24 families were forced to evacuate due to flooding . Further north in Broward County , the city of Hollywood was particularly hard hit , with 9 inches ( 230 mm ) of rain observed . Several vehicles became disabled after retention ponds overflowed . 
 = = = Elsewhere in North America = = = 
 Along the coast of Alabama , 13 swimmers were rescued due to strong rip currents . In Georgia , the storm brought gusty winds to the coast , reaching 32 mph ( 51 km / h ) at Fort Pulaski . Wind damage was minor , limited to mostly downed trees and power lines in several counties ; in Chatham County , a falling tree struck a house . Generally light rainfall was reported across much of southern and eastern Georgia , though up to 5 @.@ 34 inches ( 136 mm ) fell near Richmond Hill . In Chatham County , a portion of U.S. Route 25 was temporarily closed due to flooding . Along the coast of South Carolina , a storm surge of 3 @.@ 55 feet ( 1 @.@ 08 m ) was observed in Beaufort County . A surfer in Horry County went missing and was later presumed to have drowned . In several counties along the coast or just inland , trees and power lines were downed . Andrea dropped light rainfall in the state , peaking at 4 @.@ 9 inches ( 120 mm ) near Cordova . 
 The storm brought significant amounts of rainfall to North Carolina in short periods of time , with a peak amount of 7 @.@ 41 inches ( 188 mm ) near Cameron . In Raleigh , 5 @.@ 14 inches ( 131 mm ) of rain fell in 24 hours , which broke the highest daily precipitation record for the city . Additionally , this total exceeded the average rainfall amount for the month of June . Many streams , creeks , and river overflowed in eastern North Carolina , resulting in numerous street closures in several counties . The Crabtree Valley Mall in Raleigh was closed after the parking lots became inundated . A number of low @-@ lying and creek @-@ side communities in Apex , Cary , Clayton , Durham , and Raleigh were flooded . A tornado was spawned near <unk> , where it downed several trees and damaged a large storage building . 
 The storm produced over 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of rain in southeastern Virginia , with up to 7 @.@ 73 inches ( 196 mm ) in Williamsburg . Several roads in Accomack County were left impassable due to high water . One indirect death occurred due to a car accident in southwestern Virginia on June 7 . In Maryland , rainfall in the eastern portion of the state was generally between 3 and 6 inches ( 76 and 152 mm ) . Poor drainage in some areas resulted in multiple road closures in Caroline and Talbot counties , the latter of which reported about 20 roads shutdown . Radar estimates of precipitation in Delaware were between 2 and 4 inches ( 51 and 102 mm ) , while 5 @.@ 19 inches ( 132 mm ) was observed in Smyrna . Flash flooding occurred in areas of poor drainage , causing several road closures , especially in central Delaware . Radar estimates of precipitation in eastern Pennsylvania ranged from 2 to 4 inches ( 51 to 102 mm ) , with a peak of 4 @.@ 09 inches ( 104 mm ) in Langhorne . There , the Neshaminy Creek reached 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) above flood stage . In Delaware County , flooding was reporting along the Chester Creek . 
 Heavy rainfall was reported in New Jersey , amounting to more than 5 in ( 130 mm ) in <unk> . The heavy precipitation resulted in traffic jams and caused flooding along the Millstone and Raritan rivers . Three car accidents were blamed on the storm , two of which were fatal . Numerous roads flooded across the state , leading to several high @-@ water rescues . Overflowing rivers and streams in Bergen and Union counties flooded low @-@ lying and poor drainage areas . The Rockaway River at Boonton reached 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) above flood stage from the afternoon of June 8 until the following morning . Winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) downed some trees and power lines , leaving 500 – 2 @,@ 000 residences without power . A plane traveling from Palm Beach , Florida to Boston , Massachusetts had to make an emergency landing at Newark Liberty International Airport after being struck by lightning . In New York , 4 @.@ 77 inches ( 121 mm ) fell at Central Park in New York City in only a few hours , causing flash flooding in some areas . Train 3 on the New York City Subway briefly suspended service from 96th Street station to the 148th Street station . 
 In Connecticut , the storm dropped up to 6 @.@ 64 inches ( 169 mm ) in Gales Ferry , causing flash flooding in Fairfield and New London counties . About 3 to 5 inches ( 76 to 127 mm ) of precipitation fell throughout Rhode Island , flooding many streets , several basements , and stranding a number of cars , particularly in Providence County . An exit ramp of Interstate 95 in Providence was flooded with 1 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 46 m ) of water . An estimated 3 and 5 inches ( 76 and 127 mm ) of precipitation fell in eastern Massachusetts . A number of roads were inundated in Bristol County , including Routes 24 and 79 and the ramps onto Interstate 95 . Many cars were stranded in about 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) of water in Fall River . Several basements were flooded in New Bedford , while several streets were flooded or left impassable . Elsewhere in New England , light rainfall was observed in Maine , New Hampshire , and Vermont . 
 As a post @-@ tropical cyclone , Andrea brought rain and gale @-@ force winds to Atlantic Canada . Officials closed the Confederation Bridge to high @-@ profile vehicles due to the blustery conditions . More than 4 @,@ 000 customers in Nova Scotia and parts of New Brunswick lost power as the storm moved through on June 8 . 
 = Triple H = 
 Paul Michael Levesque ( born July 27 , 1969 ) , better known by his ring name Triple H ( an abbreviation of his previous debut name Hunter Hearst Helmsley ) , is an American professional wrestler , corporate executive , and actor . He is the Executive Vice President of Talent , Live Events , & Creative of WWE , creator of WWE NXT , and the founder and senior producer of NXT . He is married into the McMahon family , which maintains majority ownership of WWE . In addition to his corporate role , Levesque makes regular appearances on WWE television as an authority figure and former wrestler . 
 Levesque entered several bodybuilding contests after graduating high school in 1987 . He commenced his professional wrestling career in the International Wrestling Federation ( IWF ) in 1992 , under the ring name Terra Ryzing , and won his first championship , the IWF Heavyweight Championship . He joined World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) in 1994 , where he was soon repackaged as Jean @-@ Paul Lévesque , a French Canadian aristocrat . In 1995 , Levesque moved to the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF , now WWE ) , where he became Hunter Hearst Helmsley and , later , Triple H. In 1997 , Triple H co @-@ founded the influential D @-@ Generation X stable , which became a major element of the WWF 's " Attitude Era " . After winning his first WWF Championship and beginning a storyline marriage with Stephanie McMahon in 1999 , Triple H became a regular main event wrestler ( in 2003 , Levesque married McMahon in real life ) . Over the next two decades , he would win a total of 14 world championships and lead stables The McMahon @-@ Helmsley Faction , Evolution , and The Authority , with whom he continues to perform . From 2010 onwards , Triple H began wrestling on a part @-@ time basis as he took on a greater behind @-@ the @-@ scenes role within WWE . 
 In the course of his career , Levesque has held a total of 25 championships , including nine WWF / E Championships and five World Heavyweight Championships . He is the seventh Triple Crown Champion and the second Grand Slam Champion in WWF / E history . Triple H was also the winner of the 1997 King of the Ring tournament , and the 2002 and 2016 Royal Rumbles . He has headlined WrestleMania , WWE 's flagship pay @-@ per @-@ view , seven times , thus tying Hulk Hogan 's record . 
 Outside of professional wrestling , he has made numerous guest appearances in film and on television , including the lead role in the WWE Studios production The Chaperone . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Levesque was born in Nashua , New Hampshire . He watched wrestling for the first time when he was five , a match involving Chief Jay Strongbow . Levesque began to take up bodybuilding at the age of 14 , because he wanted to look like professional wrestlers . Levesque attended Nashua South High School , where he played baseball and basketball . Following his graduation from high school in 1987 , Levesque continued to enter several bodybuilding competitions , and was crowned Mr. Teenage New Hampshire in 1988 at the age of 19 . While working as a manager at Gold 's Gym in Nashua , New Hampshire , Levesque was introduced to world champion powerlifter , Ted <unk> , who at the time was employed with the WWE . Eventually , after numerous attempts , Levesque persuaded <unk> to introduce him to former pro wrestler and trainer , Killer Kowalski , who owned and ran a professional wrestling training school based in Malden , Massachusetts . In early 1992 , Levesque enrolled in Kowalski 's wrestling school , where he began to train as a professional wrestler . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 1992 – 1994 ) = = = 
 Levesque was trained to wrestle by Killer Kowalski at his school in Malden , Massachusetts . His class mates included fellow future WWF wrestlers Chyna and Perry Saturn . Levesque made his professional debut on March 24 , 1992 in Kowalski 's promotion , the International Wrestling Federation ( IWF ) , performing as Terra Ryzing . In July 1992 , Levesque defeated Mad Dog Richard to win the IWF Heavyweight Championship . 
 Levesque wrestled for various promotions on the East Coast independent circuit until 1994 . During this period , he was managed by John Rodeo . 
 = = = World Championship Wrestling ( 1994 – 1995 ) = = = 
 In early 1994 , Levesque signed a one @-@ year contract with World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) . In his first televised match , Levesque debuted as a villain named Terror Risin ' , defeating Keith Cole . His ring name was soon modified to Terra Ryzing , which he used until mid @-@ 1994 , when he was renamed Jean @-@ Paul Lévesque . This gimmick referred to his surname 's French origins and he was asked to speak with a French accent , as he could not speak French . During this time , he began using his finishing maneuver , the Pedigree . 
 Levesque had a brief feud with Alex Wright that ended at Starrcade 1994 with Wright pinning him . Between late 1994 and early 1995 , Levesque briefly teamed with Lord Steven Regal , whose upper class British persona was similar to Levesque 's character . The team was short @-@ lived , however , as Levesque left for the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) in January 1995 after WCW turned down his request to be promoted as a singles competitor . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = The Connecticut <unk> ( 1995 – 1997 ) = = = = 
 In a modified version of his gimmick in WCW , Levesque started his WWF career as a " Connecticut <unk> " . According to Levesque , JJ Dillion originally gave him the name of Reginald DuPont Helmsley , but Levesque asked for a name to play with the first letters ; management ultimately agreed to his suggestion of Hunter Hearst Helmsley . He appeared in taped vignettes , in which he talked about how to use proper etiquette , up until his wrestling debut on the April 30 , 1995 episode of Wrestling Challenge . He made his WWF pay @-@ per @-@ view debut at SummerSlam , where he defeated Bob Holly . In the fall of 1995 , Levesque began a feud with the hog farmer Henry O. <unk> , culminating in an infamous Hog Pen match at In Your House 5 : Seasons Beatings , where Levesque was victorious . 
 Although he was highly promoted in the first few months after his debut , Levesque 's career stalled during 1996 , starting off with a feud with Duke " The <unk> " <unk> following a loss during the Free for All at 1996 Royal Rumble . Up until that event , his angle included appearing on television each week with a different female valet ( which included Playboy Playmates Shae Marks and <unk> John ) . Sable was his valet at WrestleMania XII , and after his loss to The Ultimate Warrior , as part of the storyline , he took his aggressions out on her . The debuting Marc Mero – her real @-@ life husband – came to her rescue , starting a feud between the two wrestlers . 
 On June 1 , 1996 , Helmsley appeared on an episode of Superstars in a match against Marty Garner . When Levesque attempted to perform the Pedigree , Garner mistook the maneuver for a double underhook suplex and tried to jump up with the move , causing him to land squarely on top of his head and suffer neck damage . Garner sued the WWF , eventually settling out of court and later discussed the incident in an appearance on The Montel Williams Show . 
 Levesque was known backstage as one of the members of The Kliq , a stable of wrestlers including ; Shawn Michaels , Kevin Nash , Sean Waltman and Scott Hall , who were known for influencing Vince McMahon and the WWF creative team . It has been claimed that he was scheduled to win the 1996 King of the Ring tournament , but the victory was instead awarded to Stone Cold Steve Austin after the Madison Square Garden Incident , in which the Kliq broke character after a match to say goodbye to the departing Nash and Hall . Despite the punishment , Helmsley did have success following the MSG Incident . Mr. Perfect became his manager and he won the Intercontinental Championship for the first time on October 21 , 1996 , defeating Marc Mero . When Mr. Perfect left the WWF , his departure was explained to be a result of Helmsley turning his back on his manager as soon as he won the Intercontinental Championship . Levesque held the belt for nearly four months before dropping it to Rocky Maivia on the February 13 , 1997 special episode of Monday Night Raw , called Thursday Raw Thursday . For a very brief time , Helmsley was accompanied by Mr. Hughes , who was his storyline bodyguard . After losing the Intercontinental title , he feuded with Goldust , defeating him at WrestleMania 13 . During their feud , Chyna debuted as his new bodyguard . 
 = = = = D @-@ Generation X ( 1997 – 1999 ) = = = = 
 Helmsley was being highlighted again in 1997 , winning the 1997 King of the Ring tournament by defeating Mankind in the finals . Later that year , Shawn Michaels , Helmsley , Chyna and Rick Rude formed D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) . This stable became known for pushing the envelope , as Michaels and Helmsley made risqué promos – using the catchphrase " Suck It " and a " crotch chop " hand motion , – and sarcastically derided Bret Hart and Canada . By that point , Helmsley had fully dropped the " <unk> snob " gimmick , appearing in T @-@ shirts and leather jackets . During this period , his ring name was shortened to simply Triple H. Even after the DX versus Hart Foundation storyline ended , Helmsley continued to feud with the sole remaining Hart family member Owen Hart over the European Championship . This ended in a match between the two at WrestleMania XIV , with the stipulation that Chyna had to be handcuffed to then @-@ Commissioner Sgt. Slaughter . Helmsley won after Chyna threw powder into Slaughter 's eyes , momentarily " blinding " him and allowing her to interfere in the match . 
 After WrestleMania , Michaels was forced into temporary retirement due to a legitimate back injury sustained at the Royal Rumble , with Triple H taking over the leadership position in DX , claiming that his now @-@ former associate had " dropped the ball " . He introduced the returning X @-@ Pac the night after WrestleMania and joined forces with The New Age Outlaws . As 1998 went along , DX became more popular , turning the group from villains to fan favorites . During this time , Levesque adopted an entrance gimmick of asking the crowd " Are you ready ? I said , are you ready ? " , followed by a parody of rival promotion WCW 's ring announcer Michael Buffer 's famous catch @-@ phrase , " Let 's get ready to rumble " , substituting the word " rumble " with the DX slogan , " suck it " . Also during this time , he began a feud with the leader of the Nation of Domination and rising WWF villain , The Rock . This storyline rivalry eventually led to a feud over the Intercontinental Championship , which Triple H won in a ladder match at SummerSlam . He did not hold the title long , however , as he was sidelined with a legitimate knee injury . When The Rock won the WWF Championship at Survivor Series , the rivalry between the two continued , as DX fought The Corporation stable , of which The Rock was the main star . Triple H received a shot at the WWF Championship on the January 25 , 1999 Raw Is War in an " I Quit " match against The Rock , but the match ended when Triple H was forced to quit or see his aide Chyna chokeslammed by Kane . This began a new angle for Triple H , as Chyna betrayed him by attacking him after the match and joining The Corporation . 
 At WrestleMania XV , Triple H lost to Kane after Chyna interfered on his behalf , and she was thought to have rejoined DX . Later on in the night , he betrayed his long @-@ time friend and fellow DX member X @-@ Pac by helping Shane McMahon retain the European Championship and joined The <unk> turning heel in the process . In April , he started to move away from his DX look , taping his fists for matches , sporting new and shorter wrestling trunks , and adopting a shorter hairstyle . Levesque 's gimmick changed as he fought to earn a WWF Championship opportunity . After numerous failed attempts at winning the championship , Triple H and Mankind challenged then WWF Champion Stone Cold Steve Austin to a triple threat match at SummerSlam , which featured Jesse " The Body " Ventura as the special guest referee . Mankind won the match by pinning Austin . The following night on Raw Is War , Triple H defeated Mankind to win his first WWF Championship . 
 Triple H dropped the WWF Championship to Mr. McMahon on the September 16 , 1999 episode of SmackDown ! before regaining it at Unforgiven in a Six @-@ Pack Challenge that included Davey Boy Smith , Big Show , Kane , The Rock , and Mankind . He defeated Stone Cold Steve Austin at No Mercy before dropping the title to Big Show at Survivor Series . Triple H then continued his feud with Mr. McMahon by marrying his daughter , Stephanie McMahon . He then defeated McMahon at Armageddon . As a result of the feud , an angle with Triple H and Stephanie began which carried the WWF throughout the next seventeen months ; together they were known as The McMahon @-@ Helmsley Faction . 
 = = = = McMahon @-@ Helmsley Era ( 2000 – 2001 ) = = = = 
 By January 2000 , Triple H had dubbed himself " The Game " , implying that he was on top of the wrestling world ( as in not merely the " best in the game " , but that he was in fact " the game " ) and was nicknamed " The Cerebral Assassin " by Jim Ross ( " The Game " nickname was originally intended for Owen Hart , with Triple H adopting the nickname in honor of Owen ) . On the January 3 episode of Raw Is War , Triple H defeated Big Show to win his third WWF championship . 
 Triple H feuded with Mick Foley in early 2000 . They both fought at the Royal Rumble in a Street Fight Match for the WWF Championship , which Triple H won after performing two Pedigrees on Foley . The feud ended at No Way Out in a Hell in a Cell , where Triple H retained the title and forced Foley to retire . Triple H pinned The Rock at WrestleMania 2000 to retain the title , but lost it at Backlash to The Rock , thus ending his reign at 118 days . He regained it three weeks later , in an Iron Man match at Judgment Day , only to lose it back to The Rock at King of the Ring . Triple H then entered a storyline with Chris Jericho , who upset Triple H by defeated him for the WWF Championship on the April 17 episode of Raw Is War before the title was returned to Triple H because of a fast count made by referee Earl Hebner , and Jericho 's reign is not being recognized . Their feud culminated in a Last Man Standing match at Fully Loaded which was won by Triple H. Afterwards , Triple H entered a feud with Kurt Angle , initially over the WWF Championship , but then as a love triangle between himself , Angle , and Stephanie . Both Triple H and Angle wrestled for the WWF Championship against The Rock at SummerSlam , but The Rock retained the title after Angle received a legit concussion during a botched Pedigree on a commentary table by Triple H. The feud culminated at Unforgiven , where Triple H defeated Angle with a Pedigree after a low blow from McMahon . 
 After a brief run as a face that saw him defeating Chris Benoit at No Mercy , Triple H reverted to his heel persona and restarted his feud with Stone Cold Steve Austin when it emerged that Triple H had paid off Rikishi to run down Austin at Survivor Series , causing him to take a year off . While in the storyline Triple H said he had done it in order to shield Austin from the WWF Championship and end his career , in reality Austin 's previous neck injuries started bothering him again , forcing him to have surgery . In November 2000 , Triple H and Austin had a match at Survivor Series that ended when Triple H tried to trick Austin into coming into the parking lot to run him over again , only to have Austin lift his car up with a forklift and flip the car onto its roof 10 feet high . Triple H returned a few weeks later to attack Austin , and their feud continued into 2001 and ended in a Three Stages of Hell match in which Triple H defeated Austin . In 2001 , Triple H also feuded with The Undertaker , who defeated him at WrestleMania X @-@ Seven . The night after WrestleMania , Triple H interfered in a steel cage match between Austin ( who had just won the WWF Championship ) and The Rock where he joined forces with Austin and double teamed on The Rock , forming a tag team called The Two @-@ Man Power Trip . Triple H then defeated Chris Jericho for his third Intercontinental Championship on the April 5 SmackDown ! , and won it for a fourth time two weeks later by defeating Jeff Hardy . Triple H then became a world tag team champion by winning the WWF Tag Team Championship for the first time at Backlash when he and Austin defeated Kane and The Undertaker in a " Winner Take All " tag team match . As Triple H was still Intercontinental Champion , the win made him a double champion . 
 During the May 21 , 2001 episode of Raw Is War , he suffered a legitimate and career @-@ threatening injury . In the night 's main event , he and Austin were defending the WWF Tag Team Championship against Chris Jericho and Chris Benoit . At one point , Jericho had Austin trapped in the Walls of Jericho and Triple H ran in to break it up , but just as he did , he suffered a tear in his left quadriceps muscle , causing it to come completely off the bone . Despite his inability to place any weight on his leg , Triple H was able to complete the match . He even allowed Jericho to put him in the Walls of Jericho , a move that places considerable stress on the quadriceps . The tear required an operation , which was performed by orthopedic surgeon Dr. James Andrews . This injury brought an abrupt end to the McMahon @-@ Helmsley Era , as the rigorous rehabilitation process kept Triple H out of action for over eight months , completely missing The Invasion storyline . 
 = = = = Evolution ( 2002 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 Triple H returned to Raw as a face on January 7 , 2002 at Madison Square Garden . He won the Royal Rumble and received an Undisputed WWF Championship match at WrestleMania X8 , where Triple H defeated Chris Jericho for the Undisputed WWF Championship . After holding the title for a month , Triple H dropped it to Hulk Hogan at Backlash . Triple H then became exclusive to the SmackDown ! roster due to the WWF draft lottery and continued to feud with Jericho , culminating in a Hell in a Cell match at Judgment Day , which Triple H won . On the June 6 , 2002 episode of SmackDown ! , Triple H defeated Hogan in a # 1 contender match for the Undisputed WWF Championship at the King of the Ring against The Undertaker , but was unsuccessful at the event . 
 In the interim , between the Royal Rumble and WrestleMania , the McMahon @-@ Helmsley Faction was brought to an official on @-@ screen conclusion . By the time he returned , Triple H 's on @-@ screen marriage to Stephanie McMahon was faltering , so Stephanie faked a pregnancy in order to get him back on her side . When he learned that it was fake , he dumped her publicly on Raw when they were supposed to renew their wedding vows . Stephanie aligned with Jericho afterward , but she was forced to leave after losing a triple threat match on Raw the night after WrestleMania when she was pinned by Triple H. The divorce , and thus the storyline , was finalized at Vengeance . 
 Meanwhile , Shawn Michaels had made his return to WWE and joined the New World Order ( nWo ) . Michaels and Kevin Nash planned to bring Triple H over to Raw in order to put him into the group . Mr. McMahon , however , disbanded the nWo following several backstage complications and brought in Eric Bischoff as the Raw general manager . One of Bischoff 's first intentions was to follow up on the nWo 's plan and bring Triple H over to the Raw roster . Triple H went to the Raw brand , reuniting with Michaels , but on July 22 he turned on Michaels by performing a Pedigree on him during what was supposed to be a DX reunion , turning heel once again . The following week , Triple H smashed Michaels ' face into a car window to prove that Michaels was weak . These events led to the beginning of a long storyline rivalry between the former partners and an eventual " <unk> Street Fight " at SummerSlam , in which Michaels came out of retirement to win . Afterwards , however , Triple H attacked him with a sledgehammer and Michaels was carried out of the ring . 
 Before September 2 , 2002 , WWE recognized only one world champion , the Undisputed WWE Champion , for both the Raw and SmackDown ! brands . After SummerSlam , then Undisputed WWE Champion Brock Lesnar became exclusive to SmackDown ! , leaving Raw without a world champion . Raw general manager Eric Bischoff then awarded Triple H the Big Gold Belt ( which had been used for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship and WCW World Heavyweight Championship ) making him the first World Heavyweight Champion . Triple H retained his title against Rob Van Dam at Unforgiven when Ric Flair hit Van Dam with a sledgehammer . 
 In October 2002 , Triple H would begin a controversial feud with Kane , leading to a match at No Mercy on October 20 in which both Kane 's Intercontinental Championship and Triple H 's World Heavyweight Championship were at stake . In the weeks preceding the match , Triple H claimed that , several years earlier , Kane had an unrequited relationship with a woman named Katie Vick . He went on to claim that , after Vick was killed in a car crash , Kane ( the driver ) raped her corpse . Triple H later threatened to show video footage of Kane committing the act in question ; however , the footage that finally aired showed Triple H ( dressed as Kane ) simulating necrophilia with a mannequin in a casket ; Kane 's tag team partner The Hurricane responded the following week by showing a video of Triple H ( rather , someone wearing a Triple H series of masks ) getting an enema . The angle was very unpopular with fans , and was de @-@ emphasised before the title match . Triple H went on to defeat Kane at No Mercy , unifying the two titles . 
 Triple H eventually lost the World Heavyweight Championship to Shawn Michaels in the first Elimination Chamber match at Survivor Series . He defeated Van Dam to earn a title shot at Armageddon with Michaels as the special guest referee . He regained the title from Michaels in a Three Stages of Hell match at Armageddon . 
 In January 2003 , Triple H formed a stable known as Evolution with Ric Flair , Randy Orton , and Batista . Triple H and Flair challenged Rob Van Dam and Kane for the World Tag Team Championship , but they lost the match . The group was pushed on Raw from 2003 to 2004 and the height of their dominance occurred after Armageddon , where every member of Evolution left the pay @-@ per @-@ view holding a title . Triple H held the World Heavyweight Championship for most of 2003 , defending it at a match against Booker T at WrestleMania XIX in an angle with racist undertones . He lost the title after 280 days in September 2003 at Unforgiven to Bill Goldberg , in a match with the stipulation that had Goldberg lost , he would have to retire . After a failed attempt to win back the title from Goldberg in a rematch at the Survivor Series , he finally regained the championship against Goldberg in a triple threat match at Armageddon which also involved Kane . At the 2004 Royal Rumble , Triple H and Shawn Michaels fought in a Last Man Standing match to a double countout , so Triple H retained the title as a result . Triple H dropped the title to Chris Benoit at WrestleMania XX , and he was unable to reclaim the championship from Benoit in subsequent rematches , including a rematch from WrestleMania between Triple H , Benoit , and Shawn Michaels at Backlash . 
 He then ended his feud with Michaels , defeating him in a Hell in a Cell match at Bad Blood , which became the longest Hell in a Cell match in history . After another failed attempt , losing to Benoit at Vengeance , he focused on Eugene , beating him at SummerSlam . Triple H then regained the title from former associate Randy Orton at Unforgiven . Following a triple threat World Heavyweight title defense against Benoit and Edge on the November 29 , 2004 episode of Raw , the World Heavyweight Championship became vacant for the first time . At New Year 's Revolution , Triple H won the Elimination Chamber to begin his tenth world title reign . At WrestleMania 21 , Triple H lost the championship to Batista , and subsequently lost two rematches at Backlash and Vengeance . After Vengeance , Triple H took a hiatus from WWE due to suffering from minor neck problems . 
 After four @-@ month hiatus , Triple H returned to Raw on October 3 , 2005 as part of WWE Homecoming . He teamed with fellow Evolution member Flair to defeat Chris Masters and Carlito . After the match , Triple H turned on Flair hitting Flair with a sledgehammer , sparking a feud between the duo . Flair defeated Triple H in a steel cage match at Taboo Tuesday for Flair 's Intercontinental Championship . Subsequently , Triple H defeated Flair in a non @-@ title Last Man Standing match at Survivor Series to end their feud . 
 = = = = D @-@ Generation X reunion ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 Although Triple H failed to win the Royal Rumble match at the Royal Rumble , another championship opportunity arose for Triple H in the Road to WrestleMania Tournament . He won the tournament , granting him a match for the WWE Championship at WrestleMania 22 , where Triple H and John Cena fought in the main event for the title , which Triple H lost via submission . Later that month at Backlash , Triple H was involved in another WWE Championship match , fighting Edge and Cena in a triple threat match , where he lost again . Angered at his loss , a bloodied Triple H used his sledgehammer to attack both Edge and Cena and then performed a number of DX crotch chops . Triple H unsuccessfully attempted to win the WWE title from Cena on numerous occasions , blaming his shortcomings on Vince McMahon , which eventually led to a feud between the McMahons and Triple H. 
 Shawn Michaels returned on the June 12 episode of Raw and soon reunited with Triple H to reform D @-@ Generation X , turning Triple H into a fan favorite once again for the first time since 2002 . DX defeated The Spirit Squad at Vengeance in a 5 @-@ on @-@ 2 handicap match . They continued their feud with Mr. McMahon , Shane McMahon and The Spirit Squad for several weeks . They then defeated The Spirit Squad again on the July 18 , 2006 episode of Saturday Night 's Main Event in a 5 @-@ on @-@ 2 elimination match . They then again defeated the McMahons at SummerSlam , withstanding the attack of several wrestlers who assaulted them before the match <unk> directed by Mr. McMahon . At Unforgiven , D @-@ Generation X then defeated the McMahons and ECW World Champion Big Show in a 3 @-@ on @-@ 2 handicap Hell in a Cell match . During the match , DX embarrassed Vince by shoving his face in between Big Show 's buttocks , and DX won when Triple H broke a sledgehammer over the shoulders of Mr. McMahon after Michaels performed a Sweet Chin Music on him . 
 At Cyber Sunday during DX 's feud with Rated @-@ RKO , special guest referee Eric Bischoff allowed the illegal use of a weapon to give Rated @-@ RKO the win . At Survivor Series , DX got their revenge when their team defeated Edge and Orton 's team in a clean sweep during their five @-@ on @-@ five elimination match . In January 2007 , at New Year 's Revolution , DX and Rated @-@ RKO fought to a no contest after Triple H suffered a legitimate torn right quadriceps ( similar to the one he suffered in 2001 in his other leg ) 15 minutes into the match . Surgery was successfully performed on January 9 , 2007 by Dr. James Andrews . 
 = = = = WWE Champion ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 Triple H made his return at SummerSlam , where he defeated King Booker . Two months later at No Mercy , Triple H was originally scheduled to face Umaga in a singles match . However , at the start of the night , Triple H decided to challenge newly named WWE Champion Randy Orton , reigniting his rivalry with Orton that had been interrupted following his injury . Triple H won the match , winning his eleventh world championship and sixth WWE Championship , and then defended his title against Umaga in his regularly scheduled match after Mr. McMahon declared the match to be for the WWE title . After that McMahon gave Orton a rematch against Triple H in a Last Man Standing match in the main event , and Triple H lost after failing to beat the ten count when Orton hit his RKO onto the announcer 's table . Triple H 's title reign at No Mercy is the fifth shortest reign in WWE history , only lasting through the duration of the event . After winning the Raw Elimination Chamber match at No Way Out , Triple H gained a WWE Championship match by outlasting five other men , last eliminating Jeff Hardy after a Pedigree on a steel chair . However , at WrestleMania XXIV , Orton retained after punting Triple H and pinning John Cena following Triple H 's Pedigree on Cena . A month later , at Backlash , Triple H won the title in a fatal four @-@ way elimination match against Orton , Cena , and John " Bradshaw " Layfield , tying the record for most WWE Championship reigns with The Rock . Triple H then retained the title against Orton at Judgment Day in a steel cage match and again at One Night Stand in a Last Man Standing match . Orton suffered a legitimate collarbone injury during the match , thus ending the feud prematurely . 
 Triple H then went on to defeat cleanly John Cena to successfully defend the WWE Championship at Night of Champions . On the June 23 episode of Raw , Triple H was drafted to the SmackDown brand as a part of the 2008 WWE draft , in the process making the WWE Championship exclusive to SmackDown . He defended the championship over the summer by defeating the likes of Edge at The Great American Bash and The Great Khali at SummerSlam , and was the only champion to retain his title at Unforgiven 's Championship Scramble matches . After this , he successfully defended it against Jeff Hardy both at No Mercy and Cyber Sunday . 
 At Survivor Series , Triple H was scheduled to defend the championship against Vladimir Kozlov and Jeff Hardy , but Hardy was kept out of the match after a scripted attack and injury . During the match , SmackDown general manager Vickie Guerrero announced that Edge had returned and introduced him into the contest . Hardy interfered and hit Triple H with a steel chair meant for Edge , thus costing him the title after a 210 days reign and resulting in Edge winning his sixth world title . After failing to regain the title at Armageddon , Triple H entered seventh in the 2009 Royal Rumble , but was last eliminated by Randy Orton . In February at Elimination Chamber , Triple H won the WWE Championship in the SmackDown Elimination Chamber match , setting the record for most reigns at eight . That record stood until 2011 when John Cena won his ninth WWE Championship . 
 On the February 16 episode of Raw , Triple H made an appearance aiding Stephanie and Shane McMahon , after they were attacked by Randy Orton . On the February 20 episode of SmackDown , Triple H was interviewed by Jim Ross ; in the interview , footage was shown highlighting the events that occurred on the February 16 episode of Raw . Ross asked Triple H how he felt seeing that footage , in response , he broke character ( after 5 years of marriage ) by admitting that Vince McMahon is his father @-@ in @-@ law , that Shane is his brother @-@ in @-@ law , and that Stephanie is his wife , thus creating a rivalry between Triple H and Orton . On the February 23 episode of Raw , Triple H confronted Orton , before attacking him , Ted DiBiase , and Cody Rhodes ( a group known as The Legacy ) with a sledgehammer and chasing them from the arena . At WrestleMania XXV , Triple H defeated Orton to retain the title . He , with Shane McMahon and Batista , then faced Orton and The Legacy in a six @-@ man tag match for the WWE Championship at Backlash . He lost the title to Orton after trying to stop Batista from hitting Cody Rhodes with a chair , allowing Orton to hit the RKO and punt to the head . After six weeks off of TV , selling the injury , he lost a Three Stages of Hell title match to Orton at The Bash . At Night of Champions , he again lost a title match to Orton , this time a triple threat match , also involving John Cena . 
 = = = = DX 's final run and various feuds ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 On the August 10 episode of Raw , Triple H met with Michaels at an office cafeteria in Texas where Michaels was working as a chef ; throughout the show , Triple H tried to convince Michaels to return to WWE from hiatus . After several incidents ( including grease grill burgers on fire and Michaels shouting at a little girl ) , Michaels agreed to team with Triple H to face The Legacy at SummerSlam , superkicked the girl , and quit his chef job . On the August 17 episode of Raw , Triple H and Michaels officially reunited as DX , but as they were in the process of their in @-@ ring promo , The Legacy attacked them both . Their first match after reuniting was against The Legacy at SummerSlam , which they won . At Breaking Point , however , they lost to The Legacy in the first ever Submissions Count Anywhere match in WWE history . 
 At Hell in a Cell , DX defeated The Legacy in a Hell in a Cell match . DX unsuccessfully challenged John Cena for the WWE Championship in a triple threat match at Survivor Series , after which they remained friends and partners . On December 13 at TLC : Tables , Ladders and Chairs , DX defeated Jeri @-@ Show ( Chris Jericho and Big Show ) to win the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship in a Tables , Ladders , and Chairs match . This was their first tag team championship reign together . 
 On December 21 , Triple H announced that Hornswoggle was the new DX mascot . This came about after Hornswoggle sued DX for emotional and physical distress due to them not allowing him to join DX . After being taken to court where they were ruled guilty by a jury and judge consisting of dwarves , Michaels told Triple H that Hornswoggle could be the mascot . Triple H agreed to it only if the charges were dropped , which Hornswoggle agreed to . On January 11 , 2010 episode of Raw , Mike Tyson , who was the Raw guest host for the night , teamed with Jericho to face DX ; however , at the end of the bout , Tyson turned on Jericho and aligned himself with Triple H and Michaels . On the February 8 episode of Raw , DX lost the Unified Tag Team Championship to ShoMiz ( The Miz and Big Show ) in a triple threat elimination tag match , also involving The Straight Edge Society ( CM Punk and Luke Gallows ) . On the March 1 episode of Raw , they lost a rematch for the title . This was their last televised match before Michaels retired . Michaels and Triple H had a non @-@ wrestling reunion at the 2010 Tribute to the Troops . 
 On February 21 , Triple H eliminated then WWE Champion Sheamus from the Elimination Chamber match , though he did not win the title himself . Sheamus attacked him weeks later , setting up a match at WrestleMania XXVI , which Triple H won . Also at WrestleMania , Michaels lost to The Undertaker and was forced to retire . While giving a farewell speech the next night , Sheamus attacked him and set up a rematch at Extreme Rules . Sheamus attacked Triple H at the start of the show , before later winning the match . Triple H then took time off to recover from injuries , completely missing The Nexus storyline . Triple H made an untelevised appearance on October 30 at the WWE Fan Appreciation Event and also at the 2010 Tribute to the Troops . 
 = = = = Chief Operating Officer ( 2011 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 On the February 21 , 2011 episode of Raw , Triple H returned to WWE by interrupting the return of The Undertaker and challenging him to a match at WrestleMania XXVII , which later became a No Holds Barred match . A week later , he put Sheamus through the announce table with a Pedigree , in retaliation for Sheamus giving him a ten @-@ month injury . At WrestleMania XXVII , Triple H lost , which extended Undertaker 's undefeated streak to 19 – 0 ; however , Undertaker was carried from the ring on a stretcher whereas Triple H left the ring on his feet . 
 At the end of the July 18 episode of Raw , Triple H returned on behalf of WWE 's board of directors to relieve his father @-@ in @-@ law Vince McMahon of his duties . This was followed by the announcement that he had been assigned to take over as Chief Operating Officer ( COO ) of the WWE . This was during a storyline where CM Punk had won the WWE Championship and left the company . Though a new champion was crowned , Triple H helped re @-@ sign Punk and upheld both championship reigns . He announced he would referee a match to unify both WWE Championships at SummerSlam . Although he counted a pinfall for CM Punk to win , John Cena 's leg was on the ropes , which would break the pin . Regardless , Triple H 's longtime friend Kevin Nash attacked Punk immediately after the match to allow Alberto Del Rio to become the new champion . Though Nash and Punk demanded a match against each other , Triple H fired Nash for insubordination and booked himself in a No Disqualification match at Night of Champions with his position of COO on the line . He won the match despite interference from John Laurinaitis , Nash , The Miz and R @-@ Truth . After repeated attacks from these wrestlers in various matches , the majority of WWE 's on @-@ screen staff gave Triple H a vote of no confidence . Mr. McMahon returned to relieve him of his duties on Raw , though he remained the COO . He was replaced as general manager of Raw by Laurinaitis , who booked him in a tag team match against Miz and R @-@ Truth at Vengeance . During the match , Nash once again attacked him and did so the following night on the October 24 episode of Raw , hospitalizing him ( kayfabe ) . WWE later announced that Triple H had sustained a fractured vertebra , and would be out of action . He returned on December 12 , as part of the Slammy Awards . On December 18 , he defeated Nash at Tables , Ladders , and Chairs in sledgehammer ladder match , after attacking him with a sledgehammer . 
 Triple H returned on the January 30 , 2012 episode of Raw to evaluate Laurinaitis ' performance as general manager . Before he could announce the decision , he was interrupted by the returning Undertaker . After initially refusing the rematch as he did not want to tarnish The Undertaker 's legacy , Triple H accepted the challenge after being called a coward who lives in Shawn Michaels ' shadow , on the condition their rematch be contested inside Hell in a Cell . Triple H went on to lose this match at WrestleMania XXVIII . 
 Triple H returned on the April 30 episode of Raw , when he refused to give in to Brock Lesnar 's unreasonable contract demands , resulting in Lesnar attacking him and storyline breaking his arm . Upon his return two weeks later , Triple H was confronted by Lesnar 's legal representative , Paul Heyman , who announced Lesnar was filing a lawsuit against WWE for breach of contract . After he accosted Heyman , Heyman threatened another lawsuit against Triple H for assault and battery . At the No Way Out in June , Triple H challenged Lesnar , who was not present , to a match at SummerSlam , which Heyman refused on Lesnar 's behalf the following night on Raw . At Raw 1000 , Stephanie McMahon managed to goad Heyman into accepting her husband 's challenge against Lesnar . To anger Triple H , Lesnar broke his best friend Shawn Michaels 's arm on the August 13 episode of Raw . Six days later at SummerSlam , Lesnar defeated Triple H via submission after once again breaking his arm in the storyline . 
 On the August 27 episode of Raw , Triple H was supposed to address his potential retirement , but did not make a definitive decision . On the December 17 episode of Raw , Triple H made a non @-@ wrestling appearance for the 2012 Slammy Awards debuting with his new haircut . 
 Triple H returned on the February 25 , 2013 episode of Raw , brawling with Brock Lesnar after he attempted to attack Mr. McMahon . The brawl resulted in Lesnar having his head split open and requiring 18 stitches . The following week , Triple H issued a challenge to Lesnar , requesting a rematch with him at WrestleMania 29 , which Lesnar accepted on the condition that he could choose the stipulation . The following week , after Triple H signed the contract and assaulted Heyman , the stipulation was revealed as No Holds Barred with Triple H 's career on the line . Triple H went on to win the match after hitting Lesnar with a Pedigree onto the steel steps . On the April 15 episode of Raw , Heyman challenged Triple H to face Lesnar in a steel cage match at Extreme Rules , which Triple H accepted the following week . Triple H ended up losing the match at the pay @-@ per @-@ view on May 19 thanks to interference from Heyman , and he also injured his jaw . 
 The next night on Raw , Triple H wrestled Heyman 's newest client , Curtis Axel . He suffered a storyline concussion and was deemed to have forfeited . Despite being medically cleared to wrestle before the June 3 episode of Raw , Vince and Stephanie McMahon did not allow Triple H to wrestle Axel , citing concerns for his well @-@ being and the safety of his children . In response , Triple H stormed out the arena and vowed to return to the ring the next week on Raw . On that episode , he lost to Axel when McMahon dubiously disqualified him , ordered Axel to leave the ring , then stole the bell and microphone to prevent the match from being restarted . 
 = = = = The Authority ( 2013 – 2015 ) = = = = 
 On the August 12 episode of Raw , Triple H announced that he would be the special guest referee of the SummerSlam main event : the WWE Championship match between champion John Cena and Daniel Bryan , before giving original referee Brad Maddox a Pedigree . At the event , after Bryan won the match and the title , Triple H would give Bryan a Pedigree so that Randy Orton could cash in his Money in the Bank and win the title , therefore turning heel for the first time since 2006 . Along with his wife Stephanie , they created The Authority , with The Shield as his enforcers and later Kane joining as the Director of Operations . 
 Over the coming weeks he set up handicap matches against any wrestlers who questioned his decisions , such as Big Show and Dolph Ziggler , even firing Cody Rhodes in retaliation for the latter 's insolence . On the October 7 episode of Raw , after " firing " Big Show , Show knocked him out in retaliation and was carried out by officials out of the arena . At the 2013 Slammy Awards , Triple H immediately performed a Pedigree on Orton after Bryan shoved him into Stephanie McMahon , despite Orton 's shock . 
 At WrestleMania XXX , Triple H lost to Bryan , thereby granting Bryan a part in the subsequent title match against Batista and champion Randy Orton . Triple H assaulted Bryan after the match and later attempted to prevent Bryan from winning the title by interfering and recruiting Scott Armstrong as a crooked referee , but these attempts were unsuccessful as Bryan won the title by making Batista submit . In order to end Bryan 's title reign , Triple H reformed Evolution with Orton and Batista on the April 18 episode of SmackDown , but Bryan remained champion due to The Shield turning on The Authority . At Extreme Rules , Evolution lost to The Shield and again at Payback in a No Holds Barred elimination match . On the June 2 episode of Raw , Batista would leave the group after Triple H refused to grant him his shot at the WWE World Heavyweight Championship . Triple H would then resort to " Plan B " , which would be Seth Rollins turning on The Shield and rejoining The Authority . 
 On the October 27 episode of Raw , Triple H would offer John Cena a chance to join forces with The Authority , which Cena refused . This led to Triple H announcing a five @-@ on @-@ five tag team elimination match for Survivor Series , with a team representing The Authority facing a team captained by Cena . On the November 3 episode of Raw , Mr. McMahon announced that if Team Authority would lose , they would be removed from power . On the November 21 episode of SmackDown , Triple H announced that if Team Cena lost , all of Team Cena , except Cena himself , would be fired . At Survivor Series , Big Show joined The Authority by betraying Cena , but Sting made his WWE debut , attacking crooked referee Scott Armstrong and Triple H , and assisted Dolph Ziggler in pinning Rollins to give Team Cena the victory , putting the Authority out of power . 
 After being out of power for a month , Rollins coaxed Cena into reinstating The Authority on the December 29 episode of Raw , by holding Raw guest host Edge hostage with Big Show . On the January 19 episode of Raw , Cena would defeat Rollins , Kane and Big Show in a handicap match when Sting distracted The Authority , allowing Cena to pin Rollins and win back the jobs of Ziggler , Ryback and Erick Rowan , who had been fired two weeks previously by Triple H and Stephanie . On January 26 , it was officially announced via WWE.com that Triple H challenged Sting to a " face @-@ to @-@ face " confrontation at Fastlane , which Sting accepted ; at the confrontation , Sting challenged Triple H to a match at WrestleMania 31 , which Triple H accepted . At WrestleMania , Triple H defeated Sting with interference from D @-@ Generation @-@ X , but shook hands with Sting after the match . After his match with Sting , he and Stephanie McMahon were later confronted by The Rock and Ronda Rousey during a promo regarding the record crowd at the event . 
 Throughout 2015 , Triple H maintained his role as the leader of The Authority , and was involved in mediating issues between Seth Rollins and Kane . Over the summer , Triple H began to test Rollins by having him defend the championship against Roman Reigns , Brock Lesnar , John Cena , and Sting . After Rollins suffered a legitimate severe knee injury at a live event , the WWE World Heavyweight Championship was vacated and it was announced that there would be a tournament to determine a new champion at Survivor Series . 
 On the November 9 episode of Raw , Triple H offered to give Reigns a bye to the finals of the tournament if he joined The Authority , but Reigns refused . At Survivor Series , Reigns defeated Dean Ambrose in the tournament finals to become WWE World Heavyweight Champion . Triple H came out and attempted to congratulate Reigns , but was instead speared by him . This allowed Sheamus to cash in his Money in the Bank contract and quickly defeat Reigns to win the championship , resulting in Sheamus aligning with The Authority . 
 = = = = WWE World Heavyweight Champion & Hiatus ( 2015 – Present ) = = = = 
 The Authority made a rematch between Reigns and Sheamus for the title on the November 30 episode of Raw , with the stipulation that Dean Ambrose and The Usos would lose their Intercontinental Championship and WWE Tag Team Championship title shots if Reigns failed to win the match in under 5 minutes and 15 seconds ( which was the length Reigns ' title reign at Survivor Series ) ; Reigns won by disqualification , allowing Ambrose and The Usos to keep their title shots . At the TLC : Tables , Ladders and Chairs pay @-@ per @-@ view , Sheamus retained the WWE World Heavyweight Championship against Reigns due to interference from The League of Nations . After the match , Reigns " snapped " and viciously attacked Sheamus as well as Triple H , who had come to calm Reigns . Due to the injuries ( kayfabe ) suffered from Reigns , Triple H took a hiatus from television . 
 Triple H returned at the 2016 Royal Rumble match for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship , as the unannounced 30th entrant . After eliminating the defending champion , Roman Reigns , he then eliminated Dean Ambrose to secure his second Royal Rumble win and 14th world championship overall . After breaking Reigns ' nose in storyline , Triple H was then challenged by Ambrose , whom he defeated at Roadblock to defend the title , before dropping it back to Reigns – who had become the # 1 contender for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship by pinning Dean Ambrose in a triple threat match that also involved Brock Lesnar at Fastlane – at WrestleMania 32 , ending his reign at 70 days . 
 = = Business career = = 
 In 2010 , Levesque 's role as an Executive Senior Advisor was officially formalized as he was given an office at WWE headquarters in Stamford , Connecticut . Levesque was named Executive Vice President , Talent and Live events in 2011 . In this role he oversees the talent relations and talent development departments , training of performers and management of worldwide recruitment . Levesque 's role within the company has been under much criticism since 2003 , as many fans and some wrestlers view it as a way to keep him on top on @-@ screen and to give him more television time . Levesque has spoken against this criticism and has denied all of it . Additionally , Levesque has been credited for losing in high profile matches that helped elevate the careers of younger wrestlers including John Cena , Randy Orton , Batista , Jeff Hardy , Brock Lesnar , Daniel Bryan and Roman Reigns . 
 As the founder of NXT since its inception in 2012 , Levesque has been widely praised for helping cultivate the brand , recruiting fresh new talent , and helping guide the brand to various levels of success including sold @-@ out shows , increased respect for women ’ s wrestling , and international expansion . 
 In 2013 , his title was elevated to Executive Vice @-@ president of Talent , Live Events and Creative where he also works with WWE creative direction and storylines of WWE 's programming . 
 In 2013 , Levesque earned a combined salary of just over $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( U.S. ) from his front office job and as a wrestler . He also owns just over $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( U.S. ) in WWE stock . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 What began as an on @-@ screen storyline marriage in 2000 blossomed into a real @-@ life romance when Levesque began dating Stephanie McMahon . They married on October 25 , 2003 . They have three daughters . He had previously been in a long @-@ term relationship with former WWF wrestler Chyna . He has a sister named Lynn . 
 In late 2004 , Levesque released a book titled Making the Game : Triple H 's Approach to a Better Body . Mostly devoted to bodybuilding advice , the book also includes some autobiographical information , memoirs , and opinions . 
 Levesque is a fan of the band Motörhead ( which has performed three different entrance themes for Triple H over his career ) , and was good friends with lead singer Lemmy . To pay homage to both Lemmy and the band , Triple H wore Lemmy @-@ inspired facial hair during a large portion of his career . After Lemmy died on December 28 , 2015 , Triple H attended his funeral on January 9 , 2016 , where he spoke about the gift of sound that Lemmy and Motörhead have given to him and the friendship they had over the years . 
 During an interview with ITV London in December 2015 , Levesque said that he is a supporter of the English football team West Ham United FC . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 In 2014 , Levesque along with his wife Stephanie created the " Connor 's Cure " cancer fund in honor of Connor " The Crusher " Michalek , a young WWE fan who died of cancer at the age of eight . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Pedigree ( Double underhook facebuster ) – 1995 – present 
 Pedigree Pandemonium / Pedigree Perfection ( Cutter ) – 1994 – 1995 ; adopted from Diamond Dallas Page 
 Reverse or inverted Indian deathlock – WCW ; rarely used as regular move in WWF / E 
 Signature moves 
 Abdominal stretch 
 Arm @-@ trap crossface – rarely used 
 <unk> choke 
 Chop block 
 Facebreaker knee smash , often used as a back body drop counter 
 Figure four leglock 
 Flowing DDT 
 High knee 
 Jumping knee drop , rarely performed from the second / third rope . 
 Mounted punches 
 Running clothesline 
 Running neckbreaker 
 Short arm clothesline 
 Sledgehammer shot 
 Sleeper hold 
 Spinning spinebuster , often used as a counter to an upcoming opponent 
 Managers 
 Chyna 
 The Court Jester 
 Hornswoggle 
 John Rodeo 
 Mr. Majestic 
 Mr. Perfect 
 Ric Flair 
 Rick Rude 
 Stephanie McMahon / Stephanie McMahon @-@ Helmsley 
 Vito Carlucci 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Seth Rollins 
 Snitsky 
 Nicknames 
 " The Cerebral Assassin " 
 " The Connecticut Blue Blood " 
 " The Game " 
 " The King of Kings " 
 Entrance themes 
 World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment / WWE 
 " Blue Blood " by Jim Johnston ( April 28 , 1995 – December 15 , 1996 ) 
 " Symphony No. 9 in D minor with the final chorus on Friedrich Schiller 's Ode to Joy , Op. 125 : IV . Presto . Allegro assai . Alla Marcia . Andante <unk> . Allegro <unk> , ... " by Paul Kletzki & Czech <unk> Orchestra ( December 15 , 1996 – November 10 , 1997 ) 
 " Break It Down " by The DX Band ( November 10 , 1997 – April 5 , 1999 ; June 19 , 2006 – April 2007 ; August 24 , 2009 – March 1 , 2010 ; July 23 , 2012 ) 
 " Corporate Player " by Jim Johnston ( April 25 , 1999 – May 10 , 1999 ) 
 " Higher Brain Pattern " by Jim Johnston ( May 16 , 1999 – June 21 , 1999 ) 
 " My Time " by The DX Band ( June 27 , 1999 – December 10 , 2000 ) 
 " The Kings " by Run @-@ D.M.C ( March 17 , 2000 – July 2000 ) 
 " The Game " by The DX Band ( December 10 , 2000 ; used only once at Armageddon 2000 and sometimes in promos ) 
 " The Game " by Motörhead ( January 8 , 2001 – present ) 
 " King of Kings " by Motörhead ( 2006 , 2011 , August 18 , 2013 – April 3 , 2016 ; used as leader of The Authority ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 International Sports Hall of Fame 
 Class of 2015 
 International Wrestling Federation 
 IWF Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 IWF Tag Team Champions ( 1 time ) – with Perry Saturn 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Feud of the Year ( 2000 ) vs. Kurt Angle 
 Feud of the Year ( 2004 ) vs. Chris Benoit 
 Feud of the Year ( 2009 ) vs. Randy Orton 
 Feud of the Year ( 2013 ) vs. Daniel Bryan – as a member of The Authority 
 Match of the Year ( 2004 ) vs. Chris Benoit and Shawn Michaels at WrestleMania XX 
 Match of the Year ( 2012 ) vs. The Undertaker in a Hell in a Cell match at WrestleMania XXVIII 
 Most Hated Wrestler of the Decade ( 2000 – 2009 ) 
 Most Hated Wrestler of the Year ( 2003 – 2005 ) 
 Most Hated Wrestler of the Year ( 2013 ) – as a member of The Authority 
 Most Hated Wrestler of the Year ( 2014 ) – with Stephanie McMahon 
 Wrestler of the Decade ( 2000 – 2009 ) 
 Wrestler of the Year ( 2008 ) 
 Ranked # 1 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2000 and 2009 
 Ranked # 139 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the " PWI Years " in 2003 
 World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment / WWE 
 World Heavyweight Championship ( 5 times ) 
 WWE Tag Team <unk> ( 1 time ) – with Shawn Michaels 
 WWF / E World Heavyweight <unk> ( 9 times ) 
 WWF / E Intercontinental Championship ( 5 times ) 
 WWF European Championship ( 2 times ) 
 WWF Tag Team <unk> ( 2 times ) – with Stone Cold Steve Austin ( 1 ) and Shawn Michaels ( 1 ) 
 King of the Ring ( 1997 ) 
 Royal Rumble ( 2002 , 2016 ) 
 Road To Wrestlemania Tournament ( 2006 ) 
 Seventh Triple Crown Champion 
 Second Grand Slam Champion 
 Slammy Awards ( 3 times ) 
 Best Hair ( 1997 ) 
 Match of the Year ( 2012 ) – vs. The Undertaker in a Hell in a Cell match at WrestleMania XXVIII 
 OMG Moment of the Year ( 2011 ) – Triple H performing a Tombstone Piledriver on The Undertaker and The Undertaker kicking out at WrestleMania XXVII 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Best Booker ( 2015 ) with Ryan Ward 
 Feud of the Year ( 2000 ) vs. Mick Foley 
 Feud of the Year ( 2004 ) vs. Chris Benoit and Shawn Michaels 
 Feud of the Year ( 2005 ) vs. Batista 
 Wrestler of the Year ( 2000 ) 
 Most Disgusting Promotional Tactic ( 2002 ) Accusing Kane of murder and necrophilia ( Katie Vick ) 
 Most Overrated ( 2002 – 2004 , 2009 ) 
 Readers ' Least Favorite Wrestler ( 2002 , 2003 ) 
 Worst Feud of the Year ( 2002 ) vs. Kane 
 Worst Feud of the Year ( 2006 ) with Shawn Michaels vs. Vince McMahon and Shane McMahon 
 Worst Feud of the Year ( 2011 ) vs. Kevin Nash 
 Worst Worked Match of the Year ( 2003 ) vs. Scott Steiner at Royal Rumble 
 Worst Worked Match of the Year ( 2008 ) vs. Edge and Vladimir Kozlov at Survivor Series 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame ( Class of 2005 ) 
 Other awards 
 Metal Hammer 's Spirit of Lemmy Award ( 2016 ) 
 1 ^ Triple H 's only reign with the WWE Tag Team Championship was when the championship was <unk> with the World Tag Team Championship and it was known as the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship . 
 2 ^ Triple H 's fifth reign was as Undisputed WWF Champion . His next three were as simply WWE Champion , while his ninth reign was as WWE World Heavyweight Champion . 
 3 ^ Triple H 's reign with Shawn Michaels was when the title , then known as World Tag Team Championship , was unified with the WWE Tag Team Championship and known as Unified WWE Tag Team Championship . 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = Ascending cholangitis = 
 Ascending cholangitis , also known as acute cholangitis or simply cholangitis , is an infection of the bile duct ( cholangitis ) , usually caused by bacteria ascending from its junction with the duodenum ( first part of the small intestine ) . It tends to occur if the bile duct is already partially obstructed by gallstones . 
 Cholangitis can be life @-@ threatening , and is regarded as a medical emergency . Characteristic symptoms include yellow discoloration of the skin or whites of the eyes , fever , abdominal pain , and in severe cases , low blood pressure and confusion . Initial treatment is with intravenous fluids and antibiotics , but there is often an underlying problem ( such as gallstones or narrowing in the bile duct ) for which further tests and treatments may be necessary , usually in the form of endoscopy to relieve obstruction of the bile duct . The word is from Greek <unk> , bile + <unk> , vessel + -itis , inflammation . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 A person with cholangitis may complain of abdominal pain ( particularly in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen ) , fever , rigors ( uncontrollable shaking ) and a feeling of uneasiness ( malaise ) . Some may report jaundice ( yellow discoloration of the skin and the whites of the eyes ) . 
 Physical examination findings typically include jaundice and right upper quadrant tenderness . Charcot 's triad is a set of three common findings in cholangitis : abdominal pain , jaundice , and fever . This was assumed in the past to be present in 50 – 70 % of cases , although more recently the frequency has been reported as 15 – 20 % . Reynolds ' pentad includes the findings of Charcot 's triad with the presence of septic shock and mental confusion . This combination of symptoms indicates worsening of the condition and the development of sepsis , and is seen less commonly still . 
 In the elderly , the presentation may be atypical ; they may directly collapse due to sepsis without first showing typical features . Those with an indwelling stent in the bile duct ( see below ) may not develop jaundice . 
 = = Causes = = 
 Bile duct obstruction , which is usually present in acute cholangitis , is generally due to gallstones . 10 – 30 % of cases , however , are due to other causes such as benign stricturing ( narrowing of the bile duct without an underlying tumor ) , postoperative damage or an altered structure of the bile ducts such as narrowing at the site of an anastomosis ( surgical connection ) , various tumors ( cancer of the bile duct , gallbladder cancer , cancer of the ampulla of Vater , pancreatic cancer , cancer of the duodenum ) , anaerobic organisms such as Clostridium and Bacteroides ( especially in the elderly and those who have undergone previous surgery of the biliary system ) . Parasites which may infect the liver and bile ducts may cause cholangitis ; these include the roundworm Ascaris <unk> and the liver flukes Clonorchis sinensis , Opisthorchis viverrini and Opisthorchis <unk> . In people with AIDS , a large number of opportunistic organisms has been known to cause AIDS <unk> , but the risk has rapidly diminished since the introduction of effective AIDS treatment . Cholangitis may also complicate medical procedures involving the bile duct , especially ERCP . To prevent this , it is recommended that those undergoing ERCP for any indication receive prophylactic ( preventative ) antibiotics . 
 The presence of a permanent biliary stent ( e.g. in pancreatic cancer ) slightly increases the risk of cholangitis , but stents of this type are often needed to keep the bile duct patent under outside pressure . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 = = = Blood tests = = = 
 Routine blood tests show features of acute inflammation ( raised white blood cell count and elevated C @-@ reactive protein level ) , and usually abnormal liver function tests ( <unk> ) . In most cases the <unk> will be consistent with obstruction : raised bilirubin , alkaline phosphatase and γ @-@ glutamyl transpeptidase . In the early stages , however , pressure on the liver cells may be the main feature and the tests will resemble those in hepatitis , with elevations in alanine transaminase and aspartate transaminase . 
 Blood cultures are often performed in people with fever and evidence of acute infection . These yield the bacteria causing the infection in 36 % of cases , usually after 24 – 48 hours of incubation . Bile , too , may be sent for culture during ERCP ( see below ) . The most common bacteria linked to ascending cholangitis are gram @-@ negative bacilli : Escherichia coli ( 25 – 50 % ) , Klebsiella ( 15 – 20 % ) and Enterobacter ( 5 – 10 % ) . Of the gram @-@ positive cocci , Enterococcus causes 10 – 20 % . 
 = = = Medical imaging = = = 
 Given that ascending cholangitis usually occurs in the setting of bile duct obstruction , various forms of medical imaging may be employed to identify the site and nature of this obstruction . The first investigation is usually ultrasound , as this is the most easily available . Ultrasound may show dilation of the bile duct and identifies 38 % of bile duct stones ; it is relatively poor at identifying stones further down the bile duct . Ultrasound can help distinguish between cholangitis and cholecystitis ( inflammation of the gallbladder ) , which has similar symptoms to cholangitis but appears differently on ultrasound . A better test is magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography ( MRCP ) , which uses magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) ; this has a comparable sensitivity to ERCP . Smaller stones , however , can still be missed on MRCP depending on the quality of the hospital 's facilities . 
 The gold standard test for biliary obstruction is still endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography ( ERCP ) . This involves the use of endoscopy ( passing a tube through the mouth into the esophagus , stomach and thence to the duodenum ) to pass a small cannula into the bile duct . At that point , radiocontrast is injected to <unk> the duct , and X @-@ rays are taken to get a visual impression of the biliary system . On the endoscopic image of the ampulla , one can sometimes see a protuberant ampulla from an impacted gallstone in the common bile duct , or the frank extrusion of pus from the common bile duct orifice . On the X @-@ ray images ( known as <unk> ) , gallstones are visible as <unk> areas in the contour of the duct . For diagnostic purposes , ERCP has now generally been replaced by MRCP . ERCP is only used first @-@ line in critically ill patients in whom delay for diagnostic tests is not acceptable ; however , if the index of suspicion for cholangitis is high , an ERCP is typically done to achieve drainage of the obstructed common bile duct . 
 If other causes rather than gallstones are suspected ( such as a tumor ) , computed tomography and endoscopic ultrasound ( EUS ) may be performed to identify the nature of the obstruction . EUS may be used to obtain biopsy ( tissue sample ) of suspicious masses . EUS may also replace diagnostic ERCP for stone disease , although this depends on local availability . 
 = = Pathogenesis = = 
 Bile is produced by the liver , and serves to eliminate cholesterol and bilirubin from the body , as well as <unk> of fats to make them more soluble in water and aid in their digestion . Bile is formed in the liver by hepatocytes ( liver cells ) and excreted into the common hepatic duct . Part of the bile is stored in the gall bladder because of back pressure ( exerted by the sphincter of Oddi ) , and may be released at time of digestion . The gall bladder also concentrates the bile by absorbing water and dissolved salts from it . All bile reaches the duodenum ( first part of the small intestine ) through the common bile duct and the ampulla of Vater . The sphincter of Oddi , located at the junction of the ampulla of Vater and the duodenum , is a circular muscle that controls the release of both bile and pancreatic secretions into the digestive tract . 
 The biliary tree is normally relatively free of bacteria because of certain protective mechanisms . The sphincter of Oddi acts as a mechanical barrier . The biliary system normally has low pressure ( 8 to 12 cmH2O ) and allows bile to flow freely through . The continuous forward flow of the bile in the duct flushes bacteria , if present , into the duodenum , and does not allow establishment of an infection . The constitution of bile — bile salts and immunoglobulin secreted by the epithelium of the bile duct also has a protective role . 
 Bacterial contamination alone in absence of obstruction does not usually result in cholangitis . However increased pressure within the biliary system ( above 20 cmH2O ) resulting from obstruction in the bile duct widens spaces between the cells lining the duct , bringing <unk> contaminated bile in contact with the blood stream . It also adversely affects the function of <unk> cells , which are specialized macrophage cells that assist in preventing bacteria from entering the biliary system . Finally , increased biliary pressure decreases production of IgA immunoglobulins in the bile . This results in bacteremia ( bacteria in the blood stream ) and gives rise to the systemic inflammatory response syndrome ( SIRS ) comprising fever ( often with rigors ) , tachycardia , increased respiratory rate and increased white blood cell count ; SIRS in the presence of suspected or confirmed infection is called sepsis . <unk> obstruction itself disadvantages the immune system and impairs its capability to fight infection , by impairing the function of certain immune system cells ( neutrophil granulocytes ) and modifying the levels of immune hormones ( cytokines ) . 
 In ascending cholangitis , it is assumed that organisms migrate backwards up the bile duct as a result of partial obstruction and decreased function of the sphincter of Oddi . Other theories about the origin of the bacteria , such as through the portal vein or transmigration from the colon , are considered less likely . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 = = = Fluids and antibiotics = = = 
 Cholangitis requires admission to hospital . Intravenous fluids are administered , especially if the blood pressure is low , and antibiotics are commenced . Empirical treatment with broad @-@ spectrum antibiotics is usually necessary until it is known for certain which pathogen is causing the infection , and to which antibiotics it is sensitive . Combinations of penicillins and aminoglycosides are widely used , although ciprofloxacin has been shown to be effective in most cases , and may be preferred to aminoglycosides because of fewer side effects . <unk> is often added to specifically treat the anaerobic pathogens , especially in those who are very ill or at risk of anaerobic infections . Antibiotics are continued for 7 – 10 days . Drugs that increase the blood pressure ( vasopressors ) may also be required to counter the low blood pressure . 
 = = = Endoscopy = = = 
 The definitive treatment for cholangitis is relief of the underlying biliary obstruction . This is usually deferred until 24 – 48 hours after admission , when the patient is stable and has shown some improvement with antibiotics , but may need to happen as an emergency in case of ongoing deterioration despite adequate treatment , or if antibiotics are not effective in reducing the signs of infection ( which happens in 15 % of cases ) . 
 Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography ( ERCP ) is the most common approach in unblocking the bile duct . This involves endoscopy ( passing a fiberoptic tube through the stomach into the duodenum ) , identification of the ampulla of Vater and insertion of a small tube into the bile duct . A <unk> ( making a cut in the sphincter of Oddi ) is typically done to ease the flow of bile from the duct and to allow insertion of instruments to extract gallstones that are obstructing the common bile duct ; alternatively or additionally , the common bile duct orifice can be dilated with a balloon . Stones may be removed either by direct suction or by using various instruments , including balloons and baskets to trawl the bile duct in order to pull stones into the duodenum . Obstructions that are caused by larger stones may require the use of an instrument known as a mechanical lithotriptor in order to crush the stone prior to removal . <unk> stones that are too large to be removed or broken mechanically by ERCP may be managed by extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy . This technique uses acoustic shock waves administered outside the body to break down the stones . An alternative technique to remove very large obstructing stones is electrohydraulic lithotripsy , where a small endoscope known as a <unk> is inserted by ERCP to directly visualize the stone . A probe uses electricity to generate shock waves that break down the obstructing stone . Rarely , surgical exploration of the common bile duct ( termed <unk> ) , which can be performed with laparoscopy , is required to remove the stone . 
 <unk> areas may be bridged by a stent , a hollow tube that keeps the duct open . Removable plastic stents are used in uncomplicated gallstone disease , while permanent self @-@ expanding metal stents with a longer lifespan are used if the obstruction is due to pressure from a tumor such as pancreatic cancer . A <unk> drain may be left behind ; this is a plastic tube that passes from the bile duct through the stomach and the nose and allows continuous drainage of bile into a <unk> . It is similar to a nasogastric tube , but passes into the common bile duct directly , and allows for serial x @-@ ray <unk> to be done to identify the improvement of the obstruction . The decision on which of the aforementioned treatments to apply is generally based on the severity of the obstruction , findings on other imaging studies , and whether the patient has improved with antibiotic treatment . Certain treatments may be unsafe if blood clotting is impaired , as the risk of bleeding ( especially from <unk> ) is increased in the use of medication such as clopidogrel ( which inhibits platelet aggregation ) or if the prothrombin time is significantly prolonged . For a prolonged prothrombin time , vitamin K or fresh frozen plasma may be administered to reduce bleeding risk . 
 It may be difficult to obtain endoscopic access to the obstruction located higher ( proximal ) up in the biliary system , or when it is due to a stricture in the <unk> performed anastomosis between the bile duct ( surgically joining ) with the duodenum or jejunum . When this happens , percutaneous <unk> <unk> ( PTC ) may be needed to relieve pressure . This involves identifying the bile duct by ultrasound and then passing a tube through the skin ( percutaneous ) . PTC is generally performed by radiologists . PTC has potential complications , so occasionally further attempts at ERCP by more experienced doctors are preferred . 
 Continual contamination of bile duct by indwelling stents ( as may occur in chronic conditions like tumor of the head of pancreas ) requires monitoring by repeated radiologic tests and changing of the stents . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Not all gallstones implicated in ascending cholangitis actually originate from the gallbladder , but cholecystectomy ( surgical removal of the gallbladder ) is generally recommended in people who have been treated for cholangitis due to gallstone disease . This is typically delayed until all symptoms have resolved and ERCP or MRCP have confirmed that the bile duct is clear of gallstones . Those who do not undergo cholecystectomy have an increased risk of recurrent biliary pain , jaundice , further episodes of cholangitis , and need for further ERCP or related procedures ; the risk of death is also significantly increased . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Acute cholangitis carries a significant risk of death , the leading cause being irreversible shock with multiple organ failure ( a possible complication of severe infections ) . Improvements in diagnosis and treatment have led to a reduction in mortality : before 1980 , the mortality rate was greater than 50 % , but after 1980 it was 10 – 30 % . Patients with signs of multiple organ failure are likely to die unless they undergo early biliary drainage and treatment with systemic antibiotics . Other causes of death following severe cholangitis include heart failure and pneumonia . 
 Risk factors indicating an increased risk of death include older age , female gender , a history of liver cirrhosis , biliary narrowing due to cancer , acute renal failure and the presence of liver abscesses . Complications following severe cholangitis include renal failure , respiratory failure ( inability of the respiratory system to oxygenate blood and / or eliminate carbon dioxide ) , cardiac arrhythmia , wound infection , pneumonia , gastrointestinal bleeding and myocardial ischemia ( lack of blood flow to the heart , leading to heart attacks ) . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 In the Western world , about 15 % of all people have gallstones in their gallbladder but the majority are unaware of this and have no symptoms . Over ten years , 15 – 26 % will suffer one or more episodes of biliary colic ( abdominal pain due to the passage of gallstones through the bile duct into the digestive tract ) , and 2 – 3 % will develop complications of obstruction : acute pancreatitis , cholecystitis or acute cholangitis . Prevalence of gallstone disease increases with age and body mass index ( a marker of obesity ) . However , risk is also increased in those who lose weight rapidly ( e.g. after weight loss surgery ) due to alterations in the composition of the bile that makes it prone to form stones . <unk> are slightly more common in women than in men , and pregnancy increases the risk further . 
 = = History = = 
 Dr Jean @-@ Martin Charcot , working at the Salpêtrière Hospital in Paris , France , is credited with early reports of cholangitis , as well as his eponymous triad , in 1877 . He referred to the condition as " hepatic fever " ( <unk> <unk> ) . Dr Benedict M. Reynolds , an American surgeon , reignited interest in the condition in his 1959 report with colleague Dr Everett L. Dargan , and formulated the pentad that carries his name . It remained a condition generally treated by surgeons , with exploration of the bile duct and excision of gallstones , until the ascendancy of ERCP in 1968 . ERCP is generally performed by internal medicine or gastroenterology specialists . In 1992 it was shown that ERCP was generally safer than surgical intervention in ascending cholangitis . 
 = Eve Torres = 
 Eve Torres Gracie ( born Eve Marie Torres ; August 21 , 1984 ) is an American model , actress , and former professional wrestler . She is best known for her work with WWE as Eve Torres and has served as an ambassador for the company since April 2014 . 
 Torres began her career as a model and dancer . She danced for The Southern California Summer Pro League and went on to become a member of the National Basketball Association 's Los Angeles Clippers Spirit Dance Team for the 2006 – 2007 season . She has also appeared on several television shows , including Show Me The Money , Sunset Tan , and Deal or No Deal . 
 In 2007 , she entered the 2007 Diva Search and won , earning a contract with WWE . Torres first appeared on WWE programming as a backstage interviewer in 2008 , and also appeared in non @-@ wrestling contests such as bikini contests and dance competitions . She later became a full @-@ time wrestler in 2009 , and was involved in feuds with Michelle McCool , Layla and Natalya . She also managed the tag team of Cryme Tyme . After being traded to the Raw brand in late 2009 , she managed Chris Masters before winning the WWE Divas Championship in April 2010 . She held the championship for 69 days , before losing it in June . After acting as the valet for R @-@ Truth in late 2010 , Torres won the Divas Championship for the second time at the 2011 Royal Rumble in January . Her second reign lasted until April 2011 . The following year , she was given the fictional role of " Executive Administrator " of Raw and WWE SmackDown , and later the Assistant General Manager of SmackDown . At Night of Champions , Torres won the Divas Championship , becoming the first person to win it on three occasions , and held the title until January 2013 . 
 Following her Divas Championship loss , she retired from WWE to focus on her role as an instructor for the Gracie Women Empowered Self @-@ defense program . In 2014 , she appeared on the television series Matador in a recurring guest role . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Torres was born in Boston , Massachusetts , but grew up in Denver , Colorado , and has " a Latina background " . She has one younger brother , Phillip , who appeared on Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader ? in October 2008 and won $ 100 @,@ 000 , and currently hosts <unk> on Al Jazeera America . 
 Torres attended the University of Southern California ( USC ) on a full tuition scholarship . During college , she was one of the founding members of the Omega Phi Beta sorority chapter on her campus and held the vice @-@ president position for several years . While in Omega Phi Beta , Torres was awarded for Academic Excellence at the Order of Omega Greek Awards . She graduated with honors and a Grade Point Average above 3 @.@ 5 in May 2006 , with a degree in Industrial and Systems Engineering . 
 = = Dancing and modeling career = = 
 While attending the USC , Torres appeared in commercials and music videos . Torres was the co @-@ captain of the USC Fly Girls dance squad and created much of their choreography . She also danced for The Southern California Summer Pro League , the only summer league for National Basketball Association ( NBA ) players , in Long Beach , California . After graduating from college , she began dancing and modeling full @-@ time . After reaching the tryout finals in previous years , Torres became a member of the NBA 's Los Angeles Clippers Spirit Dance Team for the 2006 – 07 season . She also appeared on the game show Show Me The Money . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = Diva Search and Ohio Valley Wrestling ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 In May 2007 , Torres entered World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) ' s Diva Search . She was chosen by WWE officials as one of the eight finalists from a group of 50 women . On October 29 , 2007 , in Philadelphia , live on Raw , she was crowned the 2007 WWE Diva Search winner , defeating finalist Brooke <unk> and becoming an official WWE Diva . Following her win , she began training for her wrestling debut in WWE 's then @-@ developmental territory , Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) . 
 = = = = Various feuds ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 Vignettes promoting Eve 's debut on SmackDown began airing on January 11 , 2008 . Eve made her official debut on the February 1 , 2008 episode of SmackDown , interviewing former World Heavyweight Champion Batista . During early 2008 , Eve participated in a contest to determine the top Diva on SmackDown , participating in a bikini contest , an obstacle course , and an arm wrestling competition before being eliminated . Eve appeared at WrestleMania XXIV as a Lumberjill in the BunnyMania match between Maria and Ashley against Beth Phoenix and Melina . Eve spent the rest of the year competing in contests , including a dance @-@ off and a bikini contest , before participating in the Halloween Costume Contest on October 26 at the Cyber Sunday pay @-@ per @-@ view , where she was dressed as Raphael from the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles . On the 800th episode of Raw on November 3 , 2008 , Eve made her televised in @-@ ring debut in a 16 @-@ Diva tag team match , which her team lost , although she never tagged into the match . 
 Her first main storyline began in early 2009 , when she began a scripted feud with Michelle McCool after McCool attacked her . On the February 6 episode of SmackDown , Eve made her singles match debut in a losing effort against McCool via submission . Their feud continued for the next few months , with them competing against each other in singles and tag team matches . Eve then moved into a feud with Layla in mid @-@ 2009 . After the pair competed in dance and arm wrestling competitions , Eve defeated Layla on the May 29 episode of SmackDown in a singles match . On the June 18 episode of Superstars , Eve pinned Layla once again . After the match , they both shook hands . 
 Around the same as her scripted rivalry with Layla , Eve became associated with Cryme Tyme ( Shad and JTG ) , appearing in several backstage segments with them . She also began accompanying them to the ring as their manager during their storyline rivalry with The Hart Dynasty ( David Hart Smith , Tyson Kidd , and Natalya ) . Eve and Cryme Tyme participated in multiple six @-@ person mixed tag team matches against The Hart Dynasty , and Eve also faced Natalya in singles matches and tag team matches involving other Divas . Her final match on SmackDown was on October 9 , when she was defeated in a singles match by McCool . 
 = = = = Divas Champion ( 2009 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 On October 12 , 2009 , Eve was traded to the Raw brand . On the November 2 episode of Raw , she competed in her first match for the brand ; a battle royal , which was won by Alicia Fox . She then began a storyline romance with Chris Masters in December 2009 , becoming his valet . In January 2010 , the WWE Divas Championship was declared vacant and a tournament was set up to determine the new champion . Eve made it to the semi @-@ finals , before being defeated by the eventual winner , Maryse . At WrestleMania XXVI , Eve was on the losing team in a 10 @-@ Diva tag team match , but the following night on Raw , she pinned Maryse in a rematch to earn the victory for her team . 
 On the April 5 episode of Raw , Eve won a " Dress to Impress " battle royal to become the number one contender to the Divas Championship , and the following week on Raw , she defeated Maryse to win the championship for the first time . She successfully defended the championship against Maryse at the Over the Limit pay @-@ per @-@ view in May . At the Fatal 4 @-@ Way pay @-@ per @-@ view in June , Eve lost the championship in a fatal four @-@ way match , when Alicia Fox pinned Maryse to win the championship . On the July 5 episode of Raw , Eve invoked her rematch clause against Fox but was unsuccessful after Fox feigned an ankle injury . As a result , she received another rematch at the Money in the Bank pay per @-@ view , but lost again to Fox . In mid @-@ 2010 , she began acting as the valet for R @-@ Truth . 
 At the Royal Rumble on January 30 , 2011 , the Raw General Manager added Eve to a two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match for the Divas Championship , turning it into a four @-@ way match . Eve pinned Layla to win the match and become a two @-@ time Divas Champion . She retained the championship against Natalya in a Lumberjill match on the February 14 episode of Raw , and against Nikki Bella on the March 7 episode . She held the championship until the April 11 episode of Raw , when she lost it to Brie Bella . 
 Eve then formed an alliance with Kelly Kelly , and after Kelly won the Divas Championship in June , Eve accompanied her to the ring during her matches . Eve and Kelly began feuding with The Divas of Doom ( Beth Phoenix and Natalya ) , and after Phoenix won the Divas Championship from Kelly , Eve defeated Natalya to earn a match against Phoenix for the championship . She faced Phoenix at the Vengeance pay @-@ per @-@ view , but was unsuccessful in capturing the title . On the October 31 episode of Raw , Eve won a battle royal to become the number one contender to the Divas Championship . She received her championship match at the Survivor Series pay @-@ per @-@ view , but lost a Lumberjill match to Phoenix . She later described the match as her favorite . 
 = = = = Authority figure ( 2011 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 Eve moved into a storyline with Zack Ryder in December 2011 , and the pair won a mixed tag team match against Natalya and Tyson Kidd on the December 26 episode of Raw . On the January 9 , 2012 , episode of Raw , Eve agreed to a date with Ryder , beginning a storyline relationship . Eve quickly became involved in the storyline between Ryder , his ally John Cena , and Kane , the latter of whom began targeting Ryder . After injuring Ryder , Kane turned his attention to Eve , and tried to attack her until he was stopped by Cena . On the February 6 episode of Raw , Eve suffered a legitimate broken nose when Beth Phoenix clotheslined her during a match . The following week , John Cena saved Eve from being kidnapped by Kane , and Eve kissed him in thanks . Ryder witnessed it , and she later told Ryder she hoped they could be friends . On the February 20 episode of Raw , Eve turned into a villainess for the first time in her career , after she confessed backstage to The Bella Twins that she had never liked Zack Ryder , and had disingenuously used him for publicity and planned to take advantage of Cena the same way . Cena overheard her revelation and scorned her as she begged for forgiveness . Eve justified her actions by stating she was not a " damsel in distress " and was proud of her beauty allowing her to seduce men . She wrestled her first match as a villainess on the March 2 episode of SmackDown , defeating Natalya . Ryder returned on the March 5 <unk> of Raw , confronting Eve over her recent actions , but she managed to seduce him into forgiving her . At WrestleMania XXVIII , Eve and Beth Phoenix lost to Kelly Kelly and Extra correspondent Maria Menounos in a tag team match . Later that night , she accompanied Ryder to the ring for the Team Johnny vs. Team Teddy match , where she distracted Ryder , costing him and Team Teddy the match . Afterwards , Eve delivered a low blow to Ryder . 
 As a result of her actions during the match , John Laurinaitis appointed Eve the Executive Administrator of Raw and SmackDown . As her first order of business as Executive Administrator , on the April 30 episode of Raw , Eve fired the Bella Twins backstage . Despite her new authority figure role , she continued to participate in matches throughout mid @-@ 2012 . On the August 10 episode of SmackDown , Eve asked SmackDown General Manager Booker T if she could be his assistant , but Kaitlyn was given the job instead . Eve threatened Booker that she would tell the Board of Directors about his discriminatory hiring practices , and was given a match against Kaitlyn the following week to determine who would become his assistant , which Eve won , and got the job . 
 In August , she began a storyline where she acted friendly and nice , diminishing her heel characteristics . As part of this apparent personality change , she shook hands with her rival Kaitlyn following a match and teamed with her and Layla on the September 10 episode of Raw . At the Night of Champions pay @-@ per @-@ view , Kaitlyn was attacked and injured by a masked figure backstage , and as a result , Eve replaced Kaitlyn in a match against Divas Champion Layla . Eve won the match , becoming the first ever record three time Divas Champion . After Kaitlyn revealed that her attacker was blonde , Eve accused Beth Phoenix , and attacked her on the September 24 episode of Raw . The following week , Eve suspended Phoenix , pending an investigation into Kaitlyn 's attack , <unk> Phoenix 's suspension was reversed by Booker T , and Eve blamed Teddy Long for telling her to suspend Phoenix . It was later revealed that Kaitlyn was attacked by Aksana , on Eve 's orders . On the October 8 episode of Raw , Eve defeated Kaitlyn via submission to retain the Divas Championship . Following the match , Eve attempted to re @-@ injure Kaitlyn , but was stopped by Layla . The following week , she defeated Layla to retain the championship . The three @-@ way feud led to a match at the Hell in a Cell pay @-@ per @-@ view , where Eve retained the Divas Championship against Layla and Kaitlyn in a triple threat match . Eve continued to feud with the duo , facing them in tag team matches with multiple partners , and defeating Kaitlyn at Survivor Series to retain the championship . At TLC : Tables , Ladders & Chairs , Eve stopped Kaitlyn from winning a number one contender 's match , and defeated winner Naomi to retain the title later that night . Kaitlyn won a non @-@ title match against Eve , and won the subsequent title match by disqualification on December 18 , however Eve retained the championship . A rematch occurred on the January 7 , 2013 , episode of Raw , in which Eve successfully defended the championship after losing by count @-@ out . The following week , on the special " 20th Anniversary " episode of Raw , Eve lost the Divas Championship to Kaitlyn . Following the loss , Eve immediately quit WWE in the storyline . 
 In reality , Torres had asked for her release from the company in December 2012 to focus on her role as an instructor for the Gracie Women Empowered Self @-@ defense program . She returned to WWE for one night only , on December 9 , 2013 , presenting the Slammy Award for Diva of the Year to The Bella Twins . Since April 2014 , she has served as an ambassador for the WWE . 
 = = Other media = = 
 In August 2008 , Torres , along with fellow WWE Divas Maria and Candice Michelle , appeared on an episode of Sunset Tan . On October 2 , 2008 , Torres and Maria appeared on a special episode of Magic 's Biggest Secrets Finally Revealed . Torres appeared on the November 3 , 2009 episode of Deal or No Deal with Maria and Dolph Ziggler . On July 1 , 2012 , Torres , Kelly Kelly , and Michelle McCool appeared on Extreme Weight Loss . In 2012 , she was part of NBC 's celebrity reality competition series called Stars Earn Stripes ; she won the competition on September 3 , earning over $ 100 @,@ 000 for her charity , the USO . On September 7 , 2012 , Torres appeared on G4 's Attack of the Show for an interview . 
 Torres , along with Maryse and Michelle McCool , appeared in the January 2009 issue of Muscle & Fitness magazine . 
 On April 30 , 2012 , it was announced that Torres would be featured in the WWE Studios and Kare Production Project " Les reines du ring " ( English : Queens of the Ring ) , alongside fellow wrestlers The Miz and CM Punk . In mid @-@ 2013 , Torres filmed a role for the film The Scorpion King 4 : Quest for Power , which was released in 2015 . She later earned a role in Matador as Reyna Flores , a journalist reporting on the leading character 's career . The show was cancelled after a single season . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Torres is trained in Brazilian Jiu @-@ Jitsu , and holds a purple belt from the Gracie Jiu @-@ Jitsu Academy based in Torrance , California . Torres also participates in kickboxing . She is a spokeswoman and head instructor for the Gracie Women Empowered Self @-@ defense program . 
 Torres married <unk> Gracie in April 2014 . She gave birth to her first child , a boy , named <unk> Gracie , on September 28 , 2015 . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 <unk> ( Moonsault ) 
 Handspring standing moonsault 
 The Heart Breaker ( Snap swinging neckbreaker ) 
 Signature moves 
 Cross <unk> 
 Enzuigiri 
 Fujiwara armbar , sometimes transitioned into a triangle choke 
 Hangman 's choke 
 Schoolgirl roll @-@ up 
 Somersault senton 
 Standing moonsault , with theatrics 
 Straight jacket 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Cryme Tyme ( Shad Gaspard and JTG ) 
 Chris Masters 
 R @-@ Truth 
 Zack Ryder 
 Nicknames 
 " <unk> " 
 " The <unk> Heartbreaker " 
 Entrance themes 
 " She Looks Good " by Jim Johnston 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked her # 5 of the best 50 female singles wrestlers in the PWI Female 50 in 2010 
 World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE 
 WWE Divas Championship ( 3 times ) 
 WWE Diva Search ( 2007 ) 
 = The Carpet = 
 " The Carpet " is the fourteenth episode of the second season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's twentieth episode overall . It was written by Paul Lieberstein and directed by Victor Nelli , Jr . The episode first aired on January 26 , 2006 on NBC . The episode guest stars Ken Howard as Ed Truck , and David Koechner as Todd Packer . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , a disgusting " thing " – implied to be human feces – is left in Michael Scott 's ( Steve Carell ) office , and Michael tries to discover who did it . While his carpet is being replaced , he uses Jim Halpert 's desk , forcing Jim to move away from Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) into the annex . 
 " The Carpet " is the first and only episode to feature Howard as Truck . However , the death of the character would serve as the main plot for the third season episode " Grief Counseling " . The episode received largely positive reviews from television critics . Upon its original broadcast , " The Carpet " earned a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 6 in the 18 – 49 demographic , being viewed by 8 @.@ 6 million viewers . At the time of its release , it was the second most @-@ downloaded episode of a television show on the iTunes store . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 When someone leaves a disgusting substance on the carpet in Michael Scott 's ( Steve Carell ) office , he spends the day at Jim Halpert 's ( John Krasinski ) desk , relegating Jim to the back room ( referred to as the " Annex " ) to suffer Kelly Kapoor 's ( Mindy Kaling ) constant chattering . She asks Jim to hook her up with Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) . Jim continues to yearn for Pam Beesley ( Jenna Fischer ) , but her groom @-@ to @-@ be , Roy Anderson ( David Denman ) , is in the office replacing the carpet along with Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) , and Jim is unable to speak with her . 
 As the day wears on , Michael becomes convinced that what happened to his office is a hate crime and an act of terrorism . Believing it to have been perpetrated by someone in the office , he begins to lose his faith in his employees , whom he considers his friends . Michael tries talking to his former boss Ed Truck ( Ken Howard ) , who tells him that he does not need to have his employees be his friends . But his mood changes drastically when he finds out the prank was carried out by his obnoxious friend Todd Packer ( David Koechner ) . Michael instantly finds the joke hilarious , and his faith in his friends is restored . At the end of the day , Jim is cheered up when he finds that all seven of his voicemail messages were left by Pam throughout the day . Jim is seen driving home , and Pam 's voicemails act as a voice @-@ over , closing out the episode . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Carpet " was written by Paul Lieberstein , who portrays Toby Flenderson on the series , making it his third writing credit after the first season entry " Health Care " and the second season episode " The Client " . The episode was directed by Victor Nelli , Jr . The episode is the first and only to feature Howard as Ed Truck . However , the death of the character would serve as the main plot for the third season episode " Grief Counseling " . Actress Kate Flannery later revealed that , for the old 80s picture of Michael and Ed , Carell had to wear a mullet wig . 
 Before the episode aired , the cast and crew received news that the show would be renewed for a third season . Jenna Fischer ( Pam ) noted that " It is rare in this business to hear news of a pickup so early " , but that NBC was very pleased with how well the show was doing . It had previously , and erroneously , been advertised that the show would finish its run at the end of March 2006 . Fischer explained that while the season would end – actually in May – the show would continue . 
 The exact nature of the substance that is deposited on Michael 's carpet is never explicitly made clear . Fischer only described it as " soft [ ... ] smelly [ and ] brown " . In fact , the circumstance in which the substance is viewed by the camera is still ambiguous ; Television Without Pity reviewer M. Giant noted that the viewer only gets " the merest out @-@ of @-@ focus Blair Witch glimpse " of the substance . Fischer also noted that one of the more interesting aspects of the episode was the " you [ the audience ] finally see Pam and Roy getting along . " She explained that this was because Roy and Pam returned from " a romantic vacation in the Poconos . " 
 Deleted scenes include : Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) believing that a higher power brought Michael to his desk , Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) and Kevin Malone ( Brian Baumgartner ) speculating on the culprit , Jim unable to handle Kelly 's chattering , Jim eating lunch by himself in his car , Michael being unable to complete a sale , Michael stealing a crumpet from Dwight , Dwight and Angela having a secret conversation in the kitchen , and Jim asking Toby Flenderson ( Lieberstein ) how he handled Kelly 's loquaciousness . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Michael compares that the circumstances of the episode to the components for an audition tape for Fear Factor , an American sports dare reality game show . Michael later bothers Stanley Hudson ( Leslie David Baker ) with an impression of the Popeye cartoon character J. Wellington Wimpy . Dwight makes repeated calls to <unk> Rock 107 , a Scranton radio station that plays classic rock . Michael <unk> compares Darryl and Roy 's work to Extreme Makeover : Home Edition , an American reality television series providing home improvements for less fortunate families and community schools . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Carpet " originally aired on NBC on the January 26 , 2006 . The episode received a 4 @.@ 6 rating / 11 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 4 @.@ 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 11 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . " The Carpet " was viewed by 8 @.@ 6 million viewers . The episode retained 93 percent of its lead @-@ in My Name is Earl audience . 
 Critical reception to the episode was largely positive . M. Giant of Television Without Pity awarded the episode an " A – " . Brendan Babish of DVD Verdict gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it an " A – " . He called it " another solid episode " and praised the " guest appearance by Ken Howard of The White Shadow fame . " After the episode aired , several newspapers , including the Los Angeles Times and The Journal Gazette reported on the episode 's success , as well as others in the season , in building the show 's audience . Furthermore , the episode was particularly popular with fans of the series , especially college students . After the episode aired , it was made available on the iTunes online digital store , where , for a time , it was the second most @-@ downloaded episode of a television show . 
 = Handley Page Victor = 
 The Handley Page Victor is a British jet @-@ powered strategic bomber , developed and produced by the Handley Page Aircraft Company , which served during the Cold War . It was the third and final of the V @-@ bombers operated by the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) , the other two V @-@ bombers being the Avro Vulcan and the Vickers Valiant . The Victor had been developed to perform as part of the United Kingdom ’ s airborne nuclear deterrent . In 1968 , the type was retired from the nuclear mission following the discovery of fatigue cracks , which had been exacerbated by the RAF 's adoption of a low @-@ altitude flight profile to avoid interception . 
 A number of Victors had received modifications to undertake the strategic reconnaissance role , employing a combination of radar , cameras , and other sensors . As the nuclear deterrence mission was given to the Royal Navy 's submarine @-@ launched Polaris missiles in 1969 , a large V @-@ bomber fleet was deemed surplus to requirements . Consequently , many of the surviving Victors were converted into aerial refuelling tankers . During the Falklands War , Victor tankers were notably used in the airborne logistics operation to repeatedly refuel Vulcan bombers on their way to and from the Black Buck raids . 
 The Victor was the last of the V @-@ bombers to be retired , the final aircraft being removed from service on 15 October 1993 . In its refuelling role , the type had been replaced by the Vickers VC10 and the Lockheed Tristar . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The origin of the Victor and the other V bombers is heavily linked with the early British atomic weapons programme and nuclear deterrent policies that developed in the aftermath of the Second World War . The atom bomb programme formally began with Air Staff Operational Requirement OR.1001 issued in August 1946 , which anticipated a government decision in January 1947 to authorise research and development work on atomic weapons , the U.S. Atomic Energy Act of 1946 ( McMahon Act ) having prohibited exporting atomic knowledge , even to countries that had collaborated on the Manhattan Project . OR.1001 envisaged a weapon not to exceed 24 ft 2 in ( 7 @.@ 37 m ) in length , 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) in diameter , 10 @,@ 000 lb ( 4 @,@ 500 kg ) in weight , and suitable for release from 20 @,@ 000 ft ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) to 50 @,@ 000 ft ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) . 
 At the same time , the Air Ministry drew up requirements for bombers to replace the existing piston @-@ engined heavy bombers such as the Avro Lancaster and the new Avro Lincoln which equipped RAF Bomber Command . In January 1947 , the Ministry of Supply distributed Specification B.35 / 46 to aviation companies to satisfy Air Staff Operational Requirement <unk> for " a medium range bomber landplane capable of carrying one 10 @,@ 000 lb ( 4 @,@ 500 kg ) bomb to a target 1 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 700 mi ; 2 @,@ 800 km ) from a base which may be anywhere in the world . " A cruising speed of 500 knots ( 580 mph ; 930 km / h ) at heights between 35 @,@ 000 ft ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) and 50 @,@ 000 ft ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) was specified . The maximum weight when fully loaded ought not to exceed 100 @,@ 000 lb ( 45 @,@ 000 kg ) . The weapons load was to include a 10 @,@ 000 lb " Special gravity bomb " ( i.e. a free @-@ fall nuclear weapon ) , or over shorter ranges 20 @,@ 000 lb ( 9 @,@ 100 kg ) of conventional bombs . No defensive weapons were to be carried , the aircraft relying on its speed and height to avoid opposing fighters . 
 The similar OR.230 required a " long range bomber " with a 2 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 300 mi ; 3 @,@ 700 km ) radius of action at a height of 50 @,@ 000 ft ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) , a cruise speed of 575 mph ( 925 km / h ) , and a maximum weight of 200 @,@ 000 lb ( 91 @,@ 000 kg ) when fully loaded . Responses to OR.230 were received from Short Brothers , Bristol , and Handley Page ; however , the Air Ministry recognised that developing an aircraft to meet these stringent requirements would have been technically demanding and so expensive that the resulting bomber could only be purchased in small numbers . As a result , realising that the majority of likely targets would not require such a long range , a less demanding specification for a medium @-@ range bomber , Air Ministry Specification B.35 / 46 was issued . This demanded the ability to carry the same 10 @,@ 000 lb bomb @-@ load to a target 1 @,@ 500 nmi ( 1 @,@ 725 mi , 2 @,@ 800 km ) away at a height of 45 @,@ 000 – 50 @,@ 000 ft ( 13 @,@ 700 – 15 @,@ 200 m ) at a speed of 575 mph . 
 = = = HP.80 = = = 
 The design proposed by Handley Page in response to B.35 / 46 was given the internal designation of <unk> To achieve the required performance , Handley Page 's aerodynamicist Dr. Gustav Lachmann and his deputy , Godfrey Lee developed a crescent @-@ shaped swept wing for the HP.80 ; the sweep and chord of the wing decreased in three distinct steps from the root to the tip , to ensure a constant limiting Mach number across the entire wing and consequently a high cruise speed . Early work on the project included tailless aircraft designs , which would have used wing @-@ tip vertical surfaces instead ; however as the proposal matured a high @-@ mounted , full tailplane was adopted instead . The profile and shaping of the crescent wing was subject to considerable fine @-@ tuning and alterations throughout the early development stages , particularly to counter unfavourable pitching behavior in flight . 
 The HP.80 and Avro 's Type 698 were chosen as the best two of the proposed designs to B.35 / 46 , and orders for two prototypes of each were placed . It was recognised , however , that there were many unknowns associated with both designs , and an order was also placed for Vickers ' design , which became the Valiant . Although not fully meeting the requirements of the specification , the Valiant design posed little risk of failure and could therefore reach service earlier . The HP.80 's crescent wing was tested on a ⅓ -scale glider , the <unk> , and a heavily modified Supermarine Attacker , which was given the Handley Page HP.88 designation . The HP.88 crashed on 26 August 1951 after completing only about thirty flights and little useful data was gained during its brief two months of existence . By the time the HP.88 was ready , the HP.80 wing had changed such that the former was no longer representative . The design of the HP.80 had sufficiently advanced that the loss of the HP.88 had little effect on the programme . 
 Two HP.80 prototypes , WB771 and <unk> , were built . WB771 was broken down at the Handley Page factory at Radlett and transported by road to RAF Boscombe Down for its first flight ; bulldozers were used to clear the route and create paths around obstacles . Sections of the aircraft were hidden under wooden framing and tarpaulins printed with " <unk> / <unk> " to make it appear as a boat hull in transit . <unk> was an anagram of " Handley <unk> " marred by a <unk> 's error . On 24 December 1952 , piloted by Handley Page 's chief test pilot Hedley Hazelden , WB771 made its maiden flight , which lasted for a total of 17 minutes . Ten days later , the Air Ministry announced the aircraft 's official name to be Victor . 
 The prototypes performed well ; however , several design failings led to the loss of WB771 on 14 July 1954 , when the tailplane detached whilst making a low @-@ level pass over the runway at Cranfield , causing the aircraft to crash with the loss of the crew . Attached to the fin using three bolts , the tailplane was subject to considerably more stress than had been anticipated , and the three bolts failed due to metal fatigue . Additionally , the prototypes were considerably tail heavy due to the lack of equipment in the nose ; this was remedied by large ballast weights being fitted upon the prototypes . Production Victors had a lengthened nose that also served to move the crew escape door further from the engine intakes . The fin was shortened to eliminate the potential for flutter while the tailplane attachment was changed to a stronger four @-@ bolt fixing . 
 = = = Victor B.1 = = = 
 Production B.1 Victors were powered by the Armstrong Siddeley Sapphire <unk> turbojets rated at 11 @,@ 000 lbf ( 49 kN ) , and was initially equipped with the Blue Danube nuclear weapon , re @-@ equipping with the more powerful Yellow Sun weapon when it became available , although Victors also carried U.S.-owned Mark 5 nuclear bombs ( made available under the Project E programme ) and the British Red Beard tactical nuclear weapon . A total of 24 were upgraded to B.1A standard by the addition of Red Steer tail warning radar in an enlarged tailcone and a suite of radar warning receivers and electronic countermeasures ( ECM ) from 1958 to 1960 . 
 On 1 June 1956 , a production Victor <unk> flown by test pilot Johnny Allam inadvertently exceeded the speed of sound after Allam let the nose drop slightly at a higher power setting . Allam noticed a cockpit indication of Mach 1 @.@ 1 and ground observers from Watford to Banbury reported hearing a sonic boom . The Victor maintained stability throughout the event . Aviation author Andrew Brookes has claimed that Allam broke the sound barrier knowingly to demonstrate the Victor 's superiority to the earlier V @-@ bombers . The Victor was the largest aircraft to have broken the sound barrier at that time . 
 = = = Victor B.2 = = = 
 The RAF required a higher ceiling for its bombers , and a number of proposals were considered for improved Victors to meet this demand . At first , Handley Page proposed use of the 14 @,@ 000 lbf ( 62 @.@ 4 kN ) Sapphire 9 engines to produce a " Phase 2 " bomber , to be followed by " Phase 3 " Victors with much greater wingspan ( 137 ft ( 42 m ) ) and powered by Bristol Siddeley Olympus turbojets or Rolls @-@ Royce Conway turbofans . The Sapphire 9 was cancelled , however , and the heavily modified Phase 3 aircraft would have delayed production , so an interim " Phase 2A " Victor was proposed and accepted , to be powered by the Conway and having minimal modifications . 
 The " Phase 2A " proposal was accepted by the Air Staff as the Victor B.2 , with Conway <unk> engines providing 17 @,@ 250 lbf ( 76 @.@ 7 kN ) . The new Conway engines required redesigned enlarged intakes to provide the greater airflow required . The wingtips were extended , increasing the wingspan to 120 ft ( 36 @.@ 6 m ) . The B.2 featured distinctive retractable " elephant ear " intakes not found on the B.1 , located on the rear fuselage forward of the tail fin . These scoops fed ram air to Ram Air Turbines ( RAT ) which could provide electrical power during emergency situations , such as engine failure , during flight . 
 The first prototype Victor B.2 , serial number XH668 made its maiden flight on 20 February 1959 . It had flown 100 hours by 20 August 1959 , when , while high @-@ altitude engine tests were being carried out by the Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment ( A & AEE ) , it disappeared from radar screens , crashing into the sea off the coast of Pembrokeshire . An extensive search operation was initiated to locate and salvage the wreckage of XH668 to determine the cause of the crash . It took until November 1960 to recover most of the aircraft ; the accident investigation concluded that the starboard pitot head had failed inflight , causing the flight control system to force the aircraft into an unrecoverable dive . Only minor changes were needed to resolve this problem , allowing the Victor B.2 to enter service in February 1962 . 
 = = = Further development = = = 
 A total of 21 B.2 aircraft were upgraded to the <unk> standard with Conway <unk> engines ( 20 @,@ 600 lbf or 92 kN thrust ) and facilities to carry a Blue Steel stand @-@ off nuclear missile . Their wings were modified to incorporate two " speed pods " or " Küchemann carrots " . These were anti @-@ shock bodies ; bulged fairings that reduced wave drag at transonic speeds ( see area rule ) , which were also used as a convenient place to house chaff dispensers . Handley Page proposed to build a further refined " Phase 6 " Victor , with more fuel and capable of carrying up to four Skybolt ( AGM @-@ 48 ) ballistic missiles on standing airborne patrols , but this proposal was rejected although it was agreed that some of the Victor B.2s on order would be fitted to carry two Skybolts . This plan was abandoned when the U.S. cancelled the whole Skybolt programme in 1963 . With the move to low @-@ level penetration missions , the Victors were fitted with air @-@ to @-@ air refuelling probes above the cockpit and received large underwing fuel tanks . 
 Nine B.2 aircraft were converted for strategic reconnaissance purposes to replace Valiants which had been withdrawn due to wing fatigue , with delivery beginning in July 1965 . These aircraft received a variety of cameras , a bomb bay @-@ mounted radar mapping system and wing top <unk> to detect particles released from nuclear testing . Designated Victor SR.2 , a single aircraft could photograph the whole of the United Kingdom in a single two @-@ hour sortie . Different camera configurations could be installed in the bomb bay , including up to four <unk> survey cameras and up to eight <unk> cameras could be fitted to take vertical or oblique daylight photography ; nighttime photography required the fitting of <unk> cameras . 
 = = = Aerial refuelling conversion = = = 
 The withdrawal of the Valiant fleet because of metal fatigue in December 1964 meant that the RAF had no front line tanker aircraft , so the B.1 / 1A aircraft , now judged to be surplus in the strategic bomber role , were refitted for this duty . To get some tankers into service as quickly as possible , six B.1A aircraft were converted to B ( K ) <unk> standard ( later redesignated B.1A ( <unk> ) ) , receiving a two @-@ point system with a hose and drogue carried under each wing , while the bomb bay remained available for weapons . Handley Page worked day and night to convert these six aircraft , with the first being delivered on 28 April 1965 , and 55 Squadron becoming operational in the tanker role in August 1965 . 
 While these six aircraft provided a limited tanker capability suitable for refuelling fighters , the Mk 20A wing <unk> could only deliver fuel at a limited rate , and were not suitable for refuelling bombers . Work therefore continued to produce a definitive three @-@ point tanker conversion of the Victor <unk> Fourteen further B.1A and 11 B.1 were fitted with two permanently fitted fuel tanks in the bomb bay , and a high @-@ capacity Mk 17 centreline hose dispenser unit with three times the fuel flow rate as the wing reels , and were designated <unk> and K.1 respectively . 
 The remaining B.2 aircraft were not as suited to the low @-@ level mission profile that the RAF had adopted for carrying out strategic bombing missions as the Vulcan with its strong delta wing . This , combined with the switch of the nuclear deterrent from the RAF to the Royal Navy ( with the Polaris missile ) meant that the Victors were considered to be surplus to requirements . Hence , 24 B.2 were modified to K.2 standard . Similar to the K.1 / 1A conversions , the wing was trimmed to reduce stress and the bomb aimer 's nose glazing was plated over . During 1982 , the glazing was reintroduced on some aircraft , the former nose bomb aimer 's position having been used to mount <unk> cameras in order to perform reconnaissance missions during the Falklands War . The K.2 could carry 91 @,@ 000 lb ( 41 @,@ 000 kg ) of fuel . It served in the tanker role until withdrawn in October 1993 . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The Victor was a futuristic @-@ looking , streamlined aircraft , with four turbojet engines buried in the thick wing roots . Distinguishing features of the Victor were its highly swept T @-@ tail with considerable dihedral on the tail planes , and a prominent chin bulge that contained the targeting radar , cockpit , nose landing gear unit and an auxiliary bomb aimer 's position . It was originally required by the specification that the whole nose section could be detached at high altitudes to act as an escape pod , but the Air Ministry abandoned this demand in 1950 . 
 The Victor had a five @-@ man crew , comprising the two pilots seated side @-@ by @-@ side and three rearward @-@ facing crew , these being the navigator / plotter , the navigator / radar operator , and the air electronics officer ( AEO ) . Unlike the Vulcan and Valiant , the Victor 's pilots sat at the same level as the rest of the crew , thanks to a larger pressurised compartment that extended all the way to the nose . As with the other V @-@ bombers , only the pilots were provided with ejection seats ; the three systems operators relying on " explosive cushions " inflated by a CO2 bottle that would help them from their seats and towards a traditional bail out in the event of high g @-@ loading , but despite this , escape for the three <unk> was extremely difficult . 
 While assigned to the nuclear delivery role , the Victor was finished in an all @-@ over anti @-@ flash white colour scheme , designed to protect the aircraft against the damaging effects of a nuclear detonation . The white colour scheme was intended to reflect heat away from the aircraft ; paler variations of RAF 's roundels were also applied for this same reason . When the V @-@ bombers were assigned to the low @-@ level approach profile in the 1960s , the Victors were soon repainted in green / grey tactical camouflage to reduce visibility to ground observation ; the same scheme was applied to subsequently converted tanker aircraft . 
 = = = Armaments and equipment = = = 
 The Victor 's bomb bay was much larger than that of the Valiant and Vulcan , which allowed heavier weapon loads to be carried at the cost of range . As an alternative to the single " 10 @,@ 000 lb " nuclear bomb as required by the specification , the bomb bay was designed to carry several conventional armaments , including a single 22 @,@ 000 lb ( 10 @,@ 000 kg ) Grand Slam or two 12 @,@ 000 lb ( 5 @,@ 500 kg ) Tallboy earthquake bombs , up to forty @-@ eight 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) bombs or thirty @-@ nine 2 @,@ 000 lb ( 900 kg ) sea mines . One proposed addition to the Victor were underwing panniers capable of carrying a further 28 1 @,@ 000 lb bombs to supplement the main bomb bay , but this option was not pursued . 
 In addition to a range of free @-@ fall nuclear bombs , later Victor B.2s operated as missile carriers for standoff nuclear missiles such as Blue Steel ; it had been intended for the American Skybolt missile to be introduced ; however , development of Skybolt was cancelled . Target information for Blue Steel could be input during flight , as well in advance of the mission . It was reported that , with intensive work , a B.2 missile carrier could revert to carrying free @-@ fall nuclear weapons or conventional munitions within 30 hours . 
 Like its sibling V @-@ Bombers , the Victor made use of the Navigational and Bombing System ( NBS ) ; a little @-@ used optical sight had also been installed upon early aircraft . For navigation and bomb @-@ aiming purposes , the Victor employed numerous radar systems . These included the H2S radar , the first airborne ground @-@ scanning radar , and the Green Satin radar . Radar information was inputted into the onboard electromechanical analogue bomb @-@ aiming apparatus . Some of the navigation and targeting equipment was either directly descended from , or shared concepts with , those used on Handley Page 's preceding Halifax bomber . Operationally , the accuracy of the bomb @-@ aiming system proved to be limited to roughly 400 yards , which was deemed sufficient for high @-@ level nuclear strike operations . 
 = = = Avionics and systems = = = 
 The Victor had fully duplicated powered controls ; many of the flight controls and flight surfaces were designed with redundancies . Pilot control movements were transmitted via a low @-@ friction mechanical system . This setup was developed to provide , amongst other capabilities , a level of artificial feel to the pilot . Eight separated hydraulic circuits were present on the aircraft , which comprised the alighting gear , flaps , nose flaps , air brakes , bomb doors , wheel brakes , nose @-@ wheel steering , and the ram @-@ air turbine scoops . An AC electrical system and auxiliary power unit were significant additions upon the later Victor B.2 , electrical reliability being noticeably improved . 
 To evade enemy detection and interception efforts , the Victor was outfitted with an extensive electronic countermeasures ( ECM ) suite which were operated by the air electronics officer ( AEO ) , who had primary responsibility for the aircraft 's electronics and communication systems . The ECM equipment could be employed to disrupt effective use of both active and passive radar in the vicinity of the aircraft , and to provide situational awareness for the crew . Enemy communications could also be jammed , and radar guided missiles of the era were also reportedly rendered ineffective . The Victor B.2 featured an extended area located around the base of the tail fin which contained cooling systems and some of the ECM equipment . 
 Some of the ECM equipment which initially saw use on the Victor , such as the original chaff dispenser and Orange Putter tail warning radar , had been developed for the earlier English Electric Canberra bomber and were already considered to be near @-@ obsolete by the time the Victor had entered service . Significant improvements and alterations would be made to the avionics and ECM suites , as effective <unk> had been deemed critical to the Victor 's role ; for example , the introduction of the more capable Red Steer tail warning radar . The introduction of the Victor B.2 was accompanied by several new ECM systems , including a passive radar warning receiver , a metric radar jammer and communications jamming equipment . <unk> fairings on the trailing edges of the wings that could house large quantities of defensive chaff / flares were also new additions . While trials were conducted with terrain @-@ following radar and a side scan mode for the bombing and navigation radar , neither of these functions were integrated into the operational fleet . 
 = = = Engines = = = 
