 The Victor B.1 was powered by an arrangement of four Armstrong Siddeley Sapphire turbojet engines . The engines were embedded in pairs into the aircraft 's wing root ; because of the high mounted position of the wing , the tail had to adopt a high mounting to maintain clearance of the jet turbulence , however the airbrakes were ideally situated to take advantage of this phenomenon . Difficulties were encountered with the Sapphires when stationed in tropical environments ; several engines were destroyed by the turbine blades striking the outer engine casing . The Victor B.2 adopted the newer Rolls @-@ Royce Conway turbofan ; the Conway at one point held the distinction of being the most powerful non @-@ afterburning engine outside of the Soviet Union , and were significantly more powerful than the preceding Sapphire engines employed upon on the B.1. 
 The Victor B.2 featured a distinct change in the aircraft 's engine arrangements ; incorporated into the right wing root was a Blackburn <unk> airborne auxiliary power unit ( AAPU ) , effectively a small fifth engine . The AAPU was capable of providing high @-@ pressure air for starting the main engines , and also providing electrical power on the ground or alternatively in the air as an emergency back @-@ up in the event of main engine failures . The AAPU also acted to reduce the need for external specialist support equipment . Turbine @-@ driven alternators , otherwise known as ram air turbines ( RATs ) , had been introduced on the B.2 to provide emergency power in the event of electrical or hydraulic power being lost . <unk> scoops in the rear fuselage would open to feed ram air into the RATs , which would provide sufficient electrical power to operate the flight controls . In the event of engine flameout RATs would assist the crew in maintaining control of the aircraft until the main engines could be relit . 
 = = = Flight profile = = = 
 The Victor was commonly described as having good handling and excellent performance , along with favourable low speed flight characteristics . During the flight tests of the first prototype , the Victor proved its aerodynamic performance , flying up to Mach 0 @.@ 98 without handling or buffeting problems ; there were next to no aerodynamic changes between prototype and production aircraft . Production aircraft featured an automated nose @-@ flap operation to counteract a tendency for the aircraft to pitch upwards during low @-@ to @-@ moderate Mach numbers . At low altitude , the Victor typically flew in a smooth and comfortable manner , in part due to its narrowness and flexibility of the crescent wing . One unusual flight characteristic of the early Victor was its self @-@ landing capability ; once lined up with the runway , the aircraft would naturally flare as the wing entered into ground effect while the tail continued to sink , giving a cushioned landing without any command or intervention by the pilot . 
 The Victor has been described as an agile aircraft , atypical for a large bomber aircraft ; in 1958 , a Victor had performed several loops and a barrel roll during practices for a display flight at Farnborough Airshow . <unk> was greatly enabled by the light controls , quick response of the aircraft , and the design of certain flight surfaces such as the infinitely @-@ variable tail @-@ mounted airbrake . The Victor was designed for flight at high subsonic speeds , although multiple instances have occurred in which the sound barrier was broken . During development of the Victor B.2 , the RAF had stressed the concept of tactical <unk> , which led to much effort in development being given to increasing the aircraft 's height and range performance . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 The Victor was the last of the V bombers to enter service , with deliveries of B.1s to No. 232 Operational Conversion Unit RAF based at RAF Gaydon , Warwickshire before the end of 1957 . The first operational bomber squadron , 10 Squadron , formed at RAF Cottesmore in April 1958 , with a second squadron , 15 Squadron forming before the end of the year . Four Victors , fitted with Yellow Astor reconnaissance radar , together with a number of passive sensors , were used to equip a secretive unit , the Radar Reconnaissance Flight at RAF Wyton . The Victor bomber force continued to build up , with 57 Squadron forming in March 1959 and 55 Squadron in October 1960 . At its height , the Victor was simultaneously operating with six squadrons of RAF Bomber Command . 
 According to the operational doctrine developed by the RAF , in the circumstance of deploying a large scale nuclear strike , each Victor would have operated entirely independently ; the crews would conduct their mission without external guidance and be reliant upon the effectiveness of their individual tactics to reach and successfully attack their assigned target ; thus great emphasis was placed on continuous crew training during peacetime . Developing a sense of a crew unity was considered highly important ; Victor crews would typically serve together for at least five years , and a similar approach was adopted with ground personnel . In order to maximize the operational lifespan of each aircraft , Victor crews typically flew a single five @-@ hour training mission per week . Each crew member was required to qualify for servicing certificates to independently undertake inspection , refuelling and turnaround operations . 
 In times of high international tension , the V @-@ bombers would be dispersed and have been maintained at a high state of readiness ; if the order was given to deploy a nuclear strike , Victors at high readiness would have been airborne in under four minutes from the point the order had been issued . British intelligence had estimated that the Soviet 's radar network was capable of detecting the Victor at up to 200 miles away , so to avoid interception , the Victor would follow carefully planned routes to exploit weaknesses in the Soviet detection network . This tactic was employed in conjunction with the Victor 's extensive onboard electronic countermeasures ( ECM ) to increase the chances of evasion . Whilst originally the Victor would have maintained high altitude flight throughout a nuclear strike mission , rapid advances of the Soviet anti @-@ aircraft warfare capabilities ( exemplified by the downing of a U2 from 70 @,@ 000 ft in 1960 ) led to this tactic being abandoned : a low @-@ level high @-@ speed approach supported by increasingly sophisticated <unk> was adopted in its place . 
 The improved Victor B.2 started to be delivered in 1961 , with the first B.2 Squadron , 139 Squadron forming in February 1962 , and a second , 100 Squadron in May 1962 . These were the only two bomber squadrons to form on the B.2 , as the last 28 Victors on order were cancelled . The prospect of Skybolt ballistic missiles , with which each V @-@ bomber could strike at two separate targets , meant that fewer bombers would be needed , while the government were unhappy with Sir Frederick Handley Page 's resistance to their pressure to merge his company with competitors . While Skybolt 's development would be terminated , Victor B.2s were retrofitted as carrier aircraft for the Blue Steel standoff nuclear missile . The introduction of standoff weapons and the switch to low @-@ level flight in order to evade radar detection was said to be decisive factors in the successful penetration of enemy territory . 
 In 1964 – 1965 , a series of detachments of Victor B.1As was deployed to RAF Tengah , Singapore as a deterrent against Indonesia during the Borneo conflict , the detachments fulfilling a strategic deterrent role as part of Far East Air Force , while also giving valuable training in low @-@ level flight and visual bombing . In September 1964 , with the confrontation with Indonesia reaching a peak , the detachment of four Victors was prepared for rapid dispersal , with two aircraft loaded with live conventional bombs and held on one @-@ hour readiness , ready to fly operational sorties . However , they were never required to fly combat missions and the high readiness alert finished at the end of the month . 
 Following the discovery of fatigue cracks , developing due to their low @-@ altitude usage , the <unk> strategic bombers were retired and placed in storage by the end of 1968 . The RAF had experienced intense demand upon its existing aerial refuelling tanker fleet , and its existing fleet of Victor B.1 tankers that had been converted earlier were due to be retired in the 1970s , thus it was decided that the stored Victor <unk> would be converted to tankers also . Handley Page prepared a modification scheme that would see the Victors fitted with tip tanks , the structure modified to limit further fatigue cracking in the wings , and ejection seats provided for all six crewmembers . The Ministry of Defence delayed signing the order for conversion of the <unk> until after Handley Page went into liquidation . The contract for conversion was instead awarded to Hawker Siddeley , who produced a much simpler conversion than that planned by Handley Page , with the wingspan shortened to reduce wing bending stress and hence extend airframe life . 
 While the Victor was never permanently based with any units stationed overseas , temporary deployments were frequently conducted , often in a ceremonial capacity or to participate in training exercises and competitions . Victor squadrons were dispatched on several extended deployments to the Far East , and short term deployments to Canada were also conducted for training purposes . At one point during the early 1960s , South Africa showed considerable interest in the acquisition of several bomber @-@ configured Victors ; in the end , the Victor would not serve with any other operator other than the RAF . 
 Several of the Victor B.2s had been converted for Strategic Reconnaissance mission following the retirement of the Valiant in this capacity . In service , this type was primarily used in surveillance of the Atlantic and Mediterranean Seas , capable of surveying 400 @,@ 000 square miles in an eight @-@ hour mission ; they were also used to sample the fallout from French nuclear tests conducted in the South Pacific . Originally reconnaissance Victors were equipped for visual reconnaissance ; however , it was found to be cheaper to assign Canberra light bombers to this duty and as such the cameras were removed in 1970 . Subsequently , radar @-@ based reconnaissance was emphasised in the type 's role . The reconnaissance Victors remained in use until 1974 when they followed the standard bombers into the tanker conversion line ; a handful of modified Avro Vulcans assumed the maritime radar reconnaissance role in their place . 
 Two of the V @-@ bombers , the Victor and the Vulcan , played a high @-@ profile role during the 1982 Falklands War . In order to cross the vast distance of the Atlantic Ocean , a single Vulcan required refuelling several times from Victor tankers . A total of three bombing missions were flown against Argentine forces deployed to the Falklands , with approximately 1 @.@ 1 million gal ( 5 million L ) of fuel consumed in each mission . At the time , these missions held the record for the world 's longest @-@ distance bombing raids . The deployment of other assets to the theatre , such as the Hawker Siddeley Nimrod and Lockheed Hercules , required the support of the Victor tanker fleet , which had been temporarily relocated to RAF Ascension Island for the campaign . The Victor also undertook several reconnaissance missions over the South Atlantic . These missions provided valuable intelligence for the retaking of South Georgia by British forces . 
 Following the invasion of Kuwait by neighbouring Iraq in 1991 , a total of eight Victor K.2s were deployed to Bahrain to provide in @-@ flight refuelling support to RAF and other coalition aircraft during the subsequent 1991 Gulf War . RAF strike aircraft such as the Panavia Tornado would frequently make use of the tanker to refuel prior to launching cross @-@ border strikes inside of Iraq . Shortly after the Gulf War , the remaining Victor fleet was quickly retired in 1993 , at which point it had been the last of the three V @-@ bombers in operational service ; retiring nine years after the last Vulcan , although the Vulcan had survived longer in its original role as a bomber . 
 = = Variants = = 
 HP.80 
 Prototype , two aircraft built . 
 Victor B.1 
 Strategic bomber aircraft , 50 built . 
 Victor B.1A 
 Strategic bomber aircraft , B.1 updated with Red Steer tail warning radar and ECM suite , 24 converted . 
 Victor B.1A ( <unk> ) 
 2 point in @-@ flight refuelling tanker retaining bomber capability , six converted . 
 Victor <unk> 
 3 point in @-@ flight refuelling tanker ( renamed K.1 after bombing capability removed ) , 11 converted . 
 Victor <unk> 
 3 point in @-@ flight refuelling tanker ( renamed <unk> as for K.1 ) , 14 converted . 
 Victor B.2 
 Strategic bomber aircraft , 34 built . 
 Victor <unk> 
 Blue Steel @-@ capable aircraft with <unk> Conway 201 engines , 21 converted . 
 Victor B ( SR ) .2 
 Strategic reconnaissance aircraft , nine converted . 
 Victor K.2 
 In @-@ flight refuelling tanker . 24 converted from B.2 and B ( SR ) .2 . 
 <unk> 
 Proposed military transport of 1950 with new fuselage carrying 85 troops . <unk> . 
 <unk> 
 1950 civil airliner project . Not built . 
 <unk> 
 Proposed pathfinder version with remotely operated tail guns and powered by Conway engines . Rejected in favour of Valiant <unk> 
 <unk> 
 Proposed military transport version of <unk> Not built . 
 <unk> 
 Proposed " Phase 3 " bomber of 1955 powered by Bristol Olympus or Sapphire engines . Not built . 
 <unk> 
 1958 project for military or civil transport , powered by four Conway engines . Capacity for 200 troops in military version or 145 passengers in airliner in a double @-@ decker fuselage . 
 <unk> 
 Proposed " Phase 6 " bomber designed for standing patrols carrying two or four GAM @-@ 87 Skybolt ballistic missiles . 
 <unk> 
 Proposed military tactical transport based on <unk> and fitted with blown flaps . Rejected in favour of Armstrong Whitworth <unk> 
 = = Operators = = 
 Royal Air Force 
 No. 10 Squadron RAF operated B.1 from April 1958 to March 1964 at RAF Cottesmore . 
 No. 15 Squadron RAF operated B.1 from September 1958 to October 1964 at RAF Cottesmore . 
 No. 55 Squadron RAF operated B.1 and B.1As from RAF <unk> from October 1960 , moving to RAF Marham and receiving B.1 ( K ) A tankers in May 1965 . These were replaced by K.2 in July 1975 , with the squadron continuing to operate Victors in the tanker role until disbanding in October 1993 . 
 No. 57 Squadron RAF operated B.1As , K.1 & K.2s from March 1959 to 1992 . 
 No. 100 Squadron RAF operated B.2s at RAF Wittering from May 1962 to September 1968 . 
 No. 139 ( Jamaica ) Squadron RAF operated B.2s from February 1962 to December 1968 . 
 No. 214 Squadron RAF operated K.1 tankers from July 1966 to January 1977 . 
 No. 543 Squadron RAF operated B ( SR ) <unk> from December 195 to May 1974 . 
 No. 232 Operational Conversion Unit RAF . 
 Radar Reconnaissance Flight RAF Wyton . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 14 July 1954 : WB771 the prototype HP.80 crashed during a test flight at Cranfield , England . All four crewmen died . Witnesses reported the entire tail assembly had " ripped away " at a height of about 100 feet . 
 16 April 1958 : <unk> a B.1 undertaking Ministry of Supply trials experienced a collapse of the rear bomb bay bulkhead while cycling the bomb bay doors , damaging hydraulic and electrical systems ; the aircraft successfully returned to base . Following the incident , in @-@ service Victors had restrictions put in place on the opening of the bomb doors until Modification 943 was applied to all aircraft . 
 20 August 1959 : XH668 a B2 of the A & AEE lost a pitot head and dived into the sea off Milford Haven , Pembrokeshire . 
 19 June 1960 : <unk> a B1A of 57 Squadron caught fire in the air and was abandoned near Diss , Norfolk . 
 23 March 1962 : <unk> a B2 of the A & AEE stalled and dived into a house at <unk> , Lincolnshire . 
 14 June 1962 : <unk> a B1A of 15 Squadron lost power on all engines and was abandoned on approach to RAF Cottesmore . 
 16 June 1962 : <unk> a B1 of 10 Squadron overshot the runway and broke up at RAF Akrotiri following an aborted takeoff . 
 2 October 1962 : <unk> a B1 of ' A ' Squadron , 232 OCU had an engine fail on takeoff from RAF Gaydon after which two engines failed on approach . The aircraft crashed into a copse several miles from RAF Gaydon . Of the four crew on board only the co @-@ pilot survived . 
 20 March 1963 : <unk> a B2 of 100 Squadron stalled after takeoff from RAF Wittering . 
 29 June 1966 : <unk> a SR2 of 543 Squadron was giving a demonstration flight for the press and television at RAF Wyton . The aircraft had made one high @-@ speed circuit and was flying low in a wide arc to return over the airfield when the starboard wing was seen to break away and both it and the rest of the aircraft burst into flames . All four crew were killed . The aircraft was the first SR2 to enter service with the squadron , and released evidence suggests that it was overstressed . 
 19 August 1968 : Victor K1 <unk> of 214 Squadron collided in midair near Holt , Norfolk in bad weather with a 213 Squadron English Electric Canberra <unk> ; all four crew members of the Victor died 
 10 May 1973 : <unk> a SR2 of 543 Squadron bounced during landing at RAF Wyton and exploded . 
 24 March 1975 : Victor <unk> <unk> of 57 Squadron was involved in a midair collision with Hawker Siddeley Buccaneer <unk> during a simulated refuelling . The Buccaneer hit the Victor 's tailplane causing the Victor to crash into the sea 95 mi ( 153 km ) east of Sunderland , Tyne and Wear , four crew killed . 
 29 Sept 1976 : <unk> a K2 of No 55 Squadron aborted take off and overshot the runway at RAF Marham after a bird strike . The crew escaped with no serious injuries . The aircraft caught fire and was damaged beyond repair . 
 15 October 1982 : <unk> a K2 of No 55 Squadron suffered an uncontained turbine failure early in the take off run . The aircraft was stopped and the crew evacuated the aircraft with no injuries . Debris from the turbine penetrated a fuselage fuel tank , starting an uncontrolled fire , destroying the aircraft and damaging the runway . 
 19 June 1986 : <unk> a K2 of 57 Squadron undershot approach in bad weather at Hamilton , Ontario . 
 3 May 2009 : During a " fast taxi " run at Bruntingthorpe Aerodrome , XM715 made an unplanned brief flight , reaching a height of about 30 ft ( 9 m ) at maximum . The aircraft did not have a permit to fly ; however , the Civil Aviation Authority ( CAA ) stated that they would not be conducting an investigation . The co @-@ pilot had failed to reply to the command " throttles back " ; the pilot then had to control the throttles himself , the confusion temporarily disrupting firm control of the aircraft . 
 = = Survivors = = 
 A total of five Victors have survived and are on display in museums . None are flightworthy as of 2013 . 
 Victor B.1A 
 <unk> : a B.1A ( <unk> ) at the Imperial War Museum Duxford , Cambridgeshire . This is the sole B.1 to survive . 
 Victor K.2 
 <unk> : Maid Marian , at the Royal Air Force Museum , Cosford , Shropshire , in the National Cold War Exhibition . 
 <unk> : Gate guardian at RAF Marham , Norfolk , the Victor 's last home . 
 <unk> : Lusty Lindy , at the Yorkshire Air Museum , York . The prototype for the B.2 to K.2 conversion . <unk> is one of two Victors currently in taxiable condition . 
 XM715 : <unk> ' Tina / Victor Meldrew , at the British Aviation Heritage Centre , Bruntingthorpe , Leicestershire . XM715 is also one of two Victors currently in taxiable condition . 
 = = Specifications ( Handley Page Victor B.1 ) = = 
 Data from Handley Page Aircraft since 1907 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 5 
 Length : 114 ft 11 in ( 35 @.@ 05 m ) 
 Wingspan : 110 ft 0 in ( 33 @.@ 53 m ) 
 Height : 28 ft 1 ½ in ( 8 @.@ 57 m ) 
 Wing area : 2 @,@ 406 sq ft ( 223 @.@ 5 m ² ) 
 Empty weight : 89 @,@ 030 lb ( 40 @,@ 468 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 205 @,@ 000 lb ( 93 @,@ 182 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 4 × Armstrong Siddeley Sapphire <unk> turbojets , 11 @,@ 050 lbf ( 49 @.@ 27 kN ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 627 mph ( 545 knots , 1 @,@ 009 km / h ) at 36 @,@ 000 ft ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) 
 Range : 6 @,@ 000 mi ( 5 @,@ 217 nmi , 9 @,@ 660 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 56 @,@ 000 ft ( 17 @,@ 000 m ) 
 Armament 
 Up to 35 × 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) bombs or 
 1 × Yellow Sun free @-@ fall nuclear bomb 
 = = Notable appearances in media = = 
 A 1964 Gerhard Richter painting titled XL 513 depicts Victor K.2 , which was lost in a 1976 accident at RAF Marham . 
 = Bart vs. Thanksgiving = 
 " Bart vs. Thanksgiving " is the seventh episode of The Simpsons ' second season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 22 , 1990 . In the episode , Lisa makes a table centerpiece for the Thanksgiving dinner , which Bart accidentally destroys . After he is sent to his room by his parents , Bart runs away from home and stays at a soup kitchen for homeless people . Bart returns home eventually and climbs to the roof of the Simpson family 's house , where he hears Lisa sobbing . He apologizes to her , and the family happily enjoys a meal of leftovers . 
 The episode was written by George Meyer and directed by David Silverman . Voice actor Greg Berg guest starred as Rory , one of the homeless people at the soup kitchen . The episode features cultural references to Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade , and the three poets Allen Ginsberg , Jack Kerouac , and Edgar Allan Poe . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 9 , and was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 It is Thanksgiving and Lisa assembles a decorative centerpiece for the dinner table . The Simpson family sits down to give thanks along with Grampa , Patty , Selma , and Mrs. Bouvier . When Lisa places the centerpiece on the table , she argues with Bart about where it should go since there is no room left for the turkey . In the ensuing fight , Bart accidentally throws the centerpiece into the fireplace and it burns up . Devastated , Lisa runs to her room crying , while Bart is sent to his room by his parents for the incident . 
 Convinced he has not done anything wrong , Bart decides to run away from home , taking Santa 's Little Helper with him . Walking the streets alone , he visits a <unk> that is serving Thanksgiving dinner for homeless people . A television crew led by Kent Brockman is covering the event , and they interview Bart on live television . The family sees the report and calls the police . Homer and Marge start to regret the bad things they said to Bart , who eventually returns home feeling remorseful . However , the situation is worsened when he imagines his family blaming him for everything if he apologized for " ruining " Thanksgiving . Back to the present , he realizes that it was all his own imagination . He climbs up onto the roof of the house to think things out . Hearing Lisa cry because she misses him , Bart calls for her to come onto the roof . He realizes that what he did was wrong and apologizes to her and she accepts and kisses him . Bart rejoins the family to enjoy a meal of Thanksgiving leftovers later . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by George Meyer and directed by David Silverman . It was the first script Meyer wrote on the show , and he thought he made " quite a few mistakes , but it turned out really well overall . " The staff decided to do a Thanksgiving episode after they found out that an episode would air on Thursday , November 22 , 1990 , the date of Thanksgiving that year . The Simpsons had previously aired at 8 : 00 p.m. EST on Sunday night but the Fox network switched its timeslot to the same time on Thursdays at the beginning of the second season . The idea of Bart going up on the roof was suggested by Meyer who used to go up on the roof himself when he had fights with his family . 
 Voice actor Greg Berg guest starred as Rory , one of the homeless people at the soup kitchen . Marge 's mother , Jackie Bouvier , voiced by Julie Kavner , makes her first physical appearance on The Simpsons in the episode , though she was first referenced in a flashback in the season one episode " Moaning Lisa " . Bill and Marty , voiced by Harry Shearer and Dan Castellaneta , also make their first visual appearances , although they were heard on the radio in previous episodes , including " Bart Gets an " F " " . They are two radio show hosts and DJs on Springfield 's own radio station KBBL . Homer listens to their radio show when he drives to pick up Grampa at the retirement home for the Thanksgiving dinner . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 At the beginning of the episode , Homer and Bart watch Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade , an annual United States parade that includes floating helium balloons modeled after famous fictional characters . When Homer and Bart talk about the balloons modeled after Bullwinkle and Underdog , The Simpsons is self @-@ referenced as Homer tells Bart that if the parade " turned every flash @-@ in @-@ pan cartoon character into a balloon , it would be a farce " , after which a giant balloon of Bart can be seen on the television in the background . Not coincidentally , 1990 was the year that Bart was turned into a balloon for the Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade . While watching the Thanksgiving football game , Homer says he is cheering for the Dallas Cowboys . Two of the fictional Dallas Cowboys players are named Jay Kogen and Wallace Wolodarsky after two writers on The Simpsons . 
 The song that plays on the radio during the break in the Thanksgiving football game is " Get Dancing " by Disco @-@ Tex and the Sex @-@ O @-@ <unk> . The game is played at the Pontiac Silverdome , then home to the Detroit Lions , who also play on Thanksgiving . Lisa says the following about her centerpiece : " It 's a tribute to the trailblazing women who made our country great . See , there 's Georgia O 'Keeffe , Susan B. Anthony , and this is Marjory Stoneman Douglas . I 'm sure you haven 't heard of her , but she worked her whole life to preserve the Florida Everglades . " The poem Lisa is seen writing in her room after her centerpiece is destroyed is a reference to Allen Ginsberg 's poem " Howl " . Lisa also keeps a book of Ginsberg 's work on a bookshelf next to Jack Kerouac 's novel On the Road , and a collection of poems by Edgar Allan Poe . Feeling hungry , Bart decides to steal food from the old , rich Mr. Burns , who lives on the corner of Croesus and Mammon , two mythological figures of greed . A member of Burns ' security staff reads the novel Les Misérables . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Bart vs. Thanksgiving " finished thirty @-@ seventh in the ratings for the week of November 19 – 25 , 1990 , with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 9 , equivalent to approximately eleven million viewing households . It was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Married ... with Children and In Living Color . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote : " Marge 's mother Jackie is particularly nightmarish in her first real appearance . The final sequence on the rooftop with Lisa and Bart is lovely , and Homer 's comment to Marge is a magical wrap @-@ up to a good episode . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said the episode " maintained a nicely irreverent tone most of the time — irreverent enough to make it amusing , at least , " and added : " The interaction of the Simpson and Bouvier families at dinner was terrific , and Bart ’ s experiences on skid row made their point while they still managed to be pointed and clever . ' Bart vs. Thanksgiving ' was another winner . " Bryce Wilson of Cinema Blend said " Bart vs. Thanksgiving " and " Lisa 's Substitute " , another season two episode , were the first episodes that " asked [ the audience ] to truly care about the characters , and they work beautifully . " Both Dawn Taylor of The DVD Journal and Jacobson thought the most memorable line of the episode was Jackie 's line to Marge : " I have laryngitis and it hurts to talk , so I 'll just say one thing — you never do anything right . " A reviewer for DVD.net , on the other hand , thought the best line was Homer 's " Oh Lord , be honest – are we the most pathetic family in the universe , or what ? " . 
 = Angela James = 
 Angela James ( born December 22 , 1964 ) is a Canadian former ice hockey player who played at the highest levels of senior hockey between 1980 and 2000 . She was a member of numerous teams in the Central Ontario Women 's Hockey League ( COWHL ) from its founding in 1980 until 1998 and finished her career in the National Women 's Hockey League ( NWHL ) . She was named her league 's most valuable player six times . James is also a certified referee in Canada , and a coach . She is currently the Senior Sports Coordinator at Seneca College in Toronto . 
 Internationally , James played in the first women 's world championship , a 1987 tournament that was unsanctioned . She played with Team Canada in the first IIHF World Women 's Championship in 1990 , setting a scoring record of 11 goals and leading Canada to the gold medal . She played in three additional world championships , winning gold medals in 1992 , 1994 and 1997 . Controversially , she was left off the team for the first women 's Olympic hockey tournament in 1998 . She played her final international tournament in 1999 . 
 Considered the first superstar of modern women 's hockey , James has been honoured by numerous halls of fame . She was one of the first three women inducted into the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) Hockey Hall of Fame in 2008 and one of the first two inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 2010 . She was inducted into Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame in 2009 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James was born on December 22 , 1964 , in Toronto , Ontario . She is the daughter of Donna <unk> , a white Canadian from Toronto , and Leo James , a black American from Mississippi who came to Canada to escape racial segregation . She has two half @-@ brothers and two half @-@ sisters on her mother 's side . Her father , who was involved with a Toronto nightclub , estimates she has at least nine half @-@ siblings by him , though James believes the number closer to 15 . Among them is National Hockey League ( NHL ) player Theo Peckham . 
 A single mother , Donna raised Angela and her two half @-@ sisters with the help of government assistance . They lived in a subsidized townhouse in the Flemingdon Park neighbourhood of Toronto . Donna worked as a bookkeeper and at the concession stand of the local arena . She battled depression and mental illness and her eldest daughter , Cindy , worked two part @-@ time jobs at the age of 16 to help the family meet financial obligations . Angela was closest to her sister Kym , though the two also often fought as children . Her father never had a consistent place in her life growing up and did not provide financial support to the family , but was available if she needed him . As one of few black children in Flemingdon Park , Angela often faced insults , particularly over the fact that she was a mixed @-@ race child with a white mother and sisters . She often got into fights over the slurs , forming a combative attitude she carried into the game of hockey . Her maternal grandparents never accepted Angela as a child , though they treated her sisters well . 
 Always a tomboy , James quickly developed an interest in sports . Her godfather gave her a baseball bat and glove to celebrate her first holy communion . She excelled at hockey , baseball and synchronized swimming as a young child . Her mother wanted her to focus on swimming due to the lack of opportunities for girls in hockey in the 1970s . Her passion was for hockey , however , and she was constantly playing ball hockey with the neighbourhood boys from the time she was in kindergarten . James first played organized hockey in a Flemingdon Park boys house league at the age of eight , and then only after her mother threatened legal action as officials opposed her inclusion . 
 James dominated the Flemingdon Park league . She started in the novice ( 7 – 8 year old ) age group , but her skill level was so much higher than her peers that she was moved up to atom and then peewee ( 11 and 12 year olds ) . She led the league in scoring , was named an all @-@ star and was invited to play with the league team at a peewee tournament in Montreal . James ' participation in the Flemingdon Park league ended partway through her second year due to jealousy from the parents of the boys in the league . The president 's son was on James ' team , and was particularly offended that his boy was being overshadowed by a girl . He ordered a change in the league 's policy to forbid girls from playing . 
 The only feasible option James had for a girls league was at Annunciation , a Catholic organization in Don Mills . Lacking a vehicle to drive to the games , her mother would take her to and from games at various rinks via the bus . The girls ' hockey program was small , requiring that teams be made up of players from all age groups in order to field complete rosters . <unk> the bantam age group entirely , James first played senior hockey with the <unk> Saints . She was 13 at the time , playing against women 16 and older . The Saints were a Senior C team , the fourth highest level of women 's hockey in the Toronto area at the time . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 Focused on hockey , exposed to drugs and alcohol and frequently getting into fights , James paid little attention to her education and nearly dropped out of school . A vice @-@ principal at Valley Park Middle School , Ross Dixon , encouraged her to pay greater attention to her studies , allowing her to graduate from <unk> High School , now named Marc Garneau Collegiate Institute , and move onto Seneca College in Toronto . James struggled academically in her first year at Seneca , partially because she had rarely been held accountable for failing in her studies in the past , and partly because she was playing two sports at both the college and community level while working part @-@ time jobs to help pay the family 's bills . Seneca 's hockey coach Lee Trempe had several arguments with James before she began to take her studies seriously . 
 James was a two @-@ sport star for the Seneca Scouts . She joined the softball team in 1983 , playing the outfield and batting cleanup . She was an Ontario Colleges Athletic Association ( OCAA ) all @-@ star and led her school the inaugural OCAA women 's softball championship . She was named an OCAA all @-@ star again 1984 and 1985 , leading Seneca to another provincial championship and a silver medal finish . 
 Though James always played forward in her community hockey leagues , Trempe converted her to defence so that she could set up the plays and incorporate her teammates into the offensive systems the team used . Despite the change in position , James still led the league in scoring in 1982 – 83 , recording 15 goals and 10 assists in an 8 game season . She was named the OCAA 's most valuable player , but Seneca settled for the silver medal after losing the OCAA finals . Leading the OCAA with 30 points in 10 games in 1983 – 84 , James carried Seneca College to its first championship . She was named an all @-@ star on defence , and again voted the most valuable player . James won both awards again the following season . Seneca repeated as champions in 1984 – 85 while James dominated the OCAA . She again led the league in scoring , setting school and association records with 50 goals and 73 points in just 14 games . Her scoring exploits led a Toronto reporter to call James " the Wayne Gretzky of women 's hockey " . 
 The OCAA named James its athlete of the year in both 1984 and 1985 for her exploits in hockey and softball . She set OCAA career hockey records of 80 goals and 128 points , which stood through to 1989 when the OCAA disbanded its women 's hockey program due to a lack of competing teams . Seneca College retired her jersey number 8 in 2001 , she was inducted into Seneca Varsity Hall of Fame in 1985 and in 2004 , received the Seneca College Distinguished Alumni Award . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 After one year of Senior C hockey , James moved up to the Toronto Islanders in 1980 , a Senior AA team in the newly founded Central Ontario Women 's Hockey League ( COWHL ) . The league was at the highest level of women 's hockey in southern Ontario at the time , and James established herself as one of the league 's stars within a year . She played the first women 's national championship in 1982 , scoring the tying goal in the third period en route to a 3 – 2 overtime victory over Team Alberta to win the McTeer Cup . 
 When the Islanders folded in 1982 , James moved to a team in Burlington , where she stayed for three seasons . In 1983 , she led her new team to the national title as Burlington captured the inaugural Abby Hoffman Cup . For James , appearances in the women 's nationals were nearly an annual event , as she played in 12 national championship tournaments . 
 James changed teams frequently , moving for a variety of reasons . She often changed teams to follow friends or if she did not agree with the coach 's philosophy . Sometimes she moved out of necessity , such as if a team ceased operations . She left Burlington in 1984 – 85 to join Lee Trempe with the Agincourt Canadians for one season , then played with the Brampton <unk> for another . In 1986 – 87 she again followed Trempe to the Mississauga Warriors , where she stayed for three seasons . James won her first of seven consecutive COWHL scoring titles that season , then was loaned to the Hamilton Golden Hawks for the 1987 Women 's Nationals and helped lead that team to victory . 
 Changing teams again , James joined the Toronto Aeros in 1989 . The Aeros had formed in 1974 as an outgrowth of the Annunciation team she played with as a child . She led the team to two national championships , in 1991 and 1993 . In the first , she scored the only goal , against future national team teammate Manon Rheaume , in a 1 – 0 victory over Team Quebec . The 1993 – 94 season was a season in which James scored 40 goals and 70 points in 28 games . She continued to switch teams , joining the Toronto Red Wings / <unk> Panthers franchise for a couple seasons before rejoining the Aeros in 1997 . She remained with the team when it was rebranded the Beatrice Aeros in 1998 and joined the newly formed National Women 's Hockey League ( NWHL ) . James scored 38 goals and 55 points in the inaugural NWHL season of 1998 – 99 and was named the league 's most valuable player . The following season , she was named the Western Division 's best forward and on its First All @-@ Star team . The Aeros won their first NWHL title dominating the Sainte @-@ Julie <unk> in the finals . Also OWHA champions , the Aeros <unk> the women 's nationals against Team Quebec . Once the season over , James retired from competitive hockey in 2000 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 The Ontario Women 's Hockey Association ( OWHA ) hosted the first women 's world championship in 1987 . The event , which was not sanctioned by the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) , featured six participating teams while several nations sent observers . Team Canada was represented by the national champion Hamilton Golden Hawks , with whom James had played with in the national tournament , while " Team Ontario " was represented by her usual club team in Mississauga . While she was eligible to play with either team in the tournament , James suited up for her usual Mississauga team . She led Team Ontario throughout , and after a 5 – 2 semi @-@ final win over the United States , played for the title against Team Canada . Team Canada defeated James ' Team Ontario , 4 – 0 in the final . 
 The IIHF sanctioned the first official Women 's World Championship , held in 1990 and played in Ottawa . Canada and the United States easily dispatched their European rivals to reach the gold medal final , which Canada won by a 5 – 2 score . James scored the first goal in the tournament 's history , and 11 overall . She tied American Cindy Curley for the tournament lead which , along with The USA 's Krissy Wendell in 2000 , stands as the record for most goals by one player in one tournament , through 2012 . 
 James appeared in three additional Women 's World Championships , all three of which were won by Canada over the United States . She was named an all @-@ star at forward in the 1992 tournament in Tampere , Finland , where Canada won the gold medal with an 8 – 0 victory . The Americans provided a stronger challenge at the 1994 tournament in Lake Placid , New York . James scored two goals and was named the game 's most valuable player in the final , a 6 – 3 victory . She won her fourth , and final , world championship in 1997 , a 4 – 3 overtime victory . 
 Reflecting the growth of the game , the 1998 Nagano Games featured the first women 's Olympic hockey tournament . The announcement of Canada 's first Olympic team on December 9 , 1997 , brought a storm of controversy . Head coach Shannon Miller left James off the roster , telling the press that the 32 @-@ year @-@ old James was a " defensive liability " and suggesting she was not a team player . James was devastated at being cut and enraged by Miller 's explanations . Stating she had been " treated like a dog " and " set up and cheated " by Miller , she appealed the decision to Hockey Canada . James also argued Miller 's criticisms were unjustified and that the coach had previously maintained she was playing well . She was the national team 's leading goal scorer in preliminary games that led up to the national team camp . 
 At the time of the appeal , rumours surfaced that Miller was having an affair with one of her players . While the allegations were unfounded , their timing resulted in James being falsely accused of being their source . Hockey Canada officials determined that the rumours were started by a third party attempting to create controversy . They also rejected James ' appeal , ending her Olympic dream . Neither her teammates nor her opponents could understand how she was left off the team . Canada and the United States met in the final , as expected , but it was the Americans who emerged victorious . Having already defeated Canada 7 – 4 in the preliminary round , the Americans won the gold medal with a 3 – 1 victory . Former teammates argued that James could have made a difference for Canada had she been included . 
 At the time , James was suffering from the effects of undiagnosed Graves ' disease , a thyroid condition that resulted suffering weight loss and fatigue throughout that camp . She learned of and was treated for her condition following the Olympics , recovering lost weight and strength . The national team , under a new coach , added James back to its roster for the 1999 3 Nations Cup . She was used sparingly , but accepted her diminished role with the team . During the tournament , James made the decision that it would be her last . James ' international career ended in storybook fashion as the championship game , against the United States , went to a shootout . Selected as the first shooter , she scored the winning goal to lead Canada to a 3 – 2 victory . James played in 50 games for Team Canada , scoring 33 goals and 21 assists . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 James was a dominant player in the OWHA . Women 's hockey historian Elizabeth <unk> attributed James ' success to her skating strength and " dynamic , bullet @-@ like shot " . She was a physical player who helped the women 's game overcome a reputation that it was not a sport where the players were willing to play a " gritty " , tough style . Opponents claimed running into James was like " hitting steel " . Canadian Broadcasting Corporation commentator Robin Brown , who played against James in the OWHA , said of her : " She could do it all . She had end @-@ to @-@ end speed , she had finesse as a stick handler and her slap shot was harder and more accurate than any female player I have ever seen . She was a pure goal scorer like Mike Bossy and aggressive like Mark Messier . In her prime , she was referred to as the ' Wayne Gretzky of women 's hockey ' . " Capable of playing any position , James was primarily a centre during her senior career , but excelled on defence . In one game where her team was without a goaltender , she played the position and recorded a shutout . 
 = = Coaching and officiating = = 
 James has been active in many areas of the sport . She gained accreditation as a referee in Canada in 1980 , and has been an active official since . As a referee in a Senior D women 's game in 1986 , James was involved in an altercation with a player that resulted in the player becoming the first woman banned for life from the OWHA . The player became upset at a penalty James assessed , shoved a linesman and punched her . James ultimately gained level IV certification through Hockey Canada and has served as the OWHA 's Referee @-@ in @-@ Chief . 
 Upon her graduation from Seneca College , James took up coaching . Serving first as an assistant coach , she helped Seneca win the Ontario college championship , its third consecutive title . The school again repeated as champions in 1987 with James as its head coach . She has coached at all age levels of the game , including the national championship . She was an assistant with the gold medal winning Team Ontario at the 1999 Canada Winter Games , and led Ontario to a gold medal at the 2001 under @-@ 18 national championship . Prior to the 2010 @-@ 11 <unk> season , she was named Brampton Thunder head coach but , finding the responsibilities too time consuming , she stepped down in December , 2010 . She believes she can offer the most at the grassroots level of the sport , and has operated both her own hockey school and directed one organized through Seneca College . 
 = = Honours and legacy = = 
 James has been called " the first superstar of modern women 's hockey " , and has been hailed as a pioneer who brought the women 's game into the mainstream . Longtime women 's hockey administrator Fran Rider stated that James brought credibility , without which the women 's game would never have gained recognition as an Olympic sport . 
 An eight @-@ time scoring champion and six @-@ time most valuable player during her senior career , James has been honoured by several organizations . She was named Toronto 's Youth of the Year in 1985 and was presented the city 's Women in Sport Enhancement Award in 1992 . Hockey Canada named her the 2005 recipient of its Female Hockey Breakthrough Award . The Flemingdon Park arena was renamed the Angela James Arena in 2009 , and the Canadian Women 's Hockey League presents the Angela James Bowl to its leading scorer each <unk> . She has been inducted into several Halls of Fame , including the Ontario Colleges Athletic Association Hall of Fame in 2005 , and the Black Hockey and Sports Hall of Fame in 2006 . 
 Reflecting her role as a pioneer of the sport , James was one of the first three women , along with Geraldine Heaney and <unk> Granato , to be inducted into the IIHF Hall of Fame . They were enshrined in 2008 as part of the IIHF 's 100th anniversary celebrations . Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame hailed James as a role model upon inducting her in 2009 . One year later , she joined Granato as the first two women inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame . James described being informed of her election as a day she never thought would happen , adding : " I 'm really honoured to represent the female hockey players from all over the world " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 After earning a diploma in Recreation Facilities Management from Seneca College , James was hired by the school as a sports programmer in 1985 . She continues to work for Seneca and is now a senior sports coordinator at its King campus . 
 James realized as a teen that she is lesbian . She met her partner , Ange , in 1994 , and the couple formalized their relationship in a commitment ceremony two years later . They have three children . Ange carried their first child in 1999 , Christian , while Angela gave birth to fraternal twins , son Michael and daughter Toni , in 2004 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 Note : Complete statistics unavailable 
 = = = International = = = 
 = Operation Copperhead = 
 Operation Copperhead was a small military deception operation run by the British during the Second World War . It formed part of Operation Bodyguard , the cover plan for the invasion of Normandy in 1944 , and was intended to mislead German intelligence as to the location of General Bernard Montgomery . The operation was conceived by Dudley Clarke in early 1944 after he watched the film Five Graves to Cairo . Following the war M. E. Clifton James wrote a book about the operation , I Was Monty 's Double . It was later adapted into a film , with James in the lead role . 
 The German high command expected Montgomery ( one of the best @-@ known Allied commanders ) to play a key role in any cross @-@ channel bridgehead . Clarke and the other deception planners reasoned that a high @-@ profile appearance outside the United Kingdom would suggest that an Allied invasion was not imminent . An appropriate look @-@ alike was found , M. E. Clifton James , who spent a short time with Montgomery to familiarise himself with the general 's mannerisms . On 26 May 1944 , James flew first to Gibraltar and then to Algiers , making appearances where the Allies knew German intelligence agents would spot him . He then flew secretly to Cairo and remained in hiding until Montgomery 's public appearance in Normandy following the invasion . 
 The operation did not appear to have any significant impact on German plans and was not reported high up the chain of command . It was executed some time before D @-@ Day , and in the midst of several other Allied deceptions . German intelligence might have suspected a trick , or not attributed much importance to the visit . 
 = = Background = = 
 In preparation for the 1944 invasion of Normandy , the Allied nations conducted a complex series of deceptions under the codename Bodyguard . The overall aim of the plan was to confuse the German high command as to the exact location and timing of the invasion . Significant time was spent constructing the First United States Army Group , a notional army to threaten Pas de Calais , along with political and visual deceptions to communicate a fictional Allied battle plan . Copperhead was a small portion of Bodyguard conceived by Dudley Clarke . Earlier in the war Clarke had pioneered the idea of strategic deception , forming a deception department in Cairo named ' A ' Force . Clarke and ' A ' Force were not officially in charge of Bodyguard planning ( a role that fell to the London Controlling Section ) , but because of the location of the deception the Cairo planners organised much of the operation . 
 On a visit to Naples in January 1944 Clarke had seen the film Five Graves to Cairo , in which actor Miles Mander makes a brief appearance as Bernard Montgomery . The film involves one character impersonating another and Clarke suggested attempting the same trick in real life . He proposed an operation to mislead German commanders as to Montgomery 's location in the days immediately before the Normandy landings ( codenamed Operation Neptune ) . 
 Montgomery was one of the most prominent Allied commanders and the German high command expected him to be present for any invasion of France . Clarke hoped Montgomery 's apparent presence in Gibraltar and Africa would lend support to the idea that the Allies might be planning landings in Southern France , as part of Operation Vendetta , rather than across the Channel . While in London , in February 1944 , Clarke , the London Controlling Section and Ops ( B ) drafted Copperhead in support of Vendetta . 
 = = Operation = = 
 Mander , the actor from Five Graves to Cairo , was located in Hollywood but found to be too tall in real life . Another look @-@ alike was identified but before he could be drafted into the operation he broke a leg in a motorbike accident . Eventually , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel J. V. B. Jervis @-@ Reid , head of Ops ( B ) , spotted a photograph of Meyrick Clifton James in the News Chronicle . James , an Australian , had spent 25 years as an actor before the war , and at the time was assigned to the Royal Army Pay Corps . Colonel David Niven , a well @-@ known British actor , was asked to contact James and offer him a screen test for future army films . When he arrived at the meeting , James was told his true role . 
 James was not a perfect stand @-@ in for Montgomery . He had lost a finger during the First World War , so a prosthetic had to be made . He had also never flown before , so the London Controlling Section 's Dennis Wheatley took James up for a test flight to make sure he did not suffer from air sickness . Finally , James both drank heavily and smoked cigars , while Montgomery was a teetotaler and disliked smoking . The deception planners were worried that James might be spotted drinking , spoiling the performance . Despite these hitches , and with Montgomery 's approval , the plan went forward . To get into character , James spent some time with the general , posing as a journalist , to study his mannerisms . 
 Allied deceivers used their double agent network to circulate the idea that Montgomery would command ground forces during the invasion . Then , on 26 May 1944 , James flew overnight from RAF Northolt to Gibraltar , where the Germans maintained an observation post overlooking the airport from across the Spanish border . The plane had to circle for an hour before landing to allow James , who had smuggled a bottle of gin onto the flight , to sober up . He then attended breakfast with the British governor , Sir Ralph Eastwood , before departing again for the airfield . The Allies had arranged for Ignacio Molina Pérez , a Spanish envoy known to be a German spy , to visit Government House . After observing James 's departure , Pérez hurriedly crossed the border to place a call to his German handler . 
 James then flew to Algiers , where he was publicly paraded through the airport and driven to meet General Maitland Wilson , ostensibly for a meeting to discuss operations against the south of France . Instead , he was moved quietly to a remote villa by ' A ' Force 's Rex Hamer . Rumours suggest this was because James had been spotted smoking and staggering around Algiers , so the deceivers decided to cut his appearances short . Whatever the reason , the next day , out of character , James was flown to Cairo . He was to remain hidden there until the public disclosure of Montgomery 's presence in France . Meanwhile , double agents in North Africa were used to extend the masquerade for a few more days , by hinting Montgomery was still in the region . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The impact of Copperhead is unclear . The visit was reported up the German chain of command , and some double agents later received requests for information about Montgomery 's movements . There is no indication that Montgomery 's appearance affected German views of the imminent invasion threat . Writing in 2011 , historian Joshua Levine attributes this to the fact that the deception was carried out ten days before D @-@ Day , arguing that there would be no reason for a flying visit to North Africa to preclude an imminent invasion . 
 Another factor was that , in early May 1944 , an uncontrolled agent based in Spain ( who sold fictional intelligence to the Germans ) had passed on details of a meeting in Gibraltar between several high @-@ ranking Allied officers . Documents found after the war indicate that the Germans found this information suspect , and may have treated Montgomery 's appearance as equally so . Although double agents received several urgent requests from the Abwehr about his whereabouts it does not appear that this information was passed on to the German command in France . According to captured enemy generals , German intelligence believed that it was Montgomery , though they still guessed that it was a feint . The Bodyguard deception had confused the German command as to Allied intentions and the apparent arrival of Montgomery in Gibraltar added little to the picture . 
 James did not enjoy the experience . Although he received equivalent pay ( £ 10 per day ) to Montgomery during the operation , it had been a stressful assignment . Following Montgomery 's public appearance on the Normandy beachhead , James flew back to England and resumed his role within the Pay Corps and was warned not to discuss the operation . Dennis Wheatley , in his memoirs , commented that he felt James had been treated " shabbily " for his efforts . 
 = = Later depictions = = 
 In 1954 James wrote an account of the operation , entitled I Was Monty 's Double ( published in the United States as The Counterfeit General ) . The British government made no attempt to stop publication , and in 1958 the book was adapted into a film of the same name . James starred , both as himself and Montgomery , alongside John Mills as an intelligence agent . 
 = Jurassic Park III = 
 Jurassic Park III is a 2001 American science fiction adventure film and the third installment in the Jurassic Park film series . The film stars Sam Neill , William H. Macy , Téa Leoni , Alessandro Nivola , Trevor Morgan , and Michael Jeter . It is the first film in the series not to have been directed by Steven Spielberg , nor based on a book by Michael Crichton ( though numerous scenes in the film were ultimately taken from Crichton 's novels Jurassic Park and The Lost World ) . The film takes place on Isla Sorna , off Central America 's Pacific coast , the island featured in the second film , where a divorced couple has tricked Dr. Alan Grant into going in order to help them find their son . 
 After the success of Spielberg 's Jurassic Park , Joe Johnston expressed interest in directing a sequel . Spielberg instead gave Johnston permission to direct the third film in the series , if there were to be one . Production of Jurassic Park III began on August 30 , 2000 . Despite mixed to negative reviews from critics , the film was successful at the box office , grossing $ 368 million worldwide . A sequel was released in June 2015 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ben Hildebrand and 12 @-@ year @-@ old Eric Kirby go parasailing around the waters of Isla Sorna . A creature of unknown species attacks and kills the boat crew as it passes through a fog bank . Ben detaches the line ; he and Eric drift towards the island . 
 Dr. Alan Grant has become famous after his involvement at Jurassic Park . Ellie Sattler is married and has two children . Grant discusses with Sattler how raptors are far more intelligent than they had previously believed . At a dig site , Grant 's assistant , Billy Brennan , demonstrates how he can use a 3D printer to replicate a Velociraptor larynx . 
 Paul and Amanda Kirby , a wealthy couple , offer Grant funding for his research if he will give them an aerial tour of Isla Sorna . Desperate for research support , Grant reluctantly agrees . He flies there along with Paul , Amanda , Billy , and the Kirbys ' mercenary associates , Udesky , Cooper , and their pilot Nash . On the plane , Grant learns that the Kirbys actually plan to land on the island . When Grant opposes , he is knocked out by Cooper and wakes to the sound of Amanda using a megaphone . This attracts a Spinosaurus , which devours Cooper and causes the plane to crash into the forest . The Spinosaurus devours Nash and destroys the plane . Fleeing , the survivors briefly lose the Spinosaurus , only to encounter a Tyrannosaurus rex . The Spinosaurus returns , but the group escapes while the two carnivores fight each other . The Spinosaurus overpowers the T. rex and kills it . 
 Grant learns the Kirbys are actually a middle @-@ class divorced couple , who are looking for their son Eric , and Amanda 's boyfriend Ben , who have been missing on the island for eight weeks . Later , the group finds the parasail with Ben 's corpse attached . The group takes the parasail , and then encounter raptor nests . They find an abandoned InGen compound , where Amanda is ambushed by a raptor . The group manages to trap it , but it escapes and contacts the rest of its pack . The group flees into a herd of Corythosaurus and Parasaurolophus , causing a stampede , separating Grant and Udesky from the others . Grant retrieves Billy 's satchel , while Udesky is killed by the raptors . 
 Grant suspects the raptors are searching for something , while observing two of them communicating . He is then ambushed and cornered by the raptors , but is rescued by Eric , who managed to survive in an overturned water truck . The next day , Grant and Eric hear Paul 's satellite phone ringing and are reunited with the Kirbys and Billy . Paul explains that he gave the phone to Nash before he was devoured , and the group sees the Spinosaurus once again , with the phone ringing from inside the dinosaur . After barely escaping , Grant discovers that Billy took two eggs from the raptor nests and hid them in his satchel to use for funding , which provoked the raptor attacks . He decides to keep the eggs to ensure the group 's survival . The group unknowingly enters a large aviary used to house Pteranodons , which attack the group and fly away with Eric . Billy rescues Eric by using Ben 's parasail , but is then attacked and seemingly killed by the Pteranodons . The rest of the group escapes the aviary , unintentionally leaving the door unlocked . They make their way downriver using a boat . 
 That night , the group hears the phone ringing buried in feces of the Spinosaurus and retrieve it . As rain falls , Grant tries to contact Sattler , but the Spinosaurus attacks the boat . Grant and Paul scare it off by setting the boat 's fuel on fire . The next day , the group makes their way towards the shoreline , but are surrounded by the raptors once again . The eggs are surrendered to the raptors , while Grant uses the replicated raptor larynx to confuse the pack , who run off with the eggs . The group flees to the coast and find that Sattler had called in the U.S. Marine Corps and the U.S. Navy to rescue them . They discover that Billy , while seriously injured , is still alive . As they leave the island , they see the Pteranodons flying free , and Grant muses they are looking for new nesting grounds . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sam Neill as Dr. Alan Grant , the world @-@ famous paleontologist who survived the incident on Isla Nublar and has since developed an apathetic attitude towards the creatures he once admired . 
 William H. Macy as Paul Kirby , the owner of a hardware store who poses as a wealthy businessman in order to lure Grant into helping search for his son . 
 Téa Leoni as Amanda Kirby , Paul 's former wife who accompanies the group to Isla Sorna to search for her son . 
 Alessandro Nivola as Billy Brennan , a young and over @-@ enthusiastic graduate student from Grant 's dig site at Fort Peck Lake . 
 Trevor Morgan as Eric Kirby , Paul and Amanda 's 12 @-@ year @-@ old son , stranded on Isla Sorna . 
 Michael Jeter as Udesky , one of the mercenaries . 
 John Diehl as Cooper , a mercenary and weapons specialist . 
 Bruce A. Young as Nash , another of the mercenaries who serves as the group 's pilot . 
 Laura Dern as Ellie , a paleobotanist who also survived Isla Nublar . 
 Taylor Nichols as Mark , Ellie 's husband . 
 Mark Harelik as Ben Hildebrand , Amanda 's boyfriend . 
 Julio Oscar <unk> as Enrique Cardoso , the owner and operator of the " Dino @-@ Soar " parasailing service . 
 Blake Michael Bryan as Charlie , Ellie and Mark 's son . 
 Sarah Danielle Madison as Cheryl Logan , one of Grant 's graduate students at the dig site . 
 Linda Park as Hannah , Ellie 's secretary . 
 = = = Creatures on screen = = = 
 In a deviation from the previous films , the Spinosaurus is considered the primary antagonist : Johnston stated , " A lot of dinosaurs have a very similar silhouette to the T @-@ Rex ... and we wanted the audience to instantly recognize this as something else . " The silhouette of the Spinosaurus is also on the poster behind the Pteranodon , taking the place of the Tyrannosaurus which had been used in the previous films ' posters . Baryonyx was originally considered to be the " big bad " before Spinosaurus was chosen , and early concept posters reflected this . Within film dialogue , Billy interprets the animal encountered as a Baryonyx or Suchomimus , but Dr. Grant corrects his analysis based on its size and its sail . 
 Due to new discoveries and theories in the field of paleontology , the portrayal of several dinosaurs differed from that of the previous films . Discoveries suggesting that Velociraptor were feathered prompted the addition of quill @-@ like structures on the head and neck of the males in the film . " We 've found evidence that <unk> had feathers , or feather @-@ like structures , and we 've incorporated that into the new look of the raptor " , said paleontologist Jack Horner , the film 's technical adviser . 
 Spielberg insisted to Johnston that he include Pteranodons in the film , after they had been cut from the previous films for budget reasons . An aquatic reptile was featured in the first draft , but was ultimately removed from the final script . The special effects used for the creatures were a mixture of animatronics and CGI . The following creatures appear in the film : 
 Ankylosaurus 
 Brachiosaurus 
 Ceratosaurus 
 Compsognathus 
 Corythosaurus 
 Parasaurolophus 
 Pteranodon 
 Spinosaurus 
 Stegosaurus 
 Triceratops 
 Tyrannosaurus 
 Velociraptor 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Early development = = = 
 Joe Johnston had been interested in directing the sequel to Jurassic Park and approached Spielberg , a friend of his , about the project . While Spielberg wanted to direct the first sequel , he agreed that if there was ever a third film , Johnston could direct . The second film , entitled The Lost World : Jurassic Park , included the scene of the Tyrannosaurus rampaging through San Diego . Spielberg had initially wanted the scene to be saved for a third film , but later decided to add it into the second film after realizing that he would probably not direct another film in the series . After the release of the second film in May 1997 , Spielberg was busy with other projects and was asked about the possibility of a third Jurassic Park film ; he responded , " It would give me a tremendous Advil headache just to think about it . " 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Universal Pictures announced the film on June 29 , 1998 , with Spielberg acting as a producer . Michael Crichton was reportedly going to collaborate with Spielberg to create a storyline and write a script . The film was set for release in summer 2000 . Spielberg initially devised a story idea that involved Dr. Alan Grant , who was discovered to have been living on one of InGen 's islands . According to Johnston , " He 'd snuck in , after not being allowed in to research the dinosaurs , and was living in a tree like Robinson Crusoe . But I couldn 't imagine this guy wanting to get back on any island that had dinosaurs in it after the first movie . " 
 In June 1999 , Craig Rosenberg began writing the first draft of the script , which involved teenagers who get marooned on Isla Sorna . Johnston was announced as the film 's director in August 1999 , with Rosenberg still attached . Production was expected to begin in early 2000 . Rosenberg 's draft about teenagers on Isla Sorna was rejected in September 1999 . Although Johnston felt that it was " not a badly written script , " he also said , " It read like a bad episode of Friends " . By December 1999 , new writers had been hired to devise a better story for the film . 
 The film 's second script involved Pteranodon escaping from Isla Sorna and causing a spate of mysterious killings on the mainland , which was to be investigated by Alan Grant and a number of other characters including Billy Brennan , a naturalist named Simone , a tough military attaché , wealthy Paul Roby , and Roby 's teenage son Miles . Grant 's group crash @-@ lands on the island , while a parallel investigation is being carried out on the mainland . The aviary sequence and laboratory set piece were initially much longer and more complex , including Velociraptor stealthily entering the hatchery as the team spends the night there . Sets , costumes , and props were built for this version . 
 In February 2000 , filming was reportedly set to begin in Fiordland , New Zealand around the end of the month . Scenes were originally planned to be filmed there for The Lost World : Jurassic Park . In March 2000 , Maui , Hawaii was reportedly chosen instead of New Zealand . Sam Neill signed on to the project in June 2000 , with 18 weeks of filming expected to begin by August 2000 , for a release in July 2001 . Macy originally turned down his role due to scheduling conflicts . Trevor Morgan and Téa Leoni were cast in August 2000 , with Utah 's Dinosaur National Monument and an Oahu military base being considered as possible filming locations . During the pre @-@ production phase , concept artists created advertising for the film using a number of working titles including Jurassic Park : Extinction and Jurassic Park : Breakout . 
 Five weeks before filming began , Johnston and Spielberg rejected the entire script as they were dissatisfied with it ; $ 18 million had already been spent on the film at that time . Johnston felt that the script 's story was too complicated . The simpler " rescue mission " plot , which had been suggested by David Koepp , was used for the film instead . Alexander Payne and Jim Taylor began rewriting the script in July 2000 . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Johnston said that the script was never finished during production : " We shot pages that eventually went into the final script but we didn 't have a document " . Principal photography began on August 30 , 2000 , at Dillingham Airfield in <unk> , Hawaii . Macy , commenting on the slow pace of filming the script , said " we would do a quarter @-@ <unk> days , an eighth of a page . And that would be a full 12 @-@ hour day . " 
 Filming continued on Oahu until September 9 . Aerial footage of Molokai 's North Shore cliffs was then shot over the next two days , followed by a week of filming in Kauai . Filming concluded in Hawaii on September 20 , 2000 . Production then moved to California . John August was hired to do uncredited work on the script in September 2000 . Scenes were filmed at Occidental College in Los Angeles on October 10 , 2000 . 
 Scenes were filmed at Center Bay Studios in Los Angeles at the end of October . Other filming locations in California included South Pasadena and a rock quarry in Irwindale . Filming also took place at Universal Studios ' backlot in Los Angeles . Production returned to Hawaii in January 2001 , to film the movie 's ending , which had yet to be written during the previous Hawaiian shoot . The ending was filmed on Kauai 's Pila 'a Beach . 
 The storyline contains minor scenes from Crichton 's Jurassic Park and The Lost World novels that were ultimately not featured in the film versions , such as the Pteranodon aviary and the use of the boat . Laura Dern 's cameo was shot in a day . In an earlier draft , Neill and Dern 's characters were a couple in the process of splitting up . Johnston said , " I didn 't want to see them as a couple anymore . For one thing , I don 't think they look like a couple . It would be uncomfortable to still see them together . And Laura Dern doesn 't look like she 's aged for the past fifteen years ! " The film 's longest rough cut was approximately 96 minutes , without credits . According to Johnston , " We lost maybe 8 minutes , so it was never really that long . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Given John Williams was busy writing the music for Spielberg 's own A.I. Artificial Intelligence , he recommended Don Davis to write the Jurassic Park III score . Williams ' original themes were integrated into the score as well as several new ones , such as one for the Spinosaurus that focused on low sounds , with tubas , trombones and timpani . The fight between the Spinosaurus and the Tyrannosaurus , compared by Davis to King Kong fighting a dinosaur in the 1933 film , had a juxtaposition of the Spinosaurus theme with the one Williams wrote for the T. rex . In addition , " Big Hat , No Cattle " , a song by Randy Newman , was used in a restaurant scene . 
 = = Release = = 
 Jurassic Park III premiered at the Universal Amphitheater in Los Angeles , California , on July 18 , 2001 , followed two days later by a release in the United States and other countries . The film earned $ 181 @,@ 171 @,@ 875 in the United States and $ 368 @,@ 780 @,@ 809 worldwide , making it the eighth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of the year worldwide but it is the lowest grossing Jurassic Park film in the entire series . The film was released on VHS and DVD in December 2001 . It was re @-@ released with both sequels in December 2001 as the Jurassic Park Trilogy , and as the Jurassic Park Adventure Pack in November 2005 . The film has also been released as a two @-@ disc DVD set alongside Hulk . In 2011 , the film was released on Blu @-@ ray as part of the Jurassic Park Ultimate Trilogy . The soundtrack was released in July 2001 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Jurassic Park III has received a mostly mixed to negative response from critics and fans alike . Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a 50 % rating based on 163 reviews , with an average rating of 5 @.@ 2 / 10 . The site 's consensus states : " Jurassic Park III is darker and faster than its predecessors , but that doesn 't quite compensate for the franchise 's continuing creative decline . " It also has a 42 out of 100 on Metacritic , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . On both sites , it is the lowest rated film out of the Jurassic Park franchise . 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Owen Gleiberman , who praised both the previous Jurassic Park films , awarded the third film only a C grade , writing " Jurassic Park III has no pretensions to be anything more than a goose @-@ bumpy fantasy theme @-@ park ride for kids , but it 's such a routine ride . Spielberg 's wizardry is gone , and his balletic light touch as well , and that gives too much of this 90 @-@ minute movie over to the duller @-@ than @-@ dull characters . " Derek Elley of Variety Reviews felt likewise , calling the film " an all @-@ action , helter @-@ skelter , don 't @-@ forget @-@ to @-@ buy @-@ the @-@ computer @-@ game ride that makes the two previous installments look like models of classic filmmaking " . Ben <unk> of PopMatters called it " not as good a ride as the first " , but " better than the second . " Much of the criticism was leveled at the plot as simply a chase movie with no character development ; Apollo Movie Guide panned the film as being " almost the same as the first movie " with " no need for new ideas or even a script " . Empire magazine gave the film 3 stars out of 5 , commenting that it was " Short , scrappy and intermittently scary " and that the film ultimately " skews young " . 
 On Ebert and Roeper , Richard Roeper gave it a Thumbs Down , while Roger Ebert awarded a Thumbs Up . In a subsequent review , Ebert called it " the best blockbuster of the Summer " . In his written review , Ebert gave the film three stars and wrote that while the film was not as awe @-@ inspiring as the first film or as elaborate as the second , " it 's a nice little thrill machine . [ ... ] I can 't praise it for its art , but I must not neglect its craft ... " 
 Early pioneer of the dinosaur @-@ bird connection Robert T. Bakker has quipped that the feathery quills added to the Velociraptor for Jurassic Park III " looked like a <unk> 's toupee . " However , he conceded that feathers are difficult subjects for computer animation and speculated that Jurassic Park IV 's raptors would have more realistic thorough plumage . As of 2002 , Crichton said he had not seen the film . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = = Marketing and merchandise = = 
 A teaser trailer was released online in September 2000 . Universal avoided excessive early marketing to prevent possible backlash , as it believed that awareness of the film was high enough . Marketing began in April 2001 , three months before the film 's release . The first footage from the film was aired during the second @-@ season finale of Survivor in May 2001 . Promotional partners included Kodak and The Coca @-@ Cola Company . No fast @-@ food promotions took place in the United States , although kids ' meal toys based on the film were offered in Canadian Burger Kings . 
 Seven video games were released to coincide with the film , as well as a novelization by Scott <unk> that was aimed at young children . <unk> also wrote three children 's books to tie in with the film 's events : Jurassic Park Adventures : Survivor , the first book , detailed the eight weeks Eric spent alone on Isla Sorna ; Jurassic Park Adventures : Prey had Eric and Alan returning to Isla Sorna to rescue a group of teenage filmmakers ; Jurassic Park Adventures : Flyers involved Eric and Alan leading the Pteranodon home after they nest in a Universal Studios theme park . 
 Hasbro released a line of 3 @.@ 75 " action figures in the spring of 2001 to coincide with the release , including electronic dinosaurs , humans , and vehicles . The figures were scaled down from the original Kenner action figures from the pre @-@ Jurassic Park III toy lines . A line of toys were also released through the Lego Studios brand . <unk> released a line of toys aimed at younger children , called Jurassic Park Junior . A smaller die @-@ cast line of toys was also produced , along with clothes . In November 2001 , to promote the film 's upcoming home media release , Universal launched a viral marketing website for Isla Travel , a fictional Isla Sorna travel agency . 
 = = = Cell phone promotion = = = 
 For the film 's home media release , Universal and cell @-@ phone company Hop @-@ On partnered to produce " the world 's first @-@ disposable cell phone " , available through an in @-@ package offer upon purchase of the film . The phones were to be delivered for free to customers who responded to a winning promotional card that came with select copies of the film . Approximately 5 @,@ 000 copies of the film contained a winning promotional card ; approximately 1 @,@ 000 of them were redeemed . 
 However , the promotion was cancelled when the cell phones could not be finished on time . An investigation by the San Francisco Chronicle revealed that sample versions of Hop @-@ On 's cell phones were actually modified Nokia cell phones , as Hop @-@ On was having problems with its own design . Customers who were to receive the cell phones instead received a $ 30 check and a free DVD . 
 = Mau Piailug = 
 Pius " Mau " Piailug ( pronounced / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; 1932 – July 12 , 2010 ) was a Micronesian navigator from the Carolinian island of Satawal , best known as a teacher of traditional , non @-@ instrument wayfinding methods for open @-@ ocean voyaging . Mau 's Carolinian navigation system — which relies on navigational clues using the sun and stars , winds and clouds , seas and swells , and birds and fish — was acquired through rote learning passed down through teachings in the oral tradition . He earned the title of master navigator ( <unk> ) by the age of eighteen , around the time the first American missionaries arrived in Satawal . As he neared middle age , Mau grew concerned that the practice of navigation in Satawal would disappear as his people became acculturated to Western values . In the hope that the navigational tradition would be preserved for future generations , Mau shared his knowledge with the Polynesian Voyaging Society ( PVS ) . With Mau 's help , PVS used experimental archaeology to recreate and test lost Hawaiian navigational techniques on the Hōkūle ‘ a , a modern reconstruction of a double @-@ hulled Hawaiian voyaging canoe . 
 The successful , non @-@ instrument sailing of Hōkūle ‘ a to Tahiti in 1976 , proved the efficacy of Mau 's navigational system to the world . To academia , Mau 's achievement provided evidence for intentional two @-@ way voyaging throughout Oceania , supporting a hypothesis that explained the Asiatic origin of Polynesians . The success of the Micronesian @-@ Polynesian cultural exchange , symbolized by Hōkūle ‘ a , had an impact throughout the Pacific . It contributed to the emergence of the second Hawaiian cultural renaissance and to a revival of Polynesian navigation and canoe building in Hawaii , New Zealand , Rarotonga and Tahiti . It also sparked interest in traditional wayfinding on Mau 's home island of Satawal . Later in life , Mau was respectfully known as a grandmaster navigator , and he was called " Papa Mau " by his friends with great reverence and affection . He received an honorary degree from the University of Hawaii , and he was honored by the Smithsonian Institution and the Bishop Museum for his contributions to maritime history . Mau 's life and work was explored in several books and documentary films , and his legacy continues to be remembered and celebrated by the indigenous peoples of Oceania . 
 = = Early life ( 1932 – 1974 ) = = 
 = = = Satawal , Micronesia = = = 
 Mau was born Pius Piailug in 1932 , in the village of <unk> on the small coral island of Satawal , in Yap State of the Caroline Islands , a part of the Federated States of Micronesia . Satawal is a wooded island with an area of 1 @.@ 3 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 50 sq mi ) , located in the Western Pacific Ocean about 800 kilometres ( 500 mi ) south of Guam . Mau 's personal connection to the sea began early in his life , when he was placed in tide pools in his infancy so he could feel the pull of the ocean . At the age of four or five , Mau was chosen by his grandfather Raangipi to study as an apprentice navigator . Mau initially protested his grandfather 's teaching , preferring to spend his time playing on the beach with children his own age . Raangipi trained Mau as a young navigator for many years . Their day would begin at sunrise , when they would eat breakfast together and afterwards , take care of chores before going fishing . During the evening , Mau would join the men in the canoe house as they drank , listening to their stories about navigation and sailing . Raangipi told the young boy that if he chose to become a navigator , Mau could gain respect from his community , eat well , and maintain a position in Satawalese society higher than that of a chief . Encouraged , Mau learned basic navigational clues regarding the " stars , swells , and birds " from Raangipi , but his grandfather died sometime before Mau was fourteen . 
 After his grandfather died , Mau began training with his father , <unk> . Mau learned more about navigating by stars ( <unk> ) from his father , and how to fish and build canoes . When his father died before he turned fifteen , Mau was adopted by his aunt and uncle . Sometime around the age of eighteen , Mau 's aunt and uncle sent him to study with Angora , an acclaimed navigator . His studies culminated in his initiation as a master navigator ( <unk> ) in the <unk> school of navigation during the revered pwo ceremony presided over by Angora . It was to be the last pwo held on Satawal for the next fifty years . After the ceremony , Mau lived for a month in the canoe house where he received rigorous lessons from three navigators . When the final training was complete , Mau made his first solo voyage of about 92 kilometres ( 57 mi ) . Because he had a tendency to sail in all weather conditions , he was given the nickname " Mau " , from the Satawalese word <unk> , meaning " strong " . After becoming a navigator , Mau married <unk> with whom he raised ten boys and six girls . 
 Daily life in Mau 's village on Satawal involved harvesting taro and gathering breadfruit and coconut . The Satawalese people also raised chicken and pork and caught fish , their primary source of protein . A freshwater pond served as bathing facilities . Local materials were used to construct outrigger canoes called <unk> . The island 's isolation helped preserve the lifestyle of the Satawalese people and Mau 's role as a navigator . Even with the arrival of the Germans ( 1890 ) and the Japanese ( 1914 ) in Micronesia , Satawalese culture remained intact . American missionaries who arrived after World War II built the first church and school on Satawal . 
 In the late 1960s , Mau attempted to verify his navigational knowledge of the wider Pacific by working as a seaman on an inter @-@ island ship run by the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands . From 1969 – 1973 , Mau became friends with Mike McCoy , a Peace Corps volunteer stationed on Satawal . As well as marrying Mau 's niece , McCoy sailed with Mau and they worked together on a project tagging turtles . McCoy became interested in Satawalese navigation , published several articles on the topic and kept in touch with the anthropologist Ben Finney , who was researching Polynesian navigation . When McCoy 's assignment on Satawal ended , he asked <unk> if he wanted to come to Hawaii with him . 
 = = = Honolulu , Hawaii = = = 
 Mau first visited Hawaii in 1973 , and McCoy introduced him to Ben Finney . Later , Finney suggested to the Polynesian Voyaging Society that they should try to recruit Mau for their Hōkūle ‘ a project , since no Hawaiian traditional navigators remained . The project goal was to test the hypothesis that Polynesians made intentional non @-@ instrument voyages across the Pacific . <unk> , a renowned Polynesian navigator , had died in 1970 and only six others were known . Navigators were reluctant to release their sacred knowledge to " outsiders . " At the time , Mau was just forty @-@ one years old , and the youngest navigator out of the group . Mau feared that traditional navigation would die in his own culture , just as it had in Hawaii . He had tried to teach the young men of Satawal the skills passed on to him , but he was not optimistic . The members of the younger generation were too busy with school and too attracted to Western culture to undertake the rigorous course of study and apprenticeship . Further , Mau 's people did not seem to care that traditional navigation was dying , and could be lost forever . 
 = = Later life ( 1975 – 2010 ) = = 
 = = = Hōkūle ‘ a = = = 
 With Finney 's help , Mau was awarded a special fellowship at the East @-@ West Center . Mau returned to Honolulu in April 1975 to begin work with the Hawaii @-@ based Polynesian Voyaging Society , eventually navigating the double @-@ hulled canoe , Hōkūle ‘ a , from Hawaii to Tahiti on its maiden voyage in 1976 . Mau trained and mentored Native Hawaiian navigator Nainoa Thompson , who later would become a master navigator . David Henry Lewis , a scholar of Polynesian navigation , documented Mau 's work . 
 Mau 's first @-@ hand knowledge of traditional navigation had been accumulated in Northern Hemisphere study and sailings , but the voyage to Tahiti required Mau to familiarize himself with the geography and night sky of the Southern Hemisphere . Of this preparation , Finney writes , 
 ... To prepare Mau Piailug for the voyage , David Lewis briefed him on the geography of the islands in this part of the Pacific and the winds and currents that could be expected along the way , all information that an early Polynesian navigator acquainted with this route would have carried in his head . In addition , to alert Mau of how the elevation of stars above the northern and southern horizons would change as the canoe sailed farther and farther south , we held training sessions in Honolulu 's Bishop Museum planetarium to graphically show how , for example , as one sailed toward Tahiti [ , ] Polaris sank lower and lower on the northern horizon until it disappeared at the equator while the Southern Cross curved higher and higher in the sky . During his first few days of the voyage , Mau received further coaching on the pattern of winds and currents from Rodo Williams , a veteran Tahitian seaman on the crew who the year before had sailed a yacht from Tahiti to Hawaii and could therefore provide Mau with a firsthand account of what he could expect to encounter . 
 Their collaboration proved successful when , on the thirtieth day at sea on the 1976 voyage , Mau stated soon they would see land , and the next day , Tahiti . A few hours later , they spotted land @-@ based white terns ( Gygis alba ) followed by a diminution of the trade @-@ wind swell . That night they spotted <unk> . After a brief stopover , with little more than another day 's sailing they made landfall at Tahiti where they were welcomed by 17 @,@ 000 people — half the population of Tahiti . 
 Nainoa 's ambition was to sail Hōkūle ‘ a to Tahiti as navigator using recreated traditional techniques . He spent years training on his own and with Mau . Mau 's training and mentoring helped Nainoa achieve that goal in the 1980 Tahiti voyage . It marked the first time in over 500 years that a Native Hawaiian had mastered the stars , the seas , the birds , and the winds to guide a sailing canoe from Hawaii to Tahiti and back . The two men joined again for the 1985 – 1987 Voyage of Rediscovery to New Zealand , again with Nainoa as principal navigator and Mau as mentor . The voyage to New Zealand stoked Māori interest in cultural history , navigation techniques , and canoe building . It also brought to life for Māori the stories in their folklore of the great canoe voyages of migration and settlement in Aotearoa ( New Zealand ) . Describing a ceremony held at Waitangi to commemorate the Hawaii – New Zealand voyage of Hōkūle ‘ a , Nainoa writes : 
 Sir James Henare , the most revered of the elders of Tai Tokerau , got up and said , " You 've proven that it could be done . And you 've also proven that our ancestors did it . ... because the five tribes of Tai Tokerau trace their ancestry from the names of the canoes they arrived in , and because you people from Hawai 'i came by canoe , therefore by our traditions , you must be the sixth tribe of Tai Tokerau . 
 In 1995 , Mau took part in the Nā <unk> Holo Moana voyage of Hōkūle ‘ a to Ra ‘ <unk> . Sailing with his son <unk> <unk> , and Nainoa as sailing master , Mau watched as Nainoa 's students <unk> McKenney and <unk> <unk> served as navigators . Mau had seen Nainoa succeed in the 1980 and 1985 – 1987 voyages ; finally , in this 1995 voyage , Mau saw proof that the knowledge was carried forward to the next generation . The canoe not only landed successfully at Rarotonga , but the voyage resulted in the lifting of a six @-@ centuries @-@ old taboo on voyaging from Ra ‘ <unk> . Hōkūle ‘ a had sailed from Hawaii with <unk> Hawai ‘ <unk> and Makali ‘ i ; these canoes rendezvoused at <unk> with other voyaging canoes from across Oceania . 
 = = = Makali ‘ i = = = 
 To help preserve Hawaiian culture , Milton " Shorty " Bertelmann and his brother Clay established the nonprofit organization , Nā Kalai Wa ‘ a Moku o Hawai ‘ i on the island of Hawaii in 1992 . Beginning in 1994 , the two brothers helped construct Makali ‘ i , a 54 @-@ foot voyaging canoe , launching it in 1995 . From February to May 1999 , " Shorty " Bertelmann navigated Makali ‘ i to Satawal in a voyage known as “ E Mau – Sailing the Master Home . ” This voyage was to pay homage to master navigator Mau Piailug and to thank him for his teachings . Mau sailed home aboard Makali ‘ i as their honored guest . Makali ‘ i continued her 1999 voyage through half the length of Micronesia . She was the first Hawaiian voyaging canoe to visit the far reaches of Micronesia and her appearance stimulated interest amongst Micronesians in their own cultural history . 
 = = = <unk> Maisu = = = 
 On March 18 , 2007 Mau presided over the first pwo ceremony for navigators in fifty @-@ six years on the island of Satawal . Five Native Hawaiians and eleven other people were inducted into pwo as master navigators , including Nainoa Thompson and Mau 's son <unk> <unk> . The Polynesian Voyaging Society , as part of the 2007 Hōkūle ‘ a " One Ocean , One People " voyage named " <unk> Holo Mau , " presented Mau with a canoe named the <unk> Maisu — a gift for his key role in reviving traditional wayfinding navigation in Hawaii . The canoe was built in <unk> , Hawaii under the nonprofit organization Nā Kalai Wa ‘ a Moku O Hawai ‘ i . The commitment to build this " gift " for Mau was made by Clay Bertelmann , captain of Makali ‘ i and Hōkūle ‘ a . Maisu was given to Mau on behalf of all the voyaging families and organizations that actively continue to sail and practice the traditions taught by Mau Piailug . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 After a long struggle with diabetes , Mau died on his home island of Satawal at 18 : 30 Micronesia time , Monday , July 12 , 2010 . As is the tradition on Satawal , travel between the islands was temporarily suspended in Mau 's honor . Because there is no morgue on the island Mau was buried the following day , and a nightly rosary was held until the memorial service on July 21 at Santa Soledad Church . Mau 's son Henry <unk> will continue teaching students about their culture , preserving the legacy of his father . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Mau was awarded an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters in 1987 by the University of Hawaii . On May 9 , 2000 , he was honored by the Smithsonian Institution at the National Museum of Natural History . At the ceremony , then @-@ secretary Lawrence Small said , " The rebirth of non @-@ instrument navigation came about largely due to this man , Mau Piailug . " The Bishop Museum presented Mau with the Robert J. Pfeiffer Medal on July 12 , 2008 , honoring him for " exceptional dedication to the advancement of maritime affairs and the perpetuation of maritime heritage in Hawaii and the Pacific . " Mau also was honored for his " devotion and outstanding civic leadership " and for exemplifying " the spirit and purpose of the Museum 's founder Charles Reed Bishop " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The success of Mau 's navigational feats sparked cultural pride in Tahitians , Māori and Hawaiians and connected all Polynesians to stories their forebears told of similar voyages of generations past . The voyage of Hōkūle ‘ a attracted the interest of young students such as Milton " Shorty " Bertelmann and later Nainoa Thompson . Mau not only led Hōkūle ‘ a to Tahiti , but reconnected the people of the Pacific to their cultural roots . Revived interest in preserving traditional culture and navigation methods reinvigorated the art of canoe building and cultural studies in Hawaii , New Zealand , Rarotonga , and Tahiti , as well as Mau 's homeland of Satawal . 
 Two centuries before Mau and the Hōkūle ‘ a , Captain James Cook , with the help of Tupaia , gained knowledge that otherwise would have been closely held . Before his death in 1779 , Cook hypothesized that Polynesians shared common ancestry ; he even pinned their origin to Asia . However , Cook 's theory did not prevent debate among scholars . Before the Hōkūle ‘ a voyage in 1976 , academic debate about the settlement of Polynesia was divided between several schools of thought . 
 Norwegian ethnographer Thor Heyerdahl hypothesized that the Pacific was settled by voyages from South America and set out to prove this with his Kon @-@ Tiki expedition . Scholars did not take Heyerdahl 's hypothesis seriously . New Zealander Andrew Sharp proposed the accidental voyaging hypothesis in 1957 which ( erroneously ) argued that Oceania was too vast to have been settled by intentional voyaging , so migrations must have happened by accidental drift voyages . Sharp granted that Polynesians did likely settle the Pacific from Asia , but held the opinion that their crude vessels and navigational tools were not reliable for intentional sailing from Tahiti to Hawaii or New Zealand . He stated that voyages of more than three hundred miles were likely accidental voyages , with landfall at the mercy of wind and current . A 1973 study and computer simulation by Levison , Ward , and Web investigated the probability of Sharp 's hypothesis , but found it improbable . 
 Finney disagreed with the accidental voyaging portion of Sharp 's hypothesis . To investigate the problem he founded the Polynesian Voyaging Society with Herb Kane and Tommy Holmes in 1973 , intent on building a voyaging canoe to sail from Hawaii to Tahiti to test whether intentional two @-@ way voyaging throughout Oceania could be replicated . With the help of Mau 's navigational knowledge guiding Hōkūle ‘ a , the Polynesian Voyaging Society demonstrated that intentional voyaging was not only possible , but that the ancestors of the Polynesians could have settled the Pacific on similar voyages using non @-@ instrument wayfinding techniques such as Mau 's . Finally , linguistic and archaeological evidence suggests that the history of the Polynesian people does not originate in the east Pacific , but in the west . Recent developments in the field of DNA analysis have unequivocally settled the debate of Polynesian origin . They prove Polynesians share common ancestry with indigenous Taiwanese and East Asians . 
 = = <unk> and navigation = = 
 = = = Training = = = 
 Navigator training was historically interwoven with culture and ritual . Great discretion had to be shown in candidate selection so that the knowledge preserved through oral tradition would have the greatest chance of survival . A master navigator 's rank was equal or superior to a village chief 's rank . Prudent navigation relies on no single technique , but instead synthesizes position from multiple inputs . Underway , this constant synthesis makes it easy to spot the navigator — he 's the one with red eyes from sleep deprivation . 
 For a traditionally trained navigator , these inputs include physical signals from the sea , skies , and stars , memory signals from his knowledge of star , swell , and wind compasses ; and cultural knowledge recorded in chants , dances , and stories . Examples of physical signals include the color , temperature , and taste ( salinity ) of seawater ; floating plant debris ; sightings of land @-@ based seabirds flying out to fish ; cloud type , color , and movement ; wind direction , speed , and temperature ; the direction and nature of ocean swells and waves ; the position of stars in the sky , and his estimation of the speed , current set , and leeway of his sailing craft . The " compass " he carried was not magnetic , but a mental model of where islands are located , and the star points which one could use to navigate between them . This mental model would have taken years of study to build ; dances , chants ( rong ) , and stories help him to recall complex relationships of geography and location . The stars give him highly reliable position information when visible , but navigators such as Mau managed to keep their position and tracks in mind even when blocked by clouds , using other references such as wind and swell as proxies . 
 Mau 's Carolinian star compass ( pictured ) is the basis for Nainoa 's modern Hawaiian star compass . Apart from the bulk of training which happens at sea , historically boys were taught in the men 's house with pebbles , shells , or pieces of coral , representing stars , laid on the sand in a circular pattern . Which bits of shell or coral are chosen to represent which star or constellation is arbitrary , but generally , larger pieces are used for points of the compass while smaller pieces represent important stars between those points . In Mau 's star compass , these points are not necessarily equidistant . The outer circular formation represents the horizon , with the canoe its center point . The eastern half of the circle depicts reference stars ' rising points on the horizon ( tan ) while the western half depicts their setting points ( <unk> ) . Swell patterns of prevailing trade winds are represented by sticks ( not depicted here ) overlaying the star compass in the form of a square . All knowledge is retained by memory with the help of dances , chants , and stories , wherein the stars are enumerated as people or characters in the stories . 
 = = = Technique = = = 
 One aspect of the Carolinian method of estimating longitude on inter @-@ island sailings is to visualize the target island relative to a second reference island 's alignment with a succession of selected stars , points of the star compass . This is a refined system of dead reckoning whereby the navigator constantly synthesizes his position relative to the reference island 's location in his mental model . The most remarkable thing about this is that the reference island ( lu <unk> ) may be over the horizon , unseen , even imaginary . 
 In its simplest form the star compass describes thirty @-@ two points at which key stars rise on the eastern horizon and set on the western horizon . North latitude is fairly easy to determine because the North Pole has a zenith star easily seen with the naked eye , called Polaris ( <unk> ) . Polaris ' height above the horizon ( declination ) indicates the viewer 's southward displacement from Polaris ' nadir — the North Pole . Traveling further north , Polaris appears higher in the sky . Only at the true north pole is Polaris directly overhead at nearly 90 degrees declination . Traveling south toward the equator , Polaris appears to descend toward the northern horizon . At 45 degrees north latitude , Polaris is 45 degrees above the northern horizon . Near the equator , Polaris ' declination approaches zero degrees , but for the viewer just farther south , Polaris will have disappeared below the northern horizon . 
 Continuing south from the equator , though Polaris is no longer visible , Crux ( <unk> ) , the " Southern Cross , " will have risen above the southern horizon . Traveling further southward , Crux rises higher in the sky . Through Crux 's longest axis , an imaginary line bisecting Gacrux and Acrux points southward toward the southern celestial pole . But the South Pole has no true zenith star from which direct readings of south latitude may be taken . As a proxy , the southern celestial pole lies at the end of that imaginary line extended southward through Gacrux and Acrux , at a distance about 4 @.@ 5 times the distance between them . Nainoa Thompson notes that at Hawaiʻi 's latitude , the distance between Gacrux and the southerly Acrux is equal to Acrux 's declination above the southern horizon . 
 To steer the canoe in mid @-@ ocean on a consistent course , the navigator selects a star and keeps the canoe pointed toward it . Should it become cloud @-@ blocked , or rise too high in the sky , he selects another star but offsets his reference to remain true to the first , or steers at the same relative angle to the swell as when steering toward the star . 
 = Torpedo ... Los ! = 
 Torpedo ... Los ! ( sometimes Torpedo ... LOS ! ) is a 1963 pop art oil on canvas painting by Roy Lichtenstein . When it was last sold in 1989 , The New York Times described the work as " a comic @-@ strip image of sea warfare " . It formerly held the record for the highest auction price for a Lichtenstein work . Its 1989 sale helped finance the construction of the current home of the Museum of Contemporary Art , Chicago in 1991 . 
 Like many of Lichtenstein 's works its title comes from the speech balloon in the painting . The work was included in Lichtenstein 's second solo exhibition . The source of the image is a comic book from DC Comics . Lichtenstein has made significant alterations to the original image to change the focus and perspective in addition to significant alteration of the narrative element of the work . The work plays on the background @-@ foreground relationship and the theme of vision that appears in many of Lichtenstein 's works . 
 = = Background = = 
 The source of the image is " Battle of the Ghost Ships ? " in DC Comics ' Our Fighting Forces ( October 1962 ) , although the content of the speech balloon is different ( this is edition number 72 according to some sources and 71 ( a ) according to others ) . According to the Lichtenstein Foundation website , Torpedo ... Los ! was part of Lichtenstein 's second solo exhibition at Leo Castelli Gallery of September 28 – October 24 , 1963 , that included Drowning Girl , Baseball Manager , In the Car , Conversation , and Whaam ! . Marketing materials for the show included the lithograph artwork , Crak ! . 
 On November 7 , 1989 , Torpedo ... Los ! sold at Christie 's for $ 5 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 10 @.@ 5 million in 2016 dollars ) to Zurich dealer Thomas Ammann , which was a record for a work of art by Lichtenstein . The sale was described as the " highpoint " of a night in which Christie 's achieved more than double the total sales prices of any other contemporary art auction up to that date . The seller of the work was Beatrice C. Mayer , the widow of Museum of Contemporary Art , Chicago founder and board member Robert B. Mayer as well as daughter of Sara Lee Corporation founder Nathan Cummings . Prior to the sale the work was part of the Robert B. Mayer Memorial Loan Program and was exhibited at colleges and museums . Torpedo ... Los ! was expected to sell for $ 3 to 4 million at the time . In 1991 , Mayer became one of the key benefactors of the new Museum of Contemporary Art Building . 
 = = Description = = 
 Measuring 68 by 80 inches ( 172 @.@ 7 cm × 203 @.@ 2 cm ) , Torpedo ... Los ! is an oil on canvas painting . By enlarging the face of the captain relative to the entire field , Lichtenstein makes him more prominent than in the source . He retained the source 's " clumsiness " in how the secondary figure is presented and replaced the dialogue with a much shorter " cryptic command " . The original source had dialog related to the repeated torpedoing of the same ship , but Lichtenstein cut the entire speech balloon down to two words . He moved the captain 's scar from his nose to his cheek and he made the captain appear more aggressive by depicting him with his mouth wide open , also opting to leave the eye which was not looking through the periscope open . He also made the ship appear to be more technologically sophisticated with a variety of changes . The scar was actually most readily apparent in panels other than the source from the same story . 
 This work exemplifies Lichtenstein 's theme relating to vision . Lichtenstein uses a " mechanical viewing device " to present his depiction of technically aided vision . The depicted mechanical device , a periscope in this case , forces the vision into a monocular format . In some of his works such as this , monocularity is a strong theme that is directly embodied although only by allusion . Michael Lobel notes that " ... his work proposes a dialectical tension between monocular and binocular modes of vision , a tension that operates on the level of gender as well . " The work is regarded as one in which Lichtenstein exaggerated comic book sound effects in common pop art style . 
 = = Reception = = 
 This painting exemplifies Lichtenstein 's use of the background / foreground shift and ironic colloquialisms in critical commands . Although most of Lichtenstein 's war imagery depicts American war themes , this depicts " a scarred German submarine captain at a battle station " . The manner of depiction with the commander 's face pressed against the periscope reflects fusions of industrial art of the 1920s and 1930s . The ironic aspect of this in 1963 is in part due to its temporal displacement referring back to World War II during the much later period of the Cold War . The styling of the balloon content , especially that of the large font characters , is complemented by or complementary to the other traditional visual content of the painting . Lichtenstein 's alterations heightened the sense of urgency in the image , however , they also offset that menace by forming a detached work . A November 1963 Art Magazine review stated that this was one of the " broad and powerful paintings " of the 1963 exhibition at Castelli 's Gallery . 
 = Dobroslav Jevđević = 
 Dobroslav Jevđević ( Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] ; 28 December 1895 – October 1962 ) was a Bosnian Serb politician and self @-@ appointed Chetnik commander ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : vojvoda , вoјвода ) in the Herzegovina region of the Axis @-@ occupied Kingdom of Yugoslavia during World War II . He was a member of the interwar Chetnik Association and the Organisation of Yugoslav Nationalists , a Yugoslav National Party member of the National Assembly , and a leader of the opposition to King Alexander between 1929 and 1934 . The following year , he became the propaganda chief for the Yugoslav government . 
 Following the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , he became a Chetnik leader in Herzegovina and joined the Chetnik movement of Draža Mihailović . Jevđević collaborated with the Italians and later the Germans in actions against the Yugoslav Partisans . Although Jevđević recognised the authority of Mihailović , who was aware of and approved of his collaboration with Axis forces , a number of factors effectively rendered him independent of Mihailović 's command , except when he worked closely with Ilija Trifunović @-@ Birčanin , Mihailović 's designated commander in Dalmatia , Herzegovina , western Bosnia and southwestern Croatia . 
 During the joint Italian – Chetnik Operation Alfa , Jevđević 's Chetniks , along with other Chetnik forces , were responsible for killing between 543 and 2 @,@ 500 Bosnian Muslim and Catholic civilians in the Prozor region in October 1942 . They also participated in one of the largest Axis anti @-@ Partisan operations of the war , Case White , in the winter of 1943 . His Chetniks later merged with other collaborationist forces that had withdrawn towards the west , and were put under the command of the SS General Odilo Globocnik of the Operational Zone of the Adriatic Littoral . Jevđević fled to Italy in the spring of 1945 , where he was arrested by Allied military authorities and detained at a camp in Grottaglie . He was eventually set free , having received considerable Allied support . Yugoslavia 's requests for extradition were ignored . Jevđević moved to Rome and lived under an assumed name . In the years following the war , he collected reports for various western intelligence services and printed anti @-@ communist publications . He resided in Rome until his death in October 1962 . 
 = = Early life and political career = = 
 Dobroslav Jevđević was born in the hamlet of <unk> in <unk> , near the town of Rogatica on 28 December 1895 to Dimitrije and Angela Jevđević ( née Kosorić ) . Jevđević 's father was a Serbian Orthodox priest , and the family was of Montenegrin Serb origin . Jevđević was raised in the Christian faith and attended secondary school in Sarajevo . There , he joined the revolutionary organisation known as Young Bosnia and became a friend of Gavrilo Princip , the assassin who killed Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria on 28 June 1914 . The day of the assassination , Jevđević 's father was arrested by the Austro @-@ Hungarian police for his connections with the Serb revolutionary organisation National Defence ( Narodna Odbrana ) . He was charged with high treason , sentenced to death by hanging in April 1916 and executed in Banja Luka . 
 Jevđević was a successful writer and poet in his youth . He studied law at the universities of Zagreb , Belgrade , and Vienna and spoke Serbian , Italian , German and French . Jevđević 's political career began in 1918 . During the interwar period , he was one of the most influential Serb politicians in Bosnia . He was a member of the Chetnik Association , an aggressively Serb @-@ chauvinist political movement of over 500 @,@ 000 members led by Kosta Pećanac . He was also one of the leaders of the Independent Democratic Party of Yugoslavia ( <unk> demokratska stranka ; NDS ) and headed the movement 's military wing , the Organisation of Yugoslav Nationalists ( <unk> <unk> Nacionalista ; ORJUNA ) , which terrorised those Serbs in Bosnia , Herzegovina and Croatia who refused to join the party . Jevđević later became a parliamentary candidate of the opposition Yugoslav National Party ( Jugoslovenska nacionalna stranka ; <unk> ) in the Kingdom of Yugoslavia . He was elected to the Yugoslav Parliament a total of four times , representing the district of Rogatica then Novi Sad , and was an opposition leader during King Alexander 's dictatorship of 1929 – 34 . His tendency to cooperate with various Yugoslav political factions earned him the reputation of " being willing to sell himself to any political group in return for personal favours or advancement " . In 1935 , he was appointed as the Yugoslav government 's propaganda chief by Prime Minister Bogoljub Jevtić . Jevđević approved of the creation of the Banovina of Croatia in 1939 and advocated a large Serb counterpart that would include most of Bosnia and Herzegovina . In 1941 , his cousin , Colonel Dušan Radović , left Yugoslavia and joined the Royal Air Force . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Jevđević fled to Budva following the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 . That month , the Germans and Italians created a puppet state known as the Independent State of Croatia ( Nezavisna Država Hrvatska ; NDH ) , which implemented genocidal policies against Serbs , Jews and Romanis . The Serb population began to resist , and Jevđević became a prominent leader of the Chetnik uprising against NDH authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1941 . 
 He was known for his pro @-@ Italian sympathies prior to the war , and Chetnik leader Draža Mihailović jokingly described him as " an Italian who likes Serbs " . Jevđević and pre @-@ war Chetnik leader Ilija Trifunović @-@ Birčanin sought to work with the Italians in the belief that an Italian occupation of both Bosnia and Herzegovina would limit the ability of the NDH to carry out its anti @-@ Serb policies . Jevđević reportedly hoped that the Italians would allow the formation of a Serbian state of Bosnia and Herzegovina under their protection , but they were more interested in obtaining the practical assistance of his Chetniks in fighting the Partisans than helping him achieve his political aims . In the summer of 1941 , Jevđević established links with the Italians . 
 On 20 October 1941 , Jevđević and Trifunović @-@ Birčanin met and agreed to collaborate with the head of the information division of the Italian 6th Army Corps . In late January 1942 , Jevđević offered to assist the Italians if they occupied Bosnia , and to organise Chetnik detachments to work alongside Italian units in their fight against the communist Partisans . These contacts involved General Lorenzo Dalmazzo , commander of the Italian 6th Corps , and Chetnik leaders Stevo <unk> , Trifunović @-@ Birčanin , Jezdimir Dangić and Jevđević . In the spring and summer of 1942 , Jevđević and Trifunović @-@ Birčanin regularly toured villages in Goražde , Kalinovik and Foča , encouraging the local civilians and Chetnik detachments to behave loyally towards the Italians . In May 1942 , Jevđević met with German intelligence officers in Dubrovnik and was asked whether he would cooperate in the pacification of Bosnia . Mihailović was aware of and condoned the collaborationist arrangements entered into by Jevđević and Trifunović @-@ Birčanin . Jevđević and Trifunović @-@ Birčanin frequently met with Chetnik commander Momčilo Đujić in Split , and the three men quarreled over how to divide the financial assistance they were receiving from the Italians . 
 In an internal Chetnik report of June 1942 , Jevđević claimed that the Partisan proletarian brigades contained many " Jews , Gypsies and Muslims " . In July 1942 , he issued a proclamation to the " Serbs of eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina " claiming that : 
 Tito , the supreme military chief of the Partisans , is a Croat from Zagreb . Pijade , the supreme political chief of the Partisans , is a Jew . Four @-@ fifths of all armed Partisans were supplied to them by Pavelić 's Croatian Army . Two @-@ thirds of their officers are former Croatian officers . The financing of their movement is carried out by the powerful Croatian capitalists of Zagreb , Split , Sarajevo and Dubrovnik . Fifty percent of the Ustaše responsible for the massacres of Serbs are now in their ranks . 
 Jevđević charged the Partisans with having " destroyed Serb churches and established mosques , synagogues and Catholic temples " . In mid @-@ 1942 , the Chetniks became aware that the Italians were planning to largely withdraw from significant parts of the NDH that they had been occupying in force up to that time . Jevđević and Trifunović @-@ Birčanin told the Italians that in response to this , Mihailović was considering evacuating Serb civilians from Herzegovina to Montenegro and moving Montenegrin Chetniks north to meet the Ustaše , who were expected to unleash a new wave of violence on Serb civilians . Over 22 – 23 July 1942 , Mihailović chaired a conference with Jevđević and Trifunović @-@ Birčanin in Avtovac , Herzegovina . On the second day of the conference , Jevđević and Trifunović @-@ Birčanin traveled to nearby Trebinje where they conferred with Herzegovinian Chetnik leaders Radmilo <unk> and Milan Šantić . The German consulate in Sarajevo reported that this meeting established the ultimate goals and immediate strategy of the Herzegovinian Chetniks as : 
 ( 1 ) the creation of Greater Serbia ; ( 2 ) the destruction of the Partisans ; ( 3 ) the removal of the Catholics and Muslims ; ( 4 ) non @-@ recognition of Croatia ; ( 5 ) no collaboration with the Germans ; and ( 6 ) temporary collaboration with the Italians for weapons , ammunition and food . 
 Under the auspices of the Italians , the Chetniks thoroughly ethnically cleansed eastern Herzegovina of its Croats and Muslims in July and August 1942 . In response to a massacre of non @-@ Serbs in Foča in August , Jevđević issued a proclamation to the Muslims in eastern Herzegovina demanding that they join the Chetniks in their struggle against the Ustaše . He stated : " I personally believe that in a future state the Muslims have no other choice but to finally and definitely accept Serb nationality and renounce their speculative maneuvering between the Serb and Croat nations , above all because all the lands in which the Muslims live will indisputably and <unk> become part of the Serb state entity . " That month , General Mario Roatta , commander of the Italian 2nd Army , contacted Jevđević and " legalised " 3 @,@ 000 of his Chetniks , formally authorising them to operate in eastern Herzegovina . 
 In the autumn of 1942 , Jevđević took a radically different approach than other Chetnik leaders and spoke in favour of collaborating with the Muslims to form Muslim Chetnik units in the fight against the Ustaše and the Partisans . He favoured such tolerance in areas where the Muslims were protected by the Germans , and considered it a tactical necessity while stressing that " there can be no true unity with them " . In late September or early October 1942 , Jevđević and Chetnik commander Petar Baćović held talks with Muslim leader Ismet Popovac and agreed to form a Muslim Chetnik organisation . Jevđević then urged the Italian military to occupy all of Bosnia and Herzegovina in order to end Ustaše rule and claimed the support of 80 percent of the population , consisting of Serbs and Muslims . At the same time , he requested that the Germans grant autonomy to Bosnia and Herzegovina until the end of the war , citing that the Muslims were " tested friends of the Germans both in the earlier and in the present era " . Although Jevđević attempted to recruit Muslims while making use of the Bosnian desire for autonomy to support his alliance with the occupying Axis powers , nothing developed from these requests . 
 = = = Operation Alfa = = = 
 Towards the end of August 1942 , Mihailović issued directives to Chetnik units , including those operating in the NDH such as Jevđević 's forces , ordering them to prepare for a large scale anti @-@ Partisan operation alongside Italian and NDH troops . In September 1942 , aware that they were unable to defeat the Partisans alone , the Chetniks tried to persuade the Italians to undertake a large operation against the Partisans in western Bosnia . Trifunović @-@ Birčanin met with Roatta on 10 and 21 September and urged him to undertake this operation as soon as possible to clear the Partisans from the Prozor – Livno area and offered 7 @,@ 500 Chetniks as aid on the condition they be given the necessary arms and supplies . He was successful in obtaining some arms and promises of action . The proposed operation , faced with opposition from Ustaše leader Ante Pavelić and a cautious Italian high command , was nearly cancelled , but after Jevđević and Trifunović @-@ Birčanin promised to cooperate with Croat and Muslim anti @-@ Partisan units , it went ahead , with less Chetnik involvement . 
 In early October 1942 , Jevđević and Baćović , with 3 @,@ 000 Chetniks from Herzegovina and southeast Bosnia , participated in the Italian @-@ led Operation Alfa . This involved a two @-@ pronged thrust towards the town of Prozor . German and NDH troops drove from the north , and Italian and Chetnik forces pushed from the Neretva River . Prozor and some smaller towns were captured by the combined Italian – Chetnik force . Individual Chetnik bands , acting on their own , proceeded to burn a number of Muslim and Catholic villages , and killed between 543 and 2 @,@ 500 non @-@ Serbs in the Prozor area . Their behaviour angered the NDH government and the Italians had to order the Chetniks to withdraw . Some were discharged altogether while others were sent to northern Dalmatia to aid Đujić 's forces . A month after the massacre , Jevđević and Baćović wrote a self @-@ critical report on Prozor to Mihailović , hoping to distance themselves from the actions of the troops . 
 = = = Case White = = = 
 In a meeting with Roatta in November 1942 , Jevđević obtained Italian agreement to " legalise " another 3 @,@ 000 Chetniks and recognition of almost all of eastern Herzegovina as a " Chetnik zone " . In return , the Chetniks had to promise not to attack Muslim and Croat civilians and agreed to having an Italian liaison officer embedded in all their formations of regiment strength or more . On 15 November 1942 , Jevđević agreed to support the Italian decision to start arming Muslim anti @-@ Partisan groups . This support almost cost him his life when several Chetniks , who strongly opposed the arming of Croat and Muslim anti @-@ Partisan groups by the Italians , visited Mostar with the intention of assassinating him . 
 By the end of 1942 , Chetnik – Italian collaboration was routine . Chetnik forces were included in the Italian planning for Case White , a major Axis anti @-@ Partisan offensive which was to be launched on 20 January 1943 . On 3 January , Jevđević participated in an Axis planning conference for Case White in Rome , along with senior German , Italian and NDH commanders . The plans included the 12 @,@ 000 Chetniks under Jevđević 's command , and on 23 February 1943 he concluded an agreement with the Germans that they would not cross the Neretva River and that contact between German and Chetnik troops would be avoided . Early in the operation , Jevđević concluded an agreement for cooperation with the commander of NDH troops in Mostar . Later in the operation Jevđević requested , through the Italians , the assistance of the 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen in defending Nevesinje , which faced severe pressure from Partisan forces that had broken through the Chetnik lines at the Battle of the Neretva River . Although the Italians also made this request themselves , the Germans declined , stating that the division was reserved for other tasks . 
 After the death of Trifunović @-@ Birčanin in February 1943 , Jevđević , along with Đujić , Baćović , and Radovan Ivanišević , vowed to the Italians to carry on Trifunović @-@ Birčanin 's policies of closely collaborating with them against the Partisans . The Italians were able to exert pressure on Jevđević , as his brother and fiancée were interned in Italy . Mihailović apparently felt that Jevđević had exceeded his authority by attending the Case White planning conference in Rome , and indeed , when the Yugoslav government @-@ in @-@ exile awarded Jevđević the Order of Karađorđe 's Star in early 1943 for his services to the Serb population during the Ustaše massacres of 1941 , Mihailović suppressed the announcement of the award because of the nature of Jevđević 's agreement with the Italians , although the reason may also have been because he was aware of Chetnik revenge killings of Herzegovinian Catholics and Muslims in response to atrocities committed by the Ustaše in Croatia . Tensions between Mihailović and Jevđević became so apparent that Mihailović reportedly threatened to " string [ him ] up from the nearest tree " . In March , Jevđević publicly demanded an end to the Chetnik killing of Croats in Herzegovina . 
 In June 1943 , Mihailović sent Jevđević to Slovenia to report on the state of Chetnik forces there . Jevđević began developing contacts with the Germans prior to the Italian capitulation in September 1943 . On 3 September , he travelled to Rome via Rijeka and made contact with German intelligence services . This marked the beginning of his collaboration with the Germans . Following the German occupation of NDH territory that had previously been held by the Italians , Jevđević moved to Trieste and stayed at the Hotel Continental . There , he helped organise displaced Chetniks and arranged for them to be returned to the town of Opatija . He stayed in Trieste until January 1944 , when he relocated to Opatija with Chetniks from Trieste who had been placed under his command . He then moved his Chetniks to Ilirska Bistrica , and collaborated with the Germans until the end of the war . 
 = = = Withdrawal = = = 
 In December 1944 , Jevđević 's 3 @,@ 000 remaining fighters joined Đujić 's Chetniks , Dimitrije Ljotić 's Serbian Volunteer Corps , and the remnants of Milan Nedić 's Serbian Shock Corps , which were under the command of SS @-@ Obergruppenführer und General der Waffen @-@ SS ( SS General ) Odilo Globocnik , the Higher SS and Police Leader of the Adriatic Littoral . Despite this , they attempted to contact the western Allies in Italy in an effort to secure foreign aid for a proposed anti @-@ communist offensive to restore royalist Yugoslavia . They were all blessed by Serbian Orthodox bishop Nikolaj Velimirović upon his arrival in Slovenia . On 11 April 1945 , a detachment of Jevđević 's Chetniks , along with three regiments of the Serbian Volunteer Corps , marched into south @-@ western Croatia with the aim of linking up with the Montenegrin Volunteer Corps of Pavle Đurišić , which was marching across Bosnia in an attempt to reach Slovenia . The relief effort came too late , because the Montenegrin Volunteer Corps had already been defeated by NDH forces at the Battle of Lijevče Field near Banja Luka , after which Đurišić was captured and killed . The relief force then marched north to Slovenia , where it fought the Partisans before retreating into Austria . These Chetniks were subsequently captured by the Allies and repatriated to Yugoslavia , where they were summarily executed by the Partisans . Jevđević remained highly influential among the Chetniks until the end of the war . 
 = = Exile and death = = 
 = = = Release from captivity = = = 
 In the spring of 1945 , Jevđević fled to Italy , where he was arrested by Allied forces and detained at a camp in Grottaglie . An estimated 10 @,@ 000 Chetniks reportedly followed him and Đujić into the country . Jevđević was interned in Grottaglie for some time along with others , including the former Ustaše commissioner for Banja Luka , Viktor <unk> . During this time , an indictment was issued against him in Sarajevo . It charged that under his command in " the first half of October 1942 in and around Prozor [ the Italians and Chetniks ] butchered and killed 1 @,@ 716 persons of both sexes , of the Croatian and Muslim nations , and plundered and burnt about 500 households " . Jevđević received considerable Allied support in Italy despite being wanted by British authorities in connection with these allegations . On paper , the Chetniks in Italy were listed as " surrendered enemy personnel " , but were largely viewed with sympathy by the Allies , who considered them anti @-@ German . Hence , many Chetnik prisoners were handed British Army uniforms and given non @-@ combatant duties throughout Italy , such as guarding munitions and supplies . In August 1945 , Jevđević became the commander of a camp for disarmed Chetniks in Cesena . He was eventually set free and Yugoslavia 's requests for extradition were ignored . 
 = = = Intelligence @-@ gathering activities = = = 
 According to the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) , Jevđević lived in Rome under the aliases " Giovanni St. Angelo " and " Enrico Serrao " . He spent most of his time and money quarrelling with émigré Yugoslav politicians , trying to prove that his collaboration with the Italians was necessary in order to protect the population of Bosnia and Herzegovina from the Partisans and Germans . He became a member of the Association of Free Journalists of Central @-@ Eastern Europe , and served as an informant for the Italian intelligence services between 1946 and 1947 . During this period , he published a confidential periodical called the Royal Yugoslav Intelligence Bulletin which he shared with the Italians . Jevđević also contributed to a number of newspapers , including the Serb nationalist Srbobran . In 1946 , he helped form the Serbian National Committee in Rome and , with help from Achille <unk> , published a pan @-@ Serb and anti @-@ Croat newspaper , Srpske <unk> , in <unk> . He also established contacts with Italian neo @-@ fascist groups and with an anti @-@ communist group called the Committee of Nations Oppressed by Russia . 
 Disagreement over who would lead the 10 @,@ 000 Chetnik exiles in Italy escalated into a feud between Jevđević , Đujić and General Miodrag Damjanović in mid @-@ 1947 . Damjanović had been appointed by Mihailović in March 1945 to lead the Chetniks into northwestern Italy . Jevđević and Đujić refused to accept this and claimed that they were Mihailović 's only successors as leaders of the Chetnik movement . 
 By 1949 , the CIA claimed that Jevđević 's intelligence material was being used by the Italian Ministry of Interior , the United States Counterintelligence Corps , British Forensic Science Service in Trieste , and French intelligence services in Rome and Paris . His intelligence correspondents included Đujić , who disseminated his intelligence reports to the CIA , Konstantin <unk> , the former Yugoslav ambassador to the United States , and Miro <unk> , Croat politician Vladko Maček 's self @-@ styled intelligence representative in Rome . The intelligence reports were mostly collected from refugees fleeing Yugoslavia and arriving in Italy via Trieste and from émigré groups in Italy and Greece . By 1949 , Jevđević claimed to have formed a large network of anti @-@ communist propagandists in Italy and intelligence collection centres in Albania , Bulgaria and Greece . The CIA believed that these claims were exaggerated , if not entirely fictitious . In 1951 , Jevđević began printing an anti @-@ communist , pro @-@ Chetnik publication from an unidentified religious institution in Italy . Issues were regularly mailed to Yugoslav exiles and former Chetniks living in the United States , Canada , Australia and various European countries . 
 In May and June 1952 , Jevđević visited Canada and addressed the Congress of the Serbian National Defense ( Srpska Narodna Odbrana ) in Niagara Falls regarding developments within Italy 's Serb émigré community . The following year , he and Đujić issued a proclamation in Chicago declaring their intention to organize Chetnik groups against Damjanović , who had since emigrated to Germany . Jevđević later received threatening letters warning him not to go through with such a plan for fear of <unk> the Yugoslav diaspora . Little is known of his activities after 1953 . He continued to live in Rome until his death in October 1962 . 
 = First World = 
 The concept of the First World originated during the Cold War and included countries that were generally aligned with or on friendly terms with the United States ( including all NATO countries ) and were generally identified as non @-@ theocratic democracies with primarily market @-@ based economies . While there is no current consensus on an exact definition of the term , in modern usage , " First World country " generally implies a relatively wealthy , stable and functional non @-@ theocratic democracy with a reasonably well educated population , or just any developed country . 
 During the Cold War , relationships between the First World and the Second World of Communist states were typically competitive , ideological , and occasionally hostile . Relationships of both these " Worlds " with " Third World " countries ( i.e. all the rest ) were normally positive in theory , while some were quite negative in practice ( such as proxy war between client states ) . Since the dissolution of the Soviet Union and advances in communication technology , relations amongst the " Worlds " are not as rigid , although there are still marked disparities , with the First World generally having more influence , wealth , and access to information and technological innovations than the Second and Third Worlds . 
 = = Definition = = 
 After World War II , the world split into two large geopolitical blocs , separating into spheres of communism and capitalism . This led to the Cold War , during which the term First World was often used because of its political , social , and economic relevance . The term itself was first introduced in the late 1940s by the United Nations . Today , the First World is slightly outdated and has no official definition , however , it is generally thought of as the capitalist , industrial , wealthy and developed countries . This definition included Australia , South Korea , Japan , and most of the countries of North America and Western Europe . In contemporary society , the First World is viewed as countries that have the most advanced economies , the greatest influence , the highest standards of living , and the greatest technology . After the Cold War , these countries of the First World included member states of NATO , <unk> aligned states , neutral countries that were developed and industrialized , and the former British Colonies that were considered developed . It can be defined succinctly as Europe , plus the richer countries of the former British Empire ( USA , Canada , Australia , Singapore , New Zealand , South Africa ) , Japan , and South Korea . Countries were also placed into the First World based on how civilized the country was considered . According to Nations Online , the member countries of NATO after the Cold War included : 
 Belgium , Canada , Denmark , France , West Germany , Greece , Iceland , Italy , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , Norway , Portugal , Spain , Turkey , the United Kingdom and the United States . 
 The <unk> countries included : 
 Israel , Japan , South Korea and the Philippines 
 The neutral countries included : 
 Austria , Finland , Ireland , Sweden and Switzerland . 
 The former British colonies also included in the First World were : 
 Australia , New Zealand , Canada , Singapore , South Africa , and the United States . 
 = = = Variations in definitions = = = 
 Since the end of the Cold War , the original definition of the term First World is no longer necessarily applicable . There are varying definitions of the First World , however , they follow the same idea . John D. Daniels , past president of the Academy of International Business , defines the First World to be consisting of " high @-@ income industrial countries . " Scholar and Professor George J. Bryjak defines the First World to be the " modern , industrial , capitalist countries of North America and Europe . " L. Robert Kohls , former director of training for the U.S. Information Agency and the Meridian International Center in Washington , D.C. uses First World and " fully developed " as synonyms . 
 = = = Other indicators = = = 
 Varying definitions of the term First World and the uncertainty of the term in today 's world leads to different indicators of First World status . In 1945 , the United Nations used the terms first , second , third , and fourth worlds to define the relative wealth of nations ( although popular use of the term fourth world did not come about until later ) . They were defined in terms of Gross National Product ( GNP ) , measured in U.S. dollars , along with other socio @-@ political factors . The first world included the large industrialized , democratic ( free elections , etc . ) nations . The second world included modern , wealthy , industrialized nations , but they were all under communist control . Most of the rest of the world was deemed part of the third world , while the fourth world was considered to be those nations whose people were living on less than US $ 100 annually . If we use the term to mean high income industrialized economies , then the World Bank classifies countries according to their GNI or gross national income per capita . The World Bank separates countries into four categories : high @-@ income , upper @-@ middle @-@ income , lower @-@ middle @-@ income , and low @-@ income economies . The First World is considered to be countries with high @-@ income economies . The high @-@ income economies are equated to mean developed and industrialized countries . 
 = = Three World Model = = 
 The terms First World , Second World , and Third World were originally used to divide the world 's nations into three categories . The model did not emerge to its end state all at once . The complete overthrow of the pre – World War II status quo , known as the Cold War , left two superpowers ( the United States and the Soviet Union ) vying for ultimate global supremacy . They created two camps , known as blocs . These blocs formed the basis of the concepts of the First and Second Worlds . 
 Early in the Cold War era , NATO and the Warsaw Pact were created by the United States and The Soviet Union , respectively . They were also referred to as the Western Bloc and the Eastern Bloc . The circumstances of these two blocks were so different that they were essentially two worlds , however , they were not numbered first and second . The onset of the Cold War is marked by Winston Churchill 's famous " Iron Curtain " speech . In this speech , Churchill describes the division of the West and East to be so solid that it could be called an iron curtain . 
 In 1952 , the French demographer Alfred Sauvy coined the term Third World in reference to the three estates in pre @-@ revolutionary France . The first two estates being the nobility and clergy and everybody else comprising the third estate . He compared the capitalist world ( i.e. , First World ) to the nobility and the communist world ( i.e. , Second World ) to the clergy . Just as the third estate comprised everybody else , Sauvy called the Third World all the countries that were not in this Cold War division , i.e. , the unaligned and uninvolved states in the " East @-@ West Conflict . " With the coining of the term Third World directly , the first two groups came to be known as the " First World " and " Second World , " respectively . Here the three @-@ world system emerged . 
 However , Shuswap Chief George Manuel believes the Three World Model to be outdated . In his 1974 book The Fourth World : An Indian Reality , he describes the emergence of the Fourth World while coining the term . The fourth world refers to " nations , " e.g. , cultural entities and ethnic groups , of indigenous people who do not compose states in the traditional sense . Rather , they live within or across state boundaries ( see First Nations ) . One example is the Native Americans of North America , Central America , and the Caribbean . 
 = = = Post Cold War = = = 
 With the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 , the Eastern Bloc ceased to exist ; with it , so did all applicability of the term Second World . The definitions of the First World and Third World changed slightly , yet generally described the same concepts . 
 = = Relationships with the other worlds = = 
 = = = Historic = = = 
 During the Cold War Era , the relationships between the First World , Second World and the Third World were very rigid . The First World and Second World were at constant odds with one another via the tensions between their two cores , the United States and the Soviet Union , respectively . The Cold War , by virtue of its name , was a primarily ideological struggle between the First and Second Worlds , or more specifically , the U.S. and the Soviet Union . Multiple doctrines and plans dominated Cold War dynamics including the Truman Doctrine , Marshall Plan ( from the U.S ) and the Molotov Plan ( from the Soviet Union ) . The extent of the odds between the two worlds is evident in Berlin — which was then split into East and West . To stop citizens in East Berlin from having too much exposure to the capitalist West , the Soviet Union put up the Berlin Wall within the actual city . 
 The relationship between the First World and the Third World is characterized by the very definition of the Third World . Because countries of the Third World were noncommittal and non @-@ aligned with both the First World and the Second World , they were targets for recruitment . In the quest for expanding their sphere of influence , the United States ( core of the First World ) tried to establish <unk> lay with the First World if at the end of the war , the country became capitalistic and democratic , and with the Second World , if the country became communist . While Vietnam as a whole was eventually <unk> , only the northern half of Korea remained communist . The Domino Theory largely governed United States policy regarding the Third World and their rivalry with the Second World . In light of the Domino Theory , the U.S. saw winning the proxy wars in the Third World as a measure of the " credibility of U.S. commitments all over the world . " 
 = = = Present = = = 
 The movement of people and information largely characterizes the inter @-@ world relationships in the present day . A majority of breakthroughs and innovation originate in Western Europe and the U.S. and later their effects permeate globally . As judged by the Wharton School of Business at the University of Pennsylvania , most of the Top 30 Innovations of the Last 30 Years were from former First World countries ( e.g. , the U.S. and countries in Western Europe ) . 
 The disparity between knowledge in the First World as compared to the Third World is evident in healthcare and medical advancements . Deaths from water @-@ related illnesses have largely been eliminated in " wealthier nations , " while they are still a " major concern in the developing world . " Widely treatable diseases in the developed countries of the First World , malaria and tuberculosis needlessly claim many lives in the developing countries of the Third World . 900 @,@ 000 people die from malaria each year and combating malaria accounts for 40 % of health spending in many African countries . 
 The International Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers ( <unk> ) recently announced that the first <unk> Domain Names ( <unk> ) will be available as soon as the summer of 2010 . These include non @-@ Latin domains such as Chinese , Arabic , and Russian . This is one way that the flow of information between the First and Third Worlds may become more even . 
 The movement of information and technology from the First World to various Third World countries has created a general " <unk> ( ation ) to First World living standards . " The Third World has lower living standards as compared to the First World . Information about the comparatively higher living standards of the First World comes through television , commercial advertisements and foreign visitors to their countries . This exposure causes two changes : a ) living standards in some Third World countries rise and b ) this exposure creates hopes and many from Third World countries immigrate - both legally and illegally - to these First World countries in hopes of attaining that living standard and prosperity . In fact , this immigration is the " main contributor to the increasing populations of U.S. and Europe . " While these immigrations have greatly contributed to globalization , they have also precipitated trends like brain drain and problems with repatriation . They have also created immigration and governmental burden problems for the countries ( i.e. , First World ) that people immigrate to . 
 = = = Environmental impact = = = 
 Some have argued that the most important human population problem for the world is not the high rate of population increase in certain Third World countries , but rather the " increase in total human impact . " The per @-@ capita impact - the resources consumed and the wastes created by each person - is varied globally ; the highest in the First World and the lowest in the Third World : inhabitants of the U.S. , Western Europe and Japan consume 32 times as many resources and put out 32 times as much waste as those in the Third World . However , China leads the world in total emissions , but its large population skews its per @-@ capita statistic lower than those of more developed nations . 
 As large consumers of fossil fuels , First World countries drew attention to environmental pollution . The Kyoto Protocol is a treaty that is based on the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change , which was finalized in 1992 at the Earth Summit in Rio . It proposed to place the burden of protecting the climate on the United States and other First World countries . Countries that were considered to be developing , such as China and India , were not required to approve the treaty because they were more concerned that restricting emissions would further restrain their development . 
 = = = International relations = = = 
 Until the recent past , little attention was paid to the interests of Third World countries . This is because most international relations scholars have come from the industrialized , First World nations . As more countries have continued to become more developed , the interests of the world have slowly started to shift . However , First World nations still have many more universities , professors , journals , and conferences , which has made it very difficult for Third World countries to gain legitimacy and respect with their new ideas and methods of looking at the world . 
 = = = Development theory = = = 
 During the Cold War , the modernization theory and development theory developed in the West as a result of their economic , political , social , and cultural response to the management of former colonial territories . Western scholars and practitioners of international politics hoped to theorize ideas and then create policies based on those ideas that would cause newly independent colonies to change into politically developed sovereign nation @-@ states . However , most of the theorists were from the United States , and they were not interested in Third World countries achieving development by any model . They wanted those countries to develop through liberal processes of politics , economics , and socialization ; that is to say , they wanted them to follow the Western liberal capitalist example of a so @-@ called " First World state . " Therefore , the modernization and development tradition consciously originated as a Western ( mostly U.S. ) alternative to the Marxist and neo @-@ Marxist strategies promoted by the " Second World states " like the Soviet Union . It was used to explain how developing Third World states would naturally evolve into developed First World States , and it was partially grounded in liberal economic theory and a form of Talcott Parsons ' sociological theory . 
 = = Globalization = = 
 The United Nations 's <unk> has written that globalization " is a widely @-@ used term that can be defined in a number of different ways . " Joyce <unk> from San Jose State University wrote , " Globalization has become an increasingly controversial topic , and the growing number of protests around the world has focused more attention on the basic assumptions of globalization and its effects . " " Globalization is not new , though . For thousands of years , people — and , later , corporations — have been buying from and selling to each other in lands at great distances , such as through the famed Silk Road across Central Asia that connected China and Europe during the Middle Ages . Likewise , for centuries , people and corporations have invested in enterprises in other countries . In fact , many of the features of the current wave of globalization are similar to those prevailing before the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 . " 
 = = = European Union = = = 
 The most prominent example of globalization in the first world is the European Union ( EU ) . The European Union is an agreement in which countries voluntarily decide to build common governmental institutions to which they delegate some individual national sovereignty so that decisions can be made democratically on a higher level of common interest for Europe as a whole . The result is a union of 28 Member States covering 4 @,@ 324 @,@ 782 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 669 @,@ 808 sq mi ) with roughly half a billion people . In total , the European Union produces almost a third of the world ’ s gross national product and the member states speak more than 23 languages . All of the European Union countries are joined together by a hope to promote and extend peace , democracy , <unk> , stability , prosperity , and the rule of law . In a 2007 speech , Benita Ferrero @-@ <unk> , the European Commissioner for External Relations , said herself , " The future of the EU is linked to globalization ... the EU has a crucial role to play in making globalization work properly ... " . In a 2014 speech at the European Parliament , the Italian PM Matteo Renzi said " we are the ones who can bring civilization to globalization " . With the " <unk> " ( British Exit ) of the EU in 2016 , the fundamental economic and motivational powerhouse of globalization in Europe was placed , once again , in the hands of Germany . 
 Just as the concept of the First World came about as a result of World War II , so did the European Union . In 1951 the beginnings of the EU were founded with the creation of European Coal and Steel Community ( ECSC ) . From the beginning of its inception , countries in the EU were judged by many standards , including economic ones . This is where the relation between globalization , the EU , and First World countries arises . Especially during the 1990s when the EU focused on economic policies such as the creation and circulation of the Euro , the creation of the European Monetary Institute , and the opening of the European Central Bank . 
 In 1993 , at the Copenhagen European Council , the European Union took a decisive step towards expanding the EU , what they called the Fifth Enlargement , agreeing that " the associated countries in Central and Eastern Europe that so desire shall become members of the European Union . " Thus , enlargement was no longer a question of if , but when and how . The European Council stated that accession could occur when the prospective country is able to assume the obligations of membership , that is that all the economic and political conditions required are attained . Furthermore , it defined the membership criteria , which are regarded as the Copenhagen criteria , as follows : 
 stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy , the rule of law , human rights and respect for and protection of minorities 
 the existence of a functioning market economy as well as the capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces within the Union 
 the ability to take on the obligations of membership including adherence to the aims of political , economic and monetary union 
 It is clear that all these criteria are characteristics of developed countries . Therefore , there is a direct link between globalization , developed nations , and the European Union . 
 = = = Multinational corporations = = = 
 A majority of multinational corporations find their origins in First World countries . After the fall of communism , multinational corporations proliferated as more countries focused on global trade . The series of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) and later the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) essentially ended the protectionist measures that were dissuading global trade . The eradication of these protectionist measures , while creating avenues for economic interconnection , mostly benefited developed countries , who by using their power at GATT summits , forced developing and underdeveloped countries to open their economies to Western goods . 
 As the world starts to <unk> , it is accompanied by criticism of the current forms of globalization , which are feared to be overly corporate @-@ led . As corporations become larger and multinational , their influence and interests go further accordingly . Being able to influence and own most media companies , it is hard to be able to publicly debate the notions and ideals that corporations pursue . Some choices that corporations take to make profits can affect people all over the world . Sometimes fatally . 
 The third industrial revolution is spreading from the developed world to some , but not all , parts of the developing world . To participate in this new global economy , developing countries must be seen as attractive offshore production bases for multinational corporations . To be such bases , developing countries must provide relatively well @-@ educated workforces , good infrastructure ( electricity , telecommunications , transportation ) , political stability , and a willingness to play by market rules . 
 If these conditions are in place , multinational corporations will transfer via their offshore subsidiaries or to their offshore suppliers , the specific production technologies and market linkages necessary to participate in the global economy . By themselves , developing countries , even if well @-@ educated , cannot produce at the quality levels demanded in high @-@ value @-@ added industries and cannot market what they produce even in low @-@ value @-@ added industries such as textiles or shoes . Put bluntly , multinational companies possess a variety of factors that developing countries must have if they are to participate in the global economy . 
 = = = Outsourcing = = = 
 Outsourcing , according to Grossman and <unk> , refers to the process of " subcontracting an ever expanding set of activities , ranging from product design to assembly , from research and development to marketing , distribution and after @-@ sales service " . Many companies have moved to outsourcing services in which they no longer specifically need or have the capability of handling themselves . This is due to considerations of what the companies can have more control over . Whatever companies tend to not have much control over or need to have control over will outsource activities to firms that they consider " less competing " . According to <unk> , the process of outsourcing can take the following four phases . 
 strategic thinking 
 evaluation and selection 
 contract development 
 outsourcing management . 
 Outsourcing is among some of the many reasons for increased competition within developing countries . Aside from being a reason for competition , many First World countries see outsourcing , in particular offshore outsourcing , as an opportunity for increased income . As a consequence , the skill level of production in foreign countries handling the outsourced services increases within the economy ; and the skill level within the domestic developing countries can decrease . It is because of competition ( including outsourcing ) that Robert <unk> and Gordon Hanson predict that there will be a rise of 15 – 33 percent in inequality amongst these countries . 
 = Spotted hyena = 
 The spotted hyena ( Crocuta crocuta ) , also known as the laughing hyena , is a species of hyena , currently classed as the sole member of the genus Crocuta , native to Sub @-@ Saharan Africa . It is listed as being of least concern by the IUCN on account of its widespread range and large numbers estimated between 27 @,@ 000 and 47 @,@ 000 individuals . The species is , however , experiencing declines outside of protected areas due to habitat loss and poaching . The species may have originated in Asia , and once ranged throughout Europe for at least one million years until the end of the Late Pleistocene . The spotted hyena is the largest known member of the Hyaenidae , and is further physically distinguished from other species by its vaguely bear @-@ like build , its rounded ears , its less prominent mane , its spotted pelt , its more dual purposed dentition , its fewer nipples and the presence of a pseudo @-@ penis in the female . It is the only mammalian species to lack an external vaginal opening . 
 The spotted hyena is the most social of the Carnivora in that it has the largest group sizes and most complex social behaviours . Its social organisation is unlike that of any other carnivore , bearing closer resemblance to that of cercopithecine primates ( baboons and macaques ) with respect to group @-@ size , hierarchical structure , and frequency of social interaction among both kin and unrelated group @-@ mates . However , the social system of the spotted hyena is openly competitive rather than cooperative , with access to kills , mating opportunities and the time of dispersal for males depending on the ability to dominate other clan @-@ members . Females provide only for their own cubs rather than assist each other , and males display no paternal care . Spotted hyena society is matriarchal ; females are larger than males , and dominate them . 
 The spotted hyena is a highly successful animal , being the most common large carnivore in Africa . Its success is due in part to its adaptability and opportunism ; it is primarily a hunter but may also scavenge , with the capacity to eat and digest skin , bone and other animal waste . In functional terms , the spotted hyena makes the most efficient use of animal matter of all African carnivores . The spotted hyena displays greater plasticity in its hunting and foraging behaviour than other African carnivores ; it hunts alone , in small parties of 2 – 5 individuals or in large groups . During a hunt , spotted hyenas often run through ungulate herds in order to select an individual to attack . Once selected , their prey is chased over long distance , often several kilometres , at speeds of up to 60 km / h . 
 The spotted hyena has a long history of interaction with humanity ; depictions of the species exist from the Upper Paleolithic period , with carvings and paintings from the Lascaux and Chauvet Caves . The species has a largely negative reputation in both Western culture and African folklore . In the former , the species is mostly regarded as ugly and cowardly , while in the latter , it is viewed as greedy , gluttonous , stupid , and foolish , yet powerful and potentially dangerous . The majority of Western perceptions on the species can be found in the writings of Aristotle and Pliny the Elder , though in relatively <unk> form . Explicit , negative judgements occur in the Physiologus , where the animal is depicted as a hermaphrodite and grave robber . The IUCN 's hyena specialist group identifies the spotted hyena 's negative reputation as detrimental to the species ' continued survival , both in captivity and the wild . 
 = = Etymology , discovery and naming = = 
 The spotted hyena 's scientific name Crocuta , was once widely thought to be derived from the Latin loanword <unk> , which translates as " saffron @-@ coloured one " , in reference to the animal 's fur colour . This was proven to be incorrect , as the correct spelling of the loanword would have been <unk> , and the word was never used in that sense by Graeco @-@ Roman sources . Crocuta actually comes from the Ancient Greek word <unk> ( <unk> ) , which is derived from the Sanskrit <unk> , which in turn originates from <unk> ( both of which were originally meant to signify the golden jackal ) . The earliest recorded mention of <unk> is from Strabo 's <unk> , where the animal is described as a mix of wolf and dog native to Ethiopia . 
 From Classical antiquity until the Renaissance , the spotted and striped hyena were either assumed to be the same species , or distinguished purely on geographical , rather than physical grounds . Hiob Ludolf , in his Historia <unk> , was the first to clearly distinguish the Crocuta from Hyaena on account of physical , as well as geographical grounds , though he never had any first hand experience of the species , having gotten his accounts from an Ethiopian intermediary . Confusion still persisted over the exact taxonomic nature of the hyena family in general , with most European travelers in Ethiopia referring to hyenas as " wolves " . This partly stems from the Amharic word for hyena , <unk> ( <unk> ) , which is linked to the Arabic word <unk> ( <unk> ) " wolf " . 
 The first detailed first @-@ hand descriptions of the spotted hyena by Europeans come from Willem Bosman and Peter Kolbe . Bosman , a Dutch tradesman who worked for the Dutch West India Company at the Gold Coast ( modern day Ghana ) from 1688 – 1701 , wrote of " <unk> , of <unk> " ( jackals or woodland dogs ) whose physical descriptions match the spotted hyena . Kolben , a German mathematician and astronomer who worked for the Dutch East India Company in the Cape of Good Hope from 1705 – 1713 , described the spotted hyena in great detail , but referred to it as a " <unk> " , because the settlers in southern Africa did not know of hyenas , and thus labelled them as " wolves " . 
 Bosman and Kolben 's descriptions went largely unnoticed until 1771 , when the Welsh naturalist Thomas Pennant , in his Synopsis of Quadrupeds , used the descriptions , as well as his personal experience with a captive specimen , as a basis for consistently differentiating the spotted hyena from the striped . The description given by Pennant was precise enough to be included by Johann Erxleben in his Systema regni <unk> by simply translating Pennant 's text into Latin . Crocuta was finally recognised as a separate genus from Hyaena in 1828 . 
 = = = Local and indigenous names = = = 
 Several languages of Africa lack species specific names for hyenas : for example , the spotted and striped species have identical names in <unk> , Swahili , Mandinka , <unk> , <unk> , Wolof and Fulani . In other languages , other species may simply be termed " small spotted hyena " , such as in Swahili , where the spotted hyena is termed <unk> and the aardwolf <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Taxonomy , origins and evolution = = 
 Unlike the striped hyena , for which a number of subspecies were proposed in light of its extensive modern range , the spotted hyena is a genuinely variable species , both temporally and spatially . Its range once encompassed almost all of Africa and Eurasia , and displayed a large degree of morphological geographic variation , which led to an equally extensive set of specific and subspecific epithets . It was gradually realised that all of this variation could be applied to individual differences in a single subspecies . In 1939 , biologist L. Harrison Matthews demonstrated through comparisons between a large selection of spotted hyena skulls from Tanzania that all the variation seen in the then recognised subspecies could also be found in a single population , with the only set of characters standing out being pelage ( which is subject to a high degree of individual variation ) and size ( which is subject to Bergmann 's Rule ) . When fossils are taken into consideration , the species displayed even greater variation than it does in modern times , and a number of these named fossil species have since been classed as synonymous with Crocuta crocuta , with firm evidence of there being more than one species within the genus Crocuta still lacking . 
 Both Björn Kurtén and Camille <unk> promoted an Asiatic origin for the species ; Kurtén focussed his arguments on the Plio @-@ Pleistocene taxon Crocuta sivalensis from the <unk> , a view defended by <unk> , who nonetheless allowed the possibility of an Indo @-@ Ethiopian origin . This stance was contested by <unk> and Torre , who referred to evidence of the spotted hyena 's presence from African <unk> dating from the early Pleistocene , a similar age to the Asian C. sivalensis . Studies on the phylogeographic distribution of mtDNA haplotypes indicates three migration events from Africa to Eurasia , though neither the topology of the phylogenetic tree or the fossil record exclude the possibility of an Asian origin . The earliest migration of spotted hyenas from Africa to Eurasia began less than 3 @.@ 5 million years ago , most probably from the area where the first spotted hyena fossils were discovered , reaching East Asia and most likely also Pakistan . The second migration of spotted hyenas occurred less than 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 5 million years ago and resulted in the first arrival of hyenas in Europe and a separation of African spotted hyenas into a southern and a northern population . The third spotted hyena migration took place 0 @.@ 36 million years ago , starting from the northern African population and reaching both Europe and Asia . Unlike other African carnivores , with the exception of the leopard , there is no evidence to suggest that spotted hyenas underwent a genetic bottleneck during the Pleistocene . 
 The ancestors of the genus Crocuta diverged from Hyaena ( the genus of striped and brown hyenas ) 10 million years ago . The ancestors of the spotted hyena probably developed social behaviours in response to increased pressure from other predators on carcasses , which forced them to operate in teams . At one point in their evolution , spotted hyenas developed sharp carnassials behind their crushing premolars ; this rendered waiting for their prey to die no longer a necessity , as is the case for brown and striped hyenas , and thus became pack hunters as well as scavengers . They began forming increasingly larger territories , necessitated by the fact that their prey was often migratory , and long chases in a small territory would have caused them to encroach into another clan 's land . It has been theorised that female dominance in spotted hyena clans could be an adaptation in order to successfully compete with males on kills , and thus ensure that enough milk is produced for their cubs . Another theory is that it is an adaptation to the length of time it takes for cubs to develop their massive skulls and jaws , thus necessitating greater attention and dominating behaviours from females . Its appearance in Europe and China during the <unk> period coincided with the decline and eventual extinction of <unk> brevirostris , the giant short @-@ faced hyena . As there is no evidence of environmental change being responsible , it is likely that the giant short @-@ faced hyena became extinct due to competition with the spotted hyena . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Anatomy = = = 
 The spotted hyena has a strong and well developed neck and forequarters , but relatively underdeveloped hindquarters . The rump is rounded rather than angular , which prevents attackers coming from behind from getting a firm grip on it . The head is wide and flat with a blunt muzzle and broad rhinarium . In contrast to the striped hyena , the ears of the spotted hyena are rounded rather than pointed . Each foot has four digits , which are webbed and armed with short , stout and blunt claws . The paw @-@ pads are broad and very flat , with the whole undersurface of the foot around them being naked . The tail is relatively short , being 300 – 350 mm ( 12 – 14 in ) long , and resembles a <unk> in appearance . Unusually among <unk> , and mammals in general , the female spotted hyena is considerably larger than the male . Both sexes have a pair of anal glands which open into the rectum just inside the anal opening . These glands produce a white , creamy secretion which is pasted onto grass stalks by everting the rectum . The odour of this secretion is very strong , smelling of boiling cheap soap or burning , and can be detected by humans several metres downwind . The spotted hyena has a proportionately large heart , constituting close to 1 % of its body weight , thus giving it great endurance in long chases . In contrast , a lion 's heart makes up only 0 @.@ 45 – 0 @.@ 57 percent of its body weight . The now extinct Eurasian populations were distinguished from the modern African populations by their shorter distal extremities and longer humerus and femur . 
 The skull of the spotted hyena differs from that of the striped hyena by its much greater size and narrower sagittal crest . For its size , the spotted hyena has one of the most powerfully built skulls among the Carnivora . The dentition is more dual purposed than that of other modern hyena species , which are mostly scavengers ; the upper and lower third premolars are conical bone @-@ crushers , with a third bone @-@ holding cone jutting from the lower fourth premolar . The spotted hyena also has its carnassials situated behind its bone @-@ crushing premolars , the position of which allows it to crush bone with its premolars without blunting the carnassials . Combined with large jaw muscles and a special vaulting to protect the skull against large forces , these characteristics give the spotted hyena a powerful bite which can exert a pressure of 80 kgf / cm2 ( 1140 lbf / in ² ) , which is 40 % more force than a leopard can generate . The jaws of the spotted hyena outmatch those of the brown bear in <unk> ability , and free ranging hyenas have been observed to crack open the long bones of giraffes measuring 7 cm in diameter . A 63 @.@ 1 kg ( 139 lb ) spotted hyena is estimated to have a bite force of 565 @.@ 7 newtons at the canine tip and 985 @.@ 5 newtons at the carnassial <unk> . 
 = = = Dimensions = = = 
 The spotted hyena is the largest extant member of the Hyaenidae . Adults measure 95 – 165 @.@ 8 cm ( 37 – 65 in ) in body length , and have a shoulder height of 70 – 91 @.@ 5 cm ( 28 – 36 in ) . Adult male spotted hyenas in the Serengeti weigh 40 @.@ 5 – 55 @.@ 0 kg ( 89 – 121 lb ) , while females weigh 44 @.@ 5 – 63 @.@ 9 kg ( 98 – 141 lb ) . Spotted hyenas in Zambia tend to be heavier , with males weighing on average 67 @.@ 6 kg ( 149 lb ) , and females 69 @.@ 2 kg ( 153 lb ) . Exceptionally large weights of 81 @.@ 7 kg ( 180 lb ) and 90 kg ( 198 lb ) are known . It has been estimated that adult members of the now extinct Eurasian populations weighed 102 kg ( 225 lb ) . 
 = = = Fur = = = 
 Fur colour varies greatly and changes with age . Unlike the fur of the striped and brown hyena , that of the spotted hyena consists of spots rather than stripes and is much shorter , lacking the well defined spinal mane of the former two species . The base colour generally is a pale greyish @-@ brown or yellowish @-@ grey on which an irregular pattern of roundish spots is superimposed on the back and hind quarters . The spots , which are of variable distinction , may be reddish , deep brown or almost blackish . The spots vary in size , even on single individuals , but are commonly 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) in diameter . A less distinct spot pattern is present on the legs and belly but not on the throat and chest . A set of five , pale and barely distinct bands replace the spots on the back and sides of the neck . A broad , medial band is present on the back of the neck , and is lengthened into a forward facing crest . The crest is mostly reddish @-@ brown in colour . The crown and upper part of the face is brownish , save for a white band above both eyes , though the front of the eyes , the area around the rhinarium , the lips and the back portion of the chin are all blackish . The limbs are spotted , though the feet vary in colour , from light brown to blackish . The fur is relatively sparse and consists of two hair types ; moderately fine underfur ( measuring 15 – 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 – 0 @.@ 79 in ) ) and long , stout bristle hairs ( 30 – 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) ) . European Paleolithic rock art depicting the species indicates that the Eurasian populations retained the spots of their modern @-@ day African counterparts . 
 = = = Female genitalia = = = 
 The genitalia of the female closely resembles that of the male ; the clitoris is shaped and positioned like a penis , and is capable of erection . The female also possesses no external vagina ( vaginal opening ) , as the labia are fused to form a pseudo @-@ scrotum . The pseudo @-@ penis is traversed to its tip by a central urogenital canal , through which the female urinates , copulates and gives birth . The pseudo @-@ penis can be distinguished from the males ' genitalia by its greater thickness and more rounded glans . In both males and females , the base of the glans is covered with penile spines . The formation of the pseudo @-@ penis appears largely androgen independent , as the pseudo @-@ penis appears in the female fetus before differentiation of the fetal ovary and adrenal gland . After parturition , the pseudo @-@ penis is stretched , and loses many of its original aspects ; it becomes a slack @-@ walled and reduced prepuce with an enlarged orifice with split lips . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Social behaviour = = = 
 Spotted hyenas are social animals which live in large communities ( referred to as " clans " ) which can consist of at most 80 individuals . Group @-@ size varies geographically ; in the Serengeti , where prey is migratory , clans are smaller than those in the Ngorongoro Crater , where prey is sedentary . Spotted hyena clans are more compact and unified than wolf packs , but are not as closely knit as those of African wild dogs . Females dominate males , with even the lowest ranking females being dominant over the highest ranking males . It is typical for females to remain with their natal clan , thus large clans usually contain several matrilines , whereas males typically disperse from their natal clan at the age of 2 ½ years . The clan is a fission @-@ fusion society , in which clan @-@ members do not often remain together , but may forage alone or in small groups . High @-@ ranking hyenas maintain their position through aggression directed against lower @-@ ranking clan @-@ members . Spotted hyena hierarchy is nepotistic ; the offspring of dominant females automatically outrank adult females subordinate to their mother . However , rank in spotted hyena cubs is greatly dependent on the presence of the mother ; low @-@ ranking adults may act aggressively toward higher @-@ ranking cubs when the mother is absent . Although individual spotted hyenas only care for their own young , and males take no part in raising their young , cubs are able to identify relatives as distantly related as great @-@ aunts . Also , males associate more closely with their own daughters rather than unrelated cubs , and the latter favour their fathers by acting less aggressively toward them . 
 Spotted hyena societies are more complex than those of other carnivorous mammals , and are remarkably similar to those of cercopithecine primates in respect to group size , structure , competition and cooperation . Like cercopithecine primates , spotted hyenas use multiple sensory modalities , recognise individual conspecifics , are conscious that some clan @-@ mates may be more reliable than others , recognise third @-@ party kin and rank relationships among clan @-@ mates , and adaptively use this knowledge during social decision making . Also , like cercopithecine primates , dominance ranks in hyena societies are not correlated with size or aggression , but with ally networks . In this latter trait , the spotted hyena further show parallels with primates by acquiring rank through coalition . However , rank reversals and overthrows in spotted hyena clans are very rare . The social network dynamics of spotted hyenas are determined by multiple factors . Environmental factors include rainfall and prey abundance ; individual factors include preference to bond with females and with kin ; and topological effects include the tendency to close triads in the network . Female hyenas are more flexible than males in their social bonding preferences . 
 The higher ranking adult spotted hyenas tend to have higher telomere length , thus are healthier , naturally live longer , and reproduce more . 
 Territory size is highly variable , ranging from less than 40 km2 in the Ngorongoro Crater to over 1 @,@ 000 km2 in the Kalahari . Home ranges are defended through vocal displays , scent marking and boundary patrols . Clans mark their territories by either pasting or pawing in special latrines located on clan range boundaries . Clan boundaries are usually respected ; hyenas chasing prey have been observed to stop dead in their tracks once their prey crosses into another clan 's range . Hyenas will however ignore clan boundaries in times of food shortage . Males are more likely to enter another clan 's territory than females are , as they are less attached to their natal group and will leave it when in search of a mate . Hyenas travelling in another clan 's home range typically exhibit bodily postures associated with fear , particularly when meeting other hyenas . An intruder can be accepted into another clan after a long period of time if it persists in wandering into the clan 's territory , dens or kills . 
 = = = Mating , reproduction , and development = = = 
 The spotted hyena is a non @-@ seasonal breeder , though a birth peak does occur during the wet season . Females are <unk> , with an estrus period lasting two weeks . Like many felid species , the spotted hyena is promiscuous , and no enduring pair bonds are formed . Members of both sexes may copulate with several mates over the course of several years . Males will show submissive behaviour when approaching females in heat , even if the male outweighs his partner . Females usually favour younger males born or joined into the clan after they were born . Older females show a similar preference , with the addition of preferring males with whom they have had long and friendly prior relationships . Passive males tend to have greater success in courting females than aggressive ones . Copulation in spotted hyenas is a relatively short affair , lasting 4 – 12 minutes , and typically only occurs at night with no other hyenas present . The mating process is complicated , as the male 's penis enters and exits the female 's reproductive tract through her pseudo @-@ penis rather than directly through the vagina , which is blocked by the false scrotum and testes . These unusual traits make mating more laborious for the male than in other mammals , while also ensuring that rape is physically impossible . Once the female retracts her clitoris , the male enters the female by sliding beneath her , an operation facilitated by the penis 's upward angle . Once this is accomplished , a typical mammalian mating posture is adopted . 
 The length of the gestation period tends to vary greatly , though 110 days is the average length of time . In the final stages of pregnancy , dominant females provide their developing offspring with higher androgen levels than lower @-@ ranking mothers do . The higher androgen levels – the result of high concentrations of ovarian androstenedione – are thought to be responsible for the extreme masculinization of female behavior and morphology . This has the effect of rendering the cubs of dominant females more aggressive and sexually active than those of lower ranking hyenas ; high ranking male cubs will attempt to mount females earlier than lower ranking males . The average litter consists of two cubs , with three occasionally being reported . Males take no part in the raising of young . Giving birth is difficult for female hyenas , as the females give birth through their narrow clitoris , and spotted hyena cubs are the largest carnivoran young relative to their mothers ' weight . During parturition , the clitoris ruptures in order to facilitate the passage of the young , and may take weeks to heal . 
 Cubs are born with soft , brownish black hair , and weigh 1 @.@ 5 kg on average . Unique among carnivorous mammals , spotted hyenas are also born with their eyes open and with 6 – 7 mm long canine teeth and 4 mm long incisors . Also , cubs will attack each other shortly after birth . This is particularly apparent in same sexed litters , and can result in the death of the weaker cub . This neonatal siblicide kills an estimated 25 % of all hyenas in their first month . Male cubs which survive grow faster and are likelier to achieve reproductive dominance , while female survivors eliminate rivals for dominance in their natal clan . Lactating females can carry 3 – 4 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 – 8 @.@ 8 lb ) of milk in their udders . Spotted hyena milk has the highest protein content of any terrestrial carnivore , and its fat content is second only to that of the polar bear and sea otter . Cubs will nurse from their mother for 12 – 16 months , though they can process solid food as early as three months . Mothers do not regurgitate food for their young . Females are very protective of their cubs , and will not tolerate other adults , particularly males , approaching them . Spotted hyenas exhibit adult behaviours very early in life ; cubs have been observed to ritually sniff each other and mark their living space before the age of one month . Within ten days of birth , they are able to move at considerable speed . Cubs begin to lose the black coat and develop the spotted , lighter coloured pelage of the adults at 2 – 3 months . They begin to exhibit hunting behaviours at the age of eight months , and will begin fully participating in group hunts after their first year . Spotted hyenas reach sexual maturity at the age of three years . The average lifespan in zoos is 12 years , with a maximum of 25 years . 
 = = = Denning behaviour = = = 
 The clan 's social life revolves around a communal den . While some clans may use particular den sites for years , others may use several different dens within a year or several den sites simultaneously . Spotted hyena dens can have more than a dozen entrances , and are mostly located on flat ground . The tunnels are usually oval in section , being wider than they are high , and narrow down from an entrance width of ½ – 1 metre ( 1 @.@ 6 – 7 @.@ 7 ft ) to as small as 25 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) . In the rocky areas of East Africa and Congo , spotted hyenas use caves as dens , while those in the Serengeti use kopjes as resting areas in daylight hours . Dens have large bare patches around their entrances , where hyenas move or lie down on . Because of their size , adult hyenas are incapable of using the full extent of their burrows , as most tunnels are dug by cubs or smaller animals . The structure of the den , consisting of small underground channels , is likely an effective anti @-@ predator device which protects cubs from predation during the absence of the mother . Spotted hyenas rarely dig their own dens , having been observed for the most part to use the abandoned burrows of warthogs , <unk> and jackals . <unk> are usually deposited 20 metres ( 66 feet ) away from the den , though they urinate wherever they happen to be . Dens are used mostly by several females at once , and it is not uncommon to see up to 20 cubs at a single site . The general form of a spotted hyena den is tunnel @-@ shaped , with a spacious end chamber used for sleeping or breeding . This chamber measures up to 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 feet ) in width , the height being rather less . Females generally give birth at the communal den or a private birth den . The latter is primarily used by low status females in order to maintain continual access to their cubs , as well as ensure that they become acquainted with their cubs before transferral to the communal den . 
 = = = Intelligence = = = 
 Compared to other hyenas , the spotted hyena shows a greater relative amount of frontal cortex which is involved in the mediation of social behavior . Studies strongly suggest convergent evolution in spotted hyena and primate intelligence . A study done by evolutionary anthropologists demonstrated that spotted hyenas outperform chimpanzees on cooperative problem @-@ solving tests ; captive pairs of spotted hyenas were challenged to tug two ropes in unison to earn a food reward , successfully cooperating and learning the maneuvers quickly without prior training . Experienced hyenas even helped inexperienced clan @-@ mates to solve the problem . In contrast , chimps and other primates often require extensive training , and cooperation between individuals is not always as easy for them . The intelligence of the spotted hyena was attested to by Dutch colonists in 19th @-@ century South Africa , who noted that hyenas were exceedingly cunning and suspicious , particularly after successfully escaping from traps . Spotted hyenas seem to plan on hunting specific species in advance ; hyenas have been observed to indulge in activities such as scent marking before setting off to hunt zebras , a behaviour which does not occur when they target other prey species . Also , spotted hyenas have been recorded to utilise deceptive behaviour , including giving alarm calls during feeding when no enemies are present , thus frightening off other hyenas and allowing them to temporarily eat in peace . Similarly , mothers will emit alarm calls in attempting to interrupt attacks on their cubs by other hyenas . 
 = = = Hunting behaviour = = = 
 Unlike other large African carnivores , spotted hyenas do not preferentially prey on any species , and only African buffalo and giraffe are significantly avoided . Spotted hyenas prefer prey with a body mass range of 56 – 182 kg ( 123 – 401 lb ) , with a mode of 102 kg ( 225 lb ) . When hunting medium to large sized prey , spotted hyenas tend to select certain categories of animal ; young animals are frequently targeted , as are old ones , though the latter category is not so significant when hunting zebras , due to their aggressive anti @-@ predator behaviours . The spotted hyena tracks live prey by sight , hearing and smell . Carrion is detected by smell and the sound of other predators feeding . During daylight hours , they watch vultures descending upon carcasses . Their auditory perception is powerful enough to detect sounds of predators killing prey or feeding on carcasses over distances of up to 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) . Unlike the grey wolf , the spotted hyena relies more on sight than smell when hunting , and does not follow its prey 's prints or travel in single file . Small prey is killed by being shaken in the mouth , while large prey is eaten alive . 
 Spotted hyenas usually hunt wildebeest either singly , or in groups of two or three . They catch adult wildebeest usually after 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) chases at speeds of up to 60 km / h ( 37 mi / h ) . Chases are usually initiated by one hyena and , with the exception of cows with calves , there is little active defence from the wildebeest herd . Wildebeest will sometimes attempt to escape hyenas by taking to water although , in such cases , the hyenas almost invariably catch them . Zebras require different hunting methods to those used for wildebeest , due to their habit of running in tight groups and aggressive defence from stallions . Typical zebra hunting groups consist of 10 – 25 hyenas , though there is one record of a hyena killing an adult zebra unaided . During a chase , zebras typically move in tight bunches , with the hyenas pursuing behind in a crescent formation . Chases are usually relatively slow , with an average speed of 15 – 30 km / h . A stallion will attempt to place himself between the hyenas and the herd , though once a zebra falls behind the protective formation it is immediately set upon , usually after a chase of 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) . Though hyenas may harass the stallion , they usually only concentrate on the herd and attempt to dodge the stallion 's assaults . Unlike stallions , mares typically only react aggressively to hyenas when their foals are threatened . Unlike wildebeest , zebras rarely take to water when escaping hyenas . When hunting Thomson 's gazelles , spotted hyenas usually operate alone , and prey primarily on young fawns . Chases against both adult and young gazelles can cover distances of 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) with speeds of 60 km / h ( 37 mi / h ) . Female gazelles do not defend their fawns , though they may attempt to distract hyenas by feigning weakness . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The spotted hyena is the most carnivorous member of the Hyaenidae . Unlike its brown and striped cousins , the spotted hyena is a predator , not a scavenger ; this has been shown since the 1960s . One of the earliest studies to demonstrate their hunting abilities was done by Hans Kruuk , an African wildlife ecologist , and he showed through a 7 @-@ year study of hyena populations in Africa that spotted hyenas hunt as much as lions , and with later studies this has been shown to be the average in all areas of Africa . However spotted hyenas remain being mislabeled as scavengers , often even by ecologists and wildlife documentary channels . 
 The spotted hyena is very efficient at eating its prey ; not only is it able to splinter and eat the largest ungulate bones , it is also able to digest them completely . Spotted hyenas can digest all organic components in bones , not just the marrow . Any inorganic material is excreted with the faeces , which consist almost entirely of a white powder with few hairs . They react to alighting vultures more readily than other African carnivores , and are more likely to stay in the vicinity of lion kills or human settlements . 
 Wildebeest are the most commonly taken medium @-@ sized ungulate prey item in both Ngorongoro and the Serengeti , with zebra and Thomson 's gazelles coming close behind . Cape buffalo are rarely attacked due to differences in habitat preference , though adult bulls have been recorded to be taken on occasion . In Kruger National Park , blue wildebeest , cape buffalo , Burchell 's zebra , greater kudu and impala are the spotted hyena 's most important prey , while giraffe , impala , wildebeest and zebra are its major food sources in the nearby Timbavati area . Springbok and kudu are the main prey in Namibia 's Etosha National Park , and springbok in the Namib . In the southern Kalahari , gemsbok , wildebeest and springbok are the principal prey . In Chobe , the spotted hyena 's primary prey consists of migratory zebra and resident impala . In Kenya 's Masai Mara , 80 % of the spotted hyena 's prey consists of topi and Thomson 's gazelle , save for during the four @-@ month period when zebra and wildebeest herds migrate to the area . <unk> , suni and buffalo are the dominant prey items in the Aberdare Mountains , while Grant 's gazelle , gerenuk , sheep , goats and cattle are likely preyed upon in northern Kenya . In west Africa , it is thought that the spotted hyena is primarily a scavenger , but will occasionally attack domestic stock and medium @-@ size antelopes in some areas . In Cameroon , it is common for spotted hyenas to feed on small antelopes like kob , but may also scavenge on reedbuck , kongoni , buffalo , giraffe , African elephant , topi and roan antelope carcasses . Records indicate that spotted hyenas in Malawi feed on medium to large @-@ sized ungulates such as waterbuck and impala . In Tanzania 's Selous Game Reserve , spotted hyenas primarily prey on wildebeest , followed by buffalo , zebra , impala , giraffe , reedbuck and kongoni . In Uganda , it is thought that the species primarily preys on birds and reptiles , while in Zambia it is primarily a scavenger . 
 Spotted hyenas have also been found to catch fish , tortoises , humans , black rhino , hippo calves , young African elephants , pangolins and pythons . There is at least one record of four hyenas killing an adult hippopotamus in Kruger National Park . The fossil record indicates that the now extinct European spotted hyenas primarily fed on Przewalski 's horses , Irish elk , reindeer , red deer , roe deer , fallow deer , wild boar , ibex , steppe wisent , aurochs , and woolly rhinoceros . Spotted hyenas are thought to be responsible for the dis @-@ articulation and destruction of some cave bear skeletons . Such large carcasses were an optimal food resource for hyenas , especially at the end of winter , when food was scarce . Spotted hyenas may consume leather articles such as boots and belts around campsites . Jane Goodall recorded spotted hyenas attacking or savagely playing with the exterior and interior fittings of cars , and the species is thought to be responsible for eating car tyres . 
 A single spotted hyena can eat at least 14 @.@ 5 kg of meat per meal . Although spotted hyenas act aggressively toward each other when feeding , they compete with each other mostly through speed of eating , rather than by fighting as lions do . When feeding on an intact carcass , spotted hyenas will first consume the meat around the loins and anal region , then open the abdominal cavity and pull out the soft organs . Once the stomach , its wall and contents are consumed , the hyenas will eat the lungs and abdominal and leg muscles . Once the muscles have been eaten , the carcass is disassembled and the hyenas carry off pieces to eat in peace . Spotted hyenas are adept at eating their prey in water : they have been observed to dive under floating carcasses to take bites , then resurface to swallow . A single hyena can take less than two minutes in eating a gazelle fawn , while a group of 35 hyenas can completely consume an adult zebra in 36 minutes . Spotted hyenas do not require much water , and typically only spend 30 seconds drinking . 
 = = = Enemies and competitors = = = 
 In areas where spotted hyenas and lions are sympatric , the two species occupy the same ecological niche , and are thus in direct competition with one another . In some cases , the extent of dietary overlap can be as high as 68 @.@ 8 % . Lions typically ignore spotted hyenas , unless they are on a kill or are being harassed by them . There exists a common misconception that hyenas steal kills from lions , but most often it is the other way around . Lions will readily steal the kills of spotted hyenas ; in the Ngorongoro Crater , it is common for lions to subsist largely on kills stolen from hyenas . Lions are quick to follow the calls of hyenas feeding , a fact demonstrated by field experiments , during which lions repeatedly approached whenever the tape @-@ recorded calls of hyenas feeding were played . When confronted on a kill by lions , spotted hyenas will either leave or wait patiently at a distance of 30 – 100 metres until the lions have finished eating . In some cases , spotted hyenas are bold enough to feed alongside lions , and may occasionally force lions off a kill . This mostly occurs during the nighttime , when hyenas are bolder . Spotted hyenas usually prevail against groups of lionesses unaccompanied by males if they outnumber them 4 : 1 . In some instances they were seen to have taken on and routed two pride males while outnumbering them 5 : 1 . The two species may act aggressively toward one another even when there is no food at stake . Lions may charge at hyenas and maul them for no apparent reason ; one male lion was filmed killing two hyenas on separate occasions without eating them , and lion predation can account for up to 71 % of hyena deaths in Etosha . Spotted hyenas have adapted to this pressure by frequently mobbing lions which enter their territories . Experiments on captive spotted hyenas revealed that specimens with no prior experience with lions act indifferently to the sight of them , but will react fearfully to the scent . 
 Although cheetahs and leopards preferentially prey on smaller animals than those hunted by spotted hyenas , hyenas will steal their kills when the opportunity presents itself . Cheetahs are usually easily intimidated by hyenas , and put up little resistance , while leopards , particularly males , may stand up to hyenas . There are records of some male leopards preying on hyenas . Hyenas are nonetheless dangerous opponents for leopards ; there is at least one record of a young adult male leopard dying from a septicemia infection caused by wounds inflicted by a spotted hyena . There is also a case of two spotted hyenas killing and eating a young leopard in Timbavati Game Reserve , after a young hyena was killed by the leopard . 
 Spotted hyenas will follow packs of African wild dogs in order to appropriate their kills . They will typically inspect areas where wild dogs have rested and eat any food remains they find . When approaching wild dogs at a kill , solitary hyenas will approach cautiously and attempt to take off with a piece of meat unnoticed , though they may be mobbed by the dogs in the attempt . When operating in groups , spotted hyenas are more successful in pirating dog kills , though the dog 's greater tendency to assist each other puts them at an advantage against spotted hyenas , who rarely work in unison . Cases of dogs scavenging from spotted hyenas are rare . Although wild dog packs can easily repel solitary hyenas , on the whole , the relationship between the two species is a one sided benefit for the hyenas , with wild dog densities being negatively correlated with high hyena populations . 
 Spotted hyenas dominate other hyena species wherever their ranges overlap . Brown hyenas encounter spotted hyenas in the Kalahari , where the brown species outnumbers the spotted . The two species typically encounter each other on carcasses , which the larger spotted species usually appropriate . Sometimes , brown hyenas will stand their ground and raise their manes while emitting growls . This usually has the effect of seemingly confusing spotted hyenas , which will act bewildered , though they will occasionally attack and maul their smaller cousins . Similar interactions have been recorded between spotted and striped hyenas in the Serengeti . 
 Black @-@ backed and side @-@ striped jackals , and African golden wolves will feed alongside hyenas , though they will be chased if they approach too closely . Spotted hyenas will sometimes follow jackals and wolves during the gazelle fawning season , as jackals and wolves are effective at tracking and catching young animals . Hyenas do not take to eating wolf flesh readily ; four hyenas were reported to take half an hour in eating a golden wolf . Overall , the two animals typically ignore each other when there is no food or young at stake . 
 Spotted hyenas usually keep a safe distance from Nile crocodiles . Though they readily take to water to catch and store prey , hyenas will avoid crocodile infested waters . 
 = = Communication = = 
 = = = Body language = = = 
 Spotted hyenas have a complex set of postures in communication . When afraid , the ears are folded flat , and are often combined with baring of the teeth and a flattening of the mane . When attacked by other hyenas or by wild dogs , the hyena lowers its hindquarters . Before and during an assertive attack , the head is held high with the ears cocked , mouth closed , mane erect and the hindquarters high . The tail usually hangs down when neutral , though it will change position according to the situation . When a high tendency to flee an attacker is apparent , the tail is curled below the belly . During an attack , or when excited , the tail is carried forward on the back . An erect tail does not always accompany a hostile encounter , as it has also been observed to occur when a harmless social interaction occurs . Although they do not wag their tails , spotted hyenas will flick their tails when approaching dominant animals or when there is a slight tendency to flee . When approaching a dominant animal , subordinate spotted hyenas will walk on the knees of their forelegs in submission . Greeting ceremonies among clan @-@ members consist of two individuals standing parallel to each other and facing opposite directions . Both individuals raise their hind legs and lick each other 's anogenital area . During these greeting ceremonies , the penis or pseudo @-@ penis often becomes erect , in both males and females . Erection is usually a sign of submission , rather than dominance , and is more common in males than in females . 
 = = = Vocalisations = = = 
 It is said that feasting <unk> engage in violent fights , and there is such a croaking , shrieking and laughing at such times that a superstitious person might really think all the inhabitants of the infernal regions had been let loose . 
 The spotted hyena has an extensive vocal range , with sounds ranging from whoops , fast whoops , grunts , groans , lows , giggles , yells , growls , soft grunt @-@ laughs , loud grunt @-@ laughs , whines and soft squeals . The loud " who @-@ oop " call , along with the maniacal laughter , are among the most recognisable sounds of Africa . Typically , very high @-@ pitched calls indicate fear or submission , while loud , lower @-@ pitched calls express aggression . The pitch of the laugh indicates the hyena 's age , while variations in the frequency of notes used when hyenas make noises convey information about the animal 's social rank . 
 Dr. Hans Kruuk compiled the following table on spotted hyena calls in 1972 ; 
 = = Diseases and parasites = = 
 Spotted hyenas may contract brucellosis , rinderpest and anaplasmosis . They are vulnerable to Trypanosoma <unk> , which is contracted by consuming already infected herbivores , rather than through direct infection from tsetse flies . It is known that adult spotted hyenas in the Serengeti have antibodies against rabies , canine herpes , canine <unk> , canine parvovirus , feline <unk> , leptospirosis , bovine <unk> , rinderpest and anaplasmosis . During the canine distemper outbreak of 1993 – 94 , molecular studies indicated that the viruses isolated from hyenas and lions were more closely related to each other than to the closest canine distemper virus in dogs . Evidence of canine distemper in spotted hyenas has also been recorded in the Masai Mara . Exposure to rabies does not cause clinical symptoms or affect individual survival or longevity . Analyses of several hyena saliva samples showed that the species is unlikely to be a rabies vector , thus indicating that the species catches the disease from other animals rather than from <unk> . The <unk> of <unk> <unk> have been recorded in spotted hyenas in northern Kenya . The species is known to carry at least three cestode species of the genus Taenia , none of which are harmful to humans . It also carries protozoan parasites of the genus <unk> in the Serengeti , Kenya and South Africa . Spotted hyenas may act as hosts in the life @-@ cycles of various parasites which start life in herbivores ; Taenia <unk> and T. <unk> occur in hyenas in their adult phase . Trichinella spiralis are found as cysts in hyena muscles . 
 = = Range , habitat and population = = 
 The spotted hyena 's distribution once ranged in Europe from the Iberian Peninsula to the Urals , where it remained for at least one million years . Remains have also been found in the Russian Far East , and it has been theorised that the presence of hyenas there may have delayed the colonisation of North America . The causes of the species ' extinction in Eurasia are still largely unknown . In Western Europe at least , the spotted hyena 's extinction coincided with a decline in grasslands 12 @,@ 500 years ago . Europe experienced a massive loss of lowland habitats favoured by spotted hyenas , and a corresponding increase in mixed woodlands . Spotted hyenas , under these circumstances , would have been outcompeted by wolves and humans which were as much at home in forests as in open lands , and in highlands as in lowlands . Spotted hyena populations began to shrink roughly 20 @,@ 000 years ago , completely disappearing from Western Europe between 14 – 11 @,@ 000 years ago , and earlier in some areas . 
 Historically , the spotted hyena was widespread throughout Sub @-@ Saharan Africa . It is present in all habitats save for the most extreme desert conditions , tropical rainforests and the top of alpine mountains . Its current distribution is patchy in many places , especially in West Africa . Populations are concentrated in protected areas and surrounding land . There is a continuous distribution over large areas of Ethiopia , Kenya , Tanzania , Botswana , Namibia and the Transvaal <unk> areas of South Africa . 
 The species dwells in semi @-@ deserts , savannah , open woodland , dense dry woodland , and mountainous forests up to 4 @,@ 000 m in altitude . It is scarce or absent in tropical rainforests and coastal areas . Its preferred habitats in west Africa include the Guinea and Sudan savannahs , and is absent in the belt of dense coastal forest . In the Namib Desert , it occurs in riverine growth along seasonal rivers , the sub @-@ <unk> pro @-@ Namib and the adjoining inland plateau . In ideal habitats , the spotted hyena outnumbers other large carnivores , including other hyena species . However , the striped and brown hyena occur at greater densities than the spotted species in desert and semi @-@ desert regions . Population densities based on systematic censuses vary substantially , from 0 @.@ 006 to 1 @.@ 7 individuals per km2 . 
 = = Relationships with humans = = 
 = = = Cultural depictions and perceptions = = = 
 = = = = In prehistory = = = = 
 The spotted hyena ( cave hyena subspecies ) is depicted in a few examples of Upper Palaeolithic rock art in France . A painting from the Chauvet Cave depicts a hyena outlined and represented in profile , with two legs , with its head and front part with well distinguishable spotted coloration pattern . Because of the specimen 's steeped profile , it is thought that the painting was originally meant to represent a cave bear , but was modified as a hyena . In Lascaux , a red and black rock painting of a hyena is present in the part of the cave known as the <unk> axial , and is depicted in profile , with four limbs , showing an animal with a steep back . The body and the long neck have spots , including the flanks . An image on a cave in Ariège shows an incompletely outlined and deeply engraved figure , representing a part of an elongated neck , smoothly passing into part of the animal ’ s forelimb on the proximal side . Its head is in profile , with a possibly re @-@ engraved muzzle . The ear is typical of the spotted hyena , as it is rounded . An image in the Le <unk> Cave in Dordogne shows a deeply engraved zoomorphic figure with a head in frontal view and an elongated neck with part of the forelimb in profile . It has large round eyes and short , rounded ears which are set far from each other . It has a broad , line @-@ like mouth that evokes a smile . Though originally thought to represent a composite or zoomorphic hybrid , it is probable it is a spotted hyena based on its broad muzzle and long neck . 
 The relative scarcity of hyena depictions in Paleolithic rock art has been theorised to be due to the animal 's lower rank in the animal worship hierarchy ; the spotted hyena 's appearance was likely unappealing to Ice Age hunters , and it was not sought after as prey . Also , it was not a serious rival like the cave lion or cave bear , and it lacked the impressiveness of the mammoth or woolly rhino . 
 = = = = In Africa = = = = 
 In Africa , the spotted hyena is usually portrayed as an abnormal and ambivalent animal , considered to be sly , brutish , necrophagous and dangerous . It further embodies physical power , <unk> , ugliness , stupidity , as well as sacredness . Spotted hyenas vary in their folkloric and mythological depictions , depending on the ethnic group from which the tales originate . It is often difficult to know whether or not spotted hyenas are the specific hyena species featured in such stories , particularly in West Africa , as both spotted and striped hyenas are often given the same names . In west African tales , spotted hyenas symbolise immorality , dirty habits , the reversal of normal activities , and other negative traits , and are sometimes depicted as bad Muslims who challenge the local animism that exists among the Beng in Côte d ’ Ivoire . In East Africa , <unk> mythology portrays the spotted hyena as a solar animal that first brought the sun to warm the cold earth . 
 In the culture of the Mbugwe in Tanzania , the spotted hyena is linked to witchcraft . According to Mbugwe folklore , every witch possesses one or more hyenas , which are referred to as " night cattle " and are branded with an invisible mark . It is said that all hyenas are owned by witches , and that truly wild hyenas are non @-@ existent . Lactating female spotted hyenas are said to be milked by their owners every night to make hyena butter , and are further used as mounts . When a witch acquires a hyena mount , he rides it to distant lands in order to bewitch victims and return safely home before morning . The Mbugwe consider killing hyenas to be dangerous , as the bond between the hyena and its owner is very strong , and will likely result in the witch seeking retribution . In order to obviate this danger , a killed hyena usually has its ears , tail and front legs cut off and buried , as these are the parts which are supposed to be marked by the witches ' brand . In the Mtwara Region of Tanzania , it is believed that a child born at night while a hyena is crying will likely grow up to be a thief . In the same area , hyena faeces are believed to enable a child to walk at an early age , thus it is not uncommon in that area to see children with hyena dung wrapped in their clothes . 
 The <unk> of Tanzania and the <unk> of Southern Senegal view hyenas as inedible and greedy hermaphrodites . A mythical African tribe called the <unk> is reputed to house members able to transform into hyenas . A similar myth occurs in <unk> , Guinea @-@ Bissau . These " <unk> " are executed when discovered , but do not revert to their human form when killed . In Khoikhoi mythology , the spotted hyena is often the butt of the jackal 's tricks . Gogo folklore links the spotted hyena to the origin of death ; in one tale , the hyena prevents humanity from achieving immortality , thus ensuring it can continue to eat corpses . A similar tale is present among the Meru . In their narrative , the supreme god <unk> sent a mole to inform humanity that they would be reborn after death . Fearing this would deprive it of corpses to eat , the hyena prevents the mole from ever delivering the message . Madi and Nuer mythology links the spotted hyena to the separation between heaven and earth ; at one time , humanity kept in contact with the Creator in the sky via a cowhide rope , which was subsequently severed by a hungry hyena . The spotted hyena is a sacred totem animal for some <unk> tribes , with the skin often being used as robes by chieftains and their bones as divining instruments . According to the doctrine of the Ethiopian Orthodox <unk> Church , hyenas are unclean animals which represent sexual deviancy and lawlessness . The Egyptian Saint abba ( Father ) <unk> of <unk> was associated with hyenas ; one fable tells of how he rescued a cub trapped in a pit , and had his feet licked in gratitude by its mother . In Ethiopian folklore , an albino hyena called the " King of Hyenas " is ascribed great power . Some ethnic groups in Ethiopia associate themselves with hyenas ; the <unk> traditionally believe that their ancestors migrated from Arabia to Ethiopia using hyenas as mounts . In <unk> tradition , the highest <unk> @-@ priests have the ability to control hyenas , and will send them to punish defaulting debtors . 
 Spotted hyenas feature prominently in the rituals of certain African cultures . In the <unk> cult of the Yoruba people of Benin and Southwest Nigeria , a spotted hyena mask is used at dawn to signal the end of the <unk> ceremony . As the spotted hyena usually finishes the meals of other carnivores , the animal is associated with the conclusion of all things . Among the <unk> cult of the Bambara people in Mali , the belief that spotted hyenas are hermaphrodites appears as an ideal in @-@ between in the ritual domain . The role of the spotted hyena mask in their rituals is often to turn the neophyte into a complete moral being by integrating his male principles with femininity . The Beng people believe that upon finding a freshly killed hyena with its anus inverted , one must plug it back in , for fear of being struck down with perpetual laughter . They also view spotted hyena faeces as contaminating , and will evacuate a village if a hyena relieves itself within village boundaries . In <unk> , Ethiopia , spotted hyenas are regularly fed by the city 's inhabitants , who believe the hyenas ' presence keeps devils at bay , and associate mystical properties such as fortune telling to them . 
 = = = = In Western culture = = = = 
 Traditional Western beliefs about the spotted hyena can be traced back to Aristotle 's Historia Animalium , which described the species as a necrophagous , cowardly and potentially dangerous animal . He further described how the hyena uses retching noises to attract dogs . In On the Generation of Animals , Aristotle criticised the erroneous belief that the spotted hyena is a hermaphrodite ( which likely originated from the confusion caused by the <unk> genitalia of the female ) , though his physical descriptions are more consistent with the striped hyena . Pliny the Elder supported Aristotle 's depiction , though he further elaborated that the hyena can imitate human voices . Additionally , he wrote how the hyena was held in high regard among the Magi , and that hyena body parts could cure different diseases , give protection and stimulate sexual desire in people . 
 The author of the Physiologus , who infused pagan tales with the spirit of Christian moral and mystical teaching , reactivated the myth that the hyena is a hermaphrodite . The author compared the species to " double @-@ minded men " who are neither " man nor woman , that is , neither faithful nor unfaithful " . He further states that " The sons of Israel are like this animal since in the beginning they served the living God but later , given over to pleasure and lust , they adored idols . " The bestiaries of the Middle Ages embraced the Physiologus 's descriptions , but further elaborated on the animal 's necrophagous habits . These bestiaries almost invariably depict hyenas feeding on human corpses . These illustrations were largely based on the descriptions given by Aristotle and Pliny , though the animals have no spots or other bodily markings , thus making it unlikely that the authors had ever seen hyenas first @-@ hand . 
 During the 15th and 16th centuries , travellers to Africa provided further descriptions of the species . Leo Africanus repeated some of the old concepts on the hyena , with the addition of describing its legs and feet as similar to those of men . In 1551 , Swiss naturalist Conrad Gesner rejected the belief of the hyena 's hermaphroditism , and theorised that it originated from confusion over an androgynous fish bearing the same name . He adds three other animals within the category of hyenas , including an Ethiopian quadruped named " <unk> " , which was thought to be a hybrid between a hyena and a lioness . Sir Thomas Browne also argued against the hyena 's supposed hermaphroditism , stating that all animals follow their own " Law of <unk> " , and that a hermaphrodite would transgress this . Sir Walter Raleigh , in an attempt to rationalise how Noah 's Ark could have fitted all extant species of animal , wrote that hyenas were hybrids between foxes and wolves which originated after the Great Flood . References to the spotted hyena 's vocalisations are referenced in numerous contemporary examples of English literature , including Shakespeare 's As You Like It and George Chapman 's Eastward Ho . John Milton , in his Samson Agonistes , compares the species to <unk> . 
 Natural historians of the 18th and 19th centuries rejected stories of hermaphroditism in hyenas , and recognised the differences between the spotted and striped hyena . However , they continued to focus on the species ' scavenging habits , their potential to rob graves and their perceived cowardice . During the 20th century , Western and African stereotypes of the spotted hyena converged ; in both Ernest Hemingway 's Green Hills of Africa and Disney 's The Lion King , the traits of gluttony and comical stupidity , common in African depictions of hyenas , are added to the Western perception of hyenas being cowardly and ugly . After the release of The Lion King , hyena biologists protested against the animal 's portrayal : one hyena researcher sued Disney studios for defamation of character , and another – who had organized the animators ' visit to the University of California 's Field Station for Behavioural Research , where they would observe and sketch captive hyenas – suggested boycotting the film . 
 = = = Livestock predation = = = 
 When targeting livestock , the spotted hyena primarily preys upon cattle , sheep and goats , though hyenas in the southern parts of Ethiopia 's Tigray region preferentially target donkeys . Reports of livestock damage are often not substantiated , and hyenas observed scavenging on a carcass may be mistaken for having killed the animal . The rate at which the species targets livestock may depend on a number of factors , including stock keeping practices , the availability of wild prey and human @-@ associated sources of organic material , such as rubbish . Surplus killing has been recorded in South Africa 's eastern Cape Province . Attacks on stock tend to be fewer in areas where livestock is <unk> by thorn fences and where domestic dogs are present . One study in northern Kenya revealed that 90 % of all cases of livestock predation by hyenas occurred in areas outside the protection of thorn fences . 
 = = = Attacks on humans and grave desecration = = = 
 Like most mammalian predators , the spotted hyena is typically shy in the presence of humans , and has the highest flight distance ( up to 300 metres ) among African carnivores . However , this distance is reduced during the night , when hyenas are known to follow people closely . Although spotted hyenas do prey on humans in modern times , such incidences are rare . However , attacks on humans by spotted hyenas are likely to be underreported . Man @-@ eating spotted hyenas tend to be very large specimens ; a pair of man @-@ eating hyenas , responsible for killing 27 people in Mlanje , Malawi , in 1962 , were weighed at 72 and 77 kg ( 159 and 170 lb ) after being shot . Victims of spotted hyenas tend to be women , children and sick or infirm men , and there are numerous cases of biologists in Africa being forced up trees in order to escape them . Attacks occur most commonly in September , when many people sleep outdoors , and bush fires make the hunting of wild game difficult for hyenas . 
 In 1903 , Hector Duff wrote of how spotted hyenas in the <unk> district of <unk> would wait at dawn outside people 's huts and attack them when they opened their doors . In 1908 – 09 in Uganda , spotted hyenas regularly killed sufferers of African sleeping sickness as they slept outside in camps . Spotted hyenas are widely feared in Malawi , where they have been known to occasionally attack people at night , particularly during the hot season when people sleep outside . Hyena attacks were widely reported in Malawi 's <unk> plain , to the north of <unk> Mountain . Five deaths were recorded in 1956 , five in 1957 and six in 1958 . This pattern continued until 1961 when eight people were killed . During the 1960s , Flying Doctors received over two dozen cases of hyena attacks on humans in Kenya . An anecdotal 2004 news report from the World Wide Fund for Nature indicates that 35 people were killed by spotted hyenas during a 12 @-@ month period in Mozambique along a 20 km stretch of road near the Tanzanian border . 
 Although attacks against living humans are rare , the spotted hyena readily feeds on human corpses . In the tradition of the Maasai and the Hadza , corpses are left in the open for spotted hyenas to eat . A corpse rejected by hyenas is seen as having something wrong with it , and liable to cause social disgrace , therefore it is not uncommon for bodies to be covered in fat and blood from a slaughtered ox . In Ethiopia , hyenas were reported to feed extensively on the corpses of victims of the 1960 attempted coup and the Red Terror . Hyenas habituated to scavenging on human corpses may develop bold behaviours towards living people ; hyena attacks on people in southern Sudan increased during the Second Sudanese Civil War , when human corpses were readily available to them . 
 = = = Urban hyenas = = = 
 In some parts of Africa , spotted hyenas have begun to frequent metropolitan areas , where groups or " clans " of the animals have become a menace . The Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa is estimated to have up to a thousand resident hyenas which survive by scavenging rubbish tips and preying on feral dogs and cats . There have also been attacks on humans who are homeless . In 2013 a baby boy was killed by hyenas after being snatched from his mother as she camped near the Hilton Hotel . Some 40 of the animals were reportedly seen alongside a fence bordering the British Embassy compound . In December 2013 a cull was organised and marksmen killed ten hyenas which had occupied wasteland near the city centre . 
 = = = Hunting and use in traditional medicine = = = 
 The spotted hyena has been hunted for its body parts for use in traditional medicine , for amusement , and for sport , though this is rare , as the species is generally not considered attractive . There is fossil evidence of humans in Middle Pleistocene Europe butchering and presumably consuming spotted hyenas . Such incidences are rare in modern Africa , where most tribes , even those known to eat unusual kinds of meat , generally despise hyena flesh . 
 Several authors during the Scramble for Africa attested that , despite its physical strength , the spotted hyena poses no danger to hunters when captured or cornered . It was often the case that native <unk> refused to even touch hyena carcasses , though this was not usually a problem , as hyena skins were not considered attractive . In Burkina Faso , the hyena 's tail is used for medicinal and magical purposes . In Cameroon , Côte d 'Ivoire and Senegal , the animals ' whole body is harvested for bushmeat and medicine . In Malawi and Tanzania , the genitalia , nose tips and tails are used for traditional medicine . In Mozambique , traditional healers use various spotted hyena body parts , particularly the paws . Oromo hunters typically go through ritual purification after killing hyenas . <unk> hunters traditionally treat the spotted hyenas they kill with the same respect due to deceased tribal elders , in order to avoid retribution from hyena spirits acting on behalf of the dead animal . During the early years of Dutch colonisation in southern Africa , hyenas ( referred to as " wolves " by the colonists ) were especially susceptible to trapping , as their <unk> for carrion and lack of caution about enclosed spaces worked against them . A feature of many frontier farms was the <unk> ( hyena trap ) , which was roughly constructed from stone or wood and baited with meat . The trap featured a trap @-@ door , which was designed to shut once the bait was disturbed . In the Cape Colony , spotted hyenas were often hunted by tracking them to their dens and shooting them as they escaped . Another hunting method was to trap them in their dens and dazzle them with torchlight , before stabbing them in the heart with a long knife . When chased by hunting dogs , spotted hyenas often attack back , unless the dogs are of exceptionally large , powerful breeds . James Stevenson @-@ Hamilton wrote that wounded spotted hyenas could be dangerous adversaries for hunting dogs , recording an incident in which a hyena managed to kill a dog with a single bite to the neck without breaking the skin . Further difficulties in killing spotted hyenas with dogs include the species ' thick skin , which prevents dogs from inflicting serious damage to the animal 's muscles . 
 = = = Spotted hyenas in captivity and as pets = = = 
 From a husbandry point of view , hyenas are easily kept , as they have few disease problems and it is not uncommon for captive hyenas to reach 15 – 20 years of age . Nevertheless , the spotted hyena was historically scantily represented in zoos , and was typically obtained in order to fill empty cages until a more prestigious species could be obtained . In subsequent years , animals considered to be more charismatic were allocated larger and better quality facilities , while hyenas were often relegated to inferior exhibits . In modern times , the species faces spatial competition from more popular animals , especially large canids . Also , many captive individuals have not been closely examined to confirm their sexes , thus resulting in non @-@ breeding pairs often turning out to be same @-@ sexed individuals . As a result , many captive hyena populations are facing extinction . 
 During the 19th century , the species was frequently displayed in travelling circuses as oddities . Alfred Brehm wrote that the spotted hyena is harder to tame than the striped hyena , and that performing specimens in circuses were not up to standard . Sir John Barrow described how spotted hyenas in <unk> were trained to hunt game , writing that they were " as faithful and diligent as any of the common domestic dogs " . In Tanzania , spotted hyena cubs may be taken from a communal den by <unk> , in order to increase their social status . An April 2004 BBC article described how a shepherd living in the small town of <unk> <unk> about 50 kilometres from <unk> , Ethiopia managed to use a male spotted hyena as a livestock guardian dog , suppressing its urge to leave and find a mate by feeding it special herbs . If not raised with adult members of their kind , captive spotted hyenas will exhibit scent marking behaviours much later in life than wild specimens . Although easily tamed , spotted hyenas are exceedingly difficult to house train , and can be very destructive ; a captive , otherwise perfectly tame , specimen in the Tower of London managed to tear an 8 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) long plank nailed to its recently repaired enclosure floor with no apparent effort . During the research leading to the composition of his monograph The Spotted Hyena : A Study of Predation and Social Behavior , Hans Kruuk kept a tame hyena he named Solomon . Kruuk found Solomon 's company so congenial , he would have kept him , but Solomon had an insatiable taste for " cheese in the bar of the tourist lounge and bacon off the Chief Park Warden 's breakfast table " , and no door could hold him back , so Solomon was obliged to live out his days in the Edinburgh Zoo . 
 = Royal Stoa ( Jerusalem ) = 
 The Royal Stoa ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> , also known as the Royal Colonnade , Royal Portico , Royal Cloisters , Royal Basilica or Stoa Basileia ) was an ancient basilica constructed by Herod the Great during his renovation of the Temple Mount at the end of the 1st century BCE . Probably Herod 's most magnificent secular construction , the three @-@ aisled structure was described by Josephus as deserving " to be mentioned better than any other under the sun . " A center of public and commercial activity , the Royal Stoa was the likely location of Jesus ' Cleansing of the Temple . The Royal Stoa overlooked Jerusalem 's residential and commercial quarters , and at its southwestern corner was the place from which a ram 's horn was blown to announce the start of holy days . 
 The Royal Stoa was destroyed by the Roman army during the sack of Jerusalem in 70 CE . Its site on the Temple Mount esplanade is currently inaccessible to archaeologists . However , artifacts from the Stoa have been recovered both from excavations at the foot of the platform and in secondary use in later constructions . This evidence has confirmed details given in the accounts of the historian Josephus , and has also allowed comparison of the Royal Stoa 's decoration with that used in other , contemporaneous monumental buildings . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Herod 's reconstruction of the Second Temple was one of his principal building projects . Construction began during the last quarter of the 1st century BCE . It was both a monumental architectural feat and an important political achievement . Herod invested a great deal of effort in the expansion of the Temple platform , especially at its southern side where the Temple Mount descends into the Tyropoeon and Kidron valleys . This expansion along the southern edge of the esplanade served as a base upon which the Royal Stoa was erected . The building was <unk> in form , but open on one side , which led it to being described as a portico , a stoa or cloisters in various sources . It was likely Herod 's most magnificent secular edifice . The historian Josephus praised the Royal Stoa as " more worthy of mention than any other [ structure ] under the sun " , and described the building in detail : 
 This cloister had pillars that stood in four rows one over against the other all along , for the fourth row was interwoven into the wall , which [ also was built of stone ] ; and the thickness of each pillar was such , that three men might , with their arms extended , fathom it round , and join their hands again , while its length was 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) , with a double spiral at its basis ; and the number of all the pillars [ in that court ] was a hundred and sixty @-@ two . Their <unk> were made with sculptures after the Corinthian order [ ... ] These four rows of pillars included three intervals for walking in the middle of this cloister ; two of which walks were made parallel to each other , and were contrived after the same manner ; the breadth of each of them was 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) , the length was 1 furlong ( 200 m ; 660 ft ) , and the height 50 feet ( 15 m ) ; but the breadth of the middle part of the cloister was one and a half of the other , and the height was double , for it was much higher than those on each side ; but the roofs were adorned with deep sculptures in wood , representing many sorts of figures . The middle was much higher than the rest , and the wall of the front was adorned with beams , resting upon pillars , that were interwoven into it , and that front was all of polished stone ... 
 A basilica with four rows of columns running lengthwise , each made of 40 columns , the Royal Stoa thus contained three parallel halls , with a central 13 @.@ 5 metres ( 44 ft ) wide hall and two flanking 9 metres ( 30 ft ) wide halls . Each column was approximately 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) in diameter and , according to Josephus , 9 metres ( 30 ft ) tall , though classical proportions would have had it at roughly 17 metres ( 56 ft ) . The central hall was twice as tall as the aisles , probably nearly 33 metres ( 108 ft ) tall . Israeli archaeologist Ehud Netzer estimates the Royal Stoa was roughly 33 metres ( 108 ft ) wide and 240 metres ( 790 ft ) long , though Josephus gives its length as a stade ( approximately 600 ft ) . 
 The central aisle had a higher ceiling than the side @-@ aisles . Light was provided by clerestory windows in the upper part of the central hall . It is also possible that an apse stood at the eastern wall of the Stoa . Josephus describes the columns as Corinthian in style and Corinthian capitals have indeed been found in excavations along the mount 's southern wall , as well as reused in later Roman , Byzantine and Islamic structures . The ceilings were ornamented with deeply cut wood @-@ carvings while other parts of the interior were apparently covered with stucco . The southernmost row of columns was incorporated into the southern wall of the Temple mount , while the northern side opened onto the plaza in the middle of which stood the Temple . From the outside , the southern wall was distinguished from the retaining wall of the platform by a series of pilasters running along the length of the superstructure . The main entry to the Stoa from the city was via a monumental staircase which led up from the Tyropoeon Valley and then across Robinson 's Arch , passing over the street and shops below . 
 The Royal Stoa was built upon the artificially raised portion of the Temple Mount platform . Arches underneath supported the columns of the Stoa , and provided service areas for the structures above . The Huldah Gates at the bottom of the southern wall led through corridors beneath the Stoa , rising to the Temple plaza , and served as the main entrance to the Temple compound for worshipers . Additional passages led to storage areas , and possibly provided secondary access to the Stoa and the Temple beyond . An arched overpass on the eastern side of the Temple Mount led to a gate which opened into the so @-@ called Solomon 's Stables just beneath the eastern end of the Stoa . It is widely assumed that at least part of this area was used as a storage area in conjunction with business conducted in the Stoa . 
 The expansion of the Temple Mount platform and the erection of the Royal Stoa required Herod 's engineers to overcome the difficult topographic conditions . It was thus necessary to build 35 metres ( 115 ft ) tall foundations above the slope of the Tyropoeon valley and equivalent 40 metres ( 130 ft ) tall foundations above the Kidron . The great effort invested in the construction of the Royal Stoa is a testimony of its immense importance to Herod and his status on the Temple Mount . Unlike his predecessors , the Hasmonean kings who had also served as High Priests , Herod was not of the priestly caste and was therefore unable to participate in priestly rituals . A client king appointed by the Romans , lacking legitimacy and unpopular with his subjects , Herod had initiated the Temple reconstruction to win favour among the Jews , but was forbidden from even entering the inner sanctum of his crowning achievement . It was thus the monumental Royal Stoa which gave Herod his rightful status on the Mount , a showcase of his majesty and grandeur . 
 = = = Purpose = = = 
 Every major Roman city had a basilica which was used for banking , law courts , and other commercial transactions . In Jerusalem , the Royal Stoa was the center of this activity . In the forty years prior to the Great Revolt it served as the seat of the Sanhedrin , Judaism 's supreme judicial court , which was moved from the Chamber of Stone to the " Shop " ( <unk> in the Talmud ) , referring to the commercial activities conducted in the Stoa . A fragment of a monumental inscription found near the eastern Huldah gates below the Stoa refers to the <unk> ( elders ) and may indicate the Sanhedrin 's meeting place near the gates or in the Stoa above . 
 This center of commercial activity within sight of the Temple was considered irreverent to many devout Jews . It was also a site of commerce related to the Temple ritual , where sacrificial doves could be bought and coins bearing prohibited images could be exchanged . It is therefore a likely location for Jesus ' confrontation with the dove sellers and money changers which is related in chapter 21 of the Gospel of Matthew . Special coinage was used for sacred contributions and other purposes . The Israel Antiquities Authority 's numismatist Donald T. Ariel has proposed that the Royal Stoa as the site for a mint , run by the priesthood . During the Great Revolt against Rome , this may have been the site where silver shekels were produced . The stoa 's convenient proximity to the Temple 's silver stores and the area 's use for other commercial purposes argue for identification of the stoa as the location of minting operations . Other " Revolt " coinage was in base metal , and these may have been struck elsewhere in Jerusalem . 
 Above the basilica , either on a parapet or tower , was a place from which a trumpet or ram 's horn would be blown to signal the start of the Sabbath and holy days . On the pavement below the southwest corner of the Royal Stoa complex , a piece of stone coping was excavated which bears a dedicatory inscription which reads " to the Place of <unk> " . This location overlooked most of Jerusalem 's neighborhoods , and the recovery of the inscription confirms that the southwest corner is the site where the trumpeting took place . 
 = = = Destruction = = = 
 And now the Romans , judging that it was in vain to spare what was round about the holy house , burnt all those places , as also the remains of the cloisters and the gates , two excepted ; the one on the east side , and the other on the south ; both which , however , they burnt afterward ... The soldiers also came to the rest of the cloisters that were in the outer [ court of the ] temple , whither the women and children , and a great mixed multitude of the people , fled , in number about six thousand . But before Caesar had determined any thing about these people , or given the commanders any orders relating to them , the soldiers were in such a rage , that they set that cloister on fire ; by which means it came to pass that some of these were destroyed by throwing themselves down headlong , and some were burnt in the cloisters themselves . Nor did any one of them escape with his life . 
 The Great Revolt and the subsequent sacking of Jerusalem in 70 CE brought about the destruction of Herod 's Temple , including the Royal Stoa , by members of the Roman X Fretensis , XII Fulminata , XV Apollinaris and V Macedonica legions under the command of emperor Vespasian 's son Titus . It is likely that the stoa was modified during the initial phases of the revolt when the Temple Mount was fortified , first by Simon Bar Giora and then by John of <unk> . The main entry at Robinson 's Arch was destroyed and towers built . Excavated remains of the Stoa provide evidence of its demise in a great fire . Chemical analysis of the remains has shown that some of the materials underwent transformations requiring a minimum temperature of 800 K ( 980 ° F ) — a result of sustained , high @-@ temperature burning consistent with Josephus 's account of destruction in a large conflagration . Some remains also contain the mineral apatite , a component of bone , though its origins , human or animal , are unknown . 
 = = Temple Mount excavations = = 
 The site of the Royal Stoa is currently occupied by the Al @-@ Aqsa Mosque , Islam 's third @-@ holiest shrine , and is therefore unavailable for archaeological exploration . Between 1968 and 1978 , however , professor Benjamin Mazar of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem carried out excavations at the foot of the southern wall . These uncovered over 400 architectural fragments in the destruction debris below the site of the Stoa , some of which were incorporated in secondary use in later Byzantine and Ummayad construction . Despite their fragmentary nature , these provide some of the largest and richest Second @-@ Temple era assemblages ever found , a testament to the splendor described by Josephus . 
 Finds include Corinthian capitals , Doric friezes and <unk> cornices . The motifs featured on the fragments found occasionally match patterns witnessed in other Second @-@ Temple era public buildings unearthed in the region , while others reflect unique architectural characteristics . These include floral motifs , rosettes , cable patterns similar to finds in the Hauran region of southern Syria and acanthus leaves featured in Roman architecture . 
 In 1999 , the Muslim Wakf authority controlling the Islamic structures atop the Temple Mount began illegally excavating large amounts of fill from the former site of the Royal Stoa in order to construct a new access to the newly established ( or , as the Waqf would put it , restored and expanded ) <unk> Mosque . Material dug from the site was dumped in the Kidron Valley , so that all the important information which could have been acquired through proper excavation of the material in its archaeological context has been lost forever . Trying to save what could still be saved , an operation to sift through the debris was started by <unk> Zweig and Gabriel <unk> . The ongoing Temple Mount <unk> Project has resulted in the recovery of many architectural fragments from the Second Temple buildings as well as remnants from all other historical periods since the First Temple Period . 
 = Dark Horse ( George Harrison album ) = 
 Dark Horse is the fifth studio album by English musician George Harrison , released on Apple Records in December 1974 as the follow @-@ up to Living in the Material World . Although keenly anticipated on release , Dark Horse is associated with the controversial North American tour that Harrison staged with co @-@ headliner Ravi Shankar in November and December that year . This was the first US tour by a member of the Beatles since 1966 , and the public 's nostalgia for the band , together with Harrison contracting laryngitis during rehearsals and choosing to feature Shankar so heavily in the program , resulted in scathing concert reviews from some influential music critics . 
 The Dark Horse album was written and recorded during an extended period of upheaval in Harrison 's personal life , when he dedicated much of his energies to business issues such as setting up Dark Horse Records . Author Simon Leng refers to the album as " a musical soap opera , cataloguing rock @-@ life antics , marital strife , lost friendships , and self @-@ doubt " , due to its focus on Harrison 's split with first wife Pattie Boyd and his temporary withdrawal from the spiritual certainties of his previous work . 
 The album features an array of guest musicians – including Tom Scott , Billy Preston , Willie Weeks , Andy Newmark , Jim Keltner , Ringo Starr , Gary Wright and Ron Wood – and produced two hit singles , " Dark Horse " and " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " . It showed Harrison moving towards the funk and soul musical genres . The album was not well received by the majority of critics at the time . Dark Horse was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America within days of release , but it became Harrison 's first solo album not to chart in Britain . The cover was designed by Tom Wilkes and consists of a school photograph from Harrison 's time at the Liverpool Institute superimposed onto a Himalayan landscape . The album was reissued in remastered form on 22 September 2014 , as part of the Apple Years 1968 – 75 Harrison box set . 
 = = Background and content = = 
 George Harrison 's third studio album since the Beatles ' break @-@ up came at the end of " a bad domestic year " , as he describes it in his 1980 autobiography . From the middle of 1973 , with his marriage to Pattie Boyd all but over , Harrison had immersed himself in his work , particularly on developing the acts he would eventually sign to his new record label , Dark Horse Records − Ravi Shankar and a hitherto unknown group called Splinter . Business issues related to the Beatles ' company Apple Corps were also coming to a head during 1973 – 74 , as Harrison , John Lennon and Ringo Starr launched legal proceedings against Allen Klein , their former manager and ally against Paul McCartney ( who had served the original lawsuit in December 1970 seeking to dissolve the band 's partnership ) . The simultaneous winding down of Apple Corps ' subsidiaries left a number of music and film projects in jeopardy , which resulted in Harrison having to make regular trips to Los Angeles in order to find a distributor for the Shankar Family & Friends album , most of which was recorded in California in April 1973 , and Splinter 's debut , The Place I Love . Another venture that was affected was the movie Little Malcolm , an Apple Films project for which Harrison was executive producer and working to seal a distribution deal in Europe . 
 Compounding the pressure during what Harrison himself would refer to as " the naughty period , 1973 – 74 " , he was drinking heavily and had returned to his drug @-@ taking ways of the 1960s . Some of Harrison 's biographers suggest that this abandoning of the " semi @-@ ascetic " path espoused on his 1973 album Living in the Material World was Harrison 's reaction to the media 's sniping , particularly in Britain , at the pious content of that album , as well as a reflection of Harrison 's despondency over the failure of his first marriage . These two issues informed the lyrics to a new Harrison song , " Dark Horse " . Friend and confidant Klaus Voormann has described this time as an obvious " step back " on Harrison 's spiritual journey , while Boyd would later write : " That whole period was insane . Friar Park was a madhouse . Our lives were fuelled by alcohol and cocaine , and so it was with everyone who came into our sphere ... George used cocaine excessively and I think it changed him . " Harrison addressed this behaviour in " Simply Shady " and laid out his feelings on the couple 's inevitable split in " So Sad " . 
 Wounded by Harrison 's frequent infidelities , Boyd left him for Eric Clapton in July 1974 , having previously had an affair with another of her husband 's guitar @-@ playing friends , Ron Wood of the Faces . Both of these dalliances would also receive attention on the Dark Horse album , which Harrison 's musical biographer , Simon Leng , has described as " a musical soap opera , cataloguing rock @-@ life antics , marital strife , lost friendships , and self @-@ doubt " . In his rewrite of the Everly Brothers ' " Bye Bye , Love " , Harrison declared : " There goes our lady , with a @-@ you @-@ know @-@ who / I hope she 's happy , old Clapper too " ; while his handwritten liner notes listed one of the guest musicians on " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " as " Ron Would If You Let Him " . For his part , Harrison had taken up with Starr 's wife , Maureen Starkey , and the UK tabloids soon reported him as being romantically involved with model Kathy Simmons ( ex @-@ girlfriend of Rod Stewart ) as well as Krissy Wood ( wife of the Faces guitar player ) . Shortly before Dark Horse 's release , Harrison would dodge reporters ' questions regarding his private life with a suggestion that people wait for the new album , saying , " It 's like Peyton Place . " 
 Adultery was the subject matter of Harrison 's non @-@ album B @-@ side from this period , " I Don 't Care Anymore " , and his musical association with Ron Wood led to the song " Far East Man " . This co @-@ composition was first recorded for Wood 's debut solo album , I 've Got My Own Album to Do , and when released on Dark Horse , it marked the first foray into soul music within Harrison 's solo work . 
 Of more profound consequence , and the inspiration behind the Hindu bhajan " It Is ' He ' ( Jai Sri Krishna ) " , was his trip to India , in January and February 1974 . In Benares , Harrison forged a plan with longtime mentor Shankar to sponsor an Indian classical @-@ music concert tour later in the year , featuring as many as eighteen musicians and an unprecedented ( in the West ) range of traditional Indian instruments . An album would be recorded just beforehand , at Harrison 's home studio at Friar Park , in Oxfordshire . Ravi Shankar 's Music Festival from India was the realisation of a long @-@ held dream for the ex @-@ Beatle , but , as with his dedication to Splinter 's The Place I Love , the project would impact on the quality of his own album . 
 By May , Harrison had agreed distribution terms with A & M Records and was therefore able to formally launch Dark Horse Records , although he would remain contracted to Apple as a solo artist , like the other Beatles , until January 1976 . After announcing the staging of the Music Festival from India in September 1974 , Harrison also confirmed that he planned to tour North America , together with Ravi Shankar 's ensemble , during November and December . Despite his stated aversion to performing live , Harrison would be the first of his former band @-@ mates to undertake a tour of Beatle @-@ hungry America ; the expectations that this created , together with his role as a hands @-@ on record company boss , meant that the pressure on Harrison was immense . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = November 1973 backing tracks = = = 
 Recording for Dark Horse began in November 1973 , midway through the extended sessions for The Place I Love , at Harrison 's 16 @-@ track home studio , FPSHOT ( short for Friar Park Studios , Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames ) . As on Living in the Material World , Harrison produced the sessions himself and Phil McDonald again served as recording engineer . Using the same line @-@ up of musicians as on Material World – Ringo Starr , Jim Keltner , Klaus Voormann , and Gary Wright and Nicky Hopkins alternating on keyboards – Harrison taped basic tracks for his hoped @-@ for Christmas / New Year " classic " , " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " , an early version of " Dark Horse " , and " So Sad " . Harrison had originally given the latter song to near @-@ neighbour Alvin Lee to record , in August , and had guested on the session along with Ron Wood . Harrison , Lee and Wood all subsequently added lead @-@ guitar parts to " Ding Dong " , in the first of Harrison 's attempts to build up the song 's layers of instrumentation , and so re @-@ create his former collaborator Phil Spector 's celebrated Wall of Sound . This overdubbing session took place sometime after Harrison 's return from India in early March 1974 , judging by the pre @-@ overdubbed version of " Ding Dong " that Harrison included on a tape for David Geffen shortly before leaving . " So Sad " would similarly receive a significant amount of overdubbing , creating a " harrowing encounter " , as Harrison stated his " great despair " at the end of his relationship with Boyd . 
 = = = April 1974 with the L.A. Express = = = 
 Simon Leng observes an uncharacteristic spontaneity in Harrison 's work ethic on Dark Horse , now that his home and recording base were one and the same . The discipline of working to a schedule " flew out the ornate windows " , Leng writes , along with his usual painstaking approach to recording . After catching Joni Mitchell 's concert at the New Victoria Theatre in London , in April 1974 , Harrison was much impressed with her jazz @-@ rock backing band , the L.A. Express , led by saxophonist and flautist Tom Scott , and invited them to Friar Park the following day . The ensemble – Harrison , Scott , Robben Ford ( guitar ) , Roger Kellaway ( keyboards ) , Max Bennett ( bass ) and John Guerin ( drums ) – recorded an instrumental track that later became the opening number on the Harrison – Shankar tour , " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " . " Simply Shady " , which Harrison had written while in Bombay , was taped later the same day . Having formed a rapport with Harrison after they had worked together on Shankar Family & Friends the year before , Scott stayed on at Friar Park and overdubbed various horn parts onto " Ding Dong " and the two new tracks . Scott later told journalist Michael Gross that he was the first Western musician that Harrison approached to join him on the upcoming tour . 
 Harrison dedicated the next few months to matters relating to Dark Horse Records , his former band 's business affairs , and Little Malcolm . Although the film was tied up in the Beatles ' " divorce " , as director Stuart Cooper later said of Little Malcolm , it was entered at the Berlin Film Festival in June and won the Silver Bear award . In August , Harrison holidayed in Spain with Kathy Simmons before returning to England at the end of the month for publicity work with Splinter . 
 = = = August – September 1974 at Friar Park = = = 
 Harrison resumed recording for his album in late August , working through to early September with four musicians who had signed on for the upcoming tour : old friend Billy Preston on keyboards ; Scott , who would serve as band leader on the tour ; and the rhythm section of Andy Newmark and Willie Weeks , both of whom Harrison had met while working on Ron Wood 's album in July . Harrison taped " Māya Love " , " Far East Man " and " It Is ' He ' ( Jai Sri Krishna ) " with this all @-@ American group of musicians . They also recorded a song called " His Name Is Legs " , which Harrison decided to hold back until 1975 's Extra Texture album . Around this time , Shankar arrived in London with his handpicked orchestra of Indian classical musicians – an " outstanding " group , writes author Peter Lavezzoli , that included Hariprasad Chaurasia , Shivkumar Sharma , Alla Rakha , T.V. <unk> , L. Subramaniam , Sultan Khan and Lakshmi Shankar . According to Shankar 's later recollection , rehearsals for the Music Festival from India concerts and the recording of their eponymous studio album took place simultaneously at Friar Park , over a period of three weeks , with Harrison as producer . 
 On 23 September , Harrison introduced Shankar on stage at London 's Royal Albert Hall for the Indian orchestra 's debut performance , before accompanying them on a short tour of Europe . At this point , Harrison still had the bulk of his album to complete , and rehearsals for his tour were due to begin in Los Angeles in early October . When Harrison arrived in LA , he was apparently already hoarse , but since it would have been " music business heresy " to tour without a new album to promote , he was obligated to complete the recording during rehearsals . 
 = = = October 1974 in Los Angeles = = = 
 Using A & M Studios in Hollywood as his base for the next three weeks , Harrison rehearsed on a sound stage with his tour band , which , along with Scott , Preston , Weeks and Newmark , included L.A. Express guitarist Robben Ford , Harrison 's Concert for Bangladesh horn players Jim Horn and Chuck Findley , and jazz percussionist Emil Richards . Harrison 's drummer of choice , Jim Keltner , also participated , but he would not join the tour until late in November . Aside from the Harrison material , selections by Preston and Scott were also rehearsed for their spots in the show , since , as at the Bangladesh benefits in 1971 , Harrison was keen for other artists to have their moment centre @-@ stage . In a fusion of musical cultures , Harrison , Scott and Richards rehearsed with Shankar 's orchestra for some of the Indian @-@ music pieces , and all the musicians , Western and Indian , came together for the Shankar Family & Friends tracks " I Am Missing You " and " Dispute & Violence " . 
 Outside of the daytime rehearsals , Harrison finished off the songs hastily recorded in England , and mixed the album . Horn and Findley overdubbed flutes , and Richards wobble board onto " It Is ' He ' " . Eight Arms to Hold You authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter suggest that much of the vocals on Dark Horse were taped at this point – a situation that resulted in Harrison overworking and then blowing his voice in the middle of the tour rehearsals . He was diagnosed with laryngitis . According to Scott , Harrison recorded " Bye Bye , Love " alone one night at A & M , adding a variety of instruments to his acoustic guitar track , including Moog synthesizer , drums , electric pianos and various electric @-@ guitar parts . " I Don 't Care Anymore " is another solo track that was most likely recorded in Los Angeles . 
 Although he had intended to finish the version of " Dark Horse " taped at Friar Park with Voormann and Starr , Harrison decided to re @-@ record the song with the tour band , live , on the sound stage at A & M Studios . The session took place on either 30 or 31 October , with Norm Kinney as engineer . Leng writes of this performance of " Dark Horse " : " Anyone wondering what Harrison 's voice sounded like on the Dark Horse Tour need look no further : this track was cut only days before the first date in Vancouver . Although the band sounded good , his voice was in shreds ... " Later , Harrison would admit he was " knackered " by the time he arrived in Los Angeles , having simply taken on too much over the previous year . He also claimed that his business manager , Denis O 'Brien , had to force him out of the studio , to ensure he caught the plane for the opening show of the tour , on 2 November . 
 = = Album artwork = = 
 The Tom Wilkes @-@ designed front cover of Dark Horse features a 1956 Liverpool Institute high @-@ school photograph presented inside a lotus flower , behind which a dream @-@ like Himalayan landscape extends to the horizon , where the " deathless Yogi of the Ancient of Days " , Shiv @-@ Goraksha Babaji , sits . While some observers have seen pointed similarities with the Beatles ' iconic Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band cover image , Harrison 's choice of artwork reflected his enduring admiration for Terry Gilliam 's animation on Monty Python 's Flying Circus . In the photo , a thirteen @-@ year @-@ old Harrison is pictured in the centre of the top row , his face tinted blue ; school teachers appear dressed in long @-@ sleeve tops bearing a superimposed record @-@ company logo or Om symbol . Wilkes and Harrison disagreed over the size of the Babaji image , which the designer apparently disliked and wanted to reduce in size . 
 Inside the gatefold cover , around the edges of a tinted photo of Harrison and comedian Peter Sellers walking beside a Friar Park lake , text asks the " Wanderer through this Garden 's ways " to " Be kindly " and refrain from casting " <unk> stones " if " perchance an <unk> thou hast found " , the reason being : " The Gardener toiled to make his Garden fair , Most for thy Pleasure . " A speech balloon over the photograph contains the words " Well , Leo ! What say we promenade through the park ? " This line was taken from the Mel Brooks movie The Producers , a favourite of Sellers and Harrison . 
 On the back cover , Harrison is pictured sitting on a garden bench , the back timbers of which are apparently carved with his name and that of the album . Similar to Harrison 's attire in the outdoor scenes of the " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " video clip , Leng refers to his appearance here as resembling the Jethro Tull character " Aqualung " . Terry Doran 's photo , given the same orange hue as the one inside the gatefold , was also used on some European picture sleeves for the " Ding Dong " and " Dark Horse " singles around this time . 
 Dark Horse 's inner sleeve notes were all the work of Harrison himself , written on a plane at the start of the tour . Along with the first Harrison @-@ album credit for FPSHOT , and the now @-@ familiar " All glories to Sri Krsna " dedication , his purple pen records various in @-@ jokes while listing the many contributing musicians . As well as the confusing inclusion of Boyd and Clapton 's names ( leading to the assumption that they had actually contributed to the track ) , the song title " Bye Bye , Love " is juxtaposed with the words " Hello Los Angeles " , while " <unk> " would appear to be a reference to Harrison 's new lover and future wife , Dark Horse Records secretary Olivia Arias . The latter is also included among the title track 's musician credits – her contribution being " Trinidad <unk> Out " . Under " Ding Dong " , aside from the appearance of " Ron Would If You Let Him " on guitar , Friar Park 's original owner , Sir Frank Crisp , is credited for providing " Spirit " . Arias 's face , in a photo taken by tour photographer Henry Grossman , appeared on the record 's side @-@ two face label , while a corresponding picture of Harrison appeared on side one . 
 = = Release = = 
 Rather than introducing Harrison 's audience to his new , jazz @-@ funk sound , Dark Horse was released two @-@ thirds of the way through a tour that had alienated some of rock music 's most influential critics , notably Ben Fong @-@ Torres of Rolling Stone magazine . Fong @-@ Torres ' radio piece for the Rolling Stone News Service was broadcast across America early in the tour and cemented what has become the " given " view , according to Leng , that the Harrison – Shankar tour was a failure . The majority of critics – or those " without axes to grind " , author Robert Rodriguez writes – reviewed the concerts favourably . Band members Scott , Keltner , Weeks , Horn , Newmark and Richards have each identified " the Dark Horse Tour " as a career highpoint , while some commentators note the groundbreaking nature of the music as a precursor to the world music genre . The negative press Harrison received stemmed from his decision to feature Indian music so heavily in the concert program , and the fact that he was forced to sing with a voice " reduced to a raspy croak " , but most crucially , from his refusal to pander to the Beatles legacy . The 1960s classics " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , " Something " and " In My Life " were all performed throughout the tour , but with lyrics altered to fit Harrison 's personal spiritual transformation – or his failed marriage in the case of the guitarist 's most famous Beatles @-@ era tune , " Something " . 
 Following the release of " Dark Horse " as a lead single , in mid November , the album was issued on 9 December 1974 in the United States ( as Apple <unk> <unk> ) . In Britain , the single was " Ding Dong " , and Dark Horse was delayed until 20 December ( with Apple catalogue number PAS 10008 ) . The UK release coincided with the final show of the tour , at Madison Square Garden in New York , and came the day after Harrison and Paul McCartney had signed legal papers dissolving the Beatles partnership , at the Plaza Hotel . Dark Horse sold well in America initially , earning a gold disc for advance orders and climbing to number 4 on the Billboard 200 , but its chart stay was a relatively brief seventeen weeks . In Canada , it peaked at number 42 at the start of February 1975 before quickly falling out of the RPM Top 100 . 
 Dark Horse failed to place on the UK 's Top 50 Albums Chart . This was not only a poor result for a former Beatle – although Starr 's Beaucoups of Blues had similarly not charted in 1970 – but a dramatic turnaround in Harrison 's commercial fortunes , after his three previous solo releases ( including The Concert for Bangladesh live album ) had all made number 1 or 2 in Britain . 
 = = = Reissue = = = 
 Dark Horse was released on CD in January 1992 . The album was remastered again and reissued in September 2014 , as part of the Harrison box set The Apple Years 1968 – 75 . As bonus tracks , the reissue includes a previously unreleased demo of " Dark Horse " and the long @-@ unavailable " I Don 't Care Anymore " . Author Kevin Howlett supplied a liner note essay in the CD booklet , while the DVD exclusive to the box set contains Harrison 's promotional video for " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " and Capitol 's 1974 television ad for the album . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 Dark Horse received some of the most negative reviews of any release by a Beatle up to that point and the worst of Harrison 's career . Released amid the furore surrounding his refusal to play " Beatle George " during a tour that was a " whirlwind of pent @-@ up Beatlemania " , in Leng 's words , it was as if Harrison had already committed " acts of heresy " . Rather than having his new work judged on its own merits , it was " open season " on Harrison ; another biographer , Elliot Huntley , has written of the " tsunami of bile " unleashed on the ex @-@ Beatle in late 1974 . 
 Under the heading " Transcendental <unk> " , Jim Miller of Rolling Stone called Dark Horse a " disastrous album " to match the " disastrous tour " , and a " shoddy piece of work " . According to Miller , the musicians were " merely competent studio pros " and Harrison 's guitar playing was " rudimentary " . In contrast with the praise that the same publication had lavished on Harrison for Living in the Material World the year before , Rolling Stone 's reviewer described Dark Horse as a " chronicle of a performer out of his element , working to a deadline , enfeebling his overtaxed talents by a rush to deliver new ' LP product ' " , and stated : " In plain point of fact , George Harrison has never been a great artist ... the question becomes whether he will ever again become a competent entertainer . " The NME 's Bob Woffinden derided Harrison 's songwriting , production and vocals , particularly on two tracks dealing with his troubled personal life , " Simply Shady " and " So Sad " . Woffinden concluded : " I find Dark Horse the product of a complete egoist – no one , you see , is in my tree – someone whose universe is confined to himself . And his guru ... I 'll repeat that this album is totally colourless . Just stuff and nonsense . " Writing in The Village Voice in January 1975 , Robert Christgau bemoaned the album 's " <unk> " and particularly derided the lyrics to " Māya Love " , " in which ' window @-@ pane ' becomes ' window brain . ' Can this mean that pain ( pane , get it ? ) is the same as brain ? For all this hoarse dork knows ... " 
 There were a number of positive reviews for Dark Horse , with Billboard magazine deeming it a " Spotlight " release . The reviewer described the album as " an excellent one " and compared it favourably with Harrison 's acclaimed 1970 triple set , All Things Must Pass . Brian Harrigan of Melody Maker credited Harrison with establishing " a new category in music – Country and Eastern " and lauded his " nifty " slide @-@ guitar playing and " tremendous " singing . Although he found some of the tracks overlong , Harrigan declared : " Yep , the Sacred Cowboy has produced a good one . " Combined with his feature on the tour in Circus Raves , in which he questioned the accuracy of the negative reports about the Harrison – Shankar concerts , Michael Gross described Dark Horse as matching All Things Must Pass in quality , and " surpassing " it at times , thanks to the new album 's " clarity of production and lovely songs " . Gross highlighted " So Sad " as a " luxurious track " and described " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " , " Dark Horse " and " Far East Man " as " all , simply , good songs " . 
 Taken as a metaphor for the album itself , the plea for tolerance inside the LP sleeve – " Be kindly Wanderer through this Garden 's ways … " – was ridiculed at the time by some critics . In the 1978 edition of their book The Beatles : An Illustrated Record , Roy Carr and Tony Tyler termed these lines of verse " a self @-@ pitying slab of sub @-@ <unk> " , while Woffinden described the album cover as " ghastly " . Carr and Tyler conceded that the playing on Dark Horse was " impeccable " , but opined that Harrison 's lyrics were " sanctimonious , repetitive , vituperative and self @-@ satisfied " ; as for the album as a whole : " One wishes it had not come from an ex @-@ Beatle . " 
 Writing in his 1977 book The Beatles Forever , Nicholas Schaffner found some justification in reviewers ' sniping at the " shoddy performance " and " preachy , humorless message " on Dark Horse . Schaffner singled out " Bye Bye , Love " and " Ding Dong " for derision , but praised the title track and Harrison 's guitar work on " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " and " So Sad " , with the latter making for " delectable listening " . Like a number of Beatles authors and biographers , Schaffner found that neither the album nor the tour deserved the level of abuse it received in some sections of the press . " It was George 's turn anyway " , Schaffner reflected , " to be inflicted with the poison @-@ pen treatment that the critics had earlier accorded Paul and John . Knocking idols off their pedestals makes for excellent copy . " 
 = = = Retrospective reviews and legacy = = = 
 Having previously championed Harrison 's work since 1970 , Rolling Stone would not change its unfavourable verdict on Dark Horse over the ensuing decades , and Harrison never completely forgave the magazine for the treatment he received during this period . In 2002 , writing in the Rolling Stone Press book Harrison shortly after his death , Greg Kot approved of Dark Horse 's " jazzier backdrops " compared with Material World , but opined that Harrison 's voice turned much of the album into an " unintentionally comic exercise " . In the same publication , Mikal Gilmore identified Dark Horse as " one of Harrison 's most fascinating works – a record about change and loss " . Alan Clayson similarly writes of the interest factor of " a non @-@ Beatle , as well as an ex @-@ Beatle in uncertain transition " , and while classing the album as " an artistic faux pas " , describes " It Is ' He ' ( Jai Sri Krishna ) " as " wonderful " and " startling " . Richard Ginell of AllMusic highlights " Dark Horse " and the " exquisite " Harrison – Wood composition " Far East Man " . 
 Leng , the first author to write purely on Harrison 's career rather than on his standing as a musical celebrity , considers Dark Horse to be a " remarkably revealing album " and writes : " Any voyeur who wanted to know the intimate details of his personal life didn 't need to buy National Enquirer , they just needed to hear this disc . " While bemoaning the state of Harrison 's voice and the " sonic patchwork " nature of the set , Leng notes that both " So Sad " and " Far East Man " were received positively when first released on albums by Alvin Lee & <unk> LeFevre and Ron Wood , respectively . The difference in winter 1974 – 75 , Leng continues , was that , by championing Ravi Shankar 's Indian music segments during the tour and neglecting his duties as an ex @-@ Beatle in America , Harrison had " committed the cardinal counterculture sin – he had rejected ' rock ' n ' roll ' " . 
 Reviewing the 2014 Apple Years reissue , for Uncut magazine , Richard Williams dismisses Dark Horse as an album that " only a devoted Apple <unk> could love " , while Joe Marchese of The Second Disc describes it as " Harrison 's <unk> work to date " , containing " many stellar moments " . Blogcritics ' Chaz Lipp comments on the album 's " world @-@ weariness " yet similarly finds " a lot of rewarding listening here " , with " Bye Bye , Love " , " Far East Man " , " It Is ' He ' " and " Dark Horse " among the highlights . Scott Elingburg of PopMatters opines : " What makes Dark Horse so unique is that , aside from All Things Must Pass , Dark Horse sounds and feels like Harrison is playing music like he has nothing to lose and all the world to gain . " 
 In his review of the Apple Years box set , for Classic Rock magazine , Paul Trynka writes that " The surprise of this set , though , is the albums whose quietness and introspection were out of tune with the mid @-@ 70s . Dark Horse … [ is ] packed with beautiful , small @-@ scale moments . " While identifying " Simply Shady " and the title track among the standouts , Trynka adds : " Only ' Ding Dong , Ding Dong ' embarrasses … " AllMusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine describes Dark Horse as " a mess but … a fascinating one " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by George Harrison , except where noted . 
 Side one 
 " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " – 4 : 43 
 " Simply Shady " – 4 : 38 
 " So Sad " – 5 : 00 
 " Bye Bye , Love " ( Felice Bryant , <unk> Bryant , Harrison ) – 4 : 08 
 " Māya Love " – 4 : 24 
 Side two 
 " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " – 3 : 40 
 " Dark Horse " – 3 : 54 
 " Far East Man " ( Harrison , Ron Wood ) – 5 : 52 
 " It Is ' He ' ( Jai Sri Krishna ) " – 4 : 50 
 2014 reissue bonus tracks 
 " I Don 't Care Anymore " – 2 : 44 
 " Dark Horse ( Early Take ) " – 4 : 25 
 = = Personnel = = 
 George Harrison – vocals ( 2 – 9 ) , electric and acoustic guitars ( 1 – 9 ) , Moog synthesizer ( 4 , 9 ) , clavinet ( 3 , 4 ) , organ ( 6 ) , bass ( 4 ) , percussion ( 4 , 5 , 6 , 9 ) , gubgubbi ( 9 ) , drums ( 4 ) , backing vocals ( 2 – 6 , 8 , 9 ) 
 Tom Scott – saxophones ( 1 , 2 , 5 , 6 , 8 ) , flute ( 7 , 9 ) , horn arrangements ( 1 , 2 , 5 , 6 , 8 ) , organ ( 1 ) 
 Billy Preston – electric piano ( 5 , 7 , 8 ) , organ ( 9 ) , piano ( 9 ) 
 Willie Weeks – bass ( 3 , 5 , 7 – 9 ) 
 Andy Newmark – drums ( 5 , 7 – 9 ) , percussion ( 8 ) 
 Jim Keltner – drums ( 3 , 6 , 7 ) 
 Robben Ford – electric guitar ( 1 , 2 ) , acoustic guitar ( 7 ) 
 Jim Horn – flute ( 7 , 9 ) 
 Chuck Findley – flute ( 7 , 9 ) 
 Emil Richards – percussion ( 7 , 9 ) 
 Ringo Starr – drums ( 3 , 6 ) 
 Klaus Voormann – bass ( 6 ) 
 Gary Wright – piano ( 6 ) 
 Nicky Hopkins – piano ( 3 ) 
 Roger Kellaway – piano ( 1 , 2 ) , organ ( 2 ) 
 Max Bennett – bass ( 1 , 2 ) 
 John Guerin – drums ( 1 , 2 ) 
 Ron Wood – electric guitar ( 6 ) 
 Alvin Lee – electric guitar ( 6 ) 
 Mick Jones – acoustic guitar ( 6 ) 
 Derrek Van Eaton – backing vocals ( 7 ) 
 Lon Van Eaton – backing vocals ( 7 ) 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Shipments and sales = = 
 = Galaxy Game = 
 Galaxy Game is a space combat arcade game developed in 1971 as one of the last games created in the early history of video games . Created by Bill Pitts and Hugh Tuck , it was one of the first coin @-@ operated video games ; its initial prototype display in September 1971 at the Tresidder student union building at Stanford University was only a month after a similar display of a prototype of Computer Space , making it the second known video game to charge money to play . Galaxy Game is an expanded version of the 1962 Spacewar ! , potentially the first video game to spread to multiple computer installations . It features two spaceships , " the needle " and " the wedge " , engaged in a dogfight while maneuvering in the gravity well of a star . Both ships are controlled by human players . 
 The initial prototype , which cost Pitts and Tuck US $ 20 @,@ 000 to build , was composed of a Digital Equipment Corporation PDP @-@ 11 minicomputer attached by a cable to a wooden console with a monitor , controls , and seats . It charged players 10 cents per game or 25 cents for three , and drew crowds " ten @-@ deep " . The pair built a second prototype , replacing the first in the student union building in June 1972 . It featured the capability to play multiple games simultaneously on four monitors , though due to space restrictions only two consoles with monitors were actually installed . These consoles had a blue fiberglass casing , and the PDP @-@ 11 was housed inside one of the consoles . By the time of its installation , the pair had spent US $ 65 @,@ 000 on the project , but were unable to make the game commercially viable . The second prototype remained in the student union building until 1979 , when the display processor became faulty . It was restored and placed in the Stanford computer science department in 1997 , then moved to the Computer History Museum in 2000 , where it remains . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the beginning of the 1970s , video games existed almost entirely as novelties passed around by programmers and technicians with access to computers , primarily at research institutions and large companies . One of these games was Spacewar ! , created in 1962 for the Digital Equipment Corporation ( DEC ) PDP @-@ 1 minicomputer by Steve Russell and others in the programming community at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . The two @-@ player game has the players engage in a dogfight between two spaceships , set against the backdrop of a starfield , with a central star exerting gravitational force upon the ships . The game was copied to several of the early minicomputer installations in American academic institutions after its initial release , making it potentially the first video game to be available outside a single research institute . Spacewar was extremely popular in the small programming community in the 1960s and was widely recreated on other minicomputer and mainframe computers of the time , later migrating to early microcomputer systems . Early computer scientist Alan Kay noted in 1972 that " the game of Spacewar blossoms spontaneously wherever there is a graphics display connected to a computer , " and contributor Martin Graetz recalled in 1981 that as the game initially spread it could be found on " just about any research computer that had a programmable CRT " . Although the game was widespread for the era , it was still very limited in its direct reach : the PDP @-@ 1 was priced at US $ 120 @,@ 000 and only 55 were ever sold , most without a monitor , which prohibited the original Spacewar or any game of the time from reaching beyond a narrow , academic audience . The original developers of Spacewar considered ways to monetize the game , but saw no options given the high price of the computer it ran on . 
 In 1966 , Stanford University student Bill Pitts , who had a hobby of exploring the steam tunnels and buildings of the campus , broke into a building he found out to be the location of the Stanford Artificial Intelligence Project , which held a DEC PDP @-@ 6 time @-@ sharing computer system with 20 Teletype consoles connected to it . Fascinated by the computer and having taken several introductory computer classes , Pitts convinced the head of the project , Lester Earnest , to let him use the computer after hours . Soon , Pitts had ceased going to classes , instead spending his nights in the computer lab interacting with the graduate and postgraduate students and playing Spacewar on the PDP @-@ 6 . Pitts often played against Hugh Tuck , a student at California Polytechnic State University who was a friend from high school . During one Spacewar session that took place , depending on the source , between 1966 and 1969 , Tuck remarked that a coin @-@ operated version of the game would be very successful . Such a device was still unfeasible due to the cost of computers , and the pair did not pursue the project . In 1971 , however , Pitts , who by then had graduated and was working at Lockheed as a PDP @-@ 10 programmer , learned of the 1970 DEC PDP @-@ 11 , which was sold for around US $ 14 @,@ 000 . While this was still too high for a commercially viable product , as most electronic games in arcades cost around US $ 1 @,@ 000 at the time , Tuck and Pitts felt it was low enough to build a prototype to determine interest and optimal per @-@ game pricing . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The gameplay of Galaxy Game , like Spacewar , involves two monochrome spaceships called " the needle " and " the wedge " , each controlled by a player , attempting to shoot one another while maneuvering on a two @-@ dimensional plane in the gravity well of a star , set against the backdrop of a starfield . The ships fire torpedoes , which are not affected by the gravitational pull of the star . The ships have a limited number of torpedoes and a limited supply of fuel , which is used when the player fires his thrusters . Torpedoes are fired one at a time , and there is a cooldown period between launches . The ships follow Newtonian physics , remaining in motion even when the player is not accelerating , though the ships can rotate at a constant rate without inertia . 
 Each player controls one of the ships and must attempt to shoot down the other ship while avoiding a collision with the star . Flying near the star can provide a gravity assist to the player at the risk of misjudging the trajectory and falling into the star . If a ship moves past one edge of the screen , it reappears on the other side in a wraparound effect . A hyperspace feature , or " panic button " , can be used as a last @-@ ditch means to evade enemy torpedoes by moving the player 's ship to another location on the screen after disappearing for a few seconds , but the reentry from hyperspace occurs at a random location , and there is an increasing probability of the ship exploding with each use . Player controls include clockwise and counterclockwise rotation , forward thrust , firing torpedoes , and hyperspace . Galaxy Game features , as improvements over the original , optional modifications to the game to have faster ships , faster torpedoes , to remove the star and its gravitational field or reverse the gravity to push away from the star , and to remove the wraparound effect . The movement of the ships was controlled with a joystick , while the torpedoes , hyperspace , and game options are controlled via a panel of buttons . 
 = = Development = = 
 After deciding to begin work on a coin @-@ operated version of Spacewar , the pair , with assistance from Tuck 's family , bought a PDP @-@ 11 and started working on a prototype . They spent a total of US $ 20 @,@ 000 to build a single arcade machine for two players , like the original Spacewar , deciding to price the game at ten cents per play or 25 cents for three games , with the winner of a match given a free game . They used a PDP @-@ 11 / 20 version of the PDP @-@ 11 ( US $ 14 @,@ 000 ) , a Hewlett @-@ Packard <unk> Electrostatic Display ( US $ 3 @,@ 000 ) , and spent the remainder on the coin acceptors , joysticks , wiring , and casing . Pitts build the computer hardware and handled the programming , while Tuck , a mechanical engineer , designed the enclosing cabinet . The display adapter for the monitor was built by Ted <unk> , the coin acceptors were sourced from jukebox manufacturer Rowe International , and the joysticks found at a military surplus store as remainders from B @-@ 52 bomber controls . The code for the game was based on a version of Spacewar running on a PDP @-@ 10 in the Stanford artificial intelligence lab , but modified with additional features . 
 Pitts and Tuck renamed their product from Spacewar to Galaxy Game due to anti @-@ war sentiment and founded a company called Computer Recreations in June 1971 to operate the game as it neared completion . The development of the prototype machine took around three and a half months . By August , they were finishing the final touches and had gotten permission to place the machine at the Tresidder student union building at Stanford as a test site . It was then that they received a call from Nolan Bushnell , who had heard of their project and wanted to show them his similar project he was working on . 
 Bushnell had also played Spacewar during the 1960s and wanted to make an arcade game version of it , but had gone in a different technological direction . He and Ted Dabney had initially started with a US $ 4 @,@ 000 Data General Nova computer which they thought would be powerful enough to run multiple simultaneous games of Spacewar ; when it turned out to not be , they had started investigating replacing the computer hardware with custom @-@ built parts . They had soon discovered that while a general @-@ purpose computer cheap enough for an arcade game would not be powerful enough to run enough games of Spacewar to be profitable , a computer purpose @-@ built for solely running one game could be made for as low as US $ 100 . By August 1971 when Bushnell called Tuck and Pitts , he and Dabney had already displayed a prototype of their Computer Space game in a bar near Stanford and had found a commercial manufacturer for the game in Nutting Associates . They were curious about what Tuck and Pitts had done to make a commercially competitive version of the game , but were relieved , though also somewhat disappointed , to find that they had not solved that problem yet . 
 Tuck and Pitts , on the other hand , while impressed with Bushnell 's hardware were not impressed with the game itself . They felt that Computer Space , a single @-@ player game without the central gravity well of the original game , was a pale imitation of Spacewar , while their own Galaxy Game was a superior adaptation of the game . A few weeks later , in September 1971 , the Galaxy Game prototype debuted . The veneered walnut console , complete with seats for players , was located on the second floor of the building and connected to the PDP @-@ 11 in the attic by a 100 @-@ foot cable . It was very successful ; Pitts later said that the machine attracted crowds of people " ten @-@ deep " watching the players . They briefly attached a second monitor hanging above the console so that the watchers could more easily see the game . The low prices meant that they did not come close to making back the price of the PDP @-@ 11 , but they were excited by the game 's reception and had not intended the prototype to be profitable . As the initial Galaxy Game prototype was displayed to the public one month after the first Computer Space prototype , it is believed to be the second video game to charge money to play . 
 As a result of the reception to Galaxy Game , Pitts and Tuck started work on an expanded prototype . For the second machine , they built a full blue fiberglass casing for the consoles , improved the quality of the joysticks with the help of an machine shop , and modified the computer with a newer display processor to support up to four games at once on different monitors — either multiple simultaneous separate games or up to four players playing the same game on two screens . They also placed the PDP @-@ 11 inside one of the consoles rather than in a separate location . While the original plan had been to work on driving down the development costs after the initial prototype , the popularity of the game convinced the pair to instead focus on making a better machine that could run multiple games to recoup the upfront investment . The new version was installed in a cafe in the student union building in June 1972 , though with only two monitors due to space restrictions . The original Galaxy Game prototype was displayed at several locations around the area , but was not as successful as it had been at the student union building . By the time the second prototype was completed the pair had spent US $ 65 @,@ 000 on the project and had no feasible way of making up the cost with the machine or commercial prospects for a wider release . Pitts later explained that he and Tuck had been focused on the engineering and technical challenges of producing a faithful coin @-@ operated Spacewar game and paid little attention to the business side of the project ; he felt that Computer Space had been more commercially successful because Bushnell had focused more on the business side of his idea than the technical . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The second Galaxy Game prototype remained on display in the Tresidder building until May 1979 , when it was removed due to the display processor becoming unreliable . Throughout its time on display , it remained popular , with " ten to twenty people gathered around the machines most Friday and Saturday nights when school was in session . " Pitts later claimed that by the time the machine was removed , it had managed to make back the original investment . After its removal , the machine was dismantled , with the computer parts stored in an office and the casing outdoors . The unit was restored in 1997 with a recreated display processor and put on display for several years in the computer science department at Stanford with two consoles attached for free use by students . Due to issues with space and maintenance , in 2000 it was moved into the Computer History Museum in Mountain View , California , in the displayed storage section . In August 2010 , the museum loaned the console to Google to be placed at their headquarters campus at the request of Pitts — who wanted the game to be played as well as displayed — due to a discussion with senior vice president Jonathan Rosenberg , who had been hired as a 13 year old by Tuck and Pitts in the mid @-@ 1970s to keep the machine cleaned . It has since returned to the museum as a playable exhibit . 
 = William Johnstone Hope = 
 Vice Admiral Sir William Johnstone Hope , GCB ( 16 August 1766 – 2 May 1831 ) was a prominent and controversial British Royal Navy officer and politician in late eighteenth and early nineteenth century Britain , whose career experienced fleet actions , disputes with royalty , party politics and entry to both Russian and British orders of chivalry . A popular officer , Hope served with Nelson , Duncan and Lord Keith through several campaigns , making connections which enabled him to secure a lengthy political career after his retirement from the Royal Navy in 1804 due to ill @-@ health . After 26 years in Parliament , Hope was largely inactive and instead served as a Lord of the Admiralty and commissioner of Greenwich Naval Hospital . Hope died in 1832 after 55 years of naval and political service and was buried in the family plot in Scotland . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Johnstone Hope was born the third son of John Hope and his wife Mary Breton . The Hopes were descendants of the first Earl of Hopetoun and maintained strong political links with the family ; his brothers were also prominent figures , Charles Hope later became Lord Granton and Sir John Hope served as a brigadier under Wellington in the Peninsular War . 
 Hope was educated at Edinburgh High School between 1774 and 1776 and the following year , aged 12 , he entered the Royal Navy as a midshipman in HMS <unk> , a sloop commanded by his uncle Captain Charles Hope . As his uncle 's protégé , William traveled with his relative thorough various commands , serving during the American Revolutionary War off the Home , Lisbon and Newfoundland Stations . In 1782 he was promoted to lieutenant and left his uncle , taking a position on the frigate HMS Daedalus in Newfoundland . At the conclusion of the war , Hope returned home on Daedalus and remained on her until 1785 when his uncle returned him to his own ship , now the guardship HMS Sampson at Plymouth . 
 In 1786 , Hope 's career suffered a blow when he was stationed aboard the frigate HMS Pegasus , commanded by Prince William Henry . Hope and Prince William fell out badly and in less than a year Hope had been transferred to the frigate HMS Boreas , at that time commanded by Captain Horatio Nelson , with whom Hope had good relations . Two years later , Hope was transferred to HMS Adamant at the request of Sir Richard Hughes . When Hughes reached flag rank in 1790 whilst stationed in Newfoundland , he promoted Hope to commander and gave him command of Adamant . 
 = = = French Revolutionary War = = = 
 Hope continued in command of small ships for several years , pausing in 1792 to marry his distant cousin , Lady Anne Hope Johnstone . The couple would have two daughters and four sons before Anne 's death in 1818 . In 1794 , Hope was in command of HMS Incendiary , a fireship of the Channel Fleet attached to Lord Howe 's force sent to engage the French . In March , Hope was given his step to post captain , taking command of the ship of the line HMS Bellerophon , the flagship of Admiral Thomas Pasley . 
 Hope was still in command of the Bellerophon three months later when he was heavily engaged in the van of Howe 's fleet at the Glorious First of June , when an equally sized French fleet was defeated 200 miles out in the Atlantic Ocean . At the start of 1795 , Hope joined HMS Tremendous , but within two months was requested onboard HMS Venerable by Admiral Duncan . However , while visiting aboard a Russian ship in 1796 , Hope suffered a serious accidental head injury that left him an invalid for two years , consequently missing Duncan 's victory at the Battle of Camperdown . 
 Returning from his long convalescence , Hope was again requested by Duncan and commanded his flagship HMS Kent for the next three years . In 1799 , the Kent was Duncan 's flagship in supporting the Anglo @-@ Russian invasion of the Batavian Republic , with Hope being present at the surrender of the Dutch fleet in Texel to the Royal Navy . Sent to Britain with the dispatches proclaiming the surrender , Hope was lauded by both the British and Russian courts , King George III presenting him with £ 500 and Tsar Paul I making him a Commander of the Order of St John . 
 In 1801 in the Mediterranean , under the command of Admiral Lord Keith , Kent carried Sir Ralph Abercromby and his headquarters for the invasion of Egypt , a successful campaign which forced the surrender of the French occupying force . Hope was not present for the conclusion of the action , returning to Britain with Admiral Duncan after Sir Richard Bickerton raised his flag on Kent . He was awarded the Order of the Crescent by Emperor Selim III for this service . In 1800 , Hope began his second career , gaining the seat of Dumfries Burghs in the House of Commons through family influence . During his time as MP , Hope rarely visited his constituency and equally rarely appeared in parliament . He lost the constituency to his brother in 1802 , but in 1804 was elected to the seat of Dumfriesshire , again through family connections . He retained this post until his retirement from public life in 1830 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 In 1804 , at the end of the Peace of Amiens , Hope briefly took command of HMS Atlas , but it soon became clear that his health was failing and he could no longer maintain an active naval career . Retiring from the navy on half @-@ pay , Hope was an invalid from 1804 until 1807 , when a return to health permitted him to take a post as a Lord of the Admiralty . Hope changed positions several times in this role , but he held onto the position for twenty years as a political favourite , a status maintained by being almost totally politically inactive . In 1812 , Hope was advanced to rear @-@ admiral and in January 1815 he was appointed Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath ( KCB ) on the reorganisation of the order , and was invested later in the year . 
 From 1813 , Hope served as commander @-@ in @-@ chief at Leith until 1818 and in 1819 he was again promoted , this time to vice @-@ admiral . In 1820 he was recalled to the Admiralty and remained there for seven years without participating in any of the important decisions and innovations of the period . He remarried in 1821 to Maria , Countess of Athlone and in 1825 was advanced to Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath ( GCB ) . In 1827 , in the chaotic aftermath of the collapse of Lord Liverpool 's government , Hope was retired in favour of Sir George Cockburn and given the favourable role of treasurer and later commissioner of the Royal Naval Hospital in Greenwich . Despite his conflicts with Prince William 45 years earlier , when King William IV ascended the throne in 1830 , he made Hope a privy councillor , before Hope entered retirement later in the year . Hope died in May 1831 , a few months after giving up his seat in Parliament . Although he died in Bath , his remains were returned to the family crypt at Johnstone Church , Johnstone , Dumfriesshire . 
 = Battle of Beaufort = 
 The Battle of Beaufort , also known as the Battle of Port Royal Island , was fought on February 3 , 1779 , near Beaufort , South Carolina , during the American Revolutionary War . The inconsequential battle took place not long after British forces consolidated control around Savannah , Georgia , which they had captured in December 1778 . 
 Brigadier General Augustine Prevost sent 200 British regulars to seize Port Royal Island at the mouth of the Broad River in South Carolina in late January 1779 . Major General Benjamin Lincoln , the American commander in the south , sent South Carolina Brigadier General William Moultrie from Purrysburg , South Carolina with a mixed force composed mainly of militia , but with a few Continental Army men , to meet the British advance . The battle was inconclusive , but the British withdrew first and suffered heavier casualties than the Americans . 
 = = Background = = 
 The British began their " southern strategy " by sending expeditions from New York City and Saint Augustine , East Florida to capture Savannah , Georgia late in 1778 . The New York expedition , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Archibald Campbell , arrived first , and successfully captured the town on December 29 , 1778 . Remnants of Savannah 's defenders combined with South Carolina militia under Major General Benjamin Lincoln at an encampment at Purrysburg , South Carolina to oppose the British . 
 When Brigadier General Augustine Prevost arrived from Saint Augustine in mid @-@ January 1779 , he assumed command of the garrison there , and on the 22nd sent a force under Campbell to take control of Augusta and raise Loyalist militia companies . Prevost decided thereafter to send a force to occupy Port Royal Island just up the coast in South Carolina , where he had been led to believe that Loyalist sentiment was strong . On January 29 the HMS Vigilant , an unseaworthy ship of the line that had been converted to a floating battery , was towed by Royal Navy crews in longboats through the channel separating Hilton Head Island from the mainland . She was accompanied by a flotilla of smaller ships that carried 200 infantry from the 16th and 60th Regiments under Major William Gardner , who had orders to take control of Beaufort , the island 's main settlement . 
 The only major defense establishment on Port Royal Island was Fort Lyttelton , which was garrisoned by a company of Continental Army troops under Captain John <unk> . When he learned that a comparatively large British force was moving in his direction , he spiked the fort 's cannons and blew up its main bastion in order to deny their use to the superior force . When General Lincoln learned that communications with Port Royal Island had been cut off by the British advance , he sent South Carolina Brigadier General William Moultrie , who had distinguished himself in the 1776 Battle of Sullivan 's Island , and 300 men to counter the move . Moultrie 's force was composed mostly of South Carolina militia from the Beaufort area , but it was accompanied by a few Continental Army regulars , and two companies of artillery from Charleston , which were headed by former Congressmen Edward Rutledge and Thomas Heyward , Jr . This force arrived at the main Port Royal ferry on the 31st , not long after <unk> had finished destroying the fort . They crossed over to the island on February 1 and occupied Beaufort . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Gardner 's men landed on Port Royal Island at the plantation of Andrew Deveaux ( present @-@ day Laurel Bay ) , a Loyalist who may have guided them , on February 2 . Gardner sent a detachment to secure the island side of the ferry . These men retreated when they encountered Patriot troops , and Gardner began to move his main force toward Beaufort to face the Americans . Early on February 3 General Moultrie was alerted to the British presence , and moved his forces out of town . The two forces met near the highest ground on Port Royal Island , a rise called Gray 's Hill that was about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south of the ferry and in the middle of the island . 
 Gardner lined his men up at the edge of some woods near the top of the hill and advanced with bayonets fixed . The Americans approached and lined up in an open field outside musket range . General Moultrie positioned two six @-@ pound field cannons in the center of his line , with a smaller two @-@ pounder on the right . The Americans then advanced on the British , Moultrie observing that the action was " reversed from the usual way of fighting between British and Americans ; they taking the bushes and we taking the open ground . " The Americans opened fire first with the artillery , and then with musket volleys . The battle continued for about 45 minutes , at which point the Americans were running low on ammunition . Moultrie had begun a withdrawal when the British were also observed to retreat , leaving the field to the Americans . A company of light horse militia chased after the British , very nearly cutting them off from their boats . They successfully captured 26 men , but were unable to hold all of them due to their small numbers . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In addition to the prisoners taken ( sources cite either seven or twelve were retained ) , the British reportedly suffered 40 killed or wounded , although deserters reported that nearly half of Gardner 's men had been hit by American fire . The Americans , in contrast , suffered only 8 killed and 22 wounded . 
 Gardner was criticized by Prevost for the mauling his detachment received because he strayed too far from his boats . It was not Gardner 's fault , however , that he had no Loyalist support . The victory of a largely militia force over British regulars was a boost to the Americans ' morale . However , severe losses incurred in early March at Brier Creek delayed American plans to move against Prevost 's forces in Georgia . When Lincoln began moving troops toward Augusta in April , Prevost moved in force toward Charleston , but was able to do little more than briefly blockade the city before retreating back to Savannah . Port Royal Island was again occupied by the British during this campaign . 
 The battle is commemorated by a highway marker on U. S. Route 21 near the battle site . Fort Lyttelton 's remains are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . 
 = Battle of Kranji = 
